A DECLARATION OF THE People's Natural Right to a Share in the Legislature, etc.

A DECLARATION OF THE PEOPLE'S NATURAL RIGHT TO A SHARE IN THE LEGISLATURE;
Which is the FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF THE BRITISH CONSTITUTION OF STATE.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

Qui non libere veritatem pronunciat, proditor est veritatis. 4 Inst. Epil.
LONDON: Printed for B. WHITE, at HORACE'S-HEAD, in FLEET STREET.

M.DCC.LXXIV.

PREFACE.
THE following Declaration of the People's natural Right to a Share in the
Legislature is founded on Principles, which are certainly unquestionable, and
cannot easily be controverted; but I was not aware, I acknowledge, I freely
acknowledge my deficiency in historical as well as most other branches of
Learning, which require much reading and leisure to be obtained; but though
this affords an argument against my own personal credit and abilities, in
general, as a writer, yet it does not at all affect any particular point,
which, in my several tracts, I have labored to maintain; for, upon these, a
candid Reader will determine according to the evidence produced, and not by the
general character or demerit of the Author in other respects.


when I sent the same to the Press, that there had ever been any Controversy
before the 6th of King George I. concerning the Freedom of our fellow subjects
in Ireland, or that any Englishman, acquainted with the principles of our
excellent Constitution of State, had ever, before that time, presumed to
advance any doctrine which might tend to deprive our Irish Brethren of their
natural Freedom, and of the inestimable benefits of that happy legal
Constitution, which British Subjects in general are commonly supposed to
inherit by Birthright!

If I had not esteemed this point incontrovertible, when I wrote the said
Declaration, I should not have quoted the Union between Great Britain and
Ireland as an example of the true constitutional mode of connecting British
Dominions that are otherwise separated by nature. But having done this, and
having also given several copies of the Declaration to my friends which cannot
now be recalled, I have thereby brought upon myself the necessity of
maintaining the propriety of the said example, which might as easily have been
avoided, had I been aware of any such controversy; because the general
principles, on which my arguments are founded, would have been amply sufficient
(I apprehend) to prove the truth of my Declaration, even though Examples and
Custom had been against it; for the Common Law of England teaches us, that
examples and precedents are not to be followed if they are unreasonable, or
inconsistent with legal and constitutional Principles This is clearly proved by
a variety of unquestionable maxims; Judicandum est Legibus, non Exemplis.
Malus usus abolendus est.
In consuetudinibus non diuturnitas temporis, sod soliditas rationis,
consideranda est. Multitudo errantium non parit errori patrocinium.


; though, on the other hand, they are to be esteemed of very great weight and
authority in Law, when there are no just exceptions against them -- et quia
consuetudines illae nec contra legem divinam nec contra rationem in aliquo
existunt, et pro bono communi totius Regni ex earum diurnitate censentur, fore
necessariae, vim Legis retinent, etc. Doct. et Stud. c. 7.
. And of this latter kind is the Example which I have quoted to illustrate my
Declaration: for, though many great and respectable Writers have made
exceptions to the constitutional Freedom of Ireland, which I had supposed to be
unquestionable, yet, after the most careful examination of their opinions, and
the reasons given for the same, (in which the proofs ought to consist,) I am
now fully convinced that there are no just exceptions against that example;
and, consequently, I am bound in justice, to my fellow subjects in Ireland not
to give it up; because the "necessity" (beforementioned) of maintaining the
propriety of the example, cited in my Declaration, arises not from any
obstinate partiality to my own assertion, (which I confess was, at first, too
hastily and unadvisedly made,) but from a firm persuasion, after a most
cautious enquiry into the real state of the controversy, that the advocates for
the Liberties of Ireland have Truth and Reason on their side, which, (I hope)
the 2d Part, now added to my Declaration, will sufficiently testify.

It is necessary also for me to guard against another objection which might
perhaps hereafter have been started against the following Declaration.

I have quoted therein a maxim of the English Constitution, as a principle of
natural equity, which had previously been denied that rank by one of the most
eminent civilians of his time; and therefore, to avoid the influence of so
great an authority against my Argument, I think it prudent, in this Preface, to
examine the grounds of his objections, that my Readers may have sufficient
evidence before them to distinguish where the truth lies; for it is certainly
necessary for me to establish the first principles on which I have proceeded,
before I can expect to have any attention paid to the Arguments which I have
built upon them.

The maxim which I wish to maintain is as follows, viz. that Law, to bind all,
must be assented to by all Principia Leg. et Aequit. p. 56. to which is added,
by way of illustration, Canons therefore bind not the Laity.


. This maxim I have quoted in the following Declaration as a principle of
natural Equity; though, it seems, the learned Civilian, Baron Puffendorf, has
expressly refused to rank it with the Laws of Nature: He, or (rather I should
say) his Translator, calls The Edition which I have followed is only an English
translation printed at Oxford in 1710.


it only a notion.

"We cannot here but observe," (says he,) that the Notion, maintained by some
authors, That the Consent of the People is requisite to make Laws oblige the
Subject in Conscience, is neither true in the Laws of Nature, nor in the civil
Laws of monarchical or of aristocratical Rulers; nor indeed at all, unless it
be understood of implicit consent; as a man, by agreeing to the Sovereignty of
another, is at the same time, supposed to have agreed to all the future Acts of
that Sovereignty Law of Nature and Nations, Book 1. c. 6. p. 55.
. (He has nevertheless thought proper to add an observation which makes
strongly against his own argument.) "Though it would really be very useful,"
(says he,) and contribute much to engaging the Subjects in a voluntary
Obedience, if the Laws could be made with their Consent and Approbation;
especially such as are to pass into their Lives and Manners.

Now it would be impossible (I apprehend) to find so just a reason in favor of
the former part of the learned Baron's assertion, as he himself has here given
directly against it; and yet he is frequently harping upon the same harsh
string of absolute implicit obedience; which inconsistency cannot easily be
accounted for, unless it be attributed to the prejudice of his education as a
student in the Impeperial or Civil Law. For though the Civil Law contains many
excellent maxims highly worthy of our esteem, most of which have been adopted
by our ancient English writers of the Common Law of this Kingdom What use our
ancestors have made of the civil Law will readily appear to any one, that will
take the trouble to compare the several works, which compose that voluminous
body, with some of the most ancient English Lawyers, as Glanvil, Bracton, and
others; who have adhered very closely to the rules and method of Justinian;
have transcribed his Laws in their own proper language, and sometimes entire
titles, as familiarly as if they were the original Laws of England. Dr. Bever's
Discourse on the Study of Juris-prudence and the Civil Law, p. 17.
; yet it includes some heterogeneous positions (that have been forced upon it
by the overbearing influence and corrupt practices of unlimited Imperial
Courts) which are highly unreasonable and contradictory to the general equity
of its other principles. A position of this kind, too implicitly received as
Law, seems to be the groundwork of the learned Baron's difficulty: I mean that
unreasonable and dangerous position of the Civil Law, which attributes to the
Prince's Will and Pleasure the Force of Law Quod Principi placuit (juxta Leges
Civiles) Legis habet vigorem. Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 35. p. 83. In
this same chapter the learned Chancellor Fortescue recites many dreadful
effects of this abominable principle in the Government and Police of France.
viz. the pernicious and dangerous Policy of maintaining a standing army; for
which the people were compelled to provide quarters and provisions, in all the
great towns and villages.

Also the abominable oppression of the Salt Tax, whereby the poor were
compelled to purchase of the King a certain quantity of Salt (whether they
chose to have it or not) at an excessive price; by which, together with the
assessments to pay the troops, and various other tallage rateable at the King's
pleasure, the common people were reduced to extreme penury, and want of every
comfort in life. And, with respect to persons of highter rank, if any Nobleman
or Gentleman was accused of a crime, even by his enemies, he was liable to be
dragged to a private examination, by the intermediation of messengers in the
King's chamber, or elsewhere, in a private place, without seeing his accusers
(himself alone being seen); and when the King (or perhaps his Minister) has
been pleased to judge him guilty, the poor passive Subject is popped into a
sack, and in the night time cast into the river by the Marshal's servants.
Howsoever incredible such abominable injustice may appear to Englishmen, yet
the worthy Chancellor, who wrote this account for the instruction of Edward
Prince of Wales (the son of King Henry VI.) when in France, appeals to the
young Prince's own knowledge of the notoriety of such facts: "You have heard,"
(says he) that more men (by much) have died in this manner than by the ordinary
course of justice; yet nevertheless (says he ironically) whatsoever has
pleased the King (according to the Civil Law) has the force of Law. And while
you have been in France, and in the neighborhood of that Kingdom, (continues
the Chancellor to the young Prince,) you have heard of other enormities like to
these, and some even worse than these -- detestably and damnably perpetrated,
no otherwise than under the color (or pretense) of that Law, viz. Quod
Principi placuit (juxta Leges Civiles) legis habet vigorem. Etiam et alia
enormia, (says he) hiis similia, acquaedam hiis deteriora, dum in Francia et
prope regnum illud conversatus es, audisti non alio, quam legis illius color
DETESTABILITUR DAMNABILITER QUE PERPETRATA, quae hic inserere, nostrum nimium
dialogum protelaret, etc. Whether or not this particular mode of dispatching
the French King's Subjects is yet in use, I know not; but of this we are well
assured, that private executions of persons unknown are still practiced there,
which in effect are equally dangerous, and cannot be considered in any other
light than that of so many wilful Murders, for which the Kings of France, and
all those men whom they have entrusted with the administration of Justice, are
most certainly accountable, and must one day answer in their own private
persons as individuals, besides the enormous guilt which lies heavy upon that
whole people as a nation, for passively permitting such notorious and crying
iniquity to be practiced among them under the borrowed name of Law: And it is
not only the dispatching of men (to put them out of the way of opposition to
Government) that is intended by these midnight executions, but also, in some
cases, to satisfy a base malicious revenge by torturing the helpless victim
with the cruel death of breaking on the wheel; for, as both the name and crime
of the sufferer is concealed, (or perhaps a wrong name given out to prevent
pity,) it cannot be said that such cruelty is used by way of example to deter
bad men from commiting treason, or other particular crimes; so that such
private executions can be attributed to nothing but a DIABOLICAL DEPRAVITY in
the minds of those who order them.

It also appears that one use of a standing Army, in that unhappy Kingdom, is
to guard the avenues of streets to prevent the people from discovering the
actors as well as sufferers at such horrid masked tragedies as I have
mentioned; and therefore I cannot help remarking the extreme absurdity of that
(otherwise) sensible and shrewd people in boasting of their national military
Honor, when even large bodies of their best-disciplined troops, who are
Frenchmen also by birth, and have the means in their own hands to render
justice and restore liberty to their much-injured countrymen, can yet tamely
yield themselves so far to the absolute Will of any man or men on earth, as to
become silent accomplices (like the detestable Turkish Mutes of old) to the
horrid crime of wilful Murder, (for such are the secret executions of France,)
and professed Tools for perpetrating the most abandoned wickedness! To such a
disgraceful and slavish pitch of passive obedience is that once-spirited nation
now reduced, that they seem to give up all pretensions to that fundamental
Right of human Nature, which alone distinguishes men from brutes! I mean the
indispensible Right of judging for themselves, and of yielding obedience to the
impulse of Conscience, according to that natural knowledge of good and evil
which is implanted in all men, (French soldiers as well as others;) and of
which they must one day render a strict account in a separate disbanded state,
as individuals, (which I have before remarked,) stripped of their arms and
regimentals!

Shall we, then, adopt the Laws of France? quod principi placuit? etc. It is
not impossible that such a measure may sometime or other be proposed by an
inconsiderate Minister, and that a Parliament (through the unequal
Representation of the People, the want of frequent elections, and other defects
in the constitution, etc.) may hereafter be led to yield their consent to it;
but, even if ever that should be the case, I shall still entertain hopes, from
the general disposition of our British Troops, (notwithstanding the alarming
effects of standing Armies in all other Nations,) that they will never become
so detestably base and degenerate as to permit their country to groan under any
such iniquitous Oppressions as are practiced in France! Nevertheless, should
they also become such slavish Tools of Despotism, as to assist in enforcing any
such unconstitutional measures, let them know, for a certainty, that, as soon
as the national spirit of Freedom (of which they at present participate) is, by
their means, unhappily suppressed, even they themselves must necessarily
degenerate with their countrymen, and will be no more able to stand before
their enemies, than the other wretched troops whom they have so often driven
before them!


. I do not find, indeed, that he has literally cited the corrupt maxims, but he
has manifestly laid down the same principle (though in different words) toward
the beginning of the same chapter, where he is defining the difference between
Law and some other things, which seem to bear relation to it; as Counsel, which
requires reasons to produce an obligation, etc.

"But Law," (says he,) though it ought not to want its reasons, yet these
reasons are not the cause why obedience is paid to it, but the power of the
Exactor; who, when he has signified his pleasure, lays an obligation on the
Subjects to act in conformity to his decree, though perhaps they do not so well
apprehend the reasons of the injunction, etc. and, after citing a similar
passage from Mr. Hobbs, he adds, For no man can say, sic volo, sic jubeo; so I
will, and so I command; unless,

-- Stet pro Ratione voluntas. His Will is his Reason. "We obey Laws,
therefore," (says he,) not principally upon account of the matter of them, but
upon account of the Legislator's Will Book 1. chap. 6.. 1.
.

Thus the learned Civilian seems to consider the Will and Pleasure of a
Sovereign as the life and spirit of Laws; which notion is highly unreasonable
in every case but one, viz. when we are speaking of the Laws of that Sovereign
alone, whose Will is the fountain of Reason, and whose Pleasure (by our own
natural Reason we are convinced) is infinite goodness, justice, and mercy,
toward all those to whom he has signified his commands; because we cannot
separate the idea of infallible Reason, Wisdom, and eternal Justice, from any
command of divine authority.

And yet this application of the Baron's doctrine, even to the supreme Law, is
not conformable throughout to what I understand in this place of the Baron's
idea of Law; for he assigns no other cause why obedience is paid to it, but the
power of the Exactor; whereas God's Laws have many other apparent causes of
obligation, of which I have alteady mentioned the due sense we naturally
entertain of the infinite Wisdom and Truth (as well as the Power) of the Divine
Author, who is so far from being an Exactor of Laws, that the revelation of his
will for the good government of mankind has generally been addressed to the
Senses and Reason of Men, that their Covenant with God might be founded on free
Consent, the highest and most obligatory Cause of Obedience.

Now, as the Laws of God are thus tendered to us under the equitable form of a
reciprocal Covenant, thereby binding even himself (the supreme Lord and Creator
of all things) to us, his poor mortal subjects, under conditional Promises
which cannot fail on his part! how much more ought all mere worldly Governors
to be restrained and limited by equitable Covenants of mutual obligation
between them and their Subjects, since their equality in nature gives the
latter an undoubted Right to insist on this, the only safe mode of worldly
Government?

The consideration of this point leads me to one of the principal Grounds of
Baron Puffendorf's Mistake, beforementioned.

He does not seem to have been aware, that, in all societies of men governed by
Laws, some sort of general Covenant must be understood to subsist between the
several Sovereigns and their Subjects respectively: and, though such Covenants
are not always expressed, yet, most certainly, they are always implied; because
we must necessarily presume, that the Good of the People is the original
intention and principal end of all legal human Governments, since all Men are
naturally equals, and a Man who submits himself to the Sovereignty or
Government of another, that he may enjoy the benefit and protection of society,
does not, on that account, cease to be a Man; neither can the temporal
Sovereign himself be released from the natural Ties of that Relation: for,
whenever he forgets that he himself is a Man, (of the same fallible
understanding and natural infirmities with his Subjects, who are his equals
both on their entrance and at their exeunt from the Stage of Life,) he
immediately loses the best Rule for his Conduct as a Prince, and necessarily
degenerates into brutality; so that, in such cases, to suppose that THE WILL of
the Prince is to be allowed the force of Law is the highest absurdity! Nay,
even the Baron himself has elsewhere declared, that the word MAN, is thought to
carry somewhat of Dignity in its sound; and we commonly (says he) make use of
this as the last and the most prevailing argument against a rude insulter, I am
not a Beast, a Dog, but I am A MAN as well as yourself. Since then human nature
agrees equally to all persons, and since no one can live a sociable life with
another, who does not own and respect him as a Man; it follows, as a command of
the Law of Nature, that EVERY MAN esteem and treat ANOTHER as one who is
naturally HIS EQUAL, or who is A MAN as well as he. (Book 3. c. 2. p. 178.) It
would therefore be unreasonable to conceive, that any society of MEN should
voluntarily submit themselves to a temporal Sovereign, without supposing, at
the same time, some reciprocal obligation or duty to subsist between them;
which is nothing else but the implication of a mutual Covenant: and, indeed,
the formalities of every Coronation sufficiently indicate and warrant such an
implication; and the infringements made by Monarchs on such implied Covenants
have, in all ages, been occasionally punished by the expulsion and destruction
of the Tyrants themselves, of which most nations have, at some time or other,
afforded an example.

Nevertheless, the learned Baron seems to have neglected these necessary
considerations; for he asserts, that the distinction between a Compact or
Covenant, and a Law, is obvious. For a Compact (says he) is a Promise, but a
Law is a Command. In Compacts the form of speaking is I will do so and so; but
in Law the form runs, do thou so, after an imperative manner. Book 1. c. 6.. 2.
p. 47.

He had before been speaking of democratical Governments, and had remarked, not
only that the ancients frequently apply to Laws the name of common Agreements,
but also, that "the Laws" (among the Grecians) were made upon the proposal of
the Magistrate, with the Knowledge, and by the Command of the People, and so
(as it were) "in the way of bargain or stipulation," (says he,) they gave them
the name of Covenants and Agreements beforementioned: and yet he will not allow
(notwithstanding such authority) that they are properly styled "Covenants,"
having puzzled himself with the difference between a national Covenant and a
Covenant of individuals; for, in this last case, (says he,) a person that
dissents is not bound, and the party cannot proceed without him; whereas, in
the former case, even the dissenting Party is tied and obliged by the plurality
of votes. Now the learned Baron has not been aware that this very reason, which
he himself has assigned, confirms the propriety of that ancient custom which he
condemns, ( viz. the applying the name of Covenants and Agreements to Laws,)
for, he allows, that the dissenting Party is tied and obliged by the plurality
of votes, and therefore, even a whole nation, in that case, may be said to act
as an individual; because, that to which the greater number give consent (as he
himself remarks in the preceding paragraph) is taken for the Will and Decree of
all; so that, by this means, a whole Nation is as capable of making a Covenant
or Compact as an Individual; and I will only add, to what the Baron has allowed
about the binding of those who dissent, that they are bound only so far as the
imposed Obligation is consistent with their superior Covenant and duty to God,
which is always to be implied: for even the SOVEREIGN of the World, THE KING OF
KINGS, who alone can be said to have an absolute Right to govern his creature
man without a free Covenant; (if he had been pleased so to do,) has
nevertheless condescended to include all his positive Laws in two express legal
Covenants, the old and the new, both of which have been from time to time
confirmed and fulfilled, and still respectively subsist to this day in all
points, wherein the former is not superseded, and fulfilled by the latter. It
therefore ill becomes this learned Civilian to separate the idea of a Compact
or Covenant from Law; and more especially when he endeavors thereby to
establish the Power of the Exactor, the capricious Will of mere temporal
fallible Sovereigns, which he supposes to be Law, independent of all Compacts
or Covenants expressed or implied!

Thus I hope I have traced, to the very foundation, the Baron's error in
denying the principle or maxim beforementioned, (concerning the necessity of
popular assent in Legislation,) for, if he had not attempted to separate the
idea of a Covennant from Law, he could not have overlooked the absolute
illegality of those pretended Laws which are ordained only by the Will and
Power of the Exactor! because the meanest professor of the English common Law
would have told him, that every submission, promise, or agreement, that is
extorted by fear and compulsion, is (according to the Law of Nature) totally
null and void in itself; and he himself is sufficiently sensible of this in
another place Those promises then, or pacts, we take to be invalid, which a man
is compelled to engage in, by the unjust force of the party to whom they are
made; for since he, who extorts any thing from another by using unjust
terrors, is by the Law of Nature bound to restore it, and must consequently
make good what the other person loses by such forced bargain, the necessity of
Reparation, in the party who offered the violence, takes off ALL OBLIGATION to
payment in the party who suffered it, etc. Book 3. c. 6. 11. p. 225.
. And, even if an oath should be obtained to confirm the unjust "Power of the
Exactor," it will not increase his Right; for the Baron's own doctrine (again
in another part of his book) affords a sufficient answer to annul every
pretense of Obligation on account of oaths extorted by unjust Fear But what are
we to think of oaths extorted by unjust Fear? Surely the Person who, by means
of this Fear, procured a promise upon oath, is no less obliged to release the
promise, thus violently obtained, than if no oath had been added to confirm it.
Therefore there appears no reason, why Compensation should not be admitted in
this case, in opposition to the Claim of the injurious Party; according to the
rules laid down by us (says he) when we treated of the general subject of Fear.
Book 4. c. 2. 8. p. 272.
.

Thus the maxim concerning the necessity of Assent, for which I contend, is
sufficiently proved to be a Law of Nature even by the learned Baron's own
arguments, and I desire no better.

In consequence of the Baron's general misconception I have spent the more time
in warning my Readers against the Errors of this celebrated Civilian, because
the studying of his Works (I am informed) is at this time considered as a
material part of Education in our Universities; so that the rising Generation
of the very best Families in this Kingdom are liable to imbibe (as it were with
the Milk of Instruction) these poisonous Doctrines, which thereby become fixed
and engrafted in their tender minds as a foundation for their future political
Principles!

Thus a most dangerous source of unconstitutional notions has been opened, and
seems already to have flowed throughout the Kingdom; so that we need not wonder
at the modern partiality for increasing the number as well as the powers of
Courts of Admiralty, and other seminaries of the Civil Law, though the very
existence of British Liberty depends on duly restraining and limiting the Civil
Law Courts within those bounds of jurisdiction which have been allowed them by
the ancient Constitution of this Kingdom: And therefore I hope my Readers will
excuse my having exceeded the usual form of publications, in making so long a
Preface to so short a Work, since it was absolutely necessary to guard against
these dangerous and inveterate errors of the Civil Law, before I could safely
proceed to my Declaration in favor of popular Assent.


, concerning the necessity of agreement to make Laws valid, he has asserted
also, that neither the divine positive Laws, nor the Laws of Nature, had their
rise from the agreement of men, etc. Book 1. c. 6.. 2. p. 47.

Now his observation is certainly true as far as it relates to the rise or
origin of such Laws; for the Laws, being divine, must necessarily have "had
their rise" from God; but yet this does not set aside "the agreement of men,"
by which they have been ratified and confirmed in all ages. The Baron seems to
have overlooked the information we have received from Scripture, that men
inherit a divine attribute from their parents, I mean that knowledge of good
and evil which they took upon themselves contrary to the express command of
God, and thereby unhappily entailed Sin and Death on all their posterity; for
that divine knowledge necessarily engages and includes our agreement or assent
to the "the Laws of Nature," whether we obey them or not, and thereby renders
us answerable for our imperfect conduct in this world, and consequently guilty
before God! And from hence arises the necessity of a redemption to relieve
mankind from that unhappy effect of the Original Sin; for, as the strength of
Sin is the Law, The sting of Death is Sin; and the strength of Sin is the Law.
1 Cor. xv. 56.
so the guilt of every criminal action is with justice imputed to us, because
we have wilfully offended against this natural light or Law in our Hearts, by
which we ought to have known how to refuse the EVIL and choose the GOOD.

This knowledge of Good and Evil was discovered, even by the Gentiles, to be a
divine attribute Cicero calls this natural knowledge of Good and Evil, Law.
"Lex" (says he in his first Book De Legibus) est ratio summa, insita in natura,
quae juhet ea quae facienda sunt, prohibetque contraria; eadem catio cum est in
hominis mente confirmata et confecta Lex est. And in his third Book De
Officiis, where he is speaking again of natural Reason, he calls it a Divine
Law. -- I psa naturae ratio, quae est Lex divina. et Humana: -- And elsewhere
he more particularly declares it to be a Divine Attribute. -- Recta, (...)
numine Deorum tracta ratio. And he mentions this attribute again in his second
Book De Natura Deorum, where he speaks of prudence, or the choice of Good and
rejection of Evil, as a universal Law, common to God and man. Sequitur ut eadem
sit in his (Diis) quae in genere humano, ratio, eadem veritas utrobique sit,
eademque Lex; quae est recti praeceptio pravique depulsio. Ex quo intelligitur,
prudentiam quoque, et mentem a Diis ad homines, pervenisse, etc.


, though they were unacquainted, probably, with the occasion of its being
engrafted in human nature. It must therefore appear, that the agreement or
assent of mankind to the moral and eternal Laws of God (which the Baron and
other Civilians commonly call "the Laws of Nature") may very fairly be presumed
and admitted as a natural effect of the human understanding, whenever any of
the said Laws are mentioned; for, all persons, who have any reflection, must be
sensible that we stand self-condemned by Conscience (which is only another name
for the knowledge of Good and Evil) whenever we offend against the moral Laws
of God, by which our Agreement and Assent to the justice of them are
sufficiently implied and acknowledged I have traced this subject more at large
in a separate Tract on "the Law of Nature and Principles of Action in MAN,"
intended also for the Press.


: And, with respect to what the Baron has likewise insinuated concerning the
want of human agreement to the "divine positive Laws," the direct contrary
thereto is clearly demonstrated (as I have before hinted) by the remarkable
examples of two incontestible legal Covenants between God and Man, the Old and
New Testaments, those two original written Charters or Grants of PERFECT
LIBERTY; the one containing the Promises, and the other, the Accomplishment of
our glorious Freedom; which we are bound to maintain and defend to the last
moment of our lives!

The mention that has already been made of these two unquestionable monuments
of the free State and Condition, to which the Almighty has been pleased to
invite his creature Man, might perhaps be sufficient for my present purpose,
without descending to farther particulars; but yet, as I received extraordinary
satisfaction myself in tracing minutely the manner in which the said Covenants
have been tendered and ratified, I am inclined to suppose that many of my
Readers will reap the same satisfaction by perusing some examples of it,
because they demonstrate the real dignity and natural Rights of MAN, far beyond
any thing that I could possibly have conceived before I made the said
Examination with this particular view to the Freedom of Man; and as I have too
much reason to apprehend, that many of my countrymen have overlooked or
neglected these striking Instances, which relate to the present subject, the
Right of Assent; I propose to add (sometime hereafter, as soon as I can
possibly find leisure to revise it for the press) a third Part also to this
Declaration of the People's natural Right to a Share in the Legislature; which
3d Part (being founded on some remarkable examples in Scripture, concerning the
gracious and most liberal mode whereby the revealed Laws, even of God himself,
have been tendered (from time to time) to the consideration and acceptance of
mankind) proves by comparative demonstration, that the MAXIMS OF THE FOREIGN
CIVILIANS, whereby they set up the mere WILL of fallible earthly Princes as
LAW, (viz. Quod Principi placuit habet vigorem Legis. -- Stet pro ratione
voluntas. etc. substituting WILL for REASON,) are IMPIOUS AND UNJUST; since
even the ALMIGHTY SOVEREIGN OF THE UNIVERSE, to whose WILL alone such deference
is justly due, has not so dealt with his creature Man, enforcing his Will for
his Reason; but, on the contrary, has mercifully condescended to convince us
(his frail mortal subjects) that REASON is his WILL, and that he has limited
(if I may be allowed such an expression) even his own infinite Power by the
eternal rules of Justice and Righteousness, which, (our own natural Reason
teaches us,) can never fail! and therefore, as true Freedom consists in the
certainty of known Laws, so the most perfect Liberty must necessarily subsist
under the Government of the Almighty; who has appealed by his prophets from
time to time, in the most affecting manner, to the reason and senses of
mankind, that his Laws might be confirmed by a voluntary popular Assent, the
only true foundation of all valid Compacts; and that the said Laws have
accordingly been solemnly ratified, and voluntarily accepted by the people, in
two mutual Compacts, or Covenants, (commonly called the Old and New
Testaments,) whereby not only the People are bound on their part, but even the
ETERNAL KING HIMSELF is conditionally bound also on his part to the performance
of the most glorious Promises! The promises of God are made to all mankind
(without exception) who receive and keep his Covenant; so that every true
believer, be his rank in life ever so mean, is undoubtedly capable of becoming
an adopted Son of God -- "That we might receive the adoption of sons," (said
the Apostle to the Galatians;) and, because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father! Gal. iv. 5.6.


; -- "A temple of God," by the inward dwelling of his Holy Spirit -- Know ye
not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of
God is holy, which temple ye are. 1 Cor. iii. 16.17. See also 2 Cor. vi. 16.


: An heir of salvation -- That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the
same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel. Ephesians. iii. 6.


; -- " a joint heir with Christ -- If children, then heirs; heirs of God; and
JOINT HEIRS WITH CHRIST. Romans viii. 17.


;" and all such shall COME WITH HIM TO JUDGE THE WORLD -- For "the saints shall
judge the world." 1 Cor. vi. 2.


Now as the eternal dignity, to which human nature is invited, is so great and
glorious, can we suppose that God has not some regard also for the temporal
Rights of his highly-favoured creature, Man? How, then, can any particular Man,
or body of Men, presume to set up their own WILL for LAW and thereby deprive
their Brethren of that Right, which of all others, is most essential to
Reasonable beings, I mean the Right of Assent? Let those men, who thus
inconsiderately venture to affront the dignity of mankind* by withholding from
them their temporal Rights, ( viz. Choice, Freewill, and the due exercise of
that Reason which God has given them,) beware lest they themselves should
thereby forfeit their own eternal privileges! -- Know ye not that we shall
judge Angels? -- how much more things that pertain to this Life? 1 Cor. vi. 3.




And he has accordingly instituted by his Son (the eternal Word, in whom
dwells all the fullness of the GOD HEAD bodily, Col. ii. 9.) not only a Form
for the admission of new Members or Parties to his free COVENANT, but also
ordained a solemn rite for the renewal and acknowledgement of the said COVENANT
from time to time at his holy Table, from which the Subjects of his Kingdom
cannot safely abstain without seeming to deny that allegiance and homage which
they indispensibly owe to their eternal Sovereign!

I had intended also to have added to this Declaration a little Tract on the
Law Eternal, which limits Legislature, and forms the Basis of the Subjects
Rights; but the same Reason, which obliged me to postpone the Third part of the
Declaration already mentioned, obliged me to defer this also for the present:
Nevertheless, as my Declaration is founded on many of the principles and maxims
of that same " eternal Law," I shall beg leave to add to this Preface a short
quotation from the said Tract, concerning the weight, use, and manner, of
applying the maxims, or rules, of eternal Reason: which is the more necessary
at this time, because I find there are great numbers of people who are so ill
informed of these matters as to talk of the omnipotence of Parliament, as if
they conceived, that every thing whatsoever, that is ordained by Parliament,
must be Law, whether it be good or evil, right or wrong! -- A most pernicious
and baneful Doctrine this! -- A kind of Popery in Politics, (if I may use such
an expression.) which is dangerous to the eternal as well as temporal happiness
of mankind!

The welfare and happiness of Society, indeed, require, that every individual,
from the highest to the lowest, should have some general idea of Law; but more
particularly is this requifite in England, where the People enjoy (as the most
valuable Heritage derived from their ancestors) the natural and most equitable
Right of forming a part of the legislative Power.

Law is indeed a very comprehensive Term, which includes such a prodigious fund
of abstruse learning, that a particular and accurate knowledge of it is
scarcely to be acquired with the utmost assiduity and labor even of a man's
whole life; and yet a general idea of Law (I mean that which is immutable and
eternal, and which forms the ground and basis of all other Laws) may
nevertheless be very easily inculcated and as easily retained; because the
great out-lines, or rather the Elements and first Principles, of the LAW
consist of the most obvious and self-evident conclusions of REASON, which are
implanted in our very NATURE; since we inherit from our first Parents the
Knowledge of Good and Evil Good and Evil are not matters of Law or of Logic.
They are the most, if not the only, essential circumstances of the world. They
are what every thing else refers to. They stamp an eternal mark and difference
on all things, which even imagination cannot cancel or erase. The enjoyment of
the one, and the avoiding of the other, is the very end of our being, and
likewise of all the beings which do or which even can be supposed to exist, and
which have a sense and perception of them. Whatever therefore relates to the
general GOOD and EVIL of a People is of a public nature. It is that
circumstance which makes it so. The terms are as good as synonimous. Whatever
concerns, on the contrary, only this or that individual, is of a private
nature. It is confined to his or their happiness or welfare; to his or their
good and evil. There is again the true and unerring criterion. These things
seem clear to the greatest degree of intuitive certainty. It is strange to be
forced to reason about them! Considerations on the Measures carrying on with
respect to the British Colonies in North America. 2d Edit. p. 156, 157.

The "Considerations" indeed of this sensible Author, in every other part of
his work, highly merit the most serious attention of all those persons (of what
party soever) who desire real information and good council concerning the
present disputes with our Brethren in America.


, (beforementioned) by which, every Man who is not an idiot, or madman, (that
is, every Man of COMMON SENSE,) is naturally enabled to receive, discern, and
approve, the first Elements or leading principles of LAW and REASON, when
fairly proposed to him in his own language: and these same Elements and their
supreme incontrovertible authority being once known and acknowledged, it is
very easy, in general, for any Man of Common Sense to discern, by comparison,
what is contrary and repugnant thereto; for THE LAW is compared to a RULE, or
RIGHT LINE, -- "Lex est Linea Recti," -- by which every thing that is oblique,
crooked, transverse, or different from that RIGHT LINE is easily known to the
meanest capacity; and therefore, in the Law, the RIGHT LINE is always to be
PREFERRED, Linea recta semper praefertur transversali. Co. Lib. 10. b. And from
hence it arises, that the adjectives, OBLIQUE, CROOKED, TRANSVERSE, etc. which
have no immoral signification when applied to material shapes and figures, are
nevertheless ODIOUS IN LAW, which is well observed by the great Sir Edward
Coke. "Rectum" (says he) is a proper and significant word for the RIGHT that
any has; and WRONG, or INJURY, is in French aptly called TORT, because INJURY
and WRONG is WRESTED or CROOKED, bring contrary to that which is Right and
Straight, etc. ( See, in the margin below, the remainder of this Remark -- "Now
the LAW, that is" (says Sir Edward Coke) LINEA RECTA est Index sui et obliqui.
And Briton says that TORT A LA LEY EST CONTRARY, and as aptly for the cause
aforesaid is INJURY, in English called WRONG. And INJURIA is derived from in
and jus, because it is contrary to RIGHT, so as a fair tort is facere ^^^^um,
and Fleta says, est autem JUS PUBLICUM et PRIVATUM quod ex naturalibus
praeceptis aut Ge^^iiu^a, a^t civilibus, ^st collectum, et quod injure scripto
JUS appellatur, id in lege Augliae RECTUM esse cicitur. And in the Mirror and
other places of the Law it is called DROIT, as DROIT DEFEND, the Law defends.
1 Inst. lib. 2. c. 12. p. 158. The last two words, however, ought rather to
have been rendered the Law forbids, than "the Law defends," because the
English verb defend is very seldom used in the Sense which Sir Edward Coke
meant to express.


.

But when great Nations become too subservient to one, or a few individuals,
either by the corruption or total exclusion of popular Representation, in their
respective Legislatures, they generally seem to lose all sense of Right and
Wrong, all common Honesty in their political measures, as if they thought the
command of an earthly superior would be a sufficient warrant for them to set
aside THE ETERNAL LAW, and so perpetrate the most abominable actions with
impunity. How shall we account for such wretched time serving, in men who are
endued with the natural light of Reason and Common Sense! Perhaps it may be
often attributed to the fear of temporal Sufferings and inconveniences which
supercede that Reason and Conscience which should always control the actions
of Men, and distinguish them from Brutes For without these they deserve not the
name of men, since a more evident "mark of the Beast" need not be sought for
than the neglect of reason and conscience, or the baseness of yielding the same
in an active obedience to the arbitrary will of any man or body of men
whatsoever.


. They forget that whilst they yield an implicit active obedience to the
unlawful commands of any temporal Monarch or Legislature, through the fear of
present inconveniences or corporal Sufferings, they rebel against the King
eternal, who has power over their souls as well as their bodies "I say unto
you," (said our Lord.) my friends, be not afraid of them that kill tho body,
and, after that, have no more that they can do; but I will forewa^n you whom
you shall fear: fear him, which, after he has killed, has power to cast into
Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him. Luke xii. 5.6. See also Matthew x. 28.




It was on this Principle alone; this sense of superior Duty arising from the
fear of God, that I founded my Address to the Gentlemen of the Army, in my
little Tract on "Crown Law, respecting the due distincton between Murder and
Manslaughter; but as my sentiments on that head have since been censured, I
hope it will not be thought too foreign to my present topic, if I insist that
no act of injustice can be more flagrant than that of denying to any particular
order of Men (whether Soldiers or others) their natural Right of appealing to
the eternal Law, and of acting agreeable to the dictates of their own Reason
and Conscience!

In my former Tract I remarked, that the Law will not excuse an unlawful Act
committed by a SOLDIER, even though he commits it by the express Command of the
highest military Authority in the Kingdom, etc. and that "Men of true Honor,"
who have also a true Sense of Religion, will not only be mindful that they are
Soldiers and Subjects to an earthly KING, but that they are also Soldiers and
Subjects to the KING of KINGS, whose Laws and Precepts they will, on all
occasions, prefer to every other command, etc.

But this has been denied, it seems, by a Critic, in the Monthly Review for
January, 1774, who calls it a strange Principle! In an Age of infidelity,
indeed, it may perhaps be allowed (in one Sense) to be a strange Principle; but
then we have the greatest Reason to lament the ignorance and depravity of those
Men who esteem it so in any other sense than than of being too often neglected
and transgressed! for I trust that no Man, who admits or believes the divine
authority of the holy Scriptures, will doubt the Truth of it.

If this strange PRINCIPLE had not been equally true, the English Nation (as I
remarked in my former Tract) would long ago have been enslaved: and I will now
add, that even the very standing Army itself would, by this time, have been
reduced to that abject State of political Slavery, which at present disgraces
the standing Army of France I am a professed enemy, indeed, to standing Armies;
but God forbid that I should be so to the individuals incorporated therein,
whose true honor, natural dignity, and just privileges, AS MEN, I shall over
be ready to assert and vindicate; and indeed I am bound to do so by that
indispensible duty which I owe to the great Author of human Nature, in
opposition to the spiritual prince of this world, who is ever plotting to
corrupt, vilify, and enslave, that noblest work of God, Mankind! And as this
same Love and Reward, which I here profess for the INDIVIDUALS, of the Army,
are certainly due also to the INDIVIDUALS of every other Body of Men, whose
general Principles are censured in this Declaration, I must beg leave to assure
my Readers, that I do not mean to oppose the Men, but merely their unreasonable
Principles, without any personal application whatsoever; for, otherwise, the
severity of my expressions (especially against the Church of Rome and the
French Government) would be entirely inconsistent with that "Good Will to Men,"
which I am indispensibly obliged, Upon this point I have wrote a distinct
Tract, which is intended also for publication, and entitled "a Tract on the Law
of Liberty."


, for my own eternal Happiness, to maintain!


, and therefore those Writers, who attempt, by any fallacious sophistry, to
withdraw our British Soldiers See Note in page x. of this Preface.
from their obedience to the eternal Law, or from that allegiance which they
indispensibly owe to the empire of Reason and Conscience, may justly be said to
trial them more like Brutes than Men!

But as all men of Common Sense are enabled, by that hereditary Knowledge
beforementioned, (which has been common to all ranks of people ever since the
fall of Man,) to distinguish Good from Evil This point is more particularly
examined and proved in my Tract concerning, the Law of Nature and Principles of
Action in MAN.


; so they are equally enabled (and indeed entitled) thereby to judge "Do ye not
know that the Saints" (which Term is not confined to Persons of any particular
Rank or Office) shall JUDGE THE WORLD? And, if the World shall be judged by
you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest Matters? -- Know ye not that we
shall JUDGE Angels? -- HOW MUCH MORE THINGS THAT PERTAIN TO THIS LIFE, 1 Cor.
vi. 2.3.


concerning the Legality of all human Ordinances, that is, to discern and
distinguish Right from Wrong, Equity from Iniquity, Droit from Tort, Jus from
its opposite Injuria, etc. This universal faculty of discernment perhaps will
be better known and more readily acknowledged under the title of Conscience;
for by that natural instinct of Conscience every individual knows when he does
amiss, and is thereby rendered responsible before God and Man for all his
actions!

And as all natural Faculties may be improved by the rudiments of Art and
Science, so even the NATURAL FEELINGS OF CONSCIENCE may be rendered more
sensible, tender, and distinguishing, by a proper Knowledge of the Elements or
leading Precepts of the LAW ETERNAL.

The remainder of the Tract consists in a recital and application of such
general Maxims as must be allowed, by all persons of Common Sense, to be THE
NECESSARY CONCLUSIONS OF REASON, and are therefore to be esteemed LAWS OF
NATURE, such as no Power on Earth can have any authority to counter act; and
the said general Maxims or Rules of Reason and natural Law are accordingly by
our Law writers, with great propriety, esteemed the, first Foundation of the
English Law Primum Fundamentum Legis Angliae est LEX RATIONIS, etc. Quae in hoc
Regno, sicut in omnibus aliis Regnis, ubique tenentur. Doct. et Stud. c. 5. p.
214. There is indeed an inferior order of Maxims (though yet of very great
authority) which arise from general customs and the approved ancient
determinations of the Courts of Law; and these form, what is called, THE FOURTH
foundation of the English Law; though they may be ranked (as the Author of
Doctor and Student informs us) with the general ancient customs ON THE THIRD
foundation. -- Si quis tamen pro uno solo fundamento ea (meaning the general
customs, and the several maxims arising therefrom) censeri judicaverit, ad
placitum suum, ea pro uno tantum fundamento compotare potest, et tune secundum
illum quinque fundamenta (for otherwise he reckons six in in all) Legis Angliae
tantum assignari debent. Doct. et Stud. c. 8. p. 28. But as the true meaning of
the said inferior Maxims is not obvious to people in general, like those
belonging to the first foundation, it is happy for us that they are not
necessary to be known by any persons who do not profess the Law; neither,
indeed, can they be known without great study and labor, of which we are well
apprised by the learned Author of Doctor and Student. Haec vero maxima solum in
Curiis Regiis, five inter Legis Angliae peritos noscuntur, nec leviter absque
magno studio in legibus Angliae habendo cogno^ci possunt. Ideo pro
separabilibus fundamentis ponuntur. Ibid.


. It is on these incontrovertible and plain MAXIMS, these necessary Conclusions
of REASON, that the following Declaration is founded; and therefore, as we are
warned also by the revealed Laws of God not to do evil, that good may come The
Apostle Paul has delivered a most tremendous warning to those wretched
Politicians, who (...) the baneful Doctrine -- Let us do EVIL that GOOD may
come; for he immediately adds, -- WHOSE DAMNATION (says he) IS JUST, Romans iii.
8. If those persons, who contend for the ABSOLUTE NECESSITY of Bribery,
Pensions, and other UNDUE means of parliamentary Influence for the carrying on
public Business, would carefully consider the said warning, they would have
just reason to be alarmed on account of their own personal danger, for having
promoted such a baneful and destructive principle!


, every reasonable Man must necessarily admit, that Good and Evil, Right and
Wrong, Justice and Iniquity, can never change their real properties through the
supposed NECESSITY of any political Measures whatsoever, and that nothing but
Justice and Righteousness can ever establish the Throne Take away the Wicked
from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in Righteousness.
Prove. xxv. 5. It is only against some particular Opinions and evil Council, and
not against the Persons of those who may have promoted the same, that I mean to
apply this excellent proverb: The real intentions of such Men, though
erroneous, may have been as sincere as my own; and I therefore protest, that my
earnest wish is to promote a change of opinions and measures, rather than of
persons, since those, who are once convinced of their former mistakes, may
hereafter prove more useful Servants to the public than others perhaps, whose
abilities and conduct are yet untried.


of our most gracious Sovereign, for whose Peace, and real Happiness, both
temporal and eternal, there is not a more sincere well-wisher amongst all his
Subjects, (notwithstanding the freedom of the follow-Declaration,) than

GRANVILLE SHARP.

A DECLARATION OF THE People's Natural Right to a Share in the Legislature, etc.
AN accurate and critical knowledge of Law (such as can only be acquired by
much reading and long experience in the profession) is indeed a necessary
qualification for those persons who undertake to deliver their opinions
concerning the nicer and more difficult questions of jurisprudence; but, when
the Natural Rights of any of our fellow subjects are apparently at stake, every
man has a right to judge for himself, and to declare his sentiments, as far as
plain conclusions of reason and common-sense will fairly warrant; and such only
are referred to in the following Declaration of the Natural Right of popular
Representation in the legislature.

Amongst all the rights and privileges appertaining unto us, (said that truly
noble lawyer, Lord Summers,) Judgment of whole Kingdoms, etc. p. 14.
. that of having a Share in the Legislation, and being to be governed by such
laws as we ourselves shall choose, is the most fundamental and essential, as
well as the most advantageous and beneficial, etc.

And as all British subjects, whether in Great Britain, Ireland, or the
Colonies, are equally free by the law of Nature, they certainly are equally
entitled to the same Natural Rights that are essential for their own
preservation; because this privilege of having a share in the legislation is
not merely a British Right, peculiar to this island, but it is also a Natural
Right, which cannot, without the most flagrant and stimulating injustice, be
withdrawn from any part of the British Empire by any worldly authority
whatsoever; because, by the natural Law, whereunto he [ALMIGHTY GOD] has made
all subject, (says the learned Hooker,) Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, lib.
1,. 10, p. 87.
the lawful power of making laws, to command whole politic societies of men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire societies, that for any Prince or
Potentate, of what kind soever upon earth, to exercise the same of himself, [or
themselves,] and not either by express Commission immediately and personally
received from God, or else by authority derived at the first from their consent
upon whose persons they impose laws, it is no better than mere tyranny! Laws
they are not, therefore, which public Approbation has not made so. Agreeable
to the same just principles of natural Equity is that maxim of the English
Constitution, that Law, to bind all, must be assented to by all; (Principia
Leget Aequit. p. 56.) and there can be no legal appearance of Assent without
some degree of Representation.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that the Representation of the people of
England is not so perfect as equity may seem to require, since very many
individuals have no VOTE in Elections, and consequently cannot be said
expressly to give their Assent to the laws by which they are governed:
nevertheless, the whole country which they inhabit, and in which they earn
their bread, and even the very houses in which they live, (whether they are
housekeepers or lodgers,) are represented I must beg leave to refer the reader
also to some excellent observations on this head, in a Pamphlet published since
the above was written, entitled, An Argument in Defense of the Colonies, p. 76,
77, and 78.


by the votes of the respective proprietors; since every Freeholder has a Right
to vote; so that, in this one respect, the Representation is general; and,
though far from EQUAL, would still be a sufficient check against arbitrary
power, and afford sufficient security for the lives and property of those
persons who have no Vote, if the laws against parliamentary corruption (and
especially that Act of 7 and 8 Will. III. c. 4.) were duly enforced; and also if
all persons, who are entrusted with the disposal of public Money, were required
to render a strict account of it, and to be severely punished whenever
convicted of exerting the influence of the public treasury against public
liberty; which is the most baneful treachery and dishonesty that men in office
(who are the servants of the Public, as well as of the King) can possibly
commit. But, notwithstanding the Inequality of the English Representation, and
the various means practiced to corrupt it, yet it has been the principal
instrument of preserving amongst us those remains of natural Liberty which we
still enjoy in a greater proportion than most other kingdoms, and has
occasioned more examples of just retribution on Tyrants, Traitors, and
Court-Favourites, in the English annals, than the history of any other nation
affords; so that M. Rapin is thereby led to conclude his account of K. Richard
II. (that notorious corrupter of parliaments, and enemy to the privileges of
London and other corporations) with the following reflection: That, in a
government such as that of England, all the efforts that the Sovereign makes,
to usurp an absolute authority, are so many steps which lead him toward the
precipice. C'est que dans un Gouvernement tell que celui d'Angletorre, tous les
efforts que le Souverain fait pour usurper un pouvoir absolu sont autant de pas
qui le conduisent verse le precipice. Tome 3. Live. x. p. 329.
It is manifest, therefore, that the constitutional government of England, even
with all its defects, is infinitely better than any other form of government
whereby the people are deprived of their just share in the legislature; The
celebrated Chancellor Fortescue asserts, that a limited or politic Government
(like that of England) is infinitely more eligible, for the interest and
satisfaction even of the Prince himself, than an absolute regal power: -- Non
jugum sed libertas est politice regeve populum; securitas quoque maxima nedum
plebi, sed ET IPSI REGI; alleviatio etiam non minima solicitudinis suae: --
Viz. That to rule the people by Government politic is no Yoke, but Liberty, and
great security, not only to the subjects, but also to the King himself; and
further, no small lightening or easement to his charge. (De Laud. Leg. Angl.
cap. 34, p. 78.) So that those politicians, who plead the necessity of
securing, at any rate, a majority in parliament, to vote implicitly for
whatever the Minister proposes, do miserably betray the true interest and peace
of their Sovereign! for this fixes upon the King and his Ministers (as in
arbitrary governments) the blame and ignominy of every determination that
happens to be wrong, which would otherwise either have been overruled by the
free Council of the nation, or else must have been equally imputed to the
People themselves: and yet this wretched policy has alternately been adopted by
all parties, notwithstanding that it is founded (like many of Machiavel's
doctrines) on that abominable antichristian principle of mere worldly-minded
men, -- "Let us do evil that good may come;" -- whose damnation (says the
apostle to the Romans) is just. Romans iii. 8. The evil of an undue parliamentary
influence they endeavor to excuse by the plea of Necessity for the Good of the
State, though it is certainly the most flagrant Violation of the fundamental
principles of the State, and is absolutely destructive of the true interest
both of the Prince and People!


so that the Inequality of Representation in this island affords no just
argument for setting aside the Representation of the people in other parts of
the British Empire; because experience teaches us, that even a defective
Representation is better than none at all; and therefore it is highly
unreasonable, and contrary to natural Equity, to pretend that our brethren and
fellow subjects in the more distant parts of the British Empire ought to be
deprived entirely of their natural Rights and Liberties, merely because our own
liberties are not entirely perfect! or because our own Representation in the
Legislature appears, in some few respects, to be defective! and it would be
quite as unreasonable to allege, that the principle or reason of the maxim
before quoted ( viz. that Law, to bind all, must be assented to by all) is
unjust and inconclusive, merely because it would be very difficult to
accomplish it literally by the express assent of every individual! But it is
clearly sufficient that the maxim be construed to signify that delegated assent
of the people by a majority of their legal Representatives, which is
constitutionally necessary to make all laws binding; Nedum principis voluntate,
sed et totius regni assensu, ipsa ( i. e. Angliae statuta) conduntur, quo
populi laesuram illa efficere nequeunt, vel non eorum commodum procurare, etc.
-- Et si statuta haec, tanta solennitate et prudentia edita, efficaciae tantae,
quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non esse contingant, concito reformari
ipsa possunt, et NON SINE COMMUNITATIS ET PROCERUM REGNI ILLIUS ASSENSU, quali
ipsa primitus emanarunt, etc. Chancel. Fortesc. de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 18, p.
40. b.


and such a legal Representation of the people is therefore absolutely
necessary to constitute an effectual Legislature for any part of the British
Empire; for no Tax can be levied without manifest Robbery and Injustice where
this legal and constitutional Representation is wanting; because the English
Law abhors the idea of taking the least property from Freemen without their
free consent -- "It is iniquitous" ( iniquum est, says the maxim) Iniquum est
ingenuis hominibus non esse liberam rerum suarum alienationem. Co. Lit. 223.
And again: Quod nostrum est, sine facto five defectu nostro, amitti seu in
alium transferri non potest. 8 Co. 92. Rerum suarum quilibet est moderator et
arbiter. Co. Lit. 223. Regulariter non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda.
Co. Lit. 223. And again: Non potest rex subditum renitentem onerare
impositionibus. 2 Inst. 61. from Fortescue, c. 9. and 18.


that Freemen should not have the free disposal of their own effects; -- and
whatever is iniquitous can never be made lawful Quicquid est contra normam
recti est injuria. 3 Bulls. 313. And Lex nemini operatur iniquum -- nemini facit
injuriam. Jenk. Cent. 22. And therefore Quod contra legem fit PRO INFECTO
habetur. 4 Co. 31.


by any authority on earth; not even by the united authority of King, Lords,
and Commons; for that would be contrary to the eternal "Lex est ab aeterno."
Jenk. Cent. 34.


Laws of God, which are supreme. -- Etiam si aliquod statutum esset editum
contra eas, (leges divinas,) nullius vigoris in legibus Angliae censeri debet,
etc. Doct. et Stud. c. 6, p. 18.




In every point of view, the making laws for the subjects of any part of the
British Empire, without their participation and assent, is INIQUITOUS, and
therefore unlawful: for though the purport of any law, so made, be in itself
perfectly just and equitable, yet it becomes otherwise Qui aliquid statuerit
part inaudita altera, aequum licet dixerit, haud aequum fecerit. Princip. Leg.
et Aequit. p. 90. or -- "haud aequus fuerit." 6 Co. 52.


(that is, unjust and iniquitous, and therefore unlawful) by the want of these
necessary legal Formalities " Forma legalis forma essentialis." 10. Co. -- 100.
And Forma non observata infertur adnullatio actus. 12 Co. 7.


of Representation and Assent: for if the inhabitants of one part of the empire
might determine a question, or enact a law, for the peculiar advantage only of
that one part, though to the manifest detriment and injury of another part,
without the Representation of the latter, the former part would be made judges
in their own cause; a circumstance that would be literally partial! the very
reverse of justice and natural equity, and which must, therefore, be esteemed
Iniquity, even to a fundamental maxim, Iniquum est aliquem rei sui esse
judicem. -- "In propria causa nemo judex." Principia Legis et Aequitatis, p. 41.


viz. It is INIQUITOUS for any one to be a Judge in his own cause. Partiality
is, therefore, such an abomination in the eye of the law, that no Power on
earth can make it LAWFUL: for even an Act of Parliament (says the learned Judge
Hobart, Rep. 87.) made against NATURAL EQUITY, as to make a man judge in his
own case, (the example, observe, is the very point in question) " is VOID in
itself;" for jura naturae sunt immutabilia, and they are "leges legum."

Every King of England (apparently for the same reason) is restrained by the
Law from changing or making new Laws without the assent or consent of his WHOLE
KINGDOM in Parliament expressed. NEQUE Rex ibidem, per se, aut ministros suos,
tallagia, subsidia, aut quaevis onera alia, imponit legiis suis, aut leges
eorum mutat, vel novas condit, sine concessione vel assensu totius regni sui in
parliamento suo expresso, etc. Chancell. Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae,
c. 36, p. 84. b.
And the whole Kingdom, even of Great Britain itself, is only a part of the
British Empire; and therefore, by a parity of reasoning, cannot justly or
equitably be permitted to make laws for the whole; because where the same
reason is, the same law (or right) must prevail: "Ubi eadem ratio, ibi idem
lex," or "jus." Principia Leg. et Aequit. p. 116.


for turpis est pars quae non convenit cum suo toto; (Plowden, 161.) and nihil
in lege intolerabilius est, eandem rem diverso jure censeri. 4 Co. 83. The free
Representation of the people in the legislature is, therefore, to be esteemed,
of all our Rights, the most essential, (as Lord Summers has declared,) to
maintain that excellent Equilibrium of power, or mixed government, limited by
law, which our ancestors have always most zealously asserted, and transmitted
to us, as our best Birthright and Inheritance; Major haereditas venit unicuique
nostrum a jure et legibus quam a parentibus. 2 Inst. 56.
so that every attempt to set the same aside in any degree, or in any part of
the empire, or to corrupt it by undue influence of places and pensions, or
bribes with public money, is Treason against the Constitution; the highest of
Treason: The first and highest Treason is that which is committed against the
Constitution. Lord Sommers's Judgment of whole Kingdoms, p. 8. -- Est autem
injuria omne quod non jure fit. Fleta, l. 2, c. 1. And, on the other hand, they
neither are, nor can be Traitors, who endeavor to preserve and maintain the
Constitution; but they are the Traitors, who design and pursue the subversion
of it; they are the Rebels, that go about to overthrow the Government of their
Country; whereas such as seek to support and defend it are the truly loyal
persons, and do act conformable to the ties and obligations of fealty. Lord
Summers, p. 9. -- Agreeable to this doctrine was the answer of Dr. Sharp,
archbishop of York, when the question was put to him, How a person, who had
sworn Allegiance to King James, could, with a good conscience, take the same
oath to King William? To which he replied, That the Laws of the land are the
only rule of our conscience in this matter, and we are no further bound to pay
obedience to governors, nor to any other governors, than the Laws enjoin. If,
therefore, King William, in the eye of the Law, be our King, we must in
conscience pay obedience to him as such. I take this (says he) for a certain
truth, that, as the Law makes the King, so the same Law extends, or limits, or
transfers, our obedience and allegiance; and all Oaths imposed by the Law
oblige the conscience no further than the Law meant they should oblige. Only
this is always to be remembered, that whatever Obedience the Laws of the land
require of us, it is to be understood with this proviso, that it be not
contradictory to the Laws of God. But in that case we must obey passively,
though we cannot obey actively: and with this tacit condition I do suppose all
oaths of fidelity in the world are given and taken. Life of Abp. Sharp, part
3d, page 24, 25, and 26. MS. wrote by his Son, for the use of his Grandchildren.


and therefore whatsoever is ordained, that can clearly be proved to be
contrary to the constitution, must be allowed to be fundamentally wrong, and
therefore null and void of itself; for, sublato fundamento, cadit opus. (Jenk.
Cent. 106.) But more particularly the Parliament has no power to give up the
ancient and established Right of the people to be represented in the
legislature; because an Act for so base a purpose would entirely subvert the
principles and constitution on which the very Existence of the legislature
itself, which ordained it, is formed! so that such an unnatural Act of the
state would be parallel to the crime of felo de se in a private person; and,
being thus contrary to the nature of things, can never be rendered valid by any
Authority whatsoever. Quae rerum natura prohibentur NULLA LEGE confirmata sunt.
(Finch, 74.) And Nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum. Co. Lit. 97.


And indeed it is laid down as a maxim, by the great Lord Summers, that no man
or society of men have power to deliver up their preservation, or the means of
it, to the absolute Will of any man (or men); and they will have always a right
to preserve what they have not power to part with. P. 26. And if a politic
society has no just power to deliver up even its own preservation, it certainly
has much less right to deliver up the necessary preservation of other societies
of their brethren and friends (not represented among them) without their
Consent: and all such attempts must necessarily be deemed void and ineffectual,
because there is no necessity to obey, where there is no authority to ordain.
Ubi non est condendi authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas. Dav. 69. And
Judicium a non suo judice datum nullius est momenti. 10 Co. 76.


For as it so clearly appears, from what has been said, that Natural Equity
does not permit even the inferior Property of lands, goods, chattels, or money,
to be alienated without the consent or fault of the proprietors, much less can
it permit the alienation, annulling, or changing, of our most valuable
inheritance, the Law, without the due assent and consent of the heritors
themselves, the People at large, or their lawful Representatives in their
respective assemblies or parliaments! Nam non potest rex Angliae, ad libitum
suum, leges mutare regni, sui. Principatu nam que nedum regali, sed et
politico, ipse suo populo dominatur. And again: "Quia nec leges, ipse" [rex]
sine subditorum assensu mutare poterit, nec subjectum populum renitentem
onerare impositionibus peregrinis; quare populus ejus libere fruetur bonis
suis, LEGIBUS, quas cupit, regulatus, nec per regem suum, aut quemvis alium
depilatur, etc. Chancel. Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 9, p. 26.


This is a necessary conclusion of reason and common-sense; drawn from the
effect and force of Natural Equity, even in cases of much less consequence (
viz. respecting goods and common pecuniary property); so that the distinction,
which some great and able politicians have lately made, between Taxation and
Legislation, (in the late disputes about taxing the Colonies,) was certainly
erroneous, though well intended; since it plainly appears, that the right of
Legislation is not less inseparable, by Natural Equity, from the people of
every part of the British Empire, than the right of granting or withholding
Taxes; for, otherwise, the free subjects of one part of the empire would be
liable to be most materially injured in their greatest and most valuable
inheritance, the Law, by the hasty decisions of men on the other side of the
empire, with whom probably they would be totally unacquainted, and whose
interest might perhaps be as widely different from theirs (for any thing they
could know to the contrary) as their situation upon the face of the globe is
distant; that is, as widely different as the East is from the West! Would this
be equitable? could such notorious Injustice Si a jure discedas, vagus eris, et
erunt omnia omnibus incerta. Co. Lit. 227. And, Rerum ordo confunditur si
unicuique jurisdictio non servetur. (4 Inst. proem.) For, if the fundamental
Rule of the Constitution be set aside even in one instance, the baneful
influence of such an evil precedent will soon prepare the way for the
Destruction of the whole Law; because uno absurdo dato, infinita sequuntur. 1
Coke, 102.


be ever made lawful? The true constitutional mode of connecting British
Dominions, that are otherwise separated by Nature, is demonstrated by the
established example of the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, which by long
experience has proved to be sufficiently effectual. It must be acknowledged,
indeed, that an Act of Parliament was made in the 6th of K. George I. chap. 5.
wherein it is laid down, that the King and Parliament of Great Britain may make
Laws to bind Ireland. If the preceding arguments are not sufficient to prove in
what light the said Act is to be considered, yet the present distinct and
separate Jurisdiction of the Irish Parliament, the Continuation of their
ancient and constitutional Privileges, notwithstanding the doctrine asserted in
the said Act, and their annual Transactions, both in Taxation and Legislation,
are Facts, which prove (better than Arguments) that the people of Ireland have
an inherent Right to enact Laws independent of the British Parliament;
otherwise the King's Assent would not be sufficient to render the said laws
valid and binding without the especial approbation and consent also of the
British Parliament, which indeed is never required; so far is it from being
necessary! And, farther, the inhabitants of Great Britain would think it
extremely unreasonable and unjust, if the Parliament of Ireland should claim a
Right of making Laws, with the King's assent, to bind any part of this Island!
The argument is reciprocal: so that, if we should really detest such a measure
against ourselves, the Law of Laws forbids us to claim the like power over any
of our fellow subjects, without their free consent. "Non facias alteri quod
tibi non vis fieri." This is laid down as one of the most common precepts of
the Law of Reason (Doct. and Stud. c. 2, p. 7.); and such is the immutability
of the Law of Reason, that against it there can be no prescription, statute, or
custom; and if any are made contrary thereto, they are not to be esteemed
statutes or customs, but corruptlae, i. e. Corruptions or Depravities -- Non
sunt statuta sive consuetudines, sed corruptelae. Doct. and Stud. c. 2, p. 5.
To the same effect is that Command of Christ himself, (recorded in Matt. vii.
12.) which our Lord declared to be the Law and the Prophets; viz. Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is THE LAW AND
THE PROPHETS: so that it may justly be entitled, the Law of Laws; and a
statute, therefore, which is contrary thereto, is doubly unlawful.

The separate interests of the two Kingdoms are sufficiently restrained, with
respect to each other, by our excellent Constitution of State, which requires
the Assent of the People, (that is of those which are concerned respectively,)
to render any Law valid and binding upon either nation; which the foregoing
arguments demonstrate: and I hope the ingenious and sensible author of the
argument in defense of the Colonies (lately published) will acknowledge, that
he has allowed too much, when he admits, in page 114, that the whole kingdom of
Ireland is bound by the Acts of the supreme Legislature, etc. which doctrine
leads him afterward to make a distinction between Taxation and Legislation.

And again, the two kingdoms are so firmly united, by the bands of Allegiance,
to one Head (or Monarchy) of limited power, that their interests in all
material external exigences are thereby rendered mutual, as well as their
internal interest, in the maintenance of natural and constitutional Liberty, in
each kingdom respectively; because one of them cannot be deprived of this, (as
they are governed by the same Head,) without hastening the destruction of the
other. And this intimate connection of mutual interest in the constitution of
state, and in the reciprocal enjoyment of the same reasonable common Law,
(whereby each kingdom enjoys an Equality of privilege, and natural freedom,)
renders the Union of the two kingdoms more just and equitable, and,
consequently, more safe and durable, than it could possibly have been made by
any other means: and the inhabitants of both islands (though sprung from a
variety of jarring, jealous, and fierce nations) have, by these means acquired
a certain mutual consideration for each other, as fellow subjects, which could
never have been produced by mere alliances, guarantees, or defensive leagues,
nor, perhaps, by any other mode of government whatever, than that by which
divine Providence has effected it; viz. the English Constitution: this has
firmly united the Strength of the two Islands; whereby reciprocal succor, in
time of need, is insured to both.


But, as it does not appear that the Parliament of Ireland ever acknowledged or
gave any formal Assent to the said Act, the same must necessarily be considered
as a mere assertion on one part, at the making of which, the persons most
materially concerned on the other part were neither HEARD, nor represented! a
defect Qui aliquid statuerit, part inaudita altera, licet aequum dixerit, haud
aequum fecerit: so that, if any act is ever so just in itself, yet it becomes
otherwise (that is, unjust and iniquitous, as is before remarked) by the want
of these legal formalities.


the most notorious that can possibly be attributed to any proceeding, either
in the enacting or execution of Laws! and therefore it is to very little
purpose to cite the said Act as a Precedent for taxing the American Subjects
without their Consent; for the privileges which the Parliament of Ireland has
maintained and enjoyed, both before and since that time, (clearly distinct and
separate from the British Parliament,) afford a better and more authentic
precedent on the other side of the question, ( viz. in behalf of the people's
natural Rights,) than the Act itself does against them: for, as the King and
the People (including the Lords and Commons) of Great Britain constitute the
sovereign Power (under God) or Legislature of Great Britain, so the King and
the People of Ireland are the natural and constitutional Legislature or State
of that kingdom, and actually exercise (both in Legislation and Taxation) their
distinct jurisdiction, to this day; which is the best proof of their Right:
and, in like manner, according to this ancient and established legal precedent,
the King, together with the People of every distinct province, subject to the
imperial Crown of Great Britain, and detached (as Ireland is) from this island,
ought to be and have been esteemed, from the first establishment of our
colonies, the only proper and constitutional Legislature for each province
respectively; Every establishment in the American Colonies has been settled by
our ancestors as nearly as possible to the constitutional form of government in
the Mother Country; and, as the advantages of this mode have been proved by the
experience of more than a century; (see an argument, just published, in defense
of the exclusive Right, claimed by the Colonies, to tax themselves, p. 36, 39,
44.) it is very dangerous (now that the colonies begin to be filled with
people) to vary the ancient and approved Form of the Constitution. Periculosum
est res novas et inusitatas inducere. Co. Lit. 379. And, Clausulae inconsuetae
semper inducunt suspicionem. 3 Co. 81. And again, Quae praeter consuetudinem et
morem majorum fiunt neque placent, neque recta videntur. 4 Co. 78. And lastly,
Whatsoever is against the Rule of Law is inconvenient. Co. Lit. p. 379.


because the Representation of the People, in every part of the British Empire,
is absolutely necessary to constitute an effectual Legislature, according to
the fundamental principles of the English Constitution; for none of them,
separately, can be esteemed a competent Legislature to judge of the other's
Rights, without the highest injustice and iniquity; which is before
demonstrated by some of the first maxims or principles of Reason. And yet,
howsoever distinct these several parts or provinces may seem, in point of
situation, as well as in the exercise of a separate legislative power for each,
(which constitutional Right they have enjoyed beyond the memory of man,) they
are nevertheless firmly united by the circle of the British Diadem, so as to
form one vast Empire, which will never be divided, if the safe and honest
policy be adopted, of maintaining the British Constitution inviolate, in all
parts of the Empire: for it is a system so natural, so beneficial, and so
engaging, to the generality of mankind, that by the same means we might hold
the Empire of the World, were the laws of natural Equity, Justice, and Liberty,
to be strictly observed, and the abomination of domestic The toleration of
domestic Slavery in the Colonies greatly weakens the claim or natural Right of
our American Brethren to Liberty. Let them put away the accursed thing (that
horrid Oppression) from among them, before they presume to implore the
interposition of divine Justice; for, whilst they retain their brethren of the
world in the most shameful involuntary servitude, it is profane in them to look
up to the merciful Lord of all, and call him Father!


as well as political Slavery abolished!

On the other hand, it is not only Treason against the Constitution to attempt
to deprive any free British Subjects of their natural Right to a Share in the
Legislature, To extend the Governor's Right to command, and Subject's Duty to
obey, beyond the Laws of one's country, (said that learned lawyer, Lord
Summers,) is TREASON against the Constitution, and Treachery to the society
whereof we are members. Judgment of whole Kingdoms, etc. p. 6.


but it is equally derogatory and injurious to the Authority of the Crown; Nor
is it merely the first and highest Treason in itself, that a member of a
political society is capable of committing, to go about to subvert the
Constitution; but it is also the greatest Treason he can perpetrate against the
Person, Crown, and Dignity of the King; for such an endeavor both annuls and
vacates all his title to superiority over those above whom he was exalted from
the common level by virtue of the Constitution, and deprives him of all
rightful and legal claim of rectoral authority over the society, by destroying
the alone foundation upon which it was erected, and by which he became vested
with it, etc. Ibid. p. 9. and 10.
because a King of England has no legal Authority to govern by any other mode
than that limited government called the English Constitution, which he is sworn
to maintain; for such is the frailty of human nature, that no man or body of
men whatever is to be entrusted with the administration of government, unless
they are thus limited by Law, and by a due Representation of the people at
large, subject to a frequent appeal, by Election, to the whole body of
constituents: for it is a maxim, that he who is allowed more Power, by Law,
than is fit, (or equitable,) the same will still desire more Power than is
already lawful: Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quam licet. 2 Inst. 465.
so that no Power on earth is tolerable without a just limitation; and Law,
which ought to be supreme, Firmior et potentior est operatio legis quam
dispositio hominis. Co. Lit. 102.
cannot subsist where Will and Pleasure are absolute, whether it be the Will of
one, of a few, or of many. "Whosoever" (says Aristotle) is governed by a man
without Law, is governed by a man and by a beast. Lord Summers, N. 11.

Ipse autem rex, non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, et sub lege; quia lex
facit regem. Attribuat igitur rex legi quod lex attribuit ei, videlicet
dominationem et potestatem: non est enim rex ubi dominatur voluntas, et non
lex. Bracton, lib. 1, c. 8. -- Rex autem habet superiorem, Deum. S. -- Item
legem, per quam factus est rex. -- Item curiam suam, etc. -- Et ideo si rex
fuerit sine fraeno, i. e. sine lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, etc. Bract. lib.
2, c. 21, p. 34




A King, therefore, who presumes to act without the constitutional limitation,
destroys the foundation of his own authority; for the most respectable and most
ancient writer on the English Constitution assures us, that there is no King
where Will rules, (or is obsolute,) "and not Law." -- Non est enim rex ubi
dominatur voluntas, et non lex. Bract. lib. 1, c. 8, p. 5, b.


The same doctrine is expressed still more clearly in the old Year Books, --
I^a ley est le plus haute inheritance que le roy ad: car par la ley il meme et
touts ses sujets sont rules, et si le ley ne fuit, NULL ROI, et null inheritance,
sera. 19 Hen. VI. 63.
that, if there was no Law, there would be no King, and no inheritance.

For these plain reasons, whenever the English Government ceases to be limited,
in any part of the British Dominions, it ceases to be lawful!

And therefore the fatal consequences of proceeding to enforce the execution of
any Acts, or Resolutions, for the establishing such unlimited and unlawful Ubi
non est condendi authoritas, ibi non est parendi necessitas. Dav. 69. Prin.
Leg. et Aequit. p. 117.
Government, is more easily conceived than expressed; because the condition of
all subjects would be alike, whether under absolute or limited Government, if
it were not lawful Insuper lex rationis permittit plurima fieri, ut scilicet
quod licitum est vim vi repellere, et quod fas unicuique se tueri et rem suam
defendere contra vim injustam. Doct. et Stud. c. 2, p. 8. -- See also Bracton,
lib. 4, c. 4, p. 162. b.
to maintain and preserve those limitations, since Will and Pleasure, and not
Law, would be, alike in both, the measure of obedience; for, to have liberties
and privileges, unless they may be defended, and to have none at all, is the
same thing as to be governed by mere Will and Pleasure (Lord Summers, p. 24.);
and misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum aut incertum.

Old-Jewry, London, June 25, 1774. GRANVILLE SHARP.

(COPY.) EXTRACT of a LETTER on the foregoing Subject, to a Friend in AMERICA,
dated February 21, 1774.
(...)I have also sent you a book lately published by Dr. --, respecting the
government of the British Colonies.

The reason of my sending the latter is not because I approve of it, or have
the least connection with the author; but, on the contrary, that you and your
friends in America may be aware of the unconstitutional doctrines which are
thereby propagated amongst us. I have not, indeed, had opportunity to peruse it
regularly; neither do I now think it necessary to do so; for I was lucky
enough, when I first took it up, to turn over a few pages in the fourth part,
containing five propositions upon the point in question, whereby the author's
sentiments and intentions may be sufficiently known without descending to his
arguments upon them; for not one of them (not even the 5th and last, which he
himself prefers) can possibly be reconciled either to Law, Equity, or sound
Politics; so that if the doctor, with the same neglect of Law and
constitutional Principles, had multiplied his propositions to the number of an
hundred times five, he would not have been able to lay down a plan or mode of
government tolerably suitable to the case before him; because, in this, as in
many other things, there is but, one right, though very many wrong methods of
proceeding; and the doctor has unfortunately forgot to state the only right
proposition upon the subject in question, that can be admitted consistently
with the necessary principles abovementioned of Law, Equity, and sound
Politics; viz. to do justice to our brethren of America; that is, to govern
them according to the established Principles of the English Constitution, and
known Laws of the Land, and heartily to acknowledge their unalienable right to
the same happy privileges by which the liberties of the mother country have
hitherto been maintained; the most essential of which is the privilege of
paying no other taxes than what are voluntarily granted by the people or their
legal representatives in general councils or parliaments.

Dr. -- is inexcusable for having omitted this sixth Proposition! for he cannot
be ignorant of the legal and established mode of extending the English
Constitution to countries detached from this island, because we have a standing
precedent and example (which has long subsisted, and has been universally
allowed) in the present government of Ireland; for that island, though unjustly
conquered by our ancestors, enjoys (or, at least, is allowed to be entitled to)
the same constitutional privileges as the seat of empire, England itself. The
respective Parliaments of the two islands are entirely independent of each
other; they separately grant, from time to time, the necessary supplies to the
state; and no man may presume to deny their right of enquiring respectively
into the application of them. But, notwithstanding this distinct economy, and
the entire independency of the natives or subjects, with respect to each other,
yet they are firmly united, by the bands of allegiance, to one Head (or
Monarchy) of limited power, whereby they enjoy the privileges of the same
reasonable common Law, and the same excellent Constitution of state: so that
the equality of privilege and condition renders the Union more just and
equitable, and consequently more safe and durable, than it could possibly have
been made by any other means.

And the inhabitants of both islands (though sprung from a variety of jarring,
jealous, and fierce nations) have, by this means, acquired a certain mutual
consideration for each other, as fellow subjects, which could never have been
produced by mere alliances, guarantees, or defensive leagues, nor perhaps by
any other mode of government whatever, than that by which Divine Providence has
effected it; viz. the English Constitution.

This has firmly united the strength of the two islands; whereby reciprocal
succor in time of need is insured to both. This established example of the
true constitutional mode of connecting British Dominions, that are otherwise
separated by Nature, will enable us, by comparison, to discern the illegality
and injustice of Dr. -- 's five Propositions. The stately vine of British
Dominion (if I may use that scriptural type) has providentially extended its
luxuriant branches to the most distant parts of the earth! and will continue to
spread and increase as long as Justice and the Laws of Liberty are duly
maintained by those who are entrusted with the administration of government
(unless the wickedness of individuals, manifested by the exercise of domestic
Slavery and Oppression in the Colonies, and of political Corruption and
Venality at home, with the growing vices attending both respectively, should
unhappily draw down God's vengeance upon us! and perhaps our mutual punishment
is at this time impending in the present differences and ignorance of the
English Constitution): But how will the trunk or stock of the British Vine
appear, if we should entirely separate or lop off the branches? -- The American
Branches are already detached, indeed, (in point of distance,) and widely
separated from the Trunk, by a vast Ocean, but the imperial Crown of
Great Britain is, nevertheless, a sufficient band of union or connection between
them, it being the legal ensign of authority for the maintenance and execution
of the same just laws, the influence of which may, by a due constitutional
exertion of the regal Power, be circulated, like wholesome sap, from the root
to the most distant branches.

But if (according to Dr. -- 's 5th proposition) the flourishing branches of
North America were to be entirely separated from the trunk, and excluded from
the circle of the royal diadem, the effect would be reciprocally humiliating;
for the act of separation would, at the same time, unavoidably contract the
imperial Authority of the British Empire to the narrow limits of British and
Irish ground, except a few small Sugar-Islands, peopled chiefly by the most
miserable of slaves: so that both Great Britain and her Colonies would
reciprocally lose importance, strength, and security, by the disunion. A
Guarantee of independence against all foreign invaders, as proposed by Dr. --,
would fall far short of the effect which we enjoy by the present constitution,
because it would not, like the latter, produce that mutual consideration and
protection which are due from fellow subjects. Our connection, according to the
doctor's measure, would be upon no better footing than Alliances of the same
kind with detached foreign Powers, which (as experience teaches us) subsist no
longer than the private interest or separate views of the contracting parties.

If all these points are duly considered, the very proposing so pernicious a
measure must appear highly criminal, if not treasonable! especially as the
author has been pleased to insinuate, that there is no alternative! -- If we
neither can govern the Americans, (says he,) nor be governed by them; if we can
neither unite with them, nor ought to subdue them; what remains (says he) but
to part with them on as friendly terms as we can? But is it not Treason against
the Crown to insinuate that the Americans cannot be governed, as well as
Treason against the People at large, to say that we cannot unite with our
American Brethren, when there is a constitutional mode both of Government and
Union, established by law, and an unquestionable precedent, the observance of
which would undoubtedly satisfy every honest American Subject?

The advocates for the jurisdiction of the British Parliament in America, like
all promoters of bad measures, will not fail to represent those, that oppose
them, as licentious and disaffected persons; and therefore, as it is highly
necessary for the general welfare and subsistence of the British Empire, both
in Europe, Asia, and America, (upon the principles already explained,) that we
should strictly maintain our Loyalty to the Crown, at the same time that we
steadily assert our legal and constitutional Rights, -- I think we ought to
lose no proper opportunity of expressing our personal attachment to the King
and the royal Family, who, in themselves, indeed are truly amiable, and worthy
of esteem; but it is very difficult, in this world, to guard against
misrepresentation and bad advice; however, I trust that a steady perseverance
in Love and Duty will be the true means of your prevailing in the end, as it
will prove that your opposition is not occasioned either by disaffection or
disloyalty, but is truly legal and constitutional.

I am, with great esteem, Dear Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, GRANVILLE
SHARP.
P. S. I am entirely unacquainted, I profess, with the nature of the Crown
Charters or Grants to the several American Proprietors; and therefore (left
these should contain any condition or acknowledgement, on the part of the
landholders, which may seem to militate against the foregoing observations) I
must beg leave to add, that the legislature has agreed and laid down, as a
rule, that all the ancient arbitrary and military Tenures of land, and even
Socage in capite of the King, and the consequents upon the same, have been much
more burdensome, grievous, and prejudicial, to the Kingdom, than they have
been beneficial to the King (see preamble to the Act of 12th of Charles II.
chap. 24, for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in
capite, and by Knights Service and Purveyance, etc.); and for this just reason,
founded on "former "experience, Whereas it has been found, by former
experience, that the Courts of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures by
Knights-Service, either of the King or others, or by Knights-Service in capite,
or Soccage in capite of the King, and the consequents upon the same, have been
much more burdensome, grievous, and prejudicial, etc.


the Crown has ever since been restrained by the Law from granting "any
Manors, Lands, etc." upon such, or indeed any other conditions whatsoever, than
"free and common Socage only." See 2d and 4th Sections of the said Act.


I have heard, indeed, that a certain island in the northern part of America
was granted to a noble lord, with a particular jurisdiction upon the ancient
feudal plan, whereby he is said to have been established as Lord Paramount,
with a peculiar unconstitutional authority: but this, I am willing to presume,
is merely report; and, even if it were true, the Grant would be innocent enough
in its effects, provided the people be instructed in their Rights; because all
such undue conditions, as I have mentioned, are absolutely null and void in
themselves; for the law obliges us to construe them as if they had no other
meaning than a legal Grant of lands in free and common socage. See the 4th
section of the said Act. And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid,
that all Tenures (there is none excepted) hereafter to be created by the King's
Majesty, his heirs, or successors, upon any Gifts or Grants of any Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, of any Estate of inheritance at the common
law, shall be in free and common Socage, and shall be adjudged to be in free
and common Socage only, and not by Knights Service, etc.



SOLI DEO GLORIA ET GRATIA.
A DECLARATION OF THE People's Natural Right to a Share in the Legislature,
etc. PART II.
Qui non libere veritatem pronunciat, proditor est veritatis. 4 Inst. Epil.
PART II. CONTAINING A DECLARATION Or DEFENSE of the same DOCTRINE, ( Viz. The
Natural Right of the People to a Share in the Legislature,) When applied
particularly TO THE PEOPLE of IRELAND; In ANSWER to the ASSERTIONS of several
EMINENT WRITERS on that Point, which have hitherto been permitted to pass
without due ANIMADVERSION.
WHEN the First Part of this Declaration was sent to the Press, I was not aware
that there had been any controversy before the sixth of King George I.
concerning the freedom of our fellow subjects in Ireland, or that any
Englishman, acquainted with the principles of our excellent constitution of
State, had ever, before that time, presumed to advance any Doctrine, which
might tend to deprive our Irish Brethren of their natural freedom, and of the
inestimable benefits of that happy legal constitution, which British Subjects
in general are commonly supposed to inherit by BIRTHRIGHT!

But I have since had the mortification to find, that such great Authorities as
Lord Coke, Judge Jenkins, Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, Judge Blackstone, the
Honorable Mr. Justice Barrington, etc. might be quoted in favor of a contrary
Doctrine! And as I have mentioned the Union between Great Britain and Ireland
in the First Part of this Declaration, etc. as an Example of the true
constitutional mode of connecting British Dominions that are otherwise
separated by nature, I thought myself therefore, obliged to search and examine
the grounds upon which these grew and learned men have founded their opinions,
that if they should have Truth on their side, they might have the credit of it;
but if not, that the Truth of this important question, when plainly and
impartially stated, might prevent for the future any such undue pretensions on
the one hand, and jealousies on the other, as have too frequently occasioned
misunderstandings and controversies between the Subjects of the two Kingdoms.

Lord Hussy, Chief Justice in the Reign of King Henry VII. seems to have been
the First who ventured publicly to assert, that Statutes made in England shall
bind the Subject of Ireland Hussy, Chief Justice, disoit que les Statuts falts
on Angleterre liera ceux de Ireland, que ne suit moult. (...) d^s autres
Justices, nient obstant que a^c^^n de oux furent en coutrarid opinione. le
derrein term en son absence. Year Book, 1 Hen. VII. p. 3.
: And though the Doctrine is unconstitutional and dangerous, if admitted in a
general unlimited sense Which is clearly proved by Sir Richard Bolton,
Chancellor of Ireland, in the Declaration, etc. printed in Harris's Hibernica,
p. 29. -- As to the Opinion of Hussy, Chief Justice, in first of Hen. 7. fol.
3. that the Statutes made in England shall bind them of Ireland, this Opinion,
as it is put by him generally, cannot be law; for Brook, in abridging that
case in title Parliament, Sect. 19. says, that that opinion was denied to be
law, the last term before; and added further, tamen nota, that Ireland is a
Realm of itself, and has a Parliament in itself, implying thereby, that
Ireland could not be bound but by a Parliament of Ireland. And according to
that, is the opinion of the Judges in 20th Hen. VI. fol. 8. in John
Pilkington's case; and in 2d Rich. III. fol. II. in the Merchants of
Waterford's case, before remembered; and likewise contrary to the opinion of
Hussy, are the judgments of eight several Parliaments in Ireland before the
Statute of 10th of Hen. VII. viz. 13th of Edw. II. 19th of Edw. II. 18th of
Hen. VI. 29th of Hen. VI. 32d Hen. VI. 37th Hen. VI. and 8th Edw. IV. And since
the Statute 10th Hen. VII. of five Parliaments; viz. 28th of Hen. VIII. 33d of
Hen. VIII. 28th of Eliz. 11th of Jam. and 10th Car. besides the Statute of 10th
of Hen. VII. itself.


; yet, in justice to Judge Hussy, it must be allowed, that his Declaration was
certainly right with respect to the particular case then before him, which
related to the exportation of goods from Waterford: for, the Irish subjects
themselves do not deny the jurisdiction of Great Britain upon the high Seas,
nor in matters of external This binding in external transactions, seems to be
allowed (though unwillingly) by Mr. Molly neux, (a zealous asserter of the
liberties of Ireland in the Reign of King William.) "They seem" (says he,
speaking of English Acts of Parliament) at the utmost reach, to extend the
jurisdiction of the English Parliament over the subjects of Ireland, only in
relation to their action, beyond seas, out of the Realm of Ireland, as they are
the King of England's subjects, etc. p. 71.


commerce, though the English power, even in that respect, may sometimes
perhaps have been extended farther than reason and equity can fairly warrant.
But before Lord Chief Justice Hussy delivered his opinion, this proper
distinction, concerning the English Acts binding the Irish in external
Transactions, had been made (in his absence) by the other Judges in a preceding
term "All the Judges" (but we must except Hussy) were assembled in the
Exchequer Chamber, and there, with respect to the first question, it was said,
that the lands of Ireland have a Parliament among themselves, and all kinds of
Courts as in England; and, by the same Parliament, they make laws and change
laws, and are not bound by Statutes (made) in England, because they have not
here Knights of Parliament; but this is understood of lands and things only to
be effected in those lands, but their persons are subject to the King, and, as
subjects, they are bound to any thing out of that land, that is done out of
that land contrary to Statute, like as the inhabitants of Calais, Gascoigne,
Guicone, etc. while they were subjects of the King, and in like manner are
obedient under the Admiral of England concerning any thing done upon the
High-Seas, and also a writ of error of judgment given in Ireland (is
cognizable) in the King's Bench here in England.

Anno secundo Rich. III. p. 12. Omnes Justiciarii (but we must except Hussy)
associati fuerunt in Camera Scaccarii, et ibi quoad primam questionem
dicebatur, quod terrae Hiberniae inter se habent Parliamentum et omnimodo
Curias prout in Anglia, et per idem Parliamentum faciunt leges et mutant leges,
et non obligantur per statuta in Anglia, qui non hic babent Milites
Parliamenti; sed hoc intelligitur de terris et rebus in terris ill' tantum
efficiendo, sed personae illae sunt subjectae Regis, et tanquam subjecti erunt
obligati ad aliquam rem extra terram illam faciendam contra Statutum, sicut
habitantes in Calesia, Gascoignie, Guien, etc. dum fuerunt subjecti; et
similiter obedientes erunt sub Admirall' Angliae, de re facta super altum mare:
et similiter breve de errore de judicio reddito in Hibernia in Banco Regio hic
in Anglia, etc.


; which accounts for the remark of the Reporter, that this opinion of Chief
Justice Hussy was not much denied by the other Judges, though some of them were
of a contrary opinion the last term in his absence. But, by the expression,
that it was not much denied, it is apparent, that the other Judges did not
receive the doctrine of Chief Justice Hussy, entirely and absolutely, without
some demur; which could only consist in their adding that due distinction
beforementioned: for it plainly appears (notwithstanding the assertion of the
Reporter) that they were not, really, of a contrary opinion in the former term,
with respect to the case before them; which related to an external transaction,
the same that, in their former opinion, they declared to be subject to the
control of England; and, therefore, there was no reason why they should much
deny the opinion of Chief Justice Hussy, since the particular case before them
did not require it.

But the like excuse cannot be made for Sir Edward Coke, who, in Calvin's case,
seems to have adopted the opinion of Chief Justice Hussy, and yet has not
considered the nature of the case on which the same was delivered, having
declared a similar opinion in an indiscriminate general sense That albeit
Ireland was a distinct Dominion, yet the title thereof being by conquest, the
same, by judgment of law, might by express words be bound by Act of Parliament
of England. Calvin's Case, 7th Rep. p. 444.
, without paying the least regard to that just distinction between the external
and internal Government of Ireland, which the other Judges had before so
clearly laid down and confirmed by an unanswerable reason See the former note
in p. 56. Quia non hic habent Milites Parliamenti.
why the Irish should not be bound in the latter by any other laws than those
to which their own Parliament had assented, viz. Quia non hic habent Milites
Parliamenti: which Doctrine was agreeable also to what had long before been
declared by that celebrated constitutional Lawyer, the great Judge Fortescue on
Pilkington's -- et auxi la terre de Ireland est severe del' Roiaume d'
Angleterre: car si un disme ou quinzime soit grante icy, ceo ne liera ceux d'
Ireland mesque le Roy manderoit ^m cel' estat (for estatute) en Ireland soubz
son Grand Seel, sinon que ils veul' en leur Parliament ceo approver mes s'ils
veul allower ceo, donq sera tenu la et ils seront lies par icel'. Year Book
19th Hen. VI. p. 8.


case, in the 19th of Hen. VI. which was readily admitted at the same time by
Judge Portington, and (for any thing that appears to the contrary) agreeable
also to the opinion of all the other Judges that were then present; for, Sir
Richard Bolton remarks, that this was not denied by Markham, Yelverton, and
Ascough The case is stated by Sir Richard Bolton, Chancellor of Ireland, in his
Declaration, etc. printed in Harris's Hibernica, p. 15. as follows: That one
John Pilkington brought a scire facias against one A. to show cause, why
Letters Patents, whereby the King had granted an office in Ireland to the said
A. should not be repealed, whereas, the said John Pilkington had the same
Office granted him by former Letters Patents granted by the same King, to
occupy to himself or his Deputy. Whereupon the said A. was warned and appeared,
and said, 'That the land of Ireland, time beyond the memory of man, has been a
land separated and severed from the Realm of England, and ruled and governed by
the customs and laws of the same land of Ireland. And that the Lords of the
same land, which are of the King's Council, have used, from time to time in the
absence of the King, to elect a Justice, which Justice, so elected, has power
to pardon and punish all felonies, trespasses, etc. and to assemble a
Parliament; and by the advice of the Lords and Commonalty to make Statutes; and
he alleges further, that a Parliament was assembled, and that it was ordained
by the said Parliament, that every man who had any office within the said land,
before a certain day, and he puts the day in certain. shall occupy the said
Office by himself, or otherwise that he shall forfeit his office. And shows
further, how the said John Pilkington occupied the said office by a deputy, and
that, insomuch as he came not in proper person to reside upon his office before
the day, that his office was void, and that the King, by his Letters Patents,
granted the said office, so become void, to the said A. and prayed that the
said Letters Patents should be effectual, and not repealed.' And upon the plea
the said John Pilkington demurred in law. In the argument of which case, it was
debated by the Judges, Yelverton, Fortescue, Portington, Markham, and Ascough,
whether the said prescription were good, or void in law; Yelverton and
Portington held the prescription void; but Fortesine, Markham, and Ascough,
held the prescription good, and that the Letters Patents made to A. were good
and effectual, and ought not to be repeated: and in the argument of this case
it was agreed, by Fortescue and Portington, that if a tenth or fifteenth be
granted by Parliament in England, that shall not bind them in Ireland; although
the King send the same Statute into Ireland under his great seal: except they
in Ireland will in their Parliament approve it; but if they will approve it,
then it shall bind in Ireland. And Portington said, that if a tenth be granted
in the Parliament of England, that shall not bind in Ireland, because they have
not any commandment by writ to come to our Parliament; and this was not denied
by Markham, Yelverton, or Ascough. Upon this case these points following are to
be observed, First, that the Lords of the Council of Ireland had then power, in
the absence of the King, and vacancy of a Lieutenant or Deputy, to elect a
Justice. and that is plainly proved by the preamble of the Statutes of 33d of
Hen. VIII. chap. 2. in Ireland. The words are these; 'For as much as
continually since the conquest of this Realm of Ireland, it has been used in
this same Realm of Ireland, that at every such time, as it has chanced the
same Realm to be destitute of a Lieutenant, Deputy, Justice, or other head
Governor, by death, surrender, or departure out of the said Realm, or
otherwise, the Council of this Realm of Ireland, for the time being have used,
by the laws and usages of the same, to assemble themselves together to choose
and elect a Justice, to be Ruler and Governor of this Realm, till the King's
Highness had deputed and ordained a Lieutenant, Deputy, or other Governor for
the same Realm; which Justice, so being elected, was, and has been, always by
the ancient laws and customs of this said Realm of Ireland, authorized to do
and exercise the said room of Deputy there, for the good rule and governance,
and leading of the King's subjects within the said Realm of Ireland, and in
ministration of Justice, with diverse other authorities, pre-eminences, and
jurisdictions there; which usage, election, and authority of the said Justice,
has been many times ratified and confirmed by diverse Statutes in this Realm
provided and made. But this order of election of a Justice is now, by the laid
Statute of 33d of Hen. VIII. altered; as by the said Statute more at large may
appear.


Sir John Fortescue had declared, that, if a tenth or fifteenth were granted
here, this should not bind those of Ireland, even though the King should send
the same Statute into Ireland under his great seal, except they will in their
Parliament approve it; but, if they will allow it, (i. e.) then it shall be
held there, and they shall be bound by it. And to this point Judge Portington
expressly declared his assent -- et auxi quant a ceo que Fortescue ad dit, que
si un Disme soit grante en le Parliament icy, ceo ne liera ceux d' Ireland; Jeo
veux bien pur ceo que ils n'ont commandment ove nous per breve de venir al'
Parliament. Year Book, 19th Hen. VI. p. 8.
, "Jeo veux bien" (says he) and then assigns the incontestible reason, "pur
ceo," because they (the Irish subjects) have no summons with us to come to
Parliament.

But Lord Coke has unfortunately neglected to weigh the importance of this just
Reason, and consequently has been led to misconstrue the doctrine to which it
has at different times been applied by the Judges; for, in Calvin's Case, (7th
Rep. p. 447.) he cites the opinion of the Judges in 2d Rich. III.
beforementioned, viz. That Ireland has a Parliament, and they make laws, and
our Statutes do not bind them: and he cites also their reason, viz. because
they do not send Knights to (our) Parliament; but he adds, in a parenthesis,
that this is to be understood, unless they be especially named And 2d Rich.
III. 12. (says he) Hibernia habet Parliamentum, et faciunt leges, et nostra
Statuta non ligant eos, quia non mittunt Milites ad Parliamentum, (which is to
be understood unless they be especially named) sed personae eorum sunt subjecti
Regis sicut habitantes in Calesia, Gasconia, et Guyan. etc. Calvin's Case, 7
Rep. p. 447.


. Thus he is so far from perceiving the weight of the Reason assigned by the
former Judges, that he has ventured to set it aside (as if it had no meaning at
all) by the insertion of an arbitrary parenthesis in the middle of the
sentence, without assigning a stronger Reason, or even any Reason at all for
his authority; and therefore, we are certainly bound to prefer the Declaration
of the other Judges, who founded their opinion on a clear legal Reason, that
has never yet been disproved; for the REASON of the Law is the Life of the Law
"Ratio Legis est anima Legis." Jenk. Cent. p. 45.
.

The naming or not naming Ireland, in our English Acts, cannot in the least
affect the argument of the former Judges; for, if it holds good to secure the
Irish subjects from being bound, when not "especially named," (which is allowed
even by Sir Edward Coke himself,) it certainly is equally effectual when they
are named; or rather, (I ought to say,) the Reason is much more forcible in the
latter case, which apparently enhances the propriety and importance of it;
because, when the business relating to Ireland is debated, it is manifest that
the Irish subjects stand most in need of a due representation, which cannot
therefore be denied them at such a time, without the most flagrant violation of
Justice and natunal Equity!

But, lest any of my Readers should still retain any doubt concerning the
groundless Doctrine broached by Sir Edward Coke, that English Statutes bind in
Ireland when "especially named," I have yet another Authority to add, which
must needs turn the scale, being no less than the testimony even of Sir Edward
Coke himself upon this very point! Let his own words judge him.

He informs us, in his 4th Inst. cap. 76. p. 350. that sometimes the King of
England called his Nobles of Ireland to come to his Parliament of England, etc.
and, after reciting the form of the Writ used on such occasions 10 Octobris Rex
affectans pacificum Statum terrae Hiberniae, mandavit Richardo de Burgo Com.
Ulton. et aliis nobilibus terrae predictae, quod sint ad Parliamentum suum quod
summoneri fecit apud Westminster. in octabus sancti Hillarii proxad tractand. ibid.
cum proceribus, etc. regni sui super Statu terrae praedictae. Rot. Parl. 8. E.
2. m. 31.
, he adds -- "an excellent President" -- (says he) to be followed whenever
any, Act of Parliament shall be made in England concerning the Statute of
Ireland, etc.

But, if this be "an excellent President," the same spirit of justice, which
inclines us to approve it as such, must needs force us to condemn the opposite
notion, concerning mere English Statutes hinding Ireland, when "especially
named:" and consequently it must appear, that Lord Coke was not sufficiently
upon his guard when he advanced this unjust Doctrine. And yet, alas! he has
repeated the same in this very page, immediately after the Information, before
quoted, concerning the Nobles of Ireland being summoned to the Parliament of
England; for he adds, -- "and by special words" (says he) the Parliament of
England may bind the Subjects of Ireland; etc. but, it lucklly happens, that he
is less reserved in this place than in the other passage already is asserted;
for here he has attempted to justify his opinion by an example, which, out of
respect to so great an author, we may, of course, presume to be the very best
that could have been produced for that purpose; especially since he mentions it
as one example for many; and yet, happily for the truth, this "one example for
many" proves nothing so much (when duly considered) as the direct contrary to
his assertion, about binding Ireland by special words, etc. for it amounts to
an implied acknowledgment, upon public record, of the injustice of pretending
to "bind the Subjects of Ireland" without their express consent; being, in
reality, a copy of the King's Writ (beforementioned) to summon the Nobles of
Ireland to the Parliament at Westminster, there to treat with the Nobles, etc.
of his Kingdom upon the State of the said Land, i. e. Ireland. Thus it is plain
that the English Legislature, even so early as in the Reign of Edward II. (by
whom the Writ was issued,) did not esteem it equitable to debate "upon the
State of the said Land," -- ("super statu terrae praedictae,") without some
legislative representation thereof. But, besides this one example for all, Sir
Edward Coke has given us also, in the same page, a memorandum, from the
Parliament Rolls of the 35th of Edw. III, Rot. Parl. 35. E. 3. irrot. sic. Anno
35, E. 3. de concilio fummonit. pro terr. habentibus in Hibernia. Maria
Comitissa Norf. ad mittendum fide dignos ad colloquium. Aelianora Com. Orm. ad
mittendum fide dignos ad colloquium. Jana la Despencer, ad mittendum fide
dignos ad colloquium. Philippa Com. de la March, ad mittendum fide dignos ad
colloquium. Johanna Fitzwater, ad mittendum fide dignos ad colloquium. Agnes
Com. Penbroke, ad mittendum fide dignos ad colloquium. Margaretta de Roos, ad
mittendum fide dignos ad colloquium. Matildis Com. Oxoniae, ad mittendum fide
dignos ad colloquium. Catherina Com. Athol. ad mittendum fide dignos ad
colloquium.



of Writs being issued even to Peeresses, who, in their own right, held lands
in Ireland, and of these no less than nine, to summon them to send
Representatives, or proper persons, to confer with the Parliament; ad mittendum
fide dignos ad colloquium. And consequently if Lord Coke's Doctrine (for which
he has cited these examples) had, in those early times, been current, viz. that
by special words the Parliament of England may bind the Subjects of Ireland, it
is apparent, that the same could not have been understood in any other light
than that of including a due representation of the Irish Parliament within the
Parliament of England; which the examples themselves sufficiently demonstrate
In the same page likewise, (4th Inst. p. 350.) Lord Coke has produced still
more evidence to prove the Parliamentary Rights of the Irish Subjects; for he
cites the Parliament rolls of 10th of Edw. II. -- De Parliamentis singulis
annis in Hibernia tenendis, et de legibus, et consuetudinibus ibidem
emendandis; and he remarks thereupon, -- "Hereby it appears," (says he) that
there were Parliaments holden in Ireland before this time, and order taken at
this Parliament, (says he,) that they should be holden every year, and the like
Acts were made in England, in 4th E. III. and 36th E. III. for Parliaments to
be holden in England; so that regular annual Parliaments were established in
Ireland BEFORE they were in England!


: And that this was really the case, is clearly proved by some other English
records, cited by Mr. Mollyneux, in his Case of Ireland, pp. 73, and 74.
whereby it appears, that even Knights of the Shires, Citizens, and Burgesses,
were elected in the Shires, Cities, and Boroughs, of Ireland, to serve in
Parliament in England "Formerly" (says Mr. Mollyneux) "when Ireland was but
thinly peopled, and the English laws not fully current in all parts of the
Kingdom, it is probable, that then they could not frequently assemble with
convenience or safety to make laws in their own Parliament at home; and
therefore, during the heats of rebellions, or confusion of the times, they were
forced to enact laws in England. But then this was always by their proper
Representatives: For we find, that in the Reign of Edward the Third, and by
what foregoes, it is plain it was so in Edward the First's time; Knights of the
Shire, Citizens, and Burgesses, were elected in the Shires, Cities, and
Boroughs of Ireland, to serve in Parliament in England; and have so served
accordingly. For, amongst the records of the Tower of London, Roe. Claus. 50.
Edward the Third, Parl. 2. Memb. 23. we find a writ from the King at
Westminster, directed to James Butler, Lord Justice of Ireland, and to R.
Archbishop of Dublin, his Chancellor, requiring them to issue writs, under the
great Seal of Ireland, to the several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs, for
satisfying the expenses of the men of that land, who last came over to serve in
Parliament in England. And, in another roll, the 50th of Edw. III. Membr. 19.
on complaint to the King by John Draper, who was chosen Burgess of Cork by
writ, and served in the Parliament of England, and yet was denied his expenses
by some of the Citizens, care was taken to reimburse him.

If, from these last mentioned records, it be concluded that the Parliament of
England may bind Ireland; it must also be allowed, that the people of Ireland
ought to have their Representatives in the Parliament of England. And this, I
believe, we should be willing enough to embrace; but this is in happiness we
can hardly hope for.

This sending of Representatives out of Ireland to the Parliament in England,
on some occasions, was found in process of time to be very troublesome and
inconvenient; and this we may presume was the reason that, afterward, when
times were more settled, we fell again into our old track and regular course of
Parliaments in our own country; and hereupon the laws afore-noted, page 64,
were enacted, establishing, that no law made in the Parliament of England
should be of force in Ireland, till it was allowed and published in Parliament
here.


; which ancient privilege of the Irish Commoned has either been unknown, or
also overlooked and forgot by Lord Coke; and indeed it is not probable that the
Irish Parliament was ever summoned to England regularly, or as a matter of
course, to meet the English Parliament, but only on extraordinary occasions,
wherein the Subjects of Ireland were particularly concerned, and could not, we
may presume, be " specially named" and bound, (that is consistently with
natural equity and their own just rights) without their express assent: for it
is apparent that regular Parliaments were held in Ireland. both BEFORE, since,
and even during the Reigns of those very Princes who issued writs to summon
them to England; which latter, therefore, can only be attributed to some
extraordinary or peculiar circumstances, (out of common course) which rendered
it necessary.

In addition to the clear Precedents before cited, it may not perhaps be
improper to take notice of a circumstance quoted by the Honorable Mr. Justice
Barrington, from Petyt, MSS. Vol. XXVII. p. 294. for though it is not a
Precedent exactly to the point in question, ( i. e. the sending Representatives
from Ireland to the English Parliament,) yet it tends to corroborate the same
equitable Doctrine concerning the necessity of Representation in general, which
ought to be the basis of all determinations either in the Privy Council, (to
which the example particularly relates,) or elsewhere. There is a writ (says
he) of Edward III. in the 50th Year of his Reign, to oblige the Inhabitants of
Cork to pay the expenses of John Droup, who is stated to have been chosen by
the Community to attend the King's Privy Council in England "Observations on
the more ancient Statutes," etc. p. 145.
. The Business of his attendance, however, does not appear; but on whatever
account he might attend the Privy Council, he was probably the same person that
is mentioned in the record before cited from Mr. Mollyneux, by the name of John
Draper, who was chosen Burgess of Cork by Writ, and served in the Parliament of
England; for, as the other circumstances correspond, both with respect to the
place from whence he came, and the year of his being sent, it is natural to
conclude, that the small disagreement in the name may have been occasioned by
some accidental mistake, viz. John Droup for John Draper, or vice versa; and he
might serve the Inhabitants of Cork in the double capacity of Representative in
Parliament, and Agent for them to the Privy Council; or perhaps his summons and
attendance, even at the King's Privy Council, might have been in his
parliamentary capacity; for if a due Representation from Ireland was to attend
the King here in his Privy Council, such an Assembly might, without danger, I
apprehend, be allowed all the powers of an effectual Legislative to bind
Ireland, provided the respective branches of Irish Representation be preserved
entire and distinct; for the English Privy Council could have no legal voice in
such a case, except that of advising the assent or dissent of the Sovereign;
and yet, whenever it was necessary to call a distinct Irish Parliament in
England, it is not improbable, but that they might be summoned to meet the King
in his Privy Council by way, of distinguishing their separate Assembly from the
joint-meeting of the English and Irish Parliaments beforementioned. And that
such distinct Irish Parliaments have sometimes been held in England appears by
a record cited by Mr. Mollyneux There have been other Statutes or Ordinances,
made in England for Ireland, which may reasonably be of force here, because
they were made and assented to by our own Representatives. Thus we find in the
White Book of the Exchequer in Dublin, in the 9th Year of Edward the First, a
writ sent to his Chancellor of Ireland, wherein he mentions Quaedam Statuta per
nos de Assensa Prelatorum Comitum Baronum and Communitates Regni nostri
Hibexniae, ^^per upud Lincoln and quaedam alia Statuta postmodum papud Eborum
facta. These we may suppose were either Statutes made at the request of the
States of Ireland, to explain to them the Common Law of England: or if they
were introductive of new laws, yet they might well be of force in Ireland,
being enacted by the assent of our own Representatives, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons of Ireland; as the words aforementioned do show: and,
indeed, these are instances so far from making against our claim, that I think
nothing can be more plainly for us; for it manifestly shows, (that the King and
Parliament of England would not enact laws, to bind Ireland, without the
concurrence of the Representatives of this Kingdom.
, wherein mention is made of Statutes made at Lincoln and at York in the 9th of
Edw. I. by the express assent of the Irish Parliament in all its branches of
Legislature, (viz. per nos de assensu Prelatorum, Comitorum et Communitates
Regni nostri Hibernioe) without the least mention of the English Parliament.
Thus it appears probable, that the Irish have been represented in England, as
well in separate as in joint Parliaments; and, upon such equitable terms of
Representation in England, I presume, no Irish Patriot will object to the
binding of English Statutes -- "Add hereunto," (says Sir William Petty in his
Political Survey of Ireland, p. 31.) that if both Kingdoms were under one
Legislative Power and Parliament, the Members whereof should be proportionable
in power and wealth of each Nation, there would be no danger such a Parliament
should do any thing to the prejudice of the English interest in Ireland; nor
could the Irish ever complain of partiality when they shall be freely and
proportionably represented in all Legislatures. The same author has also made a
very striking remark in p. 97, concerning the necessity of maintaining the
independence of the Legislative Power, whether we apply the same to Ireland, or
to any other part of the British Empire; for why should men (says he) endeavor
to get estates, where the Legislative Power is not agreed upon, and where
tricks and words destroy natural Rights and Property?


whether Ireland be " especially named" or not; because the just reason of
objection, before cited from the Judges in the 19th of Henry VI. and 2d Richard
III. no longer subsists when a due Representation is allowed.

How much later than the Reign of Edw. III. this practice was continued, of
occasionally summoning the Irish Parliament into England, does not appear;
though we may be certain that it did not continue so late as the Reign of Hen.
VI. because the great Fortescue and the other Judges, his cotemporaries, could
not have declared (as has already been shown) that a tenth or fifteenth,
granted here, should not bind those of Ireland, if the practice of sending
Representatives from thence had continued to that time: nevertheless, the
proofs already produced are amply sufficient to confute the observation of
Judge Jenkins in his 4th Century, p. 164, viz. that the Statutes of England,
which expressly name Ireland, bind them and their Lands and Goods. As the
Statute of York (says he) made 12th E. II. and the 13th E. I. de Mercatoribus,
and others: For, as I have produced sufficient examples of the Irish Parliament
being summoned to England in both the Reigns which he has mentioned, these
Statutes cited by him can afford no testimony of what he supposes, because the
Irish might probably have been represented in those very Parliaments; for which
opinion (I have already shown) there is some evidence, and I am not
apprehensive that any evidence at all can be produced to the contrary.

The same reply holds good also, against the most material examples cited in
Sergeant Mayart's answer to Sir Richard Bolton's Declaration The learned Editor
of these two Tracts, (Mr. Harris,) who has published them in his Hibernica,
(printed at Dublin in 1770,) supposes, that Sir Richard Bolton was not the
author of this Declaration, and informs us, in his Preface, that he is inclined
rather to give the honor of the performance to Patrick Darcey, Esquire an eminent
Lawyer and an active Member of the House of Commons in the Parliament assembled
at Dublin in 1640, who was the author of a similar argument delivered by him at
a conference with a Committee of the Irish Lords in 1641, (printed in 1643.)
"The conformity" (says Mr. Harris) between what is alleged in the Declaration,
and in Darcy's Arguments, inclines me to think him the author of that paper.
But a conformity in substance between two authors, upon one and the same
national question, is very far from affording so substantied a proof of the
real author as the name of Sir Richard Bolton upon one of the manuscripts:
Probably the impeachment of Sir Richard Bolton (in the same year) of
High Treason, for betraying (in his capacity of Chancellor of Ireland) the
Constitution of that country Viz For having traitorously contrived, introduced,
and exercised an arbitrary and tyrannical Government, against Law, throughout
this Kingdom, (Ireland,) by the countenance, and assis^^^^^e, of Thomas Earl of
Strafford, then Christ Governor of this Kingdom. See the 1st Article of
Impeachment against Sir Richard Bolton and others, with the Speech of Mr.
Audley Mervi^ on that occasion, taken from Nalsop's Collection, of Papers, and
raprinted at Dublin in 1764, at the end of Darcy's Argument.


, might be another reason for Mr. Harris's supposition: but this very contrary
behavior, with which Sir Richard Bolton was charged, does not appear to have
been so much the effect of his private opinion, as of him political
time-serving, or yielding, with his brethren in Administration, to the
arbitrary notions of Lord Strafford, the (then) Lord Lieutenant of Ireland: or
perhaps the dangerous increasing power of the papists at that time might
occasion his thus yielding to measures which were so diametrically opposite to
his own just principles; though indeed no danger whatever can justify such
conduct, since "honesty is always" (most certainly) "the best policy."
Nevertheless, not only Sergeant Mayart's answer acknowledges Sir Richard as the
author of the Declaration; but Mr. Mollyneux in p. 48, and 49, cites a marginal
note of Sir Richard's, (when he was Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in
Ireland,) which he had affixed in his Edition of the Irish Statutes, Stat. 10
Henry VII. c. 22. to the following purport; resembling the substance of the
Declaration, attributed to Sir Rich. Bolton, much more than the argument of Mr.
Darcy, viz. That in the 13th of Edward the Second, by Parliament in this Realm
of Ireland, the Statutes of Merton, made the 20th of Henry the Second, and the
Statutes of Malbridge, made the 52d of Henry the Third; the Statute of
Westminster the first, made the 3d of Edward the First; the Statute of
Gloucester, made the 6th of Edward the First; and the Statute of Westminster
the second, made the 13th of Edward the First, were all confirmed in this
Kingdom, (Ireland;) and all other Statutes which were of force in England were
referred to be examined in the next Parliament; and so many as were then
allowed and published, to stand likewise for Laws in this Kingdom. And in the
10th of Henry the Fourth, it was enacted in this Kingdom of Ireland, That the
Statutes made in England should not be of force in this Kingdom, unless they
were allowed and published in this Kingdom by Parliament. And the like Statute
was made again in the 29th of Henry the Sixth. These Statutes are not to be
found in the Rolls, nor any Parliament Roll of that time: but he (Sir Richard
Bolton) had seen the same exemplified under the great Seal, and the
exemplification remains in the Treasury of the city of Waterford. Mollyneux's
Case of Ireland, pp. 48 and 49.


, setting forth how, and by what means the Laws and Statutes of England from
time to time came to be of force in Ireland; and it is undeniable, that the
Irish Parliament have in general thought it necessary to examine, and to
authenticate by the express assent of their own assemblies, such English
Statutes as they judged proper to be admitted as Law within their own Island;
of which Sir Richard Bolton has produced a great variety of examples But such
Statutes, as have been made in England since the 11th of King John, and are
introductory and positive, making new Laws, or any ways altering, adding unto,
or diminishing the ancient Common Laws, have not been binding or any ways of
force in Ireland, until such time as they have been enacted, allowed, and
approved of, by Act of Parliament in Ireland; as may appear by the judgments
of nine Parliaments holden there, viz. in the 13th of Edward II. in a
Parliament in Ireland, the Statutes of Merton and Marlebridge, made in the time
of Henry III. and the Statutes of Westminster 1st, and of Westminster 2d, and
the Statute of Gloucester, made in the time of Edward I. were confirmed and
approved to be of force in Ireland; and all other Statutes, which were of force
in England, were then referred to be examined in the next Parliament, and so
many of them, as should be then allowed, and published, to be accepted for Laws
in Ireland. And afterward, in a Parliament holden in Ireland in 19th of Edward
II. it was enacted that the Statutes made in England should not be of force in
the Kingdom of Ireland, unless they were allowed and published in that Kingdom
by Parliament; and the like Statute was made again in 29th of Henry VI. -- But
these Statutes are not to be found in these parliament rolls, nor any
parliament rolls at that time, but the same are exemplified under the great
Seal, and the exemplifications were remaining in the Treasury of the city of
Waterford. And it is most certain, that not only these parliament rolls, but
also many other rolls and records miscarried in those troublesome and
distempered times, which have been in Ireland: For in all the times of Edw.
III. -- Rich. II. -- Hen. IV. -- and Hen. V. which is almost an hundred years,
there is not any parliament roll to be found; and yet it is most certain, that
diverse Parliaments were holden in those times. Moreover in 28th of Edw. I. --
5th of Edw. III. -- 14th of Edw. III. -- 25th of Edw. III. -- 34th of Edw. III.
-- and 7th of Rich. II. diverse good laws were made in England by several Acts
of Parliament against the extortions and oppressions of Purveyors; which laws
were never received, nor put into execution in Ireland, until the 18th of Hen.
VI. chap. 1. that it was enacted, agreed, and established by Parliament in
Ireland, that all Statutes made against Purveyors within the Realm of England
should be holden and kept in all points, and put in execution in Ireland. --
Afterward in the time of Edward IV. a doubt was conceived, whether the Statute
made in England in 6th of Rich. II. chap, 5. concerning Rape, ought to be of
force in Ireland, without a confirmation thereof by Parliament: for the
clearing of which ambiguity and doubt, in 8th Edward IV. chap. 1. in Ireland,
it was enacted, by authority of Parliament, that the said Statute of 6th of
Richard II. be adjudged and proved in force and strength; and that the Statute
may be of force in this land of Ireland from the 6th day of March then last
past, and from thenceforth the said Act, and all other Statutes and Acts made
by the authority of the said Parliament, within the Realm of England, be
ratified and confirmed, and adjudged by the authority of Parliament, in their
force and strength from the said 6th Day of March." -- So as until the said
Statute of 8th Edw. IV. -- the said Statute of 6th Rich. II. was not wholly of
force in Ireland; and that may appear by the words of the said Statute of the
8th of Edward IV. -- For by the words thereof the said Statute of 6th Rich. II.
was to be of force from the 6th of March then last past, whereas, the said
Statute of 6th Rich. II. had been but a declaration or explanation of the
Stature of Westminster 2. chap. 34. it would have been of force at all times
since the making of the Statute of Westminster 2d. which was in 13th Edw. I. --
But afterward, 10th Hen. VII. c. 22. it was enacted in a Parliament in
Ireland, (this is one of the Acts commonly called Poining's Acts,) that all
Statutes then lately made within the said Realm of England, concerning or
belonging to the common or public weal of the same, from thenceforth should be
deemed good and effectual in the law, and over that accepted, used, and
executed within the land of Ireland at all times requisite, according to the
tenor and effect of the same; and over that by the authority aforesaid, that
they, and every of them, be authorized, proved, and confirmed in the said land
of Ireland.

By all which Statutes, made from time to time in Ireland, it plainly
appears, that all Statutes made in England before 10th Hen. VII. concerning
or belonging to the public and commonwealth of England, are made to be of
force, and to become laws in Ireland. -- In 21st Hen. VIII. chap. 7. an Act was
made in England, that makes it felony in a servant that runs away with the
goods of his master or mistress; and this Act was not received in Ireland until
the same was enacted by a Parliament holden in Ireland in 33d Hen. VIII. Sess.
1. chap. 5. -- In 21st Hen. VIII. chap. 19. -- There was a law made in England,
that all Lords might distrain upon the lands of them holden for their rents and
services, and to make their avowries, not naming the tenant, but upon the
lands: but this law was not received in Ireland until it was enacted there in
33d Hen. VIII. Sess. 1. chap. 7. -- An Act was made in England in Anno 31. Hen.
VIII. chap. 1. that joint tenants, and tenants in common, should be compelled
to make partition; which Act was not received in Ireland until it was enacted
there in 33d Hen. VIII. Sess. 1. chap. 10. -- In 27th Hen. VIII. chap. 10. the
Statute of Uses was made in England, for transferring of Uses into possession;
which Statute was never received, nor of force in Ireland, till the same was
enacted in Ireland, 10th Car. 1. chap. 1. -- So likewise, 32d Hen. VIII. chap.
1. a Statute was enacted in England, whereby it is directed, how lands and
tenements may be disposed by will, and concerning wardship, and primer seizins;
which Statute was never received, nor of force in Ireland, until it was enacted
by parliament in Ireland, in 10th Car. I. chap. 2. -- In Anno 1st Eliz. chap.
5. there was an Act made in England for the uniformity of the Common Prayer,
and Administration of the Sacraments; which Act was not received in Ireland,
until the same was confirmed and established by Parliament in Anno 2d Eliz. c.
2. -- In Anno 5th Eliz. c. 9. there was an Act of Parliament made in England
for the punishment of wilful perjury; which Act was not of force in Ireland
until the same was enacted by a Parliament in Ireland, in 28th Eliz. chap. 1.
-- Another Act was made in England in Anno 3d Eliz. chap. 12. for the
punishment of witchcraft and sorcery, and another Act in the same year, chap.
14. for the punishment of forgery; which Acts were not of force in Ireland
until the same were enacted by Parliament there in 28th Eliz. chap. 2, 3. -- In
28th Hen. VIII. chap. 15. there was an Act made in England for the punishment
of piracy; which Act was not of force in Ireland until the same was enacted in
Ireland in 12th of James, chap. 2. -- In 27th of Eliz. chap. 4. an Act was made
in England against fraudulent conveyances, which Act was not of force, nor
received in Ireland, until the same was enacted in Ireland, 10th Car. I. chap.
3. -- Besides many other Acts made in the several reigns of Henry VIII. --
Edward VI. -- Queen Elizabeth, -- King James, -- and the King's Majesty who now
is. -- In 24th Hen. VIII. chap. 12. etc. an Act was made in England concerning
appeals made to Rome, which Act does by express words extend to all his
Majesty's dominions; yet the same was not received, nor of force in Ireland,
until it was enacted by Act of Parliament there in 28th Hen. VIII. chap. 6. --
Also the Statute of 28th Hen. VIII. chap. 8. made in England concerning the
first fruits of the Clergy, extended by express words to any of the King's
dominions; yet the same was not received, or of force in Ireland, until it was
enacted there by Parliament in 28th Hen. VIII. chap. 8. -- Likewise the Act of
faculties made in England 25th Hen. VIII. chap. 21. extended by express words
to all the King's dominions; yet the same was not received, or of force, in
Ireland, until it was enacted by Parliament in Ireland, 28th Henry VIII. chap.
19.


, some general, and some particular, made at different periods of time, from
the 13th of Edward II. to the Reign of King Charles I. the time when he wrote,
and of these examples not less in number than eighteen, which surely are
sufficient to prove the uniform sense of the Irish Parliament upon this point
in every age since they received the English Law.

Of the general examples which he has cited, that in the 10th of Hen. VII. (one
of Poining's Acts) whereby all the English Statutes then in force were adopted
by the Irish, is the most remarkable; and it is necessary to take particular
notice of this Act, because the effect of it is frequently misunderstood; for
some have supposed, that hereby all the Statutes, made in the Parliament of
England concerning the public, should be observed in Ireland, without observing
any farther distinction In this indiscriminate manner Monsieur Rapin has
expressed himself, and has thereby given a wrong Idea of the Irish Legislature
to such of his readers as do not care for the trouble of secking better
information; for, in speaking of the two Statutes, commonly called Poining's
Acts, (after having mentioned that Act relating to the King's permission for
assembling the Parliament,) he adds, Un autre portoit que tous les Acts faits
dans le Parliament d'Angleterre, concernant le Public, seroient observez on
Irlande. Ces deux Statuts font encore en force aujourdui. Tome 4. p. 469.


; as if they thought the Statute capable of including, not only all the English
Acts then made, but, likewise, all such as should be ordained in future: and,
if this had really been the case, it would have been in vain to have contended
for the Liberties of Ireland; but the Act itself is not capable of such a
construction, notwithstanding that some have thought it doubtfully worded. The
tenor of it is recited by Lord Coke, in his 4th instit. p. 351. as follows:
That all Statutes, late made within the Realm of England, concerning or
belonging to the common or public weal of the same, from henceforth be deemed
good and effectual in the Law, and over that be accepted, used, and executed,
within this land of Ireland, in all points, etc. And though the word late was
afterward deemed a doubtful expression, with respect to the extent of its
effect, yet it sufficiently restrains the Act to the introduction of such
English Statutes only as were of prior date; which effect is confirmed also by
a resolution of the Judges, in the 10th of James, cited by Lord Coke in the
same page And, Hill. 10. Jacobi Regis, it was resolved, by the two Chief
Justices and Chief Baron, that this word, (late,) in the beginning of this act,
had the sense of (before), so that this Act extended to Magna Carta, and to all
Acts of Parliament made in England before this Act of 10. H. 7. But it is to be
observed, that such Acts of Parliament as have been made in England since 10.
H. 7. wherein Ireland is not particularly named or generally included, extend
not thereunto; for that, albeit it be governed by the same law, yet is it a
distinct Realm or Kingdom, and (as has been said) has Parliaments there. 4.
Inst. p. 351.
; and he has likewise stated the true effect of that Act in his is it Institute,
141 b. Viz.

By an Act of Parliament (called Poining's Law), holden in Ireland (says he) in
the 10th year of Henry the 7th, it is enacted, That all Statutes, made in this
Realm of England BEFORE THAT TIME, should be of force, and be put in use,
within the Realm of Ireland, etc.

This Act of Poining's, therefore, sufficiently proves what Sir Richard Bolton
intended by citing it, viz. that the Irish did not esteem the English Laws
binding in that Kingdom until allowed by the Authority of their own Parliament,
otherwise the Act itself had been nugatory, as also the other Irish Acts which
he has cited for the same purpose; in some of which, it seems, the Parliament
itself expressly asserted the Doctrine for which he contends; as in that of the
19th of Edw. II. wherein it was enacted, That the Statutes, made in England,
SHOULD NOT BE OF FORCE in the Kingdom of Ireland, unless they were allowed and
published in that Kingdom by Parliament. See Sir Richard Bolton's Declarations,
etc. in Harris's Hibernica, p. 15.
Sir Richard Bolton also informs us, that a like Statute was made again in the
29th of Henry VI. and therefore, notwithstanding that Sergeant Mayart has taken
great pains, and filled many pages with citations of precedents from old
Records of Law Cases, Writs, etc. (in order to prove that English Acts of
Parliament have been referred to, and allowed in judicial Proceedings, before
the same were confirmed in Ireland,) yet all his labor has been bestowed in
vain; for (besides that he ought first to have proved the Acts in question to
have been made by the English Parliament alone, without any such representation
of the Irish Parliament jointly therewith, as I have already shown to have been
frequently practiced in those early days) let it be also remarked, that, though
we should allow that the Irish Courts of Justice might, perhaps, in some
particular cases of difference between individuals, but of indifference to the
general Liberties of Ireland, have followed the directions of some mere English
Acts of Parliament, as esteeming them wholesome regulations of Justice, proper
to be adopted for the determination of the Cases before them, yet the
Confirmation of such Acts afterward, at different periods, clearly proves the
irregularity of such premature proceedings in the Courts, and that the highest
Court of that Kingdom, the Court of Parliament, did not esteem the English Acts
of sufficient legal Authority till confirmed by themselves; for, otherwise, the
Confirmation would have been unnecessary, since the Acts (if Sergeant Mayart's
examples are admitted) were already received into use; and, therefore, all such
Court-Precedents, as are cited by the learned Sergeant, are clearly Precedents
of Irregularities and not of Law; so that they are not entitled to any
consideration at all; especially as the Irish Legislature itself (which has
certainly a better right to determine what shall be esteemed Law in Ireland
than any of the inferior Courts) has positively declared, by the express Acts
of the 19th of Edward II. and the 29th of Henry VI. before cited, that English
Statutes shall not be of force in Ireland, unless allowed by the Irish
Parliament! And agreeable to this is the Declaration of the Irish House of
Commons in 1641, Article the first: That the Subjects of this his Majesty's
Kingdom of Ireland are a free people, and to be governed only according to the
common Law of England, and Statutes made and established by Parliament in this
Kingdom of Ireland, and according to the lawful Customs used in the same. p.
133.

Now, though the Conviction by these weighty Authorities will probably destroy
the credit of Sergeant Mayart, as a writer, in the opinion of every honest
Irishman, yet the Irish are more obliged to this Author than he himself,
perhaps, intended they should be; for he clearly proves that a Charter of
Liberties For the only mistake of Lord Coke is, that he conceived (says he)
that Magna Charta was not of force in Ireland 'till the 10th of Hen. 7. which
is only a mistake of a matter of fact: for in truth we find (continues the
Sergeant) that statute was given to them of Ireland in the first year of Hen.
3. and all the Chapters thereof (except three or four of the last Chapters) are
entered in the Red Book of the Exchequer of Ireland, where, in the beginning,
after the King's style recited, he says, Imprimis concessimus Deo, et hac
praesenti Charta nostra confirmamus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris in
perpetuum, quod Hibernica Ecclesia libera sit, etc. -- First, we have granted
to God, and, by this our Charter, confirm, for us and our heirs for ever, that
the Church of Ireland be frec. -- Sir John Davis cites a Record in the Tower,
1st of Hen. 3. Memb. 13. of the like Charter of Liberties granted by Hen. 3. to
his Subjects in Ireland, as himself and his Father had granted to the Subjects
of England; but yet this mistake is only for that Coke was not informed of that
matter of fact. Harris's Hibernica, pp. 226, 227.


, agreeing in all the Chapters with our Magna Charta, was separately granted to
the King's Subjects of Ireland, without distinction, in the first year of King
Henry III. so that all the Subjects of Ireland, (the conquered Irish not
excepted,) from that very early period, and even sooner For, the English
Settlers carried their Rights with them, and the native Irish gladly accepted
the English Common Law, as soon as it was tendered to them by the English
Conquerors, of which I have produced ample testimony in a Note on page 108. so
that their just title to English Liberty and all the legal Immunities of the
Conquerors was clearly established and confirmed by this Irish Magna Charta. --
They were very soon afterward, indeed, wickedly excluded from these equitable
Privileges by the inconsiderate English Settlers; many of whom, for the sake of
tyrannizing over their poor neighbors, even degenerated (as Sir John Davies
informs us in p. 32.) into the lawless Irish manners themselves, adopting the
old Irish oppressions of Tanistry, Cosherings, Cuttings, Sessings, Coigne and
Livery, etc. under which most wicked These most wicked oppressions originally
sp^ang from the undue Power and unlimited Sway of the ancient Irish Chieftaine,
or Lords, over their poor brethren; but I must refer my Readers, for a
particular description of them, to Sir John Davies, who has emply set forth the
grosa injustice and pernicious effects of such unlimited power in men:
nevertheless I am tempted to cite, by way of sample, what he has men^ioned in
on^ place concerning the wickedness of Coigne and Livery in particular: for, in
showing the ill effects of English Degeneracy, he remarks in p. 33. "By this"
(says he) it appears why the extortion of Coigne and Livery is called, in the
old Statutes of Ireland, A DAMNABLE CUSTOM, and the imposing and taking
thereof made High Treason. And it is said, in an ancient Discourse (says he) of
the Decay of Ireland, that, though it were first invented in Hell, yet, if it
had been used and practiced there as it has been in Ireland, it had long since
destroyed the very Kingdom of Beelzebub. The same bad effects are produced, in
some degree, by every kind of Vassalage; so that the bad Policy of establishing
Seigneuries in Canada. or eltewhere, is but too apparent.


pretenses they devoured the poor Natives as well as the poorer sort of English
Settlers, and thereby occasioned almost continual Wars for several ages; which,
in the end, turned out to their own great peril and disadvantage, according to
the never-failing maxim, or rather warning, of the Apostle Paul; If ye bite and
devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. Gal. v.
15. But, though the Irish were, by this wretched Policy of the English, long
deprived of the Benefit of the English Common Law, yet this by no means
deprived them of their just Right or Claim to it, which must necessarily be
acknowledged to have been due from the time that the English first settled in
that Country.


, were as much entitled to English Liberty, and all the Immunities and Benefits
of the English Common Law, as the Inhabitants of England themselves: and yet
Lord Coke himself, it seems 2d Inst. p. 2.
, was not aware of this Circumstance, but "Conceived" (says Sergeant Mayart, p.
226.) that Magna Charta was not of force in Ireland till the 10th of Hen. 7.
which is only a mistake (says he) of a matter of fact; for in truth we find
(says he) that Statute was given to them of Ireland in the first year of Hen.
3. etc. But though this was only "a mistake of a matter of fact," yet it was
such a mistake as might probably, in great measure, have occasioned the
erroneous opinions ever after, of that great and worthy man, concerning the
Constitution of Ireland.

But Sergeant Mayart has not profited so much as might have been expected by
this knowledge that the Subjects of Ireland were honored with a distinct
Charter; for, after pointing out (in page 227) the several Chapters of the
Charter, wherein (as he supposes) that Law differs from the ancient common Law,
he adds them triumphantly to his Collection of Precedents for binding Ireland
by Statutes made in England; as if a Charter of Liberties, freely given and
gladly accepted, could afford any Evidence against Liberty! For this
undistinguishing man did not consider that the King, by this Charter of
Liberties, binds and restrains himself (rather than his People) in all the most
dangerous points of Prerogative, wherein the Rulers of other Countries are left
too much unlimited; and therefore that the Subjects of Ireland might accept the
same (which they most willingly did) without the least Derogation from their
just and natural Rights.

And, as this Charter was granted to the "King's Subjects in Ireland" without
distinction, it affords the most ample proof that even the conquered Irish were
entitled to all the Immunities, Protection, and Benefits, which the English
Conquerors themselves enjoyed by it: for even Sergeant Mayart himself proves
(in p. 67.) that the English Laws were given at first -- tam ANGLIS QUAM
HIBERNICIS, as well to ENGLISH AS IRISH Sergeant Mayart also informs us, That
the whole Realm of Ireland was anciently reduced into Counties, and that the
English Laws had passage throughout the same, as appears" (says he) "by several
Pipe-Rolls of the Time of Hen. 3. in the Exchequer of Ireland, where there are
accounts (says he) made for fines, paid by the mere Irish, for Disseisins, and
many other kinds of Trespasses, committed by them in those places, which the
Author calls Irish Territories; though some of the Irish, with their posterity
after them, being always averse to the English Laws, could not digest them, but
hid themselves in the bogs, mountains, etc. But this aversion of "some of the
Irish" to the English Laws is easily accounted for, since it appears very
clearly, from Sir John Davies's Book, that the Irishry had much more experience
and woeful knowledge of English Oppression than of the English Laws; for, when
any of them wore driven from their Lands and Possessions through the avarice,
and by the unlawful power, of the great English Lords, who found their interest
in treating them as enemies, it was very natural for them to attempt to
disseize, and recover their former Rights and Possessions: and again, when they
found no Protection from the English Laws, nor other exertion thereof than that
of sining and punishing them for such "Disseizins," etc. which were mere
Re-entries, it was equally natural for them to imbibe prejudices against the
English Laws, and to fly to their Bogs, etc. Thus the English Oppressions were
apparently the cause why some of the Irish were averse to the English Laws;
which I have expressed more at large in a Note on p. 108.


. The Irish Nation are also obliged to Sergeant Mayart for some other Proofs in
their favor, which he intended against them: for, amongst his Precedents of
giving Law, he informs us, in p. 219. that, in the Reign of King Henry II. the
common Law and lawful Customs of England were received, planted, and
established, in this his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland; a Point which every
Irish Patriot is zealous to maintain! And he has favored us, in page 220, with
another notable Example of binding the Irish by English Laws: this, it seems,
was in the Reign of King John, of whom, (says he triumphantly,) in that
respect, it may be well said, that, Statuit et praecepit Leges; he appointed
and established the Laws; as also because he put them in writing, and left them
in his Court of Exchequer for their better directions: but he happily informs
us at the same time, (which spoils his own application of the Precedent,) that
all this was done "at the instance" (says he) of the Irish, (as the Record
says,) or of the English who accounted themselves Irish, etc. And therefore,
as these English Laws and Customs are clearly acknowledged by himself to have
been introduced at the instance of the Irish, it must manifestly appear, that
this ancient example excludes the Doctrine which he meant to support by it, in
opposition to Sir Richard Bolton; and therefore, if all these points are duly
considered, I think we may very fairly retort his own words (which he
exultingly applied to Sir Richard Bolton) upon himself! viz. Whereupon it must
needs also follow, that the Author's Discourse FALLS ALL IN PIECES, and is
nothing to the purpose that he would have it.

Sergeant Mayart has also taken a great deal of needless pains to prove Ireland
to be annexed to the Crown of England, and that the King and Parliament of
England have Power over Ireland, and he cites several Acts of Parliament, and
other Authorities, in pages 64 and 65 of his Answer, in the Hibernica, which
clearly prove, indeed, the former part of the Assertion, (that Ireland is
annexed to the Crown of England;) a point which the Irish themselves are so far
from denying, that they are rather desirous to maintain it Case of Ireland, p.
96. It has ever been acknowledged that the Kingdom of Ireland is inseparably
annexed to the Imperial Crown of England The obligation that our Legislature
lies under by Poining's Act, 10 Hen. VII. c. 4, makes this Tie between the two
Kingdoms indissoluble. And we must ever own it our happiness to be thus annexed
to England; and that the Kings and Queens of England are, by undoubted Right,
ipso facto, Kings and Queens of Ireland. And from hence we may reasonably
conclude, that, if any Acts of Parliament made in England should be of force in
Ireland, before they are received there in Parliament, they should be more
especially such Acts as relate to the Succession and Settlement of the Crown,
and Recognition of the King's Title thereto, and the Power and Jurisdiction of
the King. And yet we find, in the Irish Statutes, 28 Hen. VIII. c. 2, an Act
for the Succession of the King and Queen Anne; and another, chap. 5, declaring
the King to be supreme Head of the Church of Ireland; both which Acts had
formerly passed in the Parliament of England. So likewise we find, amongst the
Irish Statutes, Acts of Recognition of the King's Title to Ireland, in the
reigns of Henry VIII. Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles II. King
William and Queen Mary. By which it appears, that Ireland, though annexed to
the Crown of England, has always been looked upon to be a kingdom complete
within itself, and to have all Jurisdiction to an absolute Kingdom belonging,
and subordinate to no legislative authority on Earth: Though, it is to be
noted, these English Acts, relating to the succession, and recognition of the
King's Title, do particularly name Ireland.

See also page 33, where the same author speaks of Ireland's being annexed to,
and, as it were, united with, the imperial Crown of England, by several Acts of
Parliament, both in England and Ireland, since King John's time. But how far
this operates, I shall enquire more fully hereafter; I shall only, at present,
observe, that I conceive little more is effected, by these statutes, than that
Ireland shall not be aliened or separated from the King of England, who cannot
hereby dispose of it otherwise than in legal succession along with England; and
that whoever is King of England is, ipso fucto, King of Ireland, and the
subjects of Ireland are obliged to obey him as their liege Lord.


. But none of his Authorities afford the least shadow of Evidence for the
latter part of his Assertion, viz. the Power of the English Parliament over
Ireland. And, because Sir Richard Bolton had allowed that such Laws, made in
England, as are declaratory of the Common Law, do bind Ireland without any
confirmation there; (see Hibernica, p. 27, etc.) Sergeant Mayart hopes to avail
himself of the circumstance, and observes thereupon, It must necessarily follow
(says he, p. 76) that the Parliament of England has still an influence upon
Ireland, etc. And a little farther he adds, But if it should happen (says he)
that the Parliament of England should make an exposition of a Law in force in
Ireland, and the Parliament there should make another, and that it may be
different or contrary to that of England, certainly (says he) Ireland must be
bound (by the Author's own Rule, meaning Sir Richard Bolton) by the declaratory
Statute of the Parliament of England.

But Sir Richard Bolton's Rule includes no such Doctrine. For there is nothing
unreasonable in supposing that the Irish subjects, without prejudice to their
natural Rights and the Privileges of their own Parliament, might receive the
declaratory Statute of the Parliament of England as the best Exposition of the
Common Law, which they before acknowledged, and freely accepted by their own
express assent and desire. Sir Edward Coke himself bears ample testimony to
this. -- "Our student must know," (says he,) that King John, in the 12th year
of his reign, went into Ireland, and there, by the advice of grave and learned
men in the Laws, whom he carried with him, BY PARLIAMENT, DE COMMUNI OMNIUM DE
HYBERNIA CONSENSU, ordained and established, that Ireland should be governed by
the Laws of England, which, of many of the Irish-men, (for the common consent
before mentioned must mean that of the English settlers) according to their own
desire, was joyfully accepted and obeyed, and of many the same was soon after
absolutely refused, preferring their Brehen Law before the just and honorable
Laws of England. 1st Inst. p. 141.

But this subsequent refusal, and preference given to the Brehen Law, must not
be charged to the native Irish in general; for Sir John Davis, in his
Discovery of the true causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued, etc.
demonstrates that the English Settlers were principally to be blamed for this.
He shows, (p. 135,) that the scopes of land, which were granted to the first
adventurers, were too large, and the Liberties and Royalties, which they
obtained therein, were too great for subjects. -- And, in p. 144, that these
Grants of whole provinces and petty kingdoms, those few English Lords
pretended to be proprietors of all the land, so that there was no possibility
left of settling the natives in their possessions, and, by consequence, the
conquest became impossible, without the utter extirpation of all the Irish;
which these English Lords were not able to do, nor perhaps willing, if they
had been able. This he afterward explains, showing that false notions of
private interest, among the English Lords, prevented both the conquest, and the
introduction of the English Law: They hoped to become Lords of those lands
which were possessed by the Irish, whereunto they pretended title by their
large Grants, etc. (p. 144,) and that therefore they persuaded the King of
England (p. 145) that it was unfit to communicate the Laws of England unto
them; that it was the best policy to hold them as aliens and enemies, and to
prosecute them with a continual war. Hereby they obtained (says he) another
royal Prerogative and power; which was, to make War and Peace at their
pleasure, in every part of the kingdom: which gave them an absolute command
over the bodies, lands, and goods, (even) of the English Subjectes here;
meaning in Ireland, where he wrote. And he adds, in the same page, "And
besides" (says he) the Irish inhabiting the lauds fully conquered and reduced,
being in condition of slaves and villains, did render a greater profit and
revennew, than if they had been made the King's free subjects. They also feared
(as he declares in the preceding page) that, if the Irish were received into
the King's protection, and made liegemen and free-subjectes, the State of
England would establish them (or rather re-establish them) in their
possessions by Graunts from the Crown, etc. And "The troth is," (says he, in p.
146,) that those great English Lords did, to the uttermost of their power,
cross and withstand the enfranchisement of the Irish, for the causes before
expressed. -- And he rightly lays the fault upon the pride, covetousness, and
ill-counsell of the English planted here, which in all former ages (says he)
have bin the chief impediments of the final conquest of Ireland.

On the other hand, he clearly exculpates the native Irish from the charge of
wilfully refusing to be subject to the Laws of England. "But perhaps" (says he,
in p. 115) the Irishry in former times did wilfully refuse to be subject to the
Laws of England, and would not be partakers of the benefit thereof, though the
Crown of England did desire it; and therefore they were reputed Aliens,
Out-lawes, and Enemies. ASSUREDLY THE CONTRARY DOES APPEAR, as well by the
Charters of Denization, purchased by the Irish IN ALL AGES, as by a petition
preferred by them to the King, anno 2 Ed. III. desiring that an Act might pass
in Ireland, whereby ALL THE IRISHRIE might be enabled to use and enjoy the
Laws of England, without purchasing of particular Denizations.

And, in p. 117, he adds: -- I am well assured, that the Irishrie DID DESIRE to
be admitted to the benefit of the Law, not only in this petition exhibited to
King Edw. III. but by all their submissions made to King Richard II. and to the
Lord Thomas of Lancaster, before the wars of the two Houses; and afterward
to the Lord Leonard Gray and Sir Anthony St. Ledger, when K. Henry VIII. began
to reform this kingdom. In particular, the Birnes of of the Mountains, in the
34th of Hen. VIII. desire that their country might be made Shire ground, and
called the County of Wicklow: And, in the 23d of Hen. VIII. O. Donnel does
covenant with Sir William Skeffington, Quod si Dominus Rex velit reformare
Hiberniam, (whereof, it should seem, he made some doubt,) that he and his
people would GLADLY be governed by the Laws of England.

These quotations sufficiently demonstrate the willingness of the native Irish
to adopt the English Laws and Constitution, and that the denial of such a
reasonable desire was the just cause of their almost continual rebellions and
bloody wars against the English Settlers. However, in the reign of King James
I. the Irishry were restored to their just Rights, and the benefit and
protection of the Law of England communicated TO ALL, AS WELL IRISH AS ENGLISH,
WITHOUT DISTINCTION OR RESPECT OF PERSONS, etc. (p. 264.) And Sir John Davies
himself was one of the judges employed in that most grateful business to a
benevolent man; I mean the Visitations of Justice, whereby the just and
HONORABLE LAW OF ENGLAND was imparted and communicated to all the Irishry. (P.
265.) And he informs us, in the same page, that the common people were taught,
by the Justices of Assise, that they were FREE SUBJECTS to the Kings of
England, and not Slaves and Vassals to their pretended Lords: That the
Cuttings, Cosheries, Sessings, and other extortions of their Lords, were
UNLAWFUL, and that they should not any more submit themselves thereunto, since
they were now under the protection of so just and mighty a Prince, as both
would and could protect them from al' wrongs and oppressions. They gave (says
he) A WILLING EAR unto these lessons; and thereupon the greatness and power of
those Irish Lords over the people suddenly fell and vanished, when their
oppressions and extortions were taken away, which did maintain their greatness,
etc. In p. 262, he informs us, that Sir Edmund Pelham and himself were the
first Justices of Assise that ever sat in those countries; (speaking
particularly of Tyrone and Tirconnell;) "and in that circuit" (says he) we
visited all the shires of that province: besides which, visitation, though it
were somewhat distasteful to the Irish Lords, was sweet and most welcome to the
common people; who, albeit they were rude and barbarous, yet did they quickly
apprehend the difference between the tyranny and oppression under which they
lived before, and the just government and protection which we promised unto
them for the time to come.

Thus the common people of the Irishry were at length restored to that
equality, in the eye of the law, to which they were justly entitled (though
shamefully deprived of it) from the earliest time that the English began to be
known in that kingdom, even from the first establishment of the English
Conquerors; for Sir John Davies shows, from Matthew Paris's History, that King
Henry II. before his return out of Ireland, held a Counsel, or Parliament, at
Lissemore, where the Laws of England were, by all, willingly received; ubi
leges Angliae AB OMNIBUS sunt gratanter receptae, et juratoria cautione
praestita confirmatae: p. 100. And he informs us, in the next page, that King
Henry the Third did grant and transmit the like Charter of Liberties to his
subjects of Ireland, as himself and his Father had granted to the Subjects of
England, as appears (says he) by another Record in the Tower, 1 Hen. III.
Pat^^m. 13. And he cites also a writ of the 12th year of the same King,
commanding the Lord Justice of Ireland to cause the Charter of King John to be
read and confirmed by Parliament; and again, that the same King, by Letters
Patent under the Great-Seal of England, did confirm the establishment of the
English Laws made by King John, and that all Writs of the Common Law should
have course there as in England -- Quod OMNIA BREVIA de COMMUNI JURE, quae
currunt in Anglia, similiter current in Hibernia, etc. Thus it appears, that
all Irish Subjects, without distinction, are entitled, according to the
clearest and most unquestionable testimony, to all the Rights, Immunities, and
Advantages, of Magna Charta and the English Common Law.




But let us suppose that, in some such declaratory Act, they had reason to
think the English Exposition improper, and should therefore choose to confirm
their own sense of it by the Authority of their own Parliament, surely the
latter would be binding in Ireland, and not the English Statute, as Sergeant
Mayart supposes; for there is no example of an Irish Act of Parliament being
set aside by the Authority of the English Parliament, which Sergeant Mayart
allows: Neither is it to be imagined" (says he in p. 199) that the Kings and
Parliaments in England will ever avoid any Laws made in Ireland without a good
and just cause, since they have not done any such things for about four hundred
years, which is time enough to have experience of their honor and justice, etc.

And he afterward uses this plea concerning the Honor and Justice of the
English Parliament, as an inducement for the Irish to be bound by it; "and
seeing" (says he in p. 191) that, for above 400 years, they have never done
hurt to Ireland, etc. therefore we may well trust them hereafter, etc. And
again, in p. 192, "But we all know" (says he) with what great consultation,
deliberation, and knowledge of things, and the circumstances of them, the Kings
and Parliaments of England have still ordered their affairs, etc. And we may,
(says he,) as all our ancestors have done, trust to their wisdom, justice, and
judgment, as a sufficient hedge and security for us. But, surely, no People,
who have the use of reason or commonsense, would be induced by such an argument
to submit themselves implicitly to a Parliament, in which they have no Share of
Power or Representation; though, indeed, it may be alleged, in behalf of this
writer and his argument, that Parliaments, before his time, were, in general,
less corrupt than they have been since, if we except the Parliaments of Richard
II. and Queen Mary; but, in these latter times, we all know with what great
consultation, deliberation, and knowledge of things, etc. etc. etc.

If it had been possible for the Irish Subjects to have given up to Sergeant
Mayart this contested point, concerning the necessity of a due Representation
in the Legislature, without giving up, at the same time, all due Limitation of
Government, and consequently all pretensions to their natural Freedom, this
advice of his might have been esteemed excusable!

But it is Representation alone which forms the Basis, the superiority, and the
essential difference, of the English Constitution of State, from all others!
For, in countries where this is wanting, or where it is become totally
corrupted, it makes but little difference, to the bulk of the people, whether
the executive part of government be in the hands of one, of a few, or of many;
viz. of an Emperor, of a Triumvirate, or of a Senate of Nobles or proud
Patricians, (as among the Romans, at different periods of time). The
administration of each of these orders of power, respectively, is almost
equally arbitrary, uncertain, and dangerous to the community; to which the
Histories of all monarchical as well as aristocratical Governments (I mean
those that are merely or too nearly such) bear sufficient testimony: so that
the Representation of the people is the grand point of distinction, the
fundamental principle, whereby the equity and safety of the English Government
is to be measured, when we compare it with such Governments as either that of
France, or that of Poland.

I have already given some specimens of French Government and French Law in my
Preface, it being necessary that British Subjects should be well aware of the
Nature and Tendency of that Law which has so lately received the solemn
Sanction even of our own Legislature, The late Act for establishing the Laws of
France in the most extensive Province of the British Empire must indeed seem
very strange and unnatural to the genius of Englishmen in general; especially
when we consider that even the French Inhabitants of that Province themselves
are zealous for the "Privileges of English Subjects;" which plainly appears by
some Expressions in their late Address to the Governor on that occasion: and we
may, therefore, rest assured that they are not, in general, so ignorant, and
void of common-sense, as really to prefer the Laws of France to the equitable
Constitution of England, howsoever they may have been misrepresented. We must,
nevertheless, except a few French Seigneurs, who, having already been allowed
greater exclusive Privileges than are consistent with the safety and freedom of
their poor neighhours and fellow subjects, would rather wish to promote the
French Laws and Customs (which permit such an unjust Vassalage) than the
equitable Laws of England: and we may likewise except the Priests, and some
other absolute Bigots to the Romish Religion, who, being entangled in the
Slavery of antichristian Principles and "the Doctrines of Devils," are ready to
submit to any temporal conditions whatsoever for the sake of that spiritual, or
rather Satanical, Bribe, which was wickedly thrown out to them on this
occasion: I mean the setting up their adultecated Religion as the established
Church of that Province (with a legal Right to collect Tithes, etc.) by
national authority. This was the more unjust and inexcusable, because the
Romanists had no reason to complain of that Toleration which they so freely
enjoyed before. In a note on p. 125, where I have occasion to mention the
defects of some supposed Statutes, I have added some examples (which naturally
occurred thereupon) concerning the abominable Tyranny and Wickedness of the
adulterous Church of Rome; and these, I trust, will sufficiently justify the
severity of my expressions against that antichristian Church. See also my
Remarks on several very important Prophecies, part 2, p. 18, and part 4, p. 34.


as being proper to be renewed and enforced in a certain Province of the
British Empire! And the Hon. Mr. Justice Barrington, in his Observations on the
ancient Statutes, has also, in just abhorrence of the French Law, cited several
"Fundamental Maxims" "Si veut le Roy. si veut le Loi." The King's Will is Law!
Some of the pernicious effects of this detestable maxim I have already shown in
my Preface.


of it, upon which the King's Prerogative is founded, which (as he justly
remarks) may not only be matter of some curiosity to an Englishman, but, by
comparison, may make him thankful for the noble Constitution to which he is
happily born. A Cappadocian (says he);may indeed refuse, from custom and long
usage, to exchange a despotic for a more free Government; but I can never be
persuaded (says this benevolent Gentleman) but that there is a necessary
connection between Slavery and Misery, and between Freedom and Happiness. Seneca
(says he) nobly inforces the communication of Liberty to the Subject, from the
Safety it procures to the King: This was the uniform Doctrine of all the
ancient constitutional Lawyers of England, and especially of the great
Chancellor Fortescue, whose opinion I have expressly quoted, and added some
farther observations upon the same point, in a Note on page 7 of this
Declaration, Part 1.


Errat si quis existimat tutum esse ibi Regem, ubi nihil a Rege tutum est;
securitas securitate mutua paciscenda est. p. 179. Now, this necessary mutual
security can only be insured by a free Representation of the People in the
Legislature; and therefore the learned Author of this excellent remark will
readily allow, (I trust,) when he comes to consider these arguments, that he
himself was not sufficiently upon his guard, in another part of his useful
work, (p. 141,) where he had occasion to mention the Irish Laws; having there
unfortunately adopted the mistaken doctrine of Lord Coke, about binding the
Subjects of Ireland by English Statutes, "if Ireland is mentioned." But it is
certainly very natural for a gentleman regularly bred to the profession of the
Law to be less circumspect when he follows so great an authority as Sir Edward
Coke, who is generally, and for the most part justly, esteemed the Oracle of
the English Law.

Mr. Barrington is commenting on the Ordinance of 17 Edw. I. pro statu
Hiberniae; and, after informing us that it is not found in the Collection of
Irish Statutes, which begin only with the Ordiance of Kilkenny, in the 3d of
Edw. II. he adds, "There can be no doubt," (says he,) however, that this Law
extends to Ireland, if not repealed by some Irish Act of Parliament; This
Sentence contains an implied acknowledgement that a Law made in England,
relating to the Government of Ireland, may be repealed by an Irish Act of
Parliament; and if this be allowed, (which it certainly ought to be,) there can
be no room to suppose the Irish Subjects bound by an English Act if Ireland is
mentioned; for, wherein is the force or binding of the English Act if the Irish
are allowed a Right to repeal it? Such binding amounts to nothing: we may as
well say that an English Act binds the Emperor of Morocco and his Subjects, or
the wild Anabs, "when especially named," since it can bind no longer than while
they shall be willing to submit to it! But, that the Irish Subjects really have
a Right to repeal an English Act relating to their own internal Government, (if
we may with propriety apply the word repeal to Acts that were originally
defective and void for want of the Irish assent,) is clearly proved by Mr.
Mollyneux, in his Case of Ireland, page 76.


as by Poining's Law, in the time of Henry the Seventh, all PRECEDENT Here the
Hon. Mr. Barrington confirms what is before laid down in pages 91 and 92,
concerning the effect of Poining's Law.


ENGLISH STATUTES are made to bind in Ireland. And he remarks thereupon, in a
note, that subsequent Statutes only bind if Ireland is mentioned; as for Wales,
(continues he,) all Statutes are now made to extend to it, whether mentioned or
not, by a clause inserted in the middle of 20 Geo. II. cap. xlii. etc. But the
true reason why this doctrine may be applied to Wales with propriety and
justice, (and yet not to Ireland without injustice,) is, because the Welchmen
give their assent to the English Laws by their Representatives in the English
Parliament, whereas the assent of the Irish, which is equally essential, cannot
be known, in a legal manner, but by the voice of their own parliamentary
Representatives; so that the very reason why all English Statutes "extend to
Wales, whether named or not" forbids the application of the like Doctrine to
Ireland: and, as the opinion of the Judges, in the 19th of Hen. VI. and in the
2d of Rich. III. before cited, in favor of Ireland, was founded on this very
reason, ( quia non hic habent milites parliamenti,) I hope the same will be
thought sufficient to justify my dissent, as well from Mr. Barrington as from
the great Author whom he seems to have followed in this matter, I mean Lord
Coke himself, whose assertion I propose to examine still more closely, before I
conclude this 2d part of my Declaration.

The Hon. Mr. Justice Barrington also observes, in p. 145, that there have been
great and learned controversies between Molyneux and others, with regard to an
English Act of Parliament binding in Ireland; and Molyneux, (says he,) who
contends it should not, has argued strongly from an English Statute's not
being supposed to extend to Ireland before Poyning's Act in the reign of Henry
the Seventh, etc. -- and a very strong argument it is! which, I hope, has
already been shown. But the Hon. Mr. Barrington proceeds to cite; from the
Parliament-Rolls of the 21st of Edw. I. a memorandum of a very unwarrantable
exertion of Royal-Prerogative, by that monarch, viz. his sending a copy of the
Ordinance The Hon. Mr. Barrington, in p. 41, very justly remarks, concerning
the Statute of Merton, in the 20th year of Hen. III. that the said Statute, as
well as many others of this century, seems to be only an Ordinance; the
difference" (says he) "between an Ordinance and Statute (according to Sir
Edward Coke) consisting in this, that the Ordinance wants the consent of one
component part of the Legislature, which is, in all instances, that of the
Commons. Now, this seems to be exactly the case of the Act in question, of the
21st of Edw. I. de malefactoribus in Parcis; for, though the Act itself
declares that it was ordained by the King "at his Parliament," Our Lord the
King, at his Parliament after Easter, the 21st year of his reign, at the
instance of the Nobles of his realm, has granted and commanded to be from
henceforth firmly observed, etc.


and "at the instance of the Nobles of his realm," yet the assent of the
Commons is not expressed; which was very well known, even at that time, to be
necessary, as the assent expressed in the Acts of the preceding year
sufficiently demonstrates; viz. Our Lord the King, in his full Parliament, and
by his common Council, has ordained, etc. Statute de defensione juris, 20 E.
1. Again, in the Statute of Vouchers, By his common Council has ordained, etc.
Again, in the Statute of Waste, Our Lord the King, in his full Parliament,
holden, etc. by a general Council has ordained: so that a proper Form of
declaring the Assent of the Commons, even at that time, was very well
established, notwithstanding that many Statutes are deficient therein, and
consequently are exceptionable in point of authority; as for instance, the
Statute de Escheatoribus, of the 29th year of this reign, seems to be thus
defective; for though it is dated very speciously, (like the Act in question,
de malefactoribus in parcis,) at the Parliament of our Lord the King at
Lincoln, etc. yet it seems only to have been agreed to by the Privy Council, or
the King's Council; -- by his Council it was agreed, and also commanded by the
King himself ( per Consilium Regis concordatum est coram Domino Rege, ipso Rege
consentiente et illud extunc fieri et observari precipiente, etc.) -- so that
it was apparently enacted and ordained only by the King and his Council,
without the least mention of the Consent of the Parliament, or of the common
Council of the Kingdom, and seems therefore to have been a mere Order in
Council, though artfully dated, "at the Parliament," in order to give it the
appearance of Law. Sir Edward Coke, in his 4th inst. p. 51, gives several
instances of supposed Statutes that had been repealed or disaffirmed, (wanting
the Assent of the Commons,) which were nevertheless published and enforced as
real Statutes; viz. 5 R. II. c. 5. stat. 2, touching enquiries of Heresies, and
2 H. IV. c. 15, against pretended Heretics, giving power to the Bishop, or
Ordinary, to convent before him or imprison any person suspected of Heresy;s
and ordaining (contrary to the Laws of God) that "an obstinate Heretic" (or
any person whom an ignorant popish Enthusiast was pleased to call so) shall be
burned before the people; both which, as Sir Edward Coke remarks, were
disavowed by the Commons, and (yet) the pretended Acts printed (4 inst. p. 51,
and 3 inst. p. 40 and 41). Also 2 Hen. V. cap. 7, (which Sir Edward Coke, by
mistake, calls cap. 6,) against Preachers (was) disavowed the next Parliament
by the Commons, for that they never assented, and yet the supposed Act (was)
printed. (4 Inst. p. 51.) By such notorious treachery and dishonesty did the
Zealots of the Romish Church introduce the papal Tyranny into England.

Sir Edward Coke, in his 3d Inst. (pages 40 and 41,) clearly proves, from the
Parliament-Rolls and other Records, the fraudulent introduction of the
abovementioned Act, in the 5th of Rich. II. by a popish Prelate Sir Edward
Coke calls him "John Braibrook," 3 Inst. p. 41; but, according to Bishop
Godwin, his name was "Robert Braybrook;" ( De Praesulibus Angliae Com. p. 186.)
but both of them testify that he was Bishop of London, as well as Lord
Chancellor. Among the blessed effects of his pious fraud the following are
repo^ted by Sir Edward Coke, 3d Inst. p. 40. -- By color of this supposed Act,
(5 Rich. II.) certain persons that held that Images were not to be worshipped,
etc. were holden in strong prison, until they (to redeem their vexation)
miserably yielded before these Masters of Divinity to take an Oath, and did
swear to worship Images; which was against the moral and eternal Law of
Almighty God! This and many other such instances of hardened Apostasy in popish
Professors sufficiently justify our applying to the papal Tyranny, in general,
that Prophecy of the Apostle Paul concerning the "Man of Sin," that was to be
revealed, the Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God (2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 to 6); and whom
the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his Coming; (verse 8.) -- O! that all those persons, whose hearts
are not yet entirely seared with the hot iron of popish Enthusiasm, may duly
consider these glaring instances of popish craft in opposition to the Laws of
God, and consequently the apparent danger of adhering to that church which has
so notoriously perverted the Doctrines of the Gospel; lest they should be found
in communion with the Enemjes of Christ at his glorious Coming!


, who at that time was Lord-Chancellor: And the same learned author thereupon
directs us to mark well the manner of the penning the Act: for, seeing (says
he) the Commons did not assent thereunto, the words of the Act be, It is
ordained and assented in this present Parliament, that, etc. And so it was,
being but by the King and the Lords.

The same rule enables us to judge concerning the authenticity of many other
ancient Acts, wherein the Assent of the Commons is not particularly mentioned,
and yet they are published. The constitutions called Statutum de Bigamis, for
instance, are declared to have been "set forth in the Parliament after
Michaelmas," etc. Editae fuerunt apud Westminster. in parliamento post festum sancti
Michaelis, etc. (Mag. Char. cum statutis quae antiqua vocantur, etc. p. 104, b.
Ed. 1556.) But when we mark will the manner of the penning the Act, according
to Sir Edward Coke's rule, it appears to be very deficient in parliamentary
Authority, though he himself has taken great pains to prove its authenticity.
He remarks, that these words in the 1st chapter (concordatum est per
justiciarios et alios sapientes de Concilio Regni) prove it to be by Authority
of Parliament; for Concilium Regni, (says he) is the Lords and Commons, LEGALLY
CALLED COMMUNE CONCILIUM REGNI. 2d Inst. p. 267. But, even according to this
argument, the word "COMMUNE" is apparently wanting, to make up what he himself
allows to be the LEGAL expression for THE LORDS AND COMMONS; and, if we duly
consider the words which immediately follow, it must appear, that the
"sapientes de Concilio Regni," etc. here mentioned, were only such particular
sapientes as held judicial places, ( qui consuetudines et usum judiciorum
hactenus habuerunt); so that the expression cannot, with propriety, be supposed
to include the whole representative Body of the Commons, as well as the Lords,
etc. but merely the Judges, and such Lords, Prelates, and others, as held
judicial places, and were of the King's Council, mentioned in the preamble,
viz. In praesentia, etc. quorundam episcoporum Angliae, et aliorum, de Concilio
Regis, which Sir Edward Coke (by what authority I cannot guess) is pleased to
call a Committee of both Houses, though it can mean nothing more than a meeting
of the King's Privy Council; and the same may be said of that second meeting,
afterward mentioned, "coram Domino Rege et Concilio suo," wherein the said
Constitutions were again read (auditae et publicatae) and ordered to be
engrossed and observed; quod in scripturam redigerentur ad perpetuam memoriam,
et quod firmiter observentur: which (be pleased to remark) is the principal
enacting or enforcing clause of this Act: And, therefore, when we consider that
the same was agreed to, or ordained, by THE JUDGES as well as others, ( tam
Justiciarii quam alii concordaverunt quod in scripturam, etc.) we may be
assured that the meeting was not the Parliament, (in which the Judges, as such,
have not any vote or voice at all, except that of advising,) but merely the
King's Privy Council: and therefore Judge Shard, as cited by Lord Coke, had,
surely, reason on his side, when he, "beholding the manner of the penning of
this Act," (compare this with Lord Coke's own Rule, to the same purpose,
abovementioned,) was of opinion that it was no Act of Parliament. though Sir
Edward Coke was pleased to censure him, saying, that the contrary is holden by
many express Authorities, both before and after him. (2d Inst. p. 267.) But
what Authorities can be equal to the internal evidence of the Act itself,
according to his own rule, Mark well the manner of the penning P etc. For,
though it may have been allowed the force of an Act, in judicial proceedings,
as well as in the writings of some respectable commentators, yet this is
nothing but the natural consequence of its having been published and printed,
without remarks, among the other Acts, The undue Authority, acquired by such
impositions, was still more notorious, in the credit that has been given, even
by the Legislature itself; to the three other false Statutes beforementioned
against (what the Papists-call) Heresy: Two of them are expressly recited, and
formally repealed by an Act of Parliament in the the 1st of Edward VI. (cap.
12. 3.) as if they had really been Statutes ordained by the Authority of the
whole Legislature; and all the three false Statutes together are recited,
acknowledged, and revived, by another Act of Parliament, in the 1. and 2. P.
and M. (cap. 6.) and are yet again expressly entitled Statutes, and as such are
formally repealed by a third Act of Parliament in the 1st of Eliz. c. 1.. 15.
But yet these several great Authorities by no means invalidate the Evidence
which Sir Edward Coke has produced, to prove that the said three wicked
Ordinances were really no Statutes.


agreeable to the intention of those who unlawfully promoted it. But Lord Shard
declared from the Bench, in the Assizes at Winchester, (anno 30th E. 3.) that
this never was a Statute. Lib. Assisarum, p. 173. Shard. Negativa nihil
implicat. Et ceo que vous parles del' Statut de Bigamis, ceo ne fuit unquam
ascun Statut.

Another objection against this supposed Statute is the apparent evil intention
of the 5th Article, de Bigamis, (from whence it has acquired its title,) which
was, to acknowledge a foreign popish Law, as if it were already (without
interposition of Parliament) of legal force in England, and needed only some
small explanation, with respect to the manner of putting it in execution; an
idea this, which all free English Parliaments, even in popish times, most
zealously opposed! But, above all, the Iniquity of the foreign Decree itself,
which is introduced by this 5th Article, affords the most ample argument
against the whole Statute, as it seems to have been drawn up principally for
purpose of enforcing, and smuggling in, amongst other articles, that diabolical
popish Decretal of Pope Gregory IX. for discouraging lawful Marriages of Widows
or Widowers! The Marriages of the Clergy had been absolutely forbid As the
"forbidding to marry" is ranked by the apostle Paul amongst the "Doctrines of
Devils," (1 Timothy iv. 1.) so the papal Antichrist, in very early times, began to
discourage the Marriages of the Clergy: but Pope Gregory VII. alias Hildebrand,
a Monster in Iniquity, (to prove which Dr. Cave has cited unexceptionable
authorities, Hist. Liter. p. 535.) more openly revealed the man of sin in the
11th Century, and, amongst other notorious manifestations of most impious
Tyranny, "made a Decree" (in 1074) that, from that time forward, it should no
more be lawful for Priests to marrye, etc. Recon's Relics of Rome, p. 32 b.
This was apparently a contrary Doctrine to what St. Paul preached, and
consequently it subjects the Roman See to the Anathema of that Apostle! Though
we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Gal. i. 8 and 9. The Marriage
of the Clergy had never before been forbidden except among the worst of
Heretics, but had been allowed by the whole Church of Christ, from the time of
the Apostles, for above 1000 years, down to this unhappy Century: and, with
respect to Ireland in particular, Sir Edward Coke informs us, that, at a Synod
holden in Ireland, by St. Patrick, their Apostle, it was unanimously agreed
that Irish Priests should have Wives. 4 Inst. p. 356.


about 200 years before, and those who were already married forcibly separated
from their wives, Becon's Relics of Rome, p. 32 b.
(in open contradiction to the Laws of God,) by a Decree of Pope Gregory VII.
which was still further enforced by his successors; and the Clergy were
compelled at length to submit to that unnatural Tyranny, by a variety of the
most unjust and cruel laws and oppressions See, for instance, the several
Decrees of a Council, held at London by Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
1108, upon this subject, to oblige the Clergy to forsake their lawful wives,
who were mentioned by the Council as Concubines, and were ordered to be
delivered up to the Bishops as Adulteresses, together with all the goods of
those unfortunate husbands, who persisted in their natural affection! Tenth and
last Article: Omnia vero mobilia lapsorum posthac Presbyterorum, Diaconorum,
etc. (meaning the goods of those who continued to visit their wives,) tradentur
Episcopis, et Concubina, cum rebus suis, velut Adultera. Howel's Synopsis
Canonum, etc. vol. 1. p. 88.


that satanical malice could possibly devise, in the several ecclesiastical
Synods of that and the following century.

But the Decree against Bigamy was aimed at the Laity as well as Clergy; since
every Layman that could read was (before) entitled to the Benefit of Clergy,
when convicted of some particular offenses; which privilege was by this Decree
taken away from all persons called bigami, or who had been twice married
successively, Bigamie (says Sir William Staunford, in his "Plees del Coron." p.
134) "est un counterplee a Clergy," (Lambard calls it an ungodly and popish
Counterplea, Eiren. p. 555,) s. a dire, que cestui, qui demand le privilege
de son Clergy, suist espouse a un feme, a tiel lieu, deynz tiel dioces, et que
le dit feme morust, et ad espouse auter feme, etc.


the principal purpose of this new popish Ordinance being to cast an odium and
restraint upon lawful second marriages, and confound them with the real Felony
of having two wives at one time. Thus the intention of the Romish Church was
apparently diabolical; under a false pretense of extraordinary purity, to
discourage lawful Marriages, and thereby ensnare mankind, through their natural
frailties, into real pollutions: and it is notorious that the popish tenet of
"forbidding to marry" is one of the distinguishing scriptural marks of
ANTICHRIST!


(for I cannot properly call it a Statute) de malefactoribus in Parcis into
Ireland, with an order to the Chief Justice of Ireland, to enforce it: and he
remarks thereupon: -- This note fully proves (says he) that it was supposed the
King, by his sole authority, could then introduce any English Law; and will
that authority (says he) be lessened by the concurrence of the two Houses of
Parliament? But this by no means invalidates the justice of Mr. Molyneux's
argument, while the injustice, of which he complains, is still continued; viz.
the inequitable pretension to bind the Subjects of Ireland by Laws made without
their Assent, and this even without any exception or just distinction
concerning external or internal Government; for the Irish themselves do not
deny the propriety of the pretension in the former case. The exertion of royal
Prerogative, abovementioned, was certainly illegal, and therefore must be
esteemed a bad precedent; for Mr. Barrington himself, who cites it, does not
pretend to justify it; and I know that he will as readily allow, that one bad
precedent cannot justify another; so that his adding still more precedents of
the same kind adds no weight to his argument, because the authority of
Precedents must always be weighed and governed by First-Principles and
constitutional Law; otherwise we should be liable to adopt the most dangerous
doctrines, since there is nothing so bad but that a Precedent may be found for
it!

The second precedent of this nature, which he has produced for the same
purpose, still helps to confirm my observation on the other side of the
question: for this precedent is nothing less than the Order of King Charles the
First, in the 3d year of his reign, to the Treasurers and Chancellors of the
Exchequer, both of England and Ireland, by which they are directed to increase
the duties upon Irish exports; which shows (says he) that it was then imagined,
the King could tax Ireland by his Prerogative, without the intervention of
Parliament. -- Now, the precedent "shows" indeed (as Mr. Barrington justly
remarks) that it was then imagined, etc. that is, it shows that this false
doctrine was then imagined by the King and those wretched Courtiers, who,
either through ignorance, or wickedness, or both, betrayed him with their
unlawful counsels; but it by no means "shows" that such an arbitrary proceeding
was really Law at that time, any more than it is at present! for the very same
volume of Rymer's Foedera, ( viz. tome xviii.) that contains the
abovementioned precedent, contains also other precedents of the like
authority, which equally show that it was then imagined the King could tax EVEN
ENGLAND ITSELF by his Prerogative, without the intervention of Parliament. --
See A Declaration of his Majesty's clear intention in requiring the aid of
his loving subjects in that way of Loan The compulsive means, used on this
occasion, to extort money from the people, sufficiently demonstrate that "the
way of Loan, which" (was then) "intended by his Highness," amounted to an
exaction of the most notorious nature! Many people were imprisoned, and many
others pressed into the land and sea service, for refusing to contribute. See
Rushworth's Collection, vol. 1, p. 426. Sir Thomas Wentworth (afterward Lord
Strafford) was one of the sufferers on this occasion, for he was imprisoned by
the Lords of the Council, for refusing the royal Loan. Supplement to the new
and general Biographical Dictionary, p. 474. His Majesty demanded of the City
of London the loan of an hundred thousand pounds. Rushworth's Collection, vol.
1, p. 419. If such precedents were to be admitted, or allowed any weight at
all, in this argument, the very same reign would afford precedents sufficient
to render the King of England as despotic as the Emperor of Morocco! In the
fourth year of this reign, "the King's Commission" was issued to the
Lord-Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, and to the Customers of the Ports,
to collect Tonnage and Poundage without authority of Parliament. -- "Know ye,
that we, by advice of our Lords," (that is, the Lords of his Council, mentioned
in the beginning of the Commission,) declare our Will, that all those duties be
levied and collected as they were in the time of our father, and in such manner
as we shall appoint: and, if any person refuse to pay, then our Will is, that
the Lord-Treasurer shall commis to prison such, so refusing, till they conform
themselves: and we give full Power to all our officers, from time to time, to
give assistance to the farmers of the same, AS FULLY AS WHEN THEY WERE
COLLECTED BY AUTHORITY OF PARLIAMENT. Rushworth, vol. 1, p. 669. Here the
Neglect of the Authority of Parliament is openly avowed, though the forgetful
Monarch was bound under a solemn oath, at his coronation, to maintain the Laws
of the land!


which is now intended by his Highness. Tome xviii. p. 764. Nay, "it was then
imagined," (it seems,) by those disloyal persons who falsely called themselves
"the King's Friends," that the King could not only tax his English Subjects by
his Prerogative, but that he could also seize, imprison, try, and even HANG
them, by martial Law, without Judge or Jury!

The very same volume of Rymer's Foedera (tome xviii.) affords several
authentic precedents for delegating such unlimited Power by the King's
Commission! viz one for the county of Sussex, p. 751; another for the whole
county of Kent, p. 763; and a third for the town and county of Southampton, p.
804: The Commissioners were empowered not only to use martial Law "against
soldiers or mariners," but also against OTHER dissolute persons, joining with
them, or any of them; whereby, under the latter denomination, a way was opened
to render all other persons (besides soldiers and mariners) liable to the
uncertain decisions and hasty rigor of martial Law! Any man whatever might be
unjustly charged as a dissolute person, etc. and the accusation alone, whether
true or false, was sufficient to divest the person accused of all the
privileges of an English subject, at the very time when he stood most in need
of them! So that, if the King's Commissioners should happen to dislike any
particular person, within the county, or limits of the jurisdiction, expressed
in their Commission, it was possible for them to promote such an accusation,
and thereby render themselves Judges in their own cause; since the King's
Commission (contrary to his Majesty's most solemn engagement, before God, at
his coronation) deprived the accused subject of a legal Trial and the due
Process of the Law, the only defense of the innocent, by substituting an
illegal Process in lieu of it! And the horror of this monstrous usurpation of
power was much increased by the following circumstance, that the Commissioners
were expressly authorized, by their Commissions, to erect Gallows or Gibbetts,
and in such places as they shall think fit!


and therefore, as it would be partial to admit an arbitrary precedent as an
evidence on one side of the question, ( i^e. against Ireland,) without
weighing, at the same time, the similar precedents in the same unfortunate
reign, which equally affect the other side of the question, (I mean the
Privileges of the English Legislature,) we must necessarily exclude, from the
present enquiry, the most distant idea that Mr. Barrington's 2d Precedent, for
taxing Ireland by Prerogative, can possibly afford the least evidence against
the just Rights of the Subjects in Ireland; for, if such Precedents are
admitted to prove any thing at all, they prove too much; for they equally "show
that it was then imagined the King could tax" and oppress even England itself,
as well as Ireland, by his Prerogative, without the intervention of Parliament;
and I am very sure that the worthy writer, who unguardedly cited from Rymer the
abovementioned Precedent against Ireland, would be as zealous to oppose any
such doctrine as myself.

His 3d Precedent is still more destitute, if possible, of legal evidence. --
What would have been the answer of the English Legislature, (says he,) in the
year 1650, to the late claim of Independency in the Colonies, will appear by
the preamble to an Ordinance of the 3d Oct. of that year: -- Whereas in
Virginia, and the Islands of St. Christopher's, Nevis, Montserrat, and diverse
other islands and places in America, which were planted at the cost, and
settled by the people and authority, of this nation, which are and ought to be
subordinate to, and dependent upon, England, and has ever since the planting
thereof, and ought to be subject to such Laws, Orders, and Regulations, as
shall be made by the Parliament of England; p. 146.

But, though this was indeed the opinion of what Mr. Barrington calls the
English Legislature in the year 1650, yet no just argument can be drawn from
thence with respect to the present question, ( viz. the pretension to bind
Ireland without Representation or Assent;) because it affords as good an
argument, as the others abovementioned, for binding even England itself,
without any Representation or Assent at all, since the said Legislature (as it
is called) was totally defective in every point that is essentially necessary
to constitute an English Legislature; for (besides the total suppression of the
legal Rights of the Crown to a Share in the Legislature) even the necessary
Assent of the whole body of the People was also excluded, since it is evident
that neither the Lords nor the Commons of England were represented in that
packed junto of Hypocrites which was then called the "English Legislature!"
for, after the violent seizure of 41 Members of the House of Commons In
Rushworth's Collection, 4th part, vol. 2, p. 1355, we read the names of the
Members imprisoned by the Army, which were inserted in the Proposals and
Desires of the Army, presented that day to the Parliament by Colonel Whaley and
other officers; and in Mr. Rushworth's Diary for the next day, Dec. 7, we find
the following Memorandum relating to that transaction: viz. The Members seized
on by the Army were this day removed from Mr. Duke's house, (commonly called
Hell,) in Westminster, WHERE THEY WERE ALL LAST NIGHT, to two inns in the
Strand, viz. the King's-Head and the Swan, and there have a guard upon them; p.
1356.


by the Army, on the 6th of December, 1648, and the forcible exclusion of about
(...) more, Le 7 de Decembre les Members des Communes, en se rendant a leur
Chamber, y trouverent a la port en dehors et en dedans une guard qui en
empecha un grand nombre d'entrer. Le Comte de Clarendon dit qu'il y en eut
environ cent a qui on refusa l'entree. Rapin, tom. 8, live. 21, p. 707.
by the same unlawful power, on the following day, (preparatory to the illegal
trial and murder of the King in 1648-9,) the Long-Parliament no longer
represented the nation, but was merely the Representative of a most dangerous
standing Army; for such the national Militia was then become; the several
individuals thereof having, by a constant military Service for a few Years The
orders of the Lords and Commons for raising the militia to oppose the King's
commissions of array were dated in 1642. See Rushworth's Collection, part 3.
vol. 1. p. 678, 679, 684, 685, 689, and 765.


( viz. from four to six Years) acquired a fixed dislike and contempt for those
useful employments by which they were formerly enabled (whilst a mere militia)
to earn their bread, so that they now acknowledged no profession but that of
arms, and consequently were now become a regular standing army of mercenaries,
with a separate interest of their own from the rest of the nation -- Les
officiers et les soldats comprenoient bien qu'on vouloit se defaire d'eux,
(that is, the war being at an end, the Parliament was inclined to reduce the
number of regular troops by degrees,) et que la plupart n'etoient gueres en
etat d'aller reprendre leur professions, apres avoir ete quatre ou cinq ans
occupez a fair la guerre. Il y avoit dans Parnree un grand nombre d' officiers
qui n' etoient avaunt la guerre que dis artisans et qui ne voyoient qu' avec
peinc qu'ils alloient etre reduits a quitter leur emplois qui leur donnoient de
l'autorite, et a reprendre leurs anciens meriers. pour se meler, comme
auparavant, dans la foul du petit peuple. Ces gens la, le meme que ceux que
les independans avoient attirez dans leur parti, etoient disposez a tout
entreprendre, pour n'etre pas obligez a changer la maniere de vie qu'ils
avoient menee depuis quelques annees. Cromwell donc, et les officiers de son
parti, profitant de cette disposition, s' attacherent a inspirer a l'armee un
esprit de mecontentement contre les deux chambres, en quoi ils ne reussirent
que trop bien. Rapin, Tom. VIII. p. 579.


; and a standing army, by whomsoever paid, must ever be dangerous to
constitutional Liberty and Law.

The army were, indeed, the nominal servants of the Parliament, but were
nevertheless the absolute Lords and sovereign Directors of the same, having
ejected whomsoever they thought proper, and thereby modelled the national
Reprepresentative into a representation only of their own body and party, (as
has been said,) so that it ceased from that time to deserve the Name of a
Parliament or "Legislature," being a mere tool of military power, which was
permitted to sit for no other purpose than that of lending a pretended
parliamentary Authority to the arbitrary measures and wicked resosolutions of
an illegal Council of War; as if the mere Name of a Parliament without the
thing itself (a due Representation of the people) was sufficient to authorize
and justify the most detestable Despotism! The whole proceedings of the Council
of War, from the time the King was feized at Holmby, (though he himself was
deceived by their temporizing dissimulation,) clearly proves their fixed
intention to proceed to extremities, contrary to the declared sentiments See
the Votes of the Commons on the 28th of April, 1648, viz. 1. That the
Government of the Kingdom should be still by King, Lords, and Commons. 2. That
the groundwork for this Government should be the propositions last presented
to the King at Hampton Court; and, 3dly, That any Member of the House shall
have leave to speak freely to any Votes, Ordinances, or Declarations,
concerning the King, etc. Rushworth's Collect. part 4. vol. 2. p. 1074.


of the former Parliament, as well as of the citizens of London Tuesday June
27, 1648. This day a Petition from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council
of the City of London was presented to both Houses of Parliament; the substance
thereof, for satisfaction of those that have not seen the Petition, take
briefly thus: -- That a personal treaty may be obtained betwixt his Majesty and
both Houses, in the City of London, or some other convenient place, where it
may be most for the honor of his Majesty's royal person, and preservation of
the Parliament, as their honors thought fit; unto which treaty they humbly
desire our brethren of Scotland may be invited; that so according to the duty
of our allegiance, protestation, solemn league, and Covenant, his Majesty's
royal person, honor, and estate, may be preserved; the power and privilege of
Parliament maintained; the just Rights and Liberiies of the Subjects restored;
Religion and Government of the Church in purity established; all differences
may be the better composed, and a firm and lasting peace concluded; and the
union between the two Kingdoms continued, according to the covenant; ALL ARMIES
DISBANDED; and all your soldiers just arrears satisfied; the Kingdom's burdens
cased, and the laudable Government thereof, by the good and wholesome Laws and
Customs, happily advanced. For this, both Lords and Commons, respectively,
thank the petitioners for their good affection to the Parliament, and signify
their concurrence in the same sentiments. Rushworth, part 4. vol. 2. p. 1167,
and 1168.


in general, and of almost the whole presbyterian party, (including at that
time a very great majority of the people,) who were earnestly desirous to
maintain the ancient constitution of State, by restoring the King to such a
share of limited Power as they thought consistent with their own safety: But,
alas! the standing Army was now become the ruling Sovereign of the Kingdom, and
was not less zealous to maintain an unlimited Authority than the former ruling
Sovereign, whom they had so lately fought against and imprisoned for the like
unlawful pretensions; so that the arbitrary proceedings and injustice of the
King, in the beginning of his Reign, were severely repaid in kind by
proceedings equally arbitrary, illegal, and unjust; as Oppression is generally
punished by Oppression, that even the injustice of mankind may demonstrate the
justice of an all-ruling Providence in the Government of the World!

This mock Parliament, supported by the standing Army, held the nation in
slavery J'ai deja dit, que le Parliament n' avoit d' autreappui que l' Armee.
C' etoit par le moyen de l' Arm qu'il tenoit la nation dans la servitude.
Rapin, tom. 9. p. 57.
from December, 1648, to April, 1653, including the year referred to, as above,
for the sense of the then "English Legislature" concerning the authority of
Parliament over Virginia and the other Colonies.

In the beginning of 1653, the artful Cromwell found himself so well
established in his military post of General, or Imperator, of the standing
Army, (for such is the original root both of the name and power of Emperors,)
that he ventured, by dint of his military authority, to turn the despicable
mock Legistature out of the Parliament House Cromwell, -- apres avoir concerte
toutes chooses avec les principaux officiers, se rendit au Parliament le 20/30
Avril, accompagne d'un petit nombre d'officiers et de soldats, et sans autre
preambule il dic aux Members du Parliament, qu'il venoit mettre fin a leur
autorite don't ils avolent fait un mauvais usage, et, que sans deliberer, ils
eussent a se dissoudre sur le champ. En meme temps les officiers et les
soldats. entrerent, et se tinrent a la port, pendant que les Members se
retiroient horse de la Chamber. A mesure qu'ils sortoient, Cromwell disoit a
l'un, qu'il etoit un yvrogne, a un autre, qu'il etoit un voleur, sans en
epargner aucun de ceux qu'il connoissoit pour ses ennemis. Ensuite, il donna a
garder la Mass, qu'on port devant l' Orateur, a un de ses Officiers, et ferma
les ports a la clef. Cette action etoit extraordinaire, mais elle ne l' etoit
pas plus que celle que le General Fairfax avoit fair peu d'annees auparavant,
lors qu'il avoit fait chasser de la Chamber et emprisonner les Members QUI
N'ETOIENT PAS AGREABLES a l'Armee. Ibid. p. 59.


, and, by the same redoubtable authority, chose another junto, consisting of
144 Members, without consulting the Nation at all, that the new nominal
Parliament might be still more obedient in representing and fulfilling the Will
and Pleasure of its military Constituents: This wretched Assembly, though in
the highest degree despicable in itself, was nevertheless invested with
sovereign AUTHORITY Ces nouveaux Souverains s'etant assemblez au jour marque,
Cromwell les harangua, et, apres avoir fini son discourse, il leur delivra un
instrument en parchemin, sign par lui meme et par les principaux officiers de
l' Armee, par lequel on leur deseroit l' Autorite Souveraine. Cet ecrit
portoit, que tous les Sujets d' Angleterre, d' Ecosse, et d' Irlande, etoient
tenus de leur obeir, jusqu'au 3-13 de Novembre de l'annee suivante 1654, c'est
a dire pendant un an et quatre mois, etc. Ibid. 61.
over England, Scotland, and Ireland, by an instrument drawn up expressly for
that purpose, and signed by the General (Cromwell) and the principal Officers
of the Army; so that we have here an undeniable precedent for governing
England, Scotland, and Ireland, without the Representation and Assent of the
People of any of these Kingdoms; and yet no one will pretend to say, that the
same can justify any future attempts to deprive either the people of England,
Scotland, or even of Ireland, of their just right to a free and frequent
Representation in Parliament. Now, "the English Legislature" of 1653, (for the
Title is not less due than it was in 1650,) having continued their sittings for
about five months, dissolved themselves, and returned the instrument of their
Sovereignty to the General and his military Council. On the 1^/22 of December,
1653. Ibid. p. 63.
And, two days afterward, the Council of Officers, by virtue of this devolved
authority, which the sham Parliament (of their own creating and appointing) had
re-delivered into their hands, were pleased to declare, that, for the future,
the Government of the Republic Deux jours apres, le Conseil des Officiers, en
virtue de l'autorite que le precedent Parliament (meaning the junto of 144
persons, constituted and chosen merely by the General, or by the Army) venoit
de lui deferer, declara, qu'a l'avenir, LE GOVERNMENT DE LA REPUBLIQUE
resideroit DANS UNE SEULE PERSON, savoir, dans celle d'Olivier Cromwell,
General des Armees d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse, et d'Irlande; et qu'il auroit le
titre de Protecteur des trois Royaumes, et qu'il seroit assiste d'un conseil de
21 persons. Rapin, Tome ix. p. 64.


(plainly meaning, as appears by the event, not only the sovereign executive
Power, but also the full and supreme legislative Power of the Republic, or
three united Kingdoms, for a certain time) Viz. from the 16/26 Dec. 1653, to
the 3/13 Sept. 1654, as appears by the 1st and 8th Articles of what this
military Council were pleased to call "an Act of "Government," thereby proving
their own usurpation of the supreme legislative Authority; which Authority they
were afterward pleased to lodge in the single person of their General, by the
7th and 8th Articles of the said "Act of Government." Ibid. p. 64.


should reside in one single person, namely, their own military Commander,
General Cromwell, whom they invested with the title and power of Protector of
the three Kingdoms. I have thus far pursued the history of those arbitrary
times, as well to show the danger of keeping a standing Army, I might have
saved myself much trouble, upon this point. had I been aware, when I wrote the
foregoing pages, that the danger of keeping standing Armies had been so well
enforced by Mr. Quincy, in his Observations on the Boston Port Bill. That
ingenious and sensible Writer has very judiciously collected a number of
unquestionable examples upon the subject, which, together with his own
pertinent observations upon them, demand the most serious attention not only of
every loyal English Subject, at this time, but of all friends to mankind in
general.


and of permitting a national Militia to become such, The example of military
Tyranny, which I have already recited, demonstrates the great danger of
permitting any part of a national Militia to be absent, longer than is
absolutely necessary, from the particular county or district to which it
properly belongs; for, as soon as Militia-Men begin to depend upon their Pay.
or "Sold," "Dictionnaire militaire," p. 417.
instead of their industry and the regular daily employments which they
followed at home, they cease to be the constitutional defenders of their
country, and become mere Soldiers ("Soldats") or Mercenaries: and therefore, as
it is now reported that great pains are, at this time, taken, in the several
American Colonies, to renew the ancient discipline of the Militia, in their
respective provinces, it is a matter of great consequence, (as well for their
own internal happiness and liberty, as for the preservation of peace and union
with the mother country, and a continuance of that due constitutional
subjection, to the Crown of Great Britain, which is the true interest of all
parties, as it connects every branch of the empire, and insures mutual
confidence and protection against foreign enemies,) that no persons whatever be
allowed the rank of Officers, in any of their provincial Regiments of Militia,
unless they have a competent fortune, either in Land or Money, to enable them
to live comfortably, without military pay, lest they should ever entertain a
separate Interest from that of the Public, and, like the degenerate Militia
under Cromwell, enslave their country! Even a common Militia-Man is not
properly qualified for that public Trust (for such it is) unless, from his
situation in life, or as the master of a family, he has some permanent interest
in the welfare of the community.


as to demonstrate the insufficiency and illegality of the Precedents which
have been cited to justify the fatal pretension of England to govern Ireland,
and the other Colonies, without the Representation and Assent of the respective
inhabitants; for we might as well enquire what would have been the answer of
the English Legislature in the year 1653, (when the whole Legislature was
comprised within the narrow compass of Cromwell's own doublet,) as " in the
year 1650," to which this learned writer has referred us; since the authority
of the nominal Legislature in 1650 was entirely illegal, as well as that in
1653, both of them having been set up and maintained by the same
unconstitutional arbitrary power; and both of them totally void of the
indispensable Representation of the people: for though the wretched remains of
the Long-Parliament in 1650 (being about 80 Representatives or Members, instead
of 513 that had been elected Ainsi ce Parliament, qui dans son commencement
avoit ete compose du Roi, d'une Chamber d'environ six-vingts Seigneurs, et
d'une Chamber des Communes, ou il y avoit cinq cens treize Deputez, se vit
reduit a une Chamber des Communes composee d' environ quatre-vingts Members,
don't il y en avoit tres peu qui, au commencement de ce Parliament, eussent
cinq-cens livres sterling de rent. Cependant ces members, quoiqu'en si petit
nombre, s'attribuoient le nom de Parliament, et agissoit comme ayant reuni,
dans leur corpse, le pouvoir qui avoit auparavant reside dans le Roi, dans los
Seigneurs, et dans les Communes. Cela pourroit paroitre fort etrange, si on
n'etoit pas deja insorme de ce qui s'etoit pass, et de la terreur que L'ARME'E
inspiroit a tout le monde. Rapin, tome ix. p. 4.
at the beginning of that Parliament) were indeed chosen by a small part of the
people of England, yet the legal Representation, even of that small part, was
out of date and void, from the length of time that the said Representatives had
continued without Re-election, which was about ten years; whereas it is well
known that the due effect, or virtue, of popular Representation, was formerly
supposed to be incapable (like some annual fruits) of being so long preserved
in useful purity, without a seasonable renewal, The sensible and patriotic
author of the Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania to the Inhabitants of the
British Colonies (1774), remarks, in a note on page 103, that, the last Irish
Parliament continued thirty-three years, that is, (says he,) during all the
late reign. The present Parliament there has continued from the beginning of
this reign, and probably will continue (says he) to the end!

This is indeed, as he justly calls it, a most pernicious particularity, it
being a greater defect in the constitutional Liberties of Ireland than any
other that I ever heard of; and, as it is apparently contrary to the intention
and legal constitution of Parliaments, must necessarily reflect the greatest
dishonor on those persons, whoever they are, that have introduced this
monstrous infringement on the natural Rights of the Irish Subjects.

These excellent Letters, which contain much seasonable instruction, are said
to be written by John Dickinson, Esquire. the same eminent Author to whom thanks
were most deservedly given, by the Committee for the Province of Pensylvania,
on the 21st of July last, for the great assitance they had derived from the
application of his eminent abilities to the service of his country, in
(another) "performance," since published, entitled, "A new Essay" (by the
Pennsylvanian Farmer) on the constitutional Power of Great Britain over the
Colonies in America, etc. And the said Committee, with great justice and
propriety, recommended that performance, as highly deserving the perusal and
serious consideration of every friend of liberty, etc.


from time to time; so that our more prudent Ancestors (imitating nature)
required also an annual Sir Edw. Coke, in his 4th Inst. p. 9, speaking of "the
matters of Parliament," informs us of the reasons usually expressed in the
writs for calling a new Parliament; as pro quibusdam arduis urgentibus
negotiis, nos statum, et desensionem regni nostri Angliae, et Ecclesiae
Anglicanae concernentibus quod dam parliamentum nostrum, etc. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. And he adds, in the next paragraph, "Now, for as much" (says
he) as diverse Laws and Statutes have been enacted and provided for these ends
aforesaid, and that diverse mischiefs in particular, and diverse grievances in
general, concerning the honor and safety of the King, the State, and defense
of the Kingdom, and of the Church of England, might be prevented, an excellent
Law was made, anno 36 Edw. III. c. 10. which, being applied to the said Writs
of Parliament, does, in a few and effectual words, set down the true subject of
a Parliament in these words: For the maintenance of the said articles and
statutes, and redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances, which daily happen, A
PARLIAMENT SHALL BE HOLDEN EVERY YEAR, as another time was ordained by a
statute. Which Statute, here referred to, was made in the 4th year of the same
reign, cap 14. Item, it is accorded, that a Parliament shall be holden EVERY
YEAR ONCE, and more often if need be. But Sir William Blackstone supposes that
the King never was obliged, by these Statutes, to call a new Parliament every
year; but only to permit a Parliament to sit annually for the redress of
grievances, and dispatch of business, if need be. (1 Com. c. 2, p. 153.)

It is too true, indeed, that our Kings, in general, did not think themselves "
obliged, by these Statutes," (as they ought in conscience to have been, for the
safety of their souls,) "to call a new Parliament every year:" nay, it is
certain that many of them would never have called a Parliament at all, had they
not been "obliged" by necessity and the circumstances of the times. But by what
authority could a representative in one Parliament take his seat in the next
annual Parliament, without reelection, before any laws were made for
lengthening the duration of Parliaments? And besides, if the King did " only
permit a Parliament to sit annually," etc. by what authority could the
Parliament be convened at all, under such a circumstance, seeing that a mere
permission to sit excludes the idea of a prorogation from year to year?
However, the learned Commentator himself very justly observes, in a preceding
page, (150,) concerning "the manner and time of assembling" that the Parliament
is regularly to be summoned by the King's Writ or Letter, issued out of
Chancery. And it is well known that these Writs are not addressed to the
knights, citizens, and burgesses, elected for any former Parliament, but to the
Sheriffs alone, to cause Kinghts, Citizens, etc. to be elected; for, when the
said Acts were made, such an absurdity in politics had never been conceived in
England, as that of entrusting the Representation of the people, for a term of
years, (as at present,) to the persons elected! On the contrary, when the
business of each Sessions was finished, the Parliament, of course, was at an
end; and therefore Lord Coke did not speak in vain, when he mentioned "the
excellent Law" ( viz. the Act for annual Parliaments) "being applied to the
said Writs of Parliament," etc. before recited.

A man of so much good-sense, learning, and judgment, as Sir William
Blackstone is master of, must be well aware of the pernicious effects of
investing the Representatives of the people with a legislative power, beyond
the constitutional term of A SINGLE SESSION, without Re-election; and therefore
I cannot but be surprised at the unguarded manner in which he has expressed
himself in his Comment on the two excellent Statutes of Edward III. for annual
Parliaments; viz. that the King is not, or ever was, obliged by these Statutes
to call a new Parliament every year, etc. He has caused the word new to be
printed in Italies, as if he meant thereby to insinuate, that the Legislatures
of those early times were not unacquainted with our modern idea of conferring
on the popular Representatives a kind of continued senatorial dignity, without
Re-election, for several years together; whereas he certainly must have known
that this corrupt modorn practice has produced a new order of men amongst us a
most dangerous increase of aristocratical power, which was entirely unknown to
our Ancestors in the glorious reign of Edward III. If he could show that there
ever was a Parliament, in those times, that was not a NEW Parliament, his
Comment might be justified! But it is notorious that Writs were issued to the
Sheriffs, for new Elections, almost every year during that whole reign: The
Writs, for the most part, are still preserved with the Returns upon them. In
the catalogue of Election-Writs, which Prynn has given in his Brevia
Parliamentaria Rediviva, p. 4 to 6, there is an account of Writs issued for new
Elections in every year of that King's reign, between his 34th (when the last
Act for annual Parliaments was made) and his 50th year, except 3, viz. the
40th, 41st, and 48th years; in which years the Records of Summons to the
Prelates and Lords of Parliament are also wanting, as appears by Sir William
Dugdale's perfect Copy of Summons to Parliament, of the Nobility, etc.

And yet this affords no absolute proof that Parliaments were not held in those
very years for which the Writs are wanting; because the bundles of Writs for
the said years may have been lost or mislaid. The only wonder is, that more
have not been absolutely lost, when we consider the very little care that had
been taken of them; for Prynne found many of these Writs dispersed amongst a
vast miscellaneous heap of other records on various subjects, (as he himself
relates in his Epistle-Dedicatory to King Charles II. of his Brevia
Parliamentaria Rediviva,) calling the said heap a confused Chaos, under
corroding, putrefying cobwebs, dust, and filth, in the darkest corner of
Caesar's Chapel in the White Tower, as mere useless Relics not worthy to be
calendred, etc. And, in page 103 of that same work, he speaks of 117 Bundles of
Writs, whereof 97 had only been then lately discovered, filed, and bundled, by
himself: "But many of these 117 Bundles" (says he) are not complete, above half
or three parts of the Writs being either rotted, consumed, maimed, torn, or
utterly lost, through carelessness, wet, cankers, or other casualties; and some
of them have not above two, three, or four Writs, and one or two but one Writ
and Retorn remaining.

But that there were really Writs for Parliaments, even in those three years,
which appear to be wanting, at least in two of them, is very certain; because
it was in the 40th year of this reign, as Sir Edward Coke informs us, (4 Inst.
p. 13,) that the Pope demanded homage for the kingdoms of England and Ireland,
and the arrears of revenue granted by King John to Pope Innocent III. whereupon
the King, in the same year, calls his Court of Parliament, In this Parliament
it was unanimously agreed, by the Prelates, Dukes, Counts, Barons, and the
Commons, ("et la Common," and again, "at Communes,") that the said King John,
nor no other, could put himself, nor his Realm, nor his People, in such
Subjection, without their Assent, ('sans assent de eux;') and, if it was done,
it was done without their Assent, (that is, without the Assent of the Commons,
for the Assent of the Barons was expressed in the Charter,) "and contrary to
his Oath at his Coronation" P. 14. Whereupon Lord Coke remarks, in the margin,
that no King can put himself, nor his Rea'm, nor his People, in such
Subjection, without Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, etc.


etc. as Sir Edward Coke proves from the Parliament-Rolls of that year, No. 8,
remarking, at the same time, that the Act then made was "never yet printed."
See the margin, 4th Inst. p. 13.

And it appears that a Parliament was held also in the 48th year of this reign,
because supplies were in that year granted to the King by Parliament, as
related by Sir Richard Baker, in his Chronicle, p. 173, viz. in his eight and
fortieth year, IN A PARLIAMENT, is granted him a 10th of the Clergy, and a 15th
of the Laity. So that there is but one year, out of so many, in which we cannot
trace the meeting of the annual Parliaments: And annual Writs for new Elections
were regularly issued for the first 18 years of the following reign, (as
appears by Prynn's 2d part of a brief Register and Survey of the several kinds
and forms of parliamentary Writs, pages 116 and 117,) till Richard II. (that
wretched perjured monarch) had rendered himself absolute. His arbitrary
proceedings very soon afterward occasioned his own loss of Power, and total
Ejectment from the Throne; so that, notwithstanding his boasted Firmness in
executing his favorite Measures, he was at last reduced to the most abject
acknowledgements of his own unworthiness to reign.




After considering these unquestionable evidences of the issuing Writs annually
for new Elections, it will be difficult to comprehend the meaning of Sir
William Blackstone's Comment on the said two Acts for annual Parliaments: Not
that he (the King) is, or ever was, obliged by these Statutes to call a new
Parliament every year; but only to permit a Parliament to sit annually for the
redress of grievances and dispatch of business, if need be. -- These last words
(says he) are so loose and vague, that such of our monarchs as were inclined to
govern without Parliaments, neglected the convoking them, sometimes for a very
considerable period, under pretense that there was no need of them, etc.

But "these last words" are not so loose and vague as either to justify his own
explanation of the said Statutes, ( viz. not to call a new Parliament every
year, but only to permit a Parliament to sit, etc.) or to excuse, in the least
degree, the criminal neglects of those depraved monarchs who were inclined to
govern without them: for the words, "if need be," cannot, according to the most
obvious sense of the Act wherein they are found, be applied to the main purpose
of the Act, (the holding annual Parliaments,) but merely to the remaining part
of the sentence, viz. and more often: that is, "and more often, if need be."
The Order, that a Parliament shall be holden EVERY YEAR ONCE, is absolute, and
the discretionary power, expressed in the words "if need be," relates
apparently to the calling Parliaments "more often:" for, if the said
discretionary words, "if need be," could, with any propriety, be applied to the
whole sentence, the Act itself would have been nugatory; which could never be
the intention of the Legislature: but the true meaning and sense of the
Legislature is very clearly proved by the histories of those times: for it is
manifest, not only that new Representatives were elected every year (with only
one exception) for a considerable number of years after the last of the said
Acts was made, (which confirms the main purpose of the Acts, viz. the holding
annual Parliaments,) but it is also manifest, that Parliaments were frequently
held "more often" than once a year; Writs were issued for electing 3 new
Parliaments in the 6th year of Edw. III. 2 in his 11th year, 3 in his 12th
year, and even 4 in his 14th year; and there appear to have been 2 new
Parliaments in the 7th of R. II. See Prynne's Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva,
p. 5 and 6.


which amply confirms also what I have before said, concerning the meaning of
the discretionary power, expressed in the said Act, by the words "if need be."

These very frequent Elections (sometimes two, three, and four, times IN ONE
YEAR) sufficiently prove that the power, delegated by the people to their
Representatives, continued no longer in force than during the Session of the
particular Parliament to which they were summoned; which being "once
determined," (says Prynne, 1st part of Brief Register, etc. of Parl. Writs, p.
334.) they presently ceased to be Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, in any
succeeding Parliaments or Councils, unless newly elected and returned to serve
in them, by the King's NEW Writs, as our Law Books (referring to 4 Ed. IV. f.
44. Brook, Officer, 25. 34 Hen. VIII, c. 24.) and experience resolve, etc. And
therefore Judge Blackstone's insinuation, against the calling of a new
Parliament, has no real foundation: for, if it was the intention of the
Legislature, in the two Acts abovementioned, that the King should ever summon
any Parliament at all, they must necessarily be understood to mean a new
Parliament on all occasions; i. e. not only that the regular Parliaments, which
they ordained to be holden every year once, should be new Parliaments, but
those also that should be summoned upon any extraordinary unforeseen occasions;
which is sufficiently expressed in the 1st of the said Acts, by the words, and
more often, if need be. The meaning of the Act is unquestionably proved by the
actual issuing of writs, to the Sheriffs, for electing Knights, Citizens, etc.
for two, three, and sometimes four new Parliaments, in one year, as mentioned
above: And if any person should object, that such very frequent Elections must
be attended with insuperable difficulties and inconveniences, we may quote the
experience of all ancient times, as affording ample and sufficient proofs to
the contrary; there being not above two or three cases of elections questioned,
or complained of, from 49 Hen. III. till 22 Edw. IV. (that is, more than 200
years.) for ought that appears by the Retornes or Parliament-Rolls, and NOT SO
MUCH AS ONE DOUBLE RETURN OR INDENTURE, wherewith all the late Bundles; or
Writs, are stored, and the House of Commons and late Committees of Privileges
pestered, perplexed, to the great retarding of the more weighty public affairs
of the King and Kingdom. Prynne, Brevia Parl. Rediv. p. 137. This enormous
evil, the retardment of business, by undue Returns, will not (I may venture,
without the spirit of prophecy, to assert) be remedied by the new Regulation
for that purpose. The Commons were never (in ancient times of Freedom) esteemed
the proper Judges of their own Elections, but the King alone, that is, in his
limited judicial capacity, by his Justices and his sworn Juries, in the Courts
of Common Law. If my countrymen will seriously consider all these points, they
must be convinced that the only sure method of healing the alarming distempers
of our political Constitution Viz. the enormous national Debt; the numerous
Pensions; the secret parliamentary Influence; a standing Army of near 100
Battalions of Foot, besides Caval^y, in time of Peace I etc. etc. etc. which
must render the Estates and Property of individuals precarious and insecure, or
finally EAT THEM UP with growing burtbens, if these fatal symptoms of the most
dangerous political consumption are not speedily checked and thrown off, by the
wholesome prescriptions of a free and equal Representation of THE PEOPLE.


is to restore to the people their ancient and just Right to elect a new
Parliament, " every year once, and more often if need be," whatsoever Judge
Blackstone may think of it!

No Parliament could have any right to deprive the people of this inestimable
Law, unless the Representatives had expressly consulted their respective
constituents upon it; as the alteration was of too much moment to be entrusted
to the discretion of any Representatives or Deputies whatsoever, being
infinitely more important than any new devi^e, moved on the King's behalf, in
Parliament, for his aid, or the like; for the most essential and fundamental
Right of the whole body of the Commons (I mean the Principals, not the Deputies
or Agents) was materially injured by the fatal change, and the people's power
of control, for the general good of the kingdom, was thereby apparently
diminished! so that, if it is the duty of Representatives (even in "any new
device" of mere aid, or the like,) to consult their Constituents, how much
more, upon the proposal of so material an alteration in the Constitution, ought
they to have answered, that, in this new device, they DARE NOT AGREE WITHOUT
CONFERENCE WITH THEIR COUNTRIES! These are the words of Lord Coke, who mentions
them as the proper answer, when any new device is moved, etc. and he adds,
whereby it appears" (says he) "that SUCH CONFERENCE is warrantable by the Law
and Custom of Parliament, 4 Inst. p. 14; so that no Representative can be
justified (according to "the Law and Custom of Parliament") who refuses to
receive the Instructions of his Constituents, notwithstanding that several very
sensible, worthy, and (I believe) sincerely patriotic gentlemen have lately
declared themselves to be of a contrary opinion; but, when they peruse the
several authorities which I have cited, concerning the absolute necessity of a
very frequent appeal to the sense of the whole body of the people, I trust, in
their candor and love of truth, that they will alter their sentiments.


renewal of their parliamentary Representation, as being necessary for the
maintenance of public virtue.

Thus the third Example, given by this learned gentleman, for taxing Ireland
and Virginia, etc. without the assent of the respective inhabitants, is
manifestly illegal; since it must appear, that what he calls the English
Legistature, in the year 1650, was totally void of every essential and legal
qualification to, render it worthy of so distinguishing a title: but, supposing
that the English Legistature, in the year 1650, had been a legal and
constitutional Parliament, yet the Resolutions he has mentioned would have been
totally illegal, and amount to no more than a mere vain assertion, as void of
Law and Reason as it was really of Effect; which is proved by the ANSWER of the
English Legislature, at Virginia, (then representing the People of that
province,) to the unreasonable pretensions, beforementioned, of the mock
Legislature at London; for otherwise, if we were to consider what would have
been THE ANSWER (or rather what really were THE CLAIMS) of the one Legislature,
without considering, at the same time, the real ANSWER of the other, to such
vain and unjust pretensions, we should lay ourselves open to the charge of
partiality!

The judicious Author of a late Apppeal to the Justice and Interests of the
People of Great Britain, in the present Disputes with America, has reported the
Answer of the Virginian Legislature on that occasion. Upon the dissolution of
the Monarchy, (says he,) the Commonwealth dispatched a Governor, WITH A
SQUADRON, to take possession of Virginia. He was permitted to land, upon
Articles, of which the following is one, and decisively shows what were their
original ideas of their Rights. Article 4th. VIRGINIA shall be free from all
taxes, customs, and impositions, whatsoever, and none shall be imposed on them
WITHOUT CONSENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY. An Appeal, This little tract contains
a great dear of intelligence and sound reasoning concerning the natural Rights
of mankind, and is highly worthy the perusal of every good citizen who desires
information concerning the present differences with the British Colonies: and,
upon the same occasion, the clear and unanswerable arguments of another able
writer also, who signs himself "Free Swiss," must not be forgot: The title of
the work, last mentioned, seems indeed to be the only exceptionable part of it;
viz. Great-Britain's Right to tax her Colonies, placed in the clearest light,
by a Swiss; for a Right, without a just foundation, cannot with propriety be
entitled "a Right," nevertheless he has, most certainly, placed in the
clearest light the impropriety of any such claim upon the Colonies.


etc. p. 29.

I have dwelt much longer upon these three Precedents (cited by the Honorable
Mr. Barrington) against Ireland, than I at first intended; but the several
different subjects, to which I was naturally led in the examination of them,
are of so much constitutional importance, and so necessary to be known to every
Englishman, that I hope I may be excused for having, as they occurred, enlarged
upon them, in the several Notes which I have added to my Text.

And, with respect to the three Precedents themselves, I flatter myself that
every impartial Reader, who carefully considers what has been already said upon
them, will freely pronounce them illegal, and totally unworthy of being allowed
the least weight or consideration, as Precedents, against the Independence of
Ireland, since they are equally capable of being retorted as Precedents for
enslaving even England itself: but I must therefore repeat what I have before
declared, in p. 141 and elsewhere, that I am very sure the worthy Writer, who
unguardedly cited them, will be as zealous to oppose any such doctrine as
myself; and I believe that I may farther assure myself, that this learned
Author will not be displeased or offended with the freedom of these remarks
upon his Work; for, though I have not the honor to be personally acquainted
with him, yet I am sufficiently acquainted (by other parts of his Writings)
with the general benevolence and rectitude of his intentions, and also that he
is an admirer and fast friend to our constitutional Liberty (which plainly
appears in many other parts of his useful Work) as well as myself; so that any
corrections, on that side of the question, will be taken (I dare say) by him as
they were meant by me, that is, in good part, and without the least ill will:
and his Work (I speak of it in general) has very deservedly acquired so much
esteem and credit in the world, that I could not, without great injustice to
the subject before me, permit any arguments therein, upon the point in
question, to remain unanswered.

The same observation, I am inclined to think, is equally applicable, as well
to the candor and disposition, as to the writings, of Sir William Blackstone,
whose very learned and useful Commentaries must also be strictly examined, upon
this point, before I conclude my Declaration: and, had the other great and
eminent writers (Lord Coke, Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, Judge Jenkins, etc.)
whose opinions, upon the present subject, I am obliged also to call in
question, been still alive, I should have thought myself equally sure of their
benevolence and forgiveness, if I except Sergeant Mayart; because the
undeserved contempt, with which he has treated Sir Richard Bolton, (the learned
Author whom he attempted to answer,) prevents my entertaining so charitable and
friendly an opinion of him as I do of the rest.

Though I have now drawn these remarks concerning the Constitution of Ireland
to a much greater length than I at first proposed, yet I must not conclude
whilst any material assertions of great authority remain unanswered. Several of
Sir Edward Coke's objections, on this head, have already, toward the beginning
of this 2d part, been proved (I hope) to want foundation: but there still
remains to be considered a further doctrine, on the same point, advanced by him
in Calvin's Case, which, I trust, will appear to be equally unjust, though
founded on the opinion of all the Judges in England!

"In Anno 33 Reg. El." (says he) it was resolved, by all the Judges in England,
in the case of Orurke, an Irishman, who had committed. High Treason in Ireland,
that he, by the Stat. of 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. might be indicted, arraigned, and
tried, for the same, in England, according to the purview of the Statute. 7 Co.
448.

But this doctrine, notwithstanding the great authority with which it is here
delivered, is obnoxious to a fundamental Right of the Subject, the Trial by a
Jury of the VICINAGE, or of Neighbors to the Fact, which is due to every
private person in the British Dominions, according to the ancient Laws and
Customs of this realm; otherwise the government would cease to be limited, and
thereby would cease to be lawful! So that if Sir Edward Coke had been as much
upon his guard, when he quoted this ( "Resolution of all the Judges," as he was
when he made his Remarks on that wicked Act of Parliament, in the reign of K.
Hen. VII. by which also the fundamental Right of Trial by Juries was violated,
he would neither have mentioned that Resolution of "all the Judges," or even
the Act itself, without guarding against the pernicious effects of such an
unconstitutional doctrine, by a proper censure, as he did in the former case.

"It is not almost credible to foresee" (says he) when any when any maxim or
fundamental Law of this realm is altered, (as elsewhere has been observed,)
what dangerous inconveniences do follow; which most expresely appears by this
most unjust and strange Act of 11 Hen. VII. for hereby not only Empson and
Dudley themselves, but such justices of peace, (corrupt men,) as they caused to
be authorized, committed most grievous and heavy oppressions and exactions,
grinding of the face of the poor subjects by penal laws, (be they never so
obsolete or unfit for the time,) by information only, without any presentment
or Trial by Jury, being the ancient Birthright of the Subject, but to hear and
determine the same by their discretion, inflicting such penalty as the Statutes
not repealed imposed, etc. 4th Inst. c. 1. p. 41.

And afterward he adds: This Statute of 11 H. VII. we have recited, and showed
the just inconvenience thereof, to the end, that the like should never
hereafter be attempted in any Court of Parliament. And that others might avoid
THE FEARFUL END OF THESE TWO TIME-SERVERS, Empson and Dudley. Qui eorum
vestigia insistunt, eorum exitus perhorrescant. (ibid.)

But, though these two wretched Judges were hanged for their time-serving, yet
it appears, by this account of Lord Coke, that, when they presumed to dispense
with the interposition of Juries, they acted by the express Authority of a
Statute, or Act of Parliament; and, though they were Time-servers, so far as to
acquiesce (contrary to their Duty, as Judges) in enforcing that wicked and
unconstitutional Statute, (which exceeded the due bounds to which the English
Legislature is necessarily limited,) yet, it seems, they adjudged no penalties,
in consequence thereof, but such as the Statutes, not repealed, imposed. And it
is plain, therefore, that the crime of those two Judges (against which Lord
Coke mentioned the FEARFUL END of those two time-servers, as a warning to all
future JUDGES) consisted in allowing the force of Law to a wicked
unconstitutional Act of Parliament, by which a FUNDAMENTAL LAW of this realm
(was) "altered;" so that their crime was exactly parallel to the (equally
criminal) resolution of "all the Judges in England," in the case of Orurke the
Irishman, heforementioned, (which was, in like manner, founded on an express
Act of Parliament, viz. 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23.) and parallel also to the crime
(for it must be so esteemed) of all the Judges of England, when they
"resolved," in Sir John Perrot's Case, that, for a Treason done in IRELAND, the
offender may be tried, by the Statute 35 Hen. VIII. IN ENGLAND, because the
words of the Statute be, All Treasons, committed out of the Realm of England,
-- and IRELAND is out of the Realm of England, etc. 3d Inst. p. 11. But the
Judges, in both these cases, were quite as inexcusable as the two time-servers,
Dudley and Empson; for, if the real Intention of the Legislature, by the said
Acts of 33 and 35 Hen. VIII. had been so general as to include all places
whatever, out of the REALM of England, without leaving room for pleading a
legal exception, in behalf of those territories wherein the laws, liberties,
and constitution, of the Realm of England were already established, the said
Judges ought to have known that a fundamental Law of this Realm was thereby
"altered," and consequently that they incurred the risk of being HANGED, by
some future administration, (like their time-serving predecessors,) for
presuming to enforce such unconstitutional Acts of Parliament, by which,
(according to the just Remark of the same great Reporter on a former Act, viz.
11 H. 7.) a fundamental Law of the Realm (was) altered; whereas, they really
might have attributed a constitutional meaning to the said Acts, by duly
distinguishing those They might have alleged, that if an ambassador, sent from
this kingdom to France, Spain, or to any other foreign State, out of the
Dominions of the imperial Crown of Great Britain, should notoriously betray his
King and Country, and plot their Destruction, he might legally and
constitutionally be punished according to the letter and meaning of the said
Acts of Parliament; and also that any other British Subject whatsoever, that
is, in like manner, guilty of Treason to his King and Country, during his
residence in a foreign realm, may be treated accordingly; because all men
certainly are accountable to their country for any such Treason; and, as they
cannot be tried in the foreign realms, where the offenses were committed, it is
reasonable and just to suppose, that they may be tried in England, by an
impartial Jury, though the same a^e not "neighbors to the fact," nor
impannelled de vicineta, that is, from the neighborhood where the offense was
committed; for, though this circumstance is essentially necessary to the
Legality of a Jury in every other case, yet the law does not require
impossibilities, and it may therefore (perhaps) be legally dispensed with, when
it is apparent, from the nature of the case, that such an unexceptionable Jury
cannot be obtained, and yet that an exemplary punishment is manifestly due to
the Traitor or Traitors: but when Treasons and other offenses are committed in
any country under the dominion of the Crown of England, where the criminals
might have a legal Trial according to the laws of this realm, (as in Ireland,)
the said most essential formality of being tried by a Jury de vicineto cannot
be dispensed with; because this would deprive the Subject of an unalienable
Right, and alter a fundamental Law of this realm; so that any Judge, who should
venture to enforce the said Act, IN SUCH CASES, would manifestly DESERVE TO BE
HANGED, as much as Dudley and Empson!

The examination of this point gives some general idea how far the Power of the
high Court of Parliament (notwithstanding that imaginary "omnipotency" which
some men have ignorantly attributed to it) may be allowed to extend; for, the
more high and absolute the jurisdiction of the court is, the MORE JUST and
HONORABLE it ought to be in the proceeding, and to give example of Justice to
inferior courts. 4th Inst. p. 37. Which is most strictly true; for, whenever
the supreme temporal powers exceed the honorable limits of natural Justice and
Truth, they lessen their own dignity, and, in proportion to their errors,
forfeit that respectful consideration and esteem, which would otherwise be due
from their subjects. And we must remember, likewise, that the being "just and
honorable" in mere profession of words, without the reality, will have very
little weight with the body of the People, who are endued with common-sense, as
well as their superiors, to discern what is just and honorable from that which
is merely called so; and that a pretense to justice and honor, in a bad cause,
is only an aggravation of injury and iniquity! The most wicked ordinances have
sometimes been ushered into the world under the most sanctified titles and
specious pretenses! The abominable Act beforementioned, of Hen. VII. was
expressly said to be against "great enormities and offenses, which" (have) been
committed, and have daily, contrary to the good Statutes, for many and diverse
behoovefull considerations, severally made and ordained, to the displeasure of
Almighty God, and the great let of the common Law and wealth of the land.

Now, notwithstanding this FAIR FLATTERING PREAMBLE, as Sir Edward Coke calls
it, yet "THE PURVIEW of that Act" (as he justly remarked) tended, in the
execution, contrary EX DIAMETRO, viz. to the high displeasure of ALMIGHTY GOD,
the great LET, nay, the UTTER SUBVERSION, of the COMMON LAW, and the GREAT LET
of the Wealth of this Land; ibid. p. 40, as, indeed, every other Act of
Parliament must inevitably do, which perverts the due course of the Law, and
robs the subjects of any fundamental Right. As for instance, let us suppose,
(1st,) that an Act is made, to stop up or proscribe the passage to any seaport
town, or any haven, shore of the sea, or great river, without the Consent, and
to the great Detriment, of all the neighboring inhabitants; such an Act would
be "FUNDAMENTALLY WRONG," as being contrary to the first or most essential
Right of mankind, the Law of Nature: for it is clearly laid down by Bracton,
that all ports, havens, shores of the sea, and great rivers, are free to all
peaceable passengers, (but more particularly, we may add, to the nearest
inhabitants.) by the Law of Nature and of Nations: NATURALI VERO JURE communia
sunt omnia haec, aqua profluens, aer, et MARE, et LITTORA MARIS, quasi maris
accessoria. NEMO enim ad lit^us maris accedere prohibetur, dum tamen a villis
et aedificiis abstineat, quia littora sunt DE JURE GENTIUM COMMUNIA, sicut et
mare. etc. And again: Publica vero sunt OMNIA FLUMINA et PORTUS, etc. RIPARUM
etiam usus publicus est DE JURE GENTIUM, sicut ipsius sluminis. Itaque naves ad
eas applicare, funes arboribus ibi natis religare, ONUS ALIQUAE in eis reponere
CUIVIS LIBER EST, sicuti por ipsum fluvium naviga^e: sed proprietas earum est
illorum quorum praediis adbaerent, etc. lib. 1, c. 12, p. 7 and 8. So that such
an Act would be mainifestly contrary to the Law of Nature and Nations, and
consequently is such as NO LEGISLATURE ON EARTH can render valid or legal,
because natural Rights and the Laws of Nature are immutable, " Jura enim
naturalia sunt IMMUTABILIA:" And again, Jura enim naturalia dicuntur
IMMUTABILIA, quia non possunt ex toto ABROGARI VEL AUFIRRI, etc. Ib. c. 5, p.
4. And besides, it must be remembered, that to proscribe the passage or highway
to any city or town (especially if it is done with an avowed design to distress
the inhabitants thereof in their lawful occupations) is an intolerable
nuisance, which is clearly adjudged, in Law, to be such a "MALUM IN SE" as can
never be made lawful! -- But MALUM IN SE the King NOR ANY OTHER can dispense;
Mes MALUM IN SE LE ROY NE NULL AUTRE poit dispenser, sicome le Roi yeut
pardonner a occire un autre, ou lui license A FAIR NUISANCE IN LE HAUT CHEMIN,
CEO EST VOID, etc. 11 Hen. VII. p. 12. "Wherefore it is generally true" (as
Judge Vaughan remarks) that MALUM PER SE cannot be dispensed with, etc. Rep. p.
334.

Or, 2dly, suppose an Act should be made, to empower the Governor of a
Province, "without the consent of the Council," to appoint Judges and other
Law-Officers, who shall hold their Commissions DURING THE PLEASURE OF the
Crown, instead of the approved and established legal condition, "quamdiu se
been gesserint;" thereby setting up WILL AND PLEASURE ABOVE LAW AND JUSTICE,
which are the first and most essential Rights of the People! -- Would not such
an Act tend to the great LET, nay the UTTER SUBVERSION of the Common Law, etc.?
Suppose likewise it should be o^dained, in such an Act, that the Freeholders
and Inhabitants of the several Townships, in any particular province, shall not
be permitted (even when they are authorized to assemble together) to treat upon
matters of the MOST GENERAL CONCERN -- except the business (be) expressed in
the leave given by the Governor; which implies that one or a few individuals
have a more equitable pretension to treat upon matters of the most GENERAL
CONCERN than even the general Meeting, or whose collective Body of persons
themselves who are concerned! -- a principle which is subversive of all "common
Right and natural Equity;" and consequently must tend "to the high Displeasure
of almighty God," as well as " the great LET of the wealth of the land." And,
to complete the iniquity of such an imaginary Act, let us suppose a clause,
whereby " it shall and may BE LAWFUL" (LAWFUL!) for the Justices, etc. in any
Cause or Action which shall be brought to issue, to order the said Cause or
Action to be tried in ANY COUNTY, OTHER THAN THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE SAID CAUSE
OR ACTION SHALL HAVE BEEN BROUGHT OR LAID, BY A JURY OF SUCH OTHER COUNTY, AS
THEY SHALL JUDGE FIT, etc. -- Such a clause must strike at the very Foundation
of Justice!

Or, 3dly, if this imaginary Act should not be esteemed sufficiently injurious
to the People, (though it is apparently calculated to rob them of that
fundamental and unalienable Right, the Trial by a Jury DE VICINETO,) let us
suppose an Act still more PARTIAL (if possible) in the "administration of
Justice!" and rendeted still more aggravating and insulting by bearing a title
contrary EX DIAMETAO to the purport of it! -- Let us (I say) endeavor to
stretch that notorious Injustice to the utmost extent of inconvenience and
injury that a wicked imagination can possibly conceive or express! that is, to
establish a Power of removing the Causes and Trials (and even those which are
of the most importance, viz. for capital offenses) not only to a neighboring
County, or to a more distant Colony, but even, if caprice should require it, to
the furthermost extent of the Globe, that is, (without aggravation,) as far as
the East is from the West!

Or, 4thly, if we may conceive the idea of an Act calculated to "fulfill the
Measure of Iniquity," let us suppose an Act expressly for the purpose of
establishing the arbitrary Laws of France, ( Quod Principi placuit habet
vigorem Legis, etc. see my Preface thereupon,) and, in order that it may be
destructive to the Souls, as well as the Bodies and Property, of the wretched
Subjects, (as I have already shown,) let us suppose that ample provision is
made therein for the Establishment (not the mere Toleration) of downright
Idolatry and Image Worship! for the Toleration of the most notorious EXORCISMS
( "Exorcismus Aquae;" -- "Exorcismum Salis." -- "Exorciso te, creatura Salis;"
-- see the Missal) and SPIRITUAL WITCHCRAFT! In short, let us suppose that such
an Act provides for the Establishment of that adulterated Religion which has
long been perplexed with all the Enthusiasm of heathen ignorance, (long
Prayers, vain Repetitions, "as the Heathen do,") and bears the most apparent
marks of Antichrist, insomuch that we might be certain; at least, who was the
first spiritual Instigator and Promoter of such a Bill, though the bodily
Proposer of it should be lucky enough to-remain undiscovered! Who shall presume
to say, that any Power on Earth (whatsoever weak and ignorant men may think of
the Omnipotence of Parliament) has Authority or Right, either to establish such
notorious spiritual Abominations, or to render lawful such gross Iniquity and
palpable Injustice!


And therefore, if any such Act should be made in our days, (howsoever specious
the preamble,) it is our duty, as good subjects, to remember that the same
ought to be considered as null and void of itself, and that it cannot authorize
or indemnify the Judges, or any other persons, who presume to enforce It; for
all men (and Judges in particular) ought to take warning, (from the fearful end
of those two time-servers, Dudley and Empson,) that such an active obedience
would, perhaps, endanger their own necks! For suppose, 2dly, that such an Act
was to be decked with the most flattering title; let us call it, for instance,
An Act for the BETTER REGULATING the government of any particular province; or,
3dly, let it be called An Act for THE MORE IMPARTIAL ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE,
in the cases of Persons questioned for any acts done by them IN THE EXECUTION
OF THE LAW, or for the Suppression Though "the Suppression of Riots and
Tumults" is here included as one of "the fair flattering" PRETENSES in the
Title of the above mentioned imaginary Act of Parliament, yet it it is apparent
that the wicked Act itself would be the most effectual method that could
possibly have been devised for THE PROMOTION, instead of "THE SUPPRESSION, of
Riots and Tumults;" for which, consequently, none but the Promoters and Makers
of such an unjust Law could, with any propriety, be esteemed accountabled since
it is true, even to a maxim, that He makes THE STRIFE (or "TUMULT") who first
offends -- "Qui primum peccat, ille facit rixam," Prin. Leg. et Aequit. p. 92.


of Riots and Tumults, etc. or, 4thly, suppose such an injurious and unlawful
Act should be entitled An Act for making MORE EFFECTUAL PROVISION FOR THE
GOVERNMENT OF any particular province, etc. yet, if "the Purview" (as Lord Coke
justly remarked) of any such imaginary Acts should tend, in the execution,
contrary EX DIAMETRO to all these specious pretenses, set forth in their titles
and preambles, by establishing principles whereby any fundamental Law of the
Realm is altered, the same would manifestly endanger the necks (I must repeat
it) of any Judges that were imprudent enough to enforce them, notwithstanding
that the express Authority of King, Lords, and Commons, should be alleged as
their sufficient warrant; because we find that the like Authority afforded no
justification or excuse for poor Empson and Dudley, in a similar case, neither
did the consideration of their having acted by parliamentary Authority render
their wretched fate more pitiable in the eyes of the public! And therefore I
sincerely wish that all modern Time-servers may have prudence enough to form
(by that plain example) some reasonable judgment concerning the imaginary
"Omnipotence of Parliament," which cannot insure its wretched votaries from the
most ignominious punishment! nor secure even the Parliament itself from the
just and lasting Censures of the Sages of our Law, such as Lord Coke, for
instance, who warned them in another place, also, expressly upon this point: --
By color of which Act, (says he, meaning the said unjust Act of 11 Hen. VII.)
shaking this FUNDAMENTAL LAW, (the Law of Juries,) it is not credible what
HORRIBLE OPPRESSIONS, and EXACTIONS, to the undoing of infinite numbers of
people, were committed by Sir Rich. Empson, Knt. and Edm. Dudley, etc. and,
upon this UNJUST and INJURIOUS ACT, (as commonly in like cases it falls out,)
a new Office was erected, etc. And in the next paragraph he adds, -- And the
FEARFUL ENDS OF THESE TWO OPPRESSORS (says he) should deterred others from
committing the like and should ADMONISH PARLIAMENTS, that, instead of this
ordinary and precious Trial PER LEGEM TERRAE, they bring not in absolute and
partial Trials by Discretion. 2d Inst. p. 51.


particular cases wherein they may LEGALLY be enforced, without thwarting any
fundamental Law of the Realm.

From what has been said, I hope it will appear sufficiently clear to my
Readers, that the severe censure, which Lord Coke so justly bestowed on the two
wicked Judges, Dudley and Empson, for ACTING BY THE AUTHORITY OF AN
UNCONSTITUTIONAL ACT OF PARLIAMENT, is equally applicable (for the very same
reason) to the Resolutions beforementioned, of ALL THE JUDGES IN ENGLAND,
though Lord Coke himself (even the author of the former censure) has cited them
without the least animadversion!

The Judges, in the 33d year of Queen Elizabeth, who gave their opinion in the
case of Orurk, Or "Ornick." See 3d Inst. p. 11, margin.
the Irishman, are the more inexcusable, for their Resolution upon the Act of
33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. because they had an excellent Example set them, but a few
years before that time, by two very learned and respectable brethren, the
Judges Wray and Dyer, (together with the said Queen's Attorney General,)
concerning several similar Acts of Parliament; which Example is worthy the most
serious attention of all future Judges, that they may ever be careful to
restrain, by a legal construction, not only the said Acts of King Henry VIII.
and King Edward VI. but all others, likewise, that may happen to be equally
liable to alter the free Constitution of the realm, and rob the subjects of any
essential "fundamental Right," that ought to be esteemed unalienable.

Judge Dyer himself has reported the circumstances of it. He informs us
Gerrarde, Chauncelor de Irelande, move cest question al Counsel la Roygne, s.
fi un Countee ou Seignior de Irelande, que commit Treason in Irelande per overt
Rebellion, serra arraygne et mis a son trial in Engleterre pour le offense,
per l'estatute de 26 H. 8. cap. 13. -- 32 Hen. 8. cap. 4. -- 35 H. 8. -- 2 ou 5
Ed. 6.11. -- Et fuit tenus per Wray, Dyer, et Gerrarde, Attorney General, QUE
IL NE POIT, car il ne poit aver son trial ici PEESES PEERS, NE PER ASCUN JURY
DE XII. pur ceo que il n'est subject d'Engleterre, mes de Irelande, et ideo LA
SERRA SON TRIAL. Et dictum est, que le usage la, d'attainder un Peer, est per
Parliament, et nemy per Pares Dyer's Reports, p. 360 b.
that Gerrarde, Chauncelor of Ireland, moved this question to the Queen's
Counsel, viz. Whether an Earl or Lord of Ireland, who commits Treason by open
Rebellion, shall be arraigned and put to his Trial in England, for the offense,
by the Statute 26 H. VIII. c. 13. -- 32 H. VIII. c. 4. -- 35 H. VIII. -- and 2
and 5 Ed. VI. c. 11. And it was maintained, by Wray, Dyer, and Gerrarde, the
Attorney General, that HE COULD NOT; for he cannot have his Trial here BY HIS
PEERS, NOR BY ANY JURY OF 12, because that he is not a Subject of England, but
of Ireland, and therefore his Trial shall be there, etc.

These worthy Lawyers were not afraid, it seems, to maintain the weight of a
LEGAL and FUNDAMENTAL REASON against the combined force of FOUR EXPRESS ACTS OF
PARLIAMENT! And such a reason, though it had been advanced only by a single
Judge, or even by a private person, is certainly of much more weight than the
opinion of "all the Judges in England," when given contrary to reason, or
against the tenor of any fundamental Law.

I never heard that this Reason, assigned by the Judges Wray and Dyer and the
Attorney General, against the force of the said four Acts of Parliament, has
ever been questioned or disallowed as insufficient in the case of an Irish
Peer; and therefore a similar reason is certainly as effectual in the case of
any private Irish Subject, whose crime is parallel; because true Justice is
equal in all her ways, and has no respect to persons. But if ye have respect to
persons, YE COMMIT SIN, and are convinced of the Law AS TRANSGRESSORS. James
ii. 9.
For the same Law, which entitles the Nobleman to a Trial by his Peers, "Per
pares suos," (Magna Charta, c. 14.) or " per legale judicium PARIUM SUORUM."
lb. c. 29.
secures also, to every other person, his parallel Right to a legal impartial
Trial, by a Jury of honest unexceptionable NEIGHBORS: -- Per sacramentum
proborum et legalium hominum DE VINCINETO. Mag. Charta, c. 14.


for a Trial can neither be esteemed legal or impartial, if the Jury are not
impannelled in THE NEIGHBORHOOD where the offense was committed; --
Justiciarii per Breve Regis scribunt vicecomiti comitatus IN QUO FACTUM ILLUD
FIERI SUPPONITUR, quod ipse venire faciat coram eisdem justiciariis, ad certum
diem per cos limitatum, duodecim probos et legales homines DE VICINETO ubi
illud factum supponitur; qui neutram partium s;ic placitantium ulla assinitate
attingunt. Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 25. p. 54. b.


unless we may except the single case beforementioned, concerning treasonable
practices against this Kingdom, carried on by a British Subject in the dominion
of a foreign prince; where the Crown of England has no jurisdiction: but, in
all other cases whatsoever, the Trial by a Jury of Neighbors to the Fact is
the unalienable RIGHT of all British Subjects, according to the ancient LAW OF
THE LAND: nay, this particular mode of Trial is so inseparably annexed to the
Law of the Land, that it is sometimes expressed and known by that general term,
"the Law of the Land," (Lex Terrae,) as if there was no other Law of the Land
but this one: which emphatical expression sufficiently proves that this
particular Law for the Mode of Trials is the first and most essential Law of
the Constitution; for, otherwise, it could not be entitled to such an eminent
and peculiar distinction, in preference to all the other excellent Laws of the
Land; and consequently this principal or fundamental Law is so necessarily
implied and comprehended, in that general term, the Law of the Land, that the
latter may be considered as entirely subverted and overthrown, whenever the
former is changed or set aside; for sublato fundamento cadit opus. Jenk. Cent.
106.

In the 29th Chapter of Magna Charta, "the Law of the Land" seems to be
mentioned in this peculiar sense: Nec super cum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus,
nisi per legale judicium parium suarum, vel PER LEGEM TERRAS. Lord Cokeresers
us, for the true sense and exposition of these words, to the Statute of 37 Ed.
III. cap. 8. (meaning chapter the 18th,) where the words, by the Law of the
Land, (says he,) are rendered, without due process of law, etc. which he
farther explains, toward the end of the same sentence. -- That is, (says he,)
by indictment or, presentment of good and lawful men, WHERE SUCH DEEDS BE DONE,
in due manner, or by Writ-Original of the Common Law.

These last are the express words of another Act of Edw. III. ( viz. 25 E. III.
c. 4.) Item, Whereas it is contained in the Great Charter of the Franchises of
England, that none shall be imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold, nor of his
Franchises nor free Custom, unless it be BY THE LAW OF THE LAND: It is
accorded, assented, and stablished, that from henceforth none shall be taken,
by petition or suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his Council, unless
it be by Indictment or Presentment of his good and lawful People OF THE SAME
NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE SUCH DEEDS BE DONE, in due manner, or by Process made by
writ-original at the Common Law. Nor that none be put out of his Franchises,
etc. unless he be DULY brought in answer, and forejudged of the same BY THE
COURSE OF THE LAW. And if any be done against the same, it shall be redressed
and HOLDEN FOR NONE. 25 Ed. III. c. 4.
wherein they are given as an explanation of the words, by the Law of the Land,
mentioned in the Great Charter. And the Great Charter itself, as well as this
particular Act, and many other excellent Acts of K. Ed. III. is expressly cited
and confirmed in an Act of the 16th Cha. I. c. 10. whereby the "due Process of
the Law" (or the ordinary Course of the Law, see sect. v.) is again
re-established, in opposition to the unlawful authority that had been usurped
by the King, Privy Council, and Star Chamber.

This "due Process of the Law," therefore, can be no otherwise than by a legal
Jury of 12 credible men, -- In presentia duodecim fide dignorum virorum FACTO
VICINORUM, de quo agitur, et circumstantiis ejus: qui et noscunt eorundem
testium mores, maxim si VICINI ipsi fuerint noscunt etiam, et si ipsi sint
credulitate digni, etc. Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Ang. c. 28, p. 64. See also the
25 and 26th chapters of that excellent little book.


who are Neighbors to the Fact, and unexceptionable to the parties concerned,
according to the ancient Custom or Law of the Land. Item per antiquam Legem, et
consuetudinem Regni, omnes exitus quae emergent in aliqua Curia de Record
infra Regnum, nisi pauci de quibus non est hic necesse tractandum, debet triari
per xii. liberos et legales homines DE VICINETO, etc. qui nulli partium ulla
affinitati attingent. Doct. and Stud. c. 7. p. 26 b.
And that the same is also a fundamental and essential Right of the Subject,
every man, who pretends to doubt of it, may be informed by the feelings of his
own breast, if he will only take the trouble, for a moment, to suppose himself
in such a situation, (through the false accusations of his enemies,) that
nothing but an impartial Trial, by a Jury of Neighbors, well acquainted with
him and his case, and the malignity of his accusers, can possibly save him from
destruction! And farther, it is apparent, that the said due Process of the Law,
by a Jury de vicineto, is now become an unalterable part of the Constitution,
and must ever remain in force, not only against all contrary Resolutions and
Opinions of the Judges, (such as I have mentioned,) but even against the
express authority of any Act of Parliament that happens (inadvertently) to have
been made to the contrary, because all such must necessarily BE HOLDEN FOR
NONE, according to the 42. Ed. III. c. 1. which is cited by Judge Jenkins for
that purpose: Jenkinsius Redivivus, p. 65.
and, though it may be alleged, against the authority of this Act of
Parliament, that another Act may unbind what it has bound, according to the
maxim, eodem modo quo quid constituitur, eodem modo dissolvitur: yet a due
consideration of this very maxim will afford us a substantial argument to the
contrary: for, at the time the said Act was made, ( viz. in the 42. Ed. III.)
the Great Charter had been expressly confirmed by many Parliaments, not only in
the reigns of that noble king's ancestors, but also by at least TWELVE
preceding Parliaments And Parliaments at that time were preserved in purily and
independence by a very frequent renewal of THE POPULAR REPRESENTATION, viz.
every year once, and MORE OFTEN if (there was) need, etc. which I have already
proved in pages 160 to 170 of this Declaration; so that there was not then the
least room even for the bare suspicion of undue influence!


even in his own glorious reign; so that the Parliament, in his 42d year, had
certainly sufficient authority to add, to their confirmation of the Charters,
that, if ANY STATUTE be made to the contrary, that shall be HOLDEN FOR NONE.
And the reason is plain; for no Statute whatever (eodem modo constituitur) is
ordained by so great Authority as that which Magna Charta has at length
acquired, by the express confirmation, from time to time, of so many different
Kings and Parliaments: In the time of Sir Edward Coke the Charters had been
expressly confirmed by THIRTY-TWO DIFFERENT PARLIAMENTS, as he himself
witnesses in the Proeme of his 2d Institute: The said 2 Charters (says he) have
been confirmed, established, and commanded to be put in execution, by 32
several Acts of Parliament.


The wisdom of ages has made it venerable, and stamped it with an authority
equal to the Constitution itself, of which it is, in reality, a most essential
and fundamental part; so that any attempt to repeal Though some particular
articles of Magna Charta are indeed rendered useless, at this day, by
subsequent Statutes, yet this affords no argument against the general stability
of the Charter, with respect to its main object, the Freedom of the People. It
is a Charter of Liberties, and therefore the subsequent Statutes, which
enlarged those Liberties, (by annihilating the several oppressive customs which
are mentioned therein and limited within certain bounds, as Knights Service,
Escuage, Wards, and Liveries, etc.) cannot be said to operate against the
Charter, but rather in aid of it; for though the said oppressive Tenures and
dangerous Prerogatives are permitted by the Charter in a certain degree, yet
the apparent intention of the several articles, wherein they are mentioned, was
not to establish, but only to restrain them, as much as the circumstances,
temper, and prejudices of those early times would permit: so that the Statutes,
which afterward entirely removed the oppression, cannot be esteemed contrary
to the purpose of the Charter, because they enlarged those Liberties and
Franchises of the people, to which the Charter itself is so apparently
dedicated.


it would be treason to the state! This glorious Charter must, therefore, ever
continue unrepealed: and even the articles, which seem at present useless, must
ever remain in force, to prevent the Oppressions and Prerogatives, there named,
from being extended beyond certain limits, in case the same should ever
hereafter be revived. No single Act of Parliament can unbind or remove the
limits here laid down: nothing less than the same accumulated Authority, by
which the Charter is now established, can possibly set it aside, or any part of
it, according to the Maxim before recited, eodem modo quo quid constituitur,
eodem modo dissolvitur: for no single Act of Parliament, eodem modo
constituitur, is ordained in the same manner. The many repeated confirmations
of its authority were a work of ages; so that the said authority cannot legally
be set aside, unless it be done eodem modo quo constituitur, that is, by the
repeated suffrages of as many Parliaments against it as have already expressly
confirmed it; and God forbid that any such gross depravity and corruption
should ever obtain such a continuance in this kingdom, as to accomplish so
great an evil; for that could not be without a total national reprobacy,
dangerous to us not only in this world, but also in the next!

It must, therefore, be obvious to every person, who duly considers all these
circumstances, that the Resolutions of ALL THE JUDGES IN ENGLAND, in the cases
of Orurke, or Ornicke, the Irishman, and Sir John Perrot, were contrary to a
FUNDAMENTAL LAW in the Great Charter, and consequently ought to be "HOLDEN FOR
NONE," according to the express determination of the Parliament, in the 42d Ed.
III. c. 1. Viz. That the Great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest be holden
and kept in all points; and if any Statute be made to the contrary, THAT SHALL
BE HOLDEN FOR NONE.


and ought to be VOID IN THE LAW and HOLDEN FOR ERROR, according to the second
chapter -- It is assented and accorded, for the good governance of the Commons,
that no man be put to answer, without Presentment before Justices, or matter of
Record, or by DUE PROCESS AND WRIT ORIGINAL, according to the OLD LAW OF THE
LAND (which I have already proved to signify, in an especial manner, the Trial
by a Jury of the Vicinage); and if ANY THING, from henceforth, be done to the
contrary, it shall be VOID IN THE LAW and holden for Error.


of the same excellent Statute; because the two Acts of Parliament, of the 33
and 35 H. 8. on which they grounded their opinion, cannot have any legal force,
(notwithstanding the literal meaning of the general expressions therein,) when
applied to offenses committed in any country, province, or colony whatsoever,
that is subject to the imperial crown of Great Britain: so that even if Ireland
had been especially named therein, the said Acts would have been so far from
binding that kingdom, (according to the effect supposed by Lord Coke, Judge
Vaughan, Judge Blackstone, and others,) that the very NAMING Ireland, for such
purposes as were intended by the said Acts, would have rendered them absolutely
"NULL AND VOID," and to be "HOLDEN FOR NONE," because they would, in that case,
have been directly contrary to the Great Charter; whereas, at present, there
are some particular cases (as I have before remarked) wherein they may,
perhaps, be allowed a legal force.

Now, though what I have already remarked will probably be thought a sufficient
Answer to the two Resolutions of all the Judges in England, cited by Lord Coke
as precedents against the Liberties of our brethren, the subjects of IRELAND, I
am nevertheless inclined to add one more testimony against the said
Resolutions, which has no less authority than that even of Lord Coke himself
(in another part of his writings) against all similar Resolutions and Opinions!

Let him now bear witness both against the said Judges and himself! -- And
albeit, Judgments in the King's Courts (says he) are of high regard in Law,
and judicia are accounted as juris-dicta, yet it is provided, by Act of
Parliament, that if any Judgment be given contrary to any of the points of the
Great Charter or Charta de Foresta, BY THE JUSTICES, or by any other of the
King's Ministers, etc. it shall be undone and HOLDEN FOR NAUGHT. Proeme to his
2d Institute.

If Lord Coke, when he mentioned the BINDING IRELAND in the Parliament of
England, "BY SPECIAL WORDS," (4th Inst. p. 350.) and BY BEING ESPECIALLY NAMED,
(Calvin's Case, 7th Rep. p. 447.) had meant nothing more than what is clearly
proved by his one example for all, beforementioned, ( viz. that a
Representation of the Subjects in Ireland ought to be summoned to the English
Parliament, whenever an Act of Parliament shall be made in England (especially)
concerning the Statute of Ireland,) there would have been no essential
difference between his Opinion and that natural Justice for which I contend:
but, alas! that great man has confirmed his error upon that subject in another
part of Calvin's Case, (p. 446,) wherein he declares that albeit IRELAND was a
distinct dominion, yet, THE TITLE THEREOF BEING BY CONQUEST, the same by
judgment of law might by express words be bound by Act of the Parliament of
England. Here he has luckily given us another reason, which leads us to the
detection of his error. -- "Yet" (says he) THE TITLE THEREOF BEING BY CONQUEST,
etc. Now, it is very remarkable, that so many of the most eminent law writers
should have copied and adopted this erroneous opinion, without examining the
force of it; as if the authority and real worth of this learned Writer, in
other respects, were sufficient to render valid a mistaken and groundless
argument! Judge Jenkins, indeed, has adopted the opinion without quoting the
reasons; but Judge Vaughan, who has also adopted the opinion, refers us
expressly to Lord Coke's reason against Ireland, viz. the title by conquest. --
That it is a CONQUERED KINGDOM (says he) is not doubted, but admitted IN
CALVIN'S CASE, several times, etc. Vaughan's Rep. p. 292. And, upon the
strength of this reason, he proceeds very confidently to determine what things
the Parliament of Ireland cannot do, and to give instances of Laws made in the
Parliament of ENGLAND binding IRELAND; p. 293. of which neither the first A Law
concerning the Homage of Parceners, called, "Statutum Hiberniae," 14 Hen. III.
-- "Mr. Cay" (says the Hon. Mr. Barrington) very properly observes, that 'IT IS
NOT AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT,' and cites the old Abridgement, title Homage. He
allows it a place, however, in his edition of the Statutes, not to differ from
former editors. This, in some measure, gives the authority of Legislation (says
this learned Gentleman, ironically) to the King's Law-Printers: and yet, if
such an ordinance is inserted in every edition of the Statutes, for near 3
centuries together, by printers known to print under the authority of the
King's Patent, and the Parliament permits this for such a length of time, it
becomes a question of some difficulty to say what force it may have acquired.
No such question fortunately can ever arise upon this Statute, as it is merely
a RESCRIPTUM PRINCIPIS to certain Milites (Adventurers, probably, in the
Conquest of Ireland, or their Descendants) who had doubts with regard to the
Tenure of lands holden by Knights Service and deseending to Co-parceners within
age, etc. Observations on the more ancient Statutes, p. 39.


nor the second A Statute of Nottingham, called Ordinanatio pro Statu
Hiberniae, 17 E. I. -- Upon which the Hon. Mr. Barrington remarks: It is very
singular (says he) that, though this Ordinance has found a place amongst the
English Acts of Parliament, the Collection of Irish Statutes, printed by
authority at Dublin, begins only with the Ordinances of Kilkenny, in the 3d
year of Edward the 2d. There can be no doubt, however, that this Law extends to
Ireland, if not repealed by some Irish Act of Parliament; as, by Poyning's Law,
in the time of Henry the Seventh, all precedent English Statutes are made to
bind in Ireland. Ib. p. 141. Nevertheless I must beg leave to observe, that
this is neither an English nor an Irish Statute, but a mere Letter-Patent of
the King, by the Assent of his Council (though it might be dated, perhaps,
during the sittings of a Parliament at Nottingham): -- Edward, par la grace de
Dieu, Roy Dengliterre, Seignor Dirland, etc. -- a toutes ceux, que ceux Letters
verront ou oiront, salutes. Saches que a le mendement de gulement de nostre
terre Dirlande, a pluis grand peax et tranquil. de nostre people en cel terre
a Notin. as octaves del St. Martin, etc. par assent de nostre Counsel
illonques, etc. This is not the style of an Act of Parliament; neither is the
Assent of the common Council, or general Council expressed, but only " by the
Assent of OUR COUNCIL," that is, the King's Council, which is always understood
to signify the Privy Council, and not the national Council. Besides, the King
expressly calls this Ordinance, OUR LETTERS-PATENT, and witnessed it as such,
in the usual form, viz. En tesmoignance de quel chose nous avons fait fair
CESTES NOUS LETTERS OVERTES. Done a Notyngham le 24 jour de Novembre, lan de
nostre reign dix septisme. Secunda Pars Veterum Statutorum, printed ann. 1555,
p. 68 and 69.


are in the least entitled to the name of Laws made in the Parliament of
England, though they are printed in the Statute-Books. This seems also to be
the case with the 3d voucher which he has produced for his assertion, viz. Laws
for IRELAND, made by E. 3, per advisamentum Concilii nostri, etc. That is if he
meant the Laws contained in the Ordinance of that King's 31st year, viz.
Ordinatio facta pro Statu Terrae Hiberniae; because this Ordinance is no more
entitled to the name of a Law, or Act of Parliament, than the two former; for,
long before this period, the necessity of expressing the Assent of the Commons,
in order to render an Act valid, was well understood, as the Hon. Mr.
Barrington remarks, on the 14th of Ed. III. "The Statutes now begin to appear"
(says he) in a new, and more regular form; etc. whilst the Preamble, IN EVERY
INSTANCE, makes express mention of the CONCURRENCE OF THE COMMONS, p. 218;
whereas this Ordinance has no such mention of their "CONCURRENCE," but only the
Assent of the Council, that is, the Assent of the King's Council -- "de assensu
consilii nostri ordinanda duximus," etc. whereas the Assent of the great
Council of the Nation is expressed in very different terms, as I have remarked
in the former notes, as also in the notes on pages. 128 and 129.

But if this learned Judge meant any other Laws " for IRELAND, made by Edward
III." than this Ordinance of his 31st year, (for he refers us, in the margin,
to the Parliament-Rolls of his 5th year,) yet the same cannot afford the least
proof or precedent for binding Ireland in England without Assent, because I
have already cited ample testimony that the Parliament of Ireland in those days
was frequently summoned to England, sometimes to confer with the English
Parliament; and sometimes to meet the King and his Council: in distinct
Seffions of the Irish Legislature. See pages 66 to 80.

His fourth voucher adds no more confirmation to his assertion than the three
former; for though it is really an Act of Parliament, yet it cannot be produced
as a precedent for binding the Irish Subjects without their Consent, because it
is made expressly for the purpose of enforcing an Act of the Irish Parliament,
"Estatute "fait en la terre d' Ireland;" and therefore, as the question relates
only to the carrying the said Law into execution, which is properly the office
of the King and his Courts, it is certainly indifferent whether be is advised
therein by his Privy Council or by his Common Council of England, especially as
the latter, in the case before us, were so far from advising the King to invade
or alter the Irish Law, that they confirm it in the strongest terms -- que le
di^ Estatute estoise EN SA ENTIER FORCE, et que bien et duement soit gardez et
PLEINEMENT EXECUTE, etc.

With respect to his 5th voucher, referring us to " the late Acts made in 17
Car. 1," etc. it would be very unfair to draw from thence any conclusions
unfavourable to the Privileges of the Irish Parliament, because that was the
fatal year of the popish massacre in Ireland, when the Protestant Subjects of
that kingdom were almost universally oppressed, and all Law and Regularity
overturned by the open Rebellion of the popish party: so that even the
Parliament of Scotland (as well as the Parliament of England) thought it right
to take the affairs of Ireland under their consideration at that unfortunate
juncture; and sent two Commissioners, properly instructed by the States of that
kingdom, to treat with the English Parliament about the means of suppressing
the Irish Rebellion. Sir John Temple's History of the Irish Rebellions p. 156
to 158.

But notwithstanding that some Acts might have been made in the 17th of Charles
I. without the Assent of the Irish Parliament, yet they afford no evidence in
favor of that opinion for which they are cited by the learned Judge; for Mr.
Molyneux has proved that, by the repeal of those very Acts of 17 Cha. I. that
they afford an argument even on the other side of the question, viz. that the
Parliament of IRELAND may repeal an Act made in ENGLAND in relation to the
affairs of IRELAND, p. 75.

And again, with respect to the 6th and last voucher, under that head, ( viz.
the resolution of the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, in the case of the
Merchants of Waterford,) it by no means relates to the question in dispute; for
that concerns only the exportation and importation of goods, and the Irish do
not pretend to contest the Right of Great Britain to the Dominion of the Seas;
nor do they deny the Power of the British Parliament to regulate Commerce, as I
have before remarked. Now, as it appears that not one of these Precedents is
sufficient for the purpose proposed, and as we cannot doubt but that so learned
a Lawyer as Judge Vaughan (as I have before observed of Judge Coke) would
select the most applicable Precedents that could be found, the doctrine which
he has built upon these insufficient Precedents must necessarily fall to the
ground.




Amongst the modern writers, who have likewise unfortunately adopted the same
erroneous opinion of Lord Coke, the learned Judge Blackstone is the most
eminent, and therefore demands the most careful examination.

In the introduction to his Commentaries, p. 101, he has delivered his
sentiments much to the same effect as the other more ancient writers, already
mentioned. -- That no Acts of the ENGLISH Parliament, since the twelfth of King
John, extended into that kingdom, (Ireland,) unless it were SPECIALLY NAMED, or
INCLUDED UNDER GENERAL WORDS, such as WITHIN ANY OF THE KING'S DOMINIONS, etc.
And in page 103 he repeats the same doctrine, that no Acts of the English
Parliament made since the 10th Hen. VII. do now bind the people of Ireland,
unless SPECIALLY NAMED or INCLUDED UNDER GENERAL WORDS. For this inclusive
Power, of GENERAL WORDS, Judge Black stone refers us to Lord Coke's 12. Rep.
112. but I shall take no pains to refute any error in that last Collection of
his Reports, "which are well known" (says the honorable Mr. Barrington, p.
161) not to be of equal authority with those that precede. And besides, I have
already demonstrated, (I hope,) in my Comment on the Cases of Orurke, the
Irishman, and Sir John Perrot, (as also by the clear and decisive Resolution of
the worthy Judges, Wray and Dyer, and the Attorney General Gerrard, for
restraining the GENERAL WORDS of four express Acts of Parliament,) that all
such general Words, in Statutes, must be duly restrained by a legal
Construction, if the Judges, who enforce them, mean to avoid the Risk of
exemplary punishment!


And in the same paragraph he assigns the very same reason (drawn from the
Conquest of Ireland) which had misled both Lord Coke and Judge Vaughan before
him. And, on the other hand, (says he,) it is EQUALLY CLEAR, that, where
Ireland is particularly named, or IS INCLUDED UNDER GENERAL WORDS, they are
BOUND by such Acts of Parliament. (though I hope I have already made the
contrary appear EQUALLY CLEAR.) For this follows (says he) from the very nature
and constitution of a DEPENDENT STATE: dependence being very little else but an
OBLIGATION TO CONFORM TO THE WILL OR LAW OF THAT SUPERIOR PERSON OR STATE The
Irish do not pretend to deny a legal Dependence on the superior State of
England, for they acknowledge that the Sovereignty of their Island is
inseparably annexed to the Crown of England, of which, I believe, I have
already quoted some examples: but, when Dependencs is defined (in the manner
Judge Blackstone represents it) as an Obligation to conform to the Will or Law
of the superior Person or State, etc. it ceases to be a legal Dependence,
according to the common Law and Constitution of England; though the learned
Judge is certainly right enough, if he will be pleased to confine his
Definition of Dependence to those Countries where the civil Law prevails, as in
France or Prussia for instance; because, in such despotic Realms, the oppressed
People seem, indeed, to acknowledge an Obligation to conform to the Will or Law
of the superior Person or State; and the learned Commentator, if he meant to
refer to the Laws of such enslaved People as these, must certainly be allowed
to have delivered his meaning in the most expressive and judicious terms that
he could possibly have chosen for such a purpose; for, in speaking of "the
Will" of that superior Person or State to which he supposes an Obligation to
conform, etc. he mentions it as a synonimous term to the word "Law," viz. "Will
or Law," says he, that is, an Obligation to conform to the Will or Law of that
superior Person or State, etc. which is, indeed, a most lively description of
the dangerous unlimited Power of the French, Prussian, or Imperial,
Administrations of Government; for, wheresoever these two words, WILL and LAW,
are considered as synonimous, there Law must, of course, be any thing (be it
ever so wicked or iniquitous) that the Superior pleases; that is, in short,
Quod Principi placuit Legis habet Vigorem! But I have already held up that
detestable Maxim of the civil Law to the view of my Readers; and therefore I
shall now only remark, in general, that neither the LAWS of England nor the
LAWS of Ireland acknowledge and such Precept as the setting up the WILL of a
Superior for LAW; or, (what is the same thing,) they do not acknowledge any
such state of "Dependence" as an OBLIGATION to conform to the "WILL OR LAW"
(those synominous Terms) of the superior Person or State, etc.

Our Laws, indeed, acknowledge the King of Great Britain for the time being as
the "Superior" or Head of both Kingdoms; but the "Dependence," which is thereby
required of "the Inferior," (whether the term, Enferior, he applied to the
inferior Kingdom as subordinate, or to Persons, viz. to each Individual as a
Subject,) in either case, is a politic or legal "Dependence," and not absolute
and unlimited. -- Principatu namque nedum REGALI, sed et POLITICO, ipse suo
populo dominatur. The Laws leave no room to suppose that there is " an
Obligation to conform to the WILL or LAW" (if the latter has no other
foundation than the Will) of that superior Person. Nam non potest Rex Angliae
AD LIBITUM SUUM Leges mutare Regni sui. Principatu namque nedum REGALI, etc. as
above. (Fortescue de Laud. Leg. Angliae, c. 9. p. 25 b.) And, if even the
King's Power is not regal, but politic and limited, (which the same learned
Writer, Chancellor Fortescue, has clearly proved in a distinct Tract, expressly
on that subject, entitled, The Difference between absolute and limited
Monarchy,) much less can the King's Subjects be said to exercise a Sovereign's
legislative Power (1. Com. p. 101) over any Nation or People whatsoever, that
have no share in the said Power by a due Representation of their own collective
body: for the sovereign Majesty of the People ought never to be exerted, except
in their own necessary defense, or to maintain the natural Rights and equitable
Privileges of Mankind, against Tyrants and Oppressors, for the good of Society
in general, through that disinterested evangelical Principle, "Good Will
toward men." But when, on the contrary, any particular Nation or People exerts
that "sovereign legislative Power" to deprive another different Nation of their
natural Rights and Liberties, they no longer deserve to enjoy their own; and,
indeed, divine JUSTICE will inevitably overtake them sooner or later; for, as
the crimes of individuals will surely be punished with personal condemnation,
so national sins must feel the additional Weight of temporal national
Retribution; which, I trust, I have demonstrated in a little Tract, intended
sometime or other for Publication, entitled, The Law of Retribution, and, in
particular, of God's temporal Vengeance on Slaveholders


upon which the inferior depends. And then he immediately adds: The original
and true ground (says he) of this Superiority, in the present case, is what we
usually call, though somewhat IMPROPERLY, (very "IMPROPERLY" indeed,) "THE
RIGHT OF CONQUEST:" etc. Now, I most heartily join with him in his application
of the adverb "IMPROPERLY" to the words which follow, viz. "THE RIGHT OF
CONQUEST," whenever it is mentioned as a reason to justify this claim or
imaginary right of binding the people of Ireland, either by being specially
named or included under general words; for I hope I shall convince that learned
gentleman himself, as well as the rest of my readers, before I conclude, that
THE RIGHT OF CONQUEST is not the original and true ground of any such
superiority, in the present case, as he supposes; but, on the contrary, that it
seems rather to have been "the original and true ground" of all the dangerous
mistakes which have been made, upon this important question, by Lord Coke,
Judge Vaughan, and himself: for, if this learned gentleman will be pleased to
review this argument, founded on "the Right of Conquest," as applied by himself
and the other two very eminent Writers, beforementioned, to the free kingdom of
Ireland, I trust (through the great opinion I entertain of his candor and good
sense) that he will readily give it up; for, though the Right of Conquest may
be, as he says, a Right allowed by THE LAW OF NATIONS, if not by that of
Nature, (that is, in some particular cases,) yet it certainly is contrary both
to "the Law of Nations" and "that of Nature," (to which he has appealed,) that
"the Right of Conquest" should be pleaded for binding the Conquerors
themselves, or their Descendants, without their Assent! for of such consist the
greatest part of the landed interest in Ireland, at this day, who are entitled
to all the Rights and Liberties of the ANCIENT CONQUERORS by inheritance and
lineal descent: -- Titles so just and sacred, that I am sure Judge Blackstone
will never persist in opposing them; especially when he sees hereafter by what
authority I make this assertion: Nay, the Right of Conquest is so bad a plea to
extenuate the iniquity of exerting any such oppressive and unlimited power,
that it fails in Reason and in natural Justice, even when applied as an excuse
for oppressing the conquered; -- much less therefore can it affect the
Liberties and natural Rights of the Conquerors themselves!

That these Liberties and natural Rights of the conquerors are entailed upon a
very great part (if not the most numerous, at least the most considerable in
point of rank and fortune) of the present inhabitants of Ireland, is a point, I
believe, which cannot be contested; for Judge Blackstone himself has declared
in a preceding page, 99: -- That the inhabitants of IRELAND are, FOR THE MOST
PART The following Extract, from Sir Wm. Petty's Political Survey of Ireland,
will corroborate this just Remark of Sir William Blackstone. -- The British
Protestants and Church have three-fourths of all the Lands, five-sixths of all
the housing, nine-tenths of all the housing in walled towns and places of
strength, two-thirds of the foreign trade, etc. p. 27.


, descended from the ENGLISH, who planted it as a kind of COLONY, after the
Conquest of it by King Henry the Second, etc. and consequently "THE MOST PART"
of the said Inhabitants ought to be considered as standing in the place of the
Conquerors, rather than of the Conquered, so that if the Reason assigned by
these three learned men has any weight, viz. that some degree of superiority is
acquired by Right of Conquest, it must be allowed, that "THE MOST PART of the
said Inhabitants are equally entitled to it, in Right of their conquering
Ancestors; for it would be highly injurious to deprive them of their hereditary
Privileges, which descend to them from the actual Conquerors themselves. --
And, on the other hand, it would be equally unjust, wicked, and impolitic, to
make any partial distinction between them and the descendants of the conquered
Irish, who, after many years struggle, are now, at last, happily incorpotated
and blended with them as one free People!

Having now examined the opinions of the most eminent Writers, that have
favored this Notion of a Right in the British Parliament to bind the Subjects
of Ireland "when especially named," I trust it will appear, to every impartial
Reader, that such doctrine is so far from having any real foundation to support
it, that it is really diametrically opposite to some of the most essential
foundations of Law, and is apparently subversive of one of the first principles
of the British Constitution! so that it will be needless for me to take notice
of any thing that has been said to the same purpose by inferior Writers, or by
the Editors or Collectors of Law Dictionaries, etc. who have only quoted these
great authorities which I have already demonstrated to be erroneous; and I may
therefore, I hope, be now allowed to repeat with double satisfaction and
certainty what I before asserted only upon general Principles in the first Part
of this Declaration, viz. that the true constitutional mode of CONNECTING
British Dominions, that are otherwise separated by NATURE, is demonstrated by
the established example of the union of GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, which by
long experience has proved to be sufficiently effectual, p. 21.

But, notwithstanding that I have already been led to a tedious length of
argument by the necessary examination of so many authors, I must beg leave
still to add some general remarks upon the abovementioned groundless argument
drawn from the Right of Conquest; for Judge Blackstone has been equally
unguarded in what he has laid down concerning the American Colonies in p. 107.
of the same volume, where he has made a very improper use of this same mistaken
notion about the Right of Conquest.

"Our American Plantations" (says he) "are principally of this latter sort," (
viz. conquered or ceded countries, of which he was treating in the preceding
sentence,) "being obtained" (says he) in the last century, either by RIGHT OF
CONQUEST, and driving out the Natives, (with what natural Justice I shall not
at present enquire,) or by Treaties. And therefore (says he) the COMMON LAW OF
ENGLAND, as such, has no ALLOWANCE or authority there; they being no part of
the mother Country, but distinct (though dependent) Dominions. But, when he
reconsiders this part of his work, I trust he will allow that the COMMON LAW of
England is principally founded on Reason, natural Justice, and the eternal Laws
of God; and consequently all that part of the COMMON LAW, which arises from
these foundations, MUST HAVE allowance or authority, not only there (viz. in
the English Colonies) but every where else, if the unjust pretensions of
Tyrants were to be duly restrained by Law and Equity: and, with respect to the
remaining part of the COMMON LAW, consisting in ancient and approved usages and
customs, peculiar to English Subjects, he will not be backward, I trust, to
grant them also "allowance or authority there," when he is reminded that these
conquered Countries are not inhabited by the conquered People, but chiefly by
British Subjects, successors to the Conquerors, who are entitled by Birthright
to the Common Law of England, and every other privilege of Englishmen, quite as
much as those English Subjects mentioned by him at the top of the same page.
"For it has been held," (says he) that if an uninhabited country be discovered
and PLANTED BY ENGLISH SUBJECTS, ALL THE ENGLISH LAWS THEN IN BEING, which are
the BIRTHRIGHT OF EVERY SUBJECT, are immediately THERE IN FORCE. 1 Com. p.
107. This doctrine is unquestionable; and the more so because allowed by
himself: And though he has been pleased to add, that this must be understood
with very many and very great restrictions; that such Colonists carry with them
only so much of the English Law, as is applicable to their own situation, etc.
yet it must be apparent that, if they "carry with them" any Laws at all, it
most be by virtue of their natural Right as Englishmen, whereby they are
certainly as much entitled to all; (I mean all the English Laws that were in
being when these several Colonies respectively were established;) and
therefore, though they used (in the infant state of each Colony) only so much
of the English Law as was applicable to their own situation, (and it is absurd
to suppose that they would use more, whether entitled to it or not,) yet this
does not affect their undoubted Right to the whole; which Right descends to
posterity and successors in the same manner as all other inheritances; it
being, indeed, their very best inheritance Judge Blackstone himself has called
it in the the very same page "the Birthright of every Subject."


: And Equity surely entitles the increasing Colonies (continually as occasions
may arise from their improvements) to the use and benefit of all beneficial
Laws which were in force at the time of their ancestors emigration.

That these, however, must be understood with some "Restrictions," cannot be
denied; -- as the Laws of "Revenue," (for instance,) which the learned
Gentleman himself has mentioned: for these were merely local, and cannot
therefore be legally enforced in any new Dominions without the express Assent
or Grant of the Inhabitants in such new Dominions, the same being absolutely
necessary to give them a local effect within the said Dominions: because
nothing but the free Grant and Assent of the Inhabitants and Landholders gave
them force, originally, even in the mother Country; and, therefore, nothing but
the like authority (that is, the free Grant of the Inhabitants upon the spot
wherever they are introduced) can possibly render them legal, just, and binding
in any other part of the world; so that it must necessarily appear, that no new
acquired Territories, settled by British Subjects, can legally be taxed by
English Acts of Parliament, nor be bound thereby in their internal Government
without such manifest injustice and iniquity as must necessarily render null
and void all such pretended Acts; for, otherwise, if they were admitted, they
would render all the temporal hereditary possessions and property of the
Subjects in the Colonies entirely uncertain, which is one of the most odious
circumstances in the eye of the Law that can be mentioned. "Quod certum est
retinendum est, quod INCERTUM EST dimittendum: Nay, quod INCERTUM EST NIHIL
EST:" This is the censure of Law upon all the Acts of Men which fall under the
judgment of the Law. If then THE LAW so judge of the Acts of Men, HOLDING THEM
FOR NAUGHT and VOID that are INCERTAINE; how much more then does THE LAW
REQUIRE CERTAINTY in her own Acts, which are to bind all Men. The Liberty of
the Subject against the pretended Power of Impositions, by Wm. Hakewil, 1641.

I have been the more particular (as well here as upon Orurke's case
beforementioned) in expressing the necessity of restraining the Power of
Parliament within the bounds of Reason, Justice, and natural Equity, because, I
find, it is too common an error that an Act of Parliament is omnipotent, and
that whatever is ordained by Parliament must be Law, without any exception of
Right or Wrong, White or Black, Truth or Falsehood! which, God be thanked, is
very far from being true, though the learned Commentator Judge Blackstone, upon
the very same point, (the Omnipotence of Parliament) has unguardedly said, True
it is, that what the Parliament does, no Authority upon earth can undo. 1 Com.
p. 161. But that worthy Gentleman needs only to be reminded, that if it should
unfortunately happen, from any oversight or misunderstanding, that what the
Parliament does is in the least contrary either to the Laws of Reason, Nature,
pure Morality, natural Equity and Justice; or to that Benevolence This
Benevolence, or due Consideration for the natural Rights of all mankind is
properly called Jus Gentium, the Law of Nations The Law of Nations seems to be
almost banished at this time from Europe. The late felonious and arbitrary
Division of Poland between three of the greatest Powers in Europe: The late
iniquitous attempts against the ancient Republic of Venice and the Swiss
Cantons, and the late unjust Claims upon the free Cities of Dantzick, Hamburgh,
etc. The Robberies and horrid Murders which, for these ten years past, have
been committed by the French on the poor wretched Inhabitants of the little
Island of Corsica, upon pretense of an unlawful Cession of Sovereignty from the
Genoese; and the like abominable Iniquity, upon the like false pretense, lately
carried on, even by the English themselves, against the poor helpless Charibbs
at St. Vincent's: -- are melancholy Proofs, either that the Europeans in
general are most profoundly ignorant of the Law of Nations, or that they are
fallen into a state of the must abandoned Wiekedness and P^ofligacy.


which universal Law (as likewise ALL THE OTHER HEADS abovementioned) is
necessarily included in what is commonly called natural Religion, consisting of
the primary or eternal Laws of God; and whatsoever is contrary to any of these
is "MALUM IN SE," which no authority on earth can make lawful; (see note in p.
185 and 186.) and men of all ranks, and in all places, that have Common Sense,
are naturally qualified to distinguish whether Laws are deficient in any of
these respects, or are contrary to Reason; for the LAW OF REASON in an
universal Law -- Scribiturque HAEC LEX in cord CUJUSLIBET HOMINIS, docens cum
quid aegendum, et quid fugiendum, (for which the learned Author quotes the
Epistle to the Romans, chap. 2, and then proceeds) et quod LEX RATIONIS in
cord scribitur, ideo deleri non potest, nec etiam recipit mutationem ex loco
nec tempore, sed ubique ET INTER OMNES HOMINES servari debet. Nam JURA
NATURALIA IMMUTABILIA SUNT, et ratio immutationis. est quod recipient Naturam
rei pro fundamento, quae semper eadem est et ubique. Doct. et Stud. cap. 2. Any
Acts of Parliament, therefore, which are contrary either to Nature, to Justice,
to Morality, or to Benevolence, etc. are contrary to REASON, (that Ray of the
divine Nature, and supreme Law,) and consequently are null and void, being mere
Corruptions, (corruptelae,) and not Laws; for "contra eam" (Rationem) non est
praescriptio vel appositum statutum sive consuetudo; et, si aliqua fiat, NON
SUNT STATUTA, sive Consuetudines, sed CORRUPTELAE, etc. Doct. et Stud. p. 5. b.


and Consideration which we owe, not only to our brethren and countrymen, but
also to our brethren of the universe, by the ties of nature; or, 2dly, if
contrary to the written Laws of God; Secundum fundamentum legis Angliae est LEX
DIVINA, etc. And if any Act of Parliament is in any degree contrary to the
divine Law, it has no force in the Laws of England. Suppose, for instance, an
Act of Parliament should be made, to prohibit or annul the marriages of any
particular rank or order of men whatsoever; the same must necessarily be
esteemed null and void of itself; because the Principle, attempted to be
established by such an imaginary Act, is so directly contrary to the Laws of
God, that we may safely rank it with the "DOCTRINES OF DEVILS.;" (see notes on
pages 133 and 134.) which, indeed, every Act of Parliament ought to be esteemed
that is in any degree contrary to the holy Scriptures, (the written Laws of
God,) or contrary to Reason, (the eternal Law of God) -- Etiam si ALIQUOD
STATUTUM esset editum contra cos, NULLIUS VIGORIS in legibus Angliae censeri
debet, etc. Doct. et Stud. c. 6.


or, 3dly, if contrary to any of the fundamental Rights and Franchises declared
in the Great Charter; Of this I have already given sufficient examples in pages
178 to 208.


or, 4thly, if contrary to TRUTH; (that is, if any Act be made upon partial
information or groundless suggestions, which shall have occasioned a
misrepresentation of TRUTH in the recital of facts;) "Contra veritatem nihit
possumus." And again, Contra veritatem lex nunquam aliquid permittit. 2 Inst.
252. Plowden has reported a variety of cases wherein Acts of Parliament were
esteemed vaid in Law, through the want of truth in the recitals: see pages 398
to 400. -- Et issint Parliament puit misprender chose, et Statutes que
MISRECITE CHOOSES, et sont refer a eux, SERRONT VOID, et null serra conclude
per eux. Issint en notre principal case, le statut que recite le plaintiff fuit
attaint, et confirm ceo, ou en fail il ne fuit attaint, SERRA VOID.


if, in any of these points, it should unfortunately happen (I say) that what
the Parliament does is really defective, or made contrary thereto, the same
ought to be "HOLDEN FOR NONE!" There needs "no authority upon earth" to undo
what is so done, for it is null and void of itself, notwithstanding the united
authority of King, Lords, and Commons! And, whenever any Acts have been thus in
advertently or too hastily made, the most honorable method of getting rid of
them is, by the same authority, to declare them null and void, and not merely
to repeal them, because the latter is not a sufficient reparation to injured
justice and truth; for, as all men are fallible, it is disingenuous and highly
dishonorable, in any man, or body of men whatsoever, not to acknowledge a
mistake or error, when the same is fairly demonstrated!

The power and jurisdiction of the Parliament, for making of Laws, etc. is NOT
therefore so transcendent and absolute that it cannot be confined, either for
causes or persons, (as supposed by Lord Coke, 4 Inst. p. 36,) within any
bounds, since the just bounds and limits of it are so very clearly defined, as
well as the due bounds of regal Power, that they fall within the judgment of
every man who has COMMON SENSE to distinguish GOOD from EVIL, or RIGHT from
WRONG; so that the imaginary OMNIPOTENCE OF PARLIAMENT is not only (as Judge
Blackstone has declared) "a figure rather too bold;" but even totally false and
unjust; because the Parliament is manifestly limited, (as all powers on earth
must be,) and CANNOT do every thing that is not NATURALLY impossible; though
Judge Blackstone supposes it can (1 Com. p. 161.) for the Power -- "Quia illa
potestas" (potestas Juris) folius Dei est; potestas autem injuriae diaboli, et
non Dei; et cujus horum opera fecerit rex, ejus minister erit cujus opera
fecerit. Igitur, dum facit justit am, vicarius est Regis aeterni; minister
autem diaboli, dum declinet ad injuriam, etc. Bracton, lib. 3, c. 9, p. 107 b.


OF RIGHT (or Justice) alone is of GOD; but that of WRONG (or Injury) is of the
DEVIL; and the works of whichsoever of these the King (or any other man) shall
do, of the same shall he be esteemed the servant. Know ye not that, to whom ye
yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey?
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. etc. Romans vi. 16.




So that "the Powers that be" cannot bind the conscience when they exceed just
limits, any more than the threats of a lawless Banditti; and therefore we may
truly say of all the Branches of the Legislature together, (I mean their united
authority,) what the ingenious Mr. Sadler said particularly concerning the
House of Commons; viz. When they are FREEEST, they have LIMITS; for they be not
infinite. Nay, when they are MOST FREE, they are MOST BOUND to GOOD ORDERS, and
to RICHT-REASON. Sadler's Rights, p. 135.

It would be happy for this kingdom if all Members of Parliament were sensible
of these indispensible limitations; and therefore, though I have thought it my
duty to oppose what Judge Blackstone has unfortunately allowed concerning the
imaginary OMNIPOTENCE OF PARLIAMENT, yet I think myself bound most heartily to
concur with him in what he has mentioned in the same page -- That it is a
matter most essential to the liberties of this kingdom, that such members be
delegated to this important Trust, as are most eminent for their probity, their
fortitude, and their knowledge; for it was a known apophthegm of the great Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, "that England could never be ruined but by a Parliament,
etc.

But, before I conclude this 2d part of my Declaration, it may, perhaps, be
expected that I should apologize for the tedious length of it; and yet, when my
Readers consider that it was necessary for me to answer the assertions of some
of the most eminent Law Writers that this nation, perhaps, ever produced, they
will not think their time ill spent (I hope) in following me through this
minute examination of the said assertions, especially as they relate to the
most important points of the CONSTITUTION and COMMON LAW of England and Ireland.

And I hope, also, that my Readers will not charge me with presumption, for
having, in the course of this argument, opposed the opinions of such very
respectable Writers as Baron Puffendorf on THE CIVIL LAW, and the Judges Coke,
Vaughan, Jenkins, and Blackstone, and the Hon. Mr. Barrington, on THE LAWS OF
ENGLAND. If my Remarks should, in any part, be thought too severe, I am sorry
for it; I can only assure my Readers that the least personal disrespect is not
intended; for I am sufficiently sensible of my own unworthiness and too
superficial knowledge in all things; and have, therefore, most carefully
avoided any doctrine which may seem to rest merely upon the weak foundation of
my own opinion; but, wherever I have ventured to dissent, from the opinions of
these approved writers, I have assigned plain reasons for it, or other proper
authorities, and I desire to be trusted no farther than these plain reasons and
authorities will fairly warrant. I hope I may be permitted to use the same
apology for pointing out mistakes in the opinions of these very learned writers
which the Hon. Mr. Justice Barrington has applied particularly to the
Institutes and Reports of Sir Edward Coke; which "being" (says he) the best
LAW-CHART, and implicitly trusted to, it is proper to take notice of every
shoal and rock misplaced, though perhaps not in the proper track of navigation,
p. 91.

GRANVILLE SHARP.

LEX plus laudatur quando RATIONE probatur. Co. Lit. Epil. Post varios casus,
post tot discrimina rerum, Nunc sequitur conclusio. (Soli) "DEO GLORIA ET
GRATIA." Jucunda est praeteritorum laborum memoria. 2 Inst. Epil.

