AN INQUIRY INTO THE Original Production OF INSECTS IN HUMAN BODIES, Especially
of the Seminal Animalcula;

And whether these pass the Testicular Strainers, and are reposited in the
Seminal Bladders in Infants, or not till near Puberty.

LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane. 1727.

(Price 6 d.)

AN INQUIRY INTO THE Original Production OF INSECTS IN Human Bodies.
NOT only have the manner of Secretion and Use of the Genital Liquor been the
occasion of Disputation, but also its Matter and Composition have been the
Subject of much Inquiry; and the Methods they have used for Satisfaction, were,
(1st) Hypothetic Arguments. (2ly) Experimental Examination. Of the first sort,
viz. Inquirers, or rather Guessers, are, (1.) Such as derive the Sperm from the
Brain only. (2.) From Brain, Heart, and Liver. (3.) From an uncertain Juice
conveyed from the Brain along the spinal Marrow to the Spermaticks. (4.) Such
as ascribe a spermatick Force to the Kidneys. (5.) Such as will have it to be a
Mixture and Temperature, taken from all the Facultys of the Soul. (6.) Such as
plead that it falls from the parts of the Body into the lesser Veins, and out
of them ascends into the greater, and swims like a Cloud upon the Humors; and
is at last attracted by the force of the Testicles. (7.) Some derive it from
all the Parts of the Body; others from the Mass of Blood only. (8.) Some wholly
reject the last, and fetch it from a sweeter Juice, or some milky chylous
Matter. (9.) Others say it is the Excrement or Residuum of the most elaborated
and finely digested Juices, falling like a Dew from all the Parts of the Body,
and meeting at the Spermaticks. (10.) Some will have it to be only a simple
uncompounded nervous Juice, destitute of all other Mixtures.

These were the chief Opinions of the Hypothetical Gentlemen, and each of them
had their Patrons and strenuous Defenders; who racked their Wits to invent
Arguments to maintain their darling Notion: And many of their Arguments are
fitter to move Laughter, or raise the Choler of the sober, than to satisfy his
Curiosity, or inform his Judgment. Wherefore some who were dissatisfied with
this supposititious or guessive Way of arguing, I go with them next to
experimental Examination; the first whereof has caused the animal Seed to
undergo the fiery Trial of the Chemists Furnace, to make it discover its
Principles, but found it consist only of the same with all the Parts of animal
Bodies; viz. An insipid Water, a fetid Oil, some volatile Salt, a Residuum of
much light Earth in the Retort; but in Rectification it afforded no Spirit. See
Act. Erudit. Lips. Supplem. tom. 4. Sect. 10. p. 445. And Borellus. Obs. Med.
Phys. cent. 3. Obs. 5. p. 237. Et chymicos qui sperma and sanguinem humanum
coctione in pediculos mustasque converterunt, se fidisse refert. And, Gabr.
Glauber. de Tinct. Universal. cap. 5. p. 134. says, Eo dementiae pervenerunt
nonnulli Chymistae, ut pro conficiendo suo lapide Philosophico, materiam in
spermate humano quaerunt. But still some Men's curiosity, not being satisfied
with all these Guesses and Experiments, they next try what they can discover in
it, by ocular Examination and Demonstration; whereby they are convinced, that
the Sperm is only a Crowd of Animalcula, or small Worms, with long Tails, like
Tadpoles, swimming in a viscid Serum. And they are so found of this notable
Discovery, that Leewenhoeck and Hartsecker are like to go by the ears about it,
each challenging this for his own Observation and Invention: But let them
differ as they please, we know it belongs to neither of them, for D. Ham first
of all observed these Animalcula in the Semen of a Cock. And long before any of
them, Ludovicus Bonaciolus advises us, when we are solicitous to know whether a
Woman be conceived with Child, to take her Urine, and put it into a Glass
Vessel, shut it up, and set it three days in the Shade; then filter it through a
Linen Cloth, and if you find therein little Worms like Lice, then he says she
is certainly conceived. Now one would think that these were Leewenhoeck's
Animalcula, or little perfect Men, come down from the Vterus to keep centry in
the Neck of the Bladder, till they be washed off by the Urine, and changed into
small Lice. A strange Metamorphosis indeed, Men become Lice! But to ascend
higher; Plutarch, in his Symposiacon, Lib. 8. Quest. 9. discovered and
described a Spermatick Worm, saying, Hospitem nostrum novimus Athenis Ephebum
cum multo semine ejecisse Bestiolam asperam multis pedibus celeriter
ambulantem. But neither is this Doctrine of Seminal Animalcula without its
Opponents; for Iddo Wolfius, Philip Verheyen, Christianus Vater, Johannes
Langius, Andreas Ottomar, Gaelickius, and several others, flatly deny the
Existence of any such Infects in the Genital Liquor, and say, that what is
supposed to be these Animalcula, is only Flatus's of Air, intermixed with the
Sperm, which, seeking to unbend themselves, or make their escape, cause that
Motion in the Seed.

At nostrum non est tantas componere lites. But we shall allow the Masculine
Semen (like most other Fluids) to abound with these little Infects, and shall
attempt to give a rational Account how they come into it, and are bred in it,
and why they are more conspicuous here than in most other Fluids of the Body.

It Is the Opinion of some, that whilst we are young, and our Stomachs weak, the
Ova of Insects taken in with our Food and Air may escape the Attenuation,
Digestion, Communication and Attrition of the Stomach and Intestines, and lie
there and generate Worms, which may again deposite their Ova in the Guts, some
whereof may be so small as to enter the Lacteal Vessels, together with the
Chyle, and mix and circulate with the Blood, and be strained off by the
spermatick Vessels, sooner than any other Substance, because of their
smoothness and politeness; and if they be so small as to enter the small Pipes,
they may be readily conveyed along all the Gyres, Turnings and Windings of the
Testes and Epididymides, till they arrive at the different Vessels, and thence
get into the several Bladders, whither there are daily arriving other new ones,
till the Age of Puberty, or time of Seminal Discharge: And that thus the
Seminal Bladders, from a supposed continual Addition of new Ova, may be
stretched forth and extended, just as the Intestines of the Foetus, are full of
Meconium before the Birth, and the Bladder full of Urine. Now when these Ova
are got into the Vesiculae Seminales, where they are at rest, and lie till the
Boy is of Age, and there generate, and become little Insects, and so cover the
Surface of the Seed-Bladders, they shall never be free of that Spawn, till we
are capable of Generation; but when we are grown to Strength, our Stomachs and
Intestines are so strong, that they attenuate, digest, and grind down, not only
the Insects which we swallow, but the Ova also.

To all which may be answered, That it is improbable and impossible that these
impregnated Ova should lie in the Seminal Bladders, from Infancy to Puberty,
without coming to Life: And if they should become live Infects, and breed
without any Evacuation of them for so many Years, what irreparable Mischief
must they first make upon their containing Seminal Bladders, and then upon the
circumjacent Parts, Intestines, Bladders, Peritoneum? etc. And none can deny
this, who have read Sennertus, Schenckius, Spigelius, and others, who have seen
and written on the Tragedys acted by Worms, how they have corroded the Stomachs
and Intestines of Children, and even eaten their way through the Belly and Navel;
yea, that they consumed all that fleshy Part on the Groins, and came to the
Surface of the Body. Now if Vermin make such Dispatch, in a short time, upon
thick and strong Intestines and Muscles; I do not see how the delicate Seminal
Bladders can, for 15 or 16 Years, imprison such innumerable Numbers of
Animalcula, generated and bred from such a heap of Ova, as from Infancy to
Puberty are daily added to them from the Testes and different Vessels; besides
the prodigious Myriads which are still generated from the diurnal Generation of
the formerly reposited Ova and Insects: for what may be done by a few Worms or
Maggots in a short time, may certainly be expected from a vast Congeries of
little Animals, in so many Years; especially seeing there is both a daily
Generation there, and a continual new Addition from the Testes. How quickly is
Cheese consumed by Mites, Leaves of Trees by imperceptible Insects, Hair of
Animals by the Tinea or small Mite, and solid Wood it self into Dust by minute
Insects?

But suppose it should be answered, that the Ova arriving at the Seminal
Bladders, are so very small, and the number so inconsiderable, that we need be
under no Apprehension of Danger from them: yet this affords no Satisfaction
when we consider,

First, That from Infancy there is supposed to be a continual Addition of new
Ova, stretching forth and extending the Cavitys of the Seminal Bladders, till
the Boy be of Age.

Secondly, When we reflect on the sudden Generation of Insects every where,
(for a Chrysalis in which a Worm had been wrapped up, will be full to day, and to
morrow quite empty, and the Butterfly got out of it, flying abroad in its full
Stature and Magnitude) since this Generation is so sudden, and their Spawn so
numerous; this destroys their Argument, who say that these Ova may be laid up
in the different Vessels and Seminal Bladders, till the Boy comes to the Age of
Puberty. The Difficultys such Gentlemen leave us in the dark about, are as
great as any they can remove: for,

First, Let us suppose that these Ova may lie in a Quies in the Seminal
Bladders, till the Age of Puberty; then what prevents the Generation of these
reposited Ova, and impregnation of the Animalcula in the Vesiculae Seminales,
until the Boy be Puber? Or what is there to impregnate, and render them
fruitless after that time, which there was not before? What hinders the
Corruption and Putrefaction of these small Ova, lying so many Years in a warm
moist Place, which is fit either for Generation or Corruption? But,

Secondly, If they did generate, (as it is most probable they would, if they
were there) how could these strait Bladders be capable to contain such a vast
Crowd, as a diurnal Generation in that place, and a daily new Supply from the
Testicles, must amount to. It Is surprising that any should pretend that these
Ova should be strained off only by the ductus spermatici, when we are assured
from Experience, that they are strained off and generated in all Parts of the
Body, both internally and externally. And according to these Gentlemen's
Hypothesis, when the Ova are got into the Seed-Bladders, seeing they are for
several Years shut up in these Cells, we might expect them to produce Maggots,
were they capable of such Growth and Bulk. And as a Consequence of this, the
first ejected Semen would be chiefly a Heap of Worms or Insects, instead of
small (and imperceptible by the naked Eye) Animalcula: And according to this
Opinion, more Sperm should be ejected the first Year after Puberty, than in
several Years after, and that Sperm should be better elaborated and fuller of
Animalcula; and, supposing these Animalcula so many Embrios of human Foetus's,
should be more productive of strong, healthy and lively Children: all which is
contradicted by daily Experience.

Lastly, Seeing these Infects are so short lived, then if they generated in the
Vesiculae Seminales so many Years, the greatest number must be dead, putrified
and rotten in that time. And one would think it very improbable for the rest to
live in such a Kennel of Filthiness, especially to feed upon the putrified
Carrion of their own Species, which certainly must make up a considerable part
of their repast.

Secondly, I shall give the Reasons which seem to me more probable, why
Children have not Animalcula reposited from Ova in their Seminal Bladders
(supposing these Ova to come from without and swallowed down, together with our
Air and Food) although we had an Opportunity to examine with a Microscope, that
thin, useless, insipid Mucilage, contained in the Testicles, Epididymides,
different Vessels, and Seminal Bladders; because,

First, During Infancy the straining Vessels or Glands of the Testicles are too
narrow and small for the Ova to pass; which is further proved from such
Observations as show that the Ova being mixed with the Blood, when that comes
to pass the capillary Vessels, the Diameter of the Egg being larger than the
Cavity of the Vessel, it must stop there, and be wedged in by the Force of the
Fluids behind; is hatched by the Body's Heat, and produces a Worm or Worms, if
other Ova arrive at it, and stop also: And this Case we know has often happened
in most parts of the Body. Thus Worms have been bred and found in the Liver,
Kidneys, Bladder, Blood Vessels, Brain, Eyes, Teeth, Ears, Nostrils, Feet,
Navel, Heart, Lungs, Spleen, etc. Sometimes where Ulcers or Abcesses have
seated themselves in any external Parts of the Body, there have been found
Worms in them: Of these Herod, Sylla, and Aleman, were eaten up, and are called
by Coelius Aurelianus, pediculi ferales. I shall not here treat of the sundry
Kinds of Infects found in the Intestines; Andre and Le Clerc have written well
on this Subject; but especially the learned Valisnerius, who has carefully
dissected several of them, and has obliged the World with a curious Anatomy of
them. And tho Worms have bred in most other Parts of the Body, yet we have
scarce any Instances, where they have been observed to generate in, or be
discharged from the Substance of Childrens Testes. Wherefore I am ready to
think that these secretory Ducts, which strain off the Semen from the Blood,
are very narrow, and therefore the Eggs cannot enter nor pass them, but are,
together with the Blood, returned back to the spermatick Veins. This Opinion
appears more satisfactory, because the Sperm seems to consist of more
elaborated Particles, than the matter of other Evacuations; for its more
ponderous Subsidy in Water is of a thicker Consistence, and condenses still
more in Spirit of Wine; but if it be laid on a dry Place, exposed to the Air,
it presently becomes fluid, transparent, and loses its Viscidity. The
Production of Worms in the miliary Glands, on the Surface of the Body, is no
good Argument against this: for,

First, When the Ova get out of their road, into the Labyrinths of the miliary
Glands, they cause an Obstruction and Tumor; they breed there, break the small
Vessels, and get through the Skin.

Secondly, Worms are sometimes produced on the Surface of the Body, (where the
Skin is excoriated) from the Ova floating in the Air, falling upon the grieved
Place, and taking up their Abode there, and generating others.

Thirdly, It Is not improbable that the Ova of these Animalcula of the Masculine
Semen, are greater than the Ova of some larger Insects; and then it is no wonder
that they neither pass the miliary Glands, nor the spermatick Labyrinths of
Children.

That some particular Glands have such narrow secretory Ducts, as will not
allow the Ova to pass readily, is manifest,

First, From the ropy Matter discharged from the Penis, upon intense amorous
Thoughts, or lascivious Conversation, which tho more tenacious then the Semen,
and strained off by the Glands of the Vrethra, yet we do not hear of any
Animalcula taken notice of in it.

Secondly, Leewenhoeck owns, that Men's Semen has no Animalcula, and this he
assigns for a reason of Sterility; but hereof he gives us but one Instance, and
for any thing we know, the fault even of this might be from some indisposition
in the Ova foeminaea, Tubae fallopianae, Vterus, or some of the circumjacent
Parts; or the Male Sperm might want that Vivacity, Subtility, or forcible
Projection: but however these were, yet we may safely impute his want of
Animalcula to the narrowness of the Meanders of the Testes.

Thirdly, The Flaccidity and Emptiness of the different Vessels and Seminal
Bladders before Puberty, and the minute Portion of Semen, discharged by Boys
for some Months after the first Seminal Evacuations; yea such is the Penury of
it, that we have Historys of some wicked Boys, who desiring to anticipate
Nature, and gratify their too early libidinous Desires, have ejected Blood
instead of Sperm.

Fourthly, Not only the small quantity, but the tenuity and aqueousness of
their genital Liquor, shows the narrowness of their spermatick Strainers.

Fifthly, In old Age, when the Tubes contract the Canals are straightened, and few
or no Ova pass; there is but little Semen separated from the Blood, and what is
strained off is mostly useless, either for Generation or Stimulation to Venery.

Lastly, The Spittle has likewise passed the Microscopial Examination; but
Leewenhoeck could observe no Animalcula in it, and we are sure that that
Secretion has a much shorter way to pass, after its Separation from the Blood,
till it come into the Mouth; so that if the narrowness of the Glands hindered
not the Passage of the Ova from the Blood, we should rather expect them here,
than in the Semen.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Visibility of the Animalcula in all Male Semen:
But now let us try how we can account for such vast Multitudes of Insects in
this Liquor.

The first reason then, why I suppose we meet with greater Numbers in this
Liquor than in several other Secretions of the Body, is the slow Circulation of
the Blood in the Spermatick Vessels, whereby the seminal Particles have time to
approach and attract one another: For the Course of the Blood in the spermatick
Arterys, betwixt the great Artery and the Testes, Dr. Keil has demonstrated to
be 150 times slower than the Motion of the same Blood would be in the great
Artery, or even in the Iliacks. And if its Motion decrease so quickly in the
first Division from the Aorta; how much more languid then must its Motion be in
the many Divisions, Subdivisions, Turnings and Circumvolutions of the
testicular Glands! No inward Secretion or Circulation is so slow in the whole
Body, it being little more than what seems necessary to prevent the Blood's
stagnation.

Secondly, The long Retention of the Semen in the different Vessels and Seminal
Bladders, which is more obstinate than any one, or all of the Abdominal
Secretions. To this I add,

Thirdly, The speedy and surprising Generation of Insects, the Breeding, quick
Growth, numerous Progeny, and short Life, of the Butterfly and Silkworm,
Flesh-fly, and Fly-Maggots, may be seen at large in Leewenhoeck's Observations.
Now if these are bred and come to Maturity in so very few Hours, how much
sooner the Ova of the Animalcula, which are much less, and may therefore be
supposed of much shorter continuance? I might also instance, in the surprising,
speedy, and prodigious Progeny of the small Worms called Astarides, great
Numbers whereof I have known bred afresh every Night, and evacuated next
Morning at Stool: Let us then suppose the Generation of the Seminal Animalcula
to be as speedy; if the Ova should pass the Glands, and get into the Seminal
Bladders during Childhood, what Vesiculae Seminales would be capable to contain
the great Fry of small Worms, bred in the space of 15 or 16 Years?

Fourthly, The Sperm is seemingly the most homogene Secretion of the whole
Body, and the most agreeable for the Generation of these Animalcula, being it
self, not only a prolifick, but a smooth balsamic Fluid, seemingly endu'd with
all Propertys which can conduce to render a Liquor either fertile or
nutritious. If we consider these things, we shall see Reason to be of that
ingenious Gentleman's Opinion, mentioned by Dr. Blair, who thinks that these
Animalcula are the same with those we see in Water, but under different Shapes.

But let us next enquire for the Causes why these small Insects are either not
so numerous or perceptible in the Blood, Bile, Urine, or pancreatick Juice. And,

First, None of these seem of so agreeable a Nature, have neither so much rest,
nor afford so proper Nutrition.

Secondly, Because, as Dr. Blair says, the Blood being a Compositum of all the
various Particles of the whole Fluids in the Body; it appears, under a more
solid form in Globules, where the several Particles are compactly and firmly
united, so that the Ova or Animalcula are not so perceptible, unless the
Particles were separated into their different Parts; and even this Heterogene
Mixture called Blood has sometimes had Worms in it.

Thirdly, These Animalcula seem to meet with the cruellest Treatment in the
Bile; for although several Physicians and Naturalists have observed abundance of
live Worms in the Liver, yet rarely have they been found alive in the Bile or
Gallbladder: for this is the most purgent, sharp and bitter of all the
Secretions, and is chiefly made up of very sharp Particles like small Wedges;
whereby, when by the peristaltick Motion of the Guts it is mixed with the Food
and Fluids, it breaks their acrid saline Particles, as well as divides the
coagulated, or mixes the watery and oily: The pungent bilious Particles are
darted into either the Bodies or Ova of Insects, that are larger than the
bilious Particles in the Intestines, and kills them if alive, or prevents their
Generation if they be only in Ova: But the Ova or Animalcula swallowed with our
Meat or Drink, being both so numerous and small, get out of the Duodenum
unhurt; but if the Bile be pure and unmixed, very few Species of Insects can
live in it.

Another Reason why many Ova and Insects may get out of the Intestines
untouched by the Bile, is, either its scarcity in the Body, from the secretory
Ducts of the Liver being stuffed with a gritty Matter, causing a Jaundice; or
its meeting with obtundent and tenacious Meat, Drink, or Medicine, often poured
down into the Stomach. And, lastly, The Animalcula are not so conspicuous in
the Bile, because it is of a darker Body than the Semen.

Fourthly, The Pancreatick Juice is constantly flowing into the Duodenum, as
it is separated from the Blood, and so the Ova have but a short Residence there
to generate Insects. And suppose they were in it, its immediate Mixture with
the Bile, would render it very disagreeable to live Insects. This Mixture of
the two Juices prevents our Discovery of Animalcula; or perhaps the Texture of
the procreatick Glands may not be so convenient for their Conveyance.

Fifthly, The Urine being often full of pungent Salts, they would be darted
into the delicate Bodies of these little Creatures; therefore are we not to
expect them so frequently and plentifully in that Liquor, it not being of so
amicable a Nature for such Guests: And also several times have there been Worms
voided with the Urine; yet do I not find that either Leewenhoeck or his
Votarys, have met with what they call Seminal Animalcula in it: for which
reason it would appear that the Urine is no beloved Habitation of theirs.

Sixthly, The Serum of the Blood is not altogether so fit a Vehicle, for they
having some small Solidity, must be deposited in the Sediment, together with
the Blood Globules, and so become invisible.

Seventhly, Neither could Leewenhoeck find them in the Saliva; for the Glands
which strain it off from the Blood, seem to have too narrow Ducts to suffer the
Passage of either Infects or their Eggs. The disagreeableness of both Bile and
Urine to these little Animals, is further evident from this, that although the
strainers of both Liver and Kidneys seem larger and laxer than the testicular
Strainers, and might therefore be supposed to admit of these Insects, yet are
they rarely perceived alive in these Liquors.

I shall now try to account for be several ways how these Insects are generated
in the Semen, and come to be reposited in the Vesiculae Seminales, when Boys
come to Puberty: And this will serve to illustrate, not only the Generation of
these, but of all other Insects which are to be met with in human Bodies. These
ways I suppose to be chiefly three, viz. 1st, From our Creation. 2ly, From our
Propagation. 3ly, From our Sustentation.

It Is from the first two of these that we can account for Worms in the Bodies
of Embrios, Foetus's, and Abortives: But the Generation of Insects from our
Creation, I presume to be this, That although God, at Man's first Creation, did
not directly and purposely sow the Seeds of such an ineradicable Vermin in
human Bodies; yet Man's Body being made of Earth (whether Clay, Dust or Ashes,
it is not material to our Design) toward the Evening of the sixth Day, when he
had ended all his other Works; the Earth not only then abounded with Insects
and Ova, but having been at first created and furnished with the Seeds of all
these, there must fall some of the minuter of them to the share of that part of
Matter, which went to the Compositum of the human Machine. And these might not
only be a Seed for the Generation and Propagation of these Insects in the first
Man's Body, but serve for the Seeds of a lasting Progeny in all his Posterity,
who shall descend from him. It Is surprising to see how little trouble the
Ancients gave themselves in inquiring into the Cause of Vermin in animal
Bodies; they were satisfied that they had solved the doubt at once, by saying,
that Insects were formed from themselves, out of a certain putrid matter, by
Heat and Motion: But they never regarded the Destruction of their Hypothesis,
when they might observe that the Generation of Insects, and all other
Creatures, was always alike the same; for if slimy and putrid Matter could give
Form and Life to any Creature, it were ridiculous to expect that the Species
should still be of the Sort, and always keep one Form and Shape. According to
their Notion, where there is plenty of Slime and an agreeable Warmth, Men might
with Horror and Danger look on, and see strange and prodigious Monsters daily
arise out of this Heap of Putrefaction, ready to devour the Beholders, and the
Food designed for their Provision. Mercurialis, either persuaded of the Folly
of this Supposition, or affecting to be singular, fled to occult Qualities, and
celestial Powers, which by the Mediation of proximate Causes, formed Animals:
But he could not dispute, whether this was the Facultas fortuita Galeni, or the
powerful Factor calcodea Avicennae, or Plato's Anima Mundi: In the last Age the
indefatigable Redi has demonstrated, that the Generation of Animals and Insects
is still alike; and then all Philosophers with unanimous consent, banished the
Notion of equivocal Generation, and assigned Insects the same Parents, viz.
Ova: Of late appeared the learned Valisnerius, who strenuously contends that
Worms in the human Body are coeval with Adam, and says that the Eggs of all
Insects that generate in Men, were purposely created by God in the Body of the
first Man, even when created in a State of Purity and Innocence. One great
Difficulty which put him on coining this new Scheme, was to account from whence
these Eggs came, and how they can be detained in human Bodies; for he thinks it
equally dangerous to true Philosophy, whether we believe that Animals are bred
out of Corruption, or suppose a certain kind of Animals produced from the Eggs
of others of a different Kind, and so confound their Species. Thus, says he, we
give to some Insects feigned Fathers, and to others bastard Children: What he
chiefly builds his Argument upon, is, That we can find no Species of Insects
without us, to which we may fitly compare these Insects bred within us; and
then to establish his Opinion beyond all Controversy, he says, That the Insects
without us, as they are of different Kinds, so they have their sundry
Habitations: Such as live in one kind of Earth will die in another; and on
Shrubs and Trees, these who live on its Roots would pine on its Leaves; and
those who feed well on the Bark, would starve on the Wood, Fruit, Leaves, etc.
Tho it be not my Design to examine all this learned Man's Arguments, yet give
me leave briefly to observe, en passant, that as we meet with variety of
Infects without us, so are there different Kinds of Worms within us.

Secondly, We know that either Vegetables or Animals, removed from their
natural Soil to a very different Climate, and Nourishment, will in a few of
their Generations be so much changed from their natural Appearances, that they
will hardly be taken for the same; this is so commonly allowed, that it needs
no Proof.

Thirdly, The many Historys and Observations of the Spawn of Frogs, Beetles,
and other Insects, having been unwarily swallowed down with Meat or Drink, and
generated in the Body, leaves no room to doubt but that the Ova of Insects
swallowed down will breed in us, and produce a Vermin which will live in us,
tho deprived of the open Air, and the common Food of its Species, such as that
we meet with in the Philosophical Transactions of a Man's Girl at Sheffield,
aged only three Months, who after swallowing greedily a Pint of Wormwood Ale,
she vomited up three Hexapodes, all very active and nimble; these, Dr. Lister
says, would have changed to Beetles: And also the Man's Son, who after a long
and grievous Pain of the Stomach, vomited up several strange Worms, in the
ninth Year of his Age; these Worms, says Dr. Lister, were Caterpillars with 14
Legs, for he had many times seen of the same Kind on Plants; and no doubt (says
he) these would in due time (if the Place had not hindered) have shrunk into
Chrysalis's, and changed into Moths.

Fourthly, There may be some unheeded Circumstances in the Generation and
Production of several Insects, that will not only come up to, but exceed the
Dissimilitude of these Insects bred in in our Bodies, to these of the same Kind
without us. I shall instance in some that we know, E. gr. Who would believe
that that fine flying Insect the Lybella should be generated like a Tadpole
under Water, wrapped up in a Membrane till she be near ready to leave that
Element, and appear in a more glorious Dress in the open Air? Who would expect
that great Caterpillars should sometimes produce two or three, or a whole Swarm
of Ichneumones, an Insect with four Wings, Antennae, like a Be? etc. Dr.
Lister, Apr. 2. 1671. diffected some black Beetles which were cast up in his
Garden, and found live hair Worms in their Bellys, which crept out and crawled,
when the Beetle's Belly was cut up; they were some Inches long, and about the
thickness of a Hog's Bristle. These are what have been taken by the Vulgar for
Horse-hairs turning into Eels, or animated Bodies in Water. Strange it is also
that the wild Bees which breed in old Willows, if these Bees, Maggots or
Nymphae happen to miscarry, they breed, 1st, little Hexapodes, which produce
Beetles: 2ly, Maggots, which produce Flys: 3ly, Mites, etc. And what more
wonderful Metamorphosis can we imagine than that of a Caterpillar into a
Butterfly, and of a Butterfly into a Caterpillar again? We have also sufficient
Experience that several Insects live casually and promiscuously on Herbs,
Leaves, Flowers, and Fruits.

Fifthly, Insects from Ova taken into our Bodies, may generate and live there,
having, during their Generation, been nourished with the Juices of our Bodies,
and afterward fed with the same. And indeed it is more reasonable to think that
the Insects of our Bodies are bred from Ova, than from Vermin swallowed down
alive; for I have known some consumptive Persons swallow many small Frogs
alive, without any Generation thereof, or inconvenience therefrom. But a young
Fellow in the Neighborhood where I lived, had not so good Fate; for he in the
latter end of February, carelessly drank some Water, wherein was Frogspawn, and
had therefrom generated in his Body a fine fry of young Frogs, whereby he was
emaciated and reduced to a living Ghost; and when neither the greatest Bitters
nor strong Purges could be of any service to him, there were given him strong
Vomits of white Hellebore, which raised such violent Spasms and Convulsions in
the muscular Fibers of his Stomach and Intestines, that the nauseous
destructive Vermin were forced to quit their hold and be thrown up. So there is
no doubt but several Insects which are swallowed alive by us, will live and
breed: and for this reason it is that wise Nature has taught Herons and some
other Fowls, which live much on Worms and Insects, to draw them often through
their Bills, and pinch them till they are dead before they swallow them.
Another great Difficulty with Valisnerius, is. That there have been many kinds
of Insects found in human Bodies, none of whose Species were ever seen abroad in
the World. But to this may be replied, 1. That the different Soil may very much
alter the Creature from those of the same kind without us. 2. Some Creatures
have very different Appearances, according to the sundry Stages of their
Growth: thus Bees are first white Maggots, then Bees; Frogs are first Tadpoles
and swim like small Fish in the Water; Ichneumones are first a kind of Tadpole,
then a glorious flying Insect, etc. I confess that sometimes such Observers may
be willing to flatter themselves, and think they have seen Monsters, and so
impose upon our Faith, when perhaps their great wonder may be only a little
coagulated Blood, unnatural Excresence or Polypus appearing, or cunningly
represented by the dextrous Operator in such a Shape; for there is no such
thing as a new Creation of Animals or Insects of such an unknown Species; such
things are proper only to amuse Idiots, Half-wits and Children, who can be
prevailed upon to believe a spontaneous Generation in opposition to God, Reason
and Observation. These are the chief of Valisnerius's Difficultys, which drive
him back to Man's first Creation for the Origni of Insects in human Bodies; but
we see there is no such Difficulty in them, as to challenge our Compliance with
him.

Secondly, Another way how Insects are generated in human Bodies, is, from the
Seed it self: for consider we that the Semen whereby Man is propagated, is said
to abound with live Insects; and can we imagine that Creatures of such
vigorous, agile and minute Bodies, cannot penetrate and make their way through the
interstices of the dilated Membranes of the Ovum Foeminaeum, get into the
Rudiments of the Embrio, be shut up in its Vessels, and be mixed with its
Fluids, circulate with the Blood and Juices, live, lay their Eggs, and breed in
the Body of the Foetus? The Animalcula make up the subtilest Part of the
Masculine Semen; and it would be ridiculous to assert, that the sluggish viscid
Part made its way into the Ovum, but the more subtle and active Part did not:
Therefore the Repletion of the Seed with these, is sufficient Foundation for
future Generation, and a lasting Progeny of the kind in every Man and Woman
during Life. Now to assert the Destruction of them in the Womb, were absurd,
seeing the Embrio is nourished with the finest Juices of the Mother's Body,
which must make as agreeable a repast for them, as they can meet with
afterward in the Bodies of Adults.

Thirdly, The last way how I suppose the Insects in animal Bodies do come, is,
from our Sustentation or Food; and this I divide again into three, viz. That
wherewith we are nourished in the Womb. 2. That wherewith we are fed in our
Infancy, to wit, the Mother's Milk: and, 3. That which preserves human Life
ever after.

As to the first of these: Let us remember that the Embrio in the Vterus is not
only surrounded with, but fed by the Mother's Juices, especially those in the
Amnios, in which are discovered multitudes of Animalcula of several sorts: And
these, together with the Fluid wherein they live and sport, getting into the
Body and Vessels of the Foetus, will leave the Seeds of a Vermin, which shall
never be extirpated. And from this may Insects of sundry kinds be found in the
Bodies of Abortives. Now that the Child receives some of its Nourishment from
the Liquor contained in the Amnios, the learned and curious Heister, Professor
of Anatomy at Altorf, has fully proved. But suppose the Child had no part of
its Nourishment from these Juices, yet is there not a constant Circulation of
Fluids from Mother to Child, and back from the Child to the Mother again? And
are there not multitudes of Insects and Ova in the human Blood, tho its
globular Parts render them invisible to us? But,

Secondly, Suppose the Child should come into the World, free from all manner
of Insects or Ova (which yet is neither probable nor possible) after its Birth,
is not much of its Food Milk? and are we not satisfied that the Mother's Milk
abounds with Animalcula? and is not here sufficient Cause for the Generation of
all these Myriads in the human Body, whilst as yet an Infant? How are we to
expect that the Infant's Body should be capable to destroy all that Vermin,
since they escaped the strong Attrition of the Mother's Stomach, Lungs, and
Muscles, all which are stronger in the Mother, than it is reasonable to expect
in the Infant?

The last Cause I assigned for the Ingestion and Generation of Insects and Ova
into our Bodies, was by those Means which are the Preservation and Support of
human Life, during the remaining Course of our time; and these are our Meat,
Drink and Air: I say, from the Mixture of the Ova of Insects with these. For
although it be supposed that when we are Adult, our Stomachs are able to attenuate
and digest, not only the ingested Aliments, but also many of these Ova, which
must undergo the common Fate of Attrition and Comminution of their Particles;
but in Youth, especially in Childhood, the Stomach is weak, and the Ova escape,
and generate Insects in our Bodies. To this Cause may be added Children's
irregular way of eating, often cramming down new Food, before the former was
fully digested, and got out of the Stomach, whereby their Chyle must be coarse
and unprepared: a Viscidity will subside and line the inside of the Guts, and
become a fit Nest for the Ova to take up their Residence in, and become a
Filter to the Chyle, whereby the Ova of larger Insects are detained, hatched,
come to Life, generate, and become the Parents of an innumerable Progeny.
Childrens incapacity for Exercise contributes its share to this; for their
Solids are weak and lax, and then their Food is not only such as abounds with
Ova, but as the Parents of these Ova have found it a proper Receptacle for
them, so their Offspring must find it exceedingly agreeable, viz. Milk, and the
farinaceous Foods. I could assign other Causes, but these are sufficient.
However, I deny that when we are Adult, our Stomachs are so very capable of
attenuating, breaking, and digesting the Particles of the Ova; for that is more
properly the Use of the Lungs, and the Effect of muscular Motion, to divide and
grind down such Moleculae, or small Bodies. But when all these have exerted
their utmost Force, still great Numbers of both Ova and Animalcula escape all
their Shocks; as is evident, 1st, From the Generation of Worms and Insects in
all parts of adult Bodies: 2ly. The Production of such Myriads of Insects in
dead Bodies in few Days, as quickly eat it up, especially if the Season be very
warm. Now that all these are Ova swimming in the Air, and falling upon, and
breeding in dead Carcases, I deny: for although these Insects may seize upon it
externally, yet far greater Numbers are produced from Ova and Insects within
the Carrion it self. This I am satisfied of from these Observations. 1st, I
have found incredible Numbers of these little Animals, generated and living in
the fleshy Parts of dead Bodies, where both Skin and Scarf Skin have been sound
and entire: this I have seen, especially in dead Fish, upon the Shore in
Summertime. 2ly, Take a dead Body in a hot Summer Season, and cover it up from
the Air, and you shall find that this will not wholly prevent the Growth of
Insects, only it will be longer before they breed, and arrive at their
Perfection; and no doubt fewer in Number, from the Deprivation of adventitious
Ova and Animalcula from the Air. 3ly, The Consumption of human Bodies in the
Grave, is a plain Proof of this; for let the Coffin be contrived never so
close, or the Grave deep, yet great Numbers of Vermin generate in the Body:
Here the deep Interment prevents the Accession or Addition of Ova from the Air,
and the closeness of the Coffin hinders their getting in from the Earth; for I
found in a Skull newly dug up out of a deep Grave (which had not been many
Years shut up) a great Multitude of small Worms of different kinds, tho the
Coffin was close and sound, till broken by the Sexton. I had lately under my
care a Woman who voided, every Day by Stool, a Multitude of Ascarides; she was
then past 40 Years of Age, and had been accustomed to this Evacuation every
Morning for several Years past. I was acquainted with a Gentleman, who
discharged every Morning at Stool many large Knots of them clean before the
Excrements, and yet both enjoyed a good State of Health, had a good Appetite
and Digestion: The first I recovered by prescribing a tedious Course of
Bitters, with daily Exercise; and the last by the Chalybeat Waters. I hope it
cannot be denied, that Dogs have as strong a Digestion as most Animals, and yet
they are never free from these Insects. This I think is sufficient to
invalidate the Strength of their Arguments, who affirm that the Force of adult
Stomachs hinders the Generation of Worms, by breaking and grinding down their
Eggs.

But now it remains in the last place, That I show how I suppose these
Animalcula to come at the Seminal Bladders of Youth, when come to Puberty; and
that is, (supposing them to come from without) the Number of Vessels in Infants
or Embrios is much greater than in Adults: as Children advance in Years, tho
the greater Vessels lengthen out and grow, yet the least become more compact,
their Diameters shorten, the quantity of Fluids admitted is still less, till at
last they refuse all Access to the Fluids, then close up, grow together, and
are changed into minute Fibers, which requiring less Space, give more Liberty
to the larger Vessels to expand themselves; their Compression being lessened,
their Canals are enlarged, they allow more and larger Particles of Fluids to
enter their Orifices, and move along their Tubes; the Membranes of the Vessels
being yet dilatable, and the contained Liquor pressing Vndiquaque, the
Diameters of the Vessels are lengthened, and their Orifices and Cavitys are
proportionably widened, and are capable to admit Particles of larger Diameters
than they could formerly receive; amongst which, not only Ova, but minute
Insects get along. And this appears to be truly the Case of the testicular
Strainers; for during Infancy, the natural Narrowness of these Pipes, and that
increased by innumerable small open Vessels, (which afterward vanish into
solid Fibers) render the Tubes so exceedingly small, that only so much insipid
Humor and Nourishment is suffered to enter, as suffices to keep open their
Cavity, and nourish their Parts. But when both their Cavity naturally
increased, and the small Vessels which wedge them in on every side have lost
their Cavity, then not only a greater Quantity of Liquor will pass them, but
Fluids consisting of larger Particles and Ova together with them. 2ly, We shall
add hereto the different sorts of Animalcula found in Water; Dr. Hook says,
that from his Microscopial Observations, eight Millions two Hundred and eighty
Thousand of living Creatures may be seen in one Drop of Water. And as these had
been too few, when he had procured finer Glasses, they not only magnified these
he had formerly discovered to a very great Magnitude, but observed others much
less than what he had formerly seen, and some of them so minute, that Millions
of Millions of them might be contained in one Drop of Water. Now if we consider
the State of the Testicles of Youth arrived at Puberty, I see no Difficulty why
we may not allow the Ova of these little Animals to pass, and even the
generated Animalcula themselves may make way, and be driven through all the
Turnings and Windings of the Testicles, till they come at the deferent Vessels,
and Seminal Bladders. How improbable is it to expect that the Stomach should
exert any considerable Force upon the Ova of such Insects? 3ly, Another
Presumption that the Cavity of the Testicular Glands is the Occasion of the
Admission of these Guests, is, because the mammillary Glands of the Breasts,
which separate the Milk from the Blood, give ready Passage to prodigious
Numbers of these Insects or their Ova, which may readily be discovered by the
help but of ordinary Glasses. Thus I have explained the Manner of the
Generation of Insects in human Bodies; it now remains that I should treat of the
use of these Seminal Worms, and enquire whether they are reasonably to be
reputed the Rudiments of a human Foetus, or whether each of them be an entire
and perfect Man, as Leewenhoeck and his Followers teach and believe. But this
would protract the present Discourse far beyond its designed Bounds: wherefore
I shall defer this Inquiry to another Opportunity.

ERRATA.
PAGE 5. l. 8, 9. r. guessing way of arguing, proceeded next. Ib. l. 24. for
fidisse r. vidisse. P. 7. l. 28. r. Comminution. P. 8. l. 12. and p. 9. l. ult.
and p. 11. l. 6. and p. 13. l. 14. for different r. deferent. P. 11. l. 19. r.
fruitful. P. 12. l. 23. r. they should. P. 14. l. 30, 31. r. it is more
ponderous, subsides in Water, etc. P. 18. l. pen. r. Ascarides. P. 20. l. 16.
r. pungent. P. 22. l. 29. r. the.

BOOKS printed for J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane.
HUman Nature vindicated; or, A Reply to Mr. Beaven's Book in vindication of
the fourth Proposition of Barclay's Apology.

A Supplement to the Vindication of God's Moral Character. These Two by Mr.
Chubb.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Causes and Effects of Corpulency; together
with its Prevention and Cure. By Tho Short, M. D.


