The ILL STATE of PHYSIC IN GREAT BRITAIN: Truly represented to all Lovers of
Health, and of their Country.

AND An APOLOGY for the Regular Physicians.

Fraudantur Medici, laudantur Pharmacopolae.
Pharmaca dat Celsus, dat Paracelsus opes.
(...)
LONDON: Sold by J. ROBERTS, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCCXXVII.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. OBjections answered, page 1 SECT. II. The Qualifications of a
Physician, page 10 SECT. III. Discouragements to study Physic in Oxford, page
14 SECT. IV. Men should follow nothing but what they are bred up to, page 17
SECT. V. The Disingenuity of the Apothecaries, and the ill Consequences
thereof, page 20 SECT. VI. The Impositions of the Chemists and Wholesale
Apothecaries, page 23 SECT. VII. Of Ungarbled Drugs, page 30 SECT. VIII. All
Apothecaries, the Practicing and Retale Apothecaries especially, take
insufferable Prices for the vilest Medicines, page 32 SECT. IX. Dispensatories
and Infirmaries recommended, page 35 SECT. X. The Apothecaries abuse the
College of Physicians, etc. Page 39 SECT. XI. Physicians that strike hands with
the Apothecaries, the only Men of Vogue, page 40 SECT. XII. Our Regular
Physicians not very well treated at the College of Physicians, etc. page 43
SECT. XIII. The ill Consequences of the Bishops granting Licenses, etc. page 49
SECT. XIV. The bad State of Physic in the Country, page 50 SECT. XV. Country
Apothecaries keep but few, and those very often bad Medicines, page 56 SECT.
XVI. Barber-Surgeons aspire to be eminent Doctors, page 61 SECT. XVII. A Remedy
against these Epidemical Evils proposed, page 64
THE PREFACE.
THE following Observations and Complaints of the ill State and Male-Practice
of Physic in Great Britain, were at first intended to appear in another Dress;
and by way of Appeal to our neighboring Nations, where that noble and
necessary Art is said to be exercised in a more regular and beneficial manner.
For Bystanders, who are not heated by Animosities and personal Reflections, who
are not interested in a Debate, and have no Party-Quarrel to maintain, are the
fittest Persons to examine and determine the Reasonableness of the Cause; and
as their Passions are calmer and more moderate, so their Decisions are likely
to be more just and equal, and agreeable to Truth, than the Sentiments of those
People, who are more nearly concerned. But when I considered, that all national
Grievances, (and certainly the Abuse of this excellent Faculty is a very great
one!) ought rather to be corrected at home, than exposed abroad; that the
Mismanagement and Dishonesty of many should not procure the Condemnation of
all; and Offenders only should suffer; and that they too could not be legally
restrained and punished, but by the Legislative Powers; I had Thoughts of
addressing them to a Worthy Patriot, who might, in Parliament, have procured a
Redress of as many of them at least, as the Wisdom of the Nation might think
worth their Cognizance. Yet considering how far that August Assembly is
embarrass'd and engaged in the more arduous and difficult Affairs of the
Nation, and likewise the Temper and Taste of my intended Patron; the one so
exquisite and distinguishing, that scarce a Word could drop from the Pen
without the Terror of Reprehension; and the other so moderated, that had I
attempted to make way for a favorable Reception by (the common Method in
Dedications) reciting but few of his real Accomplishments, it would scarce have
been looked upon as a just Encomium. I resolved at length therefore to
adventure into a censorious World these rude Papers, containing little else but
Matters of Fact as naked Truths, without any Vmbrage or Defense; and think,
these Difficulties presenting, the giving my Reasons for making no Dedication,
is Dedication enough. For in all Disquisitions about Truth, it is not the
Greatness, the Authority, and Weight of the Advocate, but of his Arguments and
Proofs, that is the Point to be minded; and the more plain and unadorned his
Discourse is, the greater Air of Veracity it has. For which reason I shall no
more be at the pains to make any Apology for the loose Composition and careless
Diction of this Pamphlet, than I shall think my self obliged to answer the
unreasonable Cavils, and loud Clamours that may be raised by self-interested
and dishonest Men against it: Reasons of this Work. 1st.
Thinking that I shall have sufficiently discharged my Conscience, in detecting
their Dishonesty; and that it is not in their Power to say much in their own
Vindication, without exposing more of their own Disingenuity and Baseness, to
the Judicious especially, and discerning Part of Mankind. Neither shall I think
it any Reflection, that others have offered the same Things in a better manner;
but rather as a Confirmation of what I say; that makes what I here deliver,
appear with the greater Force of Evidence.

Though it must be acknowledged, that Matters go not so well with the World, as
that most Voices should be on the best Side; and such Persons as are Slaves to
their Lusts, indolent, ignorant and credulous, take up with the Opinions and
Ways in fashion without much Examination; and thus are easily led on to their
own Disadvantage, and sometimes Destruction, by Men of corrupt Minds, whose
sole Advantage lies in Cheat and Imposition, and who, of consequence, have also
a burning Hatred to plain, open, and fair Dealing, and to the Truth: and from
whom her strictest Followers must expect to meet with the severest Usage. The
Truths even of the Holy Gospel have generally been on the suffering Side. And
when I see those, promulged for the Salvation of Souls, have met with such bad
Treatment, how can I expect that these, of less Importance, calculated only for
the Safety of the Body, should find a more gracious Reception?

But if I am guilty of any Breach of good Manners, in meddling with other Men's
Morals, Means of living, and Interests, I am sorry for it. And if in my
Enquiries I have been any way imposed upon, and led into Mistakes; or have been
too impertinent and tedious, too clamorous and severe, I humbly beg pardon, and
submit to the Correction of my legal Superiors, assuring them, that I speak no
Falsehoods, to the best of my Understanding and Knowledge; and as I had no
Pleasure in finding out, so I have no Profit in publishing the following
Disorders; which indeed have, 2d.
of long time, been no Secrets to Multitudes of suffering People, who have
hitherto complained in vain, and groan under unsufferable Oppressions that they
would gladly get rid of, if they knew where or how they could be relieved, and
which have been discovered by many worthy Physicians. 3d.
But then they have touched these Sores too tenderly; either fearing too much
the Resentment of those People, who would not have them healed; or, finding it
a Difficulty to set Men right, who go wrong out of Choice and Interest,
surmounting all their Endeavors; and that I have no Ends in giving myself and
others this Trouble, but what are just and honest, and designed sincerely for
the common Good and Welfare of Mankind.

And as true Honesty, that is, 4th.
Integrity of Heart and Life, is the first, the chief, and fundamental Point of
true Wisdom; so it is likewise, when applied to our Occupations and
Professions, Trade and Commerce; the only sure Basis thereof, the most
preferable thing, and to be regarded above Gain. On the contrary; As all
unaccountable Ways of Livelihood, all Extortion and unreasonable Profit, are
certainly dishonest; so more especially when the Life and Health, as well as
the Estate of our Neighbor is endangered thereby, they become obnoxious, and
ought to be condemned and rejected as intolerable. And, as says a grave and
learned Et si ad honestatem nati sumus, ea aut sola expetenda est, aut certe
omni pondere gravior est habenda. Tull.
Author, "There are just Reasons, why Men that are notorious for any Vice or
Crime should be exposed and represented as they deserve, not only to prevent
others from falling into their Hands, and suffering by their Wickedness; but
that they may undergo that Shame and Reproach, which ever must be the Portion
of ill Men".

To pretend to put a stop to male Practice in Physic, is a bold Undertaking:
and notwithstanding it may, for these Reasons, appear very necessary and
commendable to some; yet as it may be thought by a prevailing Majority, to
proceed rather from Spite or Disgust than Discretion, it may chance to ruin him
that will he so hardy as to attempt it.

But since I am induced to lay open the Faults and Frauds of it, 5th.
for the sake of Justice and Charity itself; let the Event be what it will, I
resolve to persevere in this honest Disquisition, though I gain nothing thereby,
but that Peace of Mind, that proceeds necessarily from the Reflection that I
have done my Duty.

The most innocent, as well as the most serviceable and best Parts of a Man's
Life, are frequently misunderstood, and highly censured. Yet, because I know my
Intentions are founded upon a good Bottom, I may still hope that they will
discover themselves, and be justified by all in the Conclusion: Being satisfied
that what I shall deliver has Truth on its Side, (so far as I am able to come
at the Knowledge thereof) which is the best Patron; and under that Protection I
leave it.

The ILL STATE of PHYSIC IN GREAT BRITAIN.
SECT. I.
Objections answered.
HAVING gone thus far by way of Preface, I still find that I am obliged to
remove an Objection or two that lie against myself, before I proceed far in
those that I shall offer against the Men that abuse this Noble Science; and
likewise to premise something of the Difficulty to attain a competent Knowledge
in it. There are some inquisitive People, who will needs know how I came by
these dismal, ill-natured Accounts of the Maladministration of Physic? To
whom I reply: Dear-bought Experience, the most faithful Informer, has for the
most part (though I must acknowledge some things are taken upon Trust and
Narrative; but then of such Persons, whose Insight and Veracity I esteemed
altogether equal to my own Knowledge) has, I say, led me into these sad
Secrets. For being a Piece of a Physician myself, who have had a liberal
Education in one of our own celebrated Universities, and performed (though
perfunctorily I must confess with Compunction) all the Exercises there required
to be done for the last Degree that a Student can be honored with in that
Academy; who have spent some Years in the Wholesale Apothecaries Shops in
London, where I had an Opportunity of examining into their adulterate and
deadly Compositions, of seeing too many of their unfaithful Dispensations; and
have been a Practitioner of above twenty Years standing, (for some time in the
Country, but for the major Part) in this grand Metropolis, and consequently
could not well avoid being not only Ear, but more frequently an Eyewitness of
those horrid Practices, (as one ingenuous and faithful Apothecary, who could
hardly ever be prevailed upon to leave his proper Business in his Shop, to
intrude into the sick Chambers, was used to call them) that introduce such vast
Swarms of impudent Empiricks into Credit with the unthinking Multitude, and
unwary People, and discourage and disgrace the true Physicians, as well as
deprive them of their just Rights, and lawful Emoluments.

And here I need not descend to Particulars; this whole Discourse being
intende^ against these ignorant Pretenders to this learned Art in general, some
of their Disqualifi^cations will necessarily occur in every Paragraph: But for
Show of some Method, I chus^ to speak to the Formalist in the first place. The
Formalist condemned.
And it is easy to demonstrate, that he, who is merely such, and that takes all
for granted that he finds recommended to him by Authors, Nemo ex libris evasit
artifex.
and practices by their Schemes, and can use no other than their Prescriptions,
will never make any thing on it, never be a good and honest Physician. To what
Errors do Men expose themselves through Prejudice? and to how many more through
a blind Submission to a reputed Authority? Does not every Day's Experience
convince us, that the same Remedy applied to the same Disease may be successful
in some Constitutions, and fatal in others Illud ignorari non opertet, quod non
minibus aegris eadem auxilia convenient: non omnibus, etiam in similibus
casibus optulantur. Cells.
? This deserves to be insisted on more at large in our present Subject; which,
as I I doubt it will not prove very entertaining, I shall endeavor to contract
into as narrow a Compass as may be.

Such Practicers then, it is to be suspected, are more frequently obliged to
bring the Symptoms of Diseases to their Receipts, than accommodate their
Receipts to the Diseases. Such a Medicine-monger, qui medicinam ab usu tantum
and experimentis novit and tractat, non ex causis naturalibus; who fetches his
Skill therein, not from natural Causes, but from his own injudicious Use of it,
and bold Experiments, is justly called by the learned Celsus an Empiric. Those
who are not really Masters of this Science, but practice barely upon Receipts,
and those that have obtained only Notions from Books or Imagination, instead of
a true and accurate Information of the Laws of the animal Economy, will ever
be perplexed in the Mists of Fancy, and be much more likely to do hurt than
good, by putting Nature out of her way by the Force of Ignorance. Such Men have
little regard to the Caution Medici est, ci^o, tuto, and jocunde curare.
given by Asclepiades, That it is the Duty of a Physician not only to cure as
soon as may be, but to take care that his Medicines are safe, as well as
palatable; nor to the Admonition of Hippocrates, That the Physician be
perpetually upon his Guard, exert his utmost Skill and Endeavors to do good,
and take care that by his wrong Administration nothing of harm befall his
Patient. It Is better to wait, to observe, and give nothing, where there is
Cause to doubt, than venture to give what may prove wrong. And it were to be
wished, there was not, by the great Numbers of Medicines flung in at random,
perhaps to please, or to amuse, (not to mention some less honorable Ends) more
Destruction made, than by Distempers themselves.

Honesty ought to be the only Basis and Rule of the Art of Physic.
And if any Faculty is so far imperfect in or so much corrupted by those that
practice it, that a Man must be forced to play little Tricks, and to make
wonderful Pretenses to those things that are not, and to what he is utterly
ignorant of, to support his Credit in his Calling; and must cheat other People
not only of their Money, but sometimes of their Lives too, that he may get
himself a Livelihood: certainly that Art, and the Followers of it, ought to be
banished from amongst Men, to be suppressed as a Cheat and Imposture. For the
Good of Mankind, and honest Gain, is the only Bottom (as I have before
observed) upon which every Trade and Science is set on foot: And he who cannot
live honestly, that is, give a just and satisfactory Account how he lives,
should not be suffered to live. Prevertunt homines ea, quae sunt Fundamenta
Natureae, cum utilitatem ab Honestate sejungunt. Pretio aut mercede ducuntur --
quae sordidissima quidem est ratio and iis, qui ca tenentur, and illis, qui ad
eam confugere conantur. Tul.
When Men dissever Profit from Honesty, they subvert the Foundations of the
Laws of Nature, and break all the Bands of Society and public Credit. Tully
calls this a most sordid and corrupt way of living, etc. When our Profession
recedes from this Rule, and open, fair Maxims; when it must be carried on by
Frauds, and gross Ignorance must be varnished over with Pretenses to rare
Secrets, Nostrums, Philosophical Preparations, etc. then we ought presently to
suspect and avoid those, that would cheat us of the most dear thing to us in
this Life, our Health, without being able to give any other Account of their
Process, than what is wrapped up in such unintelligible Cant and Jargon. 'Twas
long ago the Complaint of Hippocrates, That because such pass, with those that
distinguish no better, for Physicians, on account of their Want of real
Accomplishments, the Art, that is of all others most excellent, is brought into
Disesteem and Neglect: But yet such, we see, commonly are the most tenacious
and secure in their own Ways. And as the Great Celsus says of such, Verba
supecresse, desse medendi scientiam; how defective soever they may be as to
their real Knowledge, they are usually the most talkative and ostentatious, and
take all Occasions to decry others of more Knowledge and Sincerity; being as
unwilling to introduce Reason into Physic, as some are to admit it into
Religion.

It Is difficult for an honest Physician live.
It Is a needless (as well as a too tedious) Task to recite all that has been
offered on this Head, by conscientions Physicians, in im their own Vindication,
and in order to detect such impudent Impostors. And it is a lamentable
Observation, That a Physician, now adays, who has been regularly educated in
one of our famous Universities, and has given reasonable and legal Tests of
his Qualification, has, after all, his Way to make through a vast Crowd, and
superior Numbers, who have no other Support but superficial Pretenses, backed
by consummate Assurance, and all the insinuating Arts of Imposition, received
greedily by an unthinking People. The honest and truly instructed Sons of
Aesculapius need not have recourse to such Subterfuges: 'They can, it is to be
hoped, give a Rationale of their Practice.

But the more I consider these things, the more I admire how an Apothecary can
commence Physician from the Doctor's Bills that hang upon his File! Yet this
prating Monster is produced every Day, not only in the Country Towns, but the
greatest Cities, and Places of Wealth and Concourse, and with Impunity, and
most impudently jostles out of place the modest Physician; assuming this
ostentatious Motto, Opiferque per orbem dicor. For which Presumption he
deserves the Fate of Python from the Hand of Apollo. As if a slight Knowledge
(as a learned Gentleman observes) gathered from a few modern Systems, or by
consulting Dispensatories, and perusing their musty Files, or spending some
time in Hospitals, would sufficiently qualify a Man to sit upon Life and Death.
Whereas no Man's own Experience is sufficient to make him a Master of the Art
of Physic: He must take in also the Experience of former Ages, as well as his
own. "I don't see (says the above quoted Author) how any honest Man can
satisfy himself with a little superficial Inspection into our present Modes of
Practice, and neglect the ancient and best Writers in our Profession".

It Is difficult to attain to the Art of Healing; to be a good Physician
Though it is one of the greatest Difficulties to find out proper and certain
Methods of Cure; and this Difficulty that attends the Attainment of a competent
Knowledge in the Art of Healing, is surely sufficient to deter any considering
and just Man from invading the Offices of it, without regular and cautious
Instructions therein; with what abundant Application, with what conscientious
Circumspection and Preparation of Mind should we set about the Duties of this
sacred Art, when we hear what the great and judicious Celsus pronounces of the
Uncertainty of its Rules and Trecepts Medicina vix ulla perpetua Praecepta
recipit, etc.
? No (...) must pass amongst Physicians. There is no Infallibility in our
Science. It Is sufficient for us to know Properties, not Textures; to know the
peculiar Attributes, and not the Essence of Things. God reserves these Secrets
to himself, and leaves us room to admire. It Is enough for us to know the
Properties of Bodies, without knowing the Causes of those Properties. Though we
may search into the Causes without Offense, yet we rarely do it to our
Satisfaction.

Do we satisfy our selves when we pretend to reason upon many Phenomenon
occuring in natural Philosophy? which agrees, that Qualities or Properties,
whether universal, particular, or occult, may be discovered, though their Way of
operating cannot be explained by us. And there are certain Textures in Bodies
we are absolutely ignorant of, whose Qualities however we are well acquainted
with. To instance; those of the Loadstone, Mercury, Opium, and that
unparalled Specific (...): And the Discovery of it was sent from Heaven.
Remedy, as it is deservedly called, the Peruvian Bark, etc. Who can account
for the attractive Virtue of the Magnet, for the Flux or Tides of the Sea? Who
can tell the Use and Nature of the Stars, any more than he can tell the Number
of them? Who can explain how the Accretion and Auction of Plants and Animals
are performed? Who can find all the Tubes, and Liquors moving in them, that
compose an human Body? And who can tell how the animal and rational Soul are
united? It must be confessed, we know no farther of the Union between Soul and
Body, than that if there be an harmonious Proportion between the Fluids and
Solids, our Senses are vigorous; but are disturbed where they fall short of, or
exceed the natural Constitution. As most, if not all the former of these things
are beyond the Knowledge of the Physcian, so the Union of the Soul and Body is
a Secret the wisest and most devout Divine does not pretend to penetrate, nor
to explain the Difficulties that attend it. But that the Body has an Influence
upon the Soul, and the Notices and Conceptions of the Understanding have a
Tincture from the Matter of which the Body is formed, is manifest. "I must
declare, (says a very great Man) That I do not find it possible for any Person
to give such an exact and satisfactory Account, as might be wished for, either
of the Make or Constitution of our Bodies, or of the Disposition and Relation
of the inward Parts, or of the Instruments of Nature for the Preservation of
the Individual or Species, or of the Diseases they are subject to, or of the
most proper Methods of Cure". The more a Man searches into the mechanical
Attempts of this kind, the more unsatisfied he will find himself about them;
and will find reason to conclude, that we may know enough for our general
Direction what to do, but that the secret Causes are so hidden from us, as we
have reason to admire the Supreme Artificer in what we know, and to adore him
in what we do not know. In short, we know many times that such a thing will
have such an Effect, or perhaps that such an Effect is produced by such a
Cause, but the manner how we know not, or but grossly: And if such an
Hypothesis be true, it is impossible for us to Come at the true Principles of
Things, or to see into the Economy of the finest Parts of Nature, and Workings
of the first Springs. The internal Constitution of most things, the subtilest
Parts of Matter, are hid from us, and our Philosophy dwells only in the Surface
of Nature. And here I must say, as St. Augustine once did of Purgatory Ego certe
usquead hoc tempus, cum inde sategerem, ad eorum indaginem pervenire non potui.
"I could never, notwithstanding great Study, attain to the perfect Knowledge
of these things". Hence we may rightly infer how dubious our Art is.

And I wish we could cure with a few, and those simple Medicines only; a Cup of
cold Water rightly applied. And I should esteem myself worth some Notice, if I
could establ^s^ but a few Certainties in my Profession for the Good of Mankind,
though I became poor for my pains in the Discovery. And this ought to be the Aim
of every conscientious Physician, who rightly considers the modern Methods of
Practice; and that one of the greates^ Uncertainties and Difficulties that he
mee^ with, is, how to be secure, that what he orders for the Sick, shall be
truly prepared. For though he prescribe never so delicate and pertinent a
Medicine, yet he will find it is in the Apothecaries Power to use one thing for
another, Vid. Sect. 14.
(and they are very dextrous at finding out Succedaneums) and he never the
wiser, till he has purchased his Knowledge and Experience with the Loss of his
Patient, or certainly of his own Reputation.

SECT. II.
The Qualifications of a Physician.
HAVING given these Hints of the Difficulties that attend the Study of Physic,
and that disqualify many, who presume to intrude themselves into the Practice
of it; it may not be altogether impertinent to delineate a true Physician, to
show what, amongst all these Uncertainties, is absolutely necessary for him
certainly to know; and what must be his real Qualifications and
Accomplishments. And though I have insinuated how dark and uncertain all
physical Knowledge is, that the Professors thereof oftentimes lose themselves,
and wander they know not where; they seek the Depth of natural Causes, the
Change of the Elements, the Impressions of the Air, the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies, of the Planets, and their Proportions and Influences; they
search the Mines in the Bowels of the Earth, and dive into the Bottom of the
Sea; they dissect the Body of Man, look into the Womb, and enquire into the
Manner and Causes of his Procreation and Nutriment, Preservation and Decay;
follow the Food from the Mouth to the Stomach, and the Chyle from thence to the
Lacteal Vessels, and their Infertion into the Veins; they search the Glands,
and trace the Arteries and Nerves, that they may know the Vessels, and the
Liquids and Fluids moving in them, of which the human Fabric is composed; that
we call Blood, and animal Spirits. And so they go on till they lose themselves,
their Senses, all ocular Demonstrations, and can find nothing but the
unsearchable Works of an Omnipotent Creator. Yet, I say, it is in the first
place necessary, that the Student in Physic make himself very well versed in
natural Philosophy; for it is generally remarked, Ubi definit Philosophus,
incipit Medicus; and he that will undertake the Art of Healing, must understand
not only the general, but also the particular Subjects thereof; not only the
sound Frame of an human Body, but the Diseases thereof, and those Remedies that
are indicated from the Causes and Symptoms of them. Hence we infer, that he
must understand Anatomy, which shows him the Figure, Position, and Use of every
Part of our Bodies, as they are in their natural State of Health. Secondly,
Pathology and Aetiology, which treat of the Difference, Causes and Symptoms of
all Diseases. Thirdly, Physiology, or the Knowledge of simple Medicines, that
are supplied to us by Nature; and this also shows the Strength and Virtue of
each Medicament. He must understand Pharmacy, both Galenical and Chemical; he
must know Herbs and Drugs, and all the Spagyrical Preparations of them; that by
knowing how to mix Simples in a just and right Proportion, he may prepare
compound Medicines to supply the Defects of the simple. Thus an expert
Physician should not only very well know the containing, but the contained
Parts also of an human Body; and be well versed in the Causes Pertiner ad rem
omnium Proprietates noscere non credunt posse eum scire quomodo morbos curare
conveniat, qui unde hi sint ignoret. Celsus.
and Symptoms of all Distempers. He must know the Virtues and Strength of all
Medicines, simple and compound, and how to apply them seasonably, and in due
Proportion. Hic labor, hoc opus: An hard Task truly! and enough to discourage
the young Student, who may have reason, upon this short View of his tedious
Undertaking, to apply the (...), etc. Vita brevis, ars longa, occasio celer,
experimentum periculosum, judicium difficile, etc.
Words of the great Father of the Faculty, who complained that the whole Life
of Man was too short a time for his Accomplishment in this Art. And hence too
we may very justly conclude with the learned Celsus, That of all Men living a
Physician has need of the highest Wisdom and Consideration: That every
thoughtless Animal is by no means capable of the Practice of this noble Art,
that is entrusted with the Superintendence over the Health and Life of Man. The
Empiricks, says he, contend, that the Search into the Procedure of Nature, and
the dark Causes of Things, was needless; since it was not of use to know what
might bring on a Disease, but what would take it off. But the learned and more
rational Practitioners were firmly persuaded, that it was not possible for any
one to know in what manner to set about the Cure of Distempers, who was
altogether unacquainted whence they proceed; and Eum vero recte curaturum, quem
prima origo causae non sefellerit.
that he alone could do that with Success, who had thoroughly informed himself
of the Causes of them. In the ancient Days, these were thought the
Qualifications generally necessary to the Faculty. But methinks a Christian
Physician requires something more in his Composition; and that he ought not
only to be Master of all these Arts and Sciences, but deserve also this
Commendation wheresoever he appears, The Accomplishments of a good Physician.
viz.

Vir eruditus, sobrius, urbanus, clemens, moribus integris, assiduus, foelix,
Deo fretus, non audax, non avarus.

These ten excellent Endowments being requisite to denominate a good Physician,
it cannot be justly supposed that he can so well attain the same by any other
Means, as by a liberal and pious Education; and without going through a
regular, careful, and well-directed Course of Studies.

SECT. III.
Discouragements to study Physic in Oxford.
AND this leads me, in the next place, to take notice of some Discouragements to
young Gentlemen to enter upon this Faculty, in Oxford especially. In that they
are obliged to take the Degrees of Bachelor and Master of Arts, before they
can there be admitted upon the Physic Line; and must then take the Degree of
Bachelor of Physic (and that after ten Years Residence) before they can be
qualified regularly to hear the public Professor; which too they must do for
full four Years longer, and be also full fourteen Years standing before they
can commence Doctors. This tedious Continuance in the University, as well as
the Exercises for those four Degrees, cannot but be attended with abundance of
Charge and Trouble. But whilst they see, in the mean time, their Brethren at
Cambridge take their Degree of Bachelor of Physic at seven Years standing;
and after that, not be obliged to Residence; and at ten Years standing put on
their Doctor's Gown: though their Time spent in the University is no longer than
that required for the Degree of a Bachelor of Physic in Oxford, and their
Tests of Probation no more expensive nor difficult than his. The Degree of
Bachelor of Physic in Oxford, tantamount to that of Doctor in Cambridge.
The Preference indeed is rather his Due upon these Accounts, when it is
considered that he takes three Degrees, performs the Exercises required
thereto, and is consequently at a far greater Expense of Money, and the same of
Time, as they are at for their Completion, or taking their Doctors Degree: To
which if the Oxford Gentlemen proceed, as they take more Degrees, so are they
in proportion at far greater Charges. And what is far more aggravating, when
they see People, that are bred in private Academies, (and thence removed to
Padua, Leyden, or Utrecht, to Edinburgh or Glascow, where in less than four or
five Years Space they shall be dubbed Doctors) intrude themselves into Places
of Resort and Practice, and by the unthinking, major Part of Mankind be
caressed, and preferred before our homebred Physicians, merely for their
Pretenses to more Skill acquired by a foreign, Regular and homebred Physicians
postponed.
though a much cheaper and shorter Way of Education: They cannot, I say, help
being affected with some Uneasiness and Disgust, to see themselves thus
injustly obviated in their Pretenses, and postponed.

And as theUniversities of other Nations are to be blamed for crowding in upon
us such Clusters of mere Novices, (or rather our Laws for suffering them so to
do;) so are our own for not better regulating their Methods of Study, and not
making the Degrees of Physic less expensive. It might be more advantageous for
the Oxford Students in this Art, if for the two first Years they applied
themselves to the Study of Logic, moral Philosophy, Politics, aliisque
humanioribus literis, etc. and for five more they should not only hear the
public Lectures, but the Professor should direct the Course of their Studies;
and by taking them with him into the sick Chambers, should inform them how to
apply the Theory in their Practice; and not suffer the young Men to go on in
their own injudicious Methods before they commence Batchelors of Physic: Which
should be at seven Years standing; and after that time so strict a Residence
should not be insisted on: and at ten Years standing they might assume the
Scarlet, having first performed all the Exercises for the several previous
Degrees, as by the Statutes are now required, as well as for that; and being
strictly examined, as to their Proficience and Knowledge in all the several
aforementioned necessary Qualifications.

But our public Professors (whether through Negligence or Want of sufficient
Salaries to encourage them) seem very indifferent how the public Exercises are
performed; and give themselves no trouble in directing the Students, either in
a regular and expeditious Method of Study, or in the usual way of Application
of Medicines, and the Rules of Practice. Or, if this were too much for our
Professors to undertake, a Catalogue of Authors they might readily exhibit;
and, out of Conscience, scrutiny and examine more narrowly into the Abilities
of those they present to their Degrees in this Faculty: Or, surely there seems
great need of some other able Men, who should be appointed to try and judge who
are fit to prescribe and administer Physic, before they are rashly admitted to
Practice.

SECT. IV.
Men should follow nothing but what they are bred up to.
FOR certainly the Law of Nature, and well ordered Commonwealths, do require,
that every ignorant Man who thinks himself skilful, should not play the
Physician, Vid.. 14, 16, 17.
lest he kill Men. Formerly in England any Man might use what Trade, and as
many Trades as he could: But in time the Public being damnified, and Trade in
general injured by this Liberty, such Persons, and those that followed
Occupations to which they were not bred, were first restrained, Stat. 37 Ed. 3.
and again by Stat. 5 Eliz. under a Penalty. This Law, that a Person should not
employ himself in any other Business than what he was bred to, was made to
encourage Skilfulness, and that Youth might be regularly brought up in some
lawful Trade. How an unqualified Practicer of Physic should be punished.
And the same Reason holds good with respect to the exercising the Faculties in
the liberal Sciences; And we have Academical Statutes made accordingly, which
say, That those that are not qualified as there directed Sicut Perturbator
Pacis puniatur.
, should be punished as Rioters and Breakers of the Peace. But they are not
much regarded, out of the University especially, to the great Injury of
Physicians. And thus, or worse, all Quacks certainly deserve to be treated.
Vid. sect;. 14. Vid.. 12.
For if they can practice, and get the Bread of learned Physicians, who have
spent many hundred Pounds, and so many Years Labor and Study; nay, many of
them the most vigorous and active Parts of their Lives, to obtain these
Privileges, to what purpose is it to study Physic in our Universities! This
does but prejudice them. They spend their whole Fortunes to obtain a Degree,
and a Diploma Liberam Tibi tenore praesentium concedimus Potestatem, and
Facultatem practicandi in medicina, and ea omnia faciendi, quae ad eam spectant
Facul^atem, ubivis per universum Angliae Regnum, in perpetuum duraturam, etc.
Vid.. 12.
, or Power and Authority to exercise their Faculty all over the Kingdom, etc.
and then have the Mortification to see an Apothecary, a Surgeon, a poor Vicar,
an idle Schoolmaster, a strolling Stage Player, a Tooth-drawer, a Pickpocket
(for Reasons best known to themselves, sometimes leaving their proper Stations,
and mounting a Jointstool, as others a spotted Horse) cum multis aliis, assume
his Title and Dignity of Degree, invade his Province, and take his Gain or
Praemium!

I wish I have not in this Remark upon the irregular Methods taken in the Study
of Physic in the Universities, discovered a vicious Ferment in the Stomach,
that makes the Mother's sweet Milk turn sour, and unfit for Digestion; and in
my Advice for the rectifying the same, shown my Inability to propound any thing
that may may tend to the Advantage of the Faculty; and can only hope, that my
Willingness to do them Service may not be rejected with Indignation and
Contempt. Indeed I know but little; but that little, that Mite, I am ready to
communicate. It Is a vulgar Proverb, Every Fool can find a Fault, but many wise
Men cannot mend one: Yet he is a weak Physician indeed, that can discover a
Malady, but cannot apply the smallest Remedy. It Is the Duty of every honest Man
to put a stop to growing Evils.
And what the great Celsus says in respect to healing the Body, I may too, in
order to the Relief of the sick, politic State of our Faculty, Satius est
anceps experiri auxilium, quam nullum: It is better to try a doubtful Remedy,
than none at all. When any particular Fault or Crime creeps into the Public,
into any Order, Profession, or Society of Men, every honest Man ought to think
himself obliged to exhibit, in his way, some salutary Medicine to prevent its
growing epidemical, and infecting the Community. For if it once get the
Sanction of a Majority, Custom will make it a Law. Therefore, as I proceed to
detect what is unjust, dishonest, and of mischievous Consequence, with relation
to any the most inferior Branches of the Art of Physic, I shall likewise
intimate the best Means that I can think of to put a stop to our
Mismanagements, and prevent our growing Dangers: And if I fail of Success, I
hope my fruitless and weak Efforts may animate some more experienced and able
Hand to produce better.

It Is true, there are Persons able, and some willing to reprehend these
Delinquents that are found amongst us, and that combine against us. But since
all Endeavors to reclaim the most formidable Enemies of the Faculty have
proved ineffectual; and they have not been so attacked yet, but that they have
kept themselves out of reach, it may be of some Use to expose the vile Arts
that are found to be exercised amongst them. But before I entered into their
dirty Laboratories, I thought it might not be amiss to recollect some very
indifferent Treatment, that the Members of this learned Faculty offer to one
another, and the bad Reception that many of our regular, academical Physicians
have met with at the College of Physicians in London; Vid.. 8, 10, 12.
had I not been pretty well assured, that the base Practices of the
Apothecaries were the principal Cause of the Misunderstanding that is so
manifest amongst these Gentlemen, who ought to love as Brethren; and this in
some sort obliges me (if I would not act so preposterously, as to postpone
Causes to their Effects) to speak of their Disingenuity in the first place.

SECT. V.
The Disingenuity of the Apothecaries, and the ill Consequences thereof.
AND it is notorious, that the Men of this Art are not altogether so just and
ingenuous, as most of them profess and ought to be. They do not always prepare
their Medicines according to the Dispensatory of the Royal College of
Physicians; but more frequently follow new Methods of their own, much more
adapted to their own unreasonable Advantage; making use of one Drug for
another, and frequently of corrupt Drugs, although they hereby endanger, nay
quite effect, the Destruction of the Medicine to all Intents and Purposes, for
which it was at the first invented and composed. There are very few Medicines
that they don't adulterate, and fewer that they make up faithfully; and no
conscientious and honest Man, who sees these Faults, can avoid Complaints. To
instance in a few Particulars.

Of Simple Waters.
I need not mention their Methods to make Simple Waters more insipid than they
naturally are; not only because they are apt to make two or three supply the
place of all the rest, but because many of them have but very little Efficacy:
of which they seem to be very sensible, when in diluting and emulsive Juleps,
instead of using the specific Waters therein prescribed, they commonly mix up
Spring, or more frequently Thames Water; which, The Excellency of Thames Water.
notwithstanding it is so excellent in itself, that I have tasted some of it
that has been carried to the East Indies and back again uncorrupted, is a
notorious Cheat put upon the Patient, who pays an extravagant Rate for the
same. An Apothecary in Bishopsgatestreet, upon a time, correcting his Boy for
turning away a Customer that enquired for Plantane Water, said, Sirrah! though
you could find no Aqua Plantaginis in the Shop, if you had stepped into the
Back-yard, you might have found Aqua Pumpaginis enough, and that would have
served as well. But whether he, or Marggrave the Professor of Chemistry at
Leyden, is most to be credited, I shall not debate. This learned Artist said,
Plantane Water, and the Preparations of it, was the greatest Febrifugium that
he knew of, either Chemical or Galenical. I have heard another Apothecary
boast, that the took 100 l. per Ann. for Dr. Cole's Aqua Saxonica, i. e. Spring
Water. Indeed little Dependence is to be made upon Simple Waters; they serving
only to convey into the Stomach some other Medicine of more Virtue, that being
nakedly administered would be very nauseous; and the more free from any
physical Taste such Vehicle is, the better it is of consequence. But then if
Fountain Water is made use of for this purpose that God sends gratis, why
should the sordid Apothecary take Money for it!

Of Infusions.
Teas or Infusions of many of the Herbs that the common Simple Waters are
distilled from, may be made ex tempore; and as such are more efficacious than
the distilled Waters, so they are not more ungrateful to the Patients weak
Stomachs, who may readily prepare them themselves by the Physician's
Direction^, and save the Charges that the Apothecaries would otherwise put them
to. Mr. Smith, in his complete Body of Distilling, says, That the Surfeit
Water made by Infusion in the best Brandy is superior to any other that is
distilled; and seems much to favor this way of preparing Compound Waters.
Indeed there are so many of them adulterated in Distilling, that it would be
too tedious to remark; and how many of the Ingredients, Herbs, Roots, Seeds,
etc. that ought to be put into them, are omitted.

Of Compound Waters, Spirits, etc.
How desirable is it to have our Compound Peony Water, Wormwood, Treacle,
Plague, Cinnamon, and Bryony Waters, etc. drawn off with the best French Brandy
only, according to the last London Dispensatory of 1721. (wherein many useless
Medicines that were crept into former Dispensatories are rejected, and the
necessary ones made up after a better manner.) But instead of French Brandy,
our Apothecaries make use of English Malt Spirits, and esteem and boast these
Medicinal Waters very extraordinary. Good indeed, if they use Molossus Spirits
in the preparing of them; yet they charge as much for them when retaled out by
the Ounce, or in Cordial Juleps, etc. as if they were made with the best Nantz.
Though were these Wholesale Dealers content with the Profits, that Mr. Smith
calculates to arise from most of their Goods of this sort, they are incredibly
great, even extravagant. But, says he, Apothecaries will sell nothing at a
moderate Rate.

SECT. VI.
The Impositions of the Chemists and Wholesale Apothecaries.
SPirits of Saffron, Castor, Lavender compound, etc. have no better Fate, with
many others, (and Tinctures also) too many to enumerate. But these last are
generally prepared by the Chemists, and sold by them to the Apothecaries; as
also most Salts, Oils, Resins, etc. And though most of these may be discovered
generally by their Color, Smell, or Taste; yet the Mixture and Adulteration of
chemical Medicines is so gross and frequent, that it is hard to say, whether
the Chemical or Galenical Operators have justly suffered most in their
Reputation; which is of small account, if compared with the Disappointments the
honest Physicians meet with upon this score, and the Loss of their Patients
Lives to boot. And what but wretched Avarice is the Cause of all this Mischief!
For which they might have some poor Pretense, did they sell their adulterate
Medicines cheaper in Proportion: But on the contrary, they keep up their Prices
of these adulterate Medicines as high as if they were genuine, especially in
the Retale Utterance of them to the deluded Patient. And many of the Country
Apothecaries, and of the Druggists too, know not when they are imposed upon by
these Wholesale Dealers; or if they do, are no farther concerned about it, than
to have their base Medicines at a Price accordingly, seeing they take them off
their Hands without any Scrutiny, and their Detection is so easy. Of Chemical
Cils.
I shall mention the Trials of but two or three chemical Medicines for brevity
sake. The chemical Oils extracted from Herbs and Seeds, etc. are proved by
mixing them with rectified Spirits of Wine in a Vial, and shaking them
together; the Spirit will immediately be separated, and remain clear, as before
it was mixed, if the Oil is true; but if the Oil is adulterated, it will become
muddy and milky.

Of Resin of Jalap.
Rectified Spirit of Wine will also, in a small time, dissolve true Resin of
Jalap; but if it is factitious, and mixed with common Rosin, the Spirit will
not dissolve it.

Of Salt of Salt of Amber.
Salt of Amber is a Medicine, though not cheap, yet frequently prescribed, and as
often adulterated: If it is true, rectified Spirit of Wine will readily
dissolve it; but if false, and any way mixed, it will not dissolve.

Of Liquid Laudanum.
There are three Sorts of liquid Laudanum commonly used in Practice. The liquid
Laudanum Cydoniatum (of late not in so great Request) is ascribed to Helmont.
The liquid Laudanum that is most frequently in Use is that of Dr. Sydenham. The
last Sort prepared with Tartar, is, I think, a Medicine of the learned Dr.
Willis. But let who will be the Authors of these several Tinctures of Opium,
and let the Authority of our learned College of Physicians be exerted as much
as it can in the Direction of Apothecaries in the Dispensation of Medicines,
one of them had a more concise Method of making these three Sorts of liquid
Laudanum, than any of their Society ever thought of. "What does it signify
(says he) to be at the Charge and Trouble that the Dispensatory directs,
(meaning, I suppose, Shipton's Additamentum, etc.) I have out of the same Glass
as good of every one of the Sorts, as any is in England"? I shall not determine
how far this shortest way may answer the Intentions of all the three, seeing
the last Edition of the London Dispensatory gives us but two of them as
necessary. But I relate this to show the Integrity of the Man. And now my hand
is in, I cannot but give an Account of the Ways another of these Wholesale
Operators took to counterfeit some other Medicines, for which a great Demand is
daily made at the Wholesale Shops, being of universal Use in the Retale or
Practicing. Apothecaries Shops throughout the Nation. This Man had a great
Trade, and sent out many Boxes of Medicines in a Week; and the following goodly
ones, amongst the rest, to hisbest Customers both in Town and Country, viz.

His Resin of Jalap.
Resin of Jalap counterfeited.
Take common black Rosin four Ounces, Gambodge finely powdered one Ounce,
dissolve and mix them.

His Locatellus Balsam.
And Locatellus Balsam.
Take Hog's Lard 20 lb.Venice Turpentine one Pound, red Sanders as much as is
sufficient to give it a due Color.

His Balsam of Tolu.
Balsam of Tolu counterfeited:
Take the purest white Resin twelve Pounds, liquid Storax eight Ounces,
Gum-Benj^min four Ounces: Dissolve and mix them.

His Syrup of the same,
And Syrup of the same.
Is made by boiling two Ounces of the abovesaid Baisam (as he calls it) in two
Pints and an half of Spring Water to two Pints: Strain it, and add as much Loaf
Sugar as will boil it up to a due Consistence, according to Art.

For the honest Preparation of this Medicine, and Genuineness of the rest, see
the College Dispensatory, and compare them with this Man's, and you cannot but
be astonished. And this informs us, viz.

That Resin of Jalap is extracted by Spirit of Wine, etc. from the black, heavy
Roots of Jalap: but his has not a Grain of Jalap in it; and indeed most that
is sold is mixed with common Resin.

That Locatellus Balsam is made of the best yellow Wax, Canary, Oil Olive,
Venice Turpentine washed in Rose Water, and lastly (...) little red Sanders.
Compare his with this and then judge!

The Balsam of Tolu, that he here pretenc^ to imitate, is a true, natural Balm
that com^ from the West Indies, and from a Tree said t^ be like the low Pine;
the Bark being cut, o^^ flows this noble Medicine.

Instead of Oils in his Emplasters, etc. th^^ Man frequently used stinking Fat,
and ranci^ Butter.

Of Plasters.
How merry is it, to see a Roll of Plaster, entitled, Oxycroceum, sine Croco,
i. e. the Plaster that takes its Name from the Saffron, etc. that ought to be
in it, made up without a Grain of that Flower.

Of Syrups and Conserves.
I need say little of the Apothecaries nasty Ways of boiling up their Syrups,
and making their Conserves with the worst of Sugars, because not many of them
are necessary: But it is vexatious to see them imitate cur excellent, native
Cathartic Syrup of Buckthorn, Syrup of Buckthorn.
(which one would imagine was parable and cheap enough) by mixing Gamboge with
a weak Sort of it, or with some other Syrup of the like Color and Consistence;
and thereby make it too rugged and boisterous, that neither the Country Buyer,
nor the Physician, knows how to proportion it in purging Potions.

Of Venic^ Treacle, etc.
The capital and grand Medicines (as the Apothecaries call them) as Mithridate,
Treacle of Andromachus, (Physician to that monstrous Roman Emperor Nero)
Confectio Fracastorii, etc. were not made up formerly without having all the
Ingredients first viewed separately by the Censors of the College of
Physicians, with some of the Court of Assistants, or Wardens of the Company of
the Apothecaries. But now they are daily made up clandestinely, notwithstanding
they are subject to the Scrutiny and Search of the College of Physicians by
Law. And the defective Dispensation of this grand Medicine is become so far
suspected, that few rich People care to buy that which they think is compounded
at home, preferring the foreign Preparations of it. But considering that our
English Saffron is the best in the World, and our Vipers as good as the
Venetian, and all the Ingredients are to be had here in London, as good and
cheap as in any Place in Europe; why should our Apothecaries be thus suffered
to bring an Odium, and make the Integrity of our Nation suspected, and taint
and poison us with that Medicine that they call our principal Alexipharmic, as
well as impose upon us, and the Poor in particular, who use what is called
Venice Treacle in every Indisposition?

Of the Compound Powder of Crabs Claws.
The next Medicine in vogue (with the Ladies especially, and what enhances the
Apothecaries Bills most plausibly) is the Gascoign's Powder; at the
Insignificancy, as well as extravagant Price of which, I cannot but wonder!
especially when I see some People, who should be better informed, use it to no
Purpose: (For if it is such a wonderful Fine Chalk free from Loam may answer
all Ends of this Powder.
Absorbent, and Alterative in the first Passages, etc. it ought to be thrown in
by whole Drams, and that frequently, and not by Scruple-Doses;) and others sell
it at one Penny a Grain, or at least 1. s. Scruple, because the Bezoar is
intolerable dear, which they pretend to put into it; I say pretend, because
they rarely put one Grain into it; but more frequently make it up with Oyster
Shells reduced to a fine Powder, the Juice of some Herb, and a cheap Aromatic,
that may imitate the Cast and Flavor of the Bezoar Stone; which is one of
those things, which are far-fetched and dearbought. But as faith Tacitus, (and
also -- Magis illa juvant, quae pluris emuntur.
a Poet) Quae e longinquo, magis placent, foreign Productions please best; and
the dearer they are bought, the greater Stress is put upon them. And just so it
fares too often with modest Physicians, who will prescribe excellent well for a
moderate Fee, yet shall be slightly set by therefore; whilst an audacious, and
sometimes impertinent Gentleman shall be caressed by the Apothecary, because he
deals much in this, to them profitable, Commodity, and takes a Guinea, or two
Guinea-Fee of the deluded Patient; and because he is a dear Doctor, is esteemed
a good one in proportion. As this Powder has little appparent Virtue in it, so
I am satisfied this Oriental Ingredient may very well be omitted without much
Detriment to those that admire it: Whose Foible is discerned and gratified by
the crafty Apothecary, in like manner as was that of William Rufus, who was
angry at his Chamberlain for bringing him a Pair of Hose that cost 3 s. and yet
was pleased with a Pair that were far worse, that he told him cost a Mark. But
if this Powder must still be retained in Use, a Succedaneum might be found out
to supply the Want of this Stone, (which indeed as it is a Disease to the
Creature out of whose Stomach it is taken, I cannot think it any great Cordial
to Man.) And these Admirers of dear land foreign Medicines might be more
innocently deceived, if we would be at the pains to study the Virtues of some
that are better and cheaper, and the Product of our own native Soils. Our
Saffron, Verginian Serpentary Root, the Male Peony Root, the Valerians, Root
Aron, Aristolochiae Rotundae, our noble White-flower'd Chamomile, Red Field
Poppy Flowers, Seeds of Rue, Cardamoms, etc. as Occasion and Symptoms require,
may be added to the testaceous Powders instead of Bezoar; and then no Plea
could be admitted for so base and extravagant an Imposition, as is put upon the
Purchasers of this officious, impertinent Medicine.

SECT. VII.
Of Ungarbled Drugs.
WERE I to proceed to every particular Abuse that is put upon the Physicians,
and the People of this Nation, by these selfinterested, covetous
Medicine-Makers, I must swell this Dissertation into the full Bulk of the
College Dispensatory: But I shall satisfy my self at present with one or two
more, which seem to be the fundamental Causes of the Increase of bad Medicines,
viz. the Neglect to garble all Drugs, and the Wholesale Apothecaries trucking
with the Druggists; and both of them furnish the Practicing, and the Country
Apothecaries.

What Need is there of some proper Persons being authorized by Law to examine
every Bale and Chest of Drugs, and to destroy all that are found damaged,
corrupt, and unfit for Use; and that the Censors of the College of Physicians
should examine the Druggists Shops, as well as those of the Apothecaries and
Chemists: and that the regularly educated and approved Physicians throughout
the Kingdom, Country Physicians should have Power to inspect Apothecaries
Shops, etc.
should have the same Powers inspect the Shops and Warehouses of Country
Apothecaries, and Medicine-Sellers of all Denominations, and to destroy
whatever they find unfit for Use; and to fine also such as, upon-legal proof,
are found guilty of there and such like horrid Cheats, Adulterations and
unmerciful Exactions. When we see the wholesale Apothecaries buy ungarbled and
damaged Drugs of the Druggists, and contract with them to pay for the same,
half in Money, and the other half in as bad Medicines: The impositions of the
Druggists, with the wholesale Apothecaries. And both furnish Country
Apothecaries. 15.
(which it is demonstrable they can vent again no way, but to little dabling
Medicasters, and to Country Chaps,) And when those great Apothecaries, who have
contracted to serve our Armies and Fleets with Medicines, have had them
returned back upon their hands, as altogether useless and corrupt, to the
incredible Damage and Danger of the Lives of the best Sailors and Soldiers in
the World! But what care these Men, so they get Money. By these means (though
very destructive ones to the People) they both (the Druggists and wholesale
Apothecaries; and Chemists likewise may be added,) disembogue their Shops of
effaete and corrupt Drugs, and of false and adulterate Medicines, and all at
dear rates, considering their bad Qualities. Thus they combine to cheat us of
our Health and Wealth, without Control or Inspection:

I would not be so excessively uncharitable, as to accuse all Apothecaries,
etc. of these base murdering Practices. For as the Proverb has it, It is not
every one can pickle well.

(...).
It is to be hoped all of them are not such pickled Rogues, as to be able to
disguise Medicines at this monstrous rate. But those who are conscientious in
the Dispensation of their Medicines are so few, that the greatest, most
conscientious, and the most learned Physicians, have, by all imaginable
Methods, and at no small Expense, attempted their Reformation; and have
endeavored, by the charitable Contrivance of a Dispensatory at their own
College, not only to prevent the adulteration of Medicines, when all other ways
have proved ineffectual, but likewise, that the exorbitant Prices, that the
Apothecaries demand not only of the Rich, but also of the Poor, may be abated.

SECT. VIII.
All Apothecaries, the practicing and retale Apothecaries especially, take
insufferable prices for the vilest Medicines.
AND this is the principal Cause of the manifest Disagreement between the honest
Physicians and the unjust Apothecaries; and also between Physicians themselves.
Of which I shall speak more hereafter; having not yet dismissed the the
ungrateful Subject the unmerciful Apothecaries have led me into. Not a Family
is without the practisiing and retale Apothecaries Bills by them: See. 4, 10,
14, 15.
And their Exactions may be easily discovered, by comparing the wholesale
Apothecaries and Druggists Bills or Charges to them with theirs. And the
wholesale Man charges liquid Laudanum at 9 d. per Ounce to the Retaler; who
sells it out again (made up into Draughts, etc.) at 1 s. for 20 Drops. I have
known it calculated, That they sell London Laudanum (made up into a Bolus with
a little Conserve) at an 100 per Cent. Profit: they buy it at 5 s. per Ounce,
nay, (to come as near as may be to the Point) they buy it at half a Farthing a
Grain, and sell it out at 96 -- half Farthings a Grain.

Mr. Smith in his Art of Distilling tells us, They will make 20 Gallons of
Plague Water, at 2 l. 9 s. 4 d. prime Cost: and they sell it out again
wholesale at 8 l. that is, at 8 s. per Gallon, nay at 12 s. per Gallon, and
retale at 2 d. an ounce, or 21 s. and 4 d. per Gallon. And this is the
honestest, and most reasonable of their Gains in things of this nature. In many
Articles (to descend to particulars were endless) their Profit runs incredibly
higher. And their Pretense for keeping up the Price of Medicines to this
exorbitant pitch, is, Because some are perishable.

But the College Dispensatory of 1721. utterly deprives them of this Plea,
ordering all Medicines to be so wisely prepared, That few, if any, are
perishable in any reasonable time: And of those that are any way liable to
decay, they keep but small Quantities by them, or make them extempore, as they
have present occasion.

Their whole Trade, as now managed, an intolerable Grievance, etc,
Thus their Art is degenerated into a most abominable Grievance, that ever was
suffered to be openly and continually carried on, in any the most abject and
corrupted Nation under Heaven. The Grocers, (out of whose Company the London
Apothecaries were at first drawn, and then incorporated) even those of them
that are Retalers, and many other honest Tradesmen declare themselves
satisfied, if they can get one Penny in a Shilling: and are too frequently
obliged to take up and to be content with much less Profit in Commodities of
far greater Value, and more exposed to damage than any the Apothecaries deal
in. And why they should be indulged in such insufferable and oppressive
Demands, and monstrous Profit in things (which if they were good) of very
little worth, for those Things that cost them little or nothing, is a Thing
utterly beyond my Capacity to account for.

All the Efforts of some honest and compassionate Physicians to stop the
Current of these Abuses, Apothecaries incorrigible.
have, for ought I can find, tended to no other End, than to exasperate the
covetous and unjust Mortar-drubbers against them. Though they have imitated the
Company of Physicians at Athens, called (...), because they would take no Money
of their Patients, they have received no other reward for their charitable
Intentions and Practices, than to be disparaged and ill-spoken of, and to be
obviated in their Pretensions, and to be thrust out of every Family, that would
give any credit to the malicious and self interested Insinuations of these
cunning Men.

This male Treatment (no doubt on it at first) animated the Doctors to erect
their Dispensatories: That the Sick-Poor having their Advice gratis, might be
also supplied with Remedies at a very low rate; and that the Rich too might be
secure of pure and effectual Medicines at a moderate Price; and the Lives of
their Patients, and their own Reputation in some measure insured to boot.

SECT. IX.
Dispensatories, and Infirmaries recommended.
AND here, I hope, it may not be thought an unpardonable Digression to insinuate
the national Advantage of Infirmaries, and Works of this nature. Vid.. 17.
Which were they encouraged, and carried on, according to the first Intention
of them, would prove no doubt noble Benefits to Persons of all Conditions. The
College Dispensatory, I say, is an Undertaking worthy of imitation by those
Physicians that reside in poor and populous Countries, and are any way able to
beat the Charge, and willing to be at the Trouble of erecting a Dispensatory,
or keeping a Closet of choice Medicines in their own Houses. And it would be a
great Encouragement to the Faculty, if in or near every Market Town, there were
a Physician appointed, at a certain Salary (to be raised by a Parish Rate or
Levy, etc.) to attend the Poor that shall be sick: who should be brought and
placed in Infirmaries provided in every Parish, (or 2 or 3 Parishes might join
their Stocks) for that End and Purpose. This would be no more (I dare adventure
to affirm, much less) Charge to the several Parishes, than they are now at, in
paying ignorant Pretenders to Physic for their attendance upon them, and their
bad Medicines: and in Maintenance of the Widows and Children of those
unfortunate poor Men, that have fallen into bad Hands, and whose Lives might
have been preserved, had an honest and skilful Physician been applied to.
Moreover, as one remarks, The sooner Diseases are taken notice of (those that
are Epidemical especially: and these begin generally and make their first
advances amongst the poorest sort of People,) by accurate and expert
Physicians, the less Footing they will have, the Cure of them will be the
easier, and their Advice will be rendered the more effectual. Which being
usurped by these injudicious Pretenders, the Distempers being mistaken, or
mal-treated, become Malignant, Contagious and Fatal. And the sooner a poor Man
is restored to his Health, he will be the sooner able to provide for his
Family; and it will be a more especial advantage to the Parish, if it shall
prevent his Death: by which else a numerous Family may be left helpless upon
their hands. And it will be a great Advantage to the Neighborhood when any of
them want a Physician, by his being so near to them, and he may afford to
attend them for much smaller than the present accustomed and extravagant Fees.
And the more Visits he makes to the Sick-Poor, the greater will be his
Experience, the more certain his Observations, and the more capable will he be
to Advise the Nobility and Gentry, etc. But to return to the Matter in hand.

Apothecaries formerly Servants to Physicians: but now aspire to be above their
Masters.
Since this flagrant Perfidy of the Apothecaries has been detected, and they
have been frequently reproved, what Reformation has appeared amongst them?
They have been so far from honoring and giving place to the Physician (
Ecclus. 38.) that they aspire to be equal to him, to supersede and shoulder him
out of place: Telling every simple Woman, they sure must know something; they
have all the Doctors Bills; that the Doctors are beholden to them for making up
their Prescriptions, which they know not how to prepare themselves; etc. But if
they would consider, that it is but a few Generations past, that they were
originally only Servants to Physicians, to help them to do the Drudgery and
Laborious part of their Dispensations in their own Houses: and that others of
them were culled out of the most trifling and peddling Part of the Grocers;
that scarce one in an Hundred of them at this day can read the Latin Testament,
(the Test that they frequently try Boys by when offered to be their
Apprentices;) and that those of them that can hammer out a Physicians Bill,
frequently have not Ingredients, or commonly not the Fidelity to make it up
truly, they could not be so audacious. That there were Physicians (now styled
Doctors) Apothecaries, and Surgeons, in 3 distinct Classes or Orders, even as
high as the Days of Moses, some have seemed to prove from that learned Jew,
Josephus. But not to enter into these needless Enquiries: these Men are so far
from paying any due Deference to the Physicians, their Instructors and Masters,
that they assume a Superiority rather: And maintain it scandalously, while we
see a learned, poor Physician crouching to them, gloseing over all their vile
Impostures, to be introduced and kept by them in the good Graces of a good
Family. Their flagrant Impudence and Ignorance.
Admonition renders them perverse: nor Conscience seems to have any check upon
them: they persevere in their Insolence and Deceit with the greater Obstinacy,
for being reprehended; and what is to be wondered at, have prevailed to have an
Act of Parliament pass, to exempt them from Parish and Ward Offices; etc. That
they may, forsooth, the better attend the Sick; or rather invade the Province
and Property, the Office, Fees and Livelihood of the regular Physicians,
educated in our Universities: and to whom alone these Rewards of our honorable
and useful Profession do legally appertain. Though it is daily and sufficiently
proved, how unqualified they are to prescribe Physic, from undeniable matters
of Fact, and the many fatal Miscarriages which their forward Ignorance leads
them into. They must needs be Empiricks, who pretend to cure by Guess, and
neglecting the Reason of Things, content themselves with bare Experience, as
has already been hinted; and it is but too manifest they do so; and for the
most Part, either for want of Learning, or by the very Method of their
Education in their Shops, can better vouch Practice for their Warrant, than
Warrant for their Practice; while they justify their Proceedings by no other
Authority, than this or that Doctors Bills upon their Files. But how come they
to be such competent judges, That the Distemper, the Symptoms, and Constitution
of the Patient, for whom these Recipes were originally prescribed, and their
new Patients Disorders, etc. are the same? I have seen this Quere answered in
the Negative by a merry Poet; says he,

No, their pretended Skill's a dangerous Cheat, To bubble those that want both
Health and Wit.

Do we not see many young Fellows amongst them administer Physic (to those
that are as ignorant as themselves) before they know how to prepare it: and
sometimes kill Men without being called to an Account for it?

SECT. X.
The Apothecaries abuse the College of Physicians, etc.
THEY have carried Matters with such an high hand, as to put the Members of the
College that Subscribed to the Dispensatory, to defiance; Vid.. 4, 8, 12.
and have and do recommend Persons assuming the Dignity of Doctors, without
ever watering their Horses at our Universities, and that were not Members of
the College of Physicians, to practice Physic in London, contrary to the Laws
and Privileges of that learned Society; who have, together with all regularly
educated Physicians, an undeniable Authority, by Law, not only to prescribe,
but also to administer Medicines. And the Apothecaries have persevered in these
unjustifiable Proceedings so long, as sufficiently to discourage our Physicians
that come from Oxford or Cambridge from entering into the College of Physicians
at London, lest they should be thus suppressed and discouraged before they are
known: till in process of Time, the old Members of the College Dying off,
Honest Physicians discouraged.
and the Society becoming Thin and Poor, there was a Necessity to fill up the
Vacancies. And then those who had rather favored the Apothecaries, than the
Dispensatory, being a Majority, introduced Exotics; Gentlemen that had their
Education or taken a Degree in Foreign Universities, as Edinburgh, Leyden,
Utretcht, or Padua (as they chanced in their Travels to ride through it.) And it
is to be feared, too many of these Foreign Gentlemen (so I must call them) to
gain Business, Some Physicians recommended for complying with the Apothecarias.
fall in too easily with these unworthy Methods of the Apothecaries, and
prescribe at large to gain their Recommendation; and can find no fault with
their bad Medicines, nor with their exorbitant Prices for the same. And if they
are called in after an Apothecary has by pernicious Applications perhaps
diverted a favorable Crisis, and well nigh killed the Patient, dare not but
applaud his Proceedings: and (then to recover what the other had lost, and
enhanse his Bill at the same Time, to make amends inter Scribendum for the
Favor done in calling him into the Family) fling in more Juleps, Apozems,
Draughts, Bolus's, Pills, Powders, and God knows what, till the poor Patient
dies of the Doctor at last! Whereas had he had Patience indeed, and taken no
Physic from his intimate Acquaintance the Apothecary, before he had applied
himself to some honest Physician; or, had placed less confidence in one whom
his Apothecary recommended, Nature and a little prudent Nursing might, in all
probability, with the Assistance of a very Few, Simple, and proper Medicines
(nay, perhaps after another Manner, without any Artificial Assistance) have
freed him from his Distemper.

SECT. XI.
Physicians that strike hands with the Apothecarys the only Men of Vogue.
AND here, the Physicians of an exotic Education are not indeed the only Persons
to be condemned in this Sort. Too too many of our own Growth, either through
Avarice, and because they will not be out of Play, and, more out of mere
Necessity, are obliged to crouch thus for a Piece of Bread.

But be that as it will: this Clan of Physicians that strike hands thus with
the Apothecaries, are the only Men of vogue, and run of Business: and know how
too, to make their Marker, and take as exorbitant Fees, as the Apothecaries can
Prices. A first-rate Man has a Guinea for a Chamber or Coffee-house Fee, and
Two for a Visit: one of the Second Class, a Guinea for a priming Fee, and Half
a one for every Visit. And thus between the Fees of the one, and the Bills of
the other, it is well if a considerable Tradesman is not well nigh undone, though
they suffer him to escape with his Life, out of a tedious Fit of Sickness. With
what Indignation must an honest Man hear his Neighbor complain to his
Physician of the unreasonableness of the Apothecaries Bill, and the other
Answer with an Air of Arrogance, Sir I don't use to garble Apothecaries Bills.
And another, sharper, advise an extorting Apothecary, to keep up the Price of
Medicines, or, says he, we shall do nothing! And what a Mortification must it
be to a modest, young Physician, that cannot in Honor and Conscience write so
profusely, and will not divide his Prescriptions into abundance of Forms, and
impertinent Varieties, and little Doses, (to augment the Apothecaries Profit,
rather than to indulge the Patients Palate) to be tacitly reprehended by the
Apothecaries flinging in a Bottle of cordial Drops, or a composing Draught; and
afterward be told boldly, O Sir, you are under a Mistake! You must sometimes
hold a Candle to the D -- l. If you expect to make much on it in this Town: you
must not reflect upon Tradesmen.

Thus the honest and the fair practicing Physicians are decry'd, and brought
into neglect by all the Artifices that can be thought on, according as the
Temper and politic Interest, or Passions of the People, that their undermining
Antagonists are tampering with, affords them occasion; Say they, This Man's
rash, and gives the nastiest Medicines; that is an old Nurse; the other minds
nothing but his Bottle; one is a scoundrel Whig; another a virulent Tory; when
perhaps the honest Man they are thus circumventing and defaming, is neither: or
has declared neither for high nor low, nor any Party: But because he has
Subscribed to the Dispensatory; or, cannot readily come into the Mercenary and
base Measures of a Set of self-interested and naughty Men.

The Artifices of cunning Knaves.
Indeed the generality of the World, is in something or other thus imposed upon.
Cunning Men for private Lucre, bandy themselves and make Parties; and then
invent discriminating Appellations: and whosoever has the Misfortune to fall
under the lash of their petulant Tongues, and to be ranged in the Class of
obnoxious Persons, that is, of those that do not or cannot favor their
unworthy Designs, and unwarrantable Practices, must of necessity be in danger
of Ruin from them; and being placed between the two opposite and impetuous
Aggressors, he cannot avoid Blows from both. Certainly it is most inhuman to
affix any Character upon a Man, that may render him odious, and that is
distasteful to others, and thereby strip him of his Understanding and Honor,
Religion and Conscience, his Profession and Livelihood!

Let a Man's private Sentiments be what they will, and personal Infirmities
very visible; he may be, for all them, a good Physician, and ought to enjoy, as
free as Air, the common Privileges of his Faculty.

SECT. XII.
Our regular Physicians not very well treated at the College of Physicians, etc.
BUT some (too many) of our graduate Physicians from Cambridge and Oxford, find
it otherwise, to their great detriment and discouragement. For as soon as one
of them emerges in London, and that before he has acquired an Acquaintance, or
writ something sufficient to recommend him to common Fame, and whilst he is in
suspense whether it is for his Advantage to adhere to the Apothecaries, or for
his Credit and Quiet of Conscience to come into the Dispensatory, he shall be
summoned by the President of the College, to give an Account of his Practice,
and to enter into the Society, very much to his prejudice, the Premises
considered: and whilst the College too, suffer Multitudes of unqualified, and
unlicensed Persons to proceed in Practice without any Notice taken: and make
others that have had no regular Education Licentiates; and abundance that have
been bred in foreign Universities, Fellows; and confer as many real Privileges
upon them as our homebred Gentlemen can have by becoming Members of that
Society; and notwithstanding the worthy Gentlemen thus prosecuted have a
Diploma from our Universities, Abuses of the College of Physicians, etc. Vid. 4.
to practice all over the Kingdom, in every Place, and to do every thing that
appertains to Physic, etc.

Physicians disagree and abuse their own Faculty.
As the Matter seems to stand at present, a Degree in one of our Universities is
only a Disadvantage (as said a Gentleman who had just reason to expostulate
with the College) as it makes a Man that has it the Mark of the College, whom
they could not (or perhaps would not,) take notice of, if he had not his
Degrees: as this Case, between the Charter of the College of Physicians in
London, and the Universities has been stated and set forth: and also as it
renders him obnoxious to the Apothecaries, if he will keep his Integrity, and
discountenance their exorbitant Proceedings.

Hence it is that so many of our regular Physicians have refused to come into
the College. For is it not intolerable, that Gentlemen educated, according to
the Laws of the Land, in our own Universities, and having expended therein 1000
l. or 700 l. at least, Vid.. 4, 14.
in proceeding through the Course of their Studies to their requisite Degrees,
etc. when afterward they come out thence to offer their Service to the World,
and by their honest Gains in their Profession to have these Charges refunded,
and to maintain themselves, must pay as dear for their Incorporation with the
College of London Physicians, and to obtain the Privileges to practice
unmolested, as Foreigners do: and have one of them (who has not been at above
a third part of their Expense, computing both his titular and purchased Degree
taken abroad, and the Charge of his Admittance into the College together)
preferred before him; and to see, now and then wealthy Apothecary or Surgeon
get to be an Archbishop's Doctor, and God knows who admitted amongst them upon
the same Level.

What can be the Reason of this? Either the Power of the College is Defective,
or not rightly exerted; or, there is a great Neglect of the Statutes, that are
as Wise and Moral as any extant, in any Society. It is certain there appears
among the Members a great Division (arising manifestly from their adhering to
the Methods pleasing the Apothecaries, Vid.. 4, 8, 10, 12.
or to the Dispensatory) and this produces Parties and Partiality, a
narrowness and self-Interest, and a want of concern for the Honor and Benefit
of the Community, and of the Profession in general. Instead of this, there are
Combinations with private Views, to promote particular Advantages: some are
applauded, and others supplanted, according as they reject or come into
particular Measures. In short, amongst our Physicians, a disregard of the true
End of their Institution, viz. The Good and Health of the People, seems but too
apparent, as well as great want of Candor one toward another. Physic is a
precarious Profession.
To whom I would only add this one Consideration, that, as the Laws have not
provided for the Support of the Professors of Physic, as they have for those
of other Professions, by Donations and lucrative Preferments, and their
Emoluments are precarious; they are not upon a national Establishment, they are
to subsist wholly by their Skill, their Industry, and their Reputation, and
good will of the People: It highly behooves them not only to encourage the
Improvement of Knowledge, but likewise to be tender and cautious of bringing
their Faculty into Contempt: and I must assure them, that it is very apparent,
that whilst they pursue every one his private Gain, and as Practice is now
carried on, the Poor are utterly neglected, and the Rich intolerably abused:
The Poor are neglected, and the Rich abused.
and neither find any true Remedy, but from the Charitable and Candid (though
much discouraged) Treatment at the Dispensatory. And if the Gentlemen that are
for and against it, proceed much longer in their intestine Debates and
Animosities, it will be an addition to the World's Wonders, if Physic should
flourish again in this Nation, under the Pressure of all these enormous Abuses!
For if the College can maintain the Power they claim over the Faculty in this
manner (and I may say too, if the Privileges thereof are thus invaded in every
corner of the Nation) our Universities are rendered useless with regard to the
Art of Physic, if they cannot effectually Authorize their graduate Physicians.

Had the great and learned Traveller Dr. Thomas Linacer (who upon his return,
is said to be the Restorer of Learning in our Nation; and founded two public
Lectures in Oxford, and one in Cambridge, for the Advantage of the Students in
Physic) foreseen these Disorders, he never would have founded also the College
of Physicians in London, That the Students of that Faculty of both
Universities, The End, for which the College of Physicians was founded,
obviated.
might meet the more conveniently together, to consult the Advantage (and not
the Disgrace and Destruction) of the Profession.

All this is but the Consequence of artful Faction, kept up by Avarice and
Ambition; and crafty Apothecaries amongst our Physicians, greedily prosecuting,
as I just now said, particular Advantages and self-Interest; neglecting the
public Good, and the Reputation of the Faculty: and indeed the Health of
Mankind; yielding, upon these scores to the Apothecaries; who at the same Time
do not stick to supplant them, and are become their Competitors. These Debates
are wittily handled by Dr. Garth in his Poem; and the Apothecaries Cheats
exposed by Mr. Thomas Brown's Farce called the Dispensatory; where he
introduces Trueman with this generous Resolution,

I never to Flattery was, or will be Slave.
He that loves Truth, is generous and brave;
And scorns the Wealthy and the Thriving Knave.
And many honest Physician^ are forced to withdraw themselves.
These indeed are worthy Expressions in the Mouth of the Man that is got above
the World: but should another, who has no means of Living but by it and in it,
take up with these Sentiments, and stick by them, he may chance to starve for
his honest Obstinacy. His Necessities will be ever and anon insinuating, that
Truth and Plain-dealing are very disobliging Things; that Honesty is an usual
Bar to Honor and Preferment; that the strongest Wing of Merit cannot mount, if
a stronger Weight of Malice that should be removed, depress it; that there is
nothing to be got by being good in bad Times, much less by daring to appear so;
that things are gone so far, that if a Man intends to gain any Practice in this
Town (or any where else indeed) he must connive at greater Abuses than these,
if any such can be found in his Profession, and he must in Prudence be silent:
whilst the Emperick, and prating Apothecary run on maliciously against the
honest Physician, administer Medicines ignorantly: and the more ignorant People
(by long Custom, and for want of better Information, are brought to) love to
have it so; and to be deluded out of their Lives, and (what too many of them
love better than their Lives,) their good Money. Nothing can prevail upon the
generality of them to see, in this important Case, their own Advantage, though in
most other Matters of far less Moment they pursue it most dexterously: they
refuse to be convinced in this Point, though their Lives lie at Stake; though the
most eminent Hand would heal them Gratis, yet they will have recourse to, rely
upon, and applaud these audacious Quack-salvers: and presently conclude him a
Partial, self-ended Man, that unfolds these Mysteries of Iniquity: He sees very
plainly, that if he cannot help Speaking, and Acting conscientiously for the
common Good, his Skill and good Character shall be traduced on all hands. Thus
many excellent, modest Physicians, finding there is no way for them to become
useful, serviceable to themselves and others, and celebrated in their
Profession, but by these vile Artifices, think it better to sit down neglected;
and that it is advisable for them to be silent, rather than to exclaim against
what they cannot remedy; and to be content to want a great Name, and great
Business, rather than attempt the Attainment of it, at the Expense of other
Peoples Fame and their own Quiet, and if their Conscience too must go to rack
for the Purchase Non juvat bonum Nomen, reclamante Conscientia.
; that Profit and Advantage, that Respect and Reputation, that must be obtained
in the World with the Loss of Honesty, and a good Conscience, is not worth the
having.

SECT. XIII.
The ill consequences of the Bishops granting Licenses, etc.
BUT say some People, the old Maxim (ars nullos habet inimicos praeter
ignorantes) allows no Men of good Sense and Literature to be your Adversaries:
Indeed if this could be made good, it would very much contribute toward a
Remedy against these growing Evils. Have not our Bishops and their Officials a
Power, (though the Legality of it, since the Reformation from Popery, is
questioned by some of their Lordships) and do they not grant Licenses to such
great numbers of Gentlemen that are bred Abroad, and settle so frequently in
our greatest Cities and Towns, that there is scarce room for a regular
Physician from one of our own Universities to thrust in amongst them? and to
abundance of mere Formalists, and what is yet worse, to many illiterate and
ignorant Persons besides, and that without due Examination and necessary Trial
before competent Judges: who ought very well to approve every one that offers
himself to them for a Qualification to exercise the Faculty of Physic, even in
the most servile and minutest Part thereof. And it is notorious, that the
Officers of their Courts, for the sake of Perquisites, are ready Solicitors for
this Tribe of Candidates; and our regular Physicians themselves are too easily
importuned to sign Certificates to many of these humble Petitioners, imagining
they cannot hurt them; that they live remote, and their Business will be amongst
the Poor; that they oblige some good Patient of their own, that entreats this
Favor of them for a poor Parson, that otherwise has not wherewithal to
Support his Family; or that another Simple Fellow may do good in a few Cases,
(or in other make Work for them) and upon some such like slight Considerations,
help the lame Dog over the Style, that presently turns again and bites them,
supplants their Character, as well as supplies their Place; and by degrees gets
into Favor (upon an Accidental Cure or two made upon some poor Person, that
Nature perhaps would have relieved without their preposterous Help) of the best
Gentlemen in the Country.

SECT. XIV.
AND this necessarily leads me, in the next Place, The bad State of Physic in
the Country.
to take a short View of the bad State of Physic there also, where Quacks, and
mere Formalists that can but Copy out a Bill, and impudent, illiterate Fellows
not only practice Physic, but meet with incredible Encouragement.

But the Majority of the People (of the common Sort especially) commonly take
the worst Side (as I have before observed) and give Countenance to Knaves and
Pretenders. and neglect Men of Integrity and Knowledge, without any Reason for
it, except that one, which is very plain and natural, viz. that they are wiser
and better than themselves. For we are apt to have great Inclinations to every
thing which resembles us, and an Aversion to what is above us.

I need not here again recite, that the right and judicious Understanding of
the Animal Economy, a long and regular Course of Study and Application,
together with abundance of judicious Instructions, and Expense of Money as well
as Time; and after all, Experience too to apply all the acquired Faculties and
Science of Physic aright, is necessary to the Accomplishment of a Physician.
That the Indications curative are to be taken from the Aetiology of Diseases,
and the Explanation of the Causes of Distempers (so far as it may be said to be
demonstrative) from Anatomy. But whatever Reason, Art, and the Laws of our
Country can advance to the Discouragement of those Persons, that pretend to
rely upon other Foundations, especially upon the Indications of what is to be
done in Diseases from the Urine only; yet these Piss-Pot Doctors Clarissimus
Bellini Divinatores ex sola Urinarum inspectione dicit Urinantes inanes.
are strangely sought to, and incredibly famous, Piss Pot Doctors.
notwithstanding the Folly as well as Uncertainty of their Conclusions, is
sufficiently apparent! Bottles of Urine are brought 20 or 30 Miles to one of
these Water-Casters; and he, without seeing the Patient, (says with Dr.
Byfield, Praesens vel absens idem est) tells the old Women all their
Infirmities and Aches, and the young ones all their Obstructions and Sickness;
and for the Price of a splendid Shilling, sends them his Orvietan, and
infallible Remedy; his Pills, that cure all Ills, past, present, and to come!
Another will do as much for a Sixpenny Fee; a third will give a large
Hodgepodge for 3 d. For which they all deserve the Pillory, as in 1382, Quacks
formerly punished.. 4.
and 1550, when such counterfeit Physicians were, if our Chronicles may be
depended upon, set on horseback with their Faces to the Horse-tail, the Tail in
their Hands as a Bridle, and a Whetstone on their Breast, and so led through
the City of London, with ringing of Basins, and banished. Hence the Proverb of
old, Not so easy to turn a crooked Body straight, as to turn a Mustard Quern;
nor one Leap out of a Docket n="*" A Manual, or little Collection of Receipts.
makes a Doctor. Yet such have all their silly Crowds of Admirers, Abettors,
and Followers, who run after one or other of them for three or four Market-days
successively, if the distressed Patient lives so long; and if he is not
recovered in that time, they do (as Dr. Fuller relates of the People in
Cheshire) make him a Posset, and tie an Handkerchief on his Head; and if that
will not mend him, then God be merciful to him.

Here too, suspended Parsons, idle Schoolmasters, Barber-Surgeons, Sea-Surgeons
discarded, broken London Apothecaries, decrepit Mountebanks, and any one that
is unknown, and has no other Means of Maintenance, set up for prodigious
Doctors; and every Sect and Party have one peculiarly qualified for themselves.
Here comes one recommended by profligate Immoralities; another by Poverty, and
a great Heap of Children; a third sets up upon a Stock of little or no
Learning, and much Self-conceit; a fourth upon abundance of Ignorance, and want
of Business in the greatest Place of Business in the whole World; some upon
pretended Cures in the unknown Parts of it; and others again boast their
Travels far at home, and pass for unborn Doctors, celebrated Corn-cutters, and
Washers of fat Brains.

But to leave this Tribe of Unaccountables in their provoking Practices, till
the Hand of Providence and Justice brings them to their due Deserts: since the
Mischiefs they do are so flagrant, The Author is naturally induced, by the
Course of his Arguments, to appeal to the Legislative Powers; tho that was not
his first Design. See Beginning and End of this Tract.
that our Lawgivers cannot but be sensible of them, and will sure ere long
revive and reinforce that excellent Statute of the 5th of Eliz. and extend it
to our Faculty. The Intent of which was, (as is before intimated) That no
Persons should take upon them any Art, Mystery or Trade, but such wherein they
had Skill and Knowledge; according to that Rule, Quod quisque norit, in hoc se
exerceat. And I am sure it is not usual for skilful and modest Men, to pretend
to Understanding in any Art or Science, before they have attained to it by an
assiduous and regular Course of Study, and a practical Habit. There are some
Diseases in which an old Nurse cannot kill; and in such some of these sort of
Doctors, (as they are called) and our daring rural Apothecaries, gain amongst
the Mobile immortal Praises. There are other Distempers, which the best
Physician cannot cure: Cases, that no Physician, was it not the Duty of his
Calling, would desire to have any thing to do with; viz. as where any of these
Pretenders have been dabbling and tampering before he was called in, and have
put the Patient out of all Hopes; or in the Confluent Smallpox, Purples,
Spotted and Malignant Fevers, Diseases not far behind the Plague. And although
he does all that he ought, as a Man of Knowledge and Honesty, yet commonly if
(through their former male Practices, or the Ungovernableness of the Patient, or
the prevailing Humor of those about him) he does not cure, it shall be imputed
to him as Mistake or Ignorance, Rashness, or Want of requisite Courage,
Inadvertency or Neglect: He shall be spoken against because he cant do
Miracles, retrieve what others have lost, or stay the Omnipotent Hand of God
himself. But he shall certainly be defamed, Country Apothecaries disingenuous.
Decry all Physicians, who will not serve their base Turns; and caress any
ignorant Formalist that will.
if in all his Proceedings he has not favored the Apothecaries, has not
augemented their Bills, nor skreened their Rashness and daring Errors. Well!
say they, this Man was called in to mend, but (by this, by that, and the other)
has marred all: And, says Mr. Mortar-scraper, (if he does cure,
notwithstanding he labors under all these Difficulties) I could have done as
much my self; or, I never saw in all my Life a Man recovered by such a simple
Method. Whereas the Simpleness, as well as Knavery, is in the Wretch himself;
who whilst he regards his own Advantage only, he does not consider at all, that
the most simple and unmixed Medicines are the best Specificks, Of simple
Medicines, Specificks.
and will do Wonders, when administerd by a judicious Hand; but are frequently
rendered useless, if not noxious, by being confounded in an heterogeneous
Hotchpotch, a Mixture contrived rather to give him an Opportunity to enhanse
his Bill, than for the Benefit of the Patient. (I cant avoid the Impertinence
of Repetition frequently upon this provoking Occasion.) Nay, and rather than
not force a Trade, he will omit the most pertinent Ingredient in the Physicians
Bill, and substitute another according to his own Fancy, or Interest,
Apothecaries make up Bills unfaithfully. Vid.. 1.
or Malice; serving him as one did the Oracle, when he asked, whether the Bird
that he held in his Hand under his Cloak was alive or not; being resolved
beforehand to produce it dead, had the God pronounced it alive. And the cunning
Shaver goes on to recommend such a Doctor as will serve his turn. O! that's a
fine Man: He writes well; that is, plentifully divides Apozems or Juleps into
little Draughts, Electuaries into Boluss, etc. Writes well for the Apothecary,
but ill for the poor Patient, who must pay for all. And it is ten to one, if
this fine Writer is not like the Gunner, that is said often to shoot well, tho
quite beside the Mark.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Tribe of accurate Formalists are caressed by
the Apothecaries, because they cant well avoid concurring with them in all
their vile Practices, and horrid Impositions upon the Patient. They prescribe
plentifully, and cant well do otherwise, if they follow the Variety of Forms
their Authors direct them to; as if the Multiplicity rather than the Matter of
the Medicine made it effectual: Neither can they complain of the Adulteration
or Badness of their Medicines, having no true Knowledge of them. (Indeed it is
difficult to discover Medicines when mixed thoroughly, but by their missing in
their usual Effects.) Nor dare they correct their extravagant Bills given in to
their Patients; for then they must lose their Credit with them, and shall be
outed as fast as they were introduced into any Family. For it so falls out
generally upon any Indisposition, that the Apothecaries are first applyd to;
and if it proceeds so far that they cannot remedy it, but rather render it
dangerous, then they are consulted what Physician shall be made use of: and to
be sure an honest one, who dares decry and discountenance these their Abuses,
shall be postponed to these intruding Gentlemen; or, (I am ashamed to speak it)
to another regular Physician, that will act so unworthily, as to disparage the
Faculty by these base Compliances, (who, and all the other Tribe, are but as
mere Stalking-Horses to their Friends the sordid Apothecaries, galloping from
one Extremity of a County to another to skreen their abusive Practices; and
that in extreme Cases only!) Or if they cant supplant him, (the conscientious
Physician) by Lies and crafty Insinuations, (as has been more than once
remarked) they will effect it, let him watch them as narrowly as he can, by
making up his Prescriptions false; by some Succedaneum, or corrupt Drug or
other, rendering them ineffectual.

SECT. XV.
Country Apothecaries keep but few, and those very often had Medicines.
INdeed it is difficult for many Country Apothecaries to make up a Bill
faithfully, having but very few Medicines in their Shops; and few of them know
how to make Medicines; and those that they have are frequently sophisticated to
their Hands by the Wholesale London Apothecaries, who sell them to the
Druggists; and the Country Apothecaries have them at second-hand from them too
commonly, as has been showed: Vid.. 5, 6, 7.
or if they make them up themselves, as many boast they do, yet they make them
up as false as the Londoners can do. And if an honest Physician (suspecting
their Veracity, And make extravagant Bills. Vid.. 8.
and knowing their cheating Craft) contracts his Prescription into a narrow
Compass, abhorring to load his Patient with Things impertinent, they will, for
that very Reason, demand the more extravagant Rates for their vile
Compositions; insinuating, that the Doctor was curious in the Drugs, and that
they were dear, etc. What Man of Sense and Honesty would not be enraged to see
a Country Apothecarys Bill run up to 3 l. in a few Days, when it can be
demonstrated, that all the Medicines taken by the Patient were not worth thrice
so many Shillings: And to see another take 1 s. 6 d. for a Febrile Julep, as he
called it, made up with nothing more than Spring Water and Sugar, and a few
Drops of Spirits of Vitriol: The whole, with Glass, Cork and all, not worth
three Farthings!

Had Pliny lived in these Days, and amongst us, his Observation n="*" Millia
Gentium fine Medicis vivunt, nee tamen ^^ne Medicina.
would have been inverted; and instead of saying, that Thousands of Nations
lived without Physicians, but none without Medicines; he would have wondered
how it should come to pass, that in a Kingdom, a learned and ingenious People,
where Physicians did so abound, there should be no safe, true, and salutary
Medicines and Remedies to be found amongst them; but that all was corrupted,
and dear, and Cheat, both Medicines and Medicine-makers. Omnia pessum eunt, he
would certainly have cried out, and pronounced of the State of Physic in
England, as Bernard once did of the Church of Rome, Honest Physicians are rare,
or rarely prosper, through the Artifices of the Apothecaries.
viz. Mali ibi proficiunt, boni deficiunt: Bad Physicians hugely prosper, but
good ones are rarely to be found; and if a good one should attempt a Redress of
these Evils by erecting a Dispensatory in his own House, or by keeping a Closet
of choice Medicines (not to be had genuine and incorrupt, if at all, in some
Apothecaries Shops) in order to the better securing of the Lives of his
Patients, in difficult Cases, that might otherwise be endangered by the Use of
adulterated and ineffectual Preparations, and to keep up that little Reputation
that he may have acquired; and although he gives away his Advice and Remedies
both to the Poor, yet he shall be treated by Country Apothecaries worse than
the Physicians in London can be, who subscribe to the Dispensatory: They will
combine against him in such sort, that nothing but the Virulence of their own
Tongues can defeat their intended Mischief. And it is not to be imagined what
an Impression their Artifices have upon many unthingking People: not to mention
the Arguments of their Friends and Relations in their Behalf stoutly persisted
in, stipulating for their Credit. Tho it is thought, on the contrary, no Crime,
but commendable in them to set up for Doctors, Country Apothecaries set up for
Physicians.
to invade the Province Profits, and Credit of a Physician, in all the Places
that they can intrude themselves into (as is before observed;) or, to supplant
him by introducing any forward Formalist, that knows no better, (or, if he
does, will act no better) than to comply with their unjustifiable Practices.

In some of the Eastern Parts of England, and in some Counties even near to
London, I know Physicians that keep Dispensatories in their own Houses, very
advantageously both to themselves, and to the Vicinity. But in other Parts, a
few discerning Persons may commend a Physician, who thus lays himself out for
the public Advantage, but encourage his Enterprise little farther: they are
not easily led out of their old Track: they will say he is honest, and at the
same time censure his Politics, and question his Understanding. The Rich, that
give him his Praemium, will grudgingly pay him little more than prime Cost for
his Medicines; and the middle Sort of People esteem him no otherwise than as an
Apothecary, thinking he has Gain enough from his Medicines (tho sold for no
more than they cost) without giving him any Fee; and Handy-craftsmen cannot
afford to give Fees, (such as are now become customary) it is well if they can
pay for a Medicine; and the Poor expect both Advice and Medicines Gratis; and
too many Parish-Officers neglect them to Barbarity, and rather let some perish
than pay much for their Cure. Again: The Ignorance and Credulity of Country
People.
Very few Country People will be persuaded to go through a requisite Course of
Physic: they run to the Doctor when they think they shall be dead; the Disease
abating, they wait for Nature to relieve them, till Nature is spent; and if an
honest Physician would interpose and visit them as frequently as the Necessity
of their Case requires, they are apt to think him impertinent; or, if paid
accordingly for Attendance, a dear, extorting Man; and ignorant too, if after
all he chance not to be successful; and the Apothecary and Piss-pot Doctor to
be preferred before him, tho the Mismanagement lies wholly at their own door.
And the whole Clan of Pretenders to Physic, and the Apothecaries especially,
will traduce him, and acquaint all their Customers with this Instance of his
Ignorance; or, he killed such a one, as sure as Gods in Gloucester: and will
never leave off to vilify and oppose him, till they have ruind his Character,
if it lies in their Power, with the Vulgar especially, who are the major Part
of the People.

And as the Gentry commonly employ one or other of these Sort of Men, when they
hear them so unanimously speak against him, they too are very apt to suspect
his Judgment, and to be shy of coming under his Hands: for no other Reason, but
because Tom (such a one) has been their Apothecary for many Years, and can
surely judge a little of a Physician, and he don't affect him; or, because their
Friend Esquire (such a one) did not approve his Methods; or, because he is of
this or that damnd Party; and that Blemish generally affects a Man. For People
of different Parties judge and condemn one another rather by their own Tenets,
The Prevalence of Party Interest.
than by the Truth. And when they have, by any of these trite Methods, lessened
his Credit, they presently assume a Superiority over him in all Cases, and set
up for Censors of the Performances of the best Physicians that may appear
amongst them.

SECT. XVI.
Barber-Surgeons aspire to be eminent Doctors.
AND not only these assuming Apothecaries, but Barber-Surgeons are made use of
as Physicians by many Persons even of the best Sort, in their wiser and
advanced Years, and that in all Cases. Some of which, whether they understand
or not, they are seen to treat in a very rude manner: and yet their Patients
applaud and endure; imagining surely, that these mercurial Medicasters, who
perhaps relieved their juvenile Disasters, are the best Judges of all their
other Diseases, and of their phlegmatic Constitutions, broken by old Age and
Luxury.

Thus it comes to pass, that these Pretenders are buoyed up; and the far
greatest Numbers of the Sick (not only in the Country, but also in London) are
committed to the Care of ignorant, audacious, disqualified, and unlawful
Intruders into the Practice of Physic. And thus it becomes scarce possible for
an honest, regular Physician to do any good to his Patients, or to himself, and
to retrieve the Honor of the Profession, tho he endeavor it by all the
engaging Methods that can be thought on. How shall a conscientious, modest,
undesigning Man, who cannot comply with these unfair Dealings, these wicked and
dangerous Practices, and who has nothing to depend upon (after he has
expended his Portion in his Education in one of our Universities) but his
Profession,. 4, 12.
and the Candor, I might rather say the Perverseness of this retrograde and
degenerate Generation, live amongst them! One asked sometime, How it was that
in Athens, so goodly and so great a City, there were no Physicians? To whom
this Answer was made, Because there are no Rewards appointed for them that
practice Physic. We read See the Story i^ Athenaeus.
that one Cleon too, only a Songster, had a Statue at Thebes kept as sacred,
when Pindar himself had none. The like Reason may be given for the Poverty and
Neglect of abundance of our modern, worthy Professors of that Art. For though
they are entitled to Respect and Rewards, yet the present, prevailing ill
Customs of the Age have deprived them even of the precarious Ways of receiving
the same; and the only Relief they meet with is this common Retort, Si Populus
vult -- If People will be imposed upon, let them!

All which is owing to a general Insensibility; whilst not a Man looks upon it
his Duty, to consider and know what he is about, and how important and valuable
a thing Health is, and the Care they ought to take in the Conservation of it:
But all love to go on in the stupid Way of their Forefathers, or the Company
they are in, without Reflection; and choose to join in the Delusion with others,
rather than believe their Senses, and their own Experience, and judge for
themselves; whilst they resolve to be ignorant of what they fear at the same
time, and of the Dangers they expose themselves to; and suffer those very
Persons to go on with Impunity, that most grossly impose upon them. And who
dares correct them! Their Impudence exceeds, and is got beyond all reasonable
Restraint: And where Argument and Persuasion, The Laws ought to restrain these
Abuses.. 4, 14, 16.
founded upon Truths and Fact, cannot reduce Offenders, and the Deluded, the Law
ought to take place, and compel.

-- In vitium Libertas excidit and vim
Dignam Lege regi --
For my own part, I give up the Cause, doubting there is no Remedy, I give up
the Cause.
no Redress of our Grievances to be obtained. And I have not looked into these
Irregularities and Mismanagements to expose the Faculty. Invitus ea tanquam
vulnera attingo, sed nisi tacta tractataque sanari non possunt: I touch upon
them unwillingly, and as raw Sores, which nevertheless cannot be healed, except
they are handled and probed to the Bottom. Though, after all, I need not mince
the matter. It is not unbecoming, but praiseworthy, to reprehend Persons that
will not amend what they are conscious is a Crime, though they are unwilling to
acknowledge it, or to hear of it. I ought rather to conclude with a Father of
the Church, (upon another Occasion) ' Quid me loqui pudeat, quod illos non
pudeat facere? Si pudeat audire quod impudenter egerant, non pudeat emendare
quod libenter non audiant.
Why should I be ashamed to speak of those things, that they are not ashamed to
do? If they are ashamed to hear of their bad Actions, let them not be ashamed
to reform what is so grievous to them to hear of; and let them not rail when
they are reproved, lest more of their Roguery should be discovered.'

Surely there is not an Instance in any Nation of such barefaced Abuses, such
Violence and Dishonor done to the Faculty, as there is in this! There is no
Nation under the Sun (that is civilized, and not utterly overrun with Ignorance
and Delusion) permits so many circumforaneous Mountebanks,
Empirick-Apothecaries, Surgeon-Barbers, Piss-pot Doctors, or Casters of Waters,
as they are called, Nurses, and silly old Women, to administer Medicines, and
to destroy People without being called to an account for it, as England does!

SECT. XVII.
A Remedy against these Epidemical Evils proposed. Vid.. 9.
AND no Remedy against all these recited Evils seems so feazible and promising,
as the giving due Encouragement to our Physicians that are bred up in our own
Academies, and the making a Law to punish, and effectually to restrain and
suppress all unqualified Intruders into the Faculty. Plato banished the famous
Homer from his imaginary Commonwealth. And if this divine Philosopher would not
suffer the most celebrated and excellent Poets, because they might corrupt the
Morals of the People with their lewd Fictions, etc. certainly those that poison
and destroy them, whilst they pretend to heal and preserve them, deserve to be
banished also. But an honest Physician placed in every Market Town, or in a
Division or Hundred of a County, and a Dispensatory (where Medicines may be had
at little more than prime Cost) kept in his own House, and Infirmaries erected,
must needs be hugely serviceable to all Sorts of People.

Physicians Fees should be regulated, and the Princes of (Bills for) Medicines
taxed.
But then his Fees should be moderated, and reduced from that extravagant Pitch
to which some now advance them: and also be ascertained; with Allowances for
riding long Journeys, and Night-Work. And the Reasonableness of this Proposal
is evident; as also for that of restraining the Apothecaries, etc. from going
out of their Shops, and practicing; since all Means of making them just and
faithful, and of moderating the Prices of their bad Medicines, have hitherto
proved ineffectual. What Success can be expected, if a pertinent Bill or
Prescript of an honest Physician is not truly made up? And how this can be done
(by many Country Apothecaries especially) the Premises considered rightly, I
leave any judicious and impartial Person to determine.

To the popular Objection, Objections answered:
and other Persons that now practice Physic, and sell Medicines, were to be
suppressed, and the Price of their Commodities lowered to the Degrees of Profit
arising from other Goods, they must either starve, or take upon them some other
ways of Maintenance; and thus an useful Order and Community of Men must sink,
and be lost to the Commonwealth, etc. it is answered, It is but just and
reasonable they should thus suffer, rather than go on in their mischievous Ways
of enriching themselves, at the Expense and Destruction of the Estates and
Lives of the rest. Tully tells us, Illud quidem natura non patitur, ut aliorum
spoliis nostras facultates, copias, opes augeamus. And to the same purpose
speak the Rules of the Jure naturae aequum est, neminem cum alterius detrimento
and injuria fieri locupletiorem. Nemo ex suo delicto meliorem suam conditionem
facere porest.
Civil Law. It is as unnatural and unlawful to support, and enrich our selves
by the Spoils and open Oppression of our Neighbors, as by our own private
Crimes and secret Villainies. And in all well regulated Governments,
incorrigible Delinquents, and all combined Societies that are found dangerous
and detrimental to the Good and Safety of the Whole, have been always cut off
and suppressed: According to that of the Poet,

-- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum est, ne Pars sincera trabatur.
Neither can their Reduction to their wonted Stations, amongst the Grocers and
Chandlers, be such a mighty Detriment and Disgrace to them, as they would fain
insinuate; since such great Numbers of them, in the Country Towns especially,
vend greater Quantities of Goods in the Grocery, Chandlers, and Distillers, (or
rather in the way of Gin-Shops, as is the modern Term for the Places where they
sell Drams of base Spirits) than they do in the way of Pharmacy; and so they
become in some measure serviceable, and promote the Trade of the Nation. Though
when they go out of their way, and move in a Sphere above their Capacity, they
are so far from doing good, that they do incredible Damage; they not only
defraud, but kill Men.

I think there is no Man of right Understanding but must hold this Maxim, Salus
Populi suprema Lex; The Good, the Health, and Safety of the People, the supreme
Law; and the End of entering into Corporations, or Societies.
That the supreme Law of all is the Safety of the People; and that all
Government was ordained by the Institution of God, for the Good and Security,
the Health and Happiness of Mankind; and that Men have voluntarily resolved
themselves into Societies, for the mutual Preservation and Assistance of one
another: Self-Preservation being the primary Aim of every Individual; and since
that cannot be effected without mutual Assistance, it is natural for a Man to
promise to others those Aids and Helps, that he would expect from them on the
like occasions. Hence arise all the Obligations a Man lays himself under, when
he enters into a Civil Society. Upon this Foot, all Corporations and Societies
of Tradesmen, and indeed for the Encouragement of Liberal Sciences, are
founded; and every Man, Those that obviate and subvert these Ends, ought to be
extirpated.
or Society of Men, that apparently subverts the very Ends of those Compacts,
ought not only to be debarred the common Privileges of, but also to be expelled
the said Society, of which he is become such an unworthy Member; so as instead
of using his utmost Endeavors for the Preservation of the Life and Health of
his Fellow-Citizens, he becomes instrumental in their Destruction. As no Man
can give another Power to kill him; because the Consent is unnatural, and in
itself null and void: So no Community or People can give any Persons Power to
destroy them, either directly, or by consequence; Because their becoming a
Community (or a Nation governed by Laws) was for their Preservation; and it is
preposterous that the Means should be destructive of the End. But how little
different from this is our present Case; when the very Order of Men, who are
instituted to be Conservators of our Health, (consequentially at least,) and
the Means they pretend to use in order thereto, are so egregiously corrupted,
as too frequently to become our Destroyers! A Man may give me power to give him
Physic, but not Poison.

The abused Art of the Apothecary not so necessary, as is the Science of the
Physician.
And if the Faculty of Physic is by so many illiterate, bold, and dishonest
Intruders into that (otherwise) sacred Art, so far corrupted, that there is a
Necessity of examining into the Abuses thereof, and to rectify the same, in
order to the Preservation of the Health and Lives of the People; and
consequently that the Branches of it, that are found not only useless but
pernicious, should be dismembered; I need not ask; every one must readily agree,
that it is safest, and most for the Advantage of the Nation, for an illiterate
inferior, The Nation has not need of, and we can do without Apothecaries; but
we cannot do without Physicians.
base and abusive Set of Mechanics to be laid aside, or made to turn their
Hands to other Occupations, to which they are better adapted; than for a
learned, noble, necessary Liberal Science to be neglected, discouraged and
rendered useless, in this trading, potent and flourishing Kingdom, and (as we
affect to be accounted) this wise and learned Nation. In short, after all that
has been said, I need not go about to prove, (it is self-evident) that the
abused Art of the Apothecaries is not necessary; that we can do much better
without them, and they much better (not so much Mischief) by laying aside that,
and pursuing some other ways of Livelihood: but that the Science of the
Physicians is absolutely necessary; we cannot do without them, nor well without
their Faculty is better regulated, and more encouraged.

Our World is turned upside down; Truth fails; there is no Judgment; Isa.
lix. 15. etc.
But the Case stands now quite otherways: We see the reverse of all this amongst
us. Perverse Custom prevails, and turns all things topsy-turvy. Truth fails;
and he that departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey; as said the Prophet:
There was no Judgment. We don't judge of Men and Things according to the
Measures that Nature and right Reason dictate to us; but suffer ourselves to be
imposed upon in every thing; and our Passions and Interest prevail in all our
Deportment. We don't esteem ourselves for those Accomplishments, which superior
Beings think valuable: Virtue, Integrity, and Knowledge are of small account.
As few Men square their Actions by these Rules, so they don't use to cast them
into their Balance; but every one is apt to measure his Understanding by the
Extent of his Acres, and his Goodness by the Length of his Purse, or the Party
he espouseth; To think no Man happy, that is not rich; and he that is, (let him
acquire his Wealth how he will) the only Man to be regarded; and that none are
wise, who do not think, and say, and do at this rate.

Reformers are generally the Subject of Hatred, Reflection and Ridic^le; and
persecuted.
And if a Man emerges, once in an Age, who has the Conscience and Courage to
detect and decry these fatal, though fashionable Errors, and the Guilty begin
(with Demetrius) to fear that their wicked Craft shall be brought to naught,
it is natural for them to hate him, and persecute him to the utmost of their
Power, and to prepossess Men's Minds with groundless Suggestions against him,
and to secure their Affections to themselves; that they may be sure to begin to
hate him, before they know him and his worthy Proposals, for fear that by
knowing them, they should be constrained to fall in with them, or at least they
should not be able to find how to condemn him.

But let me not digress. It Is to be feared, Arguments will prevail but little
on this occasion. Nothing but the Legislative Authority can redress this great
and prevailing Evil: And it repents me, that I had not addressed some worthy
Member of it, who might have introduced these affecting Complaints into the
August Assembly in which that is lodged, in such sort as might have entitled
them to a favorable Audience. But as I had laid no Scheme, had nothing in view
but to lay open the Truth and Matters of Fact, which I thought would support
themselves; so consequently I did not know, or at least did not at the
beginning of my Discourse rightly consider, whither it might tend, nor what
Consequences and Conclusions might be inferred from it. But not to trouble my
Reader with apologetic Impertinence: The Legislative Authority addressed, for
Relief against these great Evils, as the last Refuge and Resort: though that was
not at first the Intent of the Author. Vid.. 1, 4, 14, 16.
If the Author of these Sheets, and his Methods to remedy these dangerous
Mischiefs, are thought frivolous and insufficient, it is high Time for the
Wisdom of the Nation to concert better. And it is to be hoped, that the
Parliament of Great Britain will e're long do our Universities justice; since
there is no Nation besides, (as a worthy Gentleman has remarked,) where the
Professors of its Universities have not the Liberty of exercising their
Profession in any Part thereof, without such Interruption and unheard of
Violence offered to their Persons and Characters. And surely Stupidity and
Ignorance, and a Disregard to all Literature and religious Education, is not so
predominant, nor the Concern for the Health and Safety of the People so cold
and indifferent, that the Representative Body of our own Nation will think our
Peoples Lives of less Value than those of other Regions, or our own
Universities the least considerable in Europe.

And when the People are undeceived by this interposing Authority, it is to be
hoped these Disorders will be at an end: These irregular Intruders, and
unqualified Invaders of this noble, learned and necessary Science will be
suppressed, and all due Encouragement afforded to our regular Physicians, who
justly (and that for the Good and Advantage of the Nation in general, as well
as for their own just Dues and private Emolument and Subsistence) claim a
Redress of these Grievances: Since all Orders of Men expect to have justice
done their Characters, Rights and Interests, from the End and Design of their
Institution, and from a general Account of their Conduct; and not from the ill
Management of a few, or the Introduction of some irregular Customs, which they
could not foresee, and cannot yet prevent.

FINIS.

