THE IRON CHEST: A PLAY; IN THREE ACTS. WRITTEN BY GEORGE COLMAN, THE YOUNGER.
WITH A PREFACE.

First represented at the THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE, on SATURDAY, 12th MARCH,
1796.

"THE PRINCIPAL CHARACTERS"

"By Mr. KEMBLE," etc.

DRURY LANE PLAY-BILL. I had as lieve the Town-Crier had spoke my Lines."
SHAKESPEARE. DUBLIN: PRINTED BY THOMAS BURNSIDE, FOR P. WOGAN, J. RICE, AND G.
FOLINGSBY. 1796.

PREFACE.
HAVING been, for some time, a labourer in the Drama, and finding it necessary
to continue my labors, I cannot help endeavoring to guard the past from
misrepresentation, lest my supineness may injure the future. Conscious that a
prejudice has been created against the Play which I now submit to the Reader,
and conscious how far I am innocent of raising it, it were stupid to sit down
in silence, and thus tacitly acknowledge myself guilty of dullness; -- dumbly
confess I have been deficient in the knowledge of my trade, damn myself for a
bungling workman, and fix a disrepute upon every article which may, hereafter,
come from my hands.

Thanks to you, Ladies and Gentlemen! you have been kind customers to me; and I
am proud to say that you have stamped a fashion upon my goods. Base, indeed,
and ungrateful were the attempt, after your favors, so long received and
continued, to impose upon you a clumsy commodity, and boast it to be ware of
the best quality that I ever put up to sale! No -- on the word of an honest
man, I have bestowed no small pains upon this Iron Chest, which I offer you.
Inspect it; examine it; you see the maker's name is upon it. I do not say it is
perfect; I do not pretend to tell you it is of the highest polish; there is no
occasion for that: -- many of my brethren have presented you with mere linings
for chests, and you have been content: -- but, I trust, you will find that my
Iron Chest will hold together, that it is tolerably sound, and fit for all the
purposes for which it was intended.

Then how came it to fall to pieces, after four days wear? -- I will explain
that: -- but alas! alas! my heart does yearn, when I think on the task which
circumstance has thrust upon me.

Now, by the Spirit of Peace, I Swear! were I not doomed to explore the rugged
windings of the Drama, I would wrap myself in mute philosophy, and repose
calmly under the dark shade of my grievance, rather than endure the pain, and
trouble, of this explanation. -- I cannot, however, cry "Let the world slide:"
I must pursue my journey; and be active to clear away the obstacles that impede
my progress.

I am too callous, now, to be annoyed by those innumerable gnats and insects,
who daily dart their impotent stings on the literary traveller; and too knowing
to dismount, and waste my time in whipping grasshoppers: -- but here is a
scowling, sullen, black Bull, right athwart my road; -- a monster of magnitude,
of the Boeotian breed, perplexing me in my wanderings through the entangled
labyrinth of Drury! he stands sulkily before me, with sides, seemingly
impenetrable to any lash, and tougher than the Dun Cow of Warwick! -- His front
out-fronting the brazen bull of Perillus! -- He has bellowed, Gentlemen! Yea,
he has bellowed a dismal sound! A hollow, unvaried tone, heaved from his very
midriff, and striking the listener with torpor! -- Would I could pass the
animal quietly, for my own sake! -- and, for his, by Jupiter! I repeat it, I
would not willingly harm the Bull. -- I delight not in baiting him. -- I would
jog as gently by him as by the ass that grazes on the common: but he has
obstinately blocked up my way -- he has already tossed and gored me, severely
-- I must make an effort, or he batters me down, and leaves me to bite the dust.

The weapon I must use is not of that brilliant, and keen quality, which, in a
skilful hand, neatly cuts up the subject, to the delight, and admiration, of
the bye-standers: It is a homely cudgel of Narrative; a blunt batoon of Matter
of fact; affording little display of art in the wielder; and so heavy in its
nature, that it can merely claim the merit of being appropriate to the opponent
at whom it is levelled.

Pray, stand clear! -- for I shall handle this club vilely: and if any one come
in my way, he may chance to get a rap, which I did not intend to bestow upon
him. Good venal and venomous gentlemen, who dabble in ink for pay or from
pique, and who have dubbed yourselves Critics, keep your distance now! Run
home to your garrets! -- Fools! ye are but Ephemera at best; and will die soon
enough, in the paltry course of your insignificant natures, without thrusting
your ears (if there be any left you) into the heat of this perilous action. --
A vaunt! -- well, well, stay if ye are bent upon it, and be pert and busy; --
your folly, to me, is of no moment. Ye who impartially, and conscientiously,
sit in diurnal judgment upon modern dramatists, apply not this to yourselves.
It aims only at the malevolent, the mean, and the ignorant, who are the
disgrace of your order.


I hasten now to my Narrative.

I agreed to write the following Play, at the instance of the chief Proprietor
of Drury Lane Theater; who, unconditionally, agreed to pay me a certain sum for
my labor: -- and this certain sum, being much larger than any, I believe,
hitherto offered on similar occasions, created no small jealousy among the
Parnassian Sans Culottes; several of whom have, of late, been vapidly
industrious to level, to the muddy surface of their own Castalian ditch, so
Aristocratico-Dramatick a bargainer. The Play, as fast as written, (piecemeal)
was put into rehearsal: But let it here be noted, gentle reader! that a
rehearsal, in Drury Lane, (I mean as far as relates to this Iron Chest) is
lucus a non lucendo. They yclep it a rehearsal, I conjecture, because they do
NOT rehearse. I call the loved shade of Garrick to witness; nay, I call the
less loved presence of the then acting Manager to avow, -- that there never was
one fair rehearsal of the Play. -- Never one rehearsal, wherein one, or two, or
more, of the Performers, very essential to the piece, were not absent: and all
the rehearsals which I attended, so slovenly, and irregular, that the ragged
master of a theatrical Barn, might have blushed for the want of discipline in
the pompous Director of His Majesty's Servants, at the vast and astonishing
new-erected Theater Royal, in Drury Lane.

It is well known, to those conversant with the business of the stage, that no
perfect judgment can be formed of the length of a Play, apparent to the
spectator, nor of the general effect intended to be produced, until the private
repetitions, among the actors, have reduced the business into something like
lucidus ordo: -- then comes the time for the judicious author to take up his
pruning-knife, or handle his hatchet. Then he goes lustily to work, my masters!
upon his curtailments, or additions; his transpositions, his loppings, his
parings, trimmings, dockings, etc. etc. etc. As in the writing, so in the
rehearsal.

"Ordinis haec virtus erit et venus, aut ego fallor;"
"Ut jam nunc dicat, jam nunc debentia dici"
"Pleraque differat, et praesens in tempus omittat:"
"Hoc amet, hoc spernat, promissi carminis Auctor."
But, woe is me! while I was patiently waiting the expected crisis, a
circumstance occurred which compelled me to watch a crisis of a less agreeable
nature. A fever attacked me, as I sat beneath the damp dome of Drury, and drove
me, malgre moi, to bed; where I lay during a week, till three hours before the
Play was exhibited. In addition to the unavoidable injury arising from the
author's absence, Mr. KEMBLE, the acting-manager, and principal performer in
the piece, was, and had been for a few days, previous to my own illness,
confined to his chamber, by indisposition. I lay little stress, indeed, upon
his temporary incapacity to perform his managerical duty; his mode of
discharging it, hitherto, was productive of little benefit to me; -- Still it
was some drawback -- for were a mere Log thrown amidst a Thespian community,
and nominated its dull and ponderous Ruler, still the block, while in its
place, would carry some sway with it: -- but his non-attendance as an actor, so
much engaged in the Play, was particularly detrimental.

Nay, even the Composer of the music -- and here let me breathe a sigh to the
memory of departed worth and genius, as I write the name of STORAGE -- even he,
could not preside in his department. He was preparing an early flight to that
abode of harmony, where choirs of Angels swell the note of welcome to an
honest, and congenial spirit.

Here then was a direct stop to the business? No such thing. The Troops
proceeded without leaders: In the dark, Messieur.! -- "Sans eyes, Sans every
thing." The Prompter, it is true, a kind of non-commissioned officer, headed
the Corpse, and a curious march was made of it!

But, lo! two days, or three, (I forget which) previous to the public
representation, up rose King KEMBLE! like Somnus from his ebon bed, to
distribute his dozing directions among his subjects.

"Tarda gravitate jacentes"
"Vix oculus tollens;"
"Summaque percutiens nutanti pictora mento,"
"Excussit, tandem, sibi se; cubitoque levatus," etc.
He came, saw, and pronounced the Piece to be ripe for exhibition. It was
ordered to be performed immediately. News was brought to me, in my sickness, of
the mighty Fiat; and, although I was told, officially, that due care had been
taken to render it worthy of public attention, I submitted with doubt and
trembling to the decree. My doubts, too, of this boasted care, were not a
little increased by a note, which I received from the Prompter, written by the
Manager's order, three hours only, before the first representation of the Play:
-- wherein, at this late period, my consent was, abruptly, requested to a
transposition of two of the most material scenes in the second act: and the
reason given for this curious proposal was, that the present stage of Drury --
where the Architect and Machinist, with the judgment and ingenuity of a
Politician and a Wit to assist them, had combined to outdo all former
theatrical outdoings -- was so bunglingly constructed, that there was not time
for the carpenters to place the lumbering frame-work, on which an Abbey was
painted, behind the representation of a Library, without having a chasm of ten
minutes in the action of the Play; and that in the middle of an act. -- Such
was the fabrication of that New Stage, whose "extent and powers" have been so
vauntingly advertised, under the classick management of Mr. KEMBLE, in the
edifying exhibition of Pantomimes, Processions, Pageants, Triumphal Cars, Milk
white Horses, and Elephants!

As I did not choose to alter the construction of my Play, without deliberation,
merely to skreen the ill-construction of the House, I would not listen to the
modest, and well timed demand, of turning the progress of my fable topsy turvy.

Very ill, and very weak, from the effects of the fever, which ha^ not, yet,
left me, I made an effort, and went to the Theater, to witness the performance.
I found Mr. KEMBLE, in his dressing room, a short time before the curtain was
drawn up, taking Opium Pills: and, nobody who is acquainted with that gentleman
will doubt me when I assert, that, they are a medicine which he has long been
in the habit of swallowing. He appeared to me very unwell; and seemed, indeed,
to have imbibed, "Poppy and Mandragora,"
"And all the drowsy syrups of the world."


The Play began; and all went smoothly, till a trifling disapprobation was
shown to the character personated by Mr. DODD; -- the scene in which he was
engaged being much too long: A proof of the neglect of those whose business it
was to have informed me (in my unavoidable absence from the Theater) that it
appea^ed in the last rehearsals, to want curtailment. I considered this,
however, to be of no great moment; (...) Mr. KEMBLE was to appear immediately
in a sub^^quent scene, and much was expected from his execution of a part,
written expressly for his powers.

And, here, let me describe the requisites for the character which I have
attempted to draw, that the world may judge whether I have taken a wrong
measure of the personage whom I proposed to fit: premising that I have worked
for him before, with success, and, therefore, it may be presumed that I am
somewhat acquainted with the dimensions of his qualifications. -- I required,
then, a man "Of a tall stature, and of sable hue,"
"Much like the son of Kish, that lofty Jew."
A man of whom it might be said, "There Is something in his soul"
"Over which his melancholy sits, and broods."


Look at the actor; -- and will any body do him the injustice to declare that
he is deficient in these qualifications? It would puzzle any author, in any
time or country, from Aeschylus down, even, to the Translator of Lodoiska --
and really, gentlemen, I can go no lower -- to find a figure and face better
suited to the purpose. I have endeavored, more-over, to pourtray Sir Edward
Mortimer as a man stately in his deportment, reserved in his temper,
mysterious, cold, and impenetrable, in his manner: and the candid observers, I
trust, will allow that Mr. KEMBLE is thouroughly adequate to such a personation.

To complete my requisitions, I demanded a performer who could enter into the
spirit of a character proceeding upon romantic, half-witted principles,
abstracted in his opinions, sophisticated in his reasonings, and who is thrown
into situations where his mind and conduct stand, tiptoe, on the extremest
verge of probability. Here, surely, I have not mistaken my man; for if I am
able to form any opinion of him, as an Actor, -- and my opinion, I know, is far
from singular, -- his chief excellence almost approaches that style which the
learned denominate Caricature. Possibility on the stretch, passion over-leaping
it is customary bound, movements of the soul, sullen, or violent, very rarely
seen in the common course of things, yet still may be seen -- in these is his
element. As our language is said to have sunk under the vast conception of
MILTON, so does the modesty of nature suffer a depression beneath the unwieldy
imaginings of Mr. KEMBLE. He seldom deigns to accompany the Goddess in her
ordinary walks; when she decently paces the regular path, with a sober step,
and a straight person: but he kindly assists her when she is, doubtless, in
need of assistance -- when she appears out of her way, crazy and crooked.

The arrogant fault of being more refined than Refinement, more proper than
Propriety, more sensible than Sense, which, nine times in ten, will disgust the
spectator, becomes frequently, an advantage to him, in characters of the above
description.

In short, Mr KEMELE is a paragon-representative of the Lusus Naturae: and were
Mr. KEMBLE sewed up in a skin, to act a hog in a pantomime, he would act a hog
with six legs better than a hog with four.

If any one ask why I chose to sketch a Lusus Naturae when it might better
become an author to be chaste in his delineation, I can only reply that, I did
so to obtain the assistance of Mr. KEMBLE in his best manner; and that now, I
do most heartily repent me: for never, sure, did man place the main strength of
his building upon so rotten a prop!

Well, the great actor was discovered, as Sir Edward Mortimer, in his library.
Gloom and desolation sat upon his brow; and he was habited, from the wig to the
shoe-string, with the most studied exactness. Had one of King CHARLES the
First's portraits walked from its frame, upon the boards of the Theater, it
could not have afforded a truer representation of ancient and melancholy
dignity.

The picture could not have looked better -- but, in justice to the picture, it
must also be added, that, the picture could scarcely have acted worse.

The spectators, who gaped with expectation at his first appearance, yawned
with lassitude before his first exit. It seemed, however, that illness had
totally incapacitated him from performing the business he had undertaken. For
his mere illness he was entitled to pity; for his conduct under it, he,
undoubtedly, deserved censure.

How can Mr. KEMBLE, as a Manager, and an Actor, justify his thrusting himself
forward in a new Play, the material interest of which rested upon his own
powers, at a moment when he must be conscious that he had no powers at all? --
Mr. KEMELE owes a duty to the public, to his employer, and to an author
writing for his employer's house. How does he treat the claimants upon his
service, in this instance? Exactly, thus -- he insults the understanding of the
first, and injures the interests of the two last, by calling in a crowd to an
entertainment which he knows he must mar.

I requested him, at the end of the first act, to order an apology to be made
for his indisposition, lest the uninformed or malicious, might attribute the
ponderosity of the performer to the heaviness of the author. I was anxious to
disavow all right and title to those pigs of lead which did not belong to me,
and of which Mr. KEMBLE was the just proprietor. But no -- he peremptorily
declared he would not suffer an apology to be made! It should have been made
(if at all) before the play began. -- Then why was it not made? -- He did not,
then, imagine that illness would have disabled him. -- So, then, a man quits
his chamber, after an attack which has, evidently, weakened him extremely, and
he has no bodily feel, no internal monitor, to whisper to him that he is
feeble, and that he has not recovered sufficient strength to make a violent
exertion! -- This mode of reasoning, adopted by Mr. KEMBLE, is much in the
spirit of that clown's, who did not know whether he could play on the fiddle
'till he tried. Be it noted, also, that Mr. KEMBLE was swallowing his opium
pills, before the play began, because he was ill: -- but opium causes strange
oblivious effects; and these pills must have occasioned so sudden a lapse in
Mr. KEMBLE's memory, that he forgot when he took them, why he took them, or
that he had taken them at all. -- The dose must have been very powerful. --
Still, for the reasons already stated, I pressed for an apology; still Mr.
KEMBLE continued obstinate in opposing it. His indisposition, he said, was
evident; he had coughed very much upon the stage, and an apology would make him
"look like a fool.."

Goodnature in excess becomes weakness; but I never yet found, in the confined
course of my reading, that goodnature and folly would bear the same
definition: Mr. KEMBLE, it should seem (and he produced, at least, managerical
authority for it) considered the terms to be synonimous. Freely, however,
forgiving him for his unkindness, in refusing to gratify a poor devil of an
author, -- who, very anxious for his reputation, was very moderate in his
request -- I do, in all christian charity, most sincerely wish that Mr. KEMBLE
may never find greater cause to look like a fool than an apology for his
indisposition.

At length, by dint of perseverance, I gained my point. A proprietor of the
Theater was called in upon the occasion, whose mediation in my favor carried
more weight with the Acting Manager than a hapless Dramatist's entreaty; and
the apology was, in due form, delivered to the audience.

One third of the Play, only, was yet performed; and I was, now, to make up my
mind, like an unfortunate traveller, to pursue my painful journey, through two
stages more, upon a broken-down Poster, car whose back lay all the baggage for
my expedition. Miserably, and most heavily in hand, did the Poster proceed! --
He groaned, he lagged, he coughed, he winced, he weezed! -- Never was seen so
sorry a jade! The audience grew completely soured, and, once completely soured,
every thing, naturally, went wrong. They recurred to their disapprobation of
poor DODD -- and observe what this produced. I must relate it.

Mr. KEMBLE had just plodded through a scene, regardless of those loud and
manifest tokens that the Critics delight not in the "drowsy hums" with which
he rang night's "yawning peal," when DODD appeared to him on the Stage; at
whose entrance the clamor was renewed. Then, and not till then, did the Acting
Manager, who had been deaf as any post to the supplications of the author for
an apology -- then did he appear suddenly seized with a fit of good nature. He
voluntarily came forward "to look like a fool," and beg the indulgence of the
town. He feared he was the unhappy cause of their disapprobation; he entreated
their patience, and hoped he should shortly gain strength, to enable them to
judge, on a future night, what he handsomely termed the merits of the Play.
Here was friendship! Here was adroitness! While the Public were testifying
their disgust at the Piece, through the medium of poor DODD, Mr. KEMBLE, with
unexampled generosity, took the whole blame upon his own shoulders, and
heroically saved the author, by so timely an interposition. I was charmed with
this master-stroke, and, at the impulse of the moment, I thanked him. But,
alas! how narrow is the soul of man! how distrustful in its movements, how
scanty in its acknowledgments, how perplexing to itself in its combinations!
Had I, afterward, looked on the thing simply and nakedly, by itself, why the
thing is a good-natured thing: but I must be putting other circumstances by the
side of it, with a plague to me! I must be puzzling myself to see if all fits;
if all is of a piece. And what is the result? -- Miserable that I am! I have
lost the pleasure of evincing a gratitude, which I thought I owed, because I no
longer feel myself a debtor. Had I abandoned my mind to that placid negligence,
that luxurious confidence, which the inconsiderate enjoy, it had never occurred
to me that Mr. KEMBLE, foreseeing, perhaps, that an aggrieved author might not
be totally silent -- steped forward with this speech to the public, as a kind
of salvo, (should a statement be made) for his rigidity in the first instance.
It had never occurred to me that Mr. KEMBLE was sufficiently hissed, yawned at,
laughed at, and coughed down, to have made his apology before Mr. DODD
appeared: It had never occurred to me that his making his apology at a previous
moment would have answered the same purpose to me, and not to him: It had never
occurred, in short, that there is such a thing as ostentatious humility, and a
politic act of kindness; and that I should have waited the sequel of a man's
conduct, before I thanked him for one instance of seeming good will, close upon
the heels of stubborn ill nature, and in the midst of existing, and palpable
injury. The sequel will show that I was premature in my acknowledgment -- but
before I come to the sequel, a word or two (I will be brief) to close my
account of this, the first night's, eventful history. The Piece was concluded,
and given out, for a second performance with much opposition.

Friends, who never heard the Play read, shook their heads; Friends, who had
heard it read, scarcely knew it again: Several, I doubt not, of the impartial,
who chose to be active, actively condemned; and enemies, of course, rejoiced in
an opportunity of joining them.

No opportunity could be fairer. The Play was, at least, a full hour too long;
and had Job himself sat to hear it he must have lost his patience. But, if,
gentle reader, thou possessest Job's quality, and have followed me thus far, in
my Narrative, it will appear to thee (for I doubt not thy retention and
combination) that I was unable to curtail it effectually, at the proper time --
the last rehearsals. I was, then, laid flat, my dear friend, as you remember I
have told you, by a fever. The Acting Manager did attend the last rehearsals,
and suffered the piece to be produced, uncut, to "drag its slow length along"
surcharged with all his own incapacity, and all his opium.

How, then, do I stand indebted, according to the articles of this night's
statement? I owe to Mr. KEMBLE, For his illness, COMPASSION, For his conduct
under it, CENSURE, For his refusing to make an apology, A SMILE! For his making
an apology, A SNEER, For his mismanagement, A GROAN, For his acting, A HISS.


This account is somewhat like the Tavern bill, picked from Falstaff's pocket,
when he is snorting behind the arras. There is but one halfpenny worth of
compassion to this intolerable deal of blame.

Now for the sequel. -- I have shown, I think, that Mr. KEMBLE, in the first
instance, undertook a duty which he could not perform: I have now to affirm,
with all the difficulty of proving a negative full in my face, that he
afterward, made a mockery of discharging a duty which he would not perform.

After a week's interval, to give him time to recruit his strength; and the
Author time to curtail, and alter, the Play; (for the impression which the
Mis-Manager and Actor, had contrived to stamp rendered alteration necessary) it
was a second time represented.

I must, here, let the uninformed reader into a secret; -- but I must go to
Newmarket to make him understand me. -- No, Epsom will do as well; and that is
nearer home. -- It often happens, at a Race, that a known Horse, from whom good
sport is expected, disappoints the crowd by walking over the course. -- He does
not miss an inch of the ground; but affords not one jot of diversion, unless
some pleasure is received in contemplating his figure. Now, an actor can do the
very same thing. He can walk over his part: He can miss no more of his words
than the Horse does of his way: he can be as dull, and as tedious, and as
good-looking as the Horse in his progress: -- The only difference between the
two animals is, -- that the Horse brings in him who bets upon him a gainer; but
the luckless wight who has a large stake depending upon the actor is,
decidedly, certain to lose. There is a trick, too, that the Jockies practice,
which is called, I think, playing booty. This consists in appearing to use
their utmost endeavor to reach the winning-post first, when they are already
determined to come in the last. The consequence is, that all, except the
knowing ones, attribute no fault to the Jockey, but damn the Horse for a
sluggard. -- An actor can play booty if he chooses: -- he can pretend to whip
and spur, and do his best, when the Connoisseur knows, all the while, he is
shirking: -- but Sluggard is the unmerited appellation given by the majority to
the innocent author..

Mr. KEMBLE chiefly chose to be Horse, and walked over the ground. Every now
and then (but scarcely enough to save appearances) he gave a slight touch of
the Jockey, and played booty.

Whether the language which is put into the mouth of Sir Edward Mortimer be
above mediocrity, or below contempt, is not to the present purpose: but the
words he is made to utter certainly convey a meaning; and the circumstances of
the scenes afford an opportunity to the Performer of playing off his mimick
emotions, his transitions of passion, his starts, and all the trickeries of his
trade. The devil a trick did Mr. KEMBLE play but a very scurvy one! His
emotions and passions were so rare, and so feeble, that they seasoned his
general insipidity, like a single grain of wretched pepper thrown into the
largest dose of water gruel that ever was administered to an invalid. For the
most part, he toiled on, line after line, in a dull current of undiversified
sound, which stole upon the ear far more drowsily than the distant murmurings
of Lethe; with no attempt to break the lulling stream, or check its
sleep-inviting course.

Frogs in a marsh, flies in a bottle; wind in a crevice, a preacher in a field,
the drone of a bagpipe, all, all yielded to the inimitable, and soporific
monotony of Mr. KEMBLE!

The very best Dramatick writing, where passion is expressed, if delivered
languidly by the Actor, will fail in it is intended effect: and I will be bold
enough to say that were the Curse in King Lear new to an audience, and they
heard it uttered, for the first time, in a croak, fainter than a crow's in a
consumption, it would pass unnoticed, or appear vapid to the million.

If I raise a critical clatter about my ears, by this assertion, which some may
twist into a profanation of Shakspeare, I leave it to Horace, who can fight
battles better than I, to defend me.

"Si dicentis erunt fortunis absona dicta,"
"Romani tollent pedites equitesque cachinnum."
That Mr. KEMBLE did not misconceive the Part is certain; for he told me, some
time before the Play was acted, that he feared the exertions requisite, in Sir
Edward Mortimer, would strain his lungs more than Octavian, in the Mountaineers.

That he can strain his lungs, to good purpose, in Octavian, is well known;
and, after this, his own intimation, how will he escape the charge of wilful
and direct delinquency, when, with such a conception of the Part, and with
health recovered, he came forward in the true spirit of Bottom, and "aggravated
his voice so that he roared you as gentle as any sucking dove?" Mr. KEMBLE
informed me, previous to the second representation of the Play, that he felt
himself capable of exertion.


He insulted the Town, and injured his Employer, and the Author, sufficiently
in the first instance: in the second he added to the insult and injury an
hundredfold: and as often as he mangled the Character (three or four times, I
am uncertain which, after the first night's performance) he heaped aggravation
upon aggravation.

The most miserable mummer, that ever disgraced the walls of a Theater, could
not have been a stronger drawback than Mr. KEMBLE. -- He was not only dull in
himself, but the cause of dullness in others. Like the baleful Upas of Java, his
pestiferous influence infected all around him. When two Actors come forward, to
keep up the Shuttle cock of scenick-fiction, if one plays slovenly, the other
cannot maintain his game. Poor BANNISTER, Jun. would he speak out (but I have
never pressed him, and never shall press him to say a word upon the subject)
could bear ample testimony to the truth of this remark. He suffered like a man
under the cruelty of M^zentius. All alive himself, he was tied to a corpse,
which he was fated to drag about with him, scene after scene, which weighed him
down, and depressed his vigor. Miss FARREN, too, who might animate any thing
but a soul of lead, and a face of iron, experienced the same fate.

I could proceed, and argue, and reason, and discuss, and tire the reader, as I
have tired myself (it is now, my good friend, one o'clock in the morning) to
prove, further, that Mr. KEMBLE was unsound in my cause, and that he ruined my
Play: -- But I will desist here. I think I have prosed enough to manifest that
my arguments are not unfounded.

They who are experienced in Dramaticks will, I trust, see that I have made a
fair extenuation of myself -- they who are impartial will, I hope, be convinced
that I have set down naught in malice.

The only question that may arise to shake, materially, the credit of all I
have said, is -- "How is it probable that Mr. KEMBLE should injure you thus,
without provocation? Is it in nature? Is it in man?" I can merely answer that I
am unconscious of having given him cause for provocation; that if I have given
him cause, he has taken a bad mode of revenge; that Mr. KEMBLE's nature has
frequently puzzled me in my observation upon it; and that I think him a very
extraordinary man.

But let him take this with him, should this crudely written Preface ever fall
in his way. I have committed it to paper currente calamo. I mean no allusion,
no epithet, to apply to him as a private individual. As a private individual I
give him not that notice which it might, here, be impertinent to bestow: -- but
I have an undoubted right to discuss his merits, or demerits, in his public
capacities of Manager and Actor: and my cause of complaint gives me a good
reason as well as right. His want of conduct, his neglect, his injustice, his
oppression, his finesse, his person, his face, are in this point of view all
open to my animadversion.

"He is my goods, my chattlels;"
"My Horse, my Ox, my Ass, my any thing."
And I would animadvert still further, did I not think I had already said
sufficient to gain the object of guarding my own reputation. That object has
solely swayed me in dwelling so long upon a "plain tale," encumbered with so
fatiguing a Hero as JOHN KEMBLE.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I AM indebted for the groundwork of this Play to a Novel entitled "Things as
they are, or the Adventures of Caleb Williams; written by William Godwin." Much
of Mr. GODWIN's story I have omitted; much, which I have adopted, I have
compressed; much I have added; and much I have taken the liberty to alter.

All this I did that I might fit it, in the best of my judgment, to the stage.

I have cautiously avoided all tendency to that which, vulgarly, (and wrongly,
in many instances) is termed Politics; with which, many have told me, Caleb
Williams teems.

The stage has, now, no business with Politics: and, should a Dramatick Author
endeavor to dabble in them, it is the Lord Chamberlain's office to check his
attempts, before they meet the eye of the Public. I perused Mr. GODWIN's book,
as a tale replete with interesting incident, ingenious in its arrangement,
masterly in its delineation of character, and forcible in its language. I
considered it as right of Common; and, by a title which custom has given to
Dramatists, I enclosed it within my theatrical paling. However I may have
tilled the l^nd, I trust he discovers no intentional injury to him, in my
proceeding.

To all the Performers (excepting Mr. KEMBLE) I offer my hearty thanks for
their exertions; which would have served me more, had not an actor, "dark as
Erebus," cast a gloom upon them, which none of their efforts, however
brilliant, could entirely disperse.

But this does not diminish my obligations to them: -- so much, indeed, I owe
to them, that, when the Play was last performed, it was rising, spite of
Erebus, in favor with the Town. It was, then, advertised, day after day, at
the bottom of the Play-bills, for repetition, till the promissory advertisement
became laughable; and, at length, the Advertisement and the Play were dropped
together.

If, after the foregoing Preface, I should at a future period, bring the Play
forward in the Hay-market Theater, I am fully aware of the numbers who from
party and pique, may now oppose it. I am aware, too, of the weight which a
first impression leaves upon the minds of the most candid: -- Still, so strong
is my confidence in the genuine decision of a London audience, who have a fair
opportunity of exercising their judgment and feelings, (which they have not
had, yet, in respect to this Play) that I believe I shall venture an appeal.

The Piece is, now, printed as it was acted on the first night; that they who
peruse it may decide whether, even in that shape, (with all the misfortunes,
before enumerated, with which it was doomed to struggle) it should be, for
ever, consigned to moulder on the shelf.

The Songs, Duets, and Chorusses, are intended merely as vehicles for musical
effect. Some critics have pompously called them Lyrick Poetry -- that by
raising them to dignity they may more effectually degrade them: as men lift a
stone very high, before they let it fall, when they would completely dash it to
pieces.

I, now, leave the gentle reader to the perusal of the Play -- and, lest my
Father's memory may be injured by mistakes; and, in the confusion of
aftertimes, the Translator of Terence, and the Author of The Jealous Wife, be
supposed guilty of the Iron Chest; I shall, were I to reach the Patriarchal
longevity of Methusaleh, continue (in all my Dramatick publications) to
subscribe myself

GEORGE COLMAN, the Younger.
Piccadilly, July, 20th, 1796.
Dramatis Personae.
Sir Edward Mortimer, Mr. Kemble!!! Fitzharding, Mr. Wroughton. Wilford, Mr.
Bannister, jun. Adam Winterton, Mr. Dodd. Rawbold, Mr. Barrymore. Samson, Mr.
Suett. Boy, Master Walsh. Cook, Mr. Hollingsworth. Peter, Mr. Banks. Walter,
Mr. Maddocks. Simon, Mr. Webb. Gregory, Mr. Trueman. Armstrong, Mr. Kelly.
Orson, Mr. R. Palmer. 1st Robber, Mr. Dignum. 2d Robber, Mr. Sedgwick. 3d
Robber, Mr. Bannister. Robber's Boy, Master Webb. Helen, Miss Farren. Blanch,
Mrs Gibbs. Dame Rawbold, Miss Tidswell. Barbara, Signora Storace. Judith, Miss
De Camp.
SCENE, in the New Forest, in Hampshire, and on its Borders.

THE IRON CHEST; A PLAY, IN THREE ACTS.
ACT I. --
SCENE I.
The inside of RAWBOLD's COTTAGE. Several children, squalid and beggarly,
discovered in different parts of the room: some asleep. -- DAME RAWBOLD seated,
leaning over the embers of the fire. BARBARA seated near her. SAMSON standing
in the front of the stage. A narrow staircase in the back scene. A taper
burning. The whole scene exhibits poverty and wretchedness. GLEE.
SAMSON. FIVE times, by the taper's light,
The hourglass I have turned tonight.

First Boy. Where Is father?


Samson. He Is gone out to roam:
If he have luck,
He Will bring a buck,
Upon his lusty shoulders, home.
The different voices. Home! home!
He comes not home!
Hark! from the woodland vale below,
The distant clock sounds, dull, and slow!
Bome! Bome! Bome!



Sam. Five o'clock, and father not yet returned from New Forest! An he come not
shortly, the Sun will rise, and roast the venison on his shoulders. -- Sister
Barbara! -- Well, you rich men have no bowels for us lowly! they little think,
while they are gorging on the fat haunch of a goodly buck, what fatigues we
poor honest souls undergo in stealing it. -- Why, sister Barbara!


Bar. I am here brother Samson, getting up.


Sam. Here! marry, out upon you for an idle baggage! why, you crawl like a
snail.


Bar. I prithee, now, do not chide me, Samson.


Sam. It Is my humor. I am father's head man in his poaching. The rubs I take
from him, who is above me, I hand down to you, who are below me. It Is the way
of office -- where every miserable devil domineers it over the next more
miserable devil that is under him. You may scold sister Margery, an you will --
she is your younger by a twelvemonth.


Bar. Truly brother, I would not make any one unhappy, for the world. I am
content to do what I can to please; and to mind the house.


Sam. Truly, a weighty matter! Thou art even ready to hang thyself, for want of
something to white away time. What have thou much more to do than to trim the
faggots, nurse thy mother, boil the pot, patch our jackets, kill the poultry,
cure the hogs, seed the pigs, and comb the children?


Bar. Many might think that no small charge, Samson.


Sam. A mere nothing. -- While father and I (bate us but the mother and
children) have the credit of purloining every single thing that you have the
care of. We are up early, and down late, in the exercise of our industry.


Bar. I wish father and you would give up the calling.


Sam. No -- there is one keen argument to prevent us.


Bar. What Is that, brother?


Sam. Hunger. Would have us be rogues, and let our family starve? Give up
poaching and deer-stealing! Oons! do think we have no conscience? Yonder sits
mother, poor soul -- old, helpless, and crazy.


Bar. Alas! brother, it is heart-aching to look upon her. This very time three
years she got her maim. It was a piteous tempest.


Sam. Aye -- 'twas rough weather.


Bar. I never pass the old oak that was shivered that night, in the storm, but
I am ready to weep. It remembers me of the time when all our poor family went
to ruin.


Sam Pish -- no matter: The cottage was blown down -- the barn fired -- father
undone. -- Well, landlords are flinty hearted -- no help! what then? We live,
don't we? sullenly.


Bar. Troth, brother, very sadly. Father has grown desperate; all is fallen to
decay. We live by pilfering on the Forest -- and our poor mother distracted,
and unable to look to the house. The rafter, which fell in the storm, struck so
heavy upon her brain, I fear me, 'twill never again be settled.


Moth. Children! Barbara! where is my eldest daughter? She is my darling.


Bar. I am here, mother.


Sam. Peace, fool! you know she is doting.


Moth. Look to the cattle, Barbara! We must to market tomorrow. My husband's a
rich man. We thrive! we thrive! Ha, ha, ha! -- oh!


Bar. Oh brother! I cannot bear to see her thus -- though, alas! we have long
been used to it. The little ones too -- scarce clothed -- hungry -- almost
starving! -- Indeed, we are a very wretched family.


Sam. Hark! Methought I heard a tread. -- Hist! be wary. We must not open in
haste, for fear of surprise. A kneck at the Cottage door.


DUET.
Samson. Who knocks at this dead hour?


Rawbold without A friend.


Samson. How should we know,
A friend from foe?
A signal you must give.

Rawbold without. Attend.


Rawbold gives three knocks, which Samson counts, singing at intervals. Samson.
One, two, three!
It Is he.
Give me the word we fixed to night,

It Is Roebuck (in a whisper to Barbara) Rawbold without. Roebuck.


Samson. That is right,
Enter now by candlelight.

Rawbold. Open now by candlelight.




Samson opens the door, Rawbold enters. Raw. Bar the door. So, softly.


Sam. What success, father?


Raw. Good: my limbs ache for it.


Moth. O brave husband! Welcome from the court. Thou shall be made a knight;
and I a lady. Ha! ha!


Raw. Rest, rest, poor soul! How you stand! to Samson The chair, you gander.


Sam. to Barbara Why, how you stand! the chair, you gander!


They bring Rawbold a chair: he sits. Raw. Here -- take my gun -- it is
unscrewed. -- The keepers are abroad. I had scarce time to get it in my pocket.

He pulls the gun from a pocket under his coat, in three pieces, which Samson
screws together, while they are talking. Fie! it is sharp work! Barbara, you
jade, come hither.


Sam. Barbara, you jade, come hither.


Raw. Who bid thee chide her, lout! Kiss thy old father, wench. Kiss me I say.
-- So -- why do tremble? I am as rough as a tempest. Evil fortune has blown
my lowering nature into turbulence: but thou art a blossom that do bend thy
head so sweetly under my gusts of passion, it is pity they should ever harm thee.


Bar. Indeed, father, I am glad to see you safe returned.


Raw. I believe thee. Take the keys. Go to the locker, in the loft, and bring
me a glass to recruit me. Barbara goes out.


Sam. Well, father, and so --


Raw. Peace -- I have shot a buck.


Sam. O rare! Of all the sure aims on the borders of the New Forest, here, give
me old Gilbert Rawbold; though I, who am his son, say it, that should not say
it. -- Where have you stowed him, father?


Raw. Under the furze, behind the hovel. Come night again, we will draw him in,
boy. I have been watched.


Sam. Watched! O, the pestilence! our trade will be spoiled if the
Groom-Keepers be after us. The law will persecute us, father.


Raw. Do know Mortimer?


Sam. What, Sir Edward Mortimer? Aye, sure. He is head Keeper of the Forest.
It Is he who has shut himself up in melancholy. Sees no rich, and does so much
good to the poor.


Raw. He has done me naught but evil. A gun cannot be carried on the border,
here, but he has scent on it at a league's distance. He is a thorn to me. His
scouts this night were after me -- all on the watch. I Will be revenged -- I Will
-- So, the brandy.


Enter BARBARA, with the Liquor. Raw. after drinking'Tis right, in faith!


Sam. That it is I Will be sworn; for I smuggled it myself. We do not live so near
the coast for nothing.


Saw. Sir Edward Mortimer, look to it!


Bar. Sir Edward Mortimer! O, dear father, what of him?


Raw. Aye, now thou art all agog! Thou would hear somewhat of that
smooth-tongued fellow, his secretary -- his clerk, Wilford; whom thou so often
meet'st in the forest. I have news on it. Look how you walk thither again. What,
thou would betray me to him, I warrant; -- conspire against your father.


Sam. Aye; conspire against your father -- and your tender loving brother, you
viper, you!


Bar. Beshrew me, father, I meant no harm: and, indeed, indeed, Wilford is as
handsome a -- I mean as good a youth as ever breathed. If I thought he meant
ill by you, I should hate him.


Raw. When did see him last? -- Speak!


Bar. You terrify me so, father, I am scarce able to speak. Yesternoon, by the
copse. 'Twas but to read with him the book of sonnets he gave me.


Sam. That Is the way your sly, grave rogues, work into the hearts, of the
females. I never knew any good come of a girl's reading sonnets, with a learned
clerk, under a copse.


Raw. Let me hear no more of your meetings. I am content to think you would not
plot my undoing.


Bar. I? -- O father!


Raw. But he may plot yours. Mark me -- Fortune has thrust me forth to prowl,
like the wolf; -- but the wolf is anxious for its young. I am an outcast whom
hunger has hardened. I violate the law; but feeling is not dead within me* and,
callous villain as I am accounted, I would tear that greater villain piecemeal,
who would violate my child, and rob an old man of the little remains of
comfort, wretchedness has lest him.


A knocking at the door. A voice without. Hilliho! ho! Raw. How now!


Sam. There! an they be not after us already. I Will -- We have talked, too,
'till it is broad day light.


Wilford without Open, good master Rawbold; I would speak to you suddenly.


Bar. O heaven! it is the voice of Wilford himself.


Raw. Wilford! I Am glad on it -- Now he shall -- I Am glad on it. Open the door:
Quickly, I say. He shall smart for it.


Sam. Are you mad, father? It Is we shall smart for it. Let in the keeper's head
man! The hind quarter of a buck has hung these fourteen days, in the pantry.


Raw. Open, I say.


Sam. O Lord! I defy any secretary's nose not to smell stolen venison the
moment it is thrust into our hovel.


SAMSON opens the door. Enter WILFORD. Wilf. Save you, good people. You are
Gilbert Rawbold, as I take it.


Raw. I am. Your message here, young man, bodes me no good: but I am Gilbert
Rawbold -- and here is my daughter. Do know her?


Wilf. Ah, Barbara, good wench! how fares it with you?


Raw. Look on her well -- then consult your own conscience. It Is difficult,
happily, for a secretary to find one. You are a villain.


Wilf. You lie. Hold, I crave pardon. You are her father. She is innocent, and
you are unhappy: I respect virtue and misfortune too much to shock the one or
insult the other.


Raw. Sdeath! why meet my daughter in the forest?


Wilf. Because I love her.


Raw. And would ruin her.


Wilf. That Is a strange way of showing one's love, methinks. I have a simple
notion, Gilbert, that the thought of having taken a base advantage of a poor
girl's affection might go nigh to break a man's sleep, and give him unquiet
dreams: now, I love my night's rest, and shall do nothing to disturb it.


Raw. Would not poison her mind?


Wilf. It Is not my method, friend, of dosing a patient. Look ye, Gilbert; Her
mind is a fair flower, stuck in the rude soil, here, of surrounding ignorance,
and smiling in the chill of poverty: -- I would feign cheer it with the little
sunshine I possess of comfort and information. My parents were poor like
here is; Should occasion serve, I might, happily, were all parties agreed, make her
my wife. To offer aught else would affect her, you, and myself; and I have no
talent at making three people uneasy at the same time.


Raw. Your hand. On your own account, we are friends.


Bar. O dear father!


Raw. Be silent. Now to your errand. It Is from Mortimer.


Wilf. I come from Sir Edward.


Raw. I know his malice. He would oppress me with his power. He would starve me
and my family. Search my house.


Sam. No, father, no. You forget the hind quarter in the pantry. Aside


Raw. Let him do his worst: but let him beware. A tyrant; a villain.


Wilf. Harkye -- he is my master. I owe him my gratitude; -- every thing: --
and had you been any but my Barbara's father, and spoken so much against him,
my indignation had worked into my knuckles, and crammed the words down your
rusty throat.


Sam. I do begin to perceive how this will end. Father will knock down the
secretary as flat as a buck.


Raw. Why am I singled out? Is there no mark for the vengeance of office to
shoot its shaft at but me. This morning, as he dogged me in the forest --


Wilf. Hush, Rawbold. Keep your counsel. -- Should you make it public he must
notice it.


Raw. Did he not notice it?


Wilf. No matter -- but he has sent me thus early, Gilbert, with this relief to
your distresses, which he has heard of. Here are twenty marks for you and your
family.


Raw. From Sir Edward Mortimer?


Wilf. It Is his way; -- but he would not have it mentioned. He is one of those
judges who, in their office, will never warp the law to save offenders; but his
private charity bids him assist the needy, before their necessities drive them
to crimes which his public duty must punish.


Raw. Did Mortimer do this! did he! heaven bless him! Oh, young man, if you
knew half the misery -- my wife -- my children -- Shame on it! I have stood many
a tug, but the drops now fall in spite of me. I am not ungrateful; but I cannot
stand it. We will talk of Barbara when I have more man about me. Exit up the
staircase.


Wilf. Farewell. I must home to the lodge quickly. Ere this, I warrant, I am
looked for.


Bar. Farewell.


QUINTETTO.
Wilford. THE Sun has tipped the hills with red;
The lout now flourishes his flail;
The punchy parson waddles from his bed,
Heavy, and heated, with his last night's ale.
Adieu! adieu! Imust be going;
The dapper village cock is crowing.
Adieu, my little Barbara!

Barbara. Adieu! -- and should you think upon
The lowly cottage, when you're gone,
Where two old Oaks, with ivy decked,
Their branches over the roof project,
I pray, good sir, just recollect,
That there lives little Barbara.

Samson. And Samson, too, good Sir, in smoke and smother
Barbara's very tender -- loving brother.

First Boy, to Samson. Brother. look! the sun, aloof,
Peeps through the crannies of the roof.
Give us food, good brother, pray!
For we eat nothing yesterday.

Children. Give us food, good brother, pray!


Samson. Oh, fire and faggot! what a squalling!


Barbara. Do not chide 'em. --


Samson. Damn their bawling!
Hungry stomachs there is no balking:
I wish I could stop their mouths with talking:
But very good meat is, cent per cent,
Dearer than very good argument.

Wilford. Adieu, adieu, I must be going;
The dapper village cock is crowning.
Adieu, my little Barbare!

Barbara. Oh, think on little Barbara.


Children. Give us food!


Samson. Curse their squalling.


Wilford and Barbara. Adieu! adieu!


Samson. Damn their bawling.


Samson, Wilford, and Barbara. Adieu, my little Barbara!
Oh, think on little Barbara!
You Will think on little Barbara.



SCENE II. An old fashioned Hall, in Sir EDWARD MORTIMER's Lodge.
Several Servants cross the Stage, with Flaggons, Tankards, cold Meat, etc.
etc. Enter ADAM WINTERTON. Wint. Softly, varlets, softly! See you crack none of
the stone flaggons. Nay, it is plain your own breakfasts be toward, by your
skuttling thus. A goodly morning! Why, you giddy-pated knave, to one of the
servants is it so you carry a dish of pottery? No heed of our good master, Sir
Edward Mortimer's ware? Fie, Peter Pickbone, fie!


Serve. I am in haste, master Steward, to break my fast.


Wint. To break thy fast! -- to break thy neck, it should seem. Ha! ha! good
in faith! -- Go thy ways, knave! Exit servant. It Is thus the rogues ever have
me. I would feign be angry with them, but, straight a merry jest passes across
me, and my choler is over. To break thy neck it should seem! ha, ha! 'twas well
conceited, by St. Thomas! -- My table book, for the business of the day. Ah, my
memory holds not as it did. It needs the spur. Looking over his book. Nine and
forty years have I been house-steward and butler. Let me see. -- Six winters
ago, come Christmas eve, died my old master, Sir Marmaduke -- Ah! he was a
heavy loss. I looked to drop before him. He was hale and tough: -- but, thank
heaven, I have seen him out, my dear old master! Let me see -- my tables:
Looking over them and singing.

When birds do carrol on the bush,
With a heigh no nonny -- heigho!

Enter Cook. Cook. Master Steward! Good master Winterton?


Wint. Who calls merry old Adam Winterton? Ha, Jacob Cook! Well bethought --
the dinner. Nay, I bear a brain: thinking men will combine. I never see Jacob
Cook but it reminds me of ordering dinner. We must have -- what say my tables
-- we must have, Jacob -- Nay, by St. Thomas, I perceive 'twas Christmas eve
seven years died my good old master, Sir Marmaduke.


Cook. I pray you dispatch me, good master steward. I would bestir in time.


Wint. Then I would counsel thee to rise earlier, Jacob; for truth to say thou
art a sluggard. Ha! good in faith! -- Let me see; -- Dinner -- oh! Have thou
prepared the fare I ordered yester-night?


Cook. All killed, and ready: but will not Sir Edward Mortimer pall on his
diet? It Is the very same bill of fare we served yesterday.


Wint. Hey -- let me see -- I have settled the dinners throughout the week in
my tables. Now, by our lady, I have mistaken, and read Thursday twice over! --
Ha! ha! -- A pestilence upon me! Well, Sir Edward, (heaven bless him!) must
bear with me. He must even dine today on what he dined on yesterday! -- it is
too late to be changed. Get thee gone, knave, get thee gone.


Cook. -- Going out. -- Age has so overdone this old dry-bones he will shortly
tumble from the spit. -- "Thursday twice over!" -- This comes of being able to
read. An old buzzard! Exit.


Wint. These fatigues of office somewhat wear a man. I have had a long lease
on it. I have seen out Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. It Is even
almost time that I should retire, to begin to enjoy myself. Eh! by St. Thomas!
hither trips the fair mistress Blanch. Of all the waiting gentlewomen I ever
looked on, during the two last reigns, none stirred my fancy like this little
rose-bud.


Enter Blanch. Blanch. A good day, good Adam Winterton.


Wint. What wag! what tulip! I never see thee but I am a score of years the
younger.


Blanch. Nay, then, let us not meet often, or you will soon be in your second
childhood.


Wint. What, you come from your mistress, the Lady Helen, in the forest here;
and would speak with Sir Edward Mortimer, I warrant?


Blanch. I would. Is his melancholy worship stirring yet?


Wint. Fie, you mad-cap! He is my master, and your Lady's friend.


Blanch. Yes, truly, it seems, her only one, poor Lady: he protects her now she
is left an orphan.


Wint. A blessing on his heart! I would it were merrier. Well, she is much
beholden to Sir Edward for his consolation: and he never affords her his advice
but his bounty is sure to follow it.


Blanch. Just so a crow will nourish its nestling: be croaks first, and then
gives her food.


Wint. Ha, ha! good in faith! -- but wicked. Thy company will corrupt, and lead
me astray. Should they happen to marry, (and I have my fancies on it,) I Will
dance a galliard with thee in the hall, on the round Oak table. Sbud! when I
was a youth, I would have caper'd with St. Vitus, and beat him.


Blanch. You are as likely to dance, now, as they to marry. What has hindered
them, if the parties be agreed? -- yet I have, now, been with my mistress these
two years; since Sir Edward first came hither, and placed her in the cottage,
hard by his lodge.


Wint. Tush! family reasons. -- Thou know nothing: thou art scarce caught.
Two years back, when we came from Kent, and Sir Edward first entered on his
office, here, of Head Keeper, thou were a Colt, running wild about New Forest.
I hired you myself to attend on madam Helen.


Blanch. Nay I shall never forget it. But you were as frolicksome, then, as I,
methinks. Do remember the box on the ear I gave thee, Adam?


Wint. Peace, peace, you pie! an you prate thus I Will stop your mouth. I will,
by St. Thomas!


Blanch. An I be inclined to the contrary, I do not think you are able to stop
it.


Wint. Out, you baggage! thou have more tricks than a kitten. Well, go thy
ways. Sir Edward is at his study, and there thou will find him. Ah, mistress
Blanch! had you but seen me in the early part of Queen Elizabeth's reign!


Blanch. How old art thou now, Adam?


Wint. Four score, come Martlemas: and, by our Lady, I can run with a lapwing.


Blanch. Can thou? -- Well said! -- Thou art a merry old man, and shall have
a kiss of me, on one condition.


Wint. Shall I! odsbub, name it, and it is mine.


Blanch. Then, catch me. Runs off.


Wint. Pestilence on it! there was a time when my legs had served: -- but, to
speak truth, I never thrust them, now, into my scarlet hose that they do not
remember me of two sticks of red sealing-wax. I was a clean limbed stripling,
when I first stood behind Sir Marmaduke's arm chair, in the old Oak eating-room.


SONG. Adam Winterton.
SIR Marmaduke was a hearty Knight;
Good man! Old man!
He Is painted standing bolt upright,
With his hose rolled over his knee; --
His Perriwig's as white as chalk;
And on his fifth he holds a Hawk;
And he looks like the head
Of an ancient family.
II.
His dining room was long and wide;
Good man! Old man!
His Spaniels lay by the fireside; --
And in other parts, do you see,
Cross-bows, tobacco-pipes, old hats,
A saddle, his wife, and a litter of cats;
And he looked like the head
Of an ancient family.
III.
He never turned the poor from his gate;
Good man! Old man!
But always ready to break the pate
Of his Country's enemy,
What knight could do a better thing,
Than serve the poor, and fight for his King,
And so may every head
Of an ancient family.


Enter Wilford. Wilf. Every new act of Sir Edward's charity sets me a thinking;
and the more I think the more I am puzzled. It Is strange that a man should be
so ill at ease, who is continually doing good. At times, the wild glare of his
eye is frightful; and, last night, when I was writing for him, in the library,
I could not help fancying I was shut up with the devil -- I would stake my life
there is a secret; and I could almost give my life to unravel it. I must to him
for my morning's employment. Crossing the stage.


Wint: Ah! boy! Wilford! secretary! whither away, lad?


Wilf, Mr. Winterton! -- Aye, marry, this good old man has the clue, could I
but coax him to give it me. -- A good morning to you, Sir!


Wint. Yea, and the like to thee, boy. Come, thou shall have a cup of Canary,
from my corner cup-board, yonder.


Wilf. Not a drop.


Wint. Troth, I bear thee a good will for thy honest old dead father's sake.


Wilf. I do thankfully perceive it, Sir. Your placing me in Sir Edward's
family, some nine months ago, when my poor father died, and left me friendless,
will never out of my memory.


Wint. Tut, boy, no merit of mine in assisting the friendless. It Is our duty,
child. I could never abide to see honest industry chop fallen. I love to have
folks merry about me, to my heart.


Wilf. I would you could instill some mirth into our good master Sir Edward. You
are an old domestic -- the only one he brought with him, two years back, from
Kent, -- and might venture to give his spirits a jog. He seems devoured with
spleen and melancholy.


Wint. You are a prying boy. -- Go to. -- I have told thee, a score of times, I
would not have thee curious about our worthy master's humor. By my troth, I am
angry with thee. What a boy like you? -- a -- Thou have put me in choler.
Continue this, and I Will undo thee; -- I Will un -- sbud! I Will unprotect thee. --
Ha, good, in faith! nay, marry, my rage holds not long: -- flash and out again.
Unprotect thee! -- ha! 'twas exceeding good by St. Thomas!


Wilf. I should cease to pry, Sir, would you but once, (as I think you have
more than once seemed inclined) gratify my much-raised curiosity.


Wint. Well said, 'ifaith, I do not doubt thee. I warrant thou would cease to
enquire, when I had told thee all thou would know. -- What, greenhorn, did
think to trap the old man? -- Go thy ways, boy! I have a head. -- Old Adam
Winterton can sift a subtle speech to the bottom.


Wilf. Ah, good sir, you need not tell me that. Young as I am, I can admire
that experience, in another, which I want myself.


Wint. There is something mavelous engaging in this young man. You have a
world of promise, boy. Sixty years ago, in Queen Elizabeth's time, I was just
such another. I remember Marian Potpan, the farmer's daughter, of Stocks Green,
was then enamored of me. Well, beware how you offend Sir Edward.


Wilf. I would not, willingly, for the world. He has been the kindest master to
me. He has informed my mind, relieved my distresses, clothed me, sheltered me:
-- but, whilst my fortunes ripen in the warmth of his goodness, the frozen
gloom of his countenance chills me.


Wint. Well, well, take heed how you prate on it. Out on these babbling boys!
There is no keeping a secret with younkers in a family.


Wilf. very eagerly. What then there is a secret! -- It Is as I guessed after
all.


Wint. Why, how now, hot-head? -- Mercy on me! an this tinder-box boy do not
make me shake with apprehension. Is it thus you take my frequent counsel?


Wilf. Dear sir, it is your counsel which most I covet. Give me but that; admit
me to your confidence; steer me with your advice, which I ever held excellent,
and, with such a pilot, I may sail prosperously through a current which,
otherwise, might wrerk me.


Wint. It Is melting to see how unfledged youth will shelter itself, like a
chicken, under the wing of such a tough old cock as myself! Well, well, I Will
think on it, boy.


Wilf. The old answer. -- Yet, he softens apace: could I but clench him now --
Faith, sir, it is a raw morning; and I care not if I taste the canary your
kindness offered.


Wint. Aha! lad! say thou so? Just my modest humor when I was young. I ever
refused my glass at first, but I came to it ere I had quitted my company.
Here Is the key of the corner cupboard, yonder. See you do not crack the bottle,
you heedless goose, you!

Wilford takes out bottle and glasses. Ha! fill it up. Od! it sparkles
curiously. -- Here Is to -- I prithee, tell me now, Wilford; did ever in thy
life see a waiting-gentlewoman, with a more inviting eye than the little Mrs
Blanch?


Wilf. Here Is Mrs. Blanch -- drinks.


Wint. Ah, wag! well, go thy ways! Well, when I was of thy age -- odsbud! no
matter; it is past, now; -- but here is the little Mrs. Blanch -- drinks.


Wilf. It Is thought, here, Sir Edward means to marry her lady, Madame Helen.


Wint. Nay, I know not. She has long been enamored of him, poor lady! when he
was the gay, the gallant Sir Edward, in Kent. Ah, well! two years make a
wondrous change!


Wilf. Yes, it is a good tough love, nowadays, that will hold out a couple of
twelve-months.


Wint. Away, I mean not so, you giddy pate! He is all honor; and as steady in
his course as the sun: yet I wonder sometimes he can bear to look upon her.


Wilf. Eh? why so? Did not he bring her, under his protection, to the Forest;
since, it is said, she lost her relations?


Wint. Hush, boy! on your life do not name, her uncle -- I would say her
relations.


Wilf. Her uncle! wherefore? Where Is the harm in having an uncle, dead or alive?


Wint. Peace, peace! In that uncle lies the secret.


Wilf. Indeed! how good Adam Winterton? I prithee, how?


Wint. Ah! 'twas a heavy day! Poor Sir Edward is now a broken spirit -- but if
ever a good spirit walked the earth in trunk hose, he is one.


Wilf. Let us drink Sir Edward's health.


Wint. That I would, though 'twere a mile to the bottom -- drinks. Ha, it is
cheering, in faith! Well, in troth, I have a regard for thee, boy, for thy
father's sake.


Wilf. Oh, good sir! and this uncle, you say --


Wint. Of Madam Helen -- ah! there lies the mischief.


Wilf. What mischief can be in him? why, he is dead.


Wint. Come nearer -- see you prate not now, on your life. Our good master, Sir
Edward, was arraigned on his account, in open court.


Wilf. Arraigned! how mean you?


Wint. Alas, boy! tried. -- Tried for -- nearer yet -- his murder.


Wilf. Mu -- mu -- Murder! drops the glass.


Wint. Why, what! why, Wilford! out, alas! the boy's passion will betray all!
what, Wilford, I say!


Wilf. You have curdled my blood!


Wint. What, varlet, thou dare not think ill of our worthy master?


Wilf. I -- I am his secretary. Often alone with him at dead midnight, in his
library. The candles in the sockets -- and a man glaring upon me who has
committed mur -- ugh!


Wint. Committed! Thou art a base lying knave, to say it: and while I wear a
rapier, I Will -- tush! Heaven help me! I forget I am fourscore. Well, well --
hear me, pettish boy, hear me. Why, look now, thou do not attend.


Wilf. I -- I mark; I mark.


Wint. I tell thee, then, our good Sir Edward was beloved in Kent, where he had
returned a year before from his travels. Madam Helen's uncle was hated by all
the neighborhood, rich and poor. A mere brute, do mark me.


Wilf. Like enough: but when brutes walk upon two legs, the law of the land,
thank Heaven! will not suffer us to butcher them.


Wint. Go to, you firebrand! Our good master labored all he could, for many a
month, to soothe his turbulence; but in vain. He picked a quarrel with Sir
Edward, in the public county assembly; nay, the strong ruffian struck him
down, and trampled on him. Think on that, Wilford; on our good master Sir
Edward, whose great soul was nigh to burst with the indignity.


Wilf. Well, but the end on it.


Wint. Why, our young master took horse, for his own house, determined, as it
appeared, to send a challenge to this white-liver'd giant in the morning.


Wilf. I see. He killed him in a duel. That Is another kind of butchery, which
the law allows not; true humanity shudders at, and false honor justifies.


Wint. See, now, how you fly off! Sir Edward's revenge, boy, was baffled. For
his antagonist was found dead in the street, that night; killed, by some
unknown assassins, on his return from the assembly.


Wilf. Indeed! unknown assassins!


Wint. Nay, it is plain, our good Sir Edward had no hand in the wicked act: for
he was tried, as I told you, at the next assize. Mercy on me! 'twas a crowded
court; and both gentle and simple threw up their caps, at his acquital! Heaven
be thanked! he was cleared beyond a shadow of doubt.


Wilf. He was; I breathe again. 'Twas a happy thing. 'Twas the only way left of
cleansing him from a foul suspicion.


Wint. Out alas! lad, it is his principal grief. He is full of nice feeling, and
high-flown honor: and the thought of being tried, for such a crime, has given
him his hear's wound. Poor gentleman! he has shunned the world ever since. He
was once the life of all company -- but now!


Sir Edward without Winterton!


Wint. Hark! some one calls. Out on thee, thou have sunk my spirits into my
heels. Who calls merry old Adam Winterton?


Sir Edward without Adam Winterton! come hither to me.


Wint. Nay, by our lady, it is Sir Edward himself! -- Pestilence on it! if I seem
sad now, 'twill be noted. I come, good Sir Edward.


"When birds -- (not a word on thy life) -- do carrol on the bush,"
"With a hey no nonny' -- Mercy on me! Exit.
Wilf. My throat's parched, and my blood freezes. A quart of brandy couldn't
moisten the one nor thaw the other. This accounts, then, for all. Poor, unhappy
gentleman! This unravels all, from the first day of my service -- when a deep
groan made me run into the library, and I found him locking up his papers, in
the Iron Chest, as pale as ashes. -- Eh? -- What can be in that chest! --
Perhaps some proof of -- no I shudder at the suggestion -- It Is not possible
one so good can be guilty of -- I know not what to think -- nor what to
resolve. But curiosity is roused, and, come what may, I Will have an eye upon
him. Exit.


SCENE III. -- A Library.
Sir Edward Mortimer discovered at a Writing Table. Adam Winterton attending.
Mort. It Is his first trespass, so we'll quit him, Adam: --
But caution him how he offend again.
As Keeper of the Forest, I should fine him.

Wint. Nay, that your worship should. He Will prove, ere long,
-- Mark but my words -- a sturdy poacher. Well,
It Is you know best.

Mort. Well, well, no matter, Adam; --
He has a wife, and child.

Wint. Ah! bless your honor!


Mort. They killed his dog?


Wint. Aye, marry, sir: -- a lurcher.
Black Martin Wincot, the groom keeper shot him;
A perilous good aim. -- I warrant me,
The rogue has lived this year upon that lurcher.

Mort. Poor wretch! -- Oh! well bethought;
Send Walter to me --
I would employ him: he must ride for me,
On business of much import.

Wint. Lackaday!
That it should chance so! I have sent him forth,
To Winchester, to buy me flannel hose;
For winter's coming on. Good lack! that things
Should fall so crosly!

Mort. Nay, nay, do not fret --:
It Is better that my business cool, good Adam,
Than thy old limbs.

Wint. Ah! you have a kindly heart!


Mort. Is Wilford waiting?


Wint. Wilford! mercy on me!
I tremble now to hear his name. He is --
Here in the hall, sir.

Mort. Send him in, I prithee.


Wint. I shall, sir. Heaven bless you! heaven bless you! Exit.


Mort. Good morning, good old heart! This honest soul
Would feign look cheery in my house's gloom,
And, like a gay and sturdy ever-green,
Smiles in the midst of blast, and desolation,
Where all around him withers. -- Well, well -- wither!
Perish this frail and fickle frame! -- this clay,
That, in its dross-like compound, does contain
The mind's pure ore and essence. -- Oh! that mind!
That mind of man! that god-like spring of action!
That source, whence Learning, Virtue, Honor, flow! --
Which lifts us to the stars; which carries us
Over the swollen waters of the angry deep,
As swallows skim the air. -- That Fame's sole fountain!
That does transmit a fair, and spotless name
When the vile trunk is rotten: -- Give me that!
Oh! give me but to live, in after-age,
Remembered and unsullied! -- Heaven and earth!
Let my pure flame of Honor shine in story,
When I am cold in death -- and the slow fire,
That wears my vitals now, will no more move me
Than 'twould a corpse within a monument.
A knock at the door of the Library How now! Who Is there? Come in.
Enter Wilford. Wilford! is it you? You were not wont to knock.

Wilf. I feared I might surprise you, sir.


Mort. Surprise me!


Wilf. I mean -- disturb you, sir: -- yes -- at your studies --
Disturb you at your studies.

Mort. Very strange!
You were not use to be so cautious.

Wilf. No --
I never used -- but I -- hum -- I have learnt! --

Mort. Learnt!


Wilf. Better manners, sir. I was quite raw,
When, in your bounty, you first sheltered me:
But, thanks to your great goodness, and the lessons
Of Mr. Winterton. I still improve,
And pick up something daily.

Mort. Aye, indeed!
Winterton! -- No he dare not -- Hark you, sir.

stepping up to him Wilf. Sir!


Mort. retreating from him What am I about!
-- Oh, honor! honor!
Thy pile should be so uniform, displace
One atom of thee, and the slightest breath
Of a rude peasant makes thy owner tremble
For his whole building. Reach me, from the shelf,
The volume I was busied in, last night.

Wilf. Last night, sir?


Mort. Aye; -- it treats of Alexander.


Wilf. Oh, I remember, sir -- of Macedon.
I made some extracts, by your order. goes to the Book-Case

Mort. Books
(My only commerce, now,) will sometimes rouse me
Beyond my nature. I have been so warmed,
So heated by a well-turn'd rhapsody,
That I have seemed the hero of the tale,
So glowingly described. Draw me a man
Struggling for Fame, attaining, keeping it,
Dead ages since, and the Historian
Decking his memory, in polished phrase,
And I can follow him through every turn,
Grow wild in his exploits, myself himself,
Until the thick pulsation of my heart
Wakes me, to ponder on the thing I am.

Wilf. giving him the book To my poor thinking, sir, this Alexander
Would scarcely roufe a man to follow him.

Mort. Indeed! why so, lad? He is reckoned brave.
Wise, generous, learned, by older heads than thine.

Wilf. I cannot tell, sir: -- I have but a gleaning. --
He conquered all the world; -- but left unconquered
A world of his own passions -- and they led him,
(It seems so there) on petty provocation,
Even to murder. Mortimer starts -- Wilford and he exchange looks -- both
confused.
I have touched the string --
'Twas unawares -- I cannot help it. aside

Mort. attempting to recover himself. Wilford
-- Wilford -- I -- you mistake the character --
I, mark you -- he -- death and eternal tortures!
dashes the book on the floor and seizes Wilford. Slave! I will crush thee!
pulverise thy frame!
That no vile particle of prying nature
May -- Ha, ha, ha! -- I will not harm thee, boy --
O, agony! Exit.

Wilf. Is this the high-flown honor, and delicate feeling, old Winterton
talked of, that cannot bear a glance at the trial? -- Delicate! had I been born
under a throttling planet, I had never survived this collaring. This may be
guilt. If so -- well, what have I to do with the knowledge on it! -- what could
I do? cut off my benefactor! who gives me bread! who is respected for his
virtues, pitied for his misfortunes, loved by his family, blessed by the poor!
-- Pooh! he is innocent. This is his pride and shame. He was acquitted --
Thousands witnessed it -- thousands rejoiced at it -- thousands -- eh? the key
left in the iron chest! Circumstance and mystery tempt me at every turn. Ought
I -- no matter. These are no common incitements and I submit to the impulse. I
heard him stride down the stairs. It opens with a spring I see. I tremble in
every joint. goes to the chest.


Enter Sir Edward Mortimer. Mort. I had forgot the key and -- -- la! by hell!


Sees Wilford; snatches a pistol from a table* runs up to him, and holds it to
his head. Wilford on his knees, claps down the lid of the trunk which he had
just opened. After an apparent struggle of mind, Mortimer throws the pistol
from him. Mort. Begone! -- Come back. -- Come hither to me.
Mark me -- I see thou do at every turn --
And I have noted thee too. Thou have found
(I know not how) some clue to my disgrace: --
Aye, my disgrace -- we must not mince it now --
Public dishonor! -- trod on! -- buffeted!
Then tried as the foul demon who had foiled
My manly means of vengeance. Anguish gnaws me:
Mountains of shame are piled upon me! -- Me,
Who have made Fame my idol 'Twas enough!
But something must be super-added. You, --
A worm, a viper I have warmed, must plant,
In venomed sport, your sting into my wounds,
Too tender even for tenderness to touch,
And work me into madness. Thou would question
My very -- slave! -- my very innocence;
Never doubted yet by judges nor arraigners.
Wretch! you have wrung this from me. Be content,
I am sunk low enough.

Wilf. returning the key Oh, sir! I ever
Honored and loved you. But I merit all.
My passions hurried me I know not whither.
Do with me as you please, my kind, wronged master!
Discard me -- thrust me forth -- nay, kill me! -- --

Mort. Kill you!


Wilf. I know not what I say, -- I know but this,
That I would die to serve you.

Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, your brother
Is just alighted at the gate.

Mort. My brother!
He could not time it worse. Wilford, remember.
Come, show me to him. Exit with servant.

Wilf. Remember! I shall never while I live forget it: nay, I shall never while
I live forgive myself. My knees knock together still; and the cold drops stand
on my forehead, like rainwater on a penthouse.


Enter Barbara. Barb. Wilford!


Wilf. Eh? Barbara! How came thou here?


Barb. With my father, who waits below to see Sir Edward.


Wilf. He -- He is busied; he cannot see him now. He is with his brother.


Barb. Troth, I am sorry for it. My poor father's heart is bursting with
gratitude, and he would fain ease it by pouring out his thanks to his
benefactor. Oh, Wilford, yours is a happy lot to have such a master as Sir
Edward.


Wilf. Happy? Oh! yes -- I -- I am very happy


Barb. Mercy! has any ill befallen you?


Wilf. No; nothing. It Is all my happiness. My happiness is like your father's
gratitude, Barbara; and, at times, it goes near to choke me.


Barb. Nay, I Am sure there is more in this. Bless me, you look pale! I could not
bear to see you ill, or uneasy, Wilford.


Wilf. Could Not you, Barbara? Well, well, I shall be better presently. It Is
nothing of import.


Barb. Trust me, I hope not.


Wilf. Well, question me no more on it now, I beseech you, Barbara.


Barb. Believe me, I would not question you but to console you, Wilford. I
would scorn to pry into any one's grief; much more yours, Wilford, to satisfy
a busy curiosity. Though, I am told, there are such in the world who would.


Wilf. I -- I am afraid there are, Barbara. But come, no more of this. It Is a
pass^^g cloud on my spirits, and will soon blow over.


Barb. Ah! could I govern your fortunes, foul weather should never harm you.


Wilf. Should not it, sweet! Kiss me. Kisses her. The lips of a woman are a
sovereign cordial for melancholy.


DUETT.
Wilford and Barbara. Wilf. Sweet little Barbara, when you are advancing.
Sweet little Barbara, my cares you remove;

Barb. Poor little Barbara can feel her heart dancing,
When little Barbara is met by her love.

Wilf. When I am grieved, love! oh, what would you say?


Barb. Tattle to you, love,
And prattle to you, love,
And laugh your grief and care away.

Wilf. Sweet little Barbara, etc.


Barb. Poor little Barbara, etc.


Wilf. Yet, dearest Barbara, look all through the nation,
Care, soon or late, my love, is every man's lot.

Barb. Sorrow and melancholy, grief and vexation,
When we are young and jolly, soon is forgot.

Wilf. When we grow old, love! then what will you say?


Barb. Tattle to you, love,
And prattle to you, love,
And laugh your grief and care away.

Wilf. Sweet little Barbara, etc.


Barb. Poor little Barbara, etc.




ACT II.
SCENE I. -- The New Forest.
Enter ARMSTRONG and ORSON. ARMSTRONG. GO to -- I tell thee, Orson, (as I have
told thee more than once) thou art too sanguinary.


Ors. And, I tell you, Captain Armstrong -- but always under favor, you being
our leader -- you are too humane.


Arm. Humanity is scarcely counted a fault: if so, it is a fault on the right
side.


Ors. Umph! perhaps not with us. We are robbers.


Arm. And why should robbers lack humanity? They who plunder most respect it as
a virtue, and make a show on it to gild their vices. Lawyers, Physicians,
Placemen, all -- all plunder and slay, but all pretend to humanity.


Ors. They are Regulars, and plunder by license.


Arm. Then let us Quacks set the regulars a better example.


Ors. This humanity, Captain, is a high horse you are ever bestride upon. Some
day, mark my word, he will fling you.


Arm. Cruelty is a more dangerous beast: -- When the rider's thrown, his brains
are kicked out, and no one pities him.


Ors. Like enough; but your tough horseman, who ventures boldly, is never
dismounted. When I am engaged in a desperate chase, (as we are, Captain,) I
stick at nothing. I hate milk sops.


Arm. And love mutiny. Take heed, Orson, I have before cautioned you not to
glance at me.


Ors. I say nothing: but if some escape to inform against us, whom we have
robbed, it is none of my fault. Dead men tell no tales.


Arm. Wretch! Speak that again, and you shall tell none. holds a carbine to his
head


Ors. Flash away! -- I don't fear death.


Arm. More shame for thee; for thou art unfit to meet it.


Ors. I know my trade. I set powder, ball, and rope, at defiance.


Arm. Brute! You mistake headstrong insensibility for courage. Do not mistake
my horror of it for cowardice: for I, who shudder at cruelty, will fell your
boldness to the earth, when I see you practice it. Submit.


Ors. I do. I know not what it is, but I have told you, often, there is
something about you awes me. I cannot tell -- I could kill twenty to your one.


Arm. There it is. -- Thou would dart upon the weak unguarded man, like a
tiger. A ferocious animal, whether crawling or erect, ever slinks from fair
opposition.


Ors. My courage was never yet doubted, Captain.


Arm. Your nerves, fool. Thou art a mere machine. Could I but give it motion, I
would take an oak from the forest, here, clap a flint into it for heart, and
make as bold a fellow as thou art. Listen to my orders.


Ors. I obey.


Arm. Get thee to our den. Put on thy disguise -- then hie thee to the market
town for provision, for our company. Here -- Here is part of the spoil we took
yester-night: see you bring an honest account of what you lay out. giving Money


Ors. My honor! --


Arm. Well, I do not doubt thee, here. Our profession is singular; its
followers do not cheat one another. You will not be back till dusk. See you
fall not on any poor straggling peasant, as you return.


Ors. I would fain encounter the solitary man, who is sometimes wandering by
night about the forest. He is rich.


Arm. Not for your life. It Is Sir Edward Mortimer, the head keeper. Touch him
not; it is too near home. Besides, he is no object for plunder. I have watched
him, at midnight, stealing from his lodge, to wander like one crazed. He is
good, too, to the poor; and should walk unmolested by Charity's charter. 'Twere
pity that he who administers to necessity, all day, should be rifled by
necessity at night. An thou should meet him, I charge thee spare him.


Ors. I must, if it be your order. This sparing doctrine will go nigh, at last,
to starve all the thieves. When a man takes to the trade of a wolf, he should
not go like a lamb to his business. Exit.


Arm. This fellow is a downright villain: Hardened and relentless. I have felt,
in my penury, the world trample on me. It has driven me to take that,
desperately, which wanting I should starve. Death! my spirit cannot brook to
see a sleek knave walk negligently by his fellow in misery, and suffer him to
rot. I will wrench that comfort from him which he will not bestow. -- But
nature puts a bar: -- Let him administer to my wants, and pass on: -- I have
done with him.


Armstrong. SONG.
When the Robber his victim has noted,
When the Free-booter darts on his prey,
Let humanity spare the devoted;
Let Mercy forbid him to slay.
Since my hope is by penury blighted,
My sword must the traveller daunt;
I will snatch from the rich man, benighted,
The gold he denies to my want.
But the victim when, once, I have noted,
At my foot, when I look on my prey,
Let Humanity spare the devoted;
Let mercy forbid me to slay.

SCENE II. The Hall in SIR EDWARD MORTIMER's Lodge.
Enter FITZHARDING. Fitz. Well, business must be minded: -- but he stays
A tedious time, methinks. -- You fellow!

To a servant crossing the hall. Ser. Sir!


Fitz. Where is Sir Tristful? Where Is Don Melancholy?


Serve. Who, sir?


Fitz. My brother, knave, Sir Edward Mortimer.


Ser. He was with you, but now, sir


Fitz. Sir, I thank you; --
That Is information. Louts, and serving-men,
Can never parley straight. I met a fellow,
Here, in my way across the heath, -- a Hind --
And asked how far to Lymington: I looked
The answer would have bolted from his chops,
Bounce, like a pellet from a popgun. -- No: --
He stared, and scratched his empty head, and cried,
"Where do you come from?" -- Who brought in my luggage?

Serve. It was not I, sir,


Fitz. There! -- They never can!
Go to your master; pray him to dispatch
His houshold-work: -- tell him I hate fat Folios.
Plague! when I cross the country, here, to see him,
He leaves me ram'd into an elbow chair,
With a huge, heavy book, that makes me nod,
Then tumbles on my toes. Tell him, do hear,
Captain Fitzharding's company has tired me.

Serve. Whose company? --


Fitz. My own, knave.


Serve. Sir, I shall. Exit.


Fitz. A book to me's a sovereign Narcotick;
A lump of opium; every line a dose.
Edward is all deep reading, and black letter;
He shows it in his very chin. H^ speaks
Mere Dictionary; and he pores on pages
That gives plain men the headache. "Scarce, and curious,"
Are baits his learning nibbles at. His brain
Is crammed with moldy volumes, cramp, and useless,
Like a librarian's lumber-room. -- Poor fellow!
Grief will do much! -- well! some it drives to reading,
And some to drinking; -- 'twill do much! -- this trial --
A fool to fret so for it! his honor's clear.
Tut! I Am a soldier -- know what honor is.
Had I been slandered, and a fair Court martial
Cleansed me from calumny, as white as snow,
I had never moped, and fumed, and winced, and kicked,
But sat down heart-whole. Plague upon it! this house
Appears the very cave of melancholy.
Nay, hold, I lie: -- here comes a petticoat.
Enter Blanch. Od! a rare wench! This is the best edition
In Edward's whole collection. Here, come hither!
Let me peruse you.

Blanch. Would you speak with me, Sir?


Fitz. Ave. child. I Am going now to read you.


Blanch. Read me!
You Will find me full of errors, sir.

Fitz. No matter.
Come nearer, child: I cannot see to read
At such a distance.

Blanch. You had better, sir,
Put on your spectacles.

Fitz. Aye, there she has me!
A plague upon old Time! old scythe and hourglass
Has set his mark upon me. Harkve, child:
You do not know me. You and I must have
Better acquaintance.

Blanch. O, I Have heard of you.
You are Sir Edward's kinsman, Sir -- his brother.

Fitz. Aye -- his half brother -- by the mother's side --
His elder brother.

Blanch. Yes, Sir, I see that.


Fitz. This gypsey's tongue is like her eye; I know not
Which is the sharpest. Tell me what is your name.

Blanch. My name is Blanch, Sir -- born, here, in the forest.


Fitz. Sbud! I must be a Keeper in this forest. Whither art going, sweet one?


Blanch. Home, sir.


Fitz. Home!
Why is not this thy home?

Blanch. No, Sir; I live
Some half mile hence -- with madam Helen, sir.
I brought a letter from her, to Sir Edward.

Fitz. Odso, with Helen! -- so -- with her! -- the object
Of my grave brother's groaning passion. Plague!
I would 'twere in the house. I do not like
Your rheumatick, October assignations,
Under an elm, by moonlight. This will end
In flannels and sciatica. My passion
Is not Arcadian. Tell me, pretty one,
Shall I walk with you, home?

Blanch. No, Sir, I thank you;
It would fatigue you, sadly.

Fitz. Fatigue me!
Oons! this wild forest filly, here, would make me
Grandfather to Methusaleh. Look here --
Here is a purse of money

Blanch. O, the father!
What will you give me any?

Fitz. Gold I find
The universal key; the pass par tout.
It will unlock a forest maiden's heart,
As easy as a politician's. Here;
Here are two pieces, rose-bud. Buy a top-knot;
Make thyself happy with them.

Blanch. That I will.
The poor old woman, northward of the lodge,
Lies sick in bed. I Will take her this, poor soul,
To comfort her,

Fitz. Hold! -- hey! the devil! -- hold.
This was not meant to comfort an old woman.

Blanch. Why, would'nt you relieve her, Sir?


Fitz. Um? -- yes; --
But -- pshaw? pooh, prithee -- there is a time for all things.
Why tell me of her now, -- of an old fool, --
Of comforting the aged, now?

Blanch. I thought
That you might have a fellow feeling, Sir.

Fitz. This little pastoral devil's laughing at me!
Oons! come and kiss me, jade. I am a Soldier,
And Justice of the Peace.

Blanch. Then, shame upon you!
Your double calling might have taught you better.
I see your drift now. Take your dirt again,
throws down the money Good Captain-Justice! -- Stoop for it, -- and think
How an old Soldier, and a Justice, looks,
When he is picking up the bribes he offers,
To injure those he should protect; -- the helpless,
The poor, and innocent. Exit.

Fitz. I warrant me,
Could I but see my face now, in a glass,
That I look wondrous sheepish. I Am ashamed
To pick up the two pieces. -- Let them lie, --
I would not wrong the innocent; -- good reason; --
There be so few that are so; -- she is honest;
I must make reparation. Odso! Wilford!
Enter Wilford. How fares it, boy?

Wilford. I thank you, sir. I hope you have enjoyed
Your health, these three months past, since last you honored us
With your good presence at the lodge

Fitz. Indifferent.
Some cramps and shooting pains, boy. I have dropped
Some cash here, but I am afraid to bend
To pick it up again, lest it should give me
An awkward twin^e. Stoop for it, honest Wilford.
There Is a good lad!

Wilf. Right willingly Sir. Picks up the money.


Fitz. So!
The Soldier and the Justice save their blushes. --
Now, carry it, I prithee, at your leisure,
To an old gossip, near the lodge here -- northward --
I Have heard of her -- she is bed-ridden, and sick.
You reed not say who sent you.

Will. I conceive.
It Is private bounty; that is true charity.

Fitz. Nay, pish! -- my charity! --


Wilf. Nay, I could swear
It Is not the first time you have offered this
In secret.

Fitz. Um! -- why no; -- not quite the first.
But tell me, lad, how jogs the world here, eh?
In Rueful Castle? -- What, some three months back,
We two were cronies. What have thou forgot?
Thou were my favorite here, man.

Wilf. Sir, you honored me
By saying so.

Fitz. Tut! honored! -- tut -- a fig!
Thou art grown starch and sad. This air is catching;
Thou art infected. Harkye, Wilford, harkye!
You Are a sly rogue! What you could never tell me
Of Helen's waiting maid; the little cherry; --
Of -- plague upon her name! -- of --

Wilf. Blanch, Sir?


Fitz. Blanch:
That Is it; -- the forest fairy. -- You and I
Must have some talk about her.

Wilf. Have you seen her?


Fitz. Just now: just gone. Od! I have blunder'd horribly!
You must know, lad -- come hither.

They retire to the back of the scene. Enter Sir EDWARD MORTIMER. Mort. Now for
my brother, and -- Ha! Wilford with him!
That imp is made my scourge. They whisper too.
O! I had rather court the thunderbolt,
To melt my bones, and pound me to a mass,
Than suffer this vile canker to corrode me.
Wilford!

Wilf. Who calls? -- eh! -- it is sir Edward.


Fitz. Mum!


Mort. I seem to interrupt you.


Wilf. earnestly No, indeed.
No, on my life, sir: -- we were only talking
Of --

Fitz. Hold your tongue. Oons! boy, you must not tell.


Mort. Not!


Fitz. Not! not to be sure: -- why, it is a secret.


Wilf. You shall know all, sir. -- 'Twas a trifle -- nothing --
In faith you shall know all.

Fitz. In faith you lie.
Be satisfied, good Edward: -- it is a toy. --
But, of all men, I would not have thee know on it.
It is a tender subject.

Mort. Aye, indeed!


Fitz. May not I have my secret? Oons! good brother,
What would you say, now, should a meddling knave
Busy his brains with matters, though but trivial,
Which concern you alone?

Mort. I Would have him rot:
Die piecemeal; pine; moulder in misery.
Agent, and sacrifice to Heaven's wrath,
When castigating plagues are hurled on man,
Stands lean, and lynx-eyed Curiosity,
Watching his neighbor's soul. Sleepless himself
To banish sleep from others. Like a Leech
Sucking the blood-drops from a care-worn heart,
He gorges on it -- then renders up his food,
To nourish Calumny, his foul-lung'd mate,
Who carries Rumour's trumpet; and whose breath,
Infecting the wide surface of the world,
Strikes pestilence and blight. O, fie ont! fie!
Whip me the curious wretch from pole to pole!
Who writhes in fire, and scorches all around him,
A victim making victims!

Fitz. By the mass,
'Twere a sound whipping that, from pole to pole!
From constable to constable might serve.
Even you yourself were like to prove, but now,
This Leech, that is yoke fellow, you say, to Scandal,
The bad-breath'd trumpeter.

Mort. Your pardon, brother;
I had forgot. Wilford, I Have business for you.
Wait for me -- aye -- an hour after dinner,
Wait for me in the library.

Wilf. The library! --
I sicken at the sound. aside. Wait there for you -- and --
Captain Fitzharding, sir?

Mort. For me. alone.


Wilf Alone, sir!


Mort. Yes, -- begone.


Wilf. I shall, sir -- but
If I have ever breathed a syllable
That might displease you may --

Mort. Fool! breathe no more.


Wilf. I Am dumb.
I Would rather step into a Lion's den
Than meet him in the library! -- I go, Sir. Exit.

Fitz. Brother, you are too harsh with that poor boy.


Mort. Brother, a man must rule his family
In his own way.

Fitz. Well, well, well -- Don't be touchy.
I speak not to offend: I only speak
On a friend's privilege. The poor are men,
And have their feelings, brother.

Mort. So have I!


Fitz. One of the best that we can show, believe me,
Is mildness to a servant. Servants, brother,
Are born with fortune's yoke about their necks;
And that is galling in itself enough;
We should not goad them under it. The master
Should rather cheer them in their servitude,
With kindly words -- not too familiar neither;
But uttered with that air which true benevolence
Imparts to dignified nobility.

Mort. Brother, your hand. You have a gentle nature --
May no mischance ever ruffle it, my brother!
I Have known thee from my infancy, old soldier;
And never did I know -- I do not flatter --
A heart more stout, more cased with hardy manhood,
More full of milk within. Trust me, dear friend,
If admiration of thy charity
May argue charity in the admirer,
I am not destitute.

Fitz. You! -- I have seen you
Sometimes overflow with it.

Mort. And what avails it?
Honor has been my theme; good will to man
My study. I have labored for a name
As white as mountain snow; dazzling, and speckless:
Shame on it! it is blur'd with blots! Fate, like a mildew,
Ruins the virtuous harvest I would reap,
And all my crop is weeds.

Fitz. Why, how now, brother!
This is all spleen. You mope yourself too much,
In this dull forest, here. Twenty blue devils
Are dancing jigs, and hornpipes, in your brains.
Fie, fie! be more a man.

Mort. Well, I have done.


Fitz. Come, what is for dinner? Od! I mean to eat
Abundantly.

Mort I know not, brother. Honest Winterton
Will tell you all.

Fitz. What he! old Adam! he!
My merry buck of Paradise? -- Odso!:
I have not seen him. Well, he shall produce
A flaggon of the best; and, after dinner,
We will be jovial* Come, come, rouse you, man!
I came on purpose, thirty miles from home,
To jog your spirits. Prithee, now, be gay!
And, prithee, too, be kind to my young favorite!
To Wilford there.

Mort. Well, well; I hope I have been.


Fitz. No doubt, in actions: -- but in words and looks --
A rugged look's a damper to a greenhorn.
I watched him, now, when you frowned angerly:
And he betrayed --

Mort. Betrayed!


Fitz. Ten thousand fears.


Mort. Oh!


Fitz. The poor devil couldn't show more scared
Had you even held a pistol to his head.
Mortimer starts Why hey-day! what is the matter?

Mort. Brother I --
Question me not; my nerves are aspin-like;
The slightest breath will shake 'em. Come, good brother.

Fitz. You Will promise to be gay?


Mort. I Will do my best.


Fitz. Why that is well said! A man can do no more.
Od! I believe my rattling talk has given you
A stir already.

Mort. That it has indeed!
Come, brother!

Exeunt. SCENE III. HELEN'S COTTAGE.
Enter Helen and Samson. Helen. Are you he that wish to enter in my service?


Sams. Yes, so please you, Madam Helen, for want of a better.


Helen. Why, I have seen you in the forest -- at Rawbold's cottage. He is your
father, as I think.


Sams. Yes, so please you, Madam; for want of a better.


Helen. I fear me you may well say that. Your father, as I have heard, bears an
ill name, in the forest.


Sams. Alas! madam he is obliged to bear it -- for want of a better. We are all
famished, madam: and the naked and hungry have seldom many friends to speak
well of them.


Helen. If I should hire thee, who will give thee a character?


Sams. My father, madam.


Helen. Why sirrah, he has none of his own.


Sams. The more fatherly in him, madam, to give his son what he has need of,
for himself. But a knave is often applied to, to vouch for a good servant's
honesty. I will serve you as faithfully as your last footman; who, I have
heard, ran away this morning.


Helen. Truly, he did so.


Sams. I was told on it, some half hour ago; and ran, hungrily, hither, to offer
myself. So, please you, let not poverty stand in the way of my preferment.


Helen. Should I entertain you, what could you do to make yourself useful?


Sams. Any thing. I can wire hares, snare partridges, shoot a buck, and smuggle
brandy, for you, madam.


Helen. Fie on you, knave! 'Twere fitter to turn you over to the Verderors of
the forest, for punishment, than to encourage you in such practices.


Sams. I would practice any thing better, that might get me bread. I would
scrape trenchers, fill buckets, and carry a message. What can a man do! He
cannot starve.


Helen. Well, sirrah, to snatch thee from evil, I care not if I make trial of
thee?


Sams. No! will you?


Helen. Nineteen in twenty might question my prudence for this: -- but,
whatever loss I may suffer from thy roguery, the thought of having opened a
path to lead a needy wanderer back to virtue, will more than repay me.


Sams. O, bless you, lady! If I do not prove virtuous never trust in man more.
I am overjoyed!


Helen. Get thee to the kitchen. You will find a lively there will suit you.


Sams. A livery! O, the father! Virtuous and a livery, all in a few seconds!
Heaven bless you!


Helen. Well, get you to your work.


Sam. I go, madam. If I break any thing to day, beseech you let it go for
nothing; for joy makes my hand tremble. Should you want me please to cry
Samson, and I am with you in a twinkling. Heaven bless you! Here Is fortune*
Exit.


Helen. Blanch stays a tedious time. Heaven send Mortimer's health be not
worse! He is sadly altered since we came to the forest. I dreamed last night,
of the fire he saved me from; and I saw him, all fresh, in manly bloom, bearing
me through the flames, even as it once happened.


Enter Blanch. Helen. How now, wench! You have almost tired my patience.


Blanch. And my own legs, madam. If the old faotman had not made so much use of
his, by running away, they might have spared mine.


Helen. Inform me of Sir Edward Mortimer.
Have seen him?

Blanch. Yes, I have, madam.


Helen Say; tell me;
How looked he? how is his health? is he in spirits?
What said he, Blanch? Will he be here to day?

Blanch. A little breath, madam, and I will answer all duly.


Helen. O! fie up in thee, wench!
These interrogatories should be answered
Quicker than breath can utter them.

Blanch. That Is impossible, lady.


Helen. Thou would not say so had thou ever loved.
Love has a fleeter messenger than speech,
To tell love's meaning. His expresses post
Upon the orbs of vision, ere the tongue
Can shape them into words. A lover's look
Is his heart's Mercury. O! the Eye's eloquence,
Twin-born with thought, outstrips the tardy voice,
Far swifter than the nimble lightning's flash
The sluggish thunder-peal that follows it.

Blanch. I am not skilled in eye-talking, madam. I have been used to let my
discourse ride upon my tongue, and, I have been told, 'twill trot at a good
round pace upon occasion.


Helen. Then let it gallop, now, beseech you, wench,
And bring me news of Mortimer.

Blanch. Then, madam, I saw Sir Edward in his library: and delivered your
letter. He will be here either in the evening, or on the morrow: it is uncertain
which -- for his brother, Capt. Fitzharding, is arrived on a visit to him.


Helen. Is he? -- well, that may somewhat raise his spirits.
That soldier has a pleasant, harmless mind.
Mirth gilds his age, and sits upon his brow
Like sun in winter. I never saw a man
More cheerful in decline, more laughter-loving,
More gay, and frolicksome.

Blanch. Frolicksome enough, if you knew all -- but not so harmless. aside


Helen. He Will scarce be here to night.


Blanch. Who? Sir Edward? Happily not, madam: but his letter may chance to
specify further particulars.


Helen. His letter! Has he written? -- fie upon thee!
Why did not give it me, at once? Where is it?
Thou art turned dreamer, wench! -- Come, quickly.

Blanch. You talked to me so much of reading eyes, madam, that I even forgot
the letter. Here it is.


Helen. Come to me, shortly, in my cabinet:
I Will read it there. -- I am almost unfit
To open it. I never receive his letters
But my hand trembles. Well, I know it is silly,
And yet I cannot help it. I will ring;
Then come to me, good Blanch -- not yet. My Mortimer,
Now for your letter! Exit.

Blanch I would they were wedded once, and all this trembling would be over. I
am told your married lady's feelings are little roused in reading letters from
a husband.


Enter SAMSON -- dressed in a Livery. Sam. This sudden turn of fortune might
puff some men up with pride. I have looked in the glass already: -- and if ever
man looked braver in a glass than I, I know nothing of finery.


Blanch. Hey day! who have we here?


Sam. Oh, lord! this is the maid. -- I mean the waiting woman. I warrant we
shall be rare company, in a long winter's evening.


Blanch. Why, who are you?


Sam. I Am your fellow servants: -- the new comer. The last footman cast his skin
in the pantry this morning, and I have crept into it.


Blanch. Why, sure, it cannot be! -- Now I look upon you again, you are Samson
Rawbold -- old Rawbold's son, of the forest here.


Sam. The same; I am not like some upstarts; When I am prosperous, I do not
turn my back on my poor relations.


Blanch. What, has my lady hired thee?


Sam. She has taken me, like a pad nag, upon trial.


Blanch. I suspect you will play her a jade's trick, and stumble in your
probation. You have been caught tripping, ere now.


Sam. An I do not give content it is none of my fault. A man's qualities cannot
come out all at once. I wish you would teach me a little how to lay a cloth.


Blanch. You are well qualified for your office truly, not to know that!


Sam. To say truth, we had little practice that way at home. We stood not upon
forms. We had sometimes no cloth for a dinner.


Blanch. And, sometimes, no dinner for a cloth.


Sam. Just so. We had little order in our family.


Blanch. Well, I will instruct you.


Sam. That Is kind. I will be grateful. They tell me I have learnt nothing but
wickedness yet: but I will instruct you in any thing I know, in return.


Blanch. There I have no mind to become your scholar. But be steady in your
service, and you may outlive your beggary, and grow into respect.


Sam. Nay, an riches rain upon me, respect will grow of course. I never knew a
rich man yet who wanted followers to pull off their caps to him.


SAMSON. SONG.
I.
A traveller stopped at a widow's gate;
She kept an Inn, and he wanted to bait; --
But the landlady slighted her guest:
For when Nature was making an ugly race,
She certainly molded this traveller's face
As a sample for all the rest.
II.
The chamber-maid's sides they were ready to crack,
When she saw his queer nose, and the hump at his back; --
A hump is'nt handsome, no doubt --
And though it is confessed, that the prejudice goes,
Very strongly, in favor of wearing a nose,
Yet a nose should'nt look like a snout.
III.
A bag full of gold on the table he laid --
'T had a wondrous effect on the widow and maid!
And they quickly grew mavelous civil.
The money immediately altered the case;
They were charmed with his hump, and his snout, and his face,
Though he still might have frighted the devil.
IV.
He paid like a prince -- gave the widow a smack --
Then stopped on his horse, at the door, like a sack;
While the landlady, touching the chink,
Cried -- "Sir, should you travel this country again,
"I heartily hope that the sweetest of men
"Will stop at the widow's to drink" Exeunt.

SCENE IV. -- The LIBRARY.
WILFORD discovered. Wilf. I would Sir Edward were come! The dread of a fearful
encounter is, often, as terrible as the encounter itself. Yet my encounters
with him, of late, are no trifles. Some few hours back, in this very room, he
held a loaded pistol within an inch of my brains. Well, that was passion -- he
threw it from him on the instant, and -- eh! -- He Is coming. -- No. The old
wainscot cracks, and frightens me out of my wits: and, I verily believe, the
great folio dropped on my head, just now, from the shelf, on purpose to increase
my terrors.


Enter Sir EDWARD MORTIMER, at one door of the Library, which he locks after
him. WILFORD turns round on hearing him shut it. Wilf. What Is that? -- It Is he
himself! Mercy on me! he has locked the door! -- What is going to become of me!


Mort. Wilford! -- Is no one in the picture-gallery?


Wilf. No -- not a soul, Sir -- Not a human soul. --
None within hearing, if I were to bawl
Ever so loud.

Mort. Lock yonder door.


Wilf. The door, Sir!


Mort. Do as I bid you.


Wilf. What, Sir? Lock -- Mortimer waves with his hand
I shall, Sir. going to the door and locking it
His face has little anger in it, neither:
It Is rather marked with sorrow, and distress.

Mort. Wilford, approach me. -- What am I to say
For aiming at your life! -- Do you not scorn me,
Despise me for it?

Wilf. I! Oh, Sir! --


Mort. You must.
For I am singled from the herd of men,
A vile, heart-broken wretch!

Wilf. Indeed, indeed, Sir,
You deeply wrong yourself. Your equal's love,
The poor man's prayer, the orphan's tear of gratitude,
All follow you: -- and I! -- I owe you all!
I am most bound to bless you.

Mort. Mark me, Wilford. --
I know the value of the orphan's tear,
The poor man's prayer, respect from the respected;
I feel to merit these, and to obtain them,
Is to taste here, below, that thrilling cordial
Which the remunerating Angel draws,
From the eternal fountain of delight,
To pour on blessed souls, that enter heaven.
I feel this: -- I! -- How must my nature, then,
Revolt at him who seeks to stain his hand,
In human blood? -- and yet it seems, this day,
I sought your life. -- O! I have suffered madness --
None know my tortures -- pangs! -- but I can end them:
End them as far as appertains to thee. --
I have resolved it. -- Hell-born struggles tear me!
But I have pondered on it, -- and I must trust thee.

Wilf. Your confidence shall not be --


Mort. You must swear.


Wilf. Swear, Sir! -- will nothing but an oath, then --


Mort. Listen.
May all the ills that wait on frail humanity
Be doubled on your head, if you disclose
My fatal secret! May your body turn
Most lazar-like, and loathsome; and your mind
More loathsome than your body! May those fiends
Who strangle babes, for very wantonness,
Shrink back, and shudder at your monstrous crimes,
And, shrinking, curse you! Palsies strike your youth!
And the sharp terrors of a guilty mind
Poison your aged days; while all your nights,
As on the earth you lay your houseless head,
Out-horror horror! May you quit the world
Abhorred, self-hated, hopeless for the next,
Your life a burden, and your death a fear!

Wilf. For mercy's sake, forbear! you terrify me!


Mort. Hope this may fall upon thee; -- Swear thou hopest it,
By every attribute which heaven, earth, hell,
Can lend, to bind, and strengthen conjuration,
If thou betray'st me.

Wilf. Well I -- hesitating.


Mort. No retreating!


Wilf. After a pause I swear, by all the ties that bind a man,
Divine, or human, -- never to divulge!

Mort. Remember you have sought this secret.
-- Yes,
Extorted it. I have not thrust it on you.
It Is big with danger to you; and to me,
While I prepare to speak, torment unutterable.
Know, Wilford that -- damnation!

Wilf. Dearest Sir!
Collect yourself. This shakes you horribly.
You had this trembling, it is scarce a week,
At Madam Helen's.

Mort. There it is. -- Her Uncle!


Wilf. Her uncle!


Mort. Him. She knows it not -- None know it --
You are the first ordained to hear me say,
I am -- his murderer.

Wilf. O, heaven!


Mort. His assassin.


Wilf. What you that -- mur -- the murder -- I am choked!


Mort. Honor, thou blood -- stained God! at whose red altar
Sit War and Homicide, O, to what madness
Will insult drive thy votaries! By heaven,
In the world's range there does not breathe a man
Whose brutal nature I more strove to soothe,
With long forbearance, kindness, courtesy,
Than his who fell by me. But he disgraced me,
Stained me, -- oh, death, and shame! -- the world looked on,
And saw this sinewy savage strike me down;
Rain blows upon me, drag me to and fro,
On the base earth, like carrion, Desperation,
In every fiber of my frame, cried vengeance!
I left the room, which he had quitted. Chance
(Curse on the chance!) while boiling with my wrongs,
Thrust me against him, darkling, in the street: --
I stabbed him to the heart: -- and my oppressor
Rolled, lifeless, at my foot.

Wilf. Oh! mercy on me!
How could this deed be covered!

Mort. Would you think it?
Even at the moment when I gave the blow,
Butchered a fellow creature in the dark,
I had all good men's love. But my disgrace,
And my opponent's death, thus linked with it,
Demanded notice of the magistracy.
They summoned me, as friend would summon friend,
To acts of import, and communication.
We met: and 'twas resolved, to stifle rumor,
To put me on my trial. No accuser,
No evidence appeared, to urge it on. --
'Twas meant to clear my fame. -- How clear it, then?
How cover it? you say. -- Why, by a Lie:
Guilt's offspring, and its guard. I taught this breast,
Which Truth once made her throne, to forge a lie;
This tongue to utter it. -- Rounded a tale,
Smooth as a Seraph's song from Satan's mouth;
So well compacted, that the over thronged court
Disturbed cool justice, in her judgment seat,
By shouting "Innocence!" ere I had finished.
The Court enlarged me; and the giddy rabble
Bore me, in triumph, home. Aye! -- look upon me! --
I know thy sight aches at me.

Wilf. Heaven forgive me!
I think I love you still: -- but I am young;
I know not what to say: -- it may be wrong. --
Indeed I pity you.

Mort. I disdain all pity. --
I ask no consolation. Idle boy!
Think thou that this compulsive confidence
Was given to move thy pity? -- Love of fame
(For still I cling to it) has urged me, thus,
To quash thy curious mischief in its birth.
Hurt honor, in an evil, cursed hour,
Drove me to murder -- lying: -- 'twould again.
My honesty, -- sweet peace of mind, -- all, all!
Are bartered for a name. I will maintain it.
Should slander whisper over my sepulcher,
And my soul's agency survive in death,
I could embody it with heaven's lightning,
And the hot shaft of my insulted spirit
Should strike the blaster of my memory
Dead in the churchyard. Boy, I would not kill thee:
Thy rashness and discernment threatened danger:
To check them there was no way left but this:
Save one -- your death: -- you shall not be my victim.

Wilf. My death! What take my life? -- My life! to prop
This empty honor.

Mort. Empty! Grovelling fool!


Wilf. I am your servant, Sir: child of your bounty;
And know my obligation. I have been
Too curious, happily; it is the fault of youth.
I never meant injury: if it would serve you,
I would lay down my life; I Would give it freely: --
Could you, then, have the heart to rob me of it?
You could not; -- should not.

Mort. How!


Wilf. You dare not.


Mort. Dare not!


Wilf. Some hours ago you durst not. Passion moved you;
Reflection interposed, and held your arm.
But, should reflection prompt you to attempt it,
My innocence would give me strength to struggle,
And wrest the murderous weapon from your hand.
How would you look to find a peasant boy
Return the knife you levelled at his heart;
And ask you which in heaven would show the best,
A rich man's honor, or a poor man's honesty?

Mort. It Is plain I dare not take your life. To spare it,
I have endangered mine. But dread my power; --
You know not its extent. Be warned in time:
Trifle not with my feelings. Listen, Sir!
Myriads of engines, which my secret working
Can rouse to action, now encircle you.
I speak not vaguely. You have heard my principle;
Have heard, already, what it can effect:
Be cautious how you thwart it. Shun my brother;
Your ruin hangs upon a thread: Provoke me,
And it shall fall upon you. Dare to make
The slightest movement to awake my fears,
And the gaunt criminal, naked and stake-tied,
Left on the heath to blister in the sun,
'Till lingering death shall end his agony,
Compared to thee, shall seem more enviable
Than Cherubs to the damned.

Wilf. O, misery!
Discard me sir! I must be hateful to you.
Banish me hence. I will be mute as death;
But let me quit your service.

Mort. Never. -- Fool!
To buy this secret, you have sold yourself.
Your movements, eyes, and, most of all, your breath,
From this time forth, are fettered to my will.
You have said, truly: you are hateful to me:
Yet you shall feel my bounty: -- that shall flow,
And swell your fortunes; but my inmost soul
Will yearn with loathing, when -- hark! some one knocks!
Open the door.

Wilford opens the door, and Winterton comes in. Mort. How now, Winterton?
Did you knock more than once? Speak -- did you listen --
-- I mean, good Adam, did you wait? -- Aye, wait
Long at the door, here?

Wint. Bless your honor! no.
You are too good to let the old man wait.

Mort. What, then, our talk, here -- Wilford's here and mine --
Did not detain you at the door? -- Ha! -- did it?

Wint. Not half-a-second.


Mort. Oh! -- well, what is the matter?


Wint. Capt. Fitzharding, Sir, entreats your company.
I Have placed another flaggon on the table.
Your worship knows it. -- Number thirty-five: --
The supernaculum.

Mort. Well, well. -- I come.
What, has he been alone?

Wint. No -- I Have been with him.
Od! he is a merry man! and does so jest!
He calls me first of men, 'cause my name's Adam.
Well! it is exceeding pleasant, by Sr. Thomas!

Mort. Come, Adam; I Will attend the Captain. -- Wilford,
What I have just now given you in charge,
Be sure to keep fast locked. I shall be angry, --
Be very angry, if I find you careless.
Follow me, Adam.

Exit Mortimer -- Winterton following. Wilf. This house is no house for me. Fly
I will, I am resolved: -- but whither? His threats strike terror into me; and
were I to reach the pole, I doubt whether I should elude his grasp. But to live
here a slave -- slave to his fears, -- his jealousies! Night's coming on.
Darkness be my friend! for I will forth instantly. The thought of my innocence
will cheer me as I wander through the gloom. Oh! when guilty Ambition writhes
upon his couch, why should barefoot Integrity repine, though his sweet sleep
be canopied with a ragged hovel! Exit.


SCENE V. -- The inside of an Abbey, in ruins. Part of it converted into an
habitation for Robbers. Various entrances to their apartment, through the
broken arches of the building, etc. etc.
Enter JUDITH and a BOY. Jud. Well, sirrah! have you been upon the scout? Are
any of our gang returning?


Boy. No, Judith! not a soul.


Jud. The rogues tarry thus to fret me.


Boy. Why, indeed, Judith, the credit of your cookery is lost among thieves.
They never come punctual to their meals.


Jud. No tidings of Orson yet, from the market town?


Boy. I have seen nothing of him,


Jud. Brat! thou do never bring me good news.


Boy. Judith, you are ever so cross with me!


Jud. That wretch Orson slights my love of late. Hence, you hemp seed, hence!
Get to the broken porch of the abbey, and watch. It Is all you are good for.


Boy. You know I am but young yet, Judith, but with good instructions, I may be
a robber in time.


Jud. Away, you imp! you will never reach such preferment. A whistle without.
So! I hear some of our party Whistle again. The Boy puts his fingers in his
mouth, and whistles in answer.


Jud. Why must you keep your noise, sirrah?


Boy. Nay, Judith, it is one of the first steps we boys learn in the profession.
I shall never come to good, if you check me so. Huzza! here come two!


Enter two Robbers, through the broken part of the Scene. Jud. So! you have
found your road at last. A murrain light upon you! is it thus you keep your
hours!


1 st Rob. What, hag, ever at this trade! Ever grumbling?


Jub. I have reason. I toil to no credit; I watch with no thanks. I trim up the
table for your return, and no one returns in due time to notice my industry.
Your meat is scorched to cinders. Rogues, would it were poison for you!


2 d Rob. How the fury raves! Here, take my carbine; 'twas levelled, some half
hour since, at a traveller's head.


Jub. Hah, hah, hah! Rare! Did shoot him?


1 st Rob. Shoot him? No. This devil in petticoats thinks no more of slaying a
man, than killing a cockchafer. I never knew a woman turn to mischief, that she
did not outdo a man, clean.


Jub. Did any of you meet Orson on your way?


1 st Rob. Aye, there the hand points. When that fellow is abroad you are more
savage than customary; and that is needless.


2 d Rob. None of our comrades come yet? They will be finely soaked.


1 st Rob. Aye, the rain pours like a spout upon the ruins of the old abbey
wall here.


Jud. I Am glad on it. May it drench them, and breed agues! 'twill teach them to
keep time.


1 st Rob. Peace! thou abominable railer. A man had better dwell in purgatory,
than have thee in his habitation. -- Peace, devil! or I Will make thee repent.


Jud. You! it is as much as thy life is worth to move my spleen.


1 st Rob. What, you will set Orson, your champion, upon me?


Jud. Coward! he should not disgrace himself with chastising thee.


1 st Rob. Death and thunder! --


Jud. Aye, attack a woman, do! it suits your hen-hearted valor. Assault a
woman!


1 st Rob. Well -- passion hurried roe. But I have a respect for the soft sex,
and am cool again. Come, Judith, be friends. -- Nay, come, do; and I will give
thee a farthingale, I took from a lawyer's widow.


Jud. Where is it?


1 st Rob. You shall have it.


Jud. Well -- I -- Hark!


2 d Rob. Soft! I think I hear the foot of a comrade.


MUSICAL DIALOGUE AND CHORUS.
Robbers and Judith. Listen! No; it is the owl,
That hoots upon the mouldering tower.
Hark! the rain beats, the night is foul!
Our comrades stay beyond their hour.
Listen!
All Is hushed around the abbey wall. --
Soft! Now I hear the robber's call!
Listen!
They whistle! -- Answer it! -- -- It Is nigh!
Again! A comrade comes. -- It Is I!
And here another; and here another!
Who comes! A brother. Who comes?
A brother.
Now they all come pouring in;
Our jollity will soon begin.
Sturdy partners, all appear!
We Are here! and here, and here, and here!
Thus we stout freebooters prowl,
Then meet to drain the flowing bowl!


At different periods of the Music, the Robbers enter, through various parts
of Ruins, in groups. Enter ORSON, with Luggage on his Back, as if returned from
the Market. 1st. Rob. See! hither comes Orson at last. He walks in like Plenty,
with provision on his shoulder.


Jud. O, Orson! -- why did tarry, Orson? I began to fear. Thou art cold and
damp. Let me wring the wet from thy clothes. O! my heart leaps to see he.


1 st Rob. Mark how this she-bear hugs her bruin!


Ors. Stand off! This hamper has been wearisome enough. I want not thee on my
neck.


Jud. Villain! it is thus you ever use me. I can revenge: -- I can -- do not,
dear Orson! do not treat me thus.


Ors. Let a man be ever so sweet tempered, he will meet somewhat to sour it. I
have been vexed to madness.


2 d Rob. How now, Orson, what has vexed thee now?


Ors. A prize has slipped through my fingers.


3 d Rob. Aye! marry, how?


Ors. I met a straggling knave on foot, and the rogue resisted. He had the face
to tell me that he was thrust on the world to seek his fortune; and that the
little he had about him was his all. Plague on the provision at my back! I had
no time to rifle him: -- but I have spoiled him for fortune seeking, I warrant
him.


Rob. How?


Ors. Why I beat him to the ground. Whether he will ever get up again the next
passenger may discover.


Jud. Ha! Ha! O, brave,! That Is my valiant Orson!


3 d. Rob. Orson, you are ever disobeying our Captain's order. You are too
remorseless and bloody.


Ors. Take heed, then, how you move my anger, by telling me on it. The affair is
mine -- I will answer to the consequence.


4 th. Rob. I hear our Captain's signal. Here he comes. Ha! -- he is leading
one who seems wounded.


Enter ARMSTRONG, supporting WILFORD. Arm. Gently, good fellow! come, keep a
good heart!


Wilf. You are very kind. I had breathed my last, but for your care. Whither
have you led me?


4 th. Rob. Where you will be well treated, youngster. You are now among as
honorable a knot of men as ever cried "stand" to a traveller.


Wilf. How: among robbers!


4 th. Rob. Why so the law's cant calls us gentlemen who live at large.


Wilf. So! for what am I reserved!


Arm. Fear nothing. You are safe in this asylum. Judith, lead him in. See some
of my linen ready, and look to his wound.


Jud. I do not like the office. You are ever at these tricks. 'Twill ruin us in
the end. What have we to do with charity?


Arm. Turbulent wretch! obey me.


Jud. Well, I shall. Come, fellow, since it must be so.


Arm. Anon, I Will visit you myself, lad.


Wilf. Heaven bless you! whatever becomes of my life -- and faith, I am almost
weary on it -- I am bound to your charity. Gently, I pray you -- my wound pains.
Gently!


Exit, led out by Judith. Arm. I would I knew which of you had done this.


1 st. Rob. Wdy what is the matter, Captain?


Arm. Cruelty is the matter. Had not accident led me to the spot where he lay,
you poor boy had bled to death. I learned his story, partly, from him, on the
way: and know how basely he has been handled by one of you. Well, time must
discover him: for he, who had brutality enough to commit the action, can
scarcely have courage enough to confess it.


Ors. Courage, Captain, is a quality, I take it, little wanted by any here.
What signify words -- I did it.


Arm* I suspected thee, Orson. It Is scarce an hour since he, whom thou have
wounded, quitted the service of Sir Edward Mortimer, in the forest, here; and
enquiry will doubtless be made.


2 d. Rob. Nay then we are discovered.


Arm. Now, mark what thou have done. Thou have endanger^d the safety of our
party; thou have broke my order (it is not the first time, by many) in attacking
a passenger: -- and what passenger? One whose unhappy case should have claimed
thy pity. He told you he had displeased his master -- left the house of
comfort, and with his scanty pittance, was wandering round the world to mend
his fortune. Like a butcher, you struck the forlorn boy to the earth, and left
him to languish in the forest. Would any of our brave comrades have done this?


All. -- None! None!


Arm. Comrades, in this case, my voice is single. But if it have any weight,
this brute, this Orson, shall be thrust from our community, which he has
disgraced. Let it not be said, brothers, while want drives us to plunder, that
wantonness prompts us to butchery.


Robbers. O brave Captain! away with him!


Ors. You had better ponder on it, ere you provoke me.


Arm. Rascal! do you mutter threats. You cannot terrify us. Our calling teems
with danger -- we are not to be daunted by the treachery of an informer. We
defy you. Go. Yon dare not hurt us. You dare not sacrifice so many brave, and
gallant fellows, to your revenge, and proclaim yourself scoundrel. Begone.


Ors. Well, if I must, I must. I was always a friend to you all: but if you are
bent on turning me out -- why -- fare you well.


Robbers. Aye, aye -- Away, away.


Ors. Farewell then. Exit.


Arm. Come, comrades -- Think no more of this. Let us drown the choler we have
felt in wine and revelry.


FINALE.
Jolly Friars tippled here,
Ere these Abbey walls had crumbled;
Still the ruins boast good cheer,
Though long ago the cloisters tumbled.
The Monks are gone: --
Well! well!
That Is all one: --
Let^s ring their knell.
Ding dong! ding dong! to the bald-pated monk!
He set the example,
We'll follow his sample,
And all go to bed most religiously drunk.
Peace to the good fat Friar's soul!
Who every day,
Did wet his clay,
In the deep capacious bowl.
Huzza! Huzza! we'll drink and we'll sing!
We'll laugh, and we'll quaff,
And make the welkin ring!


ACT III.
SCENE I. WINTERTON's Room, in SIR EDWARD MORTIMER's Lodge.
SAMSON and BLANCH, discovered, at a Table, with Bottle and Glasses. BLANCH.
SAMSON, you must drink no more.


Sams. One more glass, Mistress Blanch, and I shall be better company. 'Twill
make me loving.


Blanch. Nay, then, you shall not have a drop.


Sams. I will: -- and so shall you too. filling the glass Who knows but it may
make you the same?


Blanch. You are wondrous familiar, Mr Lout.


Sams. I would not willingly offend. I will endeavor at more respect. My
humble duty to you. drinks.


Blanch. I would counsel you to be cautious of drinking, Samson. Consider where
you are. We are now, remember, in Sir Edward Mortimer's Lodge.


Sams. In the Butler's room; -- where drinking has always a privilege. fills.


Blanch. What, another!


Sams. Do not fear. 'Twill not make me familiar again. My lowly respects to
yon. drinks. This same old Winterton's wine has a mavelous choice flavor. I
wonder whether 'twas smuggled.


Blanch. Should you totter with this, now, in the morning, 'twould go nigh to
shake your office to the foundation, before night. My Lady would never pardon
you.


Sams. 'Twould be hard to turn me adrift, for getting drunk, on the second day
of my service.


Blanch. Truly, I think 'twould be reason sufficient.


Sams. 'Twould not be giving a man a fair trial. How should she know but I
intend to be sober for a year after?


Blanch, How should she know, indeed! or any one else, who has heard of your
former rogueries.


Sams. Well, the worst fault I had was being a sportsman.


Blanch. A sportsman! out on you, rogue! you were a poacher.


Sams. Aye, so the rich nickname us poor brothers of the field; and lay us by
the heels when we do that for hunger which they practice for amusement. Cannot
I move you to take a thimble-full, this cold morning?


Blanch. Not a drop, I


Sams. Hark! I think I hear old Winterton coming back. By our lady, Mistress
Blanch, we have made a desperate hole in the bottle, since he left us.


Blanch. We! why, you slanderous rogue, I have not tasted it.


Sams. No -- it is not he.


Blanch. No matter; he will be back on the instant. Leave this idle guzzling,
if you have any shame. Think we are attending madam Helen, in her visit to Sir
Edward, on his sudden sickness. Think, too, on the confusion from Wilford's
flight. Is it a time for you, so, to tipple, when the whole house is in
distress and melancholy?


Sams. Alas! I have too tender a heart, Mistress Blanch; and have need of
somewhat, in the midst of this sorrow, to cheer my spirits


Blanch. This wine will shortly give your profession of amendment the lie.


Sams. Let it give me the lie: It Is an affront I can easily swallow. Come, a
bargain -- an you will take one glass with me, I will give over.


Blanch. Well, on that condition --


Sam. Agreed -- for that will just finish the bottle. fills. I will drink no
health, now, but of thy giving.


Blanch. Then listen and edify. -- May a man never insult a woman with his
company, when drunkenness has made him a brute!


Sams. With all my heart: -- But a woman knows that man may be made a brute,
when wine is clean out of the question. Eh! Here comes the old man, in real
earnest.


Enter ADAM WINTERTON. Wint. Well, I am here again. -- What madcap? -- In
truth, I have a world of care. Our good master taken ill on a sudden. Wilford
flown: -- A base, ungrateful boy! -- One that I was so fond of: -- And to prove
such a profligate! I began to love the young villain like my own child. I had
marked down the unfortunate boy, in my last testament: I had -- Bless me! my
cold is wondrous troublesome to my eyes, this morning. Ah! it is a wicked world:
-- But old Winterton keeps a merry heart still. Do I not, pretty mistress
Blanch?


Blanch. I hope you do, Adam.


Wint. Nay, on second thought, I do not keep it; for thou have stolen it from
me, tulip! ha! good in faith! --


Sams. Ha! ha! -- Well in faith that is a good jest! ha! ha!


Wint. Do think so, varlet? "Thou have stolen it from me, tulip!" Well, it
was; it was exceeding pleasant, by St. Thomas! Heigho! I must even take a glass
to console me. One cup to -- eh! mercy on me! why the liquor has flown. Ha! the
bottle has leak'd, happily.


Sams. Yes, Sir: -- I cracked that bottle, myself, in your absence.


Wint. Cracked! Why what a careless goose art thou! these unthrifty knaves! --
ah* times are sadly changed for the worse, since I was a boy.


Blanch. Do think so, Adam?


Adam. Question any man, of my age, and he will say the same. Domestics never
broke bottles in queen Elizabeth's time. Servants were better then -- aye,
marry, and the bottles were better bottles. It Is a degenerate world! Well;
heigho!


Blanch. Why do sigh thus, Adam?


Wint. In truth, this is as heavy a day for me! --


Blanch. I hope not, Adam. Gome, come, things are not so bad, I warrant thee.
You have long drank smilingly of the cup of life, Adam; and when a good man
takes his potion without murmuring, Providence seldom leaves the bitterest drop
at the bottom. What is the matter, Adam?


Wint. Alas! nothing but evil. These attacks come on our worthy master as thick
as hail, and weaken him daily. He has been grievous ill, in the night, poor
soul! and never slept a wink since I brought him the news.


Blanch. What news, good Adam?


Wint. Why of Wilford's flight! -- A reprobate! The shock of his baseness has
brought on Sir Edward's old symptoms.


Blanch. What call you his old symptoms?


Wint. The shivering, and trembling its, which have troubled him these two
years. I begin to think the air of this forest does nourish agues. I can never
move him to drink enough of canary. I think, in my conscience, I had been
aguish myself, in these woods, had I not drank plenty of canary.


Sams. Mass, when I am ill, this old boy shall be my apothecary. aside.


Blanch. Well, well, he may mend. Do not fancy the worst, ere worse arrives,
Adam.


Wint. Nay, worse has arrived already. Blanch. Aye! marry, how?


Wint. Wilford's villainy. Sir Edward says, he has proofs of the blackest
treachery against him.


Blanch. Indeed!


Wint. It chills my blood to think on it! I had marked out the boy as a boy of
promise -- A learned boy! He had the backs of all the books in our library by
heart: and now a hue and cry is after him. Mercy on me! if the wretched lad be
taken, Sir Edward will bring him to the charge. We none know what it is yet; but
time will show.


Blanch. You surprise me! Wilford turn dishonest! I could scarce have credited
this; and after two years trial, too.


Sams. O, monstrous! to turn rogue after two years! Had it happened after two
days, indeed, 'twere not to be wondered at.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Mr. Winterton, there is a young woman of the forest,
would speak with you.


Wint. Out on it! These cottagers time their business vilely. Well, bid her come
in, Simon.


Ser. And, Mistress Blanch, your lady would see you anon, in the breakfast
parlour. Exit.


Blanch. I come quickly. Be not cast down, now, Adam; keep thy old heart merry
still.


Wint. Ha! in truth, I know not well, now, what would mend my spirits.


Blanch. What think you of the kiss I promised?


Wint. Ah, wag! go thy way Od! thou have nimble legs. Had I o'ertaken thee
yesterday -- Ah! well, no matter.


Blanch. Come, I will not leave thee comfortless, in these sad times Here --
Here is my hand, Adam.


Wint. Thou will show me a light pair of heels again, now.


Blanch No, in faith. Come; it is more than I would offer to every one. Take it.


Wint. That I will, most willingly. Kisses her hand.


Blanch. Do not play the rake now, and boast of my favors; for I am told there
is a breed of puppies will build stories, to a simple girl's prejudice, on
slighter encouragement than this. Be not you one of those empty coxcombs, and
so adieu, Adam. Exit.


Wint. Nay, I was never given to vaunt. 'Sbud! if I had, many a tale had been
told, sixty years back, of young, lusty Adam Winterton. -- Eh! why what do
thou titter at, scapegrace?


Sams. I, sir? -- Not I smothering a laugh.


Wint. I had forgot this varlet. Pestilence on it I Should this knave prate of
my little gallantry, I tremble for the good name of poor Mistress Blanch!


Enter Barbara. Bar. May I come in, good your worship?


Wint. Aye, marry, that thou may, pretty one. -- Well, though many things
have declined, since I was a boy, female-beauty keeps its rank still. I do
think there be more pretty women now than there were in Queen Elizabeth's reign.


Sams. Flesh! this is our Barbara. aside.


Wint. Well, and what would have, sweet one, with old Adam -- Eh! by St.
Thomas, why thou art she I have seen, ere now, with Wilford.


Barb. Beseech you, tell me where he is, sir?


Wint. Alas, child, he is gone -- flown! Eh? what -- why art not well, child?


Barb. Nothing, sir -- I only -- I hoped he would have called at our cottage,
ere he quitted the forest. Is there no hope that he may come back, sir?


Wint. None, truly, except force bring him back. Alas, child! the boy has
turned out naught; and justice is dogging him at the heels.


Barb. What Wilford, sit? -- my poor -- O, sir, my heart is bursting! I pray
you, pardon me. Had he passed our cottage in his flight, I would have ran out,
and followed him all the world over.


Wint. To see what love will do! Just so did Jane Blackthorn take on for me,
when Sir Marmaduke carried me to London, in the hard winter.


Barb. Beseech you, forgive me, sir! I only came to make enquiry, for I had
heard a strange tale. I would not have my sorrows make me troublesome to your
worship.


Wint. To me? poor wench! nay, that thou art not. I trust, child, I never
turned a deaf ear, yet, to the unfortunate. It Is man's office to listen to the
sorrows of a woman, and do all he can to soothe them. Come, come, dry thy
tears, chicken.


Barb. I looked to have been his wife shortly, sir. He was as kind a youth --
And, I am sure, he wanted not gratitude. I have heard him talk of you, as you
were his father, sir.


Wint. Did he? Ah! poor lad. Well, he had good qualities; but, alas! he is now
a reprobate. Poor boy! To think, now, that he should speak kindly of the old
man, behind his back!


Barb. Alas, this is the second flight to bring unhappiness to our poor family!


Wint. The second! How do mean, wench?


Barb. My brother, sir, left our cottage suddenly, yesterday morning; and we
have no tidings of him since.


Sams. Lo you, now, where he stands, to glad the hearts of his disconsolate
relations! Sister Barbara, why do not know me?


Barb. Eh! No -- Sure it cannot -- Brother Samson?


Sams. Mr. Samson -- Head serving man to the Lady Helen, of the New Forest.


Barb. O, the fortune! can it be! what gained thee so good a place, Samson?


Sams. Merit. I had no interest to back me. Mine is a rare case -- I was
promoted on the score of my virtues.


Wint. Out upon thee! thy knaveries have been the talk of the whole forest; and
furnished daily food for conversation.


Sams. Truly, then, conversation has fared better upon them than I. But my old
character is laid aside with my old jerkin. I am now exalted.


Wint. An I have any forecast in destiny, friend, thou bidst fair, one day, to
be more exalted. -- Ha! good in faith! Come, you must to the kitchen, knave. I
must thither myself, to give order for the day.


Barb. Must I return home, then, your worship, with no tidings?


Wint. Ah! heaven help me! what havoc does wanton Cupid make with us all!
Well, tarry about the house, with thy brother; we may hear somewhat, happily,
anon. Take care of thy sister, knave; and mark what I have said to thee. --
"Thou bidst fair one day to be more exalted." Had well, it was exceeding
pleasant, by St. Thomas! Exit.


Sams. Well, Barbara, and how fares father?


Barb. He has done naught but chide, since you disappeared, Samson. It has
sour'd him with us all.


Sams. Well, I will call, soon, and set all even.


Barb. Will yuo, brother?


Sams. I will. Bid him not be cast down. I will protect the Rawbold family.


Barb. Truly, brother, we are much in need of protection.


Sams. Do not fear. Lean upon my power. I am head of all the male domestics,
at Madam Helen's.


Barb. O, the father! of all! and how many be there, brother?


Sams. Why, truly, not so many as there be at the Lodge, here. But I have a boy
under me, to chop wood, and draw water.


Barb. The money we had from Sir Edward's bounty, is nearly gone in payment of
the debt our father owed. You know he had shortly been imprisoned, else.


Sams. My stock is somewhat low, too. -- But, no matter. Keep a good heart. I
am now a rising man. I will make you all comfortable.


Barb. Heaven bless you, Samson!


Sams. In three months, I look for a quarter's wages; and then Dick shall have
a shirt. I must now take you roundly to task.


Barb. Me, brother!


Sams. Aye, marry. You would throw yourself away on this Wilford -- who* as the
story goes, is little better than the devil's own imp.


Barb. O, brother! be not so uncharitable. I know not what is against him, but
he has not been heard yet. Consider too -- were all our actions, at home, to be
sifted, I fear me, we might not escape blameless.


Sams. Aye, but he, it seems, is falling, and we are upon the rise; and that
makes all the difference. Mass! how gingerly men will sift the faults of those
who are getting up hill in the world; and what a rough shake they give those
who are going downward!


Barb. I would not be one of those sisters, brother.


Sams. No, -- I warrant, now, thou would marry this vagabond.


Barb. That I would, brother. He has cheered me in my distress, and I would
sooner die than leave him, now he is unfortunate.


Sams. Have thou no respect for the family? Thou will bring endless disgrace on
the name of Rawbold. Shame on you! to take away from our reputation, when we
have so little!


Barb. I thought, brother, you would have shown more pity for your poor sister.


Sams. Tush! Love's a mere vapor.


Barb. Ah! brother.


DUETT.
SAMSON and BARBARA. I.
Barbara. From break of the morning, were I with my love,
I Would talk till the evening drew nigh;
And, when the day did close,
I Would sing him to repose,
And tune my love a lullaby.

II.
Samson. From break of the morning, were I with my love,
O! long ere the evening drew nigh,
Her talk would make me dose,
Till the music of my nose
Would play my love a lullaby.

III.
Barbara. Our children around us, I Would look on my love,
Each moment in rapture would fly.

Samson. But love is apt to pall,
When the brats begin to squall,
And a wife is screaming lullaby.

Both. From break of the mornings, etc,




SCENE II. A Room in Sir EDWARD MORTIMER's Lodge.
MORTIMER and HELEN discovered. Hell. Sooth, you look better now; indeed you do.


Mort. You Are a sweet flatterer!


Hell. Never trust me, then,
If I do flatter. This is wilfulness. --
Thou will be sick, because thou will be sick.
I Will laugh away this fancy, Mortimer.

Mort. What could thou do to laugh away my sickness?


Hell. I Will mimick the physician -- wise and dull --
With cane at nose, and nod emphatical,
Portentous in my silence; feel your pulse,
With an owl's face, that shall express as much
As Galen's head, cut out in wood, and gilt,
Stuck over an apothecary's door.

Mort. And what would thou prescribe?


Hell. I would distill
Each flower that lavish happiness produced.
Through the world's paradise, ere Disobedience
Scattered the seeds of care; then mingle each,
In one huge cup of comfort for thee, love,
To chase away thy dullness. Thou should wanton
Upon the wings of Time, and mock his flight,
As he sailed with thee towered Eternity.
I Would have each hour, each minute of thy life,
A golden holiday; and should a cloud
Overcast thee, be it light as a gossamer,
That Helen might disperse it with a breath,
And talk thee into sunshine!

Mort. Sweet, sweet Helen!
Death, softened with thy voice, might dull his sting,
And steep his darts in balsam. Oh! my Helen,
These warnings which that grisly monarch sends,
Forerunners of his certain visitation,
Of late are frequent with me. It should seem
I was not meant to live long.

Hell. Mortimer!
My Mortimer! You -- Oh! for heaven's sake,
Do not talk thus! You chill me. You are well;
Very well. -- You give way -- Oh, Mortimer!
Banish these fantasies. Think on poor Helen!

Mort. Think on thee, Helen?


Hell. Aye: but not think thus.
You said, my Mortimer, my voice could soothe,
In the most trying struggle.

Mort. Said I so?
Yet, Helen, when my fancy paints a deathbed,
I ever place thee foremost in the scene,
To make the picture touching. After man
Is summoned, and has made up his account,
Oh! it is a bitter after-reck'ning, when
His pallid lips receive the last, sad kiss,
Fond, female anguish prints! Then, Helen, then,
Then comes man's agony! To leave the object
He sheltered in his heart, grief-struck and helpless;
To grasp her hand; to fix his hollow eye
Upon her face, and mark her mute despair,
'Till the last flutter of his aching spirit
Hurri^s him hence, for ever!

Hell. Oh! for pity --
What have I done, that you -- bursts into tears.

Mort. My Helen!


Hell. I did not mean to weep. Oh, Mortimer,
I could not talk so cruelly to you!
I would not pain you thus, for worlds!

Mort. Nay, come;
I meant not this* I did not mean to say
There Is danger now; but it is the privilege
Of sickness to be grave, and moralize
On that which sickness brings. I prithee, now,
Be comforted. Believe me, I shall mend.
I feel I shall already.

Hell. Do you, Mortimer?
Do you, indeed, feel so?

Mort. Indeed I do.


Hell. I knew you would: -- I said it. Did I not?
I Am so glad! You must be cautious now. --
I Will play the nurse today -- and then, tomorrow,
You shall not brood at home, as you are wont,
But we will ride together, through the forest.
You must have exercise. Oh! I will make you
Fresh as the summer dew-drop, and as healthy
As ruddy Labor, springing from his bed,
To carol over the fallow!

Mort. Dearest prattler!
Men would meet sickness with a smiling welcome,
Were all wooed back to health thus prettily.

Hell. I see it in your looks, now, you are better*


Mort. Scarce possible, so suddenly!


Hell. O, yes;
There is no little movement of your face
But I can mark on the instant -- It Is my study.
I have so gazed upon it, that, I think,
I can interpret every turn it has,
And read your inmost soul.

Mort. What?


Hell. Mercy on me!
You change again.

Mort. 'Twas nothing. Do not fear;
These little shocks are usual. -- 'Twill not last.

Hell. Would you could shake them off!


Mort. I would I could!


Hell. Resolve it, then; and the bare resolution
Will bring the remedy. Rally your spirits;
I prithee, now, endeavor. -- This young man,
This boy -- this Wilford -- he has been ungrateful;
But do not let his baseness wear you thus.
Even let him go.

Mort. I Will hunt him through the world!


Hell. Why, look you there now! Pray be calm.


Mort. Well, well;
I am too boisterous: It Is my unhappiness
To seem most harsh where I would show most kind.
The world has made me peevish. This same boy
Has somewhat moved me.

Hell. He Is beneath your care.
Seek him not now, to punish him. Poor wretch!
He carries that away, within his breast,
Which will embitter all his life to come,
And make him curse the knowledge on it.

Mort. The knowledge! --
Has he then breathed -- Carries within his breast!
What does he know?

Hell. His own ingratitude.


Mort. O, very true.


Helen. Then leave him to his Conscience.
It is a scorpion, sent by Heaven itself,
To fix on hidden crimes; a flow, still stream,
Of moulten lead, kept dropping on the heart,
To scald and weigh it down. Believe me, love,
There is no earthly punishment so great,
To scourge an evil act, as man's own conscience,
To tell him he is guilty.

Mort. It Is a hell!
I pray you talk no more on it. -- I am weak --
I did not sleep last night.

Hell. Would you sleep now?


Mort. No, Helen, no. I tire thy patient sweetness.


Hell. Tire me! nay, that you do not. You forget
How often I have sat by you, and watched,
Fanning the busy summer-flies away,
Lest they should break your slumbers. Who comes here?
Enter WINTERTON. What, Winterton! How do thou, old acquaintance?
How do thou, Adam?

Wint. Bless your goodness, well.
Is my good master better?

Hell. Somewhat, Adam.


Wint. Now, by our lady, I rejoice to hear it!
I have a message --

Hell. O, no business now!


Wint. Nay, so I said. Quoth I, his honor's sick;
Perilous sick! but the rogue pressed, and pressed;
I could refuse no longer. Out upon them!
The varlets know old Winterton's good nature.
It Is my weak side.

Hell. Who has thus importuned you?


Wint. To say the truth, a most ill-favored varlet.
But he will speak to none but to his worship.
I think it is forest business.

Mort. O, not now:
Another time -- tomorrow -- when he will.
I am unfit. -- They teize me!

Wint. Even as you please, your worship. I should think,
From what he dropped, he can give some account
Of the poor boy.

Mort. Of Wilford!


Wint. Troth, I think so.
The knave is shy; but Adam has a head.

Mort. Quick; send him hither on the instant! Haste!
Fly, Adam, fly!

Wint. Well now, it glads my heart
To hear you speak so briskly.

Mort. Well, dispatch!


Wint. I go. Heaven bless you both! Heaven send you well,
And merry days may come again. Exit.

Hell. I fear this business may distract you, Mortimer:
I would you would defer it till tomorrow.

Mort. Not so, sweet. Do not fear. I prithee now,
Let me have way in this. Retire awhile.
Anon I Will come to thee.

Hell. Pray now, be careful.
I dread those agitations. Pray, keep calm.
Now do not tarry long. Adieu, my Mortimer!

Mort. Farewell, awhile, sweet!


Hell. Since it must be so --
Farewell! Exit Helen.

Mort. Dear, simple innocence! thy words of comfort
Pour oil upon my fires. Methought her eye,
When first she spoke of conscience, shot a glance
Like her dead uncle on me. Well, for Wilford!
That slave can play the Parthian with my fame,
And wound it while he flies. Bring him before me,
Place me the runagate within my gripe,
And I will plant my honor on its base,
Firmer than adamant, though hell and death
Should moat the work with blood! Oh, how will sin
Engender sin! Throw guilt upon the soul,
And, like a rock dashed on the troubled lake,
'Twill form its circles, round succeeding round,
Each wider than the --
Enter ORSON. How now! What Is your business?

Ors. Part with your office in the forest: part
Concerns yourself in private.

Mort. How myself?


Ors. Touching a servant of your house; a lad,
Whose heels, I find, were nimbler than his duty.

Mort. Speak; what of him? Quick -- Know you where he is?
Can bring me to him?

Ors. To the very spot.


Mort. Do it.


Ors. Nay, softly.


Mort. I Will reward you -- amply --
Ensure your fortunes.

Ors. First ensure my neck.
'Twill do me little good else. I Have no heirs;
And, when I die, it is like the law will bury me,
At its own charge.

Mort. Be brief, and to your purpose.


Ors. Then, to the business which concerns your office,
Here, in the forest.

Mort. Nay, of that anon,
First of my servant.

Ors. Well, even as you please.
It Is no rare thing -- Let public duty wait,
'Till private interests are settled* But
My story is a chain. Take all together,
'Twill not unlink.

Mort. Be quick, then. While we talk,
This slave escapes me.

Ors. Little fear of that.
He Is in no plight to journey far today.

Mort. Where is he hid?


Ors. Hard by; with robbers.


Mort. Robber! --
Well, I Am glad on it. 'Twill suit my purpose best.
aside. -- What, has he turned to plunder?

Ors. No; not so.
Plunder has turned to him. He was knocked down,
Last night, here in the forest, flat and sprawling;
And the milk-hearted captain of our gang
Has sheltered him.

Mort. It seems, then, you are a thief?


Ors. I served in the profession: But, last night,
The scurvy rogues cashiered me. 'Twas a plot,
To ruin a poof fellow in his calling,
And take away my means of getting bread.
I come here, in revenge. I Will hang my comrades,
In clusters, on the forest oaks, like acorns.

Mort. Where lies their haunt?


Ors. Give me your honor, first --


Mort. I pledge it, for your safety.


Ors. Send your officers
To the old abbey ruins; you will find
As bold a gang as ever infested woods,
And fatten'd upon pillage.

Mort. What, so near me!
In some few minutes, then, he is mine! Ho! Wintetton!
Now for his lurking place! Hope dawns again.
Remain you here; I may have work for you.
to Orson. O! I will weave a web so intricate,
For this base insect! so entangle him! --
Why, Winterton! -- Thou jewel, reputation!
Let me secure thee, bright and spotless, now;
And this weak, care-worn body's dissolution,
Will cheaply pay the purchase! Winterton! Exit.

Ors. There may be danger in my stay here. I will even slink off, in the
confusion I have raised. I value not the reward. I hang my comrades, and that
shall content me. Exit.


A Hall in the Lodge. Enter FITZHARDING. Fitz. Rare scuttling towered! This
lodge is little Babel:
And Spleen and Sickness are the household gods,
In this, my brother's, castle of confusion.
The hue and cry is up! I am half tempted
To wish the game too nimble for the dogs,
That hunt him at the hells. Dishonest! Well,
I Will never trust looks again. His face hangs out
A goodly sign; but all within, it seems,
Is dirty rooms, stale eggs, pricked wine, sour beer.
Rank bacon, musty beef, and tallow candles.
I Will be deceived no more. -- I Will mix with none,
In future but the ugly: honest men,
Who can out-grin a Griffin; or the head
Carved on the prow of the good ship the Gorgon.
I Am for carbuncled, weather-beaten faces,
That frighten little children, and might serve
For knockers to hall gates. -- Now -- who are you?

Enter SAMSON. Sams. Head serving man to madam Helen, Sir.


Fitz. Well, I may talk to thee; for thou do answer
To the description of the sort of men
I have resolved to live with.

Sams. I am proud, Sir,
To find I have your countenance.

Fitz. Can tell me
The news of Wilford?

Sams. He is turned a rogue, Sir,
An errant knave, Sir. It Is a rare thing, now,
To find an honest servant: -- We are scarce.

Fitz. Where lies the Abbey where they go to seek him?
Do know it?

Sams. Marry, do I; in the dark.
I have stood near it, many a time, in winter,
To watch the hares* by moonlight.

Fitz. A cold pastime!


Sams. Aye, Sir; 'twas killing work. I Have left it off.


Fitz. Think you they will be back soon?


Sams. On the instant:
It is hard by, Sir. -- Hark I hear their horses!
They are returned, I warrant.

Fitz. Run you, fellow, --
If Wilford's taken, send him here to me.

Sams. Why he is a rogue, Sir. Would your worship stoop
To parley with a rogue!

Fitz. Friend, I will stoop
To prop a sinking man, that is called a rogue,
And count him innocent, 'till he is found guilty.
I learned it from our English laws; where mercy
Models the weights that fill the scales of Justice,
And Charity, when Wisdom gives her sentence,
Stands by to prompt her. 'Till detection comes,
I side with the accused.

Sams. Would I had known
Your worship sooner. You're a friend, indeed!
All undiscovered rogues are bound to pray for you:
-- So, Heaven bless you!

Fitz. Well, well -- bustle; stir: --
Do as I bid thee.

Sams. Aye Sir. -- I shall lean
Upon your worship in any time of need. --
Heaven reward you! -- Here Is a friend to make!

Exit. Fitz. I have a kind of movement, still, for Wilford,
I cannot conquer. What can be this charge
Sir Edward brings against him? -- Should the boy
Prove guilty! -- well; why should I pity guilt?
Philosophers would call me driv'ler. -- Let them.
Whip a deserter, and philosophy
Stands by, and says he merits it. That Is true: --
But wherefore should philosophy take snuff,
When the poor culprit writhes? A plague on stoics!
I cannot hoop my heart about with iron,
Like an old beer-butt. I would have the vessel
What some call weak: -- I Would have it ooze a little.
Better compassion should be set abroach,
'Till it run waste, than let a system-monger
Bung it with Logic; or a trencher cap
Bawl out his ethics on it, 'till his thunder
Turn all the liquor sour. -- So! Here he comes!

Enter Wilford. Wilf. I am informed it is your pleasure, Sir,
To speak with me.

Fitz. Aye, Wilford. I am sorry --
Faith, very sorry, -- you and I meet thus.
How could you quit my brother thus abruptly?
Was he unkind to you?

Wilf. Most bountiful.
He made me all I am. The poor can number
His virtues thick as stars. I owe him, Sir,
A world of gratitude.

Fitz. It Is a new mode
Of payment you have taken. Wherefore fly?

Wilf. I was unfit to serve him, Sir.


Fitz. Unfit!


Wilf. I was unhappy, Sir. I fled a house
Where certain misery awaited me,
While I was doomed to dwell in it.

Fitz. Misery!
What was this certain misery?

Wilf. Your pardon, --
I never will divulge.

Fitz. Indeed!


Wilf. No, never.
Pray do not press me. All that I can say
Is, that I have a strong, and rooted reason,
Which has resolved me. 'Twere impossible
I should be tranquil here. I feel it, Sir,
A duty to myself to quit this roof.

Fitz. Harkye, young man. This smacks of mystery;
And now looks foully. Truth, and Innocence,
Walk round the world in native nakedness.
But guilt is cloak'd.

Wilf. Whatever the prejudice
My conduct conjures up, I must submit.

Fitz. 'Twere better now you conjured up your friends:
For I must tell you -- No, there is no need.
You learned it, doubtless, on the way, and know
The danger you, now, stand in.

Wilf. Danger, Sir!
What? How? I have learned nothing, Sir; my guides
Dragged me in silence hither.

Fitz. Then it is fit
I put you on your guard. It grieves me, Wilford,
To say there is a heavy charge against you,
Which, as I gather, may affect your life.

Wilf. Mine! -- O, good Heaven!


Fitz. Pray be calm: -- for, soon,
Here, in the face of all his family,
My brother will accuse you.

Wilf. He! -- What, He!
He accuse me! O monstrous! O, look down
You who can read men's hearts! -- A charge against me!
Ha! ha! I Am innocent! I Am innocent! much agitatated

Fitz. Collect your firmness. You will need it all.


Wilf. I shall, indeed! I pray you tell me, Sir,
What is the charge?

Fitz. I do not know its purport.
I would not hear on it: for on my voice rests
The issue of this business; -- and a judge
Should come unbiased to his office. Wilford,
Were twenty brothers waiting my award,
You should have even, and impartial justice.

Wilf. O, you are just! I would all men were so!


Fitz. I hope most men are so. Rally your thoughts.
When you are called upon! if truth will serve you,
Sketch out your story with her chaste, bold pencil;
If truth should fail you, Wilford, even take
The fairest color human art can mix,
To give a glow to plausibility.
It Is self-defence; and it is allowed, when man
Must battle it, with all the world against him.
-- Heaven bless you, boy! -- that is, I mean -- pshaw! plague!
-- Farewell! and may you prosper? Exit.

Wilf. Then, all my youthful hopes are blighted in the bud! The breath of my
powerful persecutor will wither them. Let me recall my actions. -- My breast is
unclog'd with crime. This charge is to be open; -- in the eye of the world; of
the laws -- Then, why should I fear? I am native of a happy soil where justice
guards equally the life of its poorest and richest inhabitant. Let him inflict
his menaces upon me, in secret; Let him torture my mind and body; he shall not,
cannot, touch my good name.


Enter BARBARA. Barb. O, Wilford! falls on his neck


Wilf. Barbara! at such a time, too!


Barb. To be brought back, thus, Wilford! and to go away without seeing me!
without thinking of me!


Wilf. It was not so. -- I was hastening to your cottage, Barbara, when a
ruffian, in the forest, encountered and wounded me.


Barb. Wounded you!


Wilf. Be not alarmed It Is not, as I thought yesternight, of moment. One of his
party took me to the Abbey ruins, and gave me timely succor.


Barb. And, was it so! was it so, Wilford?


Wilf. Aye, Barbara. When I was dragged hither, the whole troop escaped, or they
had vouched for the truth on it.


Barb. I would they had not escaped. For all here say that you had fled to join
them.


Wilf. What! join with robbers! what next shall I be charged with!


Barb. Bethink you, Wilford -- the time is short: I know your heart is good;
but --


Wi^f. But what? Can you suspect it, too, Barbara!


Barb. O! mine is so linked with it, that I would follow you through beggary,
through prisons, Wilford.


Wilf. Prison! The sound, now, makes me shudder!


Barb. If in a hasty moment you have done aught to wrong Sir Edward, throw
yourself on his mercy; -- sue for pardon.


Wilf. For pardon! -- I shall go mad! Pardon! I am innocent. -- Heaven knows I
am innocent.


Barb. Heaven be thanked! -- The family is all summoned. O, Wilford! my spirits
sink within me.


Wilf. aside I am, now, but a sorry comforter. -- Come, Barbara; be tranquil.
You see I am so. Don't -- don't you, Barbara? agitated


Enter a SERVANT. Serve. You must attend in the next room.


Wilf. What, Walter, is it you? Pray tell me if --


Serve. Do not question me. I hold no discourse with any of your stamp.


Wilf. Your tone is strangely changed on the sudden. What have I done?


Serve. You are going to be tried. That Is enough for me.


Wilf. I might rather claim your pity on that score, Walter.


Serve. What, pity a man that is going to be tried? O, monstrous!


Wilf. Well, fare you well. I will not upbraid you, Walter. You have many in
the world to countenance you. Blacken well your neighbor, and nine in ten are
in haste to cry shame upon him, ere he has time, or opoprtunity, to wipe off
the accusation. I follow you.


Serve. Do so. Exit.


Wilf. Be of good cheer. I go armed in honesty, Barbara. I can bear every
thing. Every thing, save making you the partner of my misfortunes. That,
Barbara -- I am sure you love me -- -- That would give me a pang which would --
Farewell!


Exit. Barb. Alas! I tremble for his safety! should they tear him from me! --
--


SONG. -- BARBARA.
DOWN by the river there grows a green willow;
Sing all for my true love! my true love, O!
I Will weep out the night there, the bank for my pillow;
And all for my true love, my true love, O!
When bleak blows the wind, and tempests are beating,
Ill count all the clouds, as I mark them retreating,
For true lovers joys, well a day! are as fleeting.
Sing, O for my true love, etc.
Maids come, in pity, when I am departed;
Sing all for my true love, etc.
When dead, on the bank, I am found broken hearted,
And all for my true love, etc.
Make me a grave, all while the wind's blowing,
Close to the stream, where my tears once were flowing,
And over my corse keep the green willow growing.
It Is all for my true love, etc.


Exit. An Apartment in the Lodge. FITZ-HARDING, WILFORD, and various
domestics, discovered. -- To them enter ADAM WINTERTON. Fitz. Is not Sir
Edward coming, Adam?


Wint. Aye, Sir. --
But he is grievous ill. -- Since Wilford came,
He had another fit. -- But he will be here.
Ah, boy! that I should live to see this day!
I have a merry heart no longer, now.

Wilf. Good man! you have been ever kind to me.


Wint. Heaven send you may prove honest! Heaven send it!
-- Here comes Sir Edward. Would that I had died
Two reigns ago!

Enter Sir EDWARD MORTIMER. Fitz. Now, brother. -- You look pale,
And faint with sickness.

Wint. Here Is a chair, your worship.


Mort. No matter. -- To our business, brother Wilford,
You may well guess the struggle I endure
To place you here the mark of accusation.
I gave you ample warning: Cautioned you,
When many might have scourged: and, even now,
While I stand here to crush you, -- aye, to crush you, --
My heart bleeds drops of pity for your youth,
Whose rashness plucks the red destruction down,
And pulls the bolt upon you.

Wilf. You know best
The movements of your heart, sir. Man is blind,
And cannot read them: but there is a Judge,
To whose all seeing eye our inmost thoughts
Lie open. Think to him you, now, appeal. --
Omniscience keeps heaven's register;
And, soon or late, when Time unfolds the book,
Our trembling souls must answer to the record,
And meet their due reward or punishment.

Fitz. Now, to the point, I pray you.


Mort. Thus it is, then.
I do suspect -- By heaven the story lingers,
Like poison, on my tongue, -- but he will force it --

Fitz What is it you suspect?


Mort. -- That he has robbed me.


Wilf. Robbed! I! O, horrible!


Fitz. Not yet -- not yet.
Pray tell me, brother -- I will be impartial; --
But I am somewhat moved. -- Pray tell me, brother,
How ground you this suspicion!

Mort. Briefly, thus. -- --
You may have noticed, in my library,
A chest Wilford starts -- You see he changes at the word.

Wilf. And well I may! aside.


Mort. Where I have told you, brother,
The writings which concern our family,
With jewels, cash, and other articles,
Of no mean value, were deposited.

Fitz. You oftentimes have said so.


Mort. Yesterday,
Chance called me, suddenly away: I left
The key in it -- but as suddenly returned;
And found this Wilford, this young man, whose state,
Whose orphan state, met pity in my house,
'Till pity grew to friendship, -- him I found,
Fixed over the chest, upon his knees, intent,
As, now, I think, on plunder; tinging theft
Still blacker with ingratitude; and rifling
The easy fool who sheltered him. Confusion
Shook his young joints, as he let fall the lid,
And gave me back the key.

Fitz. Did you not search
Your papers on the instant?

Mort. No: -- for, first,
(Habit so long had fixed my confidence)
I deemed it boyish curiosity; --
But told him this would meet my further question:
And, at that moment, came a servant in,
To say you were arrived. He must have marked
Our mixed emotion.

Fitz. Is that servant here?


Servant. 'Twas I, Sir.


Mort. Was it you? Well, saw you aught
To challenge your attention?

Servant. Sir, I did.
Wilford was pale and trembling; and our master
Gave him a look as if 'twould pierce him through;
And cried, "Remember." -- Then he trembled more,
And we both quitted him.

Mort. When first we met,
You found me somewhat ruffled.

Fitz. It Is most true.


Mort. But somewhat more when, afterward, I saw
Wilford conversing with you -- like a snake,
Sun'd by your looks, and basking in your favor.
I bade him quit the room, with indignation,
And wait my coming in the library.

Fitz. I witnessed that, with wonder.


Mort. O, good brother!
You little thought, while you so gently schooled me,
In the full flow of your benevolence,
For my harsh bearing towered him, on what ground
That harshness rested. I had made my search,
In the brief interval of absence from you,
And found my property had vanished.

Fitz. We'll --
You met him in the library?

Mort. O never
Can he forget that solemn interview!

Wilf. Aye, speak to that: -- it was a solemn interview.


Mort. Observe, he does acknowledge that we met*
Guilt was my theme: -- he cannot now deny it.

Wilf. It was a theme of -- No. checking himself.


Mort. He pleaded innocence:
While every word he spoke belied his features,
And mocked his protestation. I restrained
The chastisement he feared; nor would I blazon
The wrong I could not fix; and subject, thus,
By general inquiry, all the guiltless
To foul suspicion. That suspicion lay
Most heavily on him; but the big cloud
Of anger he had gathered burst not on him,
In vengeance to overwhelm him: chill it dropped,
But kindly, as the dew, in admonition;
Like tears of fathers over a wayward child,
When love enforces them to ruggedness.

Fitz. What said you to him?


Mort. "Regulate your life,
"In future, better. I, now, spare your youth;
"But dare not to proceed. All I exact,
"('It Is a soft penance) -- that you tarry here,
"My eye your guard, my house your gentle prison,
"My bounty be your chains. Attempt not flight;
"Flight ripens all my doubt to certainty,
"And justice to the world unlocks my tongue." --
He fled, and I arraign him.

Fitz. Trust me, brother,
This charge is staggering. Yet accidents
Sometimes combine to cast a shade of doubt
Upon the innocent. May it be so here!
Here is his trunk: 'twas brought here at my order.
It Is fit that it be searched.

Mort. O, that were needless.
He were a shallow villain that would trust
His freight of plunder to so frail a bottom.
Schoolboys, who strip the orchard of its fruit,
Conceal their thievery better.

Fitz. Yet it is found,
Such negligence is often linked with guilt.
-- Take not -- I say not yet that he is guilty,
But scarce heard of crafty villain, yet,
Who did not make some blot in his foul game,
That lookers-on have thought him blind, and mad,
It was so palpable. -- It Is rarely otherwise:
Heaven's hand is in it, brother: Providence
Marks guilt, as 'twere, with a fatuity. --
Adam, do you inspect it. to Winterton.

Wilf. Here Is the key --
Even take it, freely. -- You Will find little there
I value; save a locket, which my mother
Gave me upon her deathbed; and she added
Her blessing to it. Perhaps, her spirit now
Is grieving for my injuries.

Wint. after opening the trunk. O, mercy!


Fitz. How now? What Is there?


Wint. As I Am a wretched man,
The very watch my good old master wore!
And, here, my lady's jewels!

Wilf. I am innocent.
Just Heaven hear me!

Fitz. I must hear you, now.
What can you say? -- Oh! Wilford.

Wilf. Give me breath.
Let me collect myself. First this. falls on his knees May sleep
Never close my burning eyes; may conscience gnaw me;
May engines wrench my entrails from their seat;
And whirl them to the winds before my face,
If I know aught of this!

Fitz. Make it appear so. -- But look there; look there! pointing to the trunk.


Wilf Heap circumstance upon me; multiply
Charge upon charge; pile seeming fact on fact;
Still I maintain my innocence. Look at me!
Are these the throes of guilt? Are these convulsions
Of a poor, helpless friendless, wretched boy,
The struggles of a villain? -- One thing more:
I here aver it -- to his face aver it --
He knows -- Yes, he -- Yes, my accuser knows,
I merit not his charge.

a general expression of indignation Wint. O! fie on it, fie!


Fitz. Wilford, take heed! A base attempt to blacken
An injured master, will but plunge you deeper.

Wilf. I know what I am doing. I repeat it:
Will die repeating it. Sir Edward Mortimer
Is conscious of my innocence.

Mort. Proceed --
Look at these proofs, and talk. -- Unhappy boy,
Thy tongue can do me little mischief now.

Wilf. Do you not know --


Mort. What?


Wilf. -- It Is no matter, sir.
But I could swear --

Mort. Nay, Wilford, pause a while.
Reflect that oaths are sacred. Weigh the for^^
Of these asseverations. Mark it well.
I swear by all the ties that bind a man,
Divine or human! Think on that, and shudder.

Wilf. The very words I uttered! I am tongue-tied. aside.


Fitz. Wilford, if there be aught that you can urge,
To clear yourself, advance it.

Wilf. O, I could!
I could say much, but must not. -- No, I will not.
Do as you please. -- I have no friend -- no witness,
Save my accuser. Did he not -- pray ask him --
Did he not vaunt his wiles could ruin me?
Did he not menace, in his pride of power,
To blast my name, and crush my innocence?

Fitz. What do you answer, Sir?


Mort. I answer -- No. --
More were superflous, when a criminal
Opposes empty volubility.
To circumstantial charge. A steadfast brow
Repels not fact, nor can invalidate
These dumb, but damning, witnesses, before him.

pointing to the trunk. Wilf. By the just Power that rules us, I am ignorant
How they came there! -- but it is my firm belief,
You placed them there, to sink me.

Fitz. O, too much!
You steel men's hearts against you! Death and shame!
It rouses honest choler. Call the officers. --
He shall meet punishment. Servants going.

Mort. Hold! pray you, hold.
Justice has, thus far, struggled with my pity,
To do an act of duty to the world.
I would unmask a hypocrite; lay bare
The front of guilt, that men may see and shun it:
It Is done -- And I will, now, proceed no further.
I would not hurt the serpent, but to make
The serpent hurtless. He has lost his sting.
Let him depart, and freely.

Fitz. Lookye, brother.
This shall not be. -- Had he proved innocent,
My friendship had been doubled; you well know
I have been partial to him -- but this act
Is so begrimed with black, ungrateful malice,
That I insist on justice. Fly, knaves! run,
And let him be secured. Exeunt servants. You tarry here to Wilford.

Mort. I will not have it thus.


Fitz. You must -- You shall --
It Is weak else. Oons! I trust I have as much
Of good, straight-forward pity, as may serve;
But, to turn dove -- to sit still, and be peck'd at,
It is too tame. His insolence tops all!
Does not this rouse you, too? -- Look on these jewels. --
Look at this picture. -- 'Twas our mother's: Stay,
Let me inspect this nearer. What are here?
Parchments -- inspecting the trunk.

Mort. O, look no further. -- They are deeds,
Which, in his haste, no doubt he crowded there,
Not knowing what -- to look over at his leisure --
Family deeds -- They all were in my chest.

Wilf. O, it is deep laid! -- These, too, to give a color! aside.


Fitz. What have we here? I have your leave, good brother,
As arbiter in this. Here is a paper
Of curious enfolding -- slipped, as 'twere
By chance, within another. This may be
Of note upon his trial. -- What Is this drops?
A knife, it seems!

Mort. What? starting.


Fitz. Marks of blood upon it.


Mort. Touch it not. Throw it back! -- bury it -- sink it!
Oh, carele^^^^ and haste! Give me that paper.
Darkness and hell! -- Give back the paper.

MORTIMER attempts to snatch it; WILFORD runs between the two brothers, falls
on his knees, and p^events him, holding FITZHARDING. Wilf. rapidly No.
I see -- I see! -- Preserve it. You are judge! --
My innocence, my life, rests on it I

Mort. Devils.
Foil me at my own game! -- Fate! -- Ha, ha, ha!
Sport, Lucifer! -- -- He struck me --

MORTIMER is fainting, and falling; WILFORD runs and catches him. Wilf. I Will
support him. -- --
Read! read! read!

Fitz. What is this? -- My mind misgives me!
It is my brother's hand! -- To die before me!
What can this mean? -- reads.
Narrative of my murder of -- Oh, great Heaven!
"If by some chance my guilt should be disclosed,
"May this contribute to redeem the wreck
"Of my lost honor!" -- I am horror-struck!

Wilf. Plain! plain! -- Stay! he revives.


Mort. What has been -- soft!
I have been wandering with the damned, sure. -- Brother! --
And -- aye -- it is Wilford! Oh! thought flashes on me
Like Lightning. I am brain-scorch'd. Give me leave.
I will speak -- Soon I will -- a little yet --
Come hither, boy. -- Wronged boy! O Wilford, Wilford!

bursts into tears, and falls on Wilford's neck. Wilf. Be firm, Sir; pray be
firm! my heart bleeds for you --
Warms for you! Oh! all your former charity
To your poor boy, is in my mind. -- Still, still,
I see my benefactor!

Mort. Well, I will --
I will be firm. One struggle, and it is over.
I have most foully wronged you! Ere I die --
And I feel death-struck -- let me haste to make
Atonement. -- Brother, note. The jewels,
Yes, and that paper -- Heaven and accident
Ordained it so! -- were placed -- Curse on my flesh,
To tremble thus! -- were placed there by my hand.

Fitz. O, mercy on me!


Mort. More. I feared this boy;
He knew my secret; and I blackened him,
That, should he ever divulge the fatal story,
His word might meet no credit. Infamy
Will brand my memory for it: Posterity,
Whose breath I made my god, will keep my shame
Green in her damning record. Oh! I had --
I had a heart overflowing with good thoughts
For all mankind! One fatal, fatal turn,
Has poisoned all! Where is my honor, now?
To die! -- To have my ashes trampled on,
By the proud foot of scorn! Polluted! Hell --
Who dares to mock my guilt? Is It you -- or you?
-- Wrack me that grinning fiend! Damnation!
Who spits upon my grave? I Will stab again --
I Will -- Oh! falls.

Fitz. This rives my heart in twain. Why, brother, brother!
His looks are ghastly.

Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, the officers.


Fitz. Away, knave! Send them hence -- the boy is innocent.


Serve. What, Wilford?


Fitz. Aye. Tell it your fellows. Hence! --
You shall know more anon. Send in some help --
Your master's ill of the sudden. Send some help!

Exit Serve. Wilf. 'Twere best to raise him, Sir.


Fitz. Soft, who comes here?


Enter HELEN. Hell. Where is he? Ill! and on the ground! Oh, Mortimer!
Oh, Heaven! my Mortimer. O, raise him. -- Gently.
Speak to me, love. He cannot!

Mort. Helen -- 'Twas I that -- --


he struggles to speak, but appears unable to utter. Hell. Oh, he is convulsed!


Fitz. Say nothing. We must lead him to his chamber.
Beseech you to say nothing! Come, good lady.

FlTZHARDING and HELEN lead MORTIMER out. Enter BARBARA, on the opposite side.
Barb. O, Wilford! I have flown to you! You are innocent. -- The whole house now
has it, you are innocent. Thank Heaven! Speak; tell me -- How -- how was it,
dear, dear Wilford?


Wilf. I cannot tell you now, Barbara. Another time: But it is so. -- I cannot
speak now. --


Barb. Nor I, scarce, for joy! See! hither come your fellows, to greet you. I
am so happy!


Enter SERVANTS, etc. etc. etc. Servants. Joy! Wilford.


Wilf. Peace, peace, I pray you. Our master is taken ill: So ill, my fellows,
that I fear me he stands in much danger. That you rejoice in my acquittal, I
perceive, and thank you. Sir Edward's brother will explain further to you: I
cannot. But believe this: -- Heaven, to whose eye the dark movements of guilt
are manifest, will ever watch over, and succor the innocent, in their
extremity. Clamor not now your congratulations to me, I entreat you: Rather,
let the slow, still voice of gratitude be lifted up to Providence, for that
care she ever bestows upon those deserving her protection!


FINALE.
Where Gratitude shall breathe the note,
To white-robed Mercy's throne,
Bid the mild strain on ether float,
A soft and dulcet tone.
Sweet, sweet and clear the accents raise,
While mellow flutes shall swell the song of praise,
Melody! Melody!
A soft and dulcet memory!
Where Fever droops his burning head;
Where sick men languish on their bed;
Around let every accent be,
Harmony! Harmony!
A soft and dulcet harmony!


THE END.

