LEWIS BABOON Turned Honest, AND JOHN BULL POLITICIAN. Being The FOURTH PART OF
Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry
Polesworth: And Published, (as well as the Three former Parts and Appendix) by
the Author of the NEW ATALANTIS.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near, Stationers' Hall. 1712. Price 6d.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I was first called to the Office of Historiographer to John Bull, he
expressed himself to this purpose: Sir Humphry, I know you are a plain Dealer;
it is for that Reason I have chosen you for this important Trust; speak the
Truth, and spare not. That I might fulfill those his honorable Intentions, I
obtained Leave to repair to, and attend him in his most secret Retirements; and
I put the Journals of all Transactions into a strong Box, to be opened at a
fitting Occasion, after the manner of the Historiographers of some Eastern
Monarchs: This I thought was the safest way; though I declare I was never afraid
to be chopped by my Master for telling of Truth. It is from those Journals that
my Memoirs are compiled: Therefore let not Posterity, a thousand Years hence,
look for Truth in the voluminous Annals of Pedants, who are entirely ignorant
of the secret Springs of great Actions; if they do, let me tell them, they will
be Nebus'd. With incredible Pains have I endeavored to copy the several
Beauties of the ancient and modern Historians; the impartial Temper of
Herodotus, the Gravity, Austerity, and strict Morals of Thucidides, the
extensive Knowledge of Xenophon, the Sublimity and Grandeur of Titus Livius,
and to avoid the careless Style of Polybius: I have borrowed considerable
Ornaments from Dionysius Halicarnasseus and Diodorus Siculus: The specious
Gilding of Tacitus I endeavored to shun. Mariana, Davila, and Fra. Paulo, are
those amongst the Moderns whom I thought most worthy of Imitation; but I cannot
be so disingenuous, as not to own the infinite Obligations I have to the
Pilgrim's Progress of John Bunyan, and the Tenter Belly of the Reverend Joseph
Hall. From such Encouragement and Helps, it is easy to guess to what a degree
of Perfection I might have brought this great Work, had it not been nip'd in
the Bud by some illiterate People in both Houses of Parliament, who envying the
great Figure I was to make in future Ages, under Pretense of raising Money for
the War, have padlock'd all those very Pens that were to celebrato the Actions
of their Heroes, by silencing at once the whole University of Grubstreet. I am
persuaded, that nothing but the Prospect of an approaching Peace could have
encouraged them to make so bold a step. But suffer me, in the Name of the rest
of the Matriculates of that famous University, to ask them some plain
Questions: Do they think that Peace will bring along with it the Golden Age?
Will there be never a Dying-Speech of a Traitor? Are Cethegus and Cataline
turned so tame, that there will be no opportunity to cry about the Streets, ^
Dangerous Plot? Will Peace bring such Plenty, that no Gentleman will have
occasion to go upon the Highway, or break into a House? I am sorry that the
World should be so much imposed upon by the Dreams of a False Prophet, as to
imagine the Millennium is at hand. O Grubstreet! thou fruitful Nursery of
towering Genius's! how do I lament thy Downfall? Thy Ruin could never be
meditated by any who means well to English Liberty: No modern Lycaeum will ever
equal thy Glory, whether in soft Pasiorals, thou sung the Flames of pampered
Apprentices and coy Cook-Maids, or mournful Ditties of departing Lovers; or if
to Maeonian Sirains thou raised thy Voice, to record the Stratageies, the
arduous Exploits, and the nocturnal Scalade of needy Heroes, the Terror of your
peaceful Citizen, describing the powerful Betty, or the artful Picklock, or the
secret Caverns and Grotto's of Vulcan sweating at his Forge, and slamping the
Queens Image on viler Metals, which he retails for Beef, and Pots of Ale; or if
thou were content in simple Narrative to relate the cruel Acts of implacable
Revenge, or the Complaints of ravished Virgins, blushing to tell their
Adventure before the listening Crowd of City Damsels, whilst in thy faithful
History thou intermingles the gravest Counsels and the purest Morals: Nor less
acute and piercing were thou in thy Search and pompous Description of the Works
of Nature, whether in proper and emphatick Terms thou did paint the blazing
Comets fiery Tale, the stupendous Force of dreadful Thunder and Earthquakes,
and the unrelenting Inundations. Sometimes, with Machiavelian Sagacity, thou
unravellest the Intrigues of State, and the traitorous Conspiracies of Rebels
giving wise Counsel to Monarchs. How did thou move our Terror and our Pity
with thy passionate Scenes, between Jack-catch and the Heroes of the Old Bailey!
How did thou describe their intrepid March up Holborn-Hill! Nor did thou
shine less in thy theological Capacity, when thou gave ghostly Counsel to
dying Felons, and recorded the guilty Pangs of Sabbath Breakers! How will the
noble Arts of John Overton's Painting and Sculpture now languish! where rich
Invention, proper Expression, correct Design, divine Altitudes, and artful
Contrast, heightened with the Beauties of Clar-Obscur, embellished thy
celebrated Pieces to the Delight and Astonishment of the judicious Multitude!
Adieu persuasive Eloquence! the quaint Metaphor, the poinant Irony, the proper
Epithet, and the lively Simile, are fled to Burleigh on the Hill: Instead of
these, we shall have I know not what -- Vid. Bp. of St. Asap^^ Preface.
The Illiterate will tell the rest with Pleasure! I hope the Reader will excuse
the Digression, due by way of Condolance to my worthy Brethren of Grubstreet,
for the approaching Barbarity that is likely to overspread all its Regions, by
this oppressive and exorbitant Tax, It has been my good Fortune to receive my
Education there; and so long as I preserved some Figure and Rank amongst the
Learned of that Society, I scorned to take my Degree either at Utrecht or
Leyden, though I was offered it gratis by the Professors there.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THE Sequel of the History of the Meeting at the Salutation, Page 1
Chap. II. How John Bull and Nic Frog settled their Accounts, p. 7 Chap. III.
How John Bull found all his Family in an Vproar at home, p. 13 Chap. IV. How
Lewis Baboon came to Visit John Bull, and what passed between them, p. 14 Chap.
V. Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull; wherein he endeavors to vindicate all his
Conduct with relation to John Bull and the Lawsuit, p. 23 Chap. VI. The
Discourse that passed between Nic. Frog and Esquire South, which John Bull
overheard, p. 26 Chap. VII. The rest of Nic.'s Fetches, to keep John out of
Ecclesdoun Castle, p. 31 Chap. VIII. Of the great Joy that John expressed when
he got Possession of Ecclesdoun, p. 35
LEWIS BABOON Turned Honest, AND JOHN BULL POLITICIAN.
CHAP. I.
The Sequel of the History of the Meeting at the Salutation.

WHere, I think, I left John Bull, sitting between Nic. Frog and Lewis Baboon,
with his Arms a-kimbo, in great Concern to keep Lewis and Nic. asunder. As
watchful as he was, Nic. found the Means, now and then, to stear a Whisper,
and, by a cleanly Conveyance under the Table, to slip a short Note into Lewis's
hand, which Lewis as slyly put into John's Pocket, with a Pinch or a Jog, to
warn him what he was about. John had the Curiosity to retire into a Corner, to
peruse these Billet deux of Nic's; wherein he found, that Nic, had used great
Freedoms, both with his Interest and Reputation. One contained these words,
Dear Lewis, Thou see clearly that this Blockhead can never bring his Matters
to bear: Let thee and me talk to night by our selves at the Rose, and I Will give
thee Satisfaction. Another was thus expressed; Friend Lewis, Has thy Sense
quite forsaken thee, to make Bull such Offers? Hold fast, part with nothing,
and I will give thee a better Bargain, I Will warrant thee.

In some of his Billets, he told Lewis "that John Bull was under his
Guardianship; that the best part of his Servants were at his Command; that he
could have John gagged and bound whenever he pleased, by the People of his own
Family." In all these Epistles, Blockhead, Dunce, Ass, Coxcomb, were the best
Epithets he gave poor John: In others he threatened, "that He, Esquire South,
and the rest of the Tradesmen, would lay Lewis down upon his Back, beat out his
Teeth, if he did not retire immediately, and break up the Meeting.

I fancy I need not tell my Reader, that John often changed Color as he read,
and that his Fingers itch'd to give Nic. a good Slap on the Chops, but he
wisely moderated his choleric Temper: "I saved this Fellow (quoth he) from the
Gallows when he ran away from his last Master, because I thought he was harshly
treated; but the Rogue was no fooner safe under my Protection, than he began to
lie, pilfer, and steal, like the Devil: When I first set him up in a warm
House, he had hardly put up his Sign, when he began to debauch my best
Customers from me: Then it was his constant Practice to rob my Fish Ponds, not
only to feed his Family, but to trade with the Fishmongers: I connived at the
Fellow till he began to tell me, that they were his as much as mine: In my
Manor of Eastcheap, because it lay at some distance from my constant
Inspection, he broke down my Fences, robbed my Orchards, and beat my Servants.
When I used to reprimand him for his Tricks, he would talk saucily, lie, and
brazen it out, as if he had done nothing amiss. Will nothing cure thee of thy
Pranks Nic. (quoth I?) I shall be forced, some time or another, to chastise
thee: The Rogue got up his Cane and threatened me, and was well thwack'd for his
Pains: But I think his Behavior at this time worst of all; after I have almost
drowned my self, to keep his Head above Water, he would leave me sticking in
the Mud, trusting to his Goodness to help me out. After I have beggared my self
with his troublesome Lawsuit, with a Pox to him, he takes it in mighty Dudgeon
because I have brought him here to end Matters amicably, and because I will not
let him make me over, by Deed and Indenture, as his lawful Cully; which, to my
certain Knowledge, he has attempted several times. But, after all, can thou
gather Grapes from Thorns? Nic. does not pretend to be a Gentleman, he is a
Tradesman, a self-seeking Wretch, but how came thou to bear all this, John?
The Reason is plain; Thou conferrest the Benefits, and he receives them; the
first produces Love, and the last Ingratitude: Ah! Nic. Nic. thou art a damned
Dog, that is certain; thou know too well, that I will take care of thee, else
thou would not use me thus: I will not give thee up, it is true; but as true as
it is, thou shall not sell me, according to thy laudable Custom.While John was
deep in this Soliloquy, Nic. broke out into the following Protestation.

Gentlemen,
I believe every body here present will allow me to be a very just and
disinterested Person. My Friend John Bull here is very angry with me, forsooth,
because I will not agree to his foolish Bargains. Now I declare to all Mankind, I
should be ready to sacrifice my own Concerns to his Quiet; but the care of his
Interest, and that of the honest Tradesmen that are embarked with us, keeps me
from entering into this Composition. What shall become of those poor Creatures?
The Thoughts of their impending Ruin disturbs my Night's Rest, therefore I
desire they may speak for themselves. If they are willing to give up this
Affair, I shall not make two words of it.


John Bull begged him to lay aside that immoderate Concern for him; and withal,
put him in mind, that the Interest of those Tradesmen had not sat quite so
heavy upon him some Years ago, on a like Occasion. Nic. answered little to
that, but immediately pulled out a Boatswain's Whistle; upon the first Whiff,
the Tradesmen came jumping into the Room, and began to surround Lewis like so
many yelping Curs about a great Boar, or, to use a modester Simile, like Duns
at a great Lord's Leve the Morning he goes into the Country; one pulled him by
the Sleeve, another by the Skirt, a third hallowed in his Ear; they began to
ask him for all that had been taken from their Forefathers by Stealth, Fraud,
Force, or lawful Purchase; some asked for Manours, others for Acres, that lay
convenient for them; that he would pull down his Fences, level his Ditches; all
agreed in one common Demand, that he should be purged, sweated, vomited, and
starved, till be came to a sizeable Bulk, like that of his Neighbors; one
modestly asked him Leave to call him Brother; Nic. Frog demanded two Things, to
be his Porter and his Fishmonger, to keep the Keys of his Gates, and furnish
his Kitchen; John's Sister Peg only desired that he would let his Servants sing
Psalms a Sundays; some descended even to the asking of old Clothes, Shoes, and
Boots, broken Bottles, Tobacco-pipes, and Ends of Candles.

Monsieur Bull (quoth Lewis) you seem to be a Man of some Breeding; for God's
sake use your Interest with these Messicurs, that they would speak but one at
once; for if one had a hundred pair of Hands, and as many Tongues, he cannot
satisfy them all at this rate. John begged they might proceed with some Method;
then they stopped all of a sudden, and would not say a word. If this be your
Play (quoth John) that we may not be like a Quaker's dumb Meeting, let us begin
some Diversion; what do you think of Rouly-Pouly, or a Country-Dance? What if we
should have a Match at Football! I am sure we shall never end Matters at this
rate.

CHAP. II.
How John Bull and Nic. Frog settled their Accounts.

J. Bull. DVring this general Cessation of Talk, what if You and I Nic. should
enquire how Money-matters stand between us?


Nic. Frog. With all my Heart, I love exact Dealing; and let Hocus Audit; he
knows how the Money was disburs'd.


J. Bull. I am not much for that at present; we'll settle it between Ourselves:
Fair and Square Nic. keeps Friends together. There have been laid out in this
Lawsuit, at one time 36000 Pounds and 40000 Crowns: In some Cases I, in others
you, bear the greatest proportion.


Nic. Right: I pay three Fifths of the greatest Number, and you pay two Thirds
of the lesser Number: I think this is Fair and Square as you call it.


John. Well, go on.


Nic. Two Thirds of 36000 Pounds are 24000 Pounds for your Share, and there
remains 12000 for mine. Again, Of the 40000 Crowns I pay 24000, which is three
Fifths, and you pay only 16000, which is two Fifths; 24000 Crowns make 6000
Pounds, and 16000 Crowns make 4000 Pounds: 12000 and 6000 make 18000: 24000 and
4000 makes 28000. So there are 18000 Pounds to my Share of the Expenses, and
28000 to yours.


After Nic. had bambouzled John a while about the 18000 and the 28000, John
called for Counters; but what with Slight of Hand, and taking from his own
Score and, adding to John's, Nic. brought the Balance always on his own side.

J. Bull. Nay, good Friend Nic. though I am not quite so nimble in the Fingers,
I understand Cyphering as well as you: I will produce you my Accounts one by
one, fairly writ out of my own Books: And here I begin with the first. You must
excuse me if I don't pronounce the Law Terms right.

[John Reads.] l. s. d. Fees to the Lord Chapter Justice and other Judges, by way
of Dividend 200 10 06 Fees to puny Judges 50 00 00 To Esquire South for post
Terminums 100 10 06 To ditto for Non est Factums 200 00 00 To ditto for
Discontinuance, Noli prosequi, and Retraxit 80 10 06 To ditto for a Non
Omittas, and Filing a post Diem 50 00 00 To Hocus for a Dedimus potestatem. 300
00 00 To ditto for Casas and Fifas after a Devastait 500 00 00 Carry over 1481
11 06 Brought over 1481 11 06 To ditto for a Capias ad computandum 100 10 06 To
Frog's new Tenants per Account to Hocus, for Audita querelas. 200 00 00 On the
said Account for Writs of Ejectment and Destringas. 300 00 00 To Esquire
South's Quota for a Return of a Non est invent. and nulla habet bona 150 10 00
To -- for a Pardon in forma pauperis 200 00 00 To Jack for a Melius inquirendum
upon a Felo de se 100 00 00 To Don Diego for a Defecit 50 00 00 To Coach-hire
500 00 00 For Treats to Juries and Witnesses 300 00 00 Sum 3382 12 00 Due by
Nic. Frog 1691 06 00 Of which paid by Nic. Frog 1036 11 00 Remains due by Nic.
Frog 654 15 00


Then Nic. Frog pulled his Bill out of his Pocket, and began to read.

Nicholas Frog's Account. Remains to be deducted out of the former Account,
l. s. d. To Hocus for Entries of a Rege inconsulto 200 00 00 To John Bull's
Nephew for a Venire facias, the Money not yet all laid out 300 00 00 The
Coach-hire for my Wife and Family, and the Carriage of my Goods during the time
of this Lawsuit 200 10 06 For the extraordinary Expenses of feeding my Family
during this Lawsuit 500 00 00 To Major Ab. 300 00 00 To Major Will. 200 00 00
Sum 1700 10 06 From which deduct 1691 06 00 There remains due to Nic. Frog 09
04 06

Besides, recollecting, I believe I paid for Diego's Defecit.


John Bull. As for your Venire facias, I have paid you for one already; in the
other, I believe you will be Nonsuited: I Will take care of my Nephew my self.
Your Coach-hire and Family Charges are most unreasonable Deductions; at that
rate, I can bring in any Man in the World my Debtor. But who the Devil are
those two Majors that consume all my Money? I find they always run away with
the Balance in all Accounts.


Nic. Frog. Two very honest Gentlemen, I assure you, that have done me some
Service.

To tell you plainly Major Ab. denotes thy greater Ability, and Major Will thy
greater Willingness to carry on this Lawsuit. It was but reasonable thou
should pay both for thy Power and thy Positiveness.


J. Bull. I believe I shall have those two honest Majors discount on my side in
a little time.


Nic. Frog. Why all this Higgling with thy Friend about such a paltry Sum? Does
this become the Generosity of the Noble and Rich John Bull? I wonder thou art
not ashamed. Oh Hocus! Hocus! where art thou, it used to go another-guess
manner in thy time, when a poor Man has almost undone himself for thy sake,
thou art for fleecing him and fleecing him; is that thy Conscience John?


J. Bull. Very pleasant indeed; it is well known thou retains thy Lawyers by
the Year, so a fresh Lawsuit adds but little to thy Expense, they are thy
Customers, I hardly ever sell them a Farthings worth of any thing; nay, thou
have set up an Eating-house, where the whole Tribe of them spend all they can
rap or run; if it were well reckoned, I believe thou gets more of my Money than
thou spends of thy own. However, if thou will needs plead Poverty, own at least
that thy Accounts are false.


Nic. Frog. No marry will not I, I refer my self to these honest Gentlemen, let
them judge between us; let Esquire South speak his Mind, whither my Accounts
are not right, and whither we ought not to go on with our Lawsuit.


J. Bull. Consult the Butchers about keeping of Lent. I tell you once for all,
John Bull knows where his Shoe pinches, none of your Esquires shall give him
the Law, as long as he wears this trusty Weapon by his side, or has an inch of
broad Cloth in his Shop.


Nic. Frog. Why there it is, you will be both Judge and Party; I am sorry thou
discoverest so much of thy headstrong Humor before these strange Gentlemen, I
have often told you that it would prove thy Ruin some time or another.


John saw clearly he should have nothing but wrangling, and that he should have
as little Success in settling his Accounts as ending the Composition: Since
they will needs overload my Shoulders (quoth John) I shall throw down the
Burden with a squash amongst them, take it up who dares; a Man has a fine time
of it, amongst a combination of Sharpers, that Vouch for one another Honesty.
John look to thy self, Old Lewis makes reasonable Offers, when thou have spent
the small Pittance that is left, thou will make a glorious Figure when thou art
brought to live upon Nic. Frog and Esquire South's Generosity and Gratitude, if
they use thee thus, when they want thee, what will they do when thou wants
them? I say again, John look to thy self?

John wisely stiffled his Resentments, and told the Company that in a little
time he should give them Law, or something better.

All. Law! Law! Sir, by all means, what is Twenty Two poor Years toward the
finishing a Lawsuit? For the Love of God more Law, Sir!


J. Bull. Prepare your Demands, how mamany Years more of Law you want, that I
may order my Affairs accordingly. In the mean while farewell.


CHAP. III.
How John Bull found all his Family in an Vproar at Home.

NIc. Frog. who thought of nothing but carrying John to the Market, and there
disposing of him as his own proper Goods, was mad to find that John thought
himself now of Age to look afer his own Affairs: He resolved to traverse this
new Project, and to make him uneasy in his own Family. He had corrupted or
desuded most of his Servants into the extravagantest Conceits in the World,
that their Master was run mad, and wore a Dagger in one Pocket, and Poison in
the other; that he had told his Wife and Children to Lewis, disinherited his
Heir, and was going to settle his Estate upon a Parish Boy; that if they did
not look after their Master, he would do some very mischievous Thing. When John
came home he found a more surprising Scene than any he had yet met with, and
that you will say was somewhat extraordinary.

He called his Cook-maid Betty to bespeak his Dinner, Betty told him, That she
begged his Pardon; she could not dress Dinner till she knew what he intended to
do with his Will. Why Betty, Forsooth (quoth John) thou art not run mad art
thou? My Will at present is to have Dinner: That may be (quoth Betty) but my
Conscience will not allow me to dress it, till I know whither you intend to do
righteous Things by your Heir? I am sorry for that Betty (quoth John) I must
find some body else then. Then he called John the Barber. Before I begin (quoth
John) I hope your Honor will not be offended, if I ask you whither you intend to
after your Will? If you will not give me a positive Answer, your Beard may grow
down to your Middle, for me. I gad and so it shall (quoth Bull) for I will
never trust my Throat in such a mad Fellows Hands. Where Is Dick the Butler?
Look ye (quoth Dick) I am very willing to serve you in my Calling, do you see,
but there are strange Reports, and plain-dealing is best, do you see. I must be
satisfied if you intend to leave all to your Nephew, and if Nic. Frog is still
your Executor, do you see; if you will not satisfy me as to these Points, do you
see, you may drink with the Ducks: And so I will (quoth John) rather than keep
a Butler that loves my Heir better than my self. Hob the Shoemaker, and Pricket
the Tailor told him, they would most willingly serve him in their several
Stations, if he would promise them never to talk with Lewis Baboon, and let
Nicolas Frog, Linnen-draper, manage his Concerns; that they could neither make
Shoes nor Clothes to any that were not in good Correspondence with their worthy
Friend Nicolas.

J. Bull. Call Andrew my Journey-Man: How goes Affairs, Andrew? I hope the
Devil has not taken Possession of thy Body too.


Andrew. No, Sir, I only desire to know what you would do if you were dead?


J. Bull. Just as other dead Folks do, Andrew. This is Amazing [Aside.


Andrew. I mean if your Nephew shall inherit your Estate?


J. Bull. That depends upon himself. I shall do nothing to hinder him.


Andrew. But will you make it sure?


J. Bull. Thou mean, that I should put him in Possession, for I can make it
no surer without that, he has all the Law can give him.


Andrew. Indeed Possession, as you say, would make it much surer; they say, it
is eleven points of the Law.


John began now to think that they were all enchanted; he enquires about the
Age of the Moon, if Nic had not given them some intoxicating Potion, or if old
Mother Jenisa was not still alive. No, of my faith (quoth Harry) I believe there
is no Potion in the Case, but a little Aurum Potabile. You will have more of
this by and by. He had scarce spoke the Word, when of a sudden Don Diego,
followed by a great Multitude of his Tenants and Workmen, came rushing into
the Room.

D. Diego. Since those worthy Persons, who are as much concerned for your
Safety as I am, have employed me as their Orator, I desire to know whither you
will have it by way of Syllogism, Enthymem, Dilemma or Sorites.


John now began to be diverted with their Extravagance.

J. Bull. Let Us have a Sorites by all means, though they are all new to me.


D. Diego. It is evident to all that are versed in History, that there were two
Sisters that played the Whore, two thousand Years ago: Therefore it plainly
follows, that it is not lawful for John Bull to have any manner of Intercourse
with Lewis Baboon. If it is not lawful for John Bull to have any manner of
Intercourse (Correspondence, if you will, that is much the same thing) then a
Fortiori, it is much more unlawful for the said John to make over his Wife and
Children to the said Lewis; if his Wife and Children are not to be made over,
he is not to wear a Dagger and Ratsbane in his Pockets; if he wears a Dagger
and Ratsbane, it must be to do Mischief to himself or some body else; if he
intends to do Mischief, he ought to be under Guardians, and there is none so
fit as my self and some other worthy Persons, who have a Commission for that
purpose from Nic. Frog, the Executor of his Will and Testament.


J. Bull. And this is your Sorites, you say; with that he snatched a good tough
Oaken Cudgel, and began to brandish it; then happy was the Man that was first
at the Door; crouding to get out, they tumbled down Stairs, and it is credibly
reported some of them dropped very valuable Things in the hurry, which were
picked up by others of the Family.


That any of these Rogues (quoth John) should imagine I am not as much
concerned as they about having my Affairs in a settled Condition, or that I
would wrong my Heir for I know not what. Well Nic. I really cannot but applaud
thy Diligence, I must own this is really a pretty sort of a Trick, but it
shall not do thy Business for all that.

CHAP. IV.
How Lewis Baboon came to visit John Bull, and what passed between them.

I Think it is but ingenuous to acquaint the Reader, that this Chapter was not
wrote by Sir Humphry himself, but by another very able Pen of the University of
Grubstreet.

John had (by some good Instructions that was given him by Sir Roger) got the
better of his Choleric Temper, and wrought himself up to a great steadiness of
Mind, to pursue his own Interest through all Impediments that were thrown in
the way; he began to leave off some of his old Aquaintance, his roaring and
bullying about the Streets; he put on a serious Air, knit his Brows, and for
the time had made a very considerable progress in Politics, considering that
he had been kept a stranger to his own Affairs. However, he could not help
discovering some remains of his Nature, when he happened to meet with a
Football, or a Match at Cricket; for which Sir Roger was sure to take him to
task. John was walking about his Room with folded Arms, and a most thoughtful
Countenance, his Servant brought him Word that one Lewis Baboon below wanted to
speak with him. John had got an Impression that Lewis was so deadly a cunning
Man, that he was afraid to venture himself alone with him: At last he took
heart of Grace. Let him come up (quoth he) it is but sticking to my Point, and
he can never overreach me.

Lewis Baboon. Monsieur Bull I will frankly acknowledge, that my Behavior to
my Neighbors has been somewhat uncivil, and I believe you will readily grant
me, that I have met with Usage accordingly. I was fond of Back-sword and Cudgel
play from my Youth, and I now bear in my Body many a black and blue Gash and
Scars, God knows. I had as good a Warehouse, and as fair Possessions as any of
my Neighbors, though I say it; but a contentious Temper, flattering Servants,
and unfortunate Stars, have brought me into Circumstances that are not unknown
to you. These my Misfortunes are heightened by domestic Calamities, that I
need not relate. I am a poor old battered Fellow, and I would willingly end my
Days in Peace: But alas, I see but small hopes of that, for every new
Circumstance affords an Argument to my Enemies to pursue their Revenge;
formerly I was to be banged because I was too Strong, and now because I am too
Weak to resist, I am to be brought down when too Rich, and oppressed when too
Poor. Nic. Frog has used me like a Scoundrel; You are a Gentleman, and I freely
put my self in your Hands, to dispose of me as you think fit.


J. Bull. Look you, Master Baboon, as to your Usage of your Neighbors, you had
best not dwell too much upon that Chapter; let it suffice at present that you
have been met with, you have been rolling a great Stone uphill all your Life,
and at last it has come tumbling down till it is like to crush you to pieces:
Plain-dealing is best. If you have any particular Mark, Mr. Baboon, whereby one
may know when you Fib, and when you speak Truth, you had best tell it me, that
one may proceed accordingly; but since at present I know of none such, it is
better that you should trust me, than that I should trust you.


L. Baboon. I know of no particular Mark of Veracity, amongst us Tradesmen, but
Interest; and it is manifestly mine not to deceive you at this time; you may
safely trust me, I can assure you.


J. Bull. The Trust I give is in short this, I must have something in hand
before I make the Bargain, and the rest before it is concluded.


L. Baboon. To show you I deal fairly, name your Something.


J. Bull. I need not tell thee, old Boy; thou can guess.


L. Baboon. Ecclesdown Castle, I Will warrant you, because it has been formerly
in your Family! Say no more, you shall have it.


J. Bull. I shall have it to m'own self?


L. Baboon. To thy n'own self.


J. Bull. Every Wall, Gate, Room, and Inch of Ecclesdown Castle, you say?


L. Baboon. Just so.


J. Bull. Every single Stone of Ecclesdown Castle, to m'own self, speedily!


L. Baboon. When you please, what needs more Words?


J. Bull. But tell me, old Boy, have thou laid aside all thy Equivocals and
Mentals in this case?


L. Baboon. There is nothing like Matter of Fact; Seeing is Believing.


J. Bull. Now thou talk to the purpose; let us shake Hands, old Boy. Let me
ask thee one Question more, What have thou to do to meddle with the Affairs of
my Family? To dispose of my Estate, old Boy?


L. Baboon. Just as much as you have to do with the Affairs of Lord Strut.


J. Bull. Ay, but my Trade, my very Being, was concerned in that.


L. Baboon. And my Interest was concerned in the other: but let us drop both
our Pretenses; for I believe it is a moot point, whether I am more likely to
make a Master Bull, or you a Lord Strut.


J. Bull. Agreed, old Boy; but then I must have Security that I shall carry my
Broadcloth to Market, old Boy.


L. Baboon. That you shall: Ecclesdown Castle! Ecclesdown! Remember that: Why
would thou not take it when it was offered thee some Years ago?


J. Bull. I would not take it, because they told me thou would not give it
me.


L. Baboon. How could Monsieur Bull be so grossly abused by downright Nonsense?
They that advised you to refuse, must have believed I intended to give, else
why would they not make the Experiment? But I can tell you more of that Matter
than perhaps you know at present.


J. Bull. But what say thou as to the Esquire, Nic. Frog, and the rest of
the Tradesmen? I must take care of them.


L. Baboon. Thou have but small Obligations to Nic, to my certain Knowledge: He
has not used me like a Gentleman.


J. Bull. Nic, indeed, is not very nice in your Punctilio's of Ceremony; he is
Clownish, as a Man may say; Belching and Calling of Names have been allowed him
time out of mind, by Prescription: but however, we are engaged in one Common
Cause, and I must look after him.


L. Baboon. All Matters that relate to him, and the rest of the Plantiffs in
this Lawsuit, I will refer to your Justice.


CHAP. V.
Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull; wherein he endeavors to vindicate all his
Conduct, with relation to John Bull and the Lawsuit.

NIC. perceived now that his Cully had elop'd, that John intended henceforth to
deal without a Broker; but he was resolved to leave no Stone unturned to
recover his Bubble: Amongst other Artifices, he wrote a most obliging Letter,
which he sent him Printed in a fair Character.

Dear Friend,
When I consider the late ill Usage I have met with from you, I was reflecting
what it was that could provoke you to it; but upon a narrow Inspection into my
Conduct, I can find nothing to reproach my self with, but too partial a Concern
for your Interest. You no sooner set this Composition a-foot, but I was ready
to comply, and prevented your very Wishes; and the Affair might have been ended
before now, had it not been for the greater Concerns of Esquire South, and the
other poor Creatures, embarked in the same Common Cause, whose Safety touches
me to the Quick. You seemed a little jealous that I bad dealt unfairly with you
in Money-matters, till it appeared by your own Accounts, that there was
something due to me upon the Balance. Having nothing to answer to so plain a
Demonstration, you began to complain as if I had been familiar with your
Reputation; when it is well known, not only I, but the meanest Servant in my
Family, talk of you with the utmost Respect. I have always, as far as in me
lies, exhorted your Servants and Tenants to be dutiful; not that I any ways
meddle in your domestic Affairs, which were very unbecoming for me to do. If
some of your Servants express their great Concern for you in a manner that is
not so very polite, you ought to impute it to their extraordinary Zeal, which
deserves a Reward rather than a Reproof. You cannot reproach me for want of
Success at the Salutation, since I am not Master of the Passions and Interests
of other Folks. I have beggared my self with this Lawsuit, undertaken merely
in Complaisance to you; and if you would have had but a little Patience, I had
still greater things in Reserve that I intended to have done for you. I hope
what I have said will prevail with you to lay aside your unreasonable
Jealousies, and that we may have no more Meetings at the Salutation, spending
our Time and Money to no Purpose. My Concern for your Welfare and Prosperity,
almost makes me mad. You may be assured I will continue to be

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, NIC. FROG.


John received this with a good deal of Sang froid; Transeat (quoth John) cum
caeteris erroribus: He was now at his Ease; he saw he could now make a very
good Bargain for himself, and a very safe one for other Folks. My Shirt (quoth
he) is near me, but my Skin is nearer: Whilst I take care of the Welfare of
other Folks, no body can blame me, to apply a little Balsam to my own Sores.
It Is a pretty thing, after all, for a Man to do his own Business: a Man has
such a tender Concern for himself, there is nothing like it. This is somewhat
better, I trow, than for John Bull to be standing in the Market, like a great
Dray-horse, with Frog's Paws upon his Head, What will ye give me for this
Beast? Serviteur Nic. Frog, you may kiss my Backside if you please. Though John
Bull has not read your Aristotle's, Plato's, and Machiavels, he can see us far
into a Millstone as another: With that John began to chuckle and laugh, till he
was like to burst his Sides.

CHAP. VI.
The Discourse that passed between Nic. Frog and Esquire South, which John Bull
overheard.

JOhn thought every Minute a Year till he got into Ecclesdown Castle; he
repairs to the Salutation, with a Design to break the Matter gently to his
Partners: Before he entered, he overheard Nic. and the Esquire in a very
pleasant Conference.

Esquire South. Oh the Ingratitude and Injustice of Mankind! That John Bull, whom I
have honored with my Friendship and Protection so long, should flinch at last,
and pretend that he can disburse no more Money for me; that the Family of the
Souths, by his sneaking Temper, should be kept out of their own.


Nic. Frog. An't like your Worship, I am in amaze at it; I think the Rogue
should be compelled to do his Duty.


Esquire South. That he should prefer his scandalous Pelf, the Dust and Dregs of
the Earth, to the Prosperity and Grandeur of my Family!


Nic. Frog. Nay, he is mistaken there too; for, he would quickly lick himself
whole again by his Vails. It Is strange he should prefer Philip Baboon's Custom
to Esquire South's.


Esquire South. As you say, that my Clothier, that is to get so much by the
Purchase, should refuse to put me in Possession; did you ever know any Man's
Tradesman serve him so before?


Nic. Frog. No, indeed, an't please your Worship, it is a very unusual
Proceeding; and I would not have been guilty of it for the World. If your
Honor had not a great Stock of Moderation and Patience, you would not bear it
so well as you do.


Esquire South. It is most intolerable, that is certain Nic. and I will be revenged.


Nic Frog. Methinks it is strange, that Philip Baboon's Tenants do not all take
your Honor's part, considering how good and gentle a Master you are.


Esquire South. True, Nic. but few are sensible of Merit in this World: It is a
great Comfort, to have so faithful a Friend as thy self in so critical a
Juncture.


Nic. Frog. If all the World should forsake you, be assured Nic. Frog never
will; let us stick to our Point, and we'll manage Bull, I Will warrant ye.


Esquire South. Let me kiss thee, dear Nic. I have found one honest Man amongst a
thousand at last.


Nic. Frog. If it were possible, your Honor has it in your Power to wed me
still closer to your Interest.


Esquire South. Tell me quickly, dear Nic.


Nic. Frog. You know I am your Tenant; the Difference between my Lease and an
Inheritance is such a Trifle, as I am sure you will not grudge your poor
Friend, that will be an Encouragement to go on; besides, it will make Bull as
mad as the Devil: You and I shall be able to manage him then to some purpose.


Esquire South. Say no more, it shall be done Nic. to thy Heart's Content.


John, all this while, was listening to this comical Dialogue, and laughed
heartily in his Sleeve, at the Pride and Simplicity of the Esquire, and the sly
Roguery of his Friend Nic. Then of a sudden bolting into the Room, he began to
tell them, that he believed he had brought Lewis to reasonable Terms, if they
would please to hear them.

Then they all bawled out aloud, No Composition, Long live Esquire South and
the Law! As John was going to proceed, some roared, some stamped with their
Feet, others stopped their Ears with their Fingers.

Nay, Gentlemen (quoth John) if you will but stop proceeding for a while, you
shall judge your selves whether Lewis's Proposals are reasonable.

All. Very fine indeed, stop proceeding, and so lose a Term.


J. Bull. Not so neither, we have something by way of Advance, he will put us
in Possession of his Manor and Castle of Ecclesdoun.


Nic. Frog. What do talk of us, thou mean thy self?


J. Bull. When Frog took Possession of any thing, it was always said to be for
Us, and why may not John Bull be Us, as well as Nic. Frog was Us? I hope John
Bull is no more confined to Singularity than Nic. Frog; or take it so, the
constant Doctrine that thou have preached up for many Years, was that Thou and
I are One; and why must we be supposed Two in this Case, that were always One
before? It Is impossible that Thou and I can fall out Nic. we must trust one
another: I have trusted thee with a great many things, prithee trust me with
this one Trifle.


Nic. Frog. That Principle is true in the main; but there is some Speciality in
this Case, that makes it highly inconvenient for us both.


J. Bull. Those are your Jealousies, that the common Enemies sow between us;
how often have thou warned me of those Rogues, Nic. that would make us
mistrustful of one another?


Nic. Frog. This Ecclesdoun-Castle is only a Bone of Contention.


J. Bull. It depends upon you to make it so, for my part I am as peaceable as a
Lamb.


Nic. Frog. But do you consider the unwholesomness of the Air and Soil, the
Expenses of Reparations and Servants, I would scorn to accept of such a
Quag-mire.


J. Bull. You are a great Man, Nic. but in my Circumstances, I must be even
content to take it as it is.


Nic. Frog. And you are really so silly, as to believe the old cheating Rogue
will give it you.


J. Bull. I believe nothing-but Matter of Fact, I stand and fall by that, I am
resolved to put him to it.


Nic. Frog. And so relinquish the hopefulest Cause in the World, a Claim that
will certainly in the End, make thy Fortune for ever.


J. Bull. Will thou purchase it Nic? thou shall have a lumping Pennyworth; nay,
rather than we should differ, I Will give thee fomething to take it off my Hands.


Nic. Frog. If thou would but moderate that hasty impatient Temper of thine,
thou should quickly see a better thing than all that: What should thou
think to find old Lewis turned out of his paternal Estates and Mansion House of
Clay-Pool? Would not that do thy Heart good to see thy old Friend Nic. Frog
Lord of Clay Pool? Then thou and thy Wife and Children shall walk in my
Gardens, buy Toys, drink Lemonade, and now and then we should have a
Country-dance.


J. Bull. I love to be plain, I Would as lieve see my self in Ecclesdoun-Castle, as
thee in Clay-Pool. I tell you again, Lewis gives this as a Pledge of his
Sincerity, if you will not stop proceeding to hear him, I will.


CHAP. VII.
The rest of Nic's Fetches to keep John out of Ecclesdoun-Castle.

WHEN Nic. could not diswade John by Argument, he tried to move his Pity, he
pretended to be sick and like to dye, that he should leave his Wife and
Children in a starving Condition, if John did abandon him; that he was hardly
able to craul about the Room, far less capable to look after such a troublesome
Business as this Lawsuit, and therefore begged that his good Friend would not
leave him. When he saw that John was still inexorable, he pulled out a
Case-Knife, with which he used to Sneaker-snee, and threatened to cut his own
Throat. "Thrice he aimed the Knife to his Wind pipe with a most determined
threatening Air. What signifies Lise (quoth he) in this languishing Condition,
it will be some Pleasure that my Friends will revenge my Death upon this
barbarous Man, that has been the Cause of it? All this while John looked Sedate
and Calm, neither offering in the least to snatch the Knife, nor stop his Blow,
trusting to the Tenderness Nic. had for his own Person: When he perceived that
John was immovable in his Purpose, he applied himself to Lewis.

Art thou (quoth he) turned Bubble in thy Old Age, from being a Sharper in thy
Youth? what occasion have thou to give up Ecclesdoun-Castle to John Bull? his
Friendship is not worth a Rush, give it me and I Will make it worth the while. If
thou dislikest that Proposition, keep it thy self, I Would rather thou should
have it than he. If thou hearkens not to my Advice, take what follows; Esquire
South and I will go on with our Lawsuit in spite of John Bull's Teeth.

L. Baboon. Monsieur Bull has used me like a Gentleman, and I am resolved to
make good my Promise, and trust him for the Confequences.


Nic. Frog. Then I tell thee thou art an old doting Fool. With that Nic
bounc'd up with a Spring equal to that of one of your nimblest Tumblers or Rope
dancers, falls foul upon John Bull to snatch the Cudgel he had in his Hand,
that he might Thwack Lewis with it. John held it fast, so that there was no
wrenching it from him. At last Esquire South buckl'd to, to assist his Friend
Nic. John hall'd on one side, and they two on the other; sometimes they were
like to pull John over; then it went, all of a sudden again, on John's side, so
they went see-sawing up and down, from one End of the Room to the other: Down
tumbled the Tables, Bottles, Glasse^s, and Tobacco Pipes: The Wine and the
Tobacco were all spilt about the Room, and the little Fellows were almost trod
under Foot, 'till more of the Tradesmen joining with Nic. and the Esquire, John
was hardly able to pull against them all, yet he never quit hold of his trusty
Cudgel; which by the contranitent Force of two so great Powers, broke short in
his Hands. Nic. seized the longer end, and with it began to Bastinado Old
Lewis, who had slunk into a Corner, waiting the Event of this Squabble. Nic
came up to him with an insolent menacing Air, so that the old Fellow was forced
to skuttle out of the Room, and retire behind a Dung-cart: He called to Nic,
thou insolent Jackanapes, time was when thou durst not have used me so, thou
now take me unprovided, but old and infirm as I am, I shall find a Weapon by
and by to chastise thy Impudence.


When John Bull had recovered his Breath, he began to parley with Nic. Friend
Nic, I am glad to find thee so strong after thy great Complaints; really thy
Motions Nic. are pretty Vigorous for a consumptive Man. As for thy worldly
Affairs Nic, if it can do thee any Service, I freely make over to thee this
profitable Lawsuit; and I desire all these Gentlemen to bear witness to this
my Act and Deed, yours be all the Gain, as mine has been the Charges, I have
brought it to bear finely: However, all I have laid out upon it goes for
nothing, thou shall have it with all its Appurtenances, I ask nothing but leave
to go home.

Nic. Frog. The Counsel are fee'd, and all Things prepared for a Trial, thou
shall be forced to stand the Issue: It shall be pleaded in thy Name as well as
mine: Go home if thou can, the Gates are shut, the Turnpikes locked, and the
Roads barracado'd.


J. Bull. Even these very ways Nic that thou toldest me, were as open to me as
thy self? If I cannot pass with my own Equipage, what can I expect for my Goods
and Wagons? I am denied Passage through those very Grounds that I have
purchased with my own Money; however, I am glad I have made the Experiment, it
may serve me in some stead.


John Bull was so overjoyed that he was going to take Possession of
Ecclesdoun, that nothing could vex him. Nic (quoth he) I am just a going to
leave thee, cast a kind look upon me at parting.

Nic looked sower and grum, and would not open his Mouth.

J. Bull. I wish thee all the Success that thy Heart can desire, and that these
honest Gentlemen of the long Robe may have their Belly full of Law.


Nic could stand it no longer, but flung out of the Room with disdain, and
beckoned the Lawyers to follow him.

J. Bull. Buy, buy Nic, not one poor Smile at parting, will not you shake your
day-day, Nic? Buy Nic: With that John marched out of the common Road cross the
Country, to take Possession of Ecclesdoun.


CHAP. VIII.
Of the great Joy that John expressed when he got Possession of Ecclesdoun.

WHEN John had got into his Castle, he seemed like Ulysses upon his Plank after
he had been well sous'd in Salt Water; who (as Homer says) was as glad as a
Judge going to sit down to Dinner, after hearing a long Cause upon the Bench. I
dare say John Bull's Joy was equal to that of either of the two; he skip'd from
Room to Room; ran up Stairs and down Stairs, from the Kitchen to the Garrets,
and from the Garrets to the Kitchen; he peeped into every Crany; sometimes he
admired the Beauty of the Architecture, and the vast Solidity of the Masons
Work; at other times he commended the Symetry and Proportion of the Rooms. He
walked about the Gardens; he Bathed himself in the Canal, swimming, diving, and
beating the liquid Element, like a milk-white Swan. The Hall resounded with the
sprightly Violin and the martial Hautboy. The Family trip'd it about and
Caper'd like Hailstones bounding from a Marble Floor: Wine, Ale and October
flew about as plentifully as Kennel-Water; then a Frolic took John in the Head
to call up some of Nic Frog's Pensioners that had been so mutinous in his
Family.

J. Bull. Are you glad to see your Master in Ecclesdoun-Castle?


All. Yes indeed, Sir.


J. Bull. Extremely glad?


All. Extremely glad, Sir.


J. Bull. Swear to me that you are so.

Then they began to damn and sink their Souls to the lowest Pit of Hell, if any
Person in the World rejoiced more than they did.


J. Bull. Now hang me if I don't believe you are a parcel of perjured Raseals;
however take this Bumper of October to your Master's Health.

Then John got upon the Battlements, and looking over he called to Nic Frog.

How do you do Nic? Do You see where I am Nic? I hope the Cause goes on swimmingly
Nic; when do thou intend to go to Clay-Pool, Nic? Will thou buy there some
High-Heads of the newest Cut for my Daughters? How come thou to go with thy
Arm tied up? Has old Lewis given thee a rap over the Finger-ends? Thy Weapon
was a good one when I weilded it, but the Butt-end remains in my Hands. I am so
busy in packing up my Goods, that I have no time to talk with thee any longer:
It would do thy Heart good to see what Wagon Loads I am preparing for Market;
if thou want any good Office of mine, for all that has happened, I will use
thee well Nic; buy Nic.


* John Bull' s Thanks to Sir Roger, and Nic Frog' s Malediction upon all
Shrews, the Original Cause of his Misfortunes, are reserved for the next Volume.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall.
THE Examiners for the Year 1711. To which is added, an Explanatory Index. The
Four Volumes of the Atalantis, called the Memoirs of Europe. An Appendix to
John Bull still in his Senses, or Law is a Bottomless Pit. Printed from a
Manuscript, found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth; and
published (as well as the Three former Parts) by the Author of the New
Atalantis. Price 3d. Some Remarks on the Letters between the L -- d T -- nd,
and Mr. Secretary B -- le. In a Letter to the Author of the Remarks on the
Barrier-Treaty. Five extraordinary Letters supposed to be Writ to Dr. B -- y,
upon his Edition of Horace, and some other Matters of great Importance. The
Conduct of the Allies, and of the late Ministry, in beginning and carrying on
the present War, the 7th Edition. Pr. 6d. Some Remarks on the Barrier-Treaty,
between Her Majesty and the States General. By the Author of the Conduct of the
Allies. To which are added, the said Barrier-Treaty with the Two separate
Articles; part of the Counter-Project; the Sentiments of Pr. Eugene and Count
Sinzendorf, upon the said Treaty; and a Representation of the English
Merchants. 2d Edit. Pr. 6d. The Picture of a Modern Whig; First and Second
Part. By Dr. Davenant. T -- l -- nd's Invitation to Dismal, to Dine with the
Calves-head Club. Imitated from Horace, Epist. 5. Lib. 1. Price 1d. Some Advice
humbly offered to the Members of the October Club, in a Letter from a Person of
Honor. The Second Edition, price 2d. A Learned Comment upon Dr. Hare's
Excellent Sermon, preached before the Duke of Marlborough, on the Surrender of
Bouchain. By an Enemy to Peace. The second Edition. Price 2d. A New Journey to
Paris: Together with some secret Transactions between the F -- h K -- g, and an
Eng -- Gentleman. The Third Eddition Corrected. Price 2d. Some Reasons to
prove, that no Person is obliged by his Principles, as a Whig, to oppose Her
Majesty, or Her present Ministry. In a Letter to a Whig-Lord. Price 3d. The
Character and Principles of the present Set of Whigs. The Third Edition with
Additions. Price 3d. The new way of selling Places at Court: In a Letter from a
small Courtier, to a great Stock-Jobber, Price 2d.

