A New METHOD For Discovering the LONGITUDE BOTH AT SEA and LAND, Humbly
Proposed to the Consideration of the PUBLIC.

BY William Whiston, M.A. sometime Professor of the Mathematics in the
University of Cambridg. and Humphry Ditton, Master of the New Mathematick
School in Christ's Hospital, London.


LONDON: Printed for JOHN PHILLIPS, at the Black Bull in Cornhill. 1714.

TO
The Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. The Right
Reverend Father in God PHILIP Lord Bishop of Hereford. The Right Reverend
Father in God GEORGE Lord Bishop of Bristol. The Right Honorable THOMAS Lord
TREVOR, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. The Admirals of the Red, White
and Blue Squadrons. The First Commissioner of the Admiralty. The First
Commissioner of the Navy. The First Commissioner of Trade. The Master of
Trinity-House. The Hon. Sir THOMAS HANMER, Bart. Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons. The Hon. General STANHOPE. The Hon. FRANCIS ROBERTS, Esquire Sir
ISAAC NEWTON, President of the Royal Society. WILLIAM LOWNDS, Esquire WILLIAM
CLAYTON, Esquire Mr. JOHN FLAMSTEED, Astronomer Royal. Dr. EDMUND HALLEY, Savilian
Professor of Geometry. Mr. JOHN KEILL, Savilian Professor of Astronomy. Mr.
SANDERSON, Lucasian Professor of the Mathematics. Mr. ROGER COTES, Plumian
Professor of Astronomy.
Commissioners appointed by Act of Parliament for the Discovery of the
LONGITUDE.

This New Method for that Discovery is with all due Submission humbly Dedicated
by

The Authors.

THE INTRODUCTION.
BEfore we come to give an Account of this our New Method for the Discovery of
the Longitude, both by Sea and Land, which we here take leave humbly to propose
to the Consideration of the Public, we think it reasonable to premise somewhat
by way of Introduction: To give some Account of the Nature of the Problem
before us; to speak a little of the Methods hitherto tried, and the Reasons of
their ill Success; and to add a brief Historical Narration, from what Occasions
and by what Steps this our Method was first discovered, and has arrived at its
present Degree of Maturity.

As to the Problem it self, the Invention of the Longitude; it is plainly this:
To discover in some measure a like sure way of frequently knowing, how far we
are distant, on the Earth Spherical Surface, in Degrees, from any known
Meridian, Eastward or Westward; as we can easily know, almost at any time, how
far we are distant, in Degrees, on the same Surface, from the middle Circle or
Equator, Northward or Southward. Now in this Case it must be noted, that as the
Diurnal Motion does naturally imply fixed Poles, and a fixed Equator; which
infer a different Meridian Altitude of those Poles, and of that Equator, and by
consequence of all the heavenly Bodies, in different Latitudes; which different
Altitude may in clear Weather be easily observed by proper Instruments, and
thereby that Latitude may be readily discovered; so does not the same Diurnal
Motion at all imply any Phenomenon, whence the Longitude may be discovered to
us: Because the same Parallel still bears, through its whole Circumference, the
same Relation to those Poles and that Equator, without any Difference. The
Diurnal Motion therefore, which affords an obvious Foundation for the Invention
of the Latitude of every Place on the Earth, affords us no such Foundation for
the Invention of the Longitude of the same Places. Nor is it therefore an easy
Problem, either astronomical or practical to discover the same.

As to the Methods hitherto tried, they are either Celestial, or Terrestrial;
and may be reduced to these Seven, Four that are Celestial, and Three that are
Terrestrial. (1) The Eclipses of the Moon. (2) The Eclipses of the Sun. (3) The
Eclipses of Jupiters Planets. (4) The Motion of the Moon. (5) The Variation of
the Needle. (6) Clocks, or Watches. (7) The Log Line or Dead Reckoning.


First, The Eclipses of the Moon are useful for the Longitude. For its
Immersions into the Earths Shadow, its nearest Distances to that Center, and
its Emersions therefrom, are all at distinct and known Points of absolute time.
So that where and when they can be nicely observed; and the Difference of the
apparent times at every Meridian noted; the respective Longitudes of those
Places may be thereby found in time; and by allowing 15 Degrees of the Equator
to an Hour, may be found in Degrees also.

Secondly, in the same manner may the Eclipses of the Sun be made use of;
especially as now improved by our great Astronomer Mr. Flamsteeds Construction
of them; and as they will, we hope, be farther improved by Mr. Whistons actual
Exhibition of them, in his Instrument, just ready for Publication. Which
Method, by the Difference of the apparent time of any Part of the Eclipse in
different Places, gives the Difference of Meridians, or of Longitude in the
like manner as before.

Thirdly, The Eclipses of Jupiters Satellits afford another like Method for the
Discovery of the Longitude; and that on the same Foundation with those of the
Moon.

Fourthly, the Motion of the Moon, with its Distance from the Sun, or rather
its Appulse to and Occultation of those fixed Stars that ly along its Course,
is another remarkable Method for this purpose; and is of the same Nature with
the Eclipses of the Sun as to this matter.

These Four may justly be called Celestial, or Astronomical Methods of
discovering the Longitude, because they make use of the Celestial Bodies, or of
the Stars in order to that End. The Three Terrestrial Methods are as follows.

5ly, The Variation of the Needle from the North is now, especially since Dr.
Halleys noble Observations and Map thereto relating, become one Method for the
Discovery of the Longitude; particularly in those Parts, where that Variation
is best known, and the North and South Position of its Lines are most
remarkable. For by crossing the Meridians there, you also cross the Curves of
equal Variation, and discover in some measure your Longitude thereby.

Sixthly, The Use of Clocks or Watches at Sea is another Method; and was
attempted by the famous Hugenius. And indeed if they could be exactly kept to
an even motion, and so show the Hour at any one certain place at Land; the
Comparison of the Time known by that Clock or Watch, with the apparent time at
the Ship known by the Sun or Stars, or another Clock or Watch regulated by
them, would discover the Longitude from the Place to which that first Clock or
Watch was adjusted, in time, and so, as before, in Degrees also.

Seventhly, The Log-line and Dead Reckning, when all fails, is the last Remedy
in this case; and from thence the Seamen guess, as well as they can, by the
Angle and length of their Course, what Longitude and Latitude they are in: And
when by Observation they find their Error in Latitude, they conclude upon a
proportionable one in Longitude also. And so for want of a sure Guide, either
Celestial or Terrestial, they are forced to depend on this; which yet is, as
well as the rest, very uncertain and inaccurate.

For to come to the Reasons of the small Success of these several Methods.

As to the two first, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon; to say nothing here of
the slowness of the Moon's Motion, which renders any great degree of exactness
impossible; or of the difficulty of Calculation and Construction, especially in
the Sun's Eclipses; and of Observations in both: The single rareness of these
Eclipses, which is not seldom made still rarer by cloudy Weather, renders them
of very little use in Navigation.

As to the third Method, by the Eclipses of Jupiter's Planets; this must be
owned of much greater use: Since the quickness of their Motion, especially as
to the innermost, makes the Moment of their Immersion into, or Emersion from
Jupiter's Shadow very distinct and nice; and their frequency, which is almost
one for every Day, renders them fit for the constant uses of Navigation. Nor
have we hitherto had any other Method so useful at Land as this. Yet are there
great Difficulties belonging to this Method; especially at Sea. The best Tables
of their Motions are hitherto too imperfect to be at all times depended on, as
to the exact absolute Time of their Celebration: And they require Telescopes of
such a length as have not hitherto been manageable at Sea, in that state of
Tossing and Agitation, which Ships there are subject to: Which difficulties,
added to the impossibility of seeing these Eclipses for about three Months
every Year, when Jupiter is near the Sun, renders this Method at present of
small use in Navigation.

Nor can the fourth Method, or the distance of the Moon from the Sun, with its
Appulse to, or Occultation of those fixed Stars, which lie along its course,
give us the Longitude to sufficient exactness. For, to say nothing here of the
slowness of the Moon's Motion, the want of the utmost accuracy of even the
place of some of these fixed Stars themselves, and of the Sun it self; or of
the necessity of the use of smaller Telescopes, even in this Case, as well as
of the trouble of the Calculation and Construction, which are lesser
Difficulties here also; It Is plain the Theory of the Moon, especially in some
positions, is not exact enough hitherto for our purpose; as not serving for
this Longitude nearer than to two or three Degrees: whereas the Seamen want it
within one Degree, or less. Though indeed it must be allowed, that if the Moon's
Theory could be once so far perfected, that its place might be with certainty
calculated nearer than to two Minutes of a Degree, this would be a very useful
Method in order to the Discovery of the Longitude at Sea. Which Improvement
therefore of it is Theory is a thing highly desirable in Astronomy.

We come now to the Terrestrial Methods, and to those difficulties which render
them also incapable of discovering the Longitude, with that certainty, and to
that degree of exactness, which the purposes of Navigation require. Thus the
Curve lines of the Variation of the Needle, which is the first Terrestrial
Method, are of small use, because the Laws of that Variation are not yet
brought to a sufficient certainty, notwithstanding the most useful endeavors
of Dr. Halley in that Matter: The Neighborhood of Iron Mines, of Iron, or of
Loadstones themselves, does sometimes disturb the general Rules, and deceive
the Observers of that Variation: The Position of those Curves, too far Eastward
and Westward, in a great part of the World, renders this Variation useless as
to any general Discovery of the Longitude: and even there where the Position of
these Curves is the most advantageous, as it is about the Cape of Good Hope,
and a considerable way on both sides of it, yet is the distance of those Curves
for the difference of one Degree of Variation, about 100 Geographical Miles, i.
e. near two Degrees of a great Circle; and so this Method is incapable of
showing the Longitude very nicely in any Case whatsoever.

Thus the second Terrestrial Method, by Clocks or Watches, though the easiest to
understand and practice of all others, has been so long in vain attempted at
Sea, that we see little Hopes of its great usefulness there. Watches are so
influenced by heat and cold, moisture and drought; and their small Springs,
Wheels, and Pevets are so incapable of that degree of exactness, which is here
required, that we believe all wise Men give up their Hopes from them in this
Matter. Clocks, governed by long Pendulum's, go much truer: But then the
difference of Gravity in different Latitudes, the lengthening of the
Pendulum-rod by heat, and shortening it by cold; together with the different
moisture of the Air, and the tossings of the Ship, all put together, are
circumstances so unpromising, that we believe Wise Men are almost out of hope
of Success from this Method also.

And as for the Log-Line, and Dead-Reckoning, which is the third Terrestrial
Method, they were the known deficiencies of this common way, as altered by
Storms, and Currents, and the Inaccuracies of the way it self, and of even the
Latitude, as commonly taken; together with the too frequent and enduring cloudy
Weather, when they can take no Latitude at all; which have occasioned the
Seamen to desire some other Assistance for the Discovery before us.

We now come to our last Business, viz. to give the World a short History of
our own Proposal; from what occasions, and by what steps this our Method was
first discovered, and has arrived at its present degree of Maturity. As to
which matter, the Reader is to know, that somewhat above a Year ago, Mr.
Whiston and Mr. Ditton, with some other common Friends, spent part of an
Afternoon and the Evening together. Mr. Ditton took an occasion, among other
common discourse, to observe to Mr. Whiston, that 'The nature of Sounds would
afford a method, true at least in Theory, for the discovery of the Longitude';
since The difference between the apparent time, where the Sound is made, and
where it is heard; abating only the time for its diffusion, which was now well
known; is the difference of the Longitude of those two Places in time. Mr.
Whiston immediately owned the truth of the Proposition, and added, 'That as to
the Propagation of Sounds, he remembered to have himself plainly heard the
Explosion of great Guns about 90 or 100 Miles, viz. when the French Fleet was
engaged with Ours, off Beachy-head in Sussex; [which was A.D. 1690.] and
himself was at Cambridge; and that he had been informed, that in one of the
Dutch Wars, the sound of the like Explosions had been heard into the very
middle of England, at a much greater distance. Upon this, Mr. Whiston, when
they parted, told Mr. Ditton, that he took the thing to be so considerable,
that tho it had been discoursed of in mixed Company, after an unguarded manner,
yet he looked on it as fit to be concealed; since no body could tell, what
Improvements might on farther Consideration be built upon such a Foundation.'
Which Advice Mr. Ditton followed; and accordingly desired and obtained the
Silence of those, that had then heard, what had passed. This Proposition about
Sounds, and their distant Propagation, with respect to the Longitude, did upon
this so fix it self in Mr. Whiston's Mind, and did occasion such Improvements
there, that in less than two Days time he brought a small Paper to Mr. Ditton,
containing a Scheme, how that Theory of Mr. Ditton's about Sounds might be
reduced to Practice, and be actually applied to the discovery of the Longitude
at Sea; which was then not much unlike the former branch of the following
Essay, only more imperfect: Which Scheme Mr. Ditton approved of. Soon after
this Mr. Ditton imparted this Discovery to a very good Friend, belonging to the
Admiralty, in order to gain farther light as to its practicableness at Sea; and
that proper Questions might by him be asked of Seafaring Men relating thereto,
without any Suspicion; which could not well be avoided if we our selves had
asked them; especially since the Notion was then got abroad, that we had a
Project about the Longitude to propose to the World. The result of this Enquiry
was, that those Seamen our Friend inquired of, did not remember to have heard
Sounds at Sea any whit near so far as the beforementioned Examples showed they
had been heard at Land; which difficulty put some stop to our Progress for a
little while. However, at last, after farther enquiry, the final result was
this, That though Sounds were not ordinarily either at Sea or Land heard very
far, yet that was not at Sea, more than at Land, any certain Argument, that
they could not spread so far; because Sounds had been heard a full Degree at
least, or 60 Geographical Miles over Sea, even without any extraordinary
Contrivance, either at the sounding Body, or the Ear; both which were yet, for
certain, capable of great improvements, in order to the enlargement of that
distance. So that the Objection started against the spreading of Sounds at Sea
seemed to be in a manner over, and we at liberty to prosecute our Design, as
before, of discovering the Longitude by means of it. About this time Mr.
Whiston discovered and proposed a great Improvement of his own to this Method;
viz. That the Guns, which were to make the Explosions in the former Case, might
also carry Shells, full of Powder, or such other combustible Matter, as would
take fire at the utmost Altitude; and thereby certainly and exactly exhibit the
point of the Azimuth, and the Distance of the sounding Body; and so join the
use of the Eye and Ear together for the same purpose. Though at the first he must
own he suspected, that the Apparent Diameter of that Light or Fire would in
great distances be so small, as not to be there visible. In this very juncture
a day of extraordinary Fireworks happened [it was the Thanksgiving day for the
Peace, July 7th, 1713.] the Contemplation of which, did much revive and
encourage this Notion: and the certain Account he soon had, that those
Fireworks, nay, the small Stars, into which the Rockets commonly resolved
themselves, were plainly visible no less than 20 Miles, put an end to his
doubts immediately; and made him very secure, that such large Shells as might
be fired at a vastly greater height, would for certain be visible for about 100
Miles; which he looked on as nearly the limit of Sounds also, as to any
purposes of Longitude. This Improvement of Mr. Whiston's, which was also then
for the main the same with the second Branch now contained in this Paper, was
also approved of by Mr. Ditton, and agreed to as fit to be a part of the former
Design for the Discovery of the Longitude at Sea. Mr. Ditton did farther add,
for Improvement, a sure Method of Trigonometrical Calculation, to ascertain
from the Observations the horary Difference of Meridians (and by consequence
the Difference of Longitude in Degrees) between the Ship's Place, and that of
Explosion; without computing the Time of the Sound's propagation: but since
this Method is somewhat more operose than that, which is proposed hereafter, he
chooses to omit it. He did also first observe that great Use of our Method at
Land, in the Surveying of Countries, for the Perfection of Geography; which was
also readily taken notice of by Sir Isaac Newton, and afterward by Dr. Halley,
and that both of their own accord, upon our first communication of our Method
to them. For when Matters were brought to so hopeful a Posture, and necessary
Tables were preparing for the actual Practice of the whole Method, we began to
think of intimating to the Public, that we had a new Discovery, as to the
Longitude, to propose to the World. Which we soon did, by our Letter inserted
in the Paper called the Guardian, of July 14. and repeated by another in the
same Author's Paper called the Englishman, of December 10. following. Having
before communicated the matter to the illustrious Sir Isaac Newton, as we did
afterward to those great Men, Dr. Clarke Rector of St. James's, Dr. Halley of
Oxford, and Mr. Cotes of Cambridge. How far we profited by this Communication,
and what their Opinions were concerning our Method, we need not say: because we
do not give Account here of every occasional Improvement, either of our own or
others; and because we now publish the entire Method, as it stands at present,
to the whole World, for every one's open Judgment, and the farther Improvements
of the skilful. Only so far their Opinions and Declarations appear to have been
on our side, that upon hearing what they and we had to say, the Committee of
the House of Commons, which was appointed to inquire into this matter, came
unanimously to a Resolution in our Favor; and the Legislature have thereupon
thought fit to pass an Act, appointing a noble Reward for such as shall
discover a better Method than has been hitherto used for the finding the
Longitude. Which Reward, whether we have any just Claim to, in whole or in
part, we do hereby entirely submit to the Sagacity and Justice of those eminent
Persons, whom the Legislature has been pleased to entrust with the Trial,
Experiment, Judgment, and Determination of all such Proposals.

We conclude all with our hearty Wishes as Men, that this our Design may tend
to the common Benefit of Mankind: as Britains, that it may tend particularly to
the Honor and Advantage of this our Native Country; and as Christians, that it
may tend to the Propagation of our Holy Religion, in its original Purity,
throughout the World.

London, July 7. 1714. William Whiston, Humphry Ditton.

PROBLEM. To find the LONGITUDE both at Sea and Land.
LEMMATA, or Preparatory Propositions.
I. ALL Sounds are propagated almost evenly; and are observed to move 14
Measured, or 12 Geographical Miles in one Minute of Time: i. e. one
Geographical Mile or Minute of a Degree in five Seconds.

This is well known from the last and most accurate Observations Philos.
Transact. No. 247. Sir Isaac Newton 's Princip. Edit. 2. ^. 343, 344.
about the Velocity of Sounds, which are those of Mr. Dereham. Only a small
Addition of Velocity is to be made, when a strong Wind carries the Sound with
it, and Substraction when it opposes it.

II. The Sound of a great Gun may be heard by the Ear, duly assisted, if the
Wind be favorable, or still, both by Sea and Land, at the least 100 measured,
or 85 geographical Miles. In the open Sea also, the Point of the Compass may be
nearly determined whence it comes.

This is very probable, as to the Distance, from many known Experiments Philos.
Transact. p. 156, 201, 247.
; wherein the Ear, even unassisted, has heard such Sounds much farther. And if
the Sound were increased by a sounding Board, which might prevent its diffusion
upwards, and so spread it farther Horizontally on all sides; and if the Ear
were assisted by a hollow Tube of Metal, of the shape of a Bell or Tunnel,
applied thereto, this Proposition would soon be more indisputable. Nor is there
any great Difficulty, as to the Point of the Compass, whence the Sound comes at
Sea, where nothing can reflect or echo the same in any other than the true
Angle.

III. The Distance of the sounding Body, where the Sounds are of the same
Strength, and Tenor, and Circumstances, may, within some Latitude, be
determined by the Ear, duly assisted, and frequently exercised in such
Observations; even at very considerable Distances from the sounding Body.

This appears from the obvious difference of the same Sounds at very different
Distances at present; which is in a duplicate Proportion of those Distances:
and from the great Improvements, Experiments made on purpose would probably
afford us therein.

N.B. In order to determine accurately the Distance of a given Sound, there
must be distinct Trials made, in an open Place, both by Sea and Land, in clear
and in foggy Weather, with the Wind in all Positions, and of all Degrees of
Strength; and this at several Distances of the Hearers: but till that is done,
we must leave this matter to the Ear alone.

IV. A strong Wind carries Sound along with it in a Circle; where the Sounding
Body is a Point in its Axis: and is more or less remote from its Center,
according as the Wind is greater or less.

This appears by the Demonstration following. Let the Proportion of the
Velocity of the Wind, to the Velocity of the Motion of the Air that causes the
Sound, be as AB to AD. Let the two equal Circles GDHE, GCHF, be described upon
the Centers A and B; and let any Line, as KL, be drawn Parallel to DF. KI will
therefore be always equal to ML. or to the Velocity of the Wind, and according
to its direction: as AM = AK = BL = BY will be equal to the Velocity of the
Motion of the Air that causes the sound, and according to its direction; or
from the Center to the Circumference of that Circle which includes the sound.
Whence the Diagonals BK, BM will be the distance or measure of the Equal
sounds; and the points K. M will be in the Circumference of that Circle GDHE of
which the sounding body B is a point in its Axis. Q.E.D.

Corollary (1.) Because the Lines AB and AK, and the Angle BAK are given; the
distance of equal sounds BK is also given by plain Trigonometry. As the same
line may be found Geometrically also, by applying its length to a scale of
equal parts.

Coroll. (2.) Two equal Circles, sliding one upon the other, according the
direction of the Axis FD is the readiest way of solving this Problem, for the
use of Seamen; as being so very easy in Practice.

V. The Interval of apparent time, in two places, where a Sound is excited, and
where it is received; besides that which is due to the real propagation of the
Sound it self; is the Difference of their Meridians, or of their Longitude in
Time.

Thus if a Sound, excited just at 12 a clock at one place, comes to another
after the very same Time that is due to the Sounds propagation, as at the
distance of 14 measured Miles, one minute after 12. At the distance of 28 such
Miles, two minutes after 12. etc. it is evident the places are under the same
Meridian, and have no difference of Longitude. But if it be heard sooner or
later than those times, the Difference is what answers to the Temporary
difference of their Meridians, or of Longitude, Westward or Eastward: and so is
a sure indication of the same. As is very obvious on a little consideration;
and as we shall show presently by example.

VI. An Ordinary Great Gun is easily able to cast a Projectil about a Mile and
a quarter, or 6440 English feet, in perpendicular height.

This appears by that known Halley ap Transact. Philosph. No 179. Mr.
Anderson's Gunn. passim.
Theorem in the Art of Gunnery, which demonstrates, that the utmost Altitude is
always equal to half the utmost Random of the same Gun and Powder: which utmost
Random, of ordinary Great Guns, with a very small charge of Powder, is known to
be about two Miles and a half, or 12880 Feet.

N.B. That it appears by the same way that the largest Great Guns, with their
largest charge of Powder, are able to cast a Projectil twice, nay thrice, and
even four times the beforementioned height. But because the charges and trouble
are in such cases much greater; and it is uncertain whether the advantages will
be proportionably augmented, we choose to speak moderately, especially before
trial; and to propose nothing here but what is for certain cheap, practicable,
and advantageous; and leave those more surprising heights, to the consideration
of the public afterward: Only with this observation, that the Altitude will
ever be as the Squares of the Velocity, with which the Projectil is thrown.

VII. The time of the Ascent or Descent of such a Projectil; without the
consideration of the resistance of the Air; (which in the case of lead bullets,
iron shells, or the like dense bodies is but very small, and in Wood not very
great;) is 20 or of a Minute: and is always the same in the same height.

This appears from the known Velocity of descending or ascending bodies Ubi
Supra.
, which fall or rise 16*1 English Feet in one second of time; and by
consequence 6440 Feet in 20. those lines of descent or ascent being known to be
ever as the Squares of the Times.

VIII. Gunpowder may be discharged, or combustible matter set on Fire at that
utmost height.

This all that deal in Rockets, Bombs, and Mortars do very well know. It being
the great business of their art to proportion the Match or Fusee to any
particular time when it shall give Fire; which may as well be always adjusted
to 20 as to any other number. Nor indeed is it impossible to contrive all so,
that the very beginning of the descent shall be immediately instrumental in
that matter, and thereby render the experiment more exact and infallible.

IX. Fire or Light 6440 Feet high, will be visible, in the night time, when the
Air is tolerably clear about 100 measured, or 85 Geographical Miles: i. e. one
whole degree, and 25 minutes of a great Circle, from the place where it is,
even upon the surface of the Sea.

This is easily deduced from the Tables of Tangents and Secants, applied to our
Earth; as will appear presently. Only it may be noted that the Refraction of
Light out of the somewhat thinner Air above, into the somewhat thicker Air
beneath, increases this distance a little; as also that an Eye upon the Mast of
a Ship will see such Fire or Light 10 Miles farther than one on a Level with
the Surface of the Sea; as will appear presently also.

N.B. That the Distances this Fire or Light can be seen, abating the
consideration of the Atmosphere, are nearly in a subduplicate proportion of the
Altitudes; and so at four times the height here mentioned, to which yet we have
observed Projectils may be thrown, this distance will be nearly twice as large;
i. e. about 200 measured, or 170 Geographical Miles; even without the allowance
for refraction, or for the elevation of Mountains, whereon such Guns may be
placed: both which when allowed for will imply, that it is possible, if the
light be strong enough, to extend this distance to between 200 and 300
Geographical Miles, or minutes of a great Circle. A vast extent this! and
capable of affording proportionably vast advantages to Mankind, upon the
present foundation!

X The Angle such fire or light is seen above the Horrizon will very exactly
discover its distance; as will an easy observation its Azimuth.

The former branch is evident from the nature of a Sphere, with the usual
Tables of Tangents and Secants: and may thus be computed by plain Trigonometry.
Supposing the eye of the Spectator placed at the surface of the Sea; and not
considering the very small difference by the refraction.

Let A represent the Earth's Center, BD the length of the Secant of 1. 2 5.
above the Radius; or 6440 feet. ED the Tangent of the same Angle. CB the length
of the Secant above the Radius, at any lesser Angle, as BAF. and CF the Tangent
of that last Angle. It Is evident that the Angle DFC is the elevation of the
fire or light above the horizon at any given Point F. and that in the plain
Triangle DCF the Angle DCF is given, equal to a right Angle, and to the Angle
FAB. FCB is its complement; and equal to the sum of the remote Angles CFD, and
CDF. The including sides also CF and CD are given; the former being the Tangent
of the given Angle FAB, and the latter the difference of the Secant of the same
Angle from the Secant of 1. 25. So that by the known Rule of plain
Trigonometry, as the sum of the sides, CF + CD, is to their difference, CF -
CD, or CD - CF: So is the Tangent of the Semisum of the Angles, CFD + CDF =
FCB, to the Tangent of their Semidifference. Which Semidifference subtracted
at remoter and added at nearer distances to that Semisum; gives the Angle
sought CFD. Q.E.I.

According to this Rule the following Table is made to every Minute, or
Geographical Mile; for the ease of all that may use this Method, and may desire
some exactness therein.

Miles distance. Angle above the Horizon. 1 46 -- 25 2 27 -- 42 3 19 -- 16 4 14
-- 40 5 11 -- 50 6 10 -- 20 7 9 -- 0 8 7 -- 55 9 6 -- 50 10 5 -- 55 11 5 -- 20
12 4 -- 54 Miles. distance. Angle above the Horizon. 13 4 -- 30 14 4 -- 8 15 3
-- 52 16 3 -- 37 17 3 -- 23 18 3 -- 11 19 3 -- 0 20 2 -- 50 21 2 -- 41 22 2 --
33 23 2 -- 25 24 2 -- 18 25 2 -- 12 26 2 -- 6 27 2 -- 1 28 1 -- 55 29 1 -- 50
30 1 -- 46 31 1 -- 41 32 1 -- 37 33 1 -- 33 34 1 -- 28 35 1 -- 24 36 1 -- 20 37
1 -- 17 38 1 -- 14 39 1 -- 12 40 1 -- 10 41 1 -- 7 42 1 -- 4 43 1 -- 1 44 0 --
59 45 0 -- 57 46 0 -- 55 47 0 -- 53 48 0 -- 51 49 0 -- 49 50 0 -- 47 51 0 -- 45
52 0 -- 43 53 0 -- 41 54 0 -- 39 55 0 -- 38 56 0 -- 36 57 0 -- 34 58 0 -- 32 59
0 -- 31 60 0 -- 30 61 0 -- 28 62 0 -- 26 63 0 -- 25 64 0 -- 24 65 0 -- 23 66 0
-- 21 67 0 -- 20 68 0 -- 19 69 0 -- 18 70 0 -- 17 71 0 -- 15 72 0 -- 14 Miles
distance. Angle above the Horizon. 73 0 -- 13 74 0 -- 12 75 0 -- 11 76 0 -- 9
77 0 -- 8 78 0 -- 7 79 0 -- 6 80 0 -- 5 81 0 -- 4 82 0 -- 3 83 0 -- 2 84 0 -- 1
85 0 -- 0

N.B. It appears by this Table that the distance will never be less exact in
this Method than is the Observation of the Altitude; since one Mile here never
corresponds to less than one Minute; but that generally the distance is much
more exact than the Observation: Since one Mile commonly corresponds to
considerably more than one minute; nay at very near distances to more than one
whole degree; as is evident by inspection. As for the observation of the
Azimuth, it is too easy to need any demonstration.

N.B. If the Eye be elevated above the surface of the Sea, it will see the fire
or light farther; according to the following Table.

Miles distant. Elevation in feet. 1 1 2 4 3 8 4 15 5 23 6 34 7 45 8 57 9 71 10
88 11 107 12 128

XI. If the fire or light can be rendered completely visible during the entire
time of the ascent or descent, as in the ordinary Sky-rockets, its Distance may
be exactly determined also from the time it appears above the Horizon, by the
use of the following Tables, even without the knowledge of the Angle of
Elevation.

A Table of the number of feet that Bodies fall or rise, as far as 20 of time.
feet. 1 16*1 2 64*4 3 145 4 259 5 402 6 580 7 789 8 1030 9 1294 10 1610 11 1948
12 2318 13 2721 14 3156 15 3622 16 4122 17 4653 11 5216 19 5812 20 6440

A Table of the Excess of the Secants in Feet, above the Earths Semidiameter,
as far as 1. 2 5. feet. 1 1 2 4 3 8 4 15 5 23 6 34 7 45 8 57 9 71 10 88 11 107
12 128 13 151 14 174 15 199 16 227 17 256 18 288 19 321 20 357 21 393 22 430 23
470 24 512 25 556 26 601 27 647 28 695 feet. 29 745 30 798 31 853 32 909 33 968
34 1026 35 1088 36 1151 37 1216 38 1283 39 1352 40 1422 41 1493 42 1569 43 1642
44 1720 45 1800 46 1882 47 1963 48 2047 49 2134 50 2222 51 2312 52 2404 53 2497
54 2592 55 2688 56 2787 57 2887 58 2991 59 3093 60 3198 61 3305 62 3415 63 3526
64 3639 65 3755 66 3870 67 3988 68 4118 69 4229 70 4353 71 4479 72 4608 73 4735
74 4866 75 4998 76 5132 77 5269 78 5407 79 5546 80 5687 81 5830 82 5974 83 6121
84 6271 85 6422

N.B. The Rule for Practice is this: Observe the Number of the Seconds of Time
that you see the Fire or Light, either ascending or descending, in the former
Table; with its corresponding Number of Feet. Take this Number of Feet out of
the entire Number 6440, and keep the Remainder. For where that Remainder is
found in the latter Table, you will find the true Distance over against it, e.
g. Suppose the Light or Fire is observed to take up 12. or a fifth Part of a
Minute, in its visible Ascent or Descent. The corresponding Number of Feet in
the former Table is 2318, which deducted from 6440, leaves 4122, for the
Difference: Which Number in the latter Table corresponds to somewhat above 68.
and shows that the real Distance sought, is somewhat above 68 Minutes, or
geographical Miles. The Demonstration is easy from the former Scheme. For DB -
DC = CB, and so DA - DC = CA. or the Difference of the Secant of 1. 25. and of
any Part of it visible in another Horizon, as at F, is equal to the Secant of
that Angle DAF, or of the Arch BF, which is the Distance required. Only if the
Bottom of the Atmosphere be too thick to permit the Light or Fire to be seen to
any certain Altitude, allowance must be made for the same, in the use of these
Tables.

XII. When a Sound and a Light are made at the same Place, either at the same
time, or at any given Interval; the Distance of such Sound and Light from the
Auditor or Spectator may be exactly determined.

For if they are made at the very same time, the Difference of the Velocity of
Light, which is, physically speaking, instantaneous, and of Sound, which goes
12 geographical Miles in a Minute, will, with great Exactness, determine that
Distance. And if there be a given Interval between them, it is easily allowed
for.

XIII. If the Longitude or Latitude of one Place be known, and the Distance and
Position of another be also known; the Longitude and Latitude of this other
Place is known also.

This is too obvious to need a Demonstration; and may be easily showed on a
Map, with a Pair of Compasses, applied to the Scale of that Map.

XIV. If the Longitude or Latitude of one Place be known, and its Distance from
another be known also, and the Longitude of that other Place be otherwise
known, its Latitude is thereby known. And if its Latitude be otherwise known,
its Longitude is thereby known also.

This is also too obvious to need a Demonstration; and may be showed on a Map,
as well as the foregoing.

XV. Hulls of Ships, without Sails or Rigging, may be fixed at Sea in all
ordinary Cases, by Anchors; and in extraordinary Cases, where the Ocean is
vastly deep, by Weights let down from the Hulls quite through the upper
Currents into the still Waters below, as near as possible to the Bottom.

This Matter belongs to Trial and Experimenrs, and is not to be here
particularly demonstrated. Only we may observe, that the lower Parts of the
Waters in the Ocean are commonly found to be free from the Currents and Motions
of the higher Parts; and that the Method by which those very Currents are
discovered, is no other than by thus letting down the Lead far below them;
which, though it touch not the Bottom, yet makes the Boat out of which the Lead
is thrown, in the Words of an Eyewitness, Philos. Trans. No. 36. Abridg Vol.
3. p. 555, 556.
ride as firmly as if it were fastened by the strongest Cable and Anchor to the
Bottom.

N.B. If any Current or strong Wind does, in some measure, carry away such an
Hull, with any ordinary Lead, or Weights, care is to be taken that the Cord or
Chain be upward as small, and make as little Resistance to the flowing Water as
possible; and that the same Cord or Chain with its Weights or Leads below, be
as large and cumbersome, and make as great Resistance to the still Water below,
as possible: that so the Motion of the Hull may be insensible. Note also that
in case there appear still some Motion in the Hull, the Mariners are nicely to
observe its Velocity and Direction; and at convenient Seasons to bring it back
again, as near as possible, to its original Station.

N.B. These Hulls may be fixed in proper Places as to Latitude, by the known
Methods of observing the Latitude; and as to Longitude, by Eclipses of the Sun,
or Moon, or of Jupiter's Planets, or by the Moon's Appulse to fixed Stars; or
rather by an actual Mensuration of Distances on the Surface of the Sea by
Trigonometry, just as Monsieur Picard and Cassini measured the Length of a
Degree of a great Circle on the Land; while the Light to be thrown up from the
Ships will afford the same Advantage that any elevated Mark does at Land, and
while the vastly greater Length of a Basis or measured Line on the Shore, the
vastly greater Distances of the Ships; and the much greater Evenness of the
Surface of the Sea than of the Land, do give us hopes of more Exactness in this
Way of Mensuration than in any other.

N.B. By the same Method, if done with sufficient Accuracy, we may also hope to
discover the Quantity of a Degree in all sorts of great Circles, and perhaps
more exactly than even Monsieur Picard or Cassini have been able to do: because
we may hereby actually measure a much larger Portion of such great Circles than
they could. Which Advantage of this Method is in itself very considerable also.

XVI. If the Altitude of the Sun, at the best Advantage, can be taken within
four Minutes of a Degree at Sea or Land; the time is thereby determined to
about half a Minute: if to two Minutes of a Degree, the time is determined to
about a quarter of a Minute, even in our Latitude; while nearer the Equator the
like Limits determine the time still more exactly.

This the Astronomers well know: and any that observe in common Quadrants how
an Hour, in the middle between Noon and either Morning or Evening, contains
usually about 7 or 8 Degrees of Altitude; while no less than 15 Degrees makes
an Hour upon the Equator, will easily agree to this Proposition.

XVII. The best time for the exact Discovery of the Hour at Sea, and of
adjusting all Watches or Movements to show the same afterward, is that of the
rising and setting of the Sun; that is, in case Allowance be made for the
Horizontal Refraction of his Rays; but not otherwise.

For if the time while the whole Body of the Sun is rising or setting, which
may be very nicely observed at Sea, be added at Night to, and subtracted in
the Morning from, the Time that any Table of its rising and setting, or a
particular Trigonometrical Calculation, does determine; the Sum in the first,
and Difference in the second Case will give the true Time when the Sun's Center
will appear to be in the very Horizon. And this because the Sun's Horizontal
Refraction is observed to be very nearly equal to his apparent Diameter.

N.B. The Exact time of the Sun's rising and setting, at all Declinations, and
in all Latitudes, is found by the following Rule of Trigonometry.

Out of half the Sum of the Complement of the Sun's Declination, and of the
Complement of the Latitude of the Place, and of an Arch of 90. deduct severally
the two former Sides, to gain two Differences. Then say,

As the Rectangle of the Sines of thofe two former Sides: to the square of the
Radius:: so is the Rectangle of the Sines of those two Differences: to the
Square of the Sine of half the Angle at the Pole, included between the same two
Sides, which Angle is the Measure of the Time.

For Example. Suppose an Hull of a Ship was fixed in the Latitude of London,
and there were occasion to compute exactly the Time of the rising and setting
of the Sun, for the longest Day of the Year. The Calculation is thus.

Compl. of Declin. 66 31 Compl. Lat. 38 30 Quadrant. 90 00 Sum 195 01. Half 97
30 30 Deduct. 66 31 00 First Differ. 30 59 30 Deduct from the former Half 38 30
00 Second Differ. 59 00 30 Log sin. 66. 31. 00. 9.9624527. A Log. sin. 38. 30.
00 9.7941496. B A + B 19.7566023. C Log. rad. square 20.0000000. D Log. sin.
First diff. 9.7117341. E Log. sin. Second diff. 9.9331794. F E + F 19.6449135.
G D + G 39.6449135. D + G - C 19.8883112. = 9.9441556. or (61. 33. 44. Its
double 123. 7. 28. or (8h. 12. 30.

Note also that the Amplitude cannot be exactly taken even at Sea, without the
like Allowance for Refraction. And the Difference of Amplitude, when the first
Edge of the Sun touches, and the last leaves the Horizon, is to be added or
subtracted in this Case, to that when it appears to be half set; in order to
obtain the Sun's true Amplitude: as well as we added or subtracted the
Difference of time before, for the exact Adjustment of the true Moment of its
rising and setting.

The Solution of the Problem.

Let a great Gun, with a Shell that will take Fire at its utmost Altitude, be
discharged perpendicularly 6440 Feet high above the Surface of the Sea, every
Night exactly at 12 a-Clock, at all convenient Distances and Situations, and
from known Places. This Discharge will, by the Distance and Point of the
Compass of its Sound, nearly give the Longitude and Latitude to all Places or
Ships within the hearing thereof: And it will, by the same Distance and Azimuth
of its Light or Fire, exactly give the same Longitude and Latitude to all
Places or Ships within the Sight thereof; according to the foregoing Lemmata.
Q.EI.

For Example: Let us suppose an Hull fixed in a known place, 30 Degrees more
Westward than the Meridian of London; and that every Midnight its Great Gun is
discharged, as before; and that a Ship sailing by at 54 40 after Eleven, sees
the Fire or Light 30 above the Horizon; i. e. by a foregoing Table, at 60
Minutes, or Geographical Miles distance. It was therefore 12 a Clock at the
Hull, when it was only 11 h. 55 at the Ship. So that the difference of time is
5 and the difference of Longitude upon the Equator 1 15 and the Ships Longitude
from the Meridian of London is hereby known to be 31 15 Westward.

Suppose also that the Weather be such that only the sound can be heard, and
that it proves to be so weak as to be justly esteemed 60 Geographical Miles, or
one Degree of a great Circle, distant. This Distance answers to 5 of time, for
the interval of the Propagation of the Sound: which therefore, if it be heard
just at 12 a Clock at the Ship, will imply that when the Explosion was made it
was at the Ship only 55 past eleven, the same moment that it was full 12 at the
Hull; and that therefore the difference of Meridians is the same as before,
viz. 5 in time, or 1 15 upon the Equator, Westward.

Suppose farther, that the Light be seen at the same time that the Sound is
heard; with no other than the small difference of the slowness of the Sound, in
comparison of the instantaneous motion of the Light; and that the difference of
time between the most elevated appearance of the Light and the hearing of the
Sound; (which may be easily and exactly observed by any tolerable movement
whatsoever, or by a Pendulum, that vibrates half Seconds:) be found to be 4 40
or, which is all one, that the entire difference of the Explosion made, and of
the Sound heard, be 5 in time. This difference will imply the distance of the
Ship from the Explosion to be 60 Geographical Miles. And if the sound is heard
at the Ship 54 40* after Eleven, the difference of Longitude upon the Equator
will still be 1 15 and the real Longitude from London will be 31 15 Westward,
as before.

If the Azimuth of the Fire or Light be also observed, take with your Compasses
from your Scale the true distance, 60 Minutes, or Miles, and set it from the
place of the Hull, on the true Angle, in any large Map or Sea-Chart. This will
determine the very Point where the Ship is, both for Longitude and Latitude.
The same thing may be done for the Sound, in case the Point of the Compass be
observed also.

If the Latitude of the Ship be known, take the known distance, either by the
means of the Light or Fire seen, or, if the Weather be too Foggy for that, of
the Sound heard; and let it cross the known parallel of Latitude in the Chart;
and this will determine the Longitude. The like is to be done for the Latitude,
were the Longitude first known. But that not being the usual case, it needs not
be farther insisted on. Nor need we show how all this may be done by
Calculation also: since those that understand any thing of Navigation cannot be
to seek therein.

N.B. In case some parts of the Ocean prove so very deep and rough that no
Hulls can be fixed in them, the way to recover the Longitude, which may be by
this means interrupted, is rightly proposed by Sir Isaac Newton himself, in his
Paper delivered in to the Committee of the House of Commons, viz. to sail
obliquely from the last Hull into the Parallel of the next, and so along the
same; till upon approaching to that next Hull the Longitude be anew recovered,
and the Voyage be continued as before. Nor is this Interruption of any
consequence; because it cannot happen but in places where there is no Danger;
and where Seamen are under no concern for the knowledge of the Longitude.

OBSERVATIONS.
(1.) IF in all proper Roads of Ships such a great Gun be placed and
discharged, exactly every Midnight, whether on Shoars, or Islands, or in Hulls,
at the Distances of about 600 Geographical Miles or 10 Degrees, All Ships that
sail within any tolerable Distance may commonly every Week or Ten Days thereby
correct their Reckoning, and know their Longitude, as well as Latitude, even
when the Heavens are not clear enough to make Celestial Observations for either.

(2.) The Ordinary Watches, Movements, or Log-Lines in Ships, when thus
Corrected and Adjusted, once in a Week or Ten Days, will well enough show the
Longitude during every one of those short Distances between the Hulls; and so
will render the knowledge thereof still more universal.

(3.) If one such Row of Hulls be any where found too defective, a double Row
may there be laid, Pair by Pair, in the same [or equidistant] Meridians; with
proper Distinctions in the Sounds, or the Light, to prevent mistaking one Row
for the other. Nor will there, in this Case, be room for almost any
Uncertainty, since even in Cloudy Weather, as much as the Wind carries away the
Sound of any one, so much will it usually bring the Sound of another.

(4.) If it be any where necessary, Masts may be Erected upon Hollow Empty
Vessels, with White Spheres at their Tops; and these Vessels may be fixed in
proper Places, at equal Distances between the Hulls, for the more sure guiding
the Ships in Places of Danger. And since from the Top of any Mast that is 88
Feet High, the Top of another as high may be discovered at the Distance of 20
Miles, there will hardly be occasion for more of these Vessels any where than
one every 120 Miles: Nor will these Masts and Vessels be any Annual Charges at
all.

(5.) Besides the great Guns, and their solemn Explosions, In proper Places, at
several Havens, where there is any Danger at the Entrance of Ships, as well as
at other convenient Promontories jetting out into the Sea, a Rocket may be
thrown up from the Top of a Neighboring Steeple, or Hill, or the like most
elevated Place every Midnight, for the Seamens better Direction and Security.

(6.) Signals of all Sorts may be given by this Method, by mutual Agreement. As
suppose in Storms we would know which way, and how strong the Wind is at the
nearest Explosion, etc. Ships may thus give Signals of Distress to the Hulls,
or to one another. The News of great Events may be also this way carried very
soon over the Sea; especially, if any Ships were placed within Sight and
Hearing of each others Signals, as a Fleet may sail in Times of Peace, etc. In
short, no one knows how far this Method of Communication by these Kinds of
Signals may be improved; and how great a Convenience may hence arise to the
several Parts of the Globe, especially in the Way of Trade and Commerce; and
even for the Propagation of Knowledge both Divine and Human throughout the
World.

(7.) If in any clear Night a sufficient Number of such Explosions were made at
proper Distances in any Country, and conveyed in order from one to another; so
that the Second Gun were fired when the Light of the First was seen, or
otherwise; with the Observation of the exact apparent Times when they were
made, when the Light was seen, what Angle, or how long that Light was above the
Horizon, and what Azimuth it had; both the Longitude and Latitude, as well as
the Distance and Position of all these Places, might by this means be readily
determined at Land; especially if the Experiments were repeated several times,
and were compared one with another. And by the same Observations every where,
the Longitude and Latitude, Distance and Position, of all other Neighboring
Places from those, and so from another, might be readily determined also.

N.B. This Method of Survey is no hard Thing in Practice, even to those that
know little of the Mathematics: For any Right Angle, set by a Plummet or
Level, with Two Pins or Points, for the Eye and for the Object, does by the
Proportion of its Sides give the Angle above the Horizon; by the Angle its
Horizontal Side makes with the Meridian, it gives the Azimuth; and by the
Interval of Time between the Light and Sound, it gives the Distance of every
Place from that of Explosion, according to the Figure following. Where AB
represents the Horizontal Side of the Norma or Square, and BC the Perpendicular
Side; whose Proportion once given, as suppose 80 to 35, the Discovery of the
Angle of Elevation CAB is most easy, as here 23 38 Where also NS. represents
the Meridian Line lying from North to South; and the Angle SAB, suppose of 32
Degrees, 15 Minutes, represents the Azimuth, Eastward. We need not add that a
Plummet of 9^8 Inches long will vibrate half Seconds, for the Interval of Time
between the Light seen and the Sound heard. Nor is there, we think, any way yet
discovered of surveying Countries and Kingdoms that can compare with this,
either for Expedition, Certainty or Cheapness. A Specimen of which we hope soon
to give the World in an Actual Survey of Great Britain and Ireland, and their
Coasts hereby; if the Public please to give us Encouragement and Assistance
therein.

(8.) The way of casting a Shell 6440 Feet high is very easy: for the same
Force or Charge of Gunpowder that will cast any Shell 12880 Feet for its
utmost Random, at the Elevation of 45 Degrees, will certainly cast the same
Shell perpendicularly upward 6440 Feet, as we have already observed. And since
the time of this entire perpendicular Projection, or Ascent and Descent
together, is 40, or some very small Matter more; on Account of the Resistance
of the Air; We have another sure Way of Adjusting the same Projection to that
Height; viz. by observing what Quantity of Powder will cast the Shell high
enough to stay very little above 40 in the Air, before it falls to the Ground.

(9.) This Method of firing Powder, or other combustible Matter, at, or very
near the utmost Height of 6440 Feet, may be well enough put in practice, even
though some considerable Error should be committed in the adjusting the Fusee to
give Fire in 20. Since the Mistake of even a Fifth Part, or Four entire
Seconds, in that Case, would produce but an Error of the 25th Part of the whole
Altitude: and the Mistake of a Tenth Part, or Two Seconds, would occasion an
Alteration of no more than the Hundredth Part thereof. This is evident, because
this Time belongs to the highest Part of the Projectils Motion, which is the
slowest: And because the Lines described by all Ascending and Descending Bodies
are still in a Duplicate Proportion of the Times of such their Ascent and
Descent.

(10.) If one or more Rows of such Hulls were laid in the same or Equidistant
Meridians, Southward or otherways, Ships might with greater Safety than
formerly go to discover those Parts of the Globe which are hitherto
undiscovered. Nor can we at present guess what Advantages may thereby accrue to
the Parts of the World already discovered.

(11.) Every one of these Hulls may be Places of Observation as to the
Variation of the Needle, to the Currents, to the Soil, the Fowls, the Fishes,
and other Phenomenon of the several Places where they are fixed; and an
excellent Means of keeping up a mutual Correspondence between the several Parts
of the Globe, for all useful Purposes whatsoever.

(12.) As this Method ought to be put in Practice by the Consent of all Trading
Nations; so ought every one of the Hulls employed therein to have a legal
Protection from them all; And it ought to be a great Crime with every one of
them, if any other Ships either injure them, or endeavor to imitate their
Explosions, for the Amusement and Deception of any.

(13.) Since the Charges of the Powder for each Gun will be very small; since
the Shells and their Contents come to no great Price neither; since the Persons
employed in the Hulls may be in part taken out of such Places where they are
maintained at the Public Charge already; and so will require only some
Additional Rewards, or Future Privileges for such their Service; And since the
Land-Explosions, which will be much the most numerous, will be withal much the
cheapest; It will appear, upon the Whole, that the Annual or Constant Expenses
of this Method will be comparatively very small and inconsiderable: especially
if they are, as they ought to be, equally distributed among the several Trading
Nations of the World.

The Advantages of this Method.
(1.) THIS Method requires no Depth of Astronomy, no Nicety in Instruments, and
but seldom any Celestial Observations at all, either as to the Latitude, or the
Hour at the Ship; and so is to even the common Sailors the most Practicable.
(2.) It does generally determine the very Place of the Ship, both as to
Longitude and Latitude at once, and so is the most Compendious. (3.) It does
generally determine the very Place to a few Miles, at the farthest; and so is
the most Accurate. (4.) It affords Help even in Cloudy and Foggy Weather, when
no Celestial Observations can be made, and the Latitude it self cannot be
otherwise found, and so is the most General. (5.) It will frequently afford a
double Observation Two successive Nights, from the same Hull to the same Ship,
and so is the most secure. (6.) It will commonly afford a double way of
Observation at the same time, by the Eye and by the Ear, which will confirm or
correct one another; and so is the most certain. (7.) The more inaccurate
Branch, by the Sound, is not only more universal than the other; but is also
much more exact than any Method formerly discovered: So that in the very worst
Circumstances this way is certainly the very best. (8.) It is the most
undoubted and exact where there is the greatest Want and Danger: And if it
should at all be deficient, it is there only where there is no Danger, and
hardly any occasion for knowing the Longitude, as has been showed already. So
that on all Accounts it is plainly the most Useful and Advantageous.
APPENDIX.
IT is farther humbly proposed to the Learned, Whether it may not be proper for
all Nations, upon this Occasion, to agree upon one first Meridian, or beginning
of Longitude, for the common Benefit of Geography? And whether it may not be
proper, in that Case, to fix it to the Pike of Tenariff, as the most noted
Place already; and as the Place whence the Highest and most generally useful
Explosion must in this Method be made every Midnight continually for the
Discovery of the Longitude it self?


