Mr. MAITLAND'S ACCOUNT OF INOCULATING THE SMALL POX Vindicated, From Dr.
WAGSTAFFE's Misrepresentations of that PRACTICE; with some Remarks on Mr.
MASSEY's Sermon.

The Second Edition.

To which is added, His First ACCOUNT of Inoculating the SMALL POX.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by J. PEELE, at Lock's Head in Paternoster-Row. 1722.

TO THE HONORED Sir HANS SLOAN, Bart. PRESIDENT Of the College of PHYSICIANS,
etc.
PERMIT Me, Honored SIR, to Inscribe these few Sheets to you. They are written
in Vindication of the Practice of Inoculating the SMALL POX.

Your known Candor and Experience encourage me to submit them to your Censure,
with Regard not only to the Safety of the Method; but likewise to the Truth of
the Facts here contested. I am under great and many Obligations,

Honored Sir, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, CHARLES MAITLAND.

Mr. MAITLAND's Account of INOCULATING THE Small Pox Vindicated, etc.
I Am very Sensible of the Respect that is due to the Profession, and Character
of the Author of the Letter against Inoculating the Small Pox; but am no less
sensible of the Obligation I lie under to vindicate my own Reputation, which a
violent Fit of Sickness has hitherto hindered me from doing. And I can do it
with the more Freedom, because I am conscious to my self, that I began this
Practice in England with the same View to the Public Good, with which, I hope,
the Learned Author condemns it. I must take the Liberty to say, that allowing
the Doctor's Abilities to be as great as possible in his own Profession, he
seems not quite so well qualified to write upon this Subject; because of the
Narrowness of his Experience (as far as appears by his Letter) and his partial
Credulity, or Incredulity in Matters of Fact, which he takes from others; and
lastly, because of strong Prejudices, which impose upon his most excellent
Understanding; and draw him into Reasonings, which either are inconsequential,
or conclude strongly for the Practice of Inoculation, which they are brought to
overturn. All these, I believe, will appear very plain to any Impartial Reader,
in the following Animadversions, in which I will endeavor to be as short as
the Subject will allow.

The Letter pretends to be an Admonition to Physicians not to meddle in this
Practice of Inoculation, 'till they are better ascertained, by Experience, of
the Success of it: At the same Time, it is a most warm Dissuasive, not only to
Physicians, but to all Sorts of People, not to practice it at all; and
consequently, to deprive them of all Possibility of coming by Experience. Would
it not found somewhat absurd, if any one should say to a young Physician, Pray,
Sir, don't Practice 'till you have Experience? But it is still more so in this
Case, because in a Practice that is entirely to be laid aside, you can neither
have the Benefit of your own, nor other Peoples Experience.

As to Physicians meddling with this Practice of Inoculation, I can only say,
it may favor too much of Novelty to be bigotly zealous for it; and too much of
a Faculty-Interest to be so violent against it. Physicians cannot ingraft
People against their own, or their Parents Consent; and a Physician would be
out of his Duty, who should persuade them to it contrary to their Inclinations:
On the other Hand, If a Person, from the Experience of the Fatality of the
Small Pox in general, or in his own Family in particular, should resolve to
ingraft his Child, any Physician, who should dissuade him from it, might, in a
great measure, be chargeable with the fatal Consequences of the Neglect of a
Method, which the Parent had proposed, as the only Moans to save his Child's
Life: And he would be still as much to blame, if when the Parent had resolved
to ingraft his Child, he should refuse to attend him. It is very common with
Parents, not only to leave their Children in Houses infected with the Small
Pox, but to bring them into the Room, where their Brethren or Sisters lie ill
of them; and a Parent who does so, conveys the Infection to his Child as
deliberately, and according to the Doctor, certainly more than he, who orders
him to be Inoculated. Would it not then be equally, impertinent in the
Physician to deny his Attendance in either Case?

I must put the Doctor in Mind, that there are very few of the most useful
Discoveries in Physic, that have not been strenuously opposed by many of the
Faculty upon their first Appearance. There is extant a Decree of the College of
Physicians at Paris, against the Use of Antimonial Vomits: It were easy to
assign many Instances of the like Nature.

As the Doctor is surpised, that an Experiment, practiced only by a few
ignorant Women, amongst an illiterate and unthinking People, should on a
Sudden, and upon a slender Experience, so far obtain in one of the Politest
Nations in the World, as to be received into the Royal Palace. I hope he has
not forgot, that the Practice of Curing Intermitting Fevers by the BARK, was
introduced of a Sudden, by a barbarous Indian, if not into the Royal Family,
into the Family of a Viceroy; and thence transmitted to us.

Page 7.] The Blood of the English if we speak of it as National, is the
Product of the richest Diet, etc. Ergo, to bring 'em to a spare Diet before
they have the Small Pox, must be extremely dangerous and hurtful. This must be
the Doctor's Conclusion: mine, I own, would be the direct contradictory. If the
Inflammatory State of the Blood, arising from the Richness of the Diet, makes
the Small Pox in England very mortal; That Practice, which either takes the
Advantage of a contrary State of the Blood, or by a Spare Diet introduces it,
must be beneficial.

Page 8.] The finest, the most Volatile, and indeed, Insensible Particles of
the Animal Juices, are the most penetrating, and consequently the most
contagious. And for the same Reason, the most noxious: Does it follow
therefore, To convey the Infection by the grosser and sensible Parts, must be
extremely unfit and dangerous? I confess, I should have inferred the contrary.

The Symptoms are more or less, and the Distemper appears in a greater, or a
less Degree, according to the State of the Blood at the Time of Infection.
Therefore the Practice of Inoculation is highly to be encouraged, because it
either finds, or puts the Blood into a good State, before the Infection; seems
to be a more natural Conclusion, than the contrary One.

Page 10.] If we could be assured, that the Distemper would not be equally
uncertain by Inoculation, according to the Nature of the Injected Matter, or
the Disposition of the Fluids, in the Person who receives it; so that it would
constantly prove of the mildest Kind, Inoculation would, no doubt, be a very
rational and useful Practice. The Doctor surely will not affirm, that a Person
Inoculated is equally uncertain of the Circumstances mentioned, with one who
catches the Small Pox by the common Way of Infection. First, He may be assured,
if the Inoculation takes Place, of the Time when he shall have the Small Pox.
Secondly, That he has not the Infection by the insensible Particles, which the
Doctor owns to be the most contagious; or which is near the same Thing, convey
the Contagion the strongest, Thirdly, He may be as sure, as his Operator is
careful, that he is infected by a favorable Kind. And, Fourthly, He may be
much more sure of the Disposition of his Fluids, than a Person who catches them
by Chance, after a Surfeit, or a Debauch: And after all this, he may be
assured, if he has not absolute Certainty, (which, I believe, one has hardly in
Blood-letting) that he has a much greater Probability to escape, which is
sufficient Ground for human Prudence to act upon: If the Doctor will deny those
Things, I think it is Folly to reason upon this Subject any longer: And if, as
the Doctor says, Inoculation may be a more uncertain Method to give the
Contagion, than that which Nature has pursued; it may be, notwithstanding that,
much more safe.

Page 11.] The very Choice that is made of a thick purulent Matter, to intermix
immediately with the Blood, seems a little repugnant to our Reason, since we
know, that the Particles have such a different Contexture, and such different
Powers to Attract. It may proceed from my Ignorance, or Dullness, but, I
confess, I do not easily apprehend the Meaning of this Sentence; Whether by the
Particles he means the Particles of purulent Matter, or the Particles of Blood;
or whether the Particles of purulent Matter have different attractive Powers,
from those of the Blood, is not obvious from the Construction of the Sentence.
I choose rather to understand him in the last Sense, because he has afterward
very sagaciously discovered, That the blended Particles of Blood with Blood,
may, in all Reason, be thought more likely to unite, and less liable to raise
Commotions. But it happens unluckily in the Case of Inoculation, the Design is
to raise a Commotion; and the purulent Matter, for the Reason mentioned by him,
is fittest for that Purpose; And his Observation, that purging Medicines
injected into the Blood will Purge, does not prove, that the Pus of the Small
Pox, mixed with the Blood, may not raise the Small Pox. What he says in this
Paragraph, as likewise in the following, concerning the Experiment of the
Mangey Dog, proves, that Pus is a more proper Vehicle to convey Infection than
Blood; I cannot find any more in it.

Page 13.] It never came into the Heads of the Practitioners abovementioned to
raise Distempers by Art in a human Body. Then I will be bold to say, it never
came into their Heads to practice Physic; which, considered in a true Light,
is founded upon that single Principle of Curing Natural, by raising Artificial
Diseases. What is Bleeding, but an artificial Haemorrhagy; Purging, but raising
an artificial Diarrhaea? Does the Vomiting produced by a Surfeit, and that
procured by a Medicine differ so much, as that the One must be called a
Disease, and the Other not? Are not Blisters, Issues, and Setons, artificial
(...) Imposthumations? I hope he has not forgot the of his great Master
Hippocrates. The Wounds and Amputations of Surgeons, differ only from
accidental Ones, by the Manner and Intention; Morbus est ille corporis status
qui functiones Animales laedit: And it may be likewise observed, that
Physicians produce those Diseases in their Patients often by Way of Prevention
as well as Cure; and in this they do nothing but imitate Nature, which often
attempts the Cure of one Disease by another.

Page 14.] His next Argument is taken from the fatal Consequences of this very
Matter it self returning into the Blood, in the very Height of the Small Pox,
where there seldom is a full and sufficient Discharge by the Skin, etc. One
would imagine, that the natural Inference from this, would be to the Advantage
of Inoculation; For if there are terrible Symptoms, which arise from Want of a
sufficient Discharge of the purulent Matter in the Small Pox; Inoculation,
which provides for such a Discharge, by artificial Out-lets, must needs be
useful; and seems more proper than the Blisters, which the Physicians apply on
that Occasion. As to the fatal Consequences arising for Want of a sufficient
Discharge upon the Skin, I am afraid the Case is quite different from what the
Doctor represents; for the more Matter is discharged upon the Skin, the more is
often returned into the Blood; witness the confluent Kind of Small Pox, where
the Discharge upon the Skin, as well as the Symptoms arising from the Return of
the Matter into the Blood, are both the greatest: And I believe it will be
found, the less the Discharge upon the Skin, the less will be the Danger from
these Symptoms. The Doctor says, That one may always observe in this artificial
Method (even where the Distemper is the fairest and most kindly) that the
Pustules scarce ever plump up to that Degree, or contain so laudable a Matter,
as they do in the natural Sort. Here is an odd Jumble of the Words always,
scarce ever: Suppose for scarce ever one put seldom, then the Sentence runs
thus; One may always observe the Pustules seldom plump up, etc. What happens
but seldom, happens sometimes; and to observe always That not to happen, which
happens sometimes, is odd, or oddly expressed. I would be glad to know how many
Cases the Doctor has observed, to frame this so general a Proposition upon; of
the contrary of which, Hundreds of Persons about this Town, who know the
Disease perfectly, have been Eyewitnesses.

Page 16.] The Doctor foresees some Inconvenience that must happen, from those
viscid Particles intermixing with the Blood, without undergoing the common
Alterations of Aliment. But they have that in common with the Volatile and most
Insensible Particles. But then they are viscid, and therefore, (according to
the Doctor's Reasoning) don't convey the Infection so strong: But they occasion
great Disorders; Not so great as the Insensible and Volatile Particles. At
last, they break through the Glands of the Skin: If only the small Quantity of
purulent Matter, that mixes with the Blood, break through the Pores of the Skin,
the Eruption, indeed, would be very small; But to cause an Eruption, is the
very Intention of the Operation; the Small Pox cannot be produced without it:
And if the Doctor still insists, that it is only like the Small Pox; all I can
say is, If he had been pleased to attend Multitudes of Cases of Inoculated
Persons, here and elsewhere in England, since this Practice began, he must have
been convinced, that the Eruptions, produced by Inoculation, are the Genuine
Small Pox. If his Arguments so far prevail, as to hinder any future
Inoculation, he must for ever continue in his Mistake; If the Patient recovers,
then it was only something like the Small Pox; If any one dies, then to be sure
it was the Small Pox caught by Inoculation, and of the worst Sort. In this
Paragraph it is no Small Pox; by and by, it is a Small Pox so bad, that it is
capable of spreading the Small Pox through a whole City; and an artificial Way
of depopulating a whole Country. This Way of Arguing is a very plain Proof of
the strong Prejudices the Doctor lies under; and that as he has taken up his
Opinion early, he is resolved to defend it obstinately.

Page 20.] The Inoculators are charged with Acting like Empirics, because they
are not ascertained of the different Doses for Children and Adults. There does
not seem to be any great Matter in this Nicety, by Experience, as it stands
hitherto; a small Quantity will communicate the Small Pox, and a greater has
been found not to do hurt in any one Instance. If the Inoculation is performed
by Incision, the different Apertures will answer that Intention: However, there
is a great Difference between recommending Caution, and forbidding the
Practice: It is still more strange to forbid the Practice, 'till that is
determined, which can only be found out by Practice. According to this
Principle, it had been impossible ever to have found out any Thing in Medicine;
for he that gave the first Dose of a Vomiting, or Purging Medicine, or of any
other, could never be sure of the proper Dose; nay farther, according to this
Doctrine, it is impossible to give any Body their first Dose of any Medicine:
For who can tell what is the proper Dose for any particular Person, there being
often Singularities in every one's Constitution: In all these Matters, Mankind
generally govern themselves by common Sense, and strong Probabilities; there
being no absolute Certainty in any human Affairs.

Page 25.] The Doctor returns to his former Point, that it is not the Genuine
Small Pox, and consequently no Security against that Disease. The Matters of
Fact I will answer by themselves; all I shall say at present is, that if the
Symptoms of the Ingrafted Small Pox are more mild, than those of the natural
Sort, I hope the Doctor will not bring that as an Objection against the
Practice. I believe the Patient, in this Case, has just as great Certainty for
not having the Small Pox again, as any other Person who has had them; which is
no absolute one. Those who are Infected by any Method, I believe, are much in
the same Condition, as to their Security from the Disease for the future; for
which, I will give the Doctor this one plain Proof, which is sufficient to
establish a moral Certainty. This Practice of Inoculation has been continued
for many Years in several Countries; if the Inoculated had been subject to
catch the Small Pox a second Time, something of this Kind must have happened;
and a very few Instances of this, must have put an End to the whole Practice:
For can any one imagine, that People in their Senses would have continued a
troublesome Experiment, which was not effectual for the Purpose for which it
was designed? I will take the Freedom to say, that this single Reflection is a
stronger Proof of this Point, than all the Doctor's Doubts and Suggestions, who
knows nothing to the contrary; as I shall show by and by. May it not at least
be advisable to allow a Truce in the Dispute, 'till an uncontested Case of
that Kind happens?

Page 28.] But, Innoculation does not always take Place and produce the
Disease: is Therefore the Practice to be left off? There are some Persons, who
by a Speciality of their Constitutions, seem hardly susceptible of the
Distemper; and others, who have had the Disease, but it has been mistaken, or
forgot. They go farther in Turkey, and affirm, that the very running Sores are a
Security against the Small Pox. There may be, indeed, a strong Presumption,
that Persons, who have had so severe a Trial as Inoculation, may not be
susceptible of the Distemper. Besides, there are several Incidents in
performing the Operation, which may not be carefully attended to; if the
Patient has not the Small Pox, there is little Hurt done. There are some, whom
a very strong Dose of Physic will not purge: What then? must we never
afterward give a Purge?

If the Doctor's Aphorism, laid down, Page 36, That an Experiment, to make it
useful, always must be nearly uniform; there must be no such Thing as the
Practice of Physic; unless by the Word nearly he allows a very great Latitude.

I cannot allow it as a solid Argument against Inoculation, that the French and
Italians have not begun it; no more, than that the House of Bourbon has never
been Inoculated. Were the Doctor's Letter published in Italian too, as it is in
very elegant French, both Nations, to be sure, will be sufficiently frightened
from ever attempting this Practice: And to make the Antidote still more
universal, let us have it in Sclavonic and High Dutch, Welsh and Irish also.

What the Doctor says, Page 44, of the Attention that is to be given to the
natural Weaknesses of the Constitutions of the Persons Inoculated, is a very
proper Caution; and perhaps Miscarriages, if any such there be, may be owing to
the Neglect of it. But, as I hinted before, if the least ill Success, even in
the most innocent Branches of the Practice of Physic, arising from Want of
Care, or Skill, should be a perpetual Bar to the Repitition of them, People
must leave off to Purge, Vomit, Bleed, or even to cut Corns, of which Operation
several die in a Year within the Bills of Mortality.

Page 45.] But it is possible, and even probable, the Matter of the Small Pox
may communicate the Diseases of the People from which it is taken. This is
hard! The Doctor will scarcely allow, that the Matter of the Small Pox will
communicate the Small Pox; but it is probable, that it will communicate any
other Disease. Que vive Thomas Diaphoinus, il n'a Jamais ete vaincu en dispute!
How are we sure, that the Aliment, or Drugs, both for External and Internal
Uses, don't communicate the Diseases; nay, the very natural Qualities of those
Animals from which they are taken? I think, indeed, the Election of wholesome
Subjects to Inoculate from, is a proper Caution; but the Doctor demands
absolute Certainty, which cannot be found in any human Affair, and less still
in any Medical or Chyrurgical Practice. Mankind in all those Matters govern
themselves by the strongest Probabilities; and that these are on the Side of
Inoculation, I shall plainly demonstrate.

Page 51.] The Doctor's Argument from the jarring Opinions of the Innoculators;
if all he says were true, is just as strong against the Practice of Physic in
General: For if no Body was to take any Medicine 'till Doctors cease to differ,
I believe the Faculty would starve: May we not with more Truth affirm, that the
Anti-inoculators (a Word more sonorous, and longer by two Syllables than that
of Inoculators) are as inconsistent and changeable in their Opinions? One while
they asserted, that it was impossible to give the Small Pox by this Method;
when Experience had convinced them, some of 'em at least, of the Untenableness
of this Doctrine; then they allowed, if it proved mortal, that it was the Small
Pox; if they escaped, to be sure they would have them again; If it was a
favorable Sort, then there was some inveterate Distemper transplanted with it;
If any Boils or Imposthumations appeared at the going off of the Disease, those
were the Effect of the Inoculation, not the Consequence of the Small Pox in
General, or of the Constitution of the Patient. These are certainly, not the
Reasonings of ingenious and inquisitive Philosophers, but the Cavils of
interested Disputants; and it would be ridiculous, for any Man to be determined
by the jarring Opinions, either of the one Side or the other.

There is nothing material in the Way of Argumentation, 'till we come to Page
62. There this Practice is condemned, as it tends to propagate and continue an
Infection in any Place: Here again it is the Small Pox; else why should it
spread the Small Pox? I answer, if it be true, that the Generality of Mankind
have the Small Pox; if they are rare in some Years, they must be rise in
others; because a new Stock of Subjects susceptible of the Distemper is
produced; and the Operation of this Distemper upon the Mass of Mankind in any
particular Place, is nearly uniform. When this general Run of the Small Pox
happens; I take it to be indifferent to the Mass of the Inhabitants of any
Place in general, except in this one particular, that when the Disease is
produced by a bad Constitution of Air, as it is most Epidemical, so it is then
most mortal. Now if this Distemper should happen to be propagated by an
artificial Method in a favorable Season, would not this be rather an Advantage
to Mankind than otherwise? For example, The Doctor alleges that hardly one of
a hundred has died of the natural Sort this Year; would it not then have been
highly profitable to Mankind, that a general Run of the Small Pox had happened
in so favorable a Season; and this would still operate more strongly for the
Benefit of Mankind, if not only the Season, but the Method of Propagation had
ten to one of odds of producing a mild Sort. So that this Argument of the
Doctor's has the Misfortune, with a great many of the rest, to prove the
Contradictory of his Conclusion: But without taking the Advantage of the
Doctor's hardy Assertion, that hardly one of a hundred have died this Year of
the Small Pox: I will examine it a little by Numbers. I have not all the Bills
of Mortality by me, but by a small Specimen, the Account stands thus:

Died of all Diseases. Died of the Small Pox. 1707. 21600 1707. 1078 21291 1687
21800 1024 24620 3138 19833 0915 21198 1943 21057 1614 26569 2810 22232 1057
24436 2427 23446 2211 1718. 26523 1718. 1884 274605 21788

By which it appears that the single Branch of Mortality occasioned by the
Small Pox is some Years 1/^ and in a Circle of twelve Years about 1/12 of the
whole Mortality in general; For 21,788 is near 1/12 of 274,615. During this
Term of Years, London wanted an Addition of near 22000 People yearly to keep it
equally full. If all Mankind had the Small Pox, then 22000 People, one Year
with another had it; of which 1/12 died; If one half of Mankind had the Small
Pox, then 1 out of 6, who had the Distemper, died of it. Which, by the way,
shows the Doctor to be out in his Calculation; for if only 1000 die this Year,
as perhaps may appear by the Bills, 100,000 must have been sick of the
Distemper, to make his Assertion true, that one only of a hundred died: If he
means it only of Children, it is a strong Argument for Inoculation, because it
allows that to be a favorable Age.

By the Bills of Mortality of Breslaw it appears, that the Mass of Mankind lose
above 25 per Cent, before they are a Year old; that is, of a 100 that are born,
more than 25 die that first Year: I may say with great Probability that not 1/9
of those have the Small Pox at all; but die of other Diseases; and that in the
Account, as it stands before us 8 of 9 of Infants may be reckoned neither
Subjects of the Distemper, nor of this Practice, but as it were non-Entities.
Therefore out of the 22000 People, the yearly Recruits of London
abovementioned, substracting 4000, there remains 18000, of which yearly there
died above 1800 of the Small Pox; that is, 1/^: So that the Small Pox may be
reckoned to cut off 1/^ of Mankind above the Age of one Year. I wish the World
is not malicious enough to say, that Physicians (like the Clergy) are now
struggling for their Tenths. But to proceed, If, as I said, all Mankind above a
Year old have the Distemper, I out of 10 dies of it; If one half, then 1 out of
5, which have the Distemper the natural way, dies of it: If of Mankind have the
Small Pox once in their Life, then of them 2 out of 15 die: If 5/6, then 3 out
of 25, which have the Distemper, die of it. According to D. Nettleton's
Calculation; out of 1245 who had the natural Small Pox in some Neighboring
Towns in Yorkshire there died 270, which is about 22 out of a hundred. As to
the prudential Part of Inoculation, it is all one whether a greater or lesser
Number have the Small Pox; for the Chance of not dying by the Small Pox the
natural Way, is made up of the Chance of escaping the Distemper, and that of
escaping in the Distemper. If of Mankind have the Distemper, it is of or 1/^*
If ^/4 of Mankind have the Distemper, then it is x ^/^ or 6/^ or 1/^ etc. Still
all Mankind must be considered with the Seeds of a Distemper within them which
has the Chance of 1 to 9 to cut them, off. Then surely they don't merit such
hard Names, of Homicides and Spreaders of Infection, who do but attempt to
lessen the Dread and Danger of this terrible Pestilence.

By the Accounts of the Inoculation in England and the Plantations, though it is
an early Practice, and has not been managed with due Care and Circumspection;
out of about 500 on whom it has been performed, the Enemies of the Practice
have not produced the Names of above 3 Persons that have died; allowing their
Deaths chargeable on this Practice, which I believe is not in Fact true: A
Practice which brings the Mortality of the Small Pox from one in ten to one in
a hundred, if it obtained universally would save to the City of London at least
1500 People yearly; and the same Odds would be a sufficient prudential Motive
to any private Person to proceed upon, abstracting from the more occult and
abstruse Causes which seem to favor this Operation. It is a self evident
Proposition, that a Person who receives the Infection by Inoculation, has a
much fairer Chance for his Life, than he who takes it the natural Way; unless
it can be affirmed, that the having the Election of all the Circomstances of
the Disease, is of no manner of Advantage. For Example, it must be of some
Benefit, to know that one is to have the Distemper nine or ten Days before it
comes; rather than to be surprised, or perhaps mistaken in it. To have it at an
Age when it is not so mortal: To take it when the Body is in a temperate and
cool State, rather than in a contrary one: When the Constitution of the Air is
favorable, rather than malignant: After a cool Diet and other due
Preparations, rather than after a Surfeit or a drunken Bout. For if the
principal Strokes toward the Cure, are in the Regimen, in the Beginning of a
Distemper; it must be still more so, in a Regimen before it begins. If the
Doctor will deny these Truths, I have done. But if the having all the
Circumstances abovementioned in one's Power be of some Advantage, then the
Practice of Inoculation cannot be hurtful but beneficial to Mankind in
general: Then why must an Experiment already practiced with Success in another
Country, that bids fair to save the Lives of Multitudes, be entirely laid aside
and crushed in the Bud? Cannot the learned Physicians, who so zealously oppose
it, have a little Patience, and Time will clear up many Things in it, which
perhaps may be now doubtful? Therefore since this Practice cannot be hurtful
but beneficial to Mankind in general, it ought not to be discouraged.

As to the Inconsistencies and Mistakes, the Doctor is pleased to charge me
withal: I shall always be so ingenuous as to own such, as my Inadvertency or
Want of Experience have subjected me to. What I wrote was according to the best
Information or Experience I had at that Time. General Propositions, in
practical Matters, are not to be understood in the Strictness of a Logical
Universality. The Symptoms from which I exempted the Inoculated Small Pox, are
to be understood in a Comparative Sense, with regard to those of the natural
Sort; the Word usual will justify this Meaning, in which any Reader, not quite
Captious, will interpret them. If with all these Restrictions I cannot be
favorably understood, I beg Pardon; and as I said before, I shall be always
willing to recant any Mistake. But as on the one hand, I study to keep myself
free from Prejudices, so as to be susceptible of any future Conviction, which
may arise from Experience; so I would not submit a Point already established,
to the silly Cavils of those who have none.

I am sure, I am not mistaken in the Account of the Inoculation at Newgate; but
the Doctor is. I referr the Reader to my printed Journal; whereby it appears,
that the Operation was fairly and equally performed on all: And I can with
great Truth, declare, that I had no Intention to make any Difference in the
Incisions; nor was there, indeed, any made. The Doctor not having seen Evans,
the Man who had had the Small Pox before, till next Day, when they were partly
healed, this might occasion his Mistake. Nor was the Matter taken from a
violent Flux-kind, but from a full distinct Coherent kind, and at the proper
Time. Mrs. Tompions Boil (as he call's it) on her Arm; was not the same from
the first Day of the Eruption; nor the only one she had: But was a fair,
regular Pustule of the Small Pox, of which also she had others, if he had been
pleased to examine. Alcock, who had the Goal-Distemper, had also 60 Pustules,
at least, of the Genuine Small Pox; with a gentle Fever before the Eruption. As
to all of them, having had but few Eruptions; I hope, that is no Objection
against the Practice. And as to the Time and Manner of their Pustules going
off; they were much the same, as in the gentler Sort of Small Pox: Only that
Alcock opening his with a Pin, made them fall off sooner. The Doctor might have
taken Notice, that Eliz. Harrison, who had them as gently, at least, as any of
them; has been employed since in Nursing above 20 People in the Small Pox, and
never has caught them: Which any impartial Person will judge to be a better
Proof of the Genuinness of the Distemper, than all his Observations can evince
to the contrary.

As to Mr. H^n's Case, it is true. But the Inference is only, that there was
one Person, on whom the Inoculation did not take place. I hope the Doctor has
not forgot that he owned to me that Mr. Colt's Children had the true Small Pox;
though their Case differed in nothing from those in Newgate; but in the Degrees
of the Distemper.

As to the Experiment in St. Thomas's Hospital, after two vastly large
Incisions, and an immoderate Quantity of the Matter applay'd; three Days and
Nights Confinement of the Patient to his Bed, without opening his Bandage, a
warm Regimen, in a hot Season; I visited him, (to know the Truth of the Noise
that was made) on the sixth Day after the Operation, and saw no Eruptions, nor
had he any; nor were his Incisions digested: I took the Freedom to ask Doctor
Wadsworth then present, whether the Sores (pointing at them) were like those he
saw at Newgate? And he fairly owned, he could not say they were. I again saw
this Patient a Week after, but still no Eruption; If any Eruptions happened
between these Times, they could not be the Small Pox: And I believe, none who
saw and attended both Experiments, can truly say, they were like those in
Newgate.

I own that it seemed probable that the six Persons in Mr. Batt's Family might
have caught the Small Pox of the Girl that was Inoculated; but it is well
known that the Small Pox were rife not only at Hertford, but in several
Villages round it, many Months before any Person was Inoculated there: Witness
Mr. Dobb's House in Christ's Hospital Buildings, where he himself died of the
worst Sort with Purples; and his Children had it. Some other Families there,
and particularly Mrs. Moss's, where the abovenamed Elizabeth Harrison,
Inoculated in Newgate, attended several Persons under it, to prove whether she
would catch the Distemper by Infection; Both Latin Boarding-Schools; Mr.
Stout's and Mr. Loyd's Families; Mr. John Dimsdale's Coachman and his Wise; and
Mr. Santoon's Maidservant, who was brought to the same House, and died of the
Confluent kind of the Small Pox; I took Matter from the said Coachman to
Inoculate Mr. Batt's Daughter in the Country Farm House, the first Ingrafted in
that Country. After this I took Matter also from Mr. Stout's Maidservant to
Inoculate Mrs Heath's two Sons; which were all I Inoculated in that Town.
Besides all these there were a great many more, whose Names I cannot at present
call to mind both in Town and Country about it, who had the Small Pox, and
several died of it, the Summer before I began this Practice: These are Matters
of Fact, which the Doctor's Author cannot disprove. To charge then the
Spreading the Infection and the Consequences of it, (...) that Town, upon two
single Boys who were Inoculated in a Court in a manner separated from all the
rest of the Town, which was fuller of the Small Pox before than after the
Inoculation, is not agreeable to that Ingenuity which the Doctor seems to
demand of his Adversaries.

The Case of Mr. De Grave's Daughter which fills up three or four Pages in the
Letter, and upon which the Doctor lays the Foundation of his Hypothesis, the
Reader may please to take from her Father's own Words in his Letter annexed.
From which it appears that the Girl had the Small Pox but once, of the
favorable kind; and in all Probability by Inoculation. So far the Case is
singular, that it did not take place till eleven Weeks after the Operation; and
until the Blood was put into a Ferment by violent Motion. Here the Doctor
triumphs in his Dilemma, Either she had, or she had not the Small Pox by
Inoculation; If the first, then it is plain Inoculation is no preventive of the
Disease; If the second, the Experiment is good for nothing. I think in this way
of Argumentation, to make it conclusive, there ought to be a perfect
Enumeration; but here is a Third Case, and the real one, not enumerated; which
is, that the Girl had the Small Pox, and that but once, by Inoculation; though
not at the same Time when the Doctor lays the Scene of his Dilemma. But to
consider the Second Branch; allowing that this Small Pox was the natural Sort,
and not produced by Inoculation, of which, I think, the contrary is plain; sure
it is a strange Inserence to say, that because Inoculation has not taken Effect
in one Subject, it is therefore good for nothing. The Doctor's excellent
Judgment will instruct him to reason with more Temper and Solidity in other
Matters of his Profession; and not make Use of his Aphorism, That one Instance
is as good as a thousand in Matters of Experience. What the Doctor says of his
Fears of a great Class of Hypothetical Diseases, is all vanished, and the Girl
is very well. I refer the Doctor upon this Head of the Preventive Power of
Inoculation, to the Letter which he lays so much Stress upon, from Boston;
where his Ally in this Dispute owns, That not one of the Inoculated (being
about three Hundred) during the Space of five or six Months, in a general Run
of the Small Pox, has had the Small Pox the natural Way, as far as we know: But
of this more afterward.

As for his second Story of Captain Hussart, it requires only a bare Reading to
make it ridiculous; For no unprejudiced Person of common Sense can believe that
one, after having been Inoculated twice without any Effect, would try it a
third Time: But after a third Time, to try it a fourth, fifth, and sixth Time,
passes all Degrees of Credibility. But it seems this Captain was not very
certain, whether it was five or six Times; one Inoculation had quite slipped out
of his Memory: he wanted one Quality, which the Proverb demands in some Sort of
People. Since the Doctor can give Credit to this Story of Captain (...) and at
the same Time question the (...) what is said by eminent Physicians, who (...)
from their own and other Peoples Observations on the Spot, where Inoculation is
practiced daily; I appeal to my Readers, if I may not with Justice tax him of
being partially Credulous or Incredulous, as Facts make for or against his
Purpose. And with all due Respect to the Senate of Boston, I question whether a
Bill, or an Hypothesis, founded upon such a Fact, is more extraordinary. But
allowing it to be true, what is the Inference? That a Person, who could not
catch the Small Pox by Inoculation, had them the natural Way: If that were
granted, will it prove, that one who has the Small Pox by Inoculation, may
afterward have them the natural Way? If upon the same Authority, the Doctor
can believe the Story of the Muscovite Dragoon, or the Inoculated Soldiers in
the French Army; I wish him much Joy. I promise him I will not (like the Gentry
who went in quest of St. Alban's Trough) ride twenty Miles to be able to
disprove it. I should be glad to know, which Way the Doctor supports so bold an
Assertion, That [Page 17] by the Account Dr. Nettleton gives, as also by the
best Observation upon those who have been Inoculated in this City, scarcely a
fourth Part of them have had a true and genuine Small Pox; I have read over
carefully Dr. Nettleton's Account, contained in his Letters printed in the
Transactions of the Royal Society, No 370; and for my Life I cannot find any
Thing to justify this Assertion; on the contrary he says, We have not yet
found, that ever any had the Distemper twice, neither is there any Reason to
suppose it possible; there being no Difference that can be observed betwixt the
natural and artificial Sort, (if we may be allowed to call them so) but only
that in the latter the Pustules are commonly fewer in Number; and all the rest
of the Symptoms are in the same Proportion more favorable. I hope there is at
least as much Credit due to an ingenious Practitioner, who writes from a very
extended Experience, as to one who writes for the most Part by Hearsay.

As to those who have been Inoculated in London; to oppose my own, and other
Persons Testimony from ocular Inspection, against his, who talks by Report, may
seem perhaps too great Presumption. I therefore challenge the Doctor to name
the Cases and Authorities whereby he supports such a wild Assertion.

As to Mr. Sp^r's Case, I will not preoccupy my Reader with any Reflection; but
refer him to the Matter of Fact here subjoined, as it is testified by the
Surgeon and Apothecaries that attended him.

As to the Case of Lord B^ts's Servant, I refer to the Account subjoined.

He is just as much misinformed of the Case of Lord F^s's Son, who had a
favorable Sort of Small Pox, and was in no Danger of his Life; as the
Physician who attended him will readily own.

As to the unfortunate Accidents which have happened to some of the First Rank
by this Ingrafting Method; if I guess right who he means, one of them is
perfectly well without any unfortunate Accident; and the Imposthumation, which
had no Dependence nor Communication with the Incision, is perfectly cured
without any Exfoliation of the Bone, or any Hectic Fever. But it is hard to
charge the common Accidents of the Small Pox in general, upon this Method in
particular.

It is no less a Misinformation, that the Children of a Nobleman, understood in
his Letter, were Ingrafted from a bad Sort of Small Pox. As to what he says of
the poorer Sort of People of Scotland, running about with the Small Pox upon
them, without either Shoes or Stockings; the Doctor seems here to intend a
Reflection, but I choose to avoid all Reflections, either National or
Domestic. I believe the People of England, as well as those of Scotland, for
the most Part, neither wear Shoes nor Stockings in the Small Pox: As to their
Custom or Ability of running about, they are much in the same Condition, as
they are here; some have them favorably, some otherwise, and every one has
Conveniences and Helps according to their Circumstances.

As for the three Letters from Boston in New England, printed by Way of
Appendix to the Doctor's, It might suffice to say, that they are only a severe,
and perhaps a just Invective, against the Clergy and others, for meddling in
this Branch of the Physicians Practice: Upon which Encroachment, some of the
Faculty invoke the Vengeance of the Civil Magistrate; and threaten the
Offenders, as Poisoners and Spreaders of Infection, with Prisons and Gibbet's:
And if the Laws in being are somewhat deficient, modestly call, as some others
have done, upon the Legislature for new Ones. This general Consideration is
sufficient to invalidate the Credit of any Thing that is said by a Person so
strongly interested: But so great is the Force of Truth, that it has extorted
enough from this partial Complainant to justify the Practice, which he so
bitterly inveighs against. For first he owns, that the whole Practice of
Inoculation was managed by unskillful Persons; and that many who died or
suffered much under Inoculation, if they had had better Management, might have
had better Fate. That the Practitioners neglected as trivial both the
Advantages of a suitable Season, and a well prepared Body; That they Inoculated
all Ages and Constitutions from the Beginning; That they Inoculated Women with
Child, and Hysterical people: And after all, They practiced it at first with
indifferent good Success: That it had been practiced, since the Middle of June
to the Date of his Letter, Dec. 20. upon above two hundred Subjects with
various Succcess. He tells you in his second Letter, That they had at that Time
the Experience of two or three Hundred Inoculated: And after all this, in all
his three Letters, he gives you only two Letters of the Name of one Inoculated
Person who died, Mrs. D^l. He says at Random, that others died of it, whom Time
may bring to Light. Were the Bodies of those Inoculated Persons hid under
Dunghills? Had they not Christian Burial? It is wondrous strange, that in a
Place, where the Practitioners in Physic and the Magistrates both were against
Inoculation, he could not come at the Knowledge of a Mortal Case but one, the
Inoculated Mrs. D^l, who is trump'd up upon all Occasions: He says, many of the
Inoculated suffer much, Page 2. What then? A Person that has the Small Pox,
even in the gentlest Sort, must suffer, And at last, Page 10, he ingenuously
acknowledges, That the Small Pox (acquired by Inoculation) is frequently more
favorable than in the common Way, and not altogether so mortal.

Secondly, That not one of the Inoculated during the Space of five or six
Months has had the Small Pox in the natural Way, so far as we know; that is, of
about three hundred People Inoculated, some of which, no doubt, had only those
Eruptions, which they will not allow to be the genuine Small Pox; In a Time,
when the whole Town and Country was an Hospital of People sick of the
Distemper, and few Persons exempt from its Rage, for the Space of five or six
Months, not so much as one had the Small Pox, for ought they knew: I say, if
such a Case had happened, it is not probable it could have been concealed; and
that this Acknowledgment from one, who is so zealous an Enemy to the Practice,
is a stronger Proof of the Efficacy of it, for the Purpose intended, than all
the Ifs and May-be's of this or any other Letter-Writer.

It had been fair in this Gentleman to have given in the Numbers that died of
the natural Sort of Small Pox, during that Season; or to have stated the Case
fairly between two or three Hundred sick of the natural Sort, and as many of
the Inoculated Kind, both under the Care and Direction of unskillful and
unexperienced People: And then, perhaps, as in the Inoculated Kind, he could
instance, by Name, only One that died; In the other Sort he would have been
puzzled to find the Names of those who escaped.

But to this he will say, that the Inoculated Small Pox propagated the
Mortality of the natural Sort. There is a full Answer given to this Objection
of spreading Infection before. I think it is hard to exclude Men from the Means
of securing themselves from a great Pestilence, upon a mere Suggestion: The
Influence of the natural Small Pox upon Mankind, in any Place, in a Circle of
Years, may be affirmed to be uniform with strong Probability; and if the Air of
any Place, in a contagious Season, is such, as renders the Distemper very
mortal, it is a strong Motive for People to take the Advantage of a good
Season, and secure themselves in Time from a Plague, which is so likely to
destroy them: And if Prudence only were to be consulted, it would perhaps be
much more the Duty of the Legislature to order, than to forbid this Practice.
And no doubt, according to the Acknowledgment of the Enemies of this Practice,
they would, by this Method, diminish the Mortality, and increase the Number of
their People; and the Magistrate is forced often upon more arbitrary
Proceedings in any Pestilence: But as that would seem too great an Encroachment
upon the natural Rights of Mankind, I should not approve of it. But on the
other Hand, it would be a most Tyrannical Encroachment upon the same Rights, to
debar Mankind from the lawful Means of securing themselves from the Fear and
Danger of so terrible a Plague.

As for the particular Faetor, that, according to the Letter, attends the Sores
of the Inoculated; it is much of a Piece with the Story of the Kentish Long -
Tayls: It shows him to be an utter Stranger to the whole Practice; and makes
one doubt, whether he ever saw a Case of Inoculation quite through. And the
Pointing at the Inoculated in the Streets, is as great an Instance of
Barbarity, as the other is of Ignorance.

There is a Letter in Town from the Revd. Mr. Mather at Boston of a later Date,
which has several remarkable Passages in it. The Distemper (meaning the Small
Pox) has lately visited and ransacked the City of Boston; and in little more
than half a Year, of about five thousand Persons, that have undergone it, near
nine hundred have died.

But how many Lives might have been saved, if our unhappy Physicians had not
poisoned and bewitched our People with a blind Rage, that has appeared, very
like a Satanick Possession, against the Method of Relief and Safety in the way
of the Small Pox Inoculated? I prevailed with one Physician (and for it, I have
had bloody Attempts made upon my Life by some of our Energumens) to introduce
the Practice; and the Experiment has been made upon almost three hundred
Subjects in our Neighborhood, young and old, from one Year to seventy; weak
and strong, Male and Female, white and black; in Midsummer, in Autumn and
Winter: And it succeeds to Admiration.

I cannot learn that any one has died of it, though the Experiment has been made
under various and mavelous Disadvantages. Five or six have died upon it or
after it; but from other Accidents.

He mentions afterward that Cats had it; and takes notice of the same thing in
Doctor Leigh's History of Lancashire; and subjoins,

That it was generally complained that Pigeon-houses of the City continued
unfruitful; and the Pigeons did not lay or hatch, as they used to do, all the
while that the Small Pox was in its Epidemical Progress: And it is very
strongly affirmed, that our Dunghill Fowl felt much of the like upon them.

At last concludes; with the great Benefit they have found by Blisters early
applied and continued in the natural Small Pox, and is sorry it was so late
before they fell into this Way; but it has constantly prosper'd: I know not,
says he, that it has once miscarried since we came into it. I refer the Reader
to his Letter annexed.

It appears by this Letter, that somewhat more than one out of five, and less
than one out of six died of the Distemper. And likewise, by the Effects
mentioned upon Animals, that the general Contagion was owing to a bad
Disposition of the Air; and not chargeable upon Inoculation.

And lastly, notwithstanding the unfavourable Constitution of the Air, the
Inoculated did well.

I doubt not but the impartial Reader is now satisfied that this Practice of
Inoculation may be still beneficial to Mankind, notwithstanding any thing that
the Doctor has adduc'd to the contrary, either by way of Argument or Fact. And
that by the same zealous Partiality, it had been easy to have crushed any, the
most useful Practice in Medicine in the Beginning. It is pretty remarkable,
that in a Neighboring Nation, where Agues are the best Branch of the
Physicians Practice, the Use of the Bark has been, and is still in a great
Measure, suppressed by Methods not much unlike what are used against
Inoculation; and indeed every one of the Doctor's Arguments would have
concluded more strongly against the Use of the Cortex, than against this
Practice. I will suppose any Stickler against the Bark to have reasoned thus in
the Doctor's Strain. A Drug that has been only used among Slaves, an illiterate
unthinking People, who have the Advantage of a warm Climate, and a Spare Diet,
is not fit to be immediately dispensed to the English, whose Blood, speaking of
it as National, is the Product of the Richest Diet: Is it not plain by the
Diseases that it often leaves behind it, that it spoils the Constitution?
Witness the Jaundice, Tumors of the Legs, and other Cachexies that are often
subsequent upon it. Besides none but Empirics can give a Medicine of which they
are not sure of the Dose; Is it not plain that it will not answer the Design of
preventing the Disease for the future? For notwithstanding the Use of this
Drug, the Patient suffers many a Relapse. Besides there are not only one or
two, but innumerable Instances of People who have died after the Use of it; and
others, who have had a diseased Constitution all the rest of their Lives. The
Dispensers of this Medicine disagree widely among themselves, both as to the
Manner of its Operation and the Dose; Some give it in Tincture; some in
Substance; some in greater, some in lesser Quantities, etc. In fine, there are
three Letters from a Friend in New England, which inform me that many who have
taken the Bark have suffered very much; and Mrs. D^l, who had taken great
Quantities of it, actually died, etc. Though I have not my self made Use of this
Medicine, nor seen much of the Effects of it; I am well assured, that not a
fourth part of the Diseases it pretends to cure, are Genuine Agues: Before I
had seen the Practice of this Medicine, I affirmed, that is was impossible, it
would cure an Ague; but I am willing to retract that Opinion, being convinced
by an Experiment, that it does so sometimes. It were easy to carry this
Parallel reasoning through the whole Letter, not only with equal, but more
Strength in most Places.

The Doctor, in appearing with so great Zeal against this Practice, is not the
Representative of the whole Faculty. For there are many of them who from their
Disinterestedness and Innate Love to Mankind, are willing, that an Experiment
should go on, which, in Proportion to the Extensiveness of the Practice, must
necessarily diminish the Mortality of the Small Pox in general: This is a
candid, as well as decent Way of proceeding. At the same Time, I only blame the
Author of the Letter, and those who take part with him, for their too early and
strong Prejudices; being unwilling to Censure their Intentions, which I hope,
are for the Good of Mankind, as well as my own.

But there is still a stronger Dr. Massey's Sermon, Page 6.
Objection against this Practice; That it is unlawful, and first introduced by
the Devil, who Ingrafted Job of the Confluent Sort of Small Pox.

From useful Discoveries, there can always be drawn important Consequences.
First, Hence learn we, that the Small Pox is an ancient Disease; for if it was
conveyed to Job by some such Way as Inoculation, the Matter must have been
taken from some Body Infected with the Distemper. Secondly, That Sydenham was
not the first that began the cool Regimen; for Job fat down upon the Ashes in
the open Air; his Friends saw him afar off. Thirdly, That his Friends were
tardy, above three Weeks before they came to see him; for in the Genuine
Confluent Kind of Small Pox, it will be that Time before they can bear scraping
with a Potsherd. Fourthly, Beloved, this confluent Sort of Small Pox were more
gentle, to be sure, than the common natural Ones; for he seems neither to have
had Delirium, sore Throat, nor Shortness of Breath; he talked distinctly and
good Sense.

Now here a Question arises, Whether an honest Man can do that which the Devil
has done? I answer in the Affirmative; there are three things mentioned; of the
Devil's Assembling himself (as in this Place) with the Sons of God; Believing,
and Quoting of Scripture. All these Things a good Man may not only do, but is
bound to do.

I readily agree with this Reverend Divine, that if Inoculating the Small Pox
be an unlawful Action, it cannot be justified by the Good which may ensue from
it; but that it is unlawful, must be proved, either by some natural or positive
Law: That this Reverend Gentleman has brought no such Proof, either from
natural or revealed Religion, will appear plain upon a very short Review of his
Discourse.

Page 13.] He says he will attempt to prove, That Diseases are utterly unlawful
to be inflicted by any who profess themselves Christians: He terms it very
right; for it is an Attempt to Prove, and no more. By restraining the
Prohibition to Christians, one would think, there was some positive Command in
the Gospel against it; but he has brought none, which, by the most forced
Construction, can prove Inoculation to be prohibited by the Christian
Dispensation. I know of no Immorality that is forbid to a Christian, the
Practice of which is allowed to an Infidel. Indeed Morality is more clearly
taught and more strongly enforced by Rewards and Punishments amongst us; but it
does not change its Nature amongst the rest of Mankind. He does not wonder,
that the Practice of Inoculation should obtain, where the Doctrine of Fatality
is believed; but the Misfortune is, that the Matter of Fact is quite otherwise:
For if he had carefully perused Dr. Wagstaffe's Discourse, which he so much
commends, that would have informed him, That no Body pretends to give us an
Instance of an Inoculated Turk. And why? Because their Belief of a Fatality
makes them neglect very much the ordinary Helps of Medicine for preserving
their Lives.

Page 14.] The Instances which he gives of Almighty God's having given a
miraculous Power to Mankind to inflict Diseases for their Punishment, does not
prove, that He has not given them an ordinary one for their Benefit.

And his saying, [Pag.15] That no Man was ever yet condemned to an immediate
Sickness, for Want of sufficient Authority; is, without any Proof. Diseases are
External, and In^^; the Magistrate very often inflicts both: That Criminals are
lawfully punished with the Mutilation of their Body, I suppose he will allow to
be common. Is not that inflicting a Disease with a Witness? And are there not
many Executions performed by Poison, which is inflicting an Internal mortal
Disease? And here his own Argument turns upon him; for if Diseases are sent for
the Punishment of our Sins, then it would seem to follow, that the Magistrate,
who has a Power from God to punish our Crimes, has likewise a Power to inflict
Diseases, for Sins that are manifest to him and all the World. The greater
Power of inflicting Death, certainly includes the lesser in the Choice of the
Means: If, for Example, there should be a Law made to punish the Inoculators
with the Inoculation of some Disease, I fancy this Reverend Divine would not
think it sinful or unreasonable.

Page 16.] He spends a long Paragraph, to prove what no Body ever denied; That
a Man cannot lawfully do all that is in his Power to do: And another as
evident, That the Means, as well as the Intention, must be lawful; but these
are only general Propositions; The Subsumption, that inflicting Diseases for a
good Purpose is unlawful, is only supposed, not proved.

Page 18.] He doubts whether the Life of Man be a Good or not. If the Life of
Man is no Good, then, indeed, to act for the Preservation of it, is not to act
for any good End; and consequently, not only this Practice, but all others in
Medicine, and many other charitable Actions, must be given up. The rest of the
Argument of this Paragraph, is grounded upon the Insufficiency of this Method
for the Purpose intended. The Doctor might have remembered, from his Exposition
of his Text, Job had the Small Pox by Inoculation from the Devil, even of a
favorable Sort; that he recovered of them, and never had them again. But in
this he must forgive me, if I put him in Mind, that he is out of his Sphere;
and that notwithstanding his Professions to the contrary, he lays aside the
Divine, and takes upon him the Physician. The Question here is, Whether giving
a Disease with a good Intention, be in it self an unlawful Action.

Page 20.] Another Argument is, That a Law which forbids the Evil, forbids also
every thing that has a Tendency to it; therefore all causeless and voluntary
Mutilations are forbid: And yet, notwithstanding this Law against Mutilation,
more express than any against Inoculation, Surgeons cut off Peoples Limbs. Here
the Intention hallows the Action, which is in itself expressly forbid; and which
is more, I believe no Surgeon will affirm, that in all Cases, where Limbs are
cut off, there is a direct Impossibility to save the Patient's Life otherwise;
or that the Operation is always successful. A Surgeon who cuts a Person for the
Stone, even if his Patient dies of the Operation, does not think he has
committed a mortal Sin, in inflicting a mortal Disease; and yet the Patient
perhaps might have lived many Years, and not died of the Distemper at last. The
Difference of the two Cases, the one being for Cure, the other for Prevention,
does not change the State of the Question; which, in general Terms, is this,
Whether Mankind have a Lawful Power of inflicting Diseases for good Purposes? A
Person who has not had the Small Pox, may be very justly considered, as having
the Seeds of a mortal Distemper within him; and the Dread of it is surely a
Suffering, that will justify the Lawfulness of using Means, which have the
greatest Probability of saving him from a Danger, which, for ought he knows,
may be nearer and greater, than that of a Stone in the Bladder. Anxiety and
Bodily Pain, don't differ so much, as to make an Action lawful in one Case,
sinful in the other.

Page 21.] But it seems it is a Tempting of Providence. And there is no great
Difference between the Devil's Proposal to our Savior, to cast himself down
headlong, and that of Inoculation. It is wonderful, into what Absurdities, Zeal
for an Opinion, will drive a Man, even to assert that there is no Difference
between a Man's running into a Danger absolutely unnecessary, and from which
nothing but a direct Miracle can save him; and a Venturing on a small Hazard to
avoid a much greater. The Case put it as disadvantagiously as possible, more
resembles that of a Person who leaps out of a Window for fear of Fire, and
surely that can never be reckoned a Mistrust of Providence, even if he did it
before he was much in Danger; for no body can say that God Almighty may not
save a Man from Fire in the ordinary Course of his Providence; And if a Person,
who being prompted by his too early Fears had taken this Course, and lost his
Life by the Fall; no body will arraign him of Self-murder: He might have done
an imprudent, but not a sinful Action. The Parents who suffer their Children to
converse with their infected Relations; which differs in no Moral Point from
the Case of Inoculation, would think it very hard to be treated as Homicides or
Murderers of their Children, when the very Action proceeds from, the contrary
Principle, extreme Tenderness.

Page 22.] In the former Page, it was a presumptuous Trust; in this, it is an
entire Mistrust of Providence. He is sure to have the Inoculators some way or
other.

Page 23.] They cannot pray for a Blessing upon their Endeavors; because
Prayer supposes the Use of lawful Means.

I believe the contrary is true, for as a Person, who is Inoculated, puts
himself more immediately into the Hands of God, if he has any Sense of
Religion, cannot avoid praying for a Blessing upon the Means, which, to be
sure, he thinks lawful, and has not yet been proved to be otherwise.

Page 24.] His Argument to prove that Inoculation tends to promote Vice and
Immortality is the most extraordinary of all. This it does, by taking off the
Dread of the Small Pox, and consequently the Restraints of Sobriety that
Mankind lie under upon that Account. This Reverend Gentleman has very justly
found fault with one Maxim, to do Evil that Good may come of it: But he has
established one, just as dangerous in the room of it, not to do Good least Evil
come of it. For if the Diminishing the Fear of Dying of Diseases caught by
Irregularity, is an Evil, then an able Physician is a common Nuisance. We have
reason to be thankful, that there are a sufficient Number left, who cannot be
charged with being Encouragers of Vice and Immorality, upon this Score. This
Principle in its full Extent would destroy all Works of Charity and Mercy; for
the Hope of Forgiveness is an Encouragment to do Injuries; and the Hope of
being relieved in Want is a Discouragement to Industry.

I am touched with the devout Reflections upon Providence, that are all along
spread through his Sermon, to which I subscribe with all my Heart; but I cannot
so much commend the Distorting those great and solemn Truths of our Holy
Religion to mantain little Party Interests and fashionable Opinions. The Text
that is quoted Page 22. that the very Hairs of our Head are numbered; I take to
be a stronger Argument against Periwigs and Shaving; than all that the Sermon
contains against Inoculation: Our Hairs of our Beards were given us for an
Ornament by Providence, and it is known, that many have caught great Colds
with mortal DisEases ensuing upon them by Shaving. Is not a Man answerable for
all the bad Effects that follow upon an unwarrantable Action that contradicts
the very Intention of Providence?

The Peroration Page 29, is equal to any Piece of the whole Performance, Let
the Atheist and the Scoffer, the Heathen and the Unbeliever disclaim a
Dependence upon Providence: Let them Inoculate and be Inoculated, etc. I think
this clinches the whole Matter; and this Reverend Gentleman has furnished us
with a new, sensible and religious Test, an Atheist or Infidel can be found
out, as a Witch, by the Marks upon his Body: And that, as it has been intimated
already, that the Devil was the first Inoculator; I think, it is not impossible
that the next zealous Preacher upon this Subject may prove the Cicatrices of
Inoculation to be the Mark of the Beast. Thus it appears, that the Doctors
Position, of the Unlawfulness of inflicting Diseases for good Purposes, is
groundless, and contrary to the common Usages of Mankind.

I have been obliged to be the more particular in answering this Sermon,
because the Charge in it against the Inoculators, is hea^^^ than that in the
Letter, in as much as immorality is a greater Fault than bad Practice in
Physic.

From all that I have said, I will draw this one Conclusion; that there does
not appear as yet any Objection of Weight enough to stop the Progress of the
Practice of Inoculation. But if upon future Trials, it should be found that the
Inconveniences do overballance the Advantages of it; I shall then be as ready
to condemn, as I am now to justify it.

Certificate of the Honorable Mr. WILLIAM SPENCER's DEATH.
April 22, 1722.
UPON Examining the Body of the Honorable William Spencer, Son of the Right
Honorable the late Earl of Sunderland; We found the Small Pox of a mixed Sort,
distinct in some Parts, and confluent in others; almost dried and sealed
throughout the Body: All the Inward Parts were in their natural State, and free
from any Mark of the Small Pox. In the Right Ventricle of the Heart there were
two Polipus's, whereof of one was branched out into the Arteria Pulmonalis. In
the Head, we found the Surface of the Brain full of Water; and the Substance of
it flabby; the Ventricles of it being as full of Water as they could hold; The
Plexus Choroides being white by soaking in that Water: The Basis of the Brain
was also full of Water. In the Longitudinal Sinus, there was a long and pretty
large Polypus; and likewise one in the Lateral Sinus. The Cerebellum was in its
natural State.

Apr. 22. 1722. Signed thus, Claudius Amyand, Isaac Garnier, Apothecar Thomas
Garnier, Apothecar John Reilliez, John Dolignon.

N. B. The Child seemed to be in a fair Way on Saturday the 21 st, 'till Two
a-Clock in the Afternoon, when he was seized with a Convulsion Fit, of which he
died in a Quarter of an Hour.

This is also Signed thus, Claudius Amyand, Isaac Garnier, Apothecar Thomas
Garnier, Apothecar




The CASE of Mr. DEGRAVE'S Daughter, in a LETTER to Mr. MAITLAND.
SIR,
I Find my Daughter's Case has made some Noise in Town; and has been
misrepresented. It was thus: She was Inoculated the 23d of Febr. 1721-2; and as
I saw her daily during the three Weeks that she was confined after the
Inoculation, so I can affirm, no Small Pox ever appeared uponher during that
Time, but only Heats and Flushings, attended sometimes with Heaviness and Pain
in her Head, and a little more Quickness of Pulse than usual, and oftentimes
without any Disorder at all: None of those Heats and Flushings ever came to
Perfection, or to any thing like the Small Pox, which gave my Daughter some
Uneasiness; and the rather, that the other Persons, who had been Inoculated at
the same Time, and in the same House with her, had a very fair distinct Small
Pox, and yet had less Sickness than She: Nor did the Incisions in her Arms
discharge so much and so long as theirs did; and therefore were completely
healed in less than three Weeks Time, when the Sores of the other Person, were
yet large and running. Thus all Expectation of her having the Small Pox by the
Inoculation being over, she was purged once or twice, and then discharged from
her Confinement, the 17th of March following: Nay, it was believed, she never
would have that Distemper; for having been very much exposed to the Infection,
when the was but two Years of Age, and yet more when the was about Eight,
without contracting it, this last Trial being unsuccessful, seemed to give a
tolerable Ground for this Opinion. However my Daughter continued discomposed,
and out of Order, when the came Home; the Heats and Flushings abovementioned
still subsisting on her, though in a lesser Degree; her Stomach loathing
Flesh-meats, and her Rest disturbed with Dreams and Horrors. She had likewise
two small Boils, one under her Arm, and another on her Side: But none of these
Accidents were troublesome enough to hinder her Attendance on her accustomed
Business within and without the House: However these continuing for about two
Months after she came Home, the was purged once or twice, in order to remove
them; but still they subsisted upon her, not to any Degree, 'till the Small Pox
broke out upon her, which happened in this Manner: Three Days before, she had
heated herself extraordinarily; the first, by going to the Camp and back again,
on Foot, in a very warm Day; the second, by walking heartily to the
Charter House, to see her Brother and returning Home; and the third Day in
going and sitting at the Playhouse in Lincolns-Inn-Fields: As she sat at this
last Place, the Small Pox broke out upon her: at least, I never perceived it
upon her, 'till her Return; at which my Daughter was surpised, she having had
no Illness whatever, that could hinder her Pleasure at the Play, and her
walking Home; or any such precursory Warnings of that Distemper, which I hear
have been divulged Abroad. As soon as the Small Pox had appeared, she recovered
her Stomach for those Flesh-meats she had loathed before; and came to that
natural composed Sleep, of which she had been deprived since the Inoculation;
And she having gone through the most favorable Periods of that Distemper, she
got well in Eight Days from That I perceived the first Eruption; so that I must
conclude, from the Symptoms which my Daughter was by Times afflicted with,
during Eleven Weeks after she had been Inoculated, that it appears evident to
me, the Small Pox she had then, was the Effect of the Inoculation, although it
has showed itself much later than is usual, after that Operation. As to the
Itch, that appeared upon her about the same Time with the Small Pox: I can only
account for it thus; She had been Infected by her Brother, about three Months
before she was Inoculated, and I thonght her cured of it by the same Means that
were Efficacious for the Cure of her Brother. It is certain that when she was,
there was no Appearance subsisting of that Distemper, nor any Show of it, 'till
that Time the Small Pox appeared upon her. However, she is perfectly cured of
the Itch, by the same Means that were used at first: And I thank God, my
Daughter is at present as well, if not better, in every Respect, than ever she
was in her Life.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, ISAAC DEGRAVE.
August 23, 1722.
A Letter from Dr. NETTLETON, at Halifax in Yorkshire, to Dr. JURIN, R.S.Secr.
SIR,
IN Answer to what you require from me, as to what has been farther done, I
have only to add, that since I writ to Dr. Whitaker, I have made the Insition
upon about fifteen Persons, who have all had the Distemper very favorably, and
got through it with a great deal of Ease. As nothing uncommon or extraordinary
did happen in any of these Cases, it will not be necessary to trouble you with
a particular Account of any of them: They were most of them at some Distance;
the Small Pox being, in a great Measure, gone from this Town and Neighborhood.

I am very sensible of the Favor done me by the Royal Society, who were
pleased to take Notice of my Letter to Dr. Whitaker, which you had nothing to
move you to, besides a generous Disposition to encourage the smallest Attempts
toward any thing, that may tend to public Advantage. I must own that all the
Information I had concerning this Affair, which I have happened to be engaged
in was entirely from the Philosophical Transactions. It Is now about six Years
since the Royal Society did communicate to the World some Letters from two very
considerable Physicians residing in Turkey, whose good Sense or Integrity we had
no reason to call in question; these Gentlemen did solemnly assure us, that the
Method of Inoculation had been for many Years practiced in those Parts of the
World, with almost constant Success. I had, as well as all others who have been
engaged in, the Practice, with sufficient Sorrow and Concern, been called to
many in the Small Pox, whose Cases were so deplorable, as to admit of no
Relief. And therefore I could not but be very thoughtful about this Method,
which promised to carry Persons through that cruel Distemper, with so much Ease
and Safety. I was so far from knowing that it was a Crime, that I always
thought it the Duty of our Profession, to do what we could to preserve the
Lives of those who commit themselves to our Care. And I know no Reason, why we
ought not, with all humble Thankfulness to Almighty God, to make Use of any
Means, which his good Providence shall bring to Light conducing to that End.
This Matter, though of so great Importance, lying dormant so long after it was
known, is, I presume a sufficient Proof, that none have been very forward to
try Experiments. But when we had the Account in the public Papers, that it had
by their Royal-Highness's Command been done with Success at London, I could not
be satisfied without trying it here. I was soon convinced, that it would be of
very great Use; and the more Experience I have had of it since, the more I am
confirmed in the same Opinion. I believe all others, who have seen any thing of
this Practice, are in the same Sentiment, and there is no doubt, but in a few
Years the World will acknowledge the Service, which the Royal Society have done
to Mankind, in first revealing to this Part of Europe, a Thing so beneficial as
it will certainly prove; for though some few unfortunate Accidents may sometimes
happen, yet these will be very rare in comparison of the many sad and
disastrous Events, which this Distemper has been, and ever will be very
fruitful of, while it is left to rage in its full Force and Violence.

Sir, I doubt not but when you Love collected a sufficient number of
Observations for it, you will be able to demonstrate, that the Hazard in this
Method is very inconsiderable, in proportion to that in the ordinary way by
accidental Contagion, so small, that it ought not to deter any body from making
use of it. In order to satisfy my self, what Proportion the Number of those
that die of the Small Pox, might bear to the whole Number that is seized with
the Distemper; in the Natural way, I have made some Enquiry hereabouts, and I
shall take the Freedom to transmit the Accounts to you, because I believe you
may depend upon their being taken with sufficient Care and Impartiality. In
Halifax since the Beginning of last Winter, 276 have had the Small Pox, and out
of that Number 43 have died. In Rochdale, a small Neighboring Market Town, 177
have had the Distemper, and 38 have died. In Leeds, 792 have had the Small Pox,
and 189 have died. It is to be noted, that in this Town, the Small Pox have
been more favorable this Season than usual, and in Leeds they have been more
than usually mortal; but upon a Medium in these three Towns, there have died
nearly 22 out of every hundred, which is above a fifth Part, of all that have
been infected in the natural way. I have in these Accounts confined my self to
the Limits of the Towns. The Numbers that have had the Small Pox in the Country
round about, is vastly greater; but the Proportion of those that die is much
the same. I have made the Enquiry in several Country Villages hereabouts, in
some I found the Proportion to be greater, in others less, but in the main it
is nearly the same.

I am, etc. THOMAS NETTLETON.
Halifax, June 16. 1722

Mr. MATHERS Letter from Boston in New England
March 10th 1721/2. SIR,
SO considerable a Part of Mankind fearfully perishing by the Small Pox; and
many more of us grievously suffering by that miserable Distemper, you will
allow me to entertain you with a few more Communications, and writ (I think
it is) a fourth Letter upon it.

The Distemper has lately visited and ransacked the City of Boston; and in
little more than half a Year, of more then five thousand Persons that have
undergone it, near nine hundred have died. But how many Lives might have been
saved, if our unhappy Physicians, had not poisoned and bewitched our People
with a blind Rage, that has appeared very like a Satanick Possession, against
the Method of Relief and Safety in the way of the Small Pox Inoculated.

I prevailed with one Physician, (and for it I have had bloody Attempts made
upon my Life by some of our Energumens) to introduce the Practice; and the
Experiment has been made upon almost three hundred Objects in our
Neighbourhoud, Young and Old; (from one Year to seventy) weak and strong; Male
and Female, White and Black; in Midsummer, in Autumn, in Winter, and it
succeeds to Admiration.

I cannot learn that any one has died of it; though the Experiment has been made
under various and mavelous Disadvantages. Five or six have died upon it, or
after it, but from other Diseases or Accidents; chiefly from having taken the
Infection in the common way, by Inspiration, before it could be given them in
this way of Transplantation. However at present I need say no more of this,
having already given you some Report of our Proceedings in it.

To them who are under the Inoculation of the Small Pox, we commonly give a
Vomit, in the time of their Decumbiture, a Day or two before the expected
Eruption. One of our Patients not vomiting so freely as he would have done,
thrust a Finger or two into his Throat, which fetched up, what was to be
discharged from his uneasy Stomach; He had but a few of the Small Pox, and the
Pustules were sufficiently of the distinct Sort, as it uses to be where they
have the Small Pox Inoculated; but the Fingers that had been thus employed,
proved as full as they could hold, of the confluet Sort, which he now thought
his whole Body would have been, if we had not in this Way prevented it.

Doctor Leigh in his Natural History of Lancashire, counts it an Occurrence
worth relating, that there were some Catts known to catch the Small Pox; and
pass regularly through the State of it, and then to die. We have had among us the
very same Occurrence.

It was generally observed and complained, that the Pigeon- Houses of the City
continued (...) and the Pigeons did not hatch or lay as they used to do, all
the while that the Small Pox was in its Epidemical Progress: And it is very
strongly affirmed that our Dunghill Fowl felt much of the like Effect upon them.

We have so many among us, who have been visited with the Plague in other
Countries many Years ago, and who have never been arrested with the Small Pox
after it, though they have been exposed as much as any other People to it; that
it now begins to obtain a Belief with us, that they who have had the Plague,
will never have the Small Pox after it.

I will add but one Thing more. For Succor under the Small Pox, where Life is
in Danger, after all the Methods and Medicines, that our Sydenham and others
rely upon; I can assure you, we have yet found nothing so sure as this; Procure
for the Patient, as early as may be, by Epispastiks a plentiful Discharge at
the Hand-writs, or Ancles, or both, (I say as early as my be) and keep them
running till the Danger is over. When the Venom of the Small Pox, makes an
evident or violent Invasion on the Nobler Parts this Discharge does
wonderfully. I am sorry it was so late before we fell into this Way; but it has
constantly prosper'd: I know not that it has once miscarried, since we came
into it.

March 10. 1721-22.

My Lord B^st's Servants Case, by one that constantly attended him.
MY Lord B^st's Six Children were Inoculated the 18 th April: Five of them had
got through the Small Pox before the 30 th, when his Servant was Inoculated. He
came from Cirencester to My Lord's House in London about the Time that his
Children had the Small Pox on them, with an Intent to be Inoculated; but Matter
could not be found so soon as desired, and the Fellow in the mean time lived
among the Servants that attended on My Lord's Children: Whether he had
contracted any Infection by that Commerce is not determined; or whether the
Disorder he had on him three or four Days before he was Inoculated, may be
ascribed to that, as some have thought, or to a Change of Diet and Air, or only
to a Cold caught; it is most certain he complained then of Pain in his Head and
Bones; and was feverish. Doctor Mead was consulted, and ordered him to be
blooded, vomited, and other Medicines for his Relief; and that the Inoculation
should be Postpon'd till after his Recovery: For this End he was removed out of
My Lord's House to a Nurse, who takes People in for the Small Pox. He got well
of his Complaints the 28 th April; and 'twas thought proper to Inoculate him
the 30 th Ditto. He kept well till the 5th May, and then had no other Disorder
on him than what is usual before the Eruption of the Small Pox after
Inoculation. On the 6 th the Eruptions were plain of the distinct large Kind,
and he was relieved on that Account; but at Night his Complaints returned on
him, and were rather more severe than they had been, he having then a kind of
Dilirium, frequent Vomitings and Stools; These continuing the 7 th, Doctor
Arbothnot was called to his Assistance. Doctor Mead saw him also the next Day.
They prescribed several things, which had the desired Success; but at this Time
his Body was covered with Small Pox, and most of it of the confluent Sort. He
continued in a tolerable good Way till the 11 th of May, when his Fever was
sharper on him, with a Dilirium and Difficulty of Breathing. He was then
blooded and blisterd, but without any Effect. He died the 12 th, and was opened
the 13 th. Then upon Inspecting the Outside of his Body, the Face and Limbs
were found as full of Small Pox as they could hold; as were also two Places in
his Breast and Shoulders; they all appearing of the Confluent Sort. Nothing
Material was observed in the Dissection of his Body, saving that the Lungs were
Inflamed and mortified; and that in the Cavities of the Thorax there was a
pretty large Quantity of bloody Matter extravasated.


I Here think fit to declare, that whatever Pamphlets, Advertisements, or
Queries are, or shall hereafter be published in News Papers or otherwise, as
some have lately been with unknown or fictitious Names of Persons Inoculated;
and false in Fact, maliciously intended to Discredit this Practice and impose
upon the Public; I will not take any Notice of them, except the Author wi^ own
his Name, and bring sufficient Vouchers for what he advances.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 26. r. more certainly. Page 24. line 30 r. applied.


