THE FREEHOLDER.

THE FREEHOLDER, OR Political ESSAYS.

LONDON. Printed for D. MIDWINTER at the three Crowns in St. Paul's Churchyard;
and J. TONSON at Shakespeare's Head in the Strand. 1716.

CONTENTS Of the following ESSAYS.
No. I. THE Title and Design of this Work. II. Of HIS MAJESTY'S Character. III.
The Memoirs of a Preston Rebel. IV. Reasons why the British Ladies should side
with the Freeholder. V. Of the Love which we owe to our Country. VI. The
Guilt of Perjury. VII. Of Party Lies. VIII. The Female Association. IX. Answer
of the Freeholders of Great Britain to the Pretender's Declaration. X.
Arbitrary Power, exemplified in the Conduct of Muly Ishmael Emperor of Morocco.
XI. Subscriptions to the Female Association. XII. The Guilt of Rebellion in
general, and of the late Rebellion in particular. XIII. Of those who are
indifferent in a time of Rebellion. XIV. The Political Creed of a Tory
Malcontent. XV. Project of the Ladies for making the Fan serviceable to the
Protestant Cause. XVI. On the late Act of Parliament for suspending the Habeas
Corpus Act. XVII. How Ministers of State should bear an undeserved Reproach.
XVIII. Of the late French Edict for increasing the Value of their Louis d'Ors.
XIX. The unchristian Spirit of our late Party Writings. XX. Of the late Act of
Parliament for laying four Shillings in the Pound on Land. XXI. The Birthday
of Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales. XXII. The Character and
Conversation of a Tory Fox-hunter. XXIII. A Cartel for the British Ladies,
during their present State of War. XXIV. The Designs of HIS MAJESTY'S Enemies
impracticable. XXV. Of the Fickleness of the British Politics. XXVI.
Considerations offered to the disaffected part of the Fair Sex. XXVII. The
Vision of a second-sighted Highlander. XXVIII. Several useful Maxims to be
learned from the present Rebellion. XXIX. The Practice of Morality necessary to
make a Party flourish. XXX. Of the Vanity of the French Nation. XXXI. Answer to
a celebrated Pamphlet entitled, An Argument to prove the Affections of the
Pople of England to be the best Security of the Government; humbly offered to
the Consideration of the Patrons of Severity, and applied to the present
Juncture of Affairs. XXXII. Artifices of the Malcontents to draw the Women
into their Party. XXXIII. The particular concern of learned Societies to
cultivate the Favor of their Prince. XXXIV. Absurdity of admitting aspirit of
Party into public Diversions, and particularly those of the Playhouse. XXXV.
Of modern Historians. XXXVI. Annals of the Pretender's Reign. XXXVII. Ill
Consequences of the late Cry of the Churches Danger, with regard to Religion.
XXXVIII. Proposals for a Truce between the Ladies of either Party. XXXIX.
Character of the late Lord Summers, published on the Day of his Interrment. XL.
The usual Treatment of such men as make themselves Authors. XLI. Advantages to
the Spanish Trade obtained by HIS present MAJESTY. XLII. Advantages to our
Commerce in the Netherlands obtained by HIS present MAJESTY. XLIII. The
Inconsistence of a Popish Prince and Protestant Subjects. XLIV. Tory
Foxhunter's Account of the Masquerade on the Birth of the Archduke. XLV. The
Use and Advantage of Wit and Humor under proper Regulations. XLVI. HIS
MAJESTY'S Birthday. XLVII. Conversion of the Tory Fox-hunter. XLVIII. Of
Ministers of State, especially in Great Britain. XLIX. Thanksgiving Day for
suppressing the late Rebellion. L. The Folly and Mischief of Mobs and Riots.
LI. Cautions to be observed in the reading of ancient Greek and Roman
Historians. LII. Of State Jealousy. LIII. Britons, Free-thinkers in Politics.
LIVE. Preference of the Whig-Scheme to that of the Torys. LV. Conclusion.
THE FREEHOLDER.
VOL. I.
No. 1. Friday, December 23. 1715.
Rara temporum felicitas, ubi sentire quae velis, and quae sentias dicere
licet. Tacit.
THE Arguments of an Author lose a great deal of their Weight, when we are
persuaded that he only writes for Argument's sake, and has no real Concern in
the Cause which he espouses. This is the Case of one, who draws his Pen in the
Defense of Property, without having any; except, perhaps, in the Copy of a
Libel, or a Ballad. One is apt to suspect, that the Passion for Liberty, which
appears in a Grubstreet Patriot, arises only from his Apprehensions of a Gaol;
and that, whatever he may pretend, he does not write to secure, but to get
something of his Own. Should the Government be overturned, he has nothing to
lose but an old Standish.

I question not but the Reader will conceive a Respect for the Author of this
Paper, from the Title of it; since, he may be sure, I am so considerable a Man,
that I cannot have less than forty Shillings a Year.

I have rather chosen this Title than any other, because it is what I most
glory in, and what most effectually calls to my Mind the Happiness of that
Government under which I live. As a British Freeholder, I should not scruple
taking place of a French Marquis; and when I see one of my Countrymen amusing
himself in his little Cabbage-Garden, I naturally look upon him as a greater
Person than the Owner of the richest Vineyard in Champagne.

The House of Commons is the Representative of Men in my Condition. I consider
my self as one who give my Consent to every Law which passes: A Freeholder in
our Government being of the Nature of a Citizen of Rome in that famous
Commonwealth; who, by the Election of a Tribune, had a kind of remote Voice in
every Law that was enacted. So that a Freeholder is but one Remove from a
Legislator, and for that Reason ought to stand up in the Defense of those Laws,
which are in some degree of his own making. For such is the Nature of our happy
Constitution, that the Bulk of the People virtually give their Approbation to
every thing they are bound to obey, and prescribe to themselves those Rules by
which they are to walk.

At the same time that I declare I am a Freeholder, I do not exclude my self
from any other Title. A Freeholder may be either a Voter, or a Knight of the
Shire; a Wit, or a Fox-hunter; a Scholar, or a Soldier; an Alderman, or a
Courtier; a Patriot, or a Stock-Jobber. But I choose to be distinguished by this
Denomination, as the Freeholder is the Basis of all other Titles. Dignities
may be grafted upon it; but this is the substantial Stock, that conveys to them
their Life, Taste, and Beauty; and without which they are no more than
Blossoms, that would fall away with every Shake of Wind

And here I cannot but take occasion to congratulate my Country upon the
Increase of this happy Tribe of Men, since, by the Wisdom of the present
Parliament, I find the Race of Freeholders spreading into the remotest Corners
of the Island. I mean that Act which passed in the late Session for the
Encouragement of Loyalty in Scotland: By which it is provided, That all and
every Vassal and Vassals in Scotland, who shall continue peaceable, and in
dutiful Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, holding Lands or
Tenements of any Offender [guilty of High-Treason] who holds such Lands or
Tenements immediately of the Crown, shall be vested and seized, and are hereby
enacted and ordained to hold the said Lands or Tenements of His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, in Fee and Heritage for ever, by such manner of holding,
as any such Offender held such Lands or Tenements of the Crown, etc.

By this Means it will be in the Power of a Highlander to be at all times a
good Tenant, without being a Rebel; and to deserve the Character of a faithful
Servant, without thinking himself obliged to follow his Master to the Gallows.

How can we sufficiently extol the Goodness of His present Majesty, who is not
willing to have a single Slave in his Dominions! Or enough rejoice in the
Exercise of that Loyalty, which, instead of betraying a Man into the most
ignominious Servitude, (as it does in some of our neighboring Kingdoms)
entitles him to the highest Privileges of Freedom and Property! It is now to be
hoped, that we shall have few Vassals, but to the Laws of our Country.

When these Men have a Taste of Property, they will naturally love that
Constitution from which they derive so great a Blessing. There is an
unspeakable Pleasure in calling any thing one's Own. A Freehold, though it be
but in Ice and Snow, will make the Owner pleased in the Possession, and stout
in the Defense of it; and is a very proper Reward of our Allegiance to our
present King, who (by an unparalled Instance of Goodness in a Sovereign, and
Infatuation in Subjects) contends for the Freedom of his People against
themselves; and will not suffer many of them to fall into a State of Slavery,
which they are bent upon with so much Eagerness and Obstinacy.

A Freeholder of Great Britain, is bred with an Aversion to every thing that
tends to bring him under a Subjection to the arbitrary Will of another. Of this
we find frequent Instances in all our Histories; where the Persons, whose
Characters are the most amiable, and strike us with the highest Veneration, are
those who stood up manfully against the Invasions of Civil Liberty, and the
complicated Tyranny which Popery imposes upon our Bodies, our Fortunes, and our
Minds. What a despicable Figure then must the present Mock-Patriots make in the
Eyes of Posterity, who venture to be hanged, drawn and quartered, for the Ruin
of those Civil Rights which their Ancestors rather than part with, chose to be
cut to Pieces in the Field of Battle? And what an Opinion will after Ages
entertain of Their Religion who bid fair for a Gibbet, by endeavoring to bring
in a Superstition, which their Forefathers perished in Flames to keep out?

But how instructive soever the Folly of these Men may prove to future Times,
it will be my Business more immediately to consult the Happiness of the Age in
which I live. And since so many profligate Writers have endeavored to varnish
over a bad Cause, I shall do all in my Power to recommend a good One, which
indeed requires no more than barely to explain what it is. While many of my
gallant Countrymen are employed in pursuing Rebels half discomfited through
the Consciousness of their Guilt, I shall labor to improve those Victories to
the Good of my Fellow Subjects; by carrying on our Successes over the Minds of
Men, and by reconciling them to the Cause of their King, their Country, and
their Religion.

To this End, I shall in the Course of this Paper (to be published every Monday
and Friday) endeavor to open the Eyes of my Countrymen to their own Interest,
to show them the Privileges of an English Freeholder, which they enjoy in
common with my self, and to make them sensible how these Blessings are secured
to us by his Majesty's Title, his Administration, and his Personal Character.

I have only one Request to make to my Readers, that they will peruse these
Papers with the same Candor and Impartiality in which they are written; and
shall hope for no other Prepossession in favor of them, than what one would
think should be natural to every Man, a Desire to be happy, and a good Will
toward those, who are the Instruments of making them so.

No. 2. Monday, December 26.
Non de Demino, sed de Parente loquimur. Intelligamus ergo bona nostra,
dignosque nos illius usu probemus; atque identidem cogitemus, si majus
principibus praestemus obsequium, qui servitute civium, quam qui liberate
laetantur. Plin.
HAving in my first Paper set forth the Happiness of my Station as a
Freeholder of Great Britain, and the Nature of that Property which is secured
to me by the Laws of my Country; I cannot forbear considering in the next
place, That Person who is entrusted with the Guardianship and Execution of
those Laws. I have lived in one Reign, when the Prince, instead of invigorating
the Laws of our Country, or giving them their proper Course, assumed a Power
of dispensing with them: And in another, when the Sovereign was flattered by a
Set of Men into a Persuasion, that the Regal Authority was unlimited and
uncircumscribed. In either of these Cases, good Laws are at best but a dead
Letter; and by showing the People how happy they ought to be, only serve to
aggravate the Sense of their Oppressions.

We have the Pleasure at this Time to see a King upon the Throne, who has too
much Goodness to wish for any Power, that does not enable Him to promote the
Welfare of His Subjects; and too much Wisdom to look upon those as His Friends,
who would make their Court to Him by the Profession of an Obedience, which they
never practiced, and which has always proved fatal to those Princes, who have
put it to the Trial. His Majesty gave a Proof of His Sovereign Virtues before
He came to the Exercise of them in this Kingdom. His Inclination to Justice led
Him to rule His German Subjects in the same Manner, that our Constitution
directs Him to govern the English. He regarded those which are our Civil
Liberties, as the natural Rights of Mankind; and therefore indulged them to a
People, who pleaded no other Claim to them than from His known Goodness and
Humanity. This Experience of a good Prince, before we had the Happiness to
enjoy Him, must give great Satisfaction to every thinking Man, who considers
how apt Sovereignty is to deprave human Nature; and how many of our own Princes
made very ill Figures upon the Throne, who, before they ascended it, were the
Favorites of the People.

What gives us the greatest Security in the Conduct of so excellent a Prince is
That Consistency of Behavior, whereby He inflexibly pursues those Measures
which appear the most just and equitable. As He has the Character of being the
most prudent in laying proper Schemes; He is no less remarkable for being
steady in accomplishing what He has once concerted. Indeed, if we look into the
History of His present Majesty, and reflect upon that wonderful Series of
Successes which have attended Him, I think they cannot be ascribed to any thing
so much as to this Uniformity and Firmness of Mind, which has always discovered
it self in His Proceedings. It was by This that He surmounted those many
Difficulties which lay in the Way to His Succession; and by which, we have
reason to hope, He will daily make all Opposition fall before Him. The fickle
and unsteady Politics of our late British Monarchs, have been the perpetual
Source of those Dissentions and Animosities which have made the Nation unhappy:
Whereas the constant and unshaken Temper of His present Majesty, must have a
natural Tendency to the Peace of His Government, and the Unanimity of His
People.

Whilst I am enumerating the public Virtues of our Sovereign, which are so
conducive to the Advantage of those who are to obey Him, I cannot but take
Notice, that His Majesty was bred up from His Infancy with a Love to this our
Nation, under a Princess, who was the most accomplished Woman of her Age, and
particularly famous for her Affection to the English. Our Countrymen were dear
to Him, before there was any Prospect of their being His Subjects; and every
one knows, that nothing recommended a Man so much to the distinguishing
Civilities of His Court, as the being born in Great Britain.

To the Fame of His Majesty's Civil Virtues, we may add the Reputation He has
acquired by His Martial Achievements. It is observed by Sir William Temple,
that the English are particuly fond of a King who is Valiant: Upon which
Account His Majesty has a Title to all the Esteem that can be paid the most
Warlike Prince; though at the same time, for the Good of His Subjects, He studies
to decline all Occasions of Military Glory; and chooses rather to be
distinguished as the Father, than as the Captain of His People. I am glad his
rebellious Subjects are too inconsiderable to put him upon exerting that
Courage and Conduct, which raised him so great a Reputation in Hungary and the
Morea, when he fought against the Enemies of Christianity; and in Germany and
Flanders, where he commanded against the great Disturber of the Peace of
Europe. One would think there was Reason for the Opinion of those, who make
Personal Courage to be an Hereditary Virtue, when we see so many Instances of
it in the Line of Brunswick. To go no farther back than the Time of our present
King, where can we find, among the Sovereign Houses of Europe, any other
Family, that has furnished so many Persons of distinguished Fortitude? Three of
His Majesty's Brothers have fallen gloriously in the Field, fighting against
the Enemies of their Native Country: And the Bravery of his Royal Highness the
Prince of Wales, is still fresh in our Memory, who fought, with the Spirit of
his Father, at the Battle of Audenarde, when the Children of France, and the
Pretender, fled before him.

I might here take Notice of His Majesty's more private Virtues, but have
rather chosen to remind my Countrymen of the public Parts of His Character,
which are supported by such incontestable Facts as are universally known and
acknowledged.

Having thus far considered our Happiness in His Majesty's Civil and Military
Character, I cannot forbear pleasing my self with regarding him in the View of
One, who has been always Fortunate. Cicero recommends Pompey under this
particular Head to the Romans, with whom the Character of being Fortunate was
so popular, that several of their Emperors gave it a Place among their Titles.
Good Fortune is often the Reward of Virtue, and as often the Effect of
Prudence. And whether it proceeds from either of these, or from both together,
or whatever may be the Cause of it, every one is naturally pleased to see his
Interests conducted by a Person who is Used to good Success. The Establishment
of the Electoral Dignity in His Majesty's Family, was a Work reserved for him
finally to accomplish. A large Accession of Dominion fell to Him, by His
succeeding to the Dukedom of Zell, whereby He became one of the Greatest
Princes of Germany; and one of the most powerful Persons, that ever stood next
Heirs to the Throne of Great Britain. The Duchy of Bremen, and the Bishopric
of Osnaburg, have considerably strengthened his Interests in the Empire, and
given a great additional Weight to the Protestant Cause. But the most
remarkable Interpositions of Providence, in favor of him, have appeared in
removing those seemingly invincible Obstacles to his Succession; in taking
away, at so critical a Juncture, the Person who might have proved a dangerous
Enemy; in confounding the secret and open Attempts of his traitorous Subjects;
and in giving him the delightful prospect of transmitting his Power through a
numerous and still-increasing Progeny.

Upon the whole, it is not to be doubted but every wise and honest Subject will
concur with Providence in promoting the Glory and Happiness of His present
Majesty, who is endowed with all those Royal Virtues, that will naturally
secure to us the national Blessings, which ought to be dear and valuable to a
free People.

No. 3. Friday, December 30. 1715.
Quibus otio vel magnifice, vel molliter vivere copia erat, incerta pro certis,
bellum quam pacem, malebant. Sall.
EVERY one knows, that it is usual for a French Officer, who can Write and
Read, to set down all the Occurrences of a Campaign, in which he pretends to
have been Personally concerned; and to publish them under the Title of his
Memoirs, when most of his Fellow Soldiers are dead that might have contradicted
any of his Matters of Fact. Many a gallant young Fellow has been killed in
Battle before he came to the third Page of his secret History; when several,
who have taken more care of their Persons, have lived to fill a whole Volume
with their military Performances, and to astonish the World with such Instances
of their Bravery, as had escaped the Notice of every Body else. One of our late
Preston Heroes had, it seems, resolved upon this Method of doing himself
Justice: And, had he not been nipp'd in the Bud, might have made a very
formidable Figure in his own Works, among Posterity. A Friend of mine, who had
the Pillage of his Pockets, has made me a Present of the following Memoirs,
which he desires me to accept as a Part of the Spoils of the Rebels. I have
omitted the Introduction, as more proper for the Inspection of a Secretary of
State; and shall only set down so much of the Memoirs as seem to be a faithful
Narrative of that wonderful Expedition, which drew upon it the Eyes of all
Europe.

'HAving thus concerted Measures for a Rising, we had a general Meeting over a
Bowl of Punch. It was here proposed by one of the Wisest among us, to draw up a
Manifesto, setting forth the Grounds and Motives of our taking Arms: For, as he
observed, there had never yet been an Insurrection in England, where the
Leaders had not thought themselves obliged to give some Reasons for it. To this
End we laid our Heads together to consider what Grievances the Nation had
suffered under the Reign of King George. After having spent some Hours upon
this Subject, without being able to discover any, we unanimously agreed to
Rebel first, and to find out Reasons for it afterward. It was indeed easy to
guess at several Grievances of a private Nature, which influenced particular
Persons. One of us had spent his Fortune: Another was a younger Brother: A
third had the Encumbrance of a Father upon his Estate. But that which
principally disposed us in favor of the Chevalier was, that most of the
Company had been obliged to take the Abjuration Oath against their Will. Being
at length thoroughly enflamed with Zeal and Punch, we resolved to take Horse
the next Morning; which we did accordingly, having been joined by a
considerable Reinforcement of Roman Catholics, whom we could rely upon, as
knowing them to be the best Tories in the Nation, and avowed Enemies to
Presbyterianism. We were likewise joined by a very useful Associate, who was a
Fiddler by Profession, and brought in with him a Body of lusty young Fellows,
whom he had tweedled into the Service. About the third Day of our March I was
made a Colonel; though, I must need say, I gained my Commission by my Horse's
Virtues, not my own; having leapt over a six-bar Gate at the Head of the
Cavalry. My General, who is a discerning Man, hereupon gave me a Regiment;
telling me, He did not question but I would do the like when I came to the
Enemies Palisadoes. We pursued our March with much Intrepidity through two or
three open Towns, to the great Terror of the Market People, and the Miscarriage
of half a Dozen big-belly'd Women. Notwithstanding the Magistracy was generally
against us, we could discover many Friends among our Spectators; particularly
in two or three Balconies, which were filled with several tawdry Females, who
are known in that Country by the ancient Name of Harlots. This Sort of Ladies
received us every where with great Demonstrations of Joy, and promised to
assist us with their Prayers. After these signal Successes in the North of
England, it was thought advisable by our General to proceed toward our Scotch
Confederates. During our first Day's March I amused my self with considering
what Post I should accept of under James the Third, when we had put him in
Possession of the British Dominions. Being a great Lover of Country Sports, I
absolutely determined not to be a Minister of State, nor to be fobb'd off with
a Garter; till at length passing by a noble Countrey-Seat which belongs to a
Whig, I resolved to beg it; and pleased myself the Remainder of the Day with
several Alterations I intended to make in it. For though the Situation was very
delightful, I neither liked the Front of the House, nor the Avenues that led to
it. We were indeed so confident of Success, that I found most of my
Fellow Soldiers were taken up with Imaginations of the same Nature. There had
like to have been a Duel between two of our Subalterns, upon a dispute which of
them should be Governor of Portsmouth. A Popish Priest about the same Time
gave great Offense to a Northumberland Squire, whom he threatened to
Excommunicate, if he did not give up to him the Church Lands, which his Family
had usurped ever since the Reformation. In short, every Man had cut out a Place
for himself in his own Thoughts; so that I could reckon up in our little Army
two or three Lord-Treasurers, half a Dozen Secretaries of State, and at least a
Score of Lords Justices in Air for each Side of Trent. We pursued our March
through several Villages, which we drank dry, making Proclamation at our
Entrance, in the Name of James the Third, against all Concealments of Ale or
Brandy. Being very much fatigued with the Action of a whole Week, it was agreed
to rest on Sunday, when we heard a most excellent Sermon. Our Chaplain insisted
principally upon Two Heads. Under the First he proved to us, that the Breach of
Public Oaths is no Perjury; And under the Second expounded to us the Nature of
Non-Resistance; which might be interpreted from the Hebrew, to signify either
Loyalty or Rebellion, according as the Sovereign bestowed his Favors and
Preferments. He concluded with exhorting us, in a most pathetick Manner, to
Purge the Land by Wholesome Severities, and to Propagate Sound Principles by
Fire and Sword. We set forward the next Day toward our Friends at Kelso; but
by the Way had like to have lost our General, and some of our most active
Officers. For a Fox unluckily crossing the Road, drew off a considerable
Detachment, who clapped Spurs to their Horses, and pursued him with Whoops and
Hollows till we had lost Sight of them. A Covey of Patridges springing in our
Front, put our Infantry in Disorder on the same Day. It was not long after this
that we were joined by our Friends from the other Side of the Frith. Upon the
Junction of the Two Corpse our Spies brought us Word, that they discovered a
great Cloud of Dust at some distance; upon which we sent out a Party to
Reconnoitre. They returned to us with Intelligence, that the Dust was raised by
a great Drove of Black Cattle. This News was not a little welcome to us, the
Army of both Nations being very Hungry. We quickly formed ourselves, and
received Orders for the Attack, with positive Instructions to give no Quarter.
Every thing was executed with so-much good Order, that we made a very plentiful
Supper. We had, three Days after, the same Success against a Flock of Sheep,
which we were forced to eat with great Precipitation, having received Advice of
General Carpenter's March as we were at Dinner. Upon this Alarm we made
incredible Stretches toward the South, with a Design to gain the Fastnesses of
Preston. We did little remarkable in our Way, except setting Fire to a few
Houses, and frighting an old Woman into Fits. We had now got a long Day's March
of the Enemy; and meeting with a considerable Refreshment of October, all the
Officers assembled over it, among whom were several Popish Lords and Gentlemen,
who toasted many loyal Healths and Confusions, and wept very plentifully for
the Danger of the Church. We sat till Midnight, and at our Parting resolved to
give the Enemy Battle; but the next Morning changed our Resolutions, and
prosecuted our March with indefatigable Speed. We were no sooner arrived upon
the Frontiers of Cumberland, but we saw a great Body of Militia drawn up in
Array against us. Orders were given to Halt; and a Council of War was
immediately called, wherein we agreed, with that great Unanimity which was so
remarkable among us on these Occasions, to make a Retreat. But before we could
give the Word, the Trainbands, taking Advantage of our Delay, fled first. We
arrived at Preston without any memorable Adventure; where, after having formed
many Barricades, and prepared for a vigorous Resistance, upon the Approach of
the King's Troops under General Wills, who was used to the Outlandish Way of
making War, we thought it high Time to put in Practice that Passive-Obedience,
in which our Party so much glories, and which I would advise them to stick to
for the future.' Such was the End of this Rebellion; which, in all Probability,
will not only tend to the Safety of our Constitution, but the Preservation of
the Game.

No. 4. Monday, January 2. 1716.
Ne se mulier extra virtutum cogitationes, extraque bellorum casus putet, ipsis
incipientis matrimonii auspiciis admonetur, venire se laborum periculorumque
sociam, idem in pace, idem in praelio passuram ausuramque. Sic vivendum, sic
pereundum. Tacit.
IT is with great Satisfaction I observe, that the Women of our Island, who are
the most eminent for Virtue and good Sense, are in the Interest of the present
Government. As the fair Sex very much recommend the Cause they are engaged in,
it would be no small Misfortune to a Sovereign, though he had all the Male Part
of the Nation on his Side, if he did not find himself King of the most
beautiful Half of his Subjects. Ladies are always of great use to the Party
they espouse, and never fail to win over Numbers to it. Lovers, according to
Sir William Petty's Computation, make at least the Third Part of the fencible
Men of the British Nation; and it has been an uncontroverted Maxim in all Ages,
that, though a Husband is sometimes a stubborn Sort of a Creature, a Lover is
always at the Devotion of his Mistress. By this means it lies in the Power of
every fine Woman, to secure at least half a Dozen ablebodied Men to His
Majesty's Service. The Female World are likewise indispensably necessary in the
best Causes to manage the Controversial Part of them, in which no Man of
tolerable Breeding is ever able to refute them. Arguments out of a pretty Mouth
are unanswerable.

It is indeed remarkable that the Inferior Tribe of common Women, who are a
Dishonor to their Sex, have, in most Reigns, been the professed Sticklers for
such as have acted in Opposition to the true Interest of the Nation. The most
numerous Converts in King James's Reign, were particularly noted to be of this
kind. I can give no other Reason for such a Behavior, unless it be, that it is
not for the Advantage of these Female Adventurers the Laws of the Land should
take Place, and that they know Bridewell is a Part of our Constitution.

There are many Reasons why the Women of Great Britain should be on the Side of
the Freeholder, and Enemies to the Person who would bring in Arbitrary
Government and Popery. As there are several of our Ladies who amuse themselves
in the reading of Travels, they cannot but take Notice what uncomfortable Lives
those of their own Sex lead, where Passive-Obedience is professed and practiced
in its utmost Perfection. In those Countries the Men have no Property but in
their Wives, who are the Slaves to Slaves: every married Woman being subject to
a domestic Tyrant, that requires from her the same Vassalage which he pays to
his Sultan. If the Ladies would seriously consider the evil Consequences of
arbitrary lower, they would find, that it spoils the Shape of the Foot in
China, where the barbarous Politics of the Men so diminish the Basis of the
Female Figure, as to unqualify a Woman for an Evening Walk or Country Dance.
In the East Indies a Widow, who has any Regard to her Character, throws her
self into the Flames of her Husband's Funeral Pile, to show, forsooth, that she
is faithful and loyal to the Memory of her deceased Lord. In Persia the
Daughters of Eve, as they call them, are reckoned in the Inventory of their
Goods and Chattels: and it is a usual Thing when a Man sells a Bale of Silk, or
a Drove of Camels, to toss half a dozen Women into the Bargain. Through all the
Dominions of the Great Turk, a Woman thinks her self happy if she can get but
the twelfth Share of a Husband, and is thought of no manner of use in the
Creation, but to keep up a proper Number of Slaves for the Commander of the
Faithful. I need not set forth the ill Usage, which the fair Ones meet with in
those despotick Governments that lie nearer us. Every one has heard of the
several Ways of locking up Women in Spain and Italy; where, if there is any
Power lodged in any of the Sex, it is not among the young and the beautiful,
whom Nature seems to have formed for it, but among the old and withered
Matrons, known by the frightful Name of Gouvernantes and Duegna's. If any
should allege the Freedoms indulged to the French Ladies, he must own that
these are owing to the natural Gallantry of the People, not to their Form of
Government, which excludes by its very Constitution every Female from Power, as
naturally unfit to hold the Scepter of that Kingdom.

Women ought in reason to be no less averse to Popery than to arbitrary Power.
Some merry Authors have pretended to demonstrate, that the Roman Catholic
Religion could never spread in a Nation, where Women would have more Modesty
than to expose their innocent Liberties to a Confessor. Others of the same
Turn, have assured us, that the fine British Complexion, which is so peculiar
to our Ladies, would suffer very much from a Fish-Diet: And that a whole Lent
would give such a Sallowness to the celebrated Beauties of this Island, as
would scarce make them distinguishable from those of France. I shall only leave
to the serious Consideration of my Countrey-Women the Danger any of them might
have been in, (had Popery been our National Religion) of being forced by their
Relations to a State of perpetual Virginity. The most blooming Toast in the
Island might have been a Nun; and many a Lady, who is now a Mother of fine
Children, condemned to a Condition of Life, disagreeable to herself, and
unprofitable to the World. To this I might add the melancholy Objects, they
would be daily entertained with, of several sightly Men delivered over to an
inviolable Celibacy. Let a young Lady imagine to herself the brisk embroidered
Officer, who now makes Love to her with so agreeable an Air, converted into a
Monk; or the Bea^, who now addresses himself to her in a full bottomed Wig,
distinguished by a little bald Pat^^ covered with a black Leather Skull-Cap.
(...) forbear to mention many other Objections* which the Ladies, who are no
Strangers to the Doctrines of Popery, will easily recollect: The I do not in
the least doubt, but those I have already suggested, will be sufficient to
persuad^ my fair Readers to be zealous in the Protesta^ Cause.

The Freedom and Happiness of our British Ladies is so singular, that it is a
common Saying in foreign Countries, If a Bridge were built cross the Seas, all
the Women in Europe would flock into England. It has been observed, that the
Laws relating to them are so favorable, that one would think they themselves
had given Votes in enacting them. All the Honors and Indulgences of Society
are due to them by our Customs; and, by our Constitution, they have all the
Privileges of English-born Subjects, without the Burdens. I need not acquaint
my fair Fellow-Freeholders, that every Man, who is anxious for our sacred and
civil Rights, is a Champion in their Cause; since we enjoy in common a Religion
agreeable to that reasonable Nature, of which we equally partake; and since, in
Point of Property, our Law makes no Distinction of Sexes.

We may therefore justly expect from them, that they will act in concert with
us for the Preservation of our Laws and Religion, which cannot subsist, but
under the Government of His present Majesty; and would necessarily be
subverted, under that of a Person bred up in the most violent Principles of
Popery and arbitrary Power. Thus may the fair Sex contribute to fix the Peace
of a brave and generous People, who for many Ages, have disdained to bear any
Tyranny but theirs; and be as famous in History, as those illustrious Matrons,
who, in the Infancy of Rome, reconciled the Romans and the Sabines, and united
the two contendng Parties under their new King.

No. 5. Friday, January 6.
Omnium Societatum nulla est gravior, nulla cario^ quam ea quae cum republica
est unicuique nostrum Cari sunt parents, cari liberi, propinqui, familiares:
Sed omnes omnium caritates patria una com plexa est: Pro qua quis bonus dubitet
morten oppetere, si ei sit profuturus? Cic.
THere is no greater Sign of a general Decay of Virtue in a Nation, than a Want
of Zeal in its Inhabitants for the Good of their Country. This generous and
publick-spirited Passior has been observed of late Years to languish and grow
cold in this our Island; where a Party of Men have made it their Business to
represent it as chimerical and romantic, to destroy in the Minds of the People
the Sense of national Glory, and to turn into Ridicule our natural and ancient
Allies, who are united to us by the common interests both of Religion and
Policy. It may not therefore be unseasonable to recommend to this present
Generation the Practice of that Virtue, for which their Ancestors were
particularly famous, and which is called The Love of one's Country. This Love
to our Country, as a moral Virtue, is a fixed Disposition of Mind to promote
the Safety; Welrare, and Reputation of the Community in which we are born, and
of the Constitution under which we are protected. Our Obligation to this great
Duty, may appear to us from several Considerations.

In the first Place we may observe, that we are directed to it by one of those
secret Suggestions of Nature, which go under the Name of Instinct, and which
are never given in vain. As Self-love is an Instinct planted in us for the Good
and Safety of each particular Person, the Love of our Country is impressed on
our Minds for the Happiness and Preservation of the Community. This Instinct is
so remarkable, that we find Examples of it in those who are born in the most
uncomfortable Climates, or the worst of Governments. We read of an Inhabitant
of Nova Zembla, who, after having lived some Time in Denmark, where he was
clothed and treated with the utmost Indulgence, took the first Opportunity of
making his Escape, though with the Hazard of his Life, into his native Regions of
Cold, Poverty and Nakedness. We have an Instance of the same Nature among the
very Hottentots. One of these Savages was brought into England, taught our
Language, and in a great Measure polished out of his natural Barbarity: But
upon being carried back to the Cape of Good Hope (where it was thought he might
have been of Advantage to our English Traders) he mixed in a kind of Transport
with his Countrymen, brutaliz'd with 'em in their Habit and Manners, and would
never again return to his foreign Acquaintance. I need not mention the common
Opinion of the Negroes in our Plantations, who have no other Notion of a future
State of Happiness, than that, after Death, they shall be conveyed back to
their native Country. The Swiss are so remarkable for this Passion, that it
often turns to a Disease among them; for which there is a particular Name in
the German Language, and which the French call The Distemper of the Country:
For nothing is more usual than for several of their common Soldiers who are
listed into a foreign Service, to have such violent Hankerings after their
Home, as (...) pine away even to Death, unless they have (...) Permission to
return; which, on such an Occasion, is generally granted them. I shall onl^ add
under this Head, that since the Love of one'^ Country is natural to every Man,
any particula^ Nation, who, by false Politics, shall endeavou^ to stifle or
restrain it, will not be upon a Lev^ with others.

As this Love of our Country is natural to every Man, so it is likewise very
reasonable; and that in the first Place, because it inclines us to be
Beneficial to those, who are and ought to (...) dearer to us than any others.
It takes in ou^ Families, Relations, Friends and Acquaintance^ and, in short,
all whose Welfare and Security we are obliged to consult, more than that (...)
those who are Strangers to us. For this Reason it is the most sublime and
extensive of (...) social Virtues: Especially if we consider that (...) does
not only promote the Well-being of these who are our Contemporaries, but
likewise (...) their Children and their Posterity. Hence it (...) that all
Casuists are unanimous in determining* that when the Good of the Country
interferes even with the Life of the most beloved Relation* dearest Friend, or
greatest Benefactor, it is to be preferred without Exception.

Farther, though there is a Benevolence due to all Mankind, none can question but
a superior Degree of it is to be paid to a Father, a Wife, or a Child. In the
same Manner, though our Love should reach to the whole Species, a greater
Proportion of it should exert it self toward that Community in which
Providence has placed us. This is our proper Sphere of Action, the Province
allotted to us for the Exercise of all our Civil Virtues, and in which alone we
have Opportunities of expressing our Good Will to Mankind. I could not but be
pleased in the Accounts of the late Persian Embassy into France, with a
particular Ceremony of the Ambassador; who, every Morning, before he went
abroad, religiously saluted a Turf of Earth dug out of his own native Soil, to
remind him, that in all the Transactions of the Day he was to think of his
Country, and pursue its Advantages. If, in the several Districts and Divisions
of the World, Men would thus study the Welfare of those respective Communities,
to which their Power of doing Good is limited, the whole Race of reasonable
Creatures would be happy, as far as the Benefits of Society can make them so.
At least, we find so many Blessings naturally flowing from this noble
Principle, that, in Proportion, as it prevails, every Nation becomes a
prosperous and flourishing People.

It may be yet a farther Recommendation of this particular Virtue, if we
consider, that no Nation was ever famous for its Morals, which was not at the
same Time remarkable for its public Spirit: Patriots naturally rise out of a
Spartan or Roman Virtue: And there is no Remark more common among the Ancient
Historians, than that when the State was corrupted with Avarice and Luxury, it
was in Danger of being Betrayed, or Sold.

To the foregoing Reasons for the Love which every good Man owes to his
Country, we may add, that the Actions, which are most celebrated in History,
and which are read with the greatest Admiration, are such as proceed from this
Principle. The establishing of good Laws, the detecting of Conspiracies, the
crushing of Seditions and Rebellions, the falling in Battle, or the devoting of
a Man's self to certain Death for the Safety of Fellow-Citizens, are Actions
that always warm the Reader, and endear to him Persons of the remotest Ages,
and the most distant Countries.

And as Actions, that proceed from the Love of one's Country, are more
Illustrious than any other in the Records of Time; so we find that those
Persons, who have been eminent in other Virtues, have been particularly
distinguished by This. It would be endless to produce Example^ of this Kind,
out of Greek and Roman Authors* To confine my self therefore in so wide and
beaten a Field, I shall choose some Instances from Holy Writ, which abounds in
Accounts of this Nature, as much as any other History whatsoever And this I do
the more willingly, because in some Books lately written, I find it objected
against Revealed Religion, that it does not inspire the Love of one's Country.
Here I must pr^mise, that as the Sacred Author of our Religion chiefly
inculcated to the Jews those Parts of their Duty wherein they were most
defective, so there was no Need of insisting upon this: The Jews being
remarkable for an Attachment to their own Country, even to the Exclusion of
all common Humanity to Strangers. We see in the Behavior of this Divine
Person, the Practice of this Virtue in Conjunction with all others. He deferred
working a Miracle in the Behalf of a Syro-Phoenician Woman, 'till he had
declared his Superior Good Will to his own Nation; and was prevailed upon to
heal the Daughter of a Roman Centurion, by hearing from the Jews, that he was
one who loved their Nation, and had built them a Synagogue. But, to look out
for no other Instance, what was ever more moving, than his Lamentation over
Jerusalem, at his first Approach to it, notwithstanding he had foretold the
cruel and unjust Treatment he was to meet with in that City! For he foresaw the
Destruction which in a few Years was to fall upon that People; a Destruction
not to be paralleled in any Nation from the Beginning of the World to this
Day; and in the View of it melted into Tears. His Followers have in many Places
expressed the like Sentiments of Affection for their Countrymen, among which
none is more extraordinary than that of the great Convert, who wished he
himself might be made a Curse, provided it might turn to the Happiness of his
Nation; or as he words it, Of his Brethren and Kinsmen, who are Israelites.
This Instance naturally brings to Mind the same Heroic Temper of Soul in the
great Jewish Lawgiver, who would have devoted himself in the same Manner,
rather than see his People perish. It would indeed be difficult to find out any
Man of extraordinary Piety in the Sacred Writings, in whom this Virtue is not
highly conspicuous. The Reader however will excuse me, if I take Notice of one
Passage, because it is a very fine One, and wants only a Place in some Polite
Author of Greece or Rome, to have been admired and celebrated. The King of
Syria lying sick upon his Bed, sent Hasael one of his Great Officers to the
Prophet Elisha, to enquire of him whether he should recover. The Prophet looked
so attentively on this Messenger, that it put him into some Confusion; or to
quote this Beautiful Circumstance, and the whole Narrative, in the pathetick
Language of the Scripture, Elisha settled his Countenance steadfastly upon him,
until he was ashamed: And Hasael said, why weepeth my Lord? And he said,
because I know the Evil that thou will do unto the Children of Israel Their
strong Holds will thou set on Fire, and their Men will thou slay with the
Sword, and wilt dash their Children, and rip up their Women with Child And
Hasael said, But what, is thy Servant a Dog that he should do this great Thing?
And Elisha answered, The Lord has showed me, that thou shall be King over
Syria.

I might enforce these Reasons for the Love of our Country, by Considerations
adapted to my Readers as they are Englishmen, and as by that Means they enjoy a
purer Religion, and a more excellent Form of Government, than any other Nation
under Heaven. But being persuaded that every One must look upon himself as
indispensably obliged to the Practice of a Duty, which is recommended to him by
so many Arguments and Examples, I shall only desire the honest, well-meaning
Reader, when he turns his Thoughts toward the Public, rather to consider what
Opportunities he has of doing Good to his Native Country, than to throw away
his Time in deciding the Rights of Princes, or the like Speculations, which are
so far beyond his Reach. Let us leave these great Points to the Wisdom of our
Legislature, and to the Determination of those, who are the proper Judges of
our Constitution. We shall otherwise be liable to the just Reproach, which is
(...) such Christians, as waste their Lives in the (...) and intricate Disputes
of Religion, when they should be practicing the Doctrine which it teaches. If
there be any Right upon Earth, any relying on the Judgment of our most Eminent
Lawyers and Divines, or indeed any Certainty in human Reason, our Present
Sovereign has an Undoubted Title to our Duty and Obedience. But supposing for
Argument's sake, that This Right were doubtful, and that an Englishman could be
divided in his Opinion, as to the Person to whom he should pay his Allegiance:
In this Case, there is no Question, but the Love of his Country ought to cast
the Balance, and to determine him on that Side, which is most conducive to the
Welfare of his Community. To bring this to our present Case. A' Man must be
destitute of common Sense, who is capable of imagining that the Protestant
Religion could flourish under the Government of a Bigoted Roman Catholic, or
that our Civil Rights could be Protected by One who has been trained up in the
Politics of the most Arbitrary Prince in Europe, and who could not acknowledge
his Gratitude to his Benefactor, by any remarkable Instance, which would not be
detrimental to the British Nation. And are these such desirable Blessings, that
an honest Man would endeavor to arrive at 'em, through the Confusions of a
Civil War, and the Blood of many Thousands of his Fellow Subjects? On the
contrary, the Arguments for our Steady, Loyal, and Affectionate Adherence to
King GEORGE; are so evident from this single Topic, that if every Briton,
instead of A spiring after private Wealth or Power, would sincerely desire to
make his Country happy, His Present Majesty would not have a single
Malecontent in his whole Dominions.

No. 6. Monday, January 9.
Fraus enim asiringit, non dissolvit Perjurium. Cic.
AT a Time when so many of the King's Subjects present themselves before their
respective Magistrates to take the Oaths required by Law, it may not be
improper to awaken in the Minds of my Readers a due Sense of the Engagement
under which they lay themselves. It is a melancholy Consideration, that there
should be several among us so hardened and deluded, as to think an Oath a
proper Subject for a Jest; and to make this, which is one of the most solemn
Acts of Religion, an Occasion of Mirth. Yet such is the Depravation of our
Manners at present, that nothing is more frequent than to near profligate Men
ridiculing, to the best of their Abilities, these Sacred Pledges of their Duty
and Allegiance; and endeavoring to be witty upon themselves, for daring to
prevaricate with God and Man. A poor Conceit of their own, or a Quotation out
of Hudibras, shall make 'em treat with Levity an Obligation wherein their
Safety and Welfare are concerned both as to this World and the next. Raillery
of this Nature, is enough to make the Hearer tremble. As these Miscreants seem
to glory in the Profession of their Impiety, there is no Man, who has any
Regard to his Duty, or even to his Reputation, that can appear in their
Defense. But if there are Others of a more serious Turn, who join with us
deliberately in these Religious Professions of Loyalty to our Sovereign, with
any private Salvo's or Evasions, they would do well to consider those Maxims,
in which all Casuists are agreed, who have gained any Esteem for their
Learning, Judgment, or Morality. These have unanimously determined that an Oath
is always to be taken in the Sense of that Authority which imposes it: And that
those, whose Hearts do not concur with their Lips in the Form of these public
Protestations; or who have any mental Reserves, or who take an Oath against
their Consciences, upon any Motive whatsoever; or with a Design to break it, or
repent of it, are guilty of Perjury. Any of these, or the the like
Circumstances, instead of alleviating the Crime, make it more heinous, as they
are premediated Frauds (which it is the chief Design of an Oath to prevent) and
the most flagrant instances of Insincerity to Men, and Irreverence to their
Maker. For this Reason, the Perjury of a Man, who takes an Oath, with an
Intention to keep it, and is afterward seduced to the Violation of it, (though a
Crime not to be thought of, without the greatest Horror) is yet, in some
Respects, not quite so black as the Perjury abovementioned. It is indeed a very
unhappy Token of the great Corruption of our Manners, that there should be any
so inconsiderate among us, as to sacrifice the standing and essential Duties of
Morality, to the Views of Politics; and that, as in my last Paper, it was no
unseasonable to prove the Love of our Country to be a Virtue, so in this there
should be any Occasion to show that Perjury is a Sin. But it is our Misfortune
to live in an Age when such wild and unnatural Doctrines have prevailed among
some of our Fellow Subjects, that if One looks into their Schemes of
Government, they seem according as they are in the Humor, to believe that a
Sovereign is not to be restrained by his Coronation Oath, or his People by
their Oaths of Allegiance: Or to represent them in a plainer Light in some
Reigns they are both for a Power and an Obedience that is unlimited, and in
others are for retrenching within the narrowest Bounds, both the Authority of
the Prince, and the Allegiance of the Subject.

Now the Guilt of Perjury is so self-evident, that it was always reckoned among
the greatest Crimes, by those who were only governed by the Light of Reason:
The inviolable observing of an Oath, like the other practical Duties of
Christianity, is a Part of Natural Religion. As Reason is common to all
Mankind, the Dictates of it are the same through the whole Species: And since
every Man's own Heart will tell him, that there can be no greater Affront to
the Deity, whom he worships, than to appeal to him with an Intention to
deceive; nor a greater Injustice to Men, than to betray them by false
Assurances; it is no Wonder that Pagans and Christians, Infidels and Believers,
should concur in a Point wherein the Honor of the Supreme Being, and the
Welfare of Society are so highly concerned. For this Reason, Pythagoras to his
first Precept of honoring the Immortal Gods, immediately subjoyns that of
paying Veneration to an Oath. We may see the Reverence which the Heathens
showed to these Sacred and Solemn Engagements, from the Inconveniences which
they often suffered, rather than break through them. We have frequent Instances
of this Kind in the Roman Commonwealth; which, as it has been observed by
several Eminent Pagan Writers, very much excelled all other Pagan Governments
in the Practice of Virtue. How far they exceeded in this Particular, those
great Corrupters of Christianity, and indeed of Natural Religion, the Jesuists,
may appear from their Abhorrence of every Thing that looked like a fraudulent
or mental Evasion. Of this I shall only produce the following Instance. Several
Romans, who had been taken Prisoners by Hannibal, were released, upon obliging
themselves by an Oath to return again to his Camp. Among these there was One,
who thinking to elude the Oath, went the same Day back to the Camp, on Pretense
of having forgot something. But this Prevarication was so shocking to the Roman
Senate, that they ordered him to be apprehended, and delivered up to Hannibal.

We may farther see the just Sense the Heathens had of the Crime of Perjury,
from the Penalties which they inflicted on the Persons guilty of it. Perjury
among the Scythians was a Capital Crime; and among the Egyptians also was
punished with Death, as Diodorus Siculus relates, who observes that an Offender
of this Kind, is guilty of those two Crimes (wherein the Malignity of Perjury
truly consists) a failing in his Respect to the Divinity, and in his Faith
toward Men. It Is unnecessary to multiply Instances of this Nature, which may
be found in almost every Author who has written on this Subject.

If Men, who had no other Guide but their Reason, considered an Oath to be of
such a tremendous Nature, and the Violation of it to be so great a Crime; it
ought to make a much deeper Impression upon Minds enlightened by Revealed
Religion, as they have more exalted Notions of the Divinity. A supposed Heathen
Deity might be so poor in his Attributes, so stinted in his Knowledge,
Goodness, or Power, that a Pagan might hope to conceal his Perjury from his
Notice, or not to provoke him, should he be discovered, or should he provoke
him, not to be punished by him. Nay, he might have produced Examples of
Falsehood and Perjury in the Gods themselves, to whom he appealed. But as
Revealed Religion has given us a more just and clear Idea of the Divine Nature,
He, whom we appeal to, is Truth it self, the Great Searcher of Hearts, who will
not let Fraud and Falsehood go unpunished, or hold him guiltless, that takes
His Name in vain. And as with Regard to the Deity, so likewise with Regard to
Man, the Obligation of an Oath is stronger upon Christians than upon any other
Part of Mankind; and that because Charity, Truth, mutual Confidence, and all
other Social Duties are carried to greater Heights, and enforced with stronger
Motives by the Principles of our Religion.

Perjury, with Relation to the Oaths which are at present required of us, has
in it all the aggravating Circumstances, which can attend that Crime. We take
them before the Magistrates of Public Justice; are reminded by the Ceremony,
that it is a Part of that Obedience which we learn from the Gospel; expressly
disavow all Evasions and mental Reservations whatsoever; appeal to Almighty God
for the Integrity of our Hearts, and only desire Him to be our Helper, as we
fulfill the Oath we there take in His Presence. I mention these Circumstances,
to which several other might be added, because it is a received Doctrine among
those, who have treated of the Nature of an Oath, that the greater the
Solemnities are which attend it, the more they aggravate the Violation of it.
And here what must be the Success that a Man can hope for who turns a Rebel,
after having disclaimed the Divine Assistance, but upon Condition of being a
Faithful and Loyal Subject? He first of all desires that God may help him, as
he shall keep his Oaths, and afterward hope to prosper in an Enterprise, which
is the direct Breach of it.

Since therefore Perjury, by the common Sense of Mankind, the Reason of the
Thing, and from the whole Tenor of Christianity, is a Crime of so flagitious a
Nature, we cannot be too careful in avoiding every Approach toward it.

The Virtue of the Ancient Athenians is very remarkable in the Case of
Euripides. This great Tragic Poet, though famous for the Morality of his Plays,
had introduced a Person, who, being reminded of an Oath he had taken, replied,
I swore with my Mouth, but not with my Heart. The Impiety of this Sentiment set
the Audience in an Uproar; made Socrates (though an intimate Friend of the Poet)
go out of the Theater with Indignation; and gave so great Offense, that he was
publicly accused, and brought upon his Trial, as One who had suggested an
Evasion of what they thought the most Holy and Indissoluble Bond of human
Society. So jealous were these Virtuous Heathens of any the smallest. Hint,
that might open a Way to Perjury.

And here it highly imports us to consider, that we do not only break our Oath
of Allegiance by Actual Rebellion, but by all those other Methods which have a
natural and manifest Tendency to (...)* The Guilt may lie upon a Man, where the
Penalty cannot take Hold of him. Those who speak irreverently of the Person to
whom they have sworn Allegiance; who endeavor to alienate from Him the Hearts
of His Subjects; or to inspire the People with Disaffection to His Government,
cannot be thought to be true to the Oath they have taken. And as for those, who
by concerted Falsehoods and Defamations endeavor to blemish His Character, or
weaken His Authority; they incur the complicated Guilt both of Slander and
Perjury. The moral Crime is completed in such Offenders, and there are only
accidental Circumstances wanting, to work it up for the Cognizance of the Law.

Nor is it sufficient for a Man, who has given these Solemn Assurances to his
Prince, to forbear the doing Him any Evil, unless at the same Time he do Him
all the Good he can in his proper Station of Life.

Loyalty is of an Active Nature, and ought to discover it self in all the
Instances of Zeal and Affection to our Sovereign: And if we carefully examine
the Duty of that Allegiance which we pledge to His Majesty, by the Oaths that
are tendered to us, we shall find that We do not only renounce, refuse, and
abjure any Allegiance or Obedience to the Pretender, but Swear to defend King
George to the utmost of our Power, against all Traitorous Conspiracies and
Attempts whatsoever, and to disclose and make known to His Majesty, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which we shall know to be against Him.

To conclude, as among those who have bound themselves by these Sacred
Obligations, the actual Traitor or Rebel is guilty of Perjury in the Eye of the
Law; the secret Promoter, or Well-Wisher of the Cause, is so before the
Tribunal of Conscience. And though I should be unwilling to pronounce the Man who
is indolent, or indifferent in the Cause of his Prince, to be absolutely
perjured; I may venture to affirm, that he falls very short of that Allegiance
to which he is obliged by Oath. Upon the whole we may be assured, that in a
Nation which is tied down by such Religious and Solemn Engagements, the
People's Loyalty will keep pace with their Morality; and that in Proportion as
they are sincere Christians, they will be faithful Subjects.

No. 7. Friday, January 13. 1716.
Veritas pluribus modis infracta: Primum inscitia reipublicae, ut alienae; mox
libidine assentandi, aut rursus odio adversus dominantes. Obtrectatio and livor
pronis auribus accipiuntur: quippe adulationi foedum crimen servitutis,
malignitati falsa species libertatis inest. Tac.
THERE is no greater Sign of a bad Cause, than when the Patrons of it are
reduced to the Necessity of making use of the most wicked Artifices to support
it. Of this Kind are the Falsehoods and Calumnies, which are invented and spread
abroad by the Enemies to our King and Country. This Spirit of Malice and
Slander does not discover itself in any Instances so ridiculous, as in those,
by which seditious Men endeavor to depreciate His Majesty's Person and Family;
without considering, that his Court at Hanover was always allowed to be one of
the Politest in Europe, and that, before he became our King, he was reckoned
among the greatest Princes of Christendom.

But the most glorious of His Majesty's Predecessors was treated after the same
Manner. Upon that Prince's first Arrival, the inconsiderable Party, who then
labored to make him odious to the People, gave out, That he brought with him
twenty thousand Laplanders, clothed in the Skins of Bears, all of their own
killing; and that they mutiny'd because they had not been regaled with a bloody
Battle within two Days after their Landing. He was no sooner on the Throne,
than those, who had contributed to place him there, finding that he had made
some Changes at Court which were not to their Humor, endeavored to render him
Unpopular by Misrepresentations of his Person, his Character, and his Actions.
They found that his Nose had a Resemblance to that of Oliver Cromwell, and clapped
him on a huge Pair of Mustachoes to frighten his People with: His Mercy was
Fear; his Justice was Cruelty; his Temperance, Economy, prudent Behavior, and
Application to Business, were Dutch Virtues; and such as we had not been used
to in our English Kings. He did not fight a Battle, in which the Tories did not
slay double the Number of what he had lost in the Field; nor ever raised a
Siege, or gained a Victory, which did not cost more than 'twas worth. In short,
he was contriving the Ruin of his Kingdom; and in order to it advanced Dr.
Tul^tson to the highest Station of the Church, my Lord Summers of the Law, Mr.
Mountague of the Treasury, and the Admiral at la Hegue of the Fleet. Such were
the Calumnies of the Party in those Times, which we see so faithfully copied
out by Men of the same Principles under the Reign of His present Majesty.

As the Schemes of these Gentlemen are the most absurd and contradictory to
common Sense, the Means by which they are promoted must be of the same Nature.
Nothing but Weakness and Folly can dispose Englishmen and Protestants to the
Interests of a Popish Pretender: And the same Abilities of Mind will naturally
qualify his Adherents to swallow the most palpable and notorious Falsehoods.
Their self-interested and designing Leaders cannot desire a more ductile and
easy People to work upon. How long was it before many of this simple, deluded
Tribe were brought to believe, that the Highlanders were a Generation of Men
that could be conquered! The Rabble of the Party were instructed to look upon
'em as so many Giants and Saracens; and were very much surprised to find, that
every one of 'em had not with his broad Sword mowed down at least a Squadron of
the King's Forces. There were not only public Rejoycings in the Camp at Perth,
but likewise many private Congratulations nearer us, among these Well-wishers
to their Country, upon the Victories of their Friends at Preston; which
continued till the Rebels made their solemn Cavalcade from Highgate. Nay, there
were then some of these wise Partisans, who concluded, the Government had hired
two or three hundred hale Men, who looked like Fox-hunters, to be Bound and
Pinioned, if not to be Executed, as Representatives of the pretended Captives.
Their Victories in Scotland have been innumerable; and no longer ago than last
Week, they gained a very remarkable One, in which the Highlanders cut off all
the Dutch Forces to a Man; and afterward disguising themselves in their
Habits, came up as Friends to the King's Troops, and put them all to the Sword.
This Story had a great Run for a Day or two; and I believe one might still find
out a Whisper among their secret Intelligence, that the Duke of Mar is actually
upon the Road to London, if not within two Days march of the Town. I need not
take Notice, that their Successes in the Battle of Dunblain are magnified among
some of them to this Day; though a Tory may very well say with King Pyrrhus,
That such another Victory would undo them.

But the most fruitful Source of Falsehood and Calumny, is that which, one would
think, should be the least apt to produce them; I mean a pretended Concern for
the Safety of our Established Religion. Were these People as anxious for the
Doctrines, which are essential to the Church of England, as they are for the
nominal Distinction of adhering to its Interests, they would know, that the
sincere Observation of public Oaths, Allegiance to their King, Submission to
their Bishops, Zeal against Popery, and Abhorrence of Rebellion, are the great
Points that adorn the Character of the Church of England, and in which the
Authors of the Reformed Religion in this Nation have always gloried. We justly
reproach the Jesuits, who have adapted all Christianity to Temporal and
Political Views, for maintaining a Position so repugnant to the Laws of Nature,
Morality and Religion, That evil may be committed, for the sake of Good, which
may arise from it. But we cannot suppose even this Principle, (as bad a One as
it is) should influence those Persons, who, by so many absurd and monstrous
Falsehoods, endeavor to delude Men into a Belief of the Danger of the Church.
If there be any relying on the solemn Declarations of a Prince, famed for
keeping his Word, constant in the public Exercises of our Religion, and
determined in the Maintenance of our Laws, we have all the Assurances that can
be given to us, for the Security of the established Church under His
Government. When a leading Man therefore begins to grow apprehensive for the
Church, you may be sure, that he is either in danger of losing a Place, or in
despair of getting one. It is pleasant on these Occasions, to see a notorious
Profligate seized with a Concern for his Religion, and converting his Spleen
into Zeal. These narrow and selfish Views have so great an Influence in this
Cry, that, among those who call themselves the Landed Interest, there are
several of my Fellow Freeholders, who always fancy the Church in Danger upon
the rising of Bank-Stock. But the standing Absurdities, without the Belief of
which no Man is reckoned a staunch Churchman, are, That there is a Calves Head
Club; for which (by the way) some pious Tory has made suitable Hymns and
Devotions: That there is a Confederacy among the greatest part of the Prelates
to destroy Episcopacy; and that all, who talk against Popery, are Presbyterians
in their Hearts. The Emissaries of the Party are so diligent in spreading
ridiculous Fictions of this Kind, that at present, if we may credit common
Report, there are several remote Parts of the Nation in which it is firmly
believed, that all the Churches in London are shut up; and that if any
Clergyman walks the Streets in his Habit, it is ten to one but he is knocked
down by some sturdy Schismatic.

We may observe upon this Occasion, that there are many particular Falsehoods
suited to the particular Climates and Latitudes in which they are published,
according as the Situation of the Place makes them less liable to Discovery:
There is many a Lie, that will not thrive within a hundred Miles of London:
Nay, we often find a Lie born in Southwark, that dies the same Day on this Side
the Water: And several produced in the loyal Ward of Port-soken of so feeble a
Make, as not to bear Carriage to the Royal Exchange. However, as the Mints of
Calumny are perpetually at work, there are a great Number of curious Inventions
issued out from Time to Time, which grow current among the Party, and circulate
through the whole Kingdom.

As the Design of this Paper is not to exasperate, but to undeceive my
Countrymen, let me desire them to consider the many Inconveniences they bring
upon themselves by these mutual Intercourses of Credulity and Falsehood. I shall
only remind the Credulous of the strong Delusion they have by this Means been
led into the greatest part of their Lives. Their hopes have been kept up by a
Succession of Lies for rear thirty Years. How many Persons have starved in
Expectation of those profitable Employments, which were promised them by the
Authors of these Forgeries! How many of them have died with great Regret, when
they thought they were within a Month of enjoying the inestimable Blessings of
a Popish and Arbitrary Reign!

I would therefore advise this blinded Set of Men, not to give Credit to those
Persons, by whom they have been so often fooled and imposed upon; but on the
contrary, to think it an Affront to their Parts, when they hear from any of
them such Accounts, as they would not dare to tell them, but upon the
Presumption that they are Idiots. Or if the Zeal for the Cause shall dispose
them to be Credulous in any Points that are favorable to it, I would beg of
them not to venture Wagers upon the Truth of them: And in this present
Conjuncture, by no means to sell out of the Stocks upon any News they shall
hear from their good Friends at Perth. As these Party Fictions are the proper
Subjects of Mirth and Laughter, their deluded Believers are only to be treated
with Pity or Contempt. But as for those Incendiaries of Figure and Distinction,
who are the Inventors and Publishers of such gross Falsehoods and Calumnies,
they cannot be regarded by others, but with the utmost Detestation and
Abhorrence; nor, one would think, by themselves, without the greatest Remorse
and Compunction of Heart; when they consider, that in order to give a Spirit to
a desperate Cause, they have, by their false and treacherous Insinuations and
Reports, betrayed so many of their Friends into their own Destruction.

No. 8. Monday, January 16.
Adveniet qui vestra dies Muliebribus armis Verbaredargueret. Virg.
I Have heard that several Ladies of Distinction, upon the Reading of my Fourth
Paper, are studying Methods how to make themselves useful to the Public. One
has a Design of keeping an open Tea-Table, where every Man shall be welcome
that is a Friend to King George. Another is for setting up an Assembly for
Basset, where none shall be admitted to Punt, that have not taken the Oaths. A
Third is upon an Invention of a Dress which will put every Tory Lady out of
Countenance: I am not informed of the Particulars, but am told in general, that
she has contrived to show her Principles by the setting of her Commode; so that
it will be impossible for any Woman, that is disaffected, to be in the Fashion.
Some of them are of Opinion that the Fan may be made use of with good Success,
against Popery, by exhibiting the Corruptions of the Church of Rome in various
Figures; and that their Abhorrence of the superstitious Use of Beads, may be
very aptly expressed in the make of a Pearl Necklace. As for the Civil Part of
our Constitution, it is unanimously agreed among the Leaders of the Sex, that
there is no Glory in making a Man their Slave, who has not naturally a Passion
for Liberty; and to disallow of all Professions of Passive Obedience, but from
a Lover to his Mistress.

It happens very luckily for the Interest of the Whigs, that their very Enemies
acknowledge the finest Women of Great Britain to be of that Party. The Tories
are forced to borrow their Toasts from their Antagonists; and can scarce find
Beauties enough of their own Side, to supply a single Round of October. One
may, indeed, sometimes discover among the Malignants of the Sex, a Face that
seems to have been naturally designed for a Whig Lady: But then it is so often
flushed with Rage, or sowered with Disappointments, that one cannot but be
troubled to see it thrown away upon the Owner. Would the pretty Malecontent be
persuaded to love her King and Country, it would diffuse a Cheerfulness
through all her Features, and give her quite another Air. I would therefore
advise these, my gentle Readers, as they consult the Good of their Faces, to
forbear frowning upon Loyalists, and Pouting at the Government. In the mean
Time, what may we not hope from a Cause, which is recommended by the Allurement
of Beauty, and the Force of Truth! It is therefore to be hoped that every fine
Woman will make this laudable Use of her Charms; and that she may not want to
be frequently reminded of this great Duty, I will only desire her to think of
her Country every Time she looks in her Glass.

But because it is impossible to prescribe such Rules, as shall be suitable to
the Sex in general, I shall consider them under their several Divisions of
Maids, Wives and Widows.

As for Virgins, who are unexperienced in the Wiles of Men, they would do well
to consider how little they are to rely on the Faith of Lovers, who in less
than a Year have broken their Allegiance to their lawful Sovereign; and what
Credit is to be given to the Vows and Protestations of such as show themselves
so little afraid of Perjury. Besides, what would an innocent young Lady think,
should she marry a Man without examining his Principles, and afterward find
herself got with Child by a Rebel?

In the next Place, every Wife ought to answer for her Man. If the Husband be
engaged in a seditious Club, or drinks mysterious Healths, or be frugal of his
Candles on a rejoicing Night, let her look to him, and keep him out of Harms
way; or the World will be apt to say, she has a Mind to be a Widow before her
Time. She ought in such Cases to exert the Authority of the Curtain Lecture;
and if she finds him of a rebellious Disposition, to tame him, as they do Birds
of Prey, by dinning him in the Ears all Night long.

Widows may be supposed Women of too good Sense not to discountenance all
Practices, that have a Tendency to the Destruction of Mankind. Besides they
have a greater Interest in Property than either Maids or Wives, and do not hold
their Jointures by the precarious Tenure of Portions or Pin-Money. So that it
is as unnatural for a Dowager, as a Freeholder, to be an Enemy to our
Constitution.

As nothing is more Instructive than Examples, I would recommend to the Perusal
of our British Virgins the Story of Clelia a Roman Spinster, whose Behavior is
represented by all their Historians, as one of the chief Motives that
discouraged the Tarquins from prosecuting their Attempt to regain the Throne,
from whence they had been expelled. Let the Married Women reflect upon the
Glory acquired by the Wife of Coriolanus, who, when her Husband, after long
Exile, was returning into his Country with Fire and Sword, diverted him from
so cruel and unnatural an Enterprise. And let those who have out lived their
Husbands never forget their Countrey-woman Widow Boadicia, who headed her
Troops, in Person against the Invasion of a Roman Army, and encouraged them
with this memorable Saying, I, who am a Woman, am resolved upon Victory or
Death: But as for you who are Men, you may, if you please, choose Life and
Slavery.

But I do not propose to our British Ladies, that they should turn Amazons in
the Service of their Sovereign, nor so much as let their Nails grow for the
Defense of their Country. The Men will take the Work of the Field off their
Hands, and show the World, that English Valor cannot be matched, when it is
animated by English Beauty. I do not however disapprove the Project which is
now on Foot for a FEMALE ASSOCIATION; and, since I hear the fair Confederates
cannot agree among themselves upon a Form, shall presume to lay before them the
following rough Draught, to be corrected or improved, as they in their Wisdom
shall think fit.

'WE the Consorts, Relicts, and Spinsters of the Isle of Great Britain, whose
Name are underwritten, being most passionately Offended at the Falsehood and
Perfidiousness of certain faithless Men, and at the Lukewarmth and Indifference
of others, have entered into a voluntary Association for the Good and Safety of
our Constitution. And we do hereby engage our selves to raise and arm our
Vassals for the Service of His Majesty King George, and Him to Defend with our
Tongues and Hearts, our Eyes, Eye-Lashes, Favorites, Lips, Dimples, and every
other Feature, whether natural or acquired. We promise publicly and openly to
avow the Loyalty of our Principles in every Word we shall utter, and every
Patch we shall stick on. We do farther promise, to annoy the Enemy with all the
Flames, Darts and Arrows with which Nature has armed us; never to correspond
with them by Sigh, Ogle, or Billetdoux; not to have any Intercourse with them
either in Snuff or Tea; nor to accept the Civility of any Man's Hand, who is
not ready to use it in the Defense of his Country. We are determined in so
good a Cause to endure the greatest Hardships and Severities, if there should
be Occasion; and even to wear the Manufacture of our Country, rather than
appear the Friends of a foreign Interest in the richest French Brocade. And
forgetting all private Feuds, Jealousies and Animosities, We do unanimously
oblige ourselves, by this our Association, to stand and fall by one another as
Loyal and Faithful Sisters and Fellow Subjects.' N. B. This Association will be
lodged at Mr. Motteux's, where Attendance will be given to the Subscribers, who
are to be ranged in their respective Columns, as Maids, Wives, and Widows.

No. 9. Friday, January 20. 1716.
Confilia qui dant prava cautis Hominibus,
Et perdunt Operam, and deridentur turpiter. Phaedr.

THOUGH I have already seen, in The Town-Talk, a Letter from a Celebrated
Englishman to the Pretender, which is indeed an Excellent Answer to His
Declaration, the Title of this Paper obliges me to publish the following Piece,
which considers it in different Lights.

The Declaration of the Freeholders of Great Britain, in Answer to that of the
Pretender.
WE, by the Mercy of God, Freeholders of Great Britain, to the Popish
Pretender, who styles himself King of Scotland and England, and Defender of our
Faith, DEFIANCE. Having seen a Libel, which you have lately published against
the King and People of these Realms under the Title of a DECLARATION, We, in
Justice to the Sentiments of our own Hearts, have thought fit to return you the
following Answer; wherein we shall endeavor to reduce the Method the several
Particulars, which you have contrived to throw together with much Malice, and
no less Confusion.

We believe you sincere in the first Part of your Declaration, where you own it
would be a great Satisfaction to you to be placed upon the Throne by our
Endeavors: But you discourage us from making use of them, by declaring it to
be your Right both by the Laws of God and Man. As for the Laws of God; we
should think ourselves great Transgressors of them, should we for your Sake
rebel against a Prince, who, under God, is the most powerful Defender of that
Religion which we think the most pleasing to Him: And as for the Laws of Man,
we conceive those to be of that Kind, which have been enacted from Time to Time
for near thirty Years past against you and your Pretensions, by the Legislature
of this Kingdom.

You afterward proceed to Invectives against the Royal Family: Which we do
assure you is a very unpopular Topic, except to your few deluded Friends among
the Rabble.

You call them Aliens to our Country, not considering that King George has
lived above a Year longer in England than ever you did. You say they are
Distant in Blood, whereas no Body ever doubted that King George is great
Grandson to King James the First, though many believe that you are not Son to
King James the Second.

Besides all the World acknowledges he is the nearest to our Crown of the
Protestant Blood, of which you cannot have one Drop in your Veins, unless you
derive it from such Parents as you don't care for owning.

Your next Argument against the Royal Family, is, that they are Strangers to
our Language: But they must be Strangers to the British Court who have told you
so. However you must know, that we plain Men should prefer a King who was a
Stranger to our Language, before one who is a Stranger to our Laws and
Religion: For we could never endure French Sentiments, though delivered in our
native Dialect; and should abhor an arbitrary Prince, though he tyrannized over
us in the finest English that ever was spoken. For these Reasons, Sir, we
cannot bear the Thought of hearing a Man, that has been bred up in the
Politics of Lewis the Fourteenth, talk intelligibly from the British Throne;
especially when we consider, however he may boast of his speaking English, he
says his Prayers in an unknown Tongue.

We come now to the Grievances for which, in your Opinion, we ought to take up
Arms against our present Sovereign. The greatest you seem to insist upon, and
which is most in the Mouths of your Party, is the Union of the two Kingdoms;
for which his Majesty ought most certainly to be deposed, because it was made
under the Reign of her, whom you call your Dear Sister of Glorious Memory.
Other Grievances which you hint at under His Majesty's Administration, are, the
Murder of King Charles the First, who was Beheaded before King George was born;
and the Sufferings of King Charles the Second, which perhaps His present
Majesty cannot wholly clear Himself of, because He came into the World a Day
before His Restoration.

As on the one Side you arraign His present Majesty by this most extraordinary
Retrospect, on the other Hand you condemn His Government by what we may call
the Spirit of Second Sight. You are not content to draw into His Reign those
Mischiefs that were done a hundred Years ago, unless you anticipate those that
may happen a hundred Years hence. So that the keenest of your Arrows either
fall short of Him, or fly over his Head. We take it for a certain Sign that you
are at a loss for present Grievances, when you are thus forced to have recourse
to your future Prospects, and future Miseries. Now, Sir, you must know, that we
Freeholders have a natural Aversion to Hanging, and don't know how to answer
it to our Wives and Families, if we should venture our Necks upon the Truth of
your Prophecies. In our ordinary Way of Judging, we guess at the King's future
Conduct by what we have seen already; and therefore beg you will excuse us if
for the present we defer entering into a Rebellion, to which you so graciously
invite us. When we have as bad a Prospect of our King George's Reign, as we
should have of yours, then will be your Time to date another Declaration from
your Court at Commerci: Which, if we may be allowed to Prophecy in our Turn,
cannot possibly happen before the hundred and fiftieth Year of your Reign.

Having considered the past and future Grievances mentioned in your
Declaration, we come now to the present; all of which are founded upon this
Supposition, That whatever is done by His Majesty or His Ministers to keep you
out of the British Throne, is a Grievance. These, Sir, may be Grievances to
you, but they are none to us. On the contrary, we look upon them as the
greatest Instances of His Majesty's Care and Tenderness for His People. To take
them in Order: The first relates to the Ministry; who are chosen, as you
observe very rightly, out of the Worst, and not the Best of Your Subjects. Now,
Sir, can you in Conscience think us to be such Fools as to rebel against the
King, for having employed those who are His most eminent Friends, and were the
greatest Sufferers in His Cause before He came to the Crown; and for having
removed a General who is now actually in Arms against him, and two Secretaries
of State, both of whom have listed themselves in your Service; or because He
chose to substitute in their Places such Men who had distinguished themselves
by their Zeal against you, in the most famous Battles, Negotiations, and
Debates.

The second Grievance you mention, is, that the Glory of the late Queen has
suffered, who, you insinuate, had secured to you the Enjoyment of that
Inheritance out of which you had been so long kept. This may indeed be a Reason
why Her Memory shall be precious with you: But you may be sure we shall think
never the better of Her, for Her having your good Word. For the same Reason it
makes us stare, when we hear it objected to His present Majesty, That he is not
kind to Her faithful Servants; since, if we can believe what you yourself say,
it is impossible they should be His faithful Servants. And by the way, many of
your private Friends here wish you would forbear blabbing at this rate: For, to
tell you a Secret, we are very apt to suspect that any English Man, who
deserves your Praise, deserves to be Hanged.

The next Grievance, which you have a mighty Mind to redress among us, is the
Parliament of Great Britain, against whom you bring a stale Accusation which
has been used by every Minority in the Memory of Man; namely, that it was
procured by unwarrantable Influences and Corruptions. We cannot indeed blame
you for being angry at those, who have set such a round Price upon your Head.
Your Accusation of our High Court of Parliament, puts us in Mind of a Story,
often told among us Freeholders, concerning a rattle-brain'd young Fellow, who
being indicted for two or three Pranks upon the Highway, told the Judge he
would swear the Peace against him, for putting him in fear of his Life.

The next Grievance is such a one, that we are amazed how it could come into
your Head. Your Words are as follow. Whilst the Principal Powers engaged in the
late Wars do enjoy the Blessings of Peace, and are attentive to discharge their
Debts, and ease their People, Great Britain in the midst of Peace, feels all
the Load of War. New Debts are contracted, new Armies are raised at Home, Dutch
Forces are brought into these Kingdoms. What in the Name of Wonder do you mean?
Are you in earnest, or do you design to banter us? Whom is the Nation obliged
to for all this Load of War that it feels? Had you been wise enough to have
slept at Barle-duc in a whole Skin, we should not have contracted new Debts,
raised new Armies, or brought over Dutch Forces to make an Example of you.

The most pleasant Grievance is still behind, and indeed a most proper one to
close up this Article. King George has taken Possession of the Duchy of
Bremen, whereby a Door is opened to let in an Innundation of Foreigners from
Abroad, and to reduce these Nations to the State of a Province to one of the
most inconsiderable Provinces of the Empire. And do you then really believe the
Mob-Story, that King George designs to make a Bridge of Boats from Hanover to
Wapping? We would have you know that some of us read Baker's Chronicle, and
don't find that William the Conqueror ever thought of making England a Province
to his Native Duchy of Normandy, notwithstanding it lay so much more
convenient for that Purpose: Nor that King James the First had ever any
Thoughts of reducing this Nation to the State of a Province to his ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, though it lies upon the same Continent. But pray how comes
it to pass that the Electorate of Hanover is become all of a sudden one of the
most inconsiderable Provinces of the Empire? If you undervalue it upon the
Account of its Religion, you have some Reason for what you say; though you
should not think we are such Strangers to Maps, and live so much out of the
World, as to be ignorant that it is for Power and Extent the second Protestant
State in Germany; and whether you know it or no, the Protestant Religion in the
Empire, is looked upon as a sufficient Balance against Popery. Besides, you
should have considered that in your Declaration upon the King's coming to the
Throne of Great Britain, you endeavored to terrify us from receiving him, by
representing him as a powerful foreign Prince, supported by a numerous Army of
his own Subjects. Be that as it will; we are no more afraid of being a Province
to Hanover, than the Hanoverians are apprehensive of being a Province to Bremen.

We have now taken Notice of those great Evils which you are come to rescue us
from: But as they are such as we have neither felt or seen, we desire you will
put yourself to no farther Trouble for our sakes.

You afterward begin a kind of Te Deum, before the Time, in that remarkable
Sentence, We adore the Wisdom of the Divine Providence, which has opened a way
to our Restoration, by the Success of those very Measures that were laid to
disappoint us for ever. We are at a loss to know what you mean by this Devout
Jargon: But by what goes before and follows, we suppose it to be this: That the
coming of King George to the Crown, has made many Malecontens, and by that
Means opened a Way to your Restoration; whereas you should consider, that if he
had not come to the Crown, the Way had been open of itself. In the same pious
Paragraph, You most earnestly conjure us to pursue those Methods for your
Restoration, which the Finger of God seems to point out to us. Now the only
Methods which we can make use for that End, are, Civil War, Rapine, Bloodshed,
Treason and Perjury; Methods which we Protestants do humbly conceive, can never
be pointed out to us by the Finger of God.

The Rest of your Declaration contains the Encouragements you give us to
Rebel. First, you promise to share with us all Dangers and Difficulties which
we shall meet with in this worthy Enterprise. You are very much in the Right
on it: You have nothing to lose, and hope to get a Crown. We don't hope for any
new Free-Holds, and only desire to keep what we have. As therefore you are in
the right to undergo Dangers and Difficulties to make yourself our Master, we
shall think ourselves as much in the right to undergo Dangers and Difficulties
to hinder you from being so.

Secondly, You promise to refer your and our Interest to a Scotch Parliament,
which you are resolved to call immediately. We suppose you mean if the Frost
holds. But, Sir, we are certainly informed there is a Parliament now sitting at
Westminster, that are busy at present in taking care both of the Scotch and
English Interest, and have actually done every thing which you would let be
done by our Representatives in the High-Lands.

Thirdly, You promise that if we will Rebel for you against our present
Sovereign, you will remit and discharge all Crimes of High Treason, Misprision,
and all other Crimes and Offenses whatsoever, done or committed against you or
your Father. But will you answer in this Case that King George will forgive us?
Otherwise we beseech you to consider what poor Comfort it would be for a
British Freeholder to be conveyed up Holbourn, with your Pardon in his Pocket.
And here we cannot but remark, that the Conditions of your General Pardon are
so stinted, as to show that you are very cautious lest your good Nature should
carry you too far. You exclude from the Benefit of it, all those who do not
from the time of your Landing lay hold on Mercy, and return to their Duty and
Allegiance. By this means all Neuters and Lookers on are to be executed of
Course: And by the studied Ambiguity in which you couch the Terms of your
gracious Pardon, you still leave room to gratify yourself in all the Pleasures
of Tyranny and Revenge.

Upon the Whole, we have so bad an Opinion of Rebellion, as well as of your
Motives to it, and Rewards for it, that you may rest satisfied, there are few
Freeholders on this Side the Forth who will engage in it: And we verily
believe that you will suddenly take a Resolution in your Cabinet of Highlanders
to scamper off with your new Crown, which we are told the Ladies of those Parts
have so generously Clubbed for. And you may assure yourself that it is the only
One you are like to get by this notable Expedition. And so we bid you heartily
Farewell.

Dated Jan. 19. in the Second Year of our Public Happiness.
No. 10. Monday, January 23.
Potior visa est periculosa Libertas quieto Servitio. Sall.
ONE may venture to affirm, that all honest and disinterested Britons of what
Party soever, if they understood one another, are of the same Opinion in Points
of Government: And that the Gross of the People, who are imposed upon by Terms
which they do not comprehend, are Whigs in their Hearts. They are made to
believe, that Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, Unlimited Power and
Indefeasible Right, have something of a venerable and religious Meaning in
them; whereas in Reality they only imply, that a King of Great Britain has a
Right to be a Tyrant, and that his Subjects are obliged in Conscience to be
Slaves. Were the Case truly and fairly laid before them, they would know, that
when they make a Profession of such Principles, they renounce their legal Claim
to Liberty and Property, and unwarily submit to what they really abhor.

It is our Happiness, under the present Reign, to hear our King from the Throne
exhorting us to be zealous Assertors of the Liberties of our Country; which
exclude all Pretensions to an arbitrary, tyrannick or despotick Power. Those,
who have the Misfortune to live under such a Power, have no other Law but the
Will of their Prince, and consequently no Privileges, but what are precarious.
For though in some arbitrary Governments there may be a Body of Laws observed
in the ordinary Forms of Justice, they are not sufficient to secure any Rights
to the People; because they may be dispensed with, or laid aside at the
Pleasure of the Sovereign.

And here it very much imports us to consider, that Arbitrary Power naturally
tends to make a Man a bad Sovereign, who might possibly have been a good One,
had he been invested with an Authority limited and circumscribed by Laws. None
can doubt of this Tendency in Arbitrary Power, who consider, that it fills the
Mind of Man with great and unreasonable Conceits of Himself; raises Him into a
Belief, that He is of a Superior Species to His Subjects; extinguishes in Him
the Principle of Fear, which is one of the greatest Motives to all Duties; and
creates an Ambition of magnifying Himself, by the Exertion of such a Power in
all its Instances. So great is the Danger, that when a Sovereign can do what He
will, He will do what He can.

One of the most Arbritary Princes in our Age was Muley Ishmael, Emperor of
Morocco, who, after a long Reign, died about a Twelve Month ago This Prince was
a Man of much Wit and natural Sense, of an active Temper, undaunted Courage,
and great application. He was a Descendent of Mahomet; and so exemplary for his
Adherence to the Law of his Prophet, that he abstained all his Life from the
Taste of Wine; began the annual Fast, or Lent of Ramadan two Months before his
Subjects; was frequent in his Prayers; and that he might not want Opportunities
of Kneeling, had fixed in all the spacious Courts of his Palace large
Consecrated Stones pointing toward the East, for any occasional Exercise of
his Devotion. What might not have been hoped from a Prince of these Endowments,
had they not all been rendered useless and ineffectual to the Good of his
People by the Notion of that Power which they ascribed to him! This will
appear, if we consider how he exercised it toward his Subjects in those three
great Points which are the chief Ends of Government, the Preservation of their
Lives, the Security of their Fortunes, and the Determinations of Justice
between Man and Man.

Foreign Envoys, who have given an Account of their Audiences, describe this
holy Man mounted on horseback in an open Court, with several of his Alcaydes,
or Governors of Provinces about him, standing bare foot, trembling, bowing to
the Earth, and at every Word he spoke, breaking out into passionate
Exclamations of Praise, as, Great is the Wisdom of our Lord the King; Our Lord
the King speaks as an Angel from Heaven. Happy was the Man among them, who was
so much a Favorite as to be sent on an Errand to the most remote Street in his
Capital; which he performed with the greatest Alacrity, ran through every
Puddle that lay in his Way, and took Care to return out of Breath and covered
with Dirt, that he might show himself a diligent and faithful Minister His
Majesty at the same Time, to exhibit the Greatness of his Power, and show his
Horsemanship, seldom dismissed the Foreigner from his Presence, 'till he had
entertained him with the Slaughter of two or three of his Liege Subjects, whom
he very dexterously put to Death with the Tilt of his Lance. St. Olon, the
French Envoy, tells us, that when he had his last Audience of him, he received
him in Robes just stained with an Execution; and that he was blooded up to his
Elbows by a Couple of Moors, whom he had been butchering with his own Imperial
Hands. By the Calculation of that Author, and many Others, who have since given
an Account of his Exploits, we may reckon that by his own Arm he killed above
Forty Thousand of his People. To render himself the more awful, he chose to
wear a Garb of a particular Color when he was bent upon Executions; so that
when he appeared in Yellow his Great Men hid themselves in Corners, and durst
not pay their Court to him, till he had satiated his Thirst of Blood by the
Death of some of his loyal Commoners, or of such unwary Officers of State as
chanced to come in his Way. Upon this Account we are told, that the first News
inquired after every Morning at Mequinez, was, Whether the Emperor were
stirring, and in a good or bad Humor? As this Prince was a great Admirer of
Architecture, and employed many Thousands in Works of that Kind, if he did not
approve the Plan or the Performance, it was usual for him to show the Delicacy
of his Taste by demolishing the Building, and putting to Death all that had a
Hand in it. I have heard but of one Instance of his Mercy; which was shown to
the Master of an English Vessel. This our Countreyman presented him with a
curious Hatchet, which he received very graciously; and asking him whether it
had a good Edge, tried it upon the Donor, who slipping aside from the Blow,
escaped with the Loss only of his right Ear; for Old Muley, upon second
Thoughts, considering that it was not one of his own Subjects, stopped his
Hand, and would not send him to Paradise. I cannot quit this Article of his
Tenderness for the Lives of his People, without mentioning one of his Queens,
whom he was remarkably fond of; as also a Favorite Prime Minister, who was
very dear to him. The first died by a Kick of her Lord the King, when she was
big with Child, for having gathered a Flower as she was walking with him in his
Pleasure Garden. The Other was bastinado'd to Death by his Majesty; who,
repenting of the Drubs he had given him when it was too late, to manifest his
Esteem for the Memory of so Worthy a Man, executed the Surgeon that could not
cure him.

This Absolute Monarch was as notable a Guardian of the Fortunes, as of the
Lives of his Subjects. When any Man among his People grew rich, in Order to
keep him from being dangerous to the State, he used to send for all his Goods
and Chattels. His Governors of Towns and Provinces, who formed themselves upon
the Example of their Grand Monarque, practiced Rapine, Violence, Extortion, and
all the Arts of Despotick Government in their respective Districts, that they
might be the better enabled to make him their yearly Presents. For the greatest
of his Viceroys could only propose to himself a comfortable Subsistence out of
the Plunder of his Province, and was in certain Danger of being recalled or
hanged, if he did not remit the Bulk of it to his Dread Sovereign. That he
might make a right Use of these Prodigious Treasures, which flowed in to him
from all the Parts of his wide Empire, he took Care to bury them under Ground,
by the Hands of his most trusty Slaves, and then cut their Throats, as the most
effectual Method to keep them from making Discoveries. These were his Ways and
Means for raising Money, by which he weakened the Hands of the Factious, and in
any Case of Emergency, could employ the whole Wealth of his Empire, which he
had thus amassed together in his subterraneous Exchequer.

As there is no such Thing as Property under an Arbitrary Government, you may
learn what was Muley Ishmael's Notion of it from the following Story Being upon
the Road, amidst his Life-Guards, a little before the Time of the Ram-Feast, he
met one of his Alcaydes at the Head of his Servants, who were driving a great
Flock of Sheep to Market. The Emperor asked whose they were: The Alcayde
answered with profound Submission, They are mine, O Ishmael, Son of Elcherif,
of the Line of Hassan. Thine! thou Son of a Cuckold, said this SERVANT OF THE
LORD, I thought I had been the only Proprietor in this Country; upon which he
run him through the Body with his Lance, and very piously distributed the
Sheep among his Guards, for the Celebration of the Feast.

His Determinations of Justice between Man and Man, were indeed very summary
and decisive, and generally put an End to the Vexations of a Lawsuit, by the
Ruin both of Plaintiff and Defendant. Travelers have recorded some Samples of
this Kind, which may give us an Idea of the Blessings of his Administration.
One of his Alcaydes complaining to him of a Wife, whom he had received from his
Majesty's Hands, and therefore could not divorce her, that she used to pull him
by the Beard; the Emperor to redress this Grievance, ordered his Beard to be
plucked up by the Roots, that he might not be liable to any more such Affronts.
A Country Farmer having accused some of his Negro Guards for Robbing him of a
Drove of Oxen, the Emperor readily shot the Offenders: But afterward demanding
Reparation of the Accuser, for the Loss of so many Brave Fellows, and finding
him insolvent, compounded the Matter with him by taking away his Life. There
are many other Instances of the same Kind. I must observe however under this
Head, that the only good Thing he is celebrated for, during his whole Reign,
was the clearing of the Roads and Highways of Robbers, with which they used to
be very much infested. But his Method was to slay Man, Woman and Child, who
lived within a certain Distance from the Place, where the Robbery was
committed. This extraordinary Piece of Justice could not but have its Effect,
by making every Road in his Empire unsafe for the Profession of a Free-Booter.

I must not omit this Emperor's Reply to Sir Cloudesly Shovel, who had taken
several of his Subjects by Way of Reprizal for the English Captives that were
detained in his Dominions. Upon the Admiral's offering to exchange them on very
advantageous Terms, this good Emperor sent him Word, The Subjects he had taken
were poor Men, not worth the Ransoming; and that he might throw them over
Board, or destroy them otherwise as he pleased.

Such was the Government of Muley Ishmael, The Servant of God, the Emperor of
the Faithful, who was Courageous in the Way of the Lord, the Noble, the Good.

To conclude this Account, which is extracted from the best Authorities. I
shall only observe that he was a great Admirer of His late Most Christian
Majesty. In a Letter to him, he Compliments him with the Title of Sovereign
Arbiter of the Actions and Wills of his People. And in a Book published by a
French Man, who was sent to him as an Ambassador, is the following Passage, He
is absolute in his States, and often compares himself to the Emperor of France,
who he says is the only Person that knows how to reign like himself, and to
make his Will the Law.

This was that Emperor of France to whom the Person who has a great Mind to be
King of these Realms owed his Education, and from whom he learned his Notions
of Government. What should hinder One, whose Mind is so well seasoned with such
Prepossessions, from attempting to copy after his Patron, in the Exercise of
such a Power; especially considering that the Party who espouse his Interest,
never fail to compliment a Prince that distributes all his Places among them,
with unlimited Power on his Part, and unconditional Obedience on that of his
Subjects.

No. 11. Friday, January 27.
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE.
BY our latest Advices, both from Town and Country, it appears, that the
Ladies of Great Britain, who are able to bear Arms, that is, to Smile or Frown
to any Purpose, have already begun to commit Hostilities upon the Men of each
opposite Party. To this End we are assared, that many of them on both Sides
Exercise before their Glasses every Morning; that they have already cashiered
several of their Followers as Mutineers, who have contradicted them in some
political Conversations; and that the Whig Ladies in particular design very
soon to have a general Review of their Forces at a Play bespoken by one of
their Leaders. This Set of Ladies, indeed, as they daily do Duty at Court, are
much more expert in the Use of their Airs and Graces than their female
Antagonists, who are most of them bred in the Country: So that the Sisterhood
of Loyalists, in respect of the fair Malcontents, are like an Army of regular
Forces, compared with a raw undisciplined Militia.

It is to this Misfortune in their Education that we may ascribe the rude and
opprobrious Language with which the disaffected Part of the Sex treat the
present Royal Family. A little lively Rustic, who has been trained up in
Ignorance and Prejudice, will prattle Treason a whole Winter's Evening, and
string together a Parcel of silly seditious Stories, that are equally void of
Decency and Truth. Nay, you sometimes meet with a zealous Matron, who sets up
for the Pattern of a Parish, uttering such Invectives as are highly misbecoming
her, both as a Woman and a Subject. In answer therefore to such distoyal
Termagants, I shall repeat to them a Speech of the honest and blunt Duke du
Sully to an Assembly of Popish Ladies, who were railing very bitterly against
Henry the Fourth, at his Accession to the French Throne; Ladies, said he, you
have a very good King, if you know when you are well. However set your Hearts
at rest, for he is not a Man to be scolded or seratched out of his Kingdom.

But as I never care to speak of the fair Sex, unless I have an Occasion to
Praise them, I shall take my Leave of these ungentle Damsels; and only beg of
them, not to make themselves less amiable than Nature designed them, by being
Rebels to the Best of their Abilities, and endeavoring to bring their Country
into Bloodshed and Confusion. Let me therefore recommend to them the Example of
those beautiful Associates, whom I mentioned in my eighth Paper, as I have
received the Particulars of their Behavior from the Person with whom I lodged
their Association.

This Association being written at length in a large Roll of the finest Vellum,
with three distinct Columns for the Maids, Wives, and Widows, was opened for
the Subscribers near a Fortnight ago. Never was a Subscription for a Raffiing
or an Opera more crowded. There is scarce a celebrated Beauty about Town that
you may not find in one of the three Lists; insomuch, that if a Man, who did
not know the Design, should read only the Names of the Subscribers, he would
fancy every Column to be a Catalogue of Toasts. Mr. Motteux has been heard to
say more than once, that if he had the Portraits of all the Associates, they
would make a finer Auction of Pictures, than he or any Body else had ever
exhibited.

Several of these Ladies indeed criticized upon the Form of the Association.
One of them, after the Perusal of it, wondered that among the Features to be
used in Defense of their Country, there was no mention made of Teeth; upon
which she smiled very charmingly, and discovered as fine a Set as ever Eye
beheld. Another, who was a tall lovely Prude, holding up her Head in a most
majestic Manner, said, with some Disdain. She thought a good Neck might have
done His Majesty as much Service as Smiles or Dimples. A Third looked upon the
Association as defective, because so necessary a Word as Hands was omitted; and
by her Manner of taking up the Pen, it was easy to guess the Reason of her
Objection.

Most of the Persons who associated, have done much more than by the Letter of
the Association they were obliged to; having not only set their Names to it,
but subscribed their several Aids and Subsidies for the carrying on so good a
Cause. In the Virgin Column is one who subscribes fifteen Lovers, all of them
good Men and true. There is another who subscribes five Admirers, with one tall
handsome black Man fit to be a Colonel. In short, there is scarce one in this
List who does not engage herself to supply a Quota of brisk young Fellows many
of them already equipt with Hats and Feathers. Among the rest, was a pretty
sprightly Coquette, with sparkling Eyes, who sub-scribed two Quivers of Arrows.

In the Column of Wives, the first who took Pen in Hand writ her own Name and
one Vassal, meaning her Husband. Another subscribes her Husband and three Sons.
Another her Husband and six Coach-Horses. Most in this Catalogue paired
themselves with their respective Mates, answering for'em as Men of honest
Principles, and fit for the Service.

N. B. There were two in this Column that wore Association Ribbons: The first
of them subscribed her Husband, and her Husband's Friend; the second a Husband
and five Lovers; but upon enquiry into their Characters, they are both of them
found to be Tories, who hung out false Colors to be Spies upon the
Association, or to insinuate to the World by their Subscriptions, as if a Lady
of Whig Principles could love any Man besides her Husband.

The Widows Column is headed by a fine Woman who calls herself Boadicea, and
subscribes six hundred Tenants. It was indeed observed that the Strength of the
Association lay most in this Column; every Widow, in Proportion to her
Jointure, having a great Number of Admirers, and most of them distinguished as
able Men. Those who have examined this List, compute that there may be three
Regiments raised out of it, in which there shall not be one Man under fix Foot
high.

I must not conclude this Account, without taking Notice of the
ASSOCIATION-RIBBON, by which these Beautiful Confederates have agreed to
distinguish themselves. It is indeed so very pretty an Ornament, that I wonder
any English Woman will be without it. A Lady of the ASSOCIATION who bears this
Badge of Allegiance upon her Breast, naturaly produces a Desire in every
Male-Beholder, of gaining a Place in a Heart which carries on it such a visible
Mark of its Fidelity. When the Beauties of our Island are thus industrious to
show their Principles as well as their Charms, they raise the Sentiments of
their Countrymen, and inspire them at the same time both with Loyalty and
Love. What Numbers of Proselytes may we not expect, when the most amiable of
the Britons thus exhibit to their Admirers the only Terms upon which they are
to hope for any Correspondence or Alliance with them! It is well known that the
greatest Blow the French Nation ever received, was the dropping of a fine
Lady's Garter, in the Reign of King Edward the Third. The most remarkable
Battles which have been since gained over that Nation, were fought under the
Auspices of a Blue RIBBON. As our British Ladies have still the same Faces, and
our Men the same Hearts, why may we not hope for the same glorious
Achievements from the Influence of this Beautiful Breast-Knot?

No 12. Monday, January 30.
Quapropter, de summa salute vestra, P. C. de vestris conjugibus ac liberis, de
aris ac focis, de fanis ac templis, de totius urbis tectis ac sedibus de
imperio, de liberate, de salute Patriae, deque universa Republica decernite
diligenter, ut instituistis ac fortiter. Cic.
THIS Day having been set apart by Public Authority to raise in us an
Abhorrence of the GREAT REBELLION, which involved this Nation in so many
Calamities, and ended in the Murder of their Sovereign; it may not be
unseasonable to show the Guilt of Rebellion in general, and of that Rebellion
in particular which is stirred up against His present Majesty.

That Rebellion is one of the most heinous Crimes which it is in the Power of
Man to commit, may appear from several Considerations. First, as it destroys
the End of all Government, and the Benefits of Civil Society. Government was
instituted for maintaining the Peace, Safety, and Happiness of a People. These
great Ends are brought about by a general Conformity and Submission to that
Frame of Laws which is established in every Community, for the Protection of
the Innocent, and the Punishment of the Guilty. As on the one Side Men are
secured the quiet Possession of their Lives, Properties, and every Thing they
have a Right to: So on the other Side, those who offer them any Injury in these
Particulars, are subject to Penalties proportioned to their respective
Offenses. Government therefore mitigates the Inequality of Power among
particular Persons, and makes an innocent Man, though of the lowest Rank, a Match
for the Mightiest of his Fellow Subjects; since he has the Force of the whole
Community on his Side, which is able to control the Insolence or Injustice of
any private Oppressor. Now Rebellion disappoints all these Ends and Benefits of
Government, by raising a Power in Opposition to that Authority which has been
established among a People for their mutual Welfare and Defense. So that
Rebellion is as great an Evil to Society, as Government itself is a Blessing.

In the next Place, Rebellion is a Violation of all those Engagements, which
every Government exacts from such Persons as live under it; and consequently,
the most base and pernicious Instance of Treachery and Perfidiousness. The
Guilt of Rebellion Increases in Proportion as these Engagements are more Solemn
and Obligatory. Thus if a Man makes his Way to Rebellion through Perjury, he
gives additional Horrors to that Crime, which is in itself of the blackest
Nature.

We may likewise consider Rebellion as a greater Complication of Wickedness
than any other Crime we can commit. It is big with Repine, Sacrilege, and
Murder. It is dreadful in its mildest Effects, as it impoverishes the Public;
ruins particular Families; begets and perpetuates Hatreds among
Fellow Subjects, Friends, and Relations; makes a Country the Seat or War and
Desolation, and exposes it to the Attempts of its foreign Enemies. In short, as
it is impossible for it to take Effect, or to make the smallest Progress, but
through a continued Course of Violence and Bloodshed; a Robber or a Murderer
looks like an Innocent Man, when we compare him with a Rebel.

I shall only add, that as in the Subordinations of a Government the King is
offended by any Insults or Oppositions to an inferior Magistrate; so the
Sovereign Ruler of the Universe is affronted by a Breach of Allegiance to those
whom he has set over us; Providence having delegated to the Supreme Magistrate
in every Country the same Power for the Good of Men, which that Supreme
Magistrate transfer to those several Officers and Substitutes who (...) under
Him, for the preserving of Order and Justice.

Now if we take a View of the present Rebellion which is formed against His
Majesty, we shall find in it all the Guilt that is naturally inherent in this
Crime, without any single Circumstance to alleviate it. Insurrections among
(...) People to rescue themselves from the most violent and illegal
Oppressions; to throw off a Tyranny that makes Property precarious, and Li^^
painful; to preserve their Laws and their Religion to themselves and their
Posterity; are excused from the Necessity of such an Undertaking, when no other
Means are left for the Security of every Thing that is dear and valua^ to
reasonable Creatures. By the Frame of (...) Constitution, the Duties of
Protection and Allegiance are reciprocal; and as the Safety of (...) Community
is the ultimate End and Design (...) Government, when this, instead of being
preserved, is manifestly destroyed, Civil Societi^^ are excusable before God
and Man, if they en+ deavour to recover themselves out of so miserable a
Condition. For in such a Case Government becomes an Evil instead of a Blessing,
and is not at all preferable to a State of Anarchy and mutual Independence. For
these Reasons, we have scarce ever yet heard of an Insurrection that was not
either colored with Grievances of the highest Kind, or countenanced by one or
more Branches of the Legislature. But the present Rebellion is formed against a
King, whose Right has been established by frequent Parliaments of all Parties,
and recognized by the most solemn Oaths; who has not been charged with one
illegal Proceeding; who acts in perfect Concert with the Lords and Commons of
the Realm; who is famed for his Equity and Goodness, and has already very much
advanced the Reputation and Interest of our Country. The Guilt therefore of
this Rebellion has in it all the most aggravating Circumstances; which will
still appear more plainly, if we consider in the first Place the real Motives
to it.

The Rebellion, which was one of the most flagitious in itself, and described
with the most Horror by Historians, is that of Catiline and his Associates.
Their Motives to it are displayed at large by the Roman Writers, in order to
inspire the Reader with the utmost Detestation of it. Catiline the Chief of the
Rebellion, had been disappointed in his Competition for one of the first
Offices in the Government, and had involved himself in such private Debts and
Difficulties, as nothing could extricate him out of, but the Ruin of an
Administration that would not entrust him with Posts of Honor or Profit. His
principal Accomplices were Men of the same Character, and animated by the same
Incentives. They complained that Power was lodged in the Hands of the Worst, to
the Oppression of the Best; and that Places were conferred on unworthy Men, to
the Exclusion of themselves and their Friends. Many of them were afraid of
public Justice for past Crimes, and some of them stood actually condemned as
Traitors to their Country. These were joined by Men of desperate Fortunes, who
hoped to find their Account in the Confusions of their Country, were applauded
by the meanest of the Rabble, who always delighted in Change, and privately
abetted by Persons of a considerable Figure, who aimed at those Honors and
Preferments which were in the Possession of their Rivals. These are the Motives
with which Catiline's Rebellion is branded in History, and which are expressly
mentioned by Sallust. I shall leave it to every unprejudiced Reader to compare
them with the Motives which have kindled the present Rebellion in His Majesty's
Dominions.

As this Rebellion is of the most criminal Nature from its Motives, so it is
likewise if we consider its Consequences. Should it Succeed, (a Supposition
which, God be thanked, is very extravagant) what must be the natural Effects of
it upon our Religion! What could we expect from an Army, blessed by the Pope,
headed by a zealous Roman Catholic, encouraged by the most bigoted Princes of
the Church of Rome, supported by Contributions not only from these several
Potentates, but from the Wealthiest of their Convents, and officer'd by Irish
Papists and Outlaws! Can we imagine that the Roman Catholics of our own Nation
would so heartily embark in an Enterprise, to the visible Hazard of their Lives
and Fortunes, did they only hope to enjoy their Religion under those Laws which
are now in Force? In short, the Danger to the Protestant Cause is so manifest,
that it would be an Affront to the Understanding of the Reader to endeavor
farther to prove it.

Arbitrary Power is so interwoven with Pope^y, and so necessary to introduce
it, so agreeable (...) the Education of the Pretender, so conforma^^^ to the
Principles of his Adherents, and so ^^^ural to the Insolence of Conquerors,
that ^ould our Invader gain the Sovereign Power (...) Violence, there is no
doubt but he would ^^eserve it by Tyranny. I shall leave to the ^eader's own
Consideration, the Change of ^^operty in general, and the utter Extinction of
(...) our National Funds, the Inundation of No^^s without Estates, Prelates
without Bisho^^cks, Officers Civil and Military without ^^ces; and in short,
the several Occasions of ^^^ine and Revenge, which would necessarily (...) upon
such a fatal Revolution. But by (...) Blessing of Providence, and the Wisdom of
Majesty's Administration, this melancholy ^spect is as distant as it is
dreadful.

These are the Consequences which would ^^essarily attend the Success of the
present ^^^ellion. But we will now suppose that the (...) of it should for some
time remain Doubt^^* In this Case we are to expect all the Mise^^^of a Civil
War: Nay, the Armies of the ^^est Foreign Princes would be subsisted, and (...)
Battles of Europe fought in England. The (...) have already shown us, that they
want ^^clination to promote their Cause by Fire ^word, where they have an
Opportunity of ^sing their Barbarities. Should such a fierce ^apacious Host of
Men, as that which is now in the Highlands, fall down into our Country, that
is so well Peopled, adorned and cultivated, how would their March be
distinguished by Ravage and Devastation! Might not we say of them in the
sublime and beautiful Word of the Prophet, describing the Progress of an
enraged Army from the North; Before them as (...) Garden of Eden, and behind
them as (...) desolate Wilderness; yea, and nothing shall (...) them.

What then can we think of a Party, (...) would plunge their native Country
into (...) Evils as these; when the only avowed Mo^^^ for their Proceedings is
a Point of Theory, (...) has been already determined by those who (...) proper
Judges, and in whose Determination (...) have so many Years acquiesced. If the
Ca^mities of the Nation in General can make (...) Impression on them, let them
at least, in (...) to themselves, their Friends and Depend^^^ forbear all open
and secret Methods of En^^raging a Rebellion, so destructive, and so (...)
provoked. All human Probabilities are aga^^ them; and they cannot expect
Success, but (...) a miraculous Interposition of the Almig^^* And this we may
with all Christian Hum^^ hope, will not turn against us, who ob^^^ those Oaths
which we have made in His (...)sense; who are zealous for the Safety of (...)
Religion, which we think most acceptab^^^ His Sight; and who endeavor to
preserve (...) Constitution which is most conducive to (...) Happiness of our
Country.

No. 13. Friday, February 3.
Ignavum sucos pecus a praesepibus arcent. Virg.
THE most common, and indeed the most natural Division of all Offenses, is into
those of Omission, and those of Commission. We may make the same Division of
that particular Set of Crimes which regard Human Society. The greatest Crime
which can be committed against it is Rebellion; as was shown in my last Paper.
The greatest Crime of Omission, is an Indifference in the particular Members of
a Society, when a Rebellion is actually begun among them. In such a Juncture,
though a Man may be innocent of the great Breach which is made upon Government,
he is highly culpable, if he does not use all the Means that are suitable to
his Station for reducing the Community into its former State of Peace and good
Order.

Our Obligation to be active on such an Occasion appears from the very Nature
of Civil Government; which is an Institution, whereby we are all confederated
together for our mutual Defense and Security. Men who profess a State of
Neutrality in Times of Public Danger, desert the Common Interest of their
Fellow Subjects; and act with Independence to that Constitution into which they
are incorporated. The Safety of the whole requires our joint Endeavors. When
this is at Stake, the indifferent are not properly a Part of the Community; or
rather are like dead Limbs, which are an Encumbrance to the Body, instead of
being of Use to it. Besides that, the Protection which all receive from the
same Government, justly calls upon the Gratitude of All to Strengthen it, as
well as upon their Self-Interest to preserve it.

But farther; If Men, who in their Hearts are Friends to a Government, forbear
giving it their utmost Assistance against its Enemies, they put it in the Power
of a few desperate Men to ruin the Welfare of those who are much superior to
them in Strength, Number, and Interest. It was a remarkable Law of Solon, the
great Legislator of the Athenians, that any Person who in the Civil Tumults and
Commotions of the Republic remained Neuter, or an indifferent Spectator of the
contending Parties, should, after the Re-establishment of the public Peace,
forfeit all his Possessions, and be condemned to perpetual Banishment. This Law
made it necessary for every Citizen to take his Party, because it was highly
probable the Majority would be so Wise as to espouse that Cause which was most
agreeable to the public Weal, and by that Means hinder a Sedition from making
a successful Progress. At least, as every prudent and honest Man, who might
otherwise favor any Indolence in his own Temper, was hereby engaged to be
active, such a one would be sure to join himself to that Side which had the
Good of their Country most at Heart. For this Reason their famous Lawgiver
condemned the Persons who sat Idle in Divisions so dangerous to the
Government, as Aliens to the Community, and therefore to be cut off from it as
unprofitable Members.

Further; Indifference cannot but be criminal, when it is conversant about
Objects which are so far from being of an indifferent Nature, that they are of
the highest Importance to our selves and our Country. If it be indifferent to
us whether we are Free-Subjects or Slaves; whether our Prince be of our own
Religion, or of one that obliges him to extirpate it; we are in the right to
give ourselves no trouble in the present Juncture. A Man governs himself by the
Dictates of Virtue and good Sense, who acts without Zeal or Passion in Points
that are of no Consequences: But when the whole Community is shaken, and the
Safety of the Public endangered, the Appearance of a Philosophical or an
affected Indolence must arise either from Stupidity, or Perfidiousness.

When in the Division of Parties among us, Men only strove for the first Place
in the Prince's Favor; when all were attached to the same Form of Government,
and contended only for the highest Offices in it; a prudent and an honest Man
might look upon the Struggle with Indifference, and be in no great Pain for the
Success of either Side. But at present the Contest is not in Reality between
Whigs and Tories, but between Loyalists and Rebels. Our Country is not now
divided into two Parties, who propose the same End by different Means; but into
such as would preserve, and such as would destroy it. Whatever Denominations we
might range our selves under in former Times, Men who have any natural Love to
their Country, or Sense of their Duty, should exert their united Strength in a
Cause that is common to all Parties, as they are Protestants and Britons. In
such a Case, an avowed Indifference is Treachery to our Fellow Subjects; and a
Lukewarm Allegiance* may prove as pernicious in its Consequences as Treason.

I need not repeat here what I have proved at large in a former Paper, that we
are obliged to an active Obedience by the solemn Oaths we have taken to His
Majesty; and that the neutral Kind of Indifference, which is the Subject of
this Paper, falls short of that Obligation they lie under, who have taken such
Oaths; as will easily appear to any one who considers the Form of those sacred
and religious Engagements.

How then can any Man answer it to himself, if, for the sake of managing his
Interest or Character among a Party, or out of any personal Pique to those who
are the most conspicuous for their Zeal in His Majesty's Service, or from any
other private and self-interested Motive, he stands as a Looker on when the
Government is attacked by an open Rebellion; especially when those engaged in
it, cannot have the least Prospect of Success, but by the Assistance of the
ancient and hereditary Enemies to the British Nation. It is strange that these
Luke warm Friends to the Government, whose Zeal for their Sovereign rises and
falls with their Credit at Court, do not consider, before it be too late, that
as they strengthen the Rebels by their present Indifference, they at the same
time establish the Interest of those who are their Rivals and Competitors for
public Posts of Honor. When there is an End put to this Rebellion, these
Gentlemen cannot pretend to have had any Merit in so good a Work: And they may
well believe the Nation will never care to see those Men it the highest Offices
of Trust, who when they an out of them, will not stir a Finger in its Defense.

No. 14. Monday, February 6.
Periculosum est credere, and non credere:
Utriusque exemplum breviter exponam rei.
Hippolytus obiit, quia novercae creditum est:
Cassandrae quia non creditum, ruit Ilium.
Ergo exploranda est veritas multum prius,
Quam stulta prave judicet sententia. Phaedr.

HAVING in the Seventh Paper considered many of those Falsehoods, by which the
Cause of our Malcontents is supported; I shall here speak of that extravagant
Credulity, which disposes each particular Member of their Party to believe
them. This strange Alacrity in Believing Absurdity and Inconsistence may be
called the Political Faith of a Tory.

A Person who is thoroughly endowed with this Political Faith, like a Man in a
Dream, is entertained from one end of his Life to the other with Objects that
have no Reality or Existence. He is daily nourished and kept in Humor by
Fiction and Delusion; and may be compared to the old obstinate Knight in
Rabelais, that every Morning swallowed a Chimera for his Breakfast.

This Political Faith of a Malecontent is altogether founded on Hope. He does
not give Credit to any thing because it is probable, but because it is
pleasing. His Wishes serve him instead of Reasons, to confirm the Truth of what
he hears. There is no Report so incredible or contradictory in itself which he
does not cheerfully believe, if it tends to the Advancement of the Cause. In
short, a Malecontent who is a good Believer has generally reason to repeat the
celebrated Rant of an Ancient Father, Credo quia impossible est: Which is as
much as to say, It must be True, because it is Impossible.

It has been very well observed, that the most credulous Man in the World is
the Atheist, who believes the Universe to be the Production of Chance. In the
same Manner a Tory, who is the greatest Believer in what is improbable, is the
greatest Infidel in what is certain. Let a Friend to the Government relate to
him a Matter of Fact, he turns away his Ear from him, and gives him the Lie in
every Look. But if one of his own Stamp should tell him that the King of Sweden
would be suddenly at Perth, and that his Army is now actually marching thither
upon the Ice; he hugs himself at the good News, and gets Drunk upon it before
he goes to Bed. This sort of People puts one in Mind of several Towns in Europe
that are inaccessible on the one Side, while they lie open and unguarded on the
other. The Minds of our Malcontents are indeed so depraved with those
Falsehoods which they are perpetually imbibing, that they have a natural Relish
for Error, and have quite lost the Taste of Truth in political Matters. I shall
therefore dismiss this Head with a Saying of King Charles the Second. This
Monarch, when he was at Windsor, used to amuse himself with the Conversation of
the famous Vossius, who was full of Stories relating to the Antiquity,
Learning, and Manners of the Chinese; and at the same time a Free-thinker in
Points of Religion. The King upon hearing him repeat some incredible Accounts
of these Eastern People, turning to those who were about: him, This Learned
Divine, said he, is a very strange Man: He believes every thing but the Bible.

Having thus far considered the political Faith of the Party as it regards
Matters of Fact, let us in the next Place take a View of it with respect to
those Doctrines which it embraces, and which are the Fundamental Points whereby
they are distinguished from those, whom they used to represent as Enemies to
the Constitution in Church and State. How far their great Articles of political
Faith, with respect to our Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, are consistent
with themselves, and agreeable to Reason and Truth, may be seen in the
following Paradoxes, which are the Essentials of a Tory's Creed, with relation
to political Matters. Under the Name of Tories, I do not here comprehend
Multitudes of well-designing Men, who were formerly included under that
Denomination, but are now in the Interest of His Majesty and the present
Government. These have already seen the evil Tendency of such Principles, which
are the Credenda of the Party, as it is opposite to that of the Whigs.

Article I. That the Church of England will be always in Danger, till it has a
Popish King for its Defender. II. That, for the Safety of the Church, no
Subject should be Tolerated in any Religion different from the Established; but
that the Head of our Church may be of that Religion which is most repugnant to
it. III. That the Protestant Interest in this Nation, and in all Europe, could
not but flourish under the Protection of One, who thinks himself obliged, on
Pain of Damnation, to do all that lies in his Power for the Extirpation of it.
IV. That we may safely rely upon the Promises of One, whose Religion allows him
to make them, and at the same Time obliges him to break them. V. That a good
Man should have a greater Abhorrence of Presbyterianism which is Perverseness,
than of Popery which is but Idolatry. VI. That a Person who hopes to be King of
England by the Assistance of France, would naturally adhere to the British
Interest, which is always opposite to that of the French. VII.That a Man has no
Opportunities of learning how to Govern the People of England in any foreign
Country, so well as in France. VIII. That ten Millions of People should rather
choose to fall into Slavery, than not acknowledge their Prince to be invested
with an Hereditary and Indefeasible Right of Oppression. IX. That we are
obliged in Conscience to become Subjects of a Duke of Savoy, or of a French
King, rather than enjoy for our Sovereign a Prince, who is the First of the
Royal Blood in the Protestant Line. X. That Non-Resistance is the Duty of every
Christian, whilst he is in a good Place. XI. That we ought to profess the
Doctrine of Passive-Obedience till such Time as Nature rebels against
Principle, that is, till we are put to the Necessity of practicing it. XII.
That the Papists have taken up Arms to defend the Church of England with the
utmost Hazard of their Lives and Fortunes. XIII. That there is an Unwarrantable
Faction in this Island, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons. XIV. That the
Legislature, when there is a Majority of Whigs in it, has not Power to make
Laws. XV. That an Act of Parliament to empower the King to Secure Suspected
Persons in Times of Rebellion, is the Means to Establish the Sovereign on the
Throne, and consequently a great Infringement of the Liberties of the Subject.
No. 15. Friday, February 10.
-- Auxilium, quoniam sic cogitis ipsi,
Dixit, ab Host petam: Vultus avertite vestros,
Si quis Amicus adest: Et Gorgonis extulit ora. Ovid.

IT is with great Pleasure that I see a Race of Female-Patriots springing up in
this Island. The fairest among the Daughters of Great Britain no longer confine
their Cares to a Domestic Life, but are grown anxious for the Welfare of their
Country, and show themselves good Stateswomen as well as good Housewives.

Our She-Confederates keep pace with us in quashing that Rebellion which had
begun to spread itself among Part of the fair Sex. If the Men who are true to
their King and Country have taken Preston and Perth, the Ladies have possessed
themselves of the Opera and the Playhouse with as little Opposition or
Bloodshed. The Non-resisting Women, like their Brothers in the Highlands, think
no Post tenable against an Army that makes so fine an Appearance; and dare not
look them in the Face, when they are drawn up in Battel-array.

As an Instance of the Cheerfulness in our fair Fellow Subjects to oppose the
Designs of the Pretender, I did but suggest in one of my former Papers, That
the Fan might be made use of with good Success against Popery, by exhibiting
the Corruptions of the Church of Rome in various Figures; when immediately they
took the Hint, and have since had frequent Consultations upon several Ways and
Methods to make the Fan useful. They have unanimously agreed upon the following
Resolutions, which are indeed very suitable to Ladies who are at the same Time
the most Beautiful and the most Loyal of their Sex. To hide their Faces behind
the Fan, when they observe a Tory gazing upon 'em. Never to peep through it,
but in Order to pick out Men, whose Principles make them worth the Conquest. To
return no other Answer to a Tory's Addresses, than by counting the Sticks of it
all the while he is talking to them. To avoid dropping it in the Neighborhood
of a Malecontent, that he may not have an Opportunity of taking it up. To show
their Disbelief of any Jacobite Story by a Flirt of it. To fall a Fanning
themselves, when a Tory comes into one of their Assemblies, as being disordered
at the Sight of him.

These are the Uses by which every Fan may in the Hands of a fine Woman become
serviceable to the Public. But they have at present under Consideration,
certain Fans of a Protestant Make, that they may have a more extensive
Influence, and raise an Abhorrence of Popery in a whole Crowd of Beholders: For
they intend to let the World see what Party they are of, by Figures and Designs
upon these Fans; as the Knights Errant used to distinguish themselves by
Devices on their Shields.

There are several Sketches of Pictures which have been already presented to
the Ladies for their Approbation, and out of which several have made their
Choice. A pretty young Lady will very soon appear with a Fan, which has on it a
Nunnery of lively black-Eyed Vestals, who are endeavoring to creep out at the
Grates. Another has a Fan mounted with a fine Paper, on which is represented a
Groupe of People upon their Knees very devoutly worshipping an old Ten-Penny
Nail. A certain Lady of great Learning has chosen for her Device the Council of
Trent; and another, who has a good Satirical Turn, has filled her Fan with the
Figure of a huge tawdry Woman, representing the Whore of Babylon; which she is
resolved to spread full in the Face of any Sister-Disputant, whose Arguments
have a Tendency to Popery. The following Designs are already executed on
several Mountings. The Ceremony of the Holy Pontiff opening the Mouth of a
Cardinal in a full Consistory. An old Gentleman with a Triple Crown upon his
Head, and big with Child, being the Portrait of Pope Joan. Bishop Bonner
purchasing great Quantities of Faggots and Brush-Wood, for the Conversion of
Heretics. A Figure reaching at a Scepter with one Hand, and holding a Chaplet
of Beads in the other: With a distant View of Smithfield.

When our Ladies make their Zeal thus visible upon their Fans, and, every Time
they open them, display an Error of the Church of Rome, it cannot but have a
good Effect, by showing the Enemies of our present Establishment the Folly of
what they are contending for. At least, every One must allow that Fans are much
more innocent Engines for propagating the Protestant Religion, than Racks,
Wheels, Gibbets, and the like Machines, which are made Use of for the
Advancement of the Roman Catholic. Besides, as every Lady will of course study
her Fan, she will be a perfect Mistress of the Controversy at least in one
Point of Popery; and as her Curiosity will put her upon the Perusal of every
other Fan that is fashionable, I doubt not but in a very little Time there will
scarce be a Woman of Quality in Great Britain, who would not be an Over-Match
for an Irish Priest.

The beautiful Part of this Island, whom I am proud to number amongst the most
candid of my Readers, will likewise do well to reflect, that our Dispute at
present concerns our Civil as well as Religious Rights. I shall therefore only
offer it to their Thoughts as a Point that highly deserves their Consideration,
Whether the Fan may not also be made Use of with Regard to our Political
Constitution. As a Freeholder, I would not have them confine their Cares for
us as we are Protestants, but at the same Time have an Eye to our Happiness as
we are Britons. In this Case they would give a new Turn to the Minds of their
Countrymen, if they would exhibit on their Fans the several Grievances of a
Tyrannical Government. Why might not an Audience of Muley Ishmael, or a Turk
dropping his Handkerchief in his Seraglio, be proper Subjects to express their
Abhorrence both of Despotick Power, and of Male Tyranny? Or if they have a
Fancy for Burlesque, what would they think of a French Cobbler cutting Shoes for
several of his Fellow Subjects out of an old Apple Tree? On the contrary, a
fine Woman, who would maintain the Dignity of her Sex, might bear a String of
Gally-Slaves, dragging their Chains the whole Breadth of her Fan; and at the
same Time, to celebrate her own Triumphs, might order every Slave to be drawn
with the Face of one of her Admirers.

I only propose these as Hints to my gent^^ Readers, which they may alter or
improve (...) they shall think fit: But cannot conclude without congratulating
our Country upon this Disposition among the most amiable of its Inhabitants,
to consider in their Ornaments the Advantage of the Public as well as of their
Persons. It was with the same Spirit, though not with the same Politeness, that
the ancient British Women had the Figures of Monsters painted on their naked
Bodies, in Order (as our Historians tell us) to make themselves Beautiful in
the Eyes of their Countrymen, and terrible to their Enemies. If this Project
goes on, we may boast, that our Sister Whigs have the finest Fans, as well as
the most Beautiful Faces, of any Ladies in the World. At least, we may venture
to foretell, that the Figures in their Fans will lessen the Tory Interest, much
more than those in the Oxford Almanacks will advance it.

No. 16. Monday, February 13.
Itaque quod plerumque in atroci negotio solet, Senatus decrevit, darent Operam
Consules ne quid Respublica Detrimenti caperet. Ea Potestas per Senatum More
Romano Magistratui maxuma permittitur, exercitum parare, bellum gerere,
coercere omnibus modis Socios atque Cives, domi militiaeque Imperium atque
Judicium summum habere. Aliter, sine Populi jussu nulli earum Rerum Consuli Jus
est. Sall.
IT being the Design of these Papers to reconcile Men to their own Happiness,
by removing those wrong Notions and Prejudices which hinder them from seeing
the Advantage of themselves and their Posterity in the present Establishment, I
cannot but take Notice of every Thing that by the Artifice of our Enemies is
made a Matter of Complaint.

Of this Nature is the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, by which His
Majesty has been enabled in these Times of Danger, to seize and detain the
Persons of such, who He had Reason to believe were Conspiring against His
Person and Government. The Expediency and Reasonableness of such a temporary
Suspension in the present Juncture may appear to every considerate Man, who
will turn his Thoughts impartially on this Subject.

I have chosen in Points of this Nature to draw my Arguments from the first
Principles of Government, which, as they are of no Party, but assented to by
every reasonable Man, carry the greater Weight with them, and are accommodated
to the Notions of all my Readers. Every One knows, who has considered the
Nature of Government, that there must be in each particular Form of it an
Absolute and Unlimited Power; and that This Power is lodged in the Hands of
those, who have the Making of its Laws, whether by the Nature of the
Constitution it be in One or more Persons, in a single Order of Men, or in a
mixed Body of different Ranks and Degrees. It is an Absurdity to imagine that
those, who have the Authority of Making Laws, cannot suspend any particular
Law, when they think it expedient for the Public. Without such a Power all
Government would be defective, and not armed with a sufficient Force for its
own Security. As Self-Preservation by all honest Methods is the first Duty of
every Community, as well as of every private Person, so the public Safety is
the general View of all Laws. When therefore any Law does not conduce to this
great End, but on the contrary in some extraordinary and unnatural Junctures,
the very Observation of it would endanger the Community, that Law ought to be
laid asleep for such a Time, by the proper Authority. Thus the very Intention
of our Habeas Corpus Act, namely, the Preservation of the Liberties of the
Subject, absolutely requires that Act to be now suspended, since the
Confinement of dangerous and suspected Persons, who might strengthen this
Rebellion, and spread a Civil War through all Parts of this Kingdom, secures to
us our Civil Rights, and every Thing that can be valuable to a Free People.

As every Government must in its Nature be armed with such an Authority, we may
observe that those Governments which have been the most famous for public
Spirit, and the most jealous of their Liberty, have never failed to exert it
upon proper Occasions. There cannot be a greater Instance of this, than in the
old Common wealth of Rome, who flattered themselves with an Opinion that their
Government had in it a due Temper of the Regal, Noble, and Popular Power,
represented by the Consuls, the Senators, and the Tribunes. The Regal Part was
however in several Points notoriously defective, and particularly because the
Consuls had not a Negative in the passing of a Law, as the other two Branches
had. Nevertheless in this Government, when the Republic was threatened with
any great and imminent Danger, they thought it for the common Safety to appoint
a Temporary Dictator, invested with the whole Power of the three Branches; who,
when the Danger was over, retired again into the Community, and left the
Government in its natural Situation. But what is more to our Case, the Consular
Power itself, though infinitely short of the Regal Power in Great Britain, was
entrusted with the whole Authority which the Legislature has put into the Hands
of His Majesty. We have an Eminent Instance of this in the Motto of my Paper,
which I shall Translate for the Benefit of the English Reader, after having
advertised him, that the Power there given to the Consul, was in the Time of a
Conspiracy. The Senate therefore made a Decree, as usual, when they have
Matters before them of so Horrid a Nature, That the Consuls should take Care
the Commonwealth did not suffer any Prejudice. By Virtue of this very great
Power which the Senate allows to the Magistrate, according to the Ancient
Customs of Rome, He may raise an Army, wage War, make Use of all kinds of
Methods to restrain the Associates and Citizens of Rome, and exercise the
Supreme Authority both at Home and Abroad in Matters Civil and Military;
whereas otherwise the Consul is not invested with any of these Powers without
the express Command of the People.

There now only remains to show, that His Majesty is legally possessed of this
Power; and that the Necessity of the present Affairs requires He should be so.
He is entrusted with it by the Legislature of the Nation; and in the very
Notion of a Legislature is implied a Power to change, repeal, and suspend what
Laws are in Being, as well as to make what new Laws they shall think fit for
the Good of the People. This is so uncontroverted a Maxim, that I believe never
any Body attempted to refute it. Our Legislature have however had that just
Regard for their Fellow Subjects, as not to entertain a Thought of abrogating
this Law, but only to hinder it from operating at a Time when it would endanger
the Constitution. The King is empowered to act but for a few Months by Virtue
of this Suspension; and by that Means differs from a King of France, or any
other Tyrannical Prince, who in Times of Peace and Tranquillity, and upon what
Occasion he pleases, sends any of his Subjects out of the Knowledge of their
Friends into such Castles, Dungeons, or Imprisonments as he thinks fit. Nor did
the Legislature do any Thing in this that was unprecedented. The Habeas Corpus
Act was made but about five and thirty Years ago, and since that Time has been
suspended four Times before his present Majesty's Accession to the Throne:
Twice under the Reign of King William and Queen Mary; once under the Reign of
King William; and once under the Reign of Queen Anne.

The Necessity of this Law at this Time arose from the Prospect of an Invasion,
which has since broke out into an actual Rebellion; and from Informations of
secret and dangerous Practices among Men of considerable Figure, who could not
have been prevented from doing Mischief to their Country but by such a
Suspension of this Act of Parliament.

I cannot however but observe, that notwithstanding the Lawfulness and
Necessity of such a Suspension, had not the Rebellion broke out after the
passing of this Act of Parliament, I do not know how those who had been the
most instrumental in procuring it, could have escaped that popular Odium, which
their malicious and artful Enemies have now in vain endeavored to stir up
against them. Had it been possible for the Vigilance and Endeavors of a
Ministry to have hindered even the Attempt of an Invasion, their very
Endeavors might have proved prejudicial to them. Their prudent and resolute
Precautions would have turned to their Disadvantage, had they not been
justified by those Events, which they did all that was in their Power to
obviate. This naturally brings to Mind the Reflection of Tully in the like
Circumstances, That amidst the Divisions of Rome, a Man was in an unhappy
Condition who had a Soar in the Administration, nay even in the Preservation
of the Commonwealth. O conditionem miseram non modo administrandae, verum
etiam conservandae Reipublicae!

Besides, every unprejudiced Man will consider how mildly and equitably this
Power has been used. The Persons confined have been treated with all possible
Humanity, and abridged of nothing but the Liberty of hurting their Country,
and very probably of ruining both themselves and their Families. And as to the
Numbers of those who are under this short Restraint, it is very observable,
that People do not seem so much surpized at the Confinement of some, as at the
Liberty of many Others. But we may from hence conclude, what every Englishman
must observe with great Pleasure; that His Majesty does not in this great Point
regulate Himself by any private Jealousies or Suspicions, but by those
Evidences and Informations which he has received.

We have already found the good Consequences of this Suspension, in that it has
hindered the Rebellion from gathering the Strength it would otherwise have
gained; not to mention those Numbers it has kept from engaging in so desperate
an Enterprise, with the many Lives it has preserved, and the Desolations it has
prevented.

For these and many other Reasons the Representatives of Great Britain in
Parliament could never have answered it to the People they represent, who have
found such great Benefits from the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, and
without it must have felt such fatal Consequences, had they not in a Case of
such great Necessity made Use of this customary, legal, and reasonable Method
for Securing His Majesty on the Throne, and their Country from Misery or Ruin.

No. 17. Friday, February 17.
-- Hic Niger est: hunc tu, Roman, caveto. Hor.
WE are told, that in Turkey, when any Man is the Author of Notorious
Falsehoods, it is usual to blacken the whole Front of his House: Nay we have
sometimes heard, that an Ambassador, whose Business it is (if I may quote his
Character in Sir Henry Wotton's Words) to (...) for the Good of his Country,
has sometimes had this Mark set upon his House; when he (...) been detected in
any Piece of feigned Intelligence, that has prejudiced the Government, and
misled the Minds of the People. One could almost wish that the Habitations of
such of our own Countrymen as deal in Forgeties detrimental to the Public,
were distinguished in the same Manner; that their Fellow Subjects might be
cautioned not to be too easy in giving Credit to them. Were such a Method put
in Practice, this Metropolis would be strangely checkered; some entire
Parishes would be in Mourning, and several Streets darkened from one End to the
other.

But I have given my Thoughts in two preceding Papers, both on the Inventors
and the Believers of these public Falsehoods and Calumnies, and shall here
speak of that Contempt with which they are and ought to be received by those in
high Stations, at whom they are levelled. Any Person indeed, who is zealous for
promoting the Interest of his Country, must conquer all that Tenderness and
Delicacy which may make him afraid of being spoken ill of; or his Endeavors
will often produce no less Uneasiness to himself, than Benefit to the Public.
Among a People who indulge themselves in the utmost Freedoms of Thought and
Speech, a Man must either be insignificant, or able to bear an undeserved
Reproach. A true Patriot may comfort himself under the Attacks of Falsehood and
Obloquy, from several Motives and Reflections.

In the first Place he should consider, that the chief of his Antagonists are
generally acted by Spirit of Envy; which would not rise against him, if it were
not provoked by his Desert. A Statesman, who is possessed of real Merit, should
look upon his political Censurers with the same Neglect, that a good Writer
regards his Critics; who are generally a Race of Men that are not able to
discover the Beauties of a Work they examine, and deny that Approbation to
Others, which they never met with themselves. Patriots therefore should rather
rejoice in the Success of their honest Designs, than be mortified by those who
misrepresent them.

They should likewise consider, that not only Envy, but Vanity has a Share in
the Detraction of their Adversaries. Such Aspersions therefore do them Honor
at the same Time that they are intended to lessen their Reputation. They should
reflect, That those who endeavor to stir up the Multitude against them, do it
to be thought considerable; and not a little applaud themselves in a Talent
that can raise Clamours out of nothing, and throw a Ferment among the People,
by Murmurs or Complaints, which they know in their own Hearts are altogether
groundless. There is a pleasant Instance of this Nature recorded at length in
the First Book of the Annals of Tacitus. When a great Part of the Roman Legions
were in a Disposition to mutiny, an Impudent Varlet, who was a private
Sentinel, being mounted upon the Shoulders of his Fellow Soldiers, and resolved
to try the Power of his Eloquence, addressed himself to the Army, in all the
Postures of an Orator, after the following Manner: You have given Liberty to
these miserable Men: said he, (pointing to some Criminals whom they had
rescued) but which of you can restore Life to my Brother? Who can give me back
my Brother? He was murdered no longer ago than (...) Night, by the Hands of
those Ru^^ians, who are eatertain'd by the General to butcher the poor S^^^ery.
Tell me, Blaesus, (for that was the Name of the General, who was then sitting
on the Tribunal) tell me, Where have thou cast his dead Body? An Enemy does not
grudge the Rites of Burial. When I have tired my self with kissing his cold
Corpse, and weeping over it, order me to be slain upon it. All I ask of my
Fellow Soldiers, since we both dye in their Cause, is that they would lay me in
the same Grave with my Brother. The whole Army was in an Uproar at this moving
Speech, and resolved to do the Speaker Justice, when, upon Enquiry, they found
that he never had a Brother in his Life; and that he had stirred up the
Sedition only to show his Parts.

Public Ministers would likewise do well to consider, that the principal
Authors of such Reproaches as are cast upon them, are those who have a Mind to
get their Places: And as for a Censure arising from this Motive, it is in their
Power to escape it when they please, and turn it upon their Competitors.
Malcontents of an inferior Character are acted by the same Principle; for so
long as there are Employments of all Sizes, there will be Murmurers of all
Degrees. I have heard of a Countrey-Gentleman, who made a very long and
melancholy Complaint to the late Duke of Buckingham, when he was in great Power
at Court, of several public Grievances. The Duke, after having given him a
very patient Hearing, My dear Friend, says he, this is but too true; but I have
thought of an Expedient which will set all Things right, and that very soon.
His Country Friend asked him, what it was. You must know, says the Duke,
there is a Place of five Hundred Pounds a Year fallen this very Morning, which I
(...) to put you in Possession of. The Gentleman thanked his Grace, went away
satisfied, and thought the Nation the happiest under Heaven, during that whole
Ministry.

But farther, every Man in a public Station ought to consider, that when there
are two different Parties in a Nation, they will see Things in different
Lights. An Action however conducive to the Good of their Country, will be
represented by the Artful and appear to the Ignorant as prejudicial to it.
Since I have here, according to the usual Liberty of Essay-Writers, rambled
into several Stories, I shall fetch one to my present Purpose out of the
Persian History. We there read of a virtuous young Emperor, who was very much
afflicted to find his Actions misconstrued and defamed by a Party among his
Subjects that favored another Interest. As he was one Day sitting among the
Ministers of his Divan, and amusing himself after the Eastern Manner, with the
Solution of difficult Problems and Aenigma's, he proposed to them in his Turn,
the following one. What is the Tree that bears three Hundred and sixty five
Leaves, which are all Black on the one Side, and White on the other? His Grand
Vizier immediately replied, it was the Year which consisted of three Hundred
and sixty five Days and Nights: But Sir, says he, permit me at the same Time to
take Notice, that these Leaves represent your Actions, which carry different
Faces to your Friends and Enemies, and will always appear black to those who
are resolved only to look upon the wrong Side of 'em.

A virtuous Man therefore who lays out his Endeavors for the Good of his
Country, should never be troubled at the Reports which are made of him, so
long as he is conscious of his own Integrity. He should rather be pleased, to
find People descanting upon his Actions, because when they are thoroughly
canvassed and examined, they are sure in the End to turn to his Honor and
Advantage. The reasonable and unprejudiced Part of Mankind will be of his Side,
and rejoice to see their common Interest lodged in such honest Hands. A strict
Examination of a great Man's Character, is like the Trial of a suspected
Chastity, which was made among the Jews by the Waters of Jealousy. Moses
assures us that the Criminal burst upon the drinking of them; but if she was
accused wrongfully, the Rabbis tell us, they heightened her Charms, and made
her much more amiable than before: So that they destroyed the Guilty, but
beautified the Innocent.

No. 18. Monday, February 20.
-- Inopem me Copia fecit. Ovid.
EVery Englishman will be a good Subject to King George, in Proportion as he is
a good Englishman, and a Lover of the Constitution of his Country. In Order to
awaken in my Readers the Love of this their Constitution, it may be necessary
to set forth its superior Excellency to that Form of Government, which many
wicked and ignorant Men have of late Years endeavored to introduce among us. I
shall not therefore think it improper to take Notice from Time to Time of any
particular Act of Power, exerted by those among whom the Pretender to His
Majesty's Crown has been educated; which would prove fatal to this Nation,
should it be Conquered and Governed by a Person, who, in all Probability, would
put in Practice the Politics in which he has been so long instructed.

There has been nothing more observable in the Reign of His present Gallick
Majesty, than the Method he has taken for supplying his Exchequer with a
necessary Sum of Money. The Ways and Means for raising it has been an Edict, or
a Command in Writing signed by himself, to increase the Value of Louis d' Ors
from Fourteen to Sixteen Livres, by Virtue of a new Stamp which shall be struck
upon them. As this Method will bring all the Gold of the Kingdom into his
Hands, it is provided by the same Edict that they shall be paid out again to
the People at Twenty Livres each; so that Four Livres in the Score by this
Means accrue to His Majesty out of all the Money in the Kingdom of France.

This Method of raising Money is consistent with that Form of Government, and
with the repeated Practice of their late Grand Monarque; so that I shall not
here consider the many evil Consequences which it must have upon their Trade,
their Exchange, and public Credit: I shall only take Notice of the whimsical
Circumstances a People must lie under, who can be thus made poor or rich by an
Edict, which can throw an Alloy into a Louis d' Or, and debase it into half its
former Value, or, if His Majesty pleases, raise the Price of it, not by the
Accession of Metal, but of a Mark. By the present Edict many a Man in France
will swell into a Plumb, who fell several Thousand Pounds short of it the Day
before its Publication. This conveys a Kind of Fairy Treasure into their
Chests, even whilst they are under Lock and Key; and is a Secret of
Multiplication without Addition. It is natural enough however for the Vanity of
the French Nation to grow insolent upon this imaginary Wealth, not considering
that their Neighbors think them no more Rich by Virtue of an Edict to make
Fourteen Twenty, than they would think 'em more formidable should there be
another Edict to make every Man in the Kingdom Seven Foot high.

It was usual for his late Most Christian Majesty to sink the Value of their
Louis d' Ors about the Time he was to receive the Taxes of his good People, and
to raise them when he had got them safe into his Coffers. And there is no
Question but the present Government in that Kingdom, will so far observe this
Kind of Conduct, as to reduce the Twenty Livres to their old Number of
Fourteen, when they have paid them out of their Hands; which will immediately
sink the present Timpany of Wealth, and re-establish the natural Poverty of the
Gallick Nation.

One cannot but pity the melancholy Condition of a Miser in this Country, who
is perpetually telling his Livres, without being able to know how Rich he is.
He is as ridiculously puzzled and perplexed as a Man that counts the Stones on
Salisbury-Plain, which can never be settled to any certain Number, but are more
or fewer every Time he reckons them.

I have heard of a young French Lady, a Subject of Louis the Fourteenth, who
was contracted to a Marquis upon the Foot of a Five Thousand Pound Fortune,
which she had by her in Specie; but one of these unlucky Edicts coming out a
Week before the intended Marriage, she lost a Thousand Pound, and her
Bridegroom into the Bargain.

The Uncertainty of Riches is a Subject much discoursed of in all Countries,
but may be insisted on more emphatically in France than any other. A Man is
here under such a Kind of Situation, as One who is managed by a Jugler. He
fancies he has so many Pieces of Money in his Hand; but let him grasp them
never so carefully, upon a Word or two of the Artist they increase or dwindle
to what Number the Doctor is pleased to name.

This Method of lowering or advancing Money, we, who have the Happiness to be
in another Form of Government, should look upon as an unwarrantable Kind of
Clipping and Coining. However, as it is an Expedient that is often practiced,
and may be justified in that Constitution which has been so thoroughly studied
by the Pretender to His Majesty's Crown, I do not see what should have hindered
him from making Use of so expeditious a Method for raising a Supply, if he had
succeeded in his late Attempt to dethrone His Majesty, and subvert our
Constitution. I shall leave it to the Consideration of the Reader, if in such a
Case the following Edict, or something very like it, might not have been
expected.

'WHereas these our Kingdoms have long groaned under an expensive and consuming
Land-War, which has very much exhausted the Treasure of the Nation, we, being
willing to increase the Wealth of our People, and not thinking it advisable for
this Purpose to make Use of the tedious Methods of Merchandise and Commerce,
which have been always promoted by a Faction among the worst of our Subjects,
and were so wisely discountenanced by the best of them in the late Reign, do
hereby Enact by our sole Will and Pleasure, that every Shilling in
Great Britain, shall pass in all Payments for the Sum of fourteen Pence, till
the first of September next, and that every other Piece of Money shall rise and
pass in current Payment in the same Proportion. The Advantage which will accrue
to these Nations by this our Royal Donative, will visibly appear to all Men of
sound Principles, who are so justly famous for their Antipathy to Strangers,
and would not see the Landed Interest of their Country weakened by the
Importations of Foreign Gold and Silver. But since by Reason of the great Debts
which we have contracted Abroad, during our fifteen Years Reign, as well as of
our present Exigencies, it will be necessary to fill our Exchequer by the most
prudent and expeditious Methods, we do also hereby order every one of our
Subjects to bring in these his fourteen-penny Pieces, and all the other current
Cash of this Kingdom, by what new Titles soever dignified or distinguished, to
the Master of our Mint, who, after having set a Mark upon them shall deliver
out to them, on or after the first of September aforesaid, their respective
Sums, taking only Four Pence for our self for such his Mark on every Fourteen
Penny Piece, which from henceforth shall pass in Payment for Eighteen Pence,
and so in Proportion for the rest. By this Method, the Money of this Nation
will be more by one Third than it is at present; and we shall content our self
with not quite one Fifth Part of the Current Cash of our loving Subjects; which
will but barely suffice to clear the Interest of those Sums in which we stand
indebted to our most dear Brother and ancient Ally. We are glad of this
Opportunity of showing such an Instance of our Goodness to our Subjects, by
this our Royal Edict, which shall be Read in every Parish Church of
Great Britain, immediately after the Celebration of High Mass. FOR SUCH IS OUR
PLEASURE.' No. 19. Friday, February 24.
Pulchrum est been facere reipublicae; etiam been dicere haud absurdum est.
Sall.
IT has been usual these many Years for Writers, who have approved the Scheme
of Government which has taken Place, to explain to the People the
Reasonableness of those Principles which have prevailed, and to justify the
Conduct of those, who act in Conformity to such Principles. It therefore
happens well for the Party which is undermost, when a Work of this Nature falls
into the Hands of those who content themselves to attack their Principles,
without exposing their Persons, or singling out any particular Objects for
Satyr and Ridicule. This Manner of Proceeding is no inconsiderable Piece of
Merit in Writers, who are often more influenced by a Desire of Fame, than a
Regard to the public Good; and who, by this Means, lose many fair
Opportunities of showing their own Wit, or of gratifying the Ill Nature of
their Readers.

When a Man thinks a Party engaged in such Measures as tend to the Ruin of his
Country, it is certainly a very laudable and virtuous Action in him to make
War after this Manner upon the whole Body. But as several Casuists are of
Opinion, that in a Battle you should discharge upon the Gross of the Enemy,
without levelling your Piece at any particular Person; so in this Kind of
Combat also, I cannot think it fair to aim at any one Man, and make his
Character the Mark of your Hostilities. There is now to be seen in the Castle
of Milan, a Cannon-Bullet, inscribed, This to the Marshall de Crequi, which
was the very Ball that shot him. An Author who points his Satyr at a Great Man,
is to be looked upon in the same View with the Engineer who signalized himself
by this ungenerous Practice.

But as the Spirit of the Whigs and Tories shows itself, upon every Occasion,
to be very widely different from one another; so is it particularly visible in
the Writings of this Kind, which have been published by each Party. The latter
may, indeed, assign one Reason to justify themselves in this Practice; that,
having nothing of any Manner of Weight to offer against the Principles of their
Antagonists, if they speak at all, it must be against their Persons. When they
cannot refute an Adversary, the shortest Way is to libel him; and to endeavor
at the making his Person odious, when they cannot represent his Notions as
absurd.

The Examiner was a Paper, in the last Reign, which was the Favourite-Work of
the Party. It was ushered into the World by a Letter from a Secretary of State,
setting forth the great Genius of the Author, the Usefulness of his Design, and
the mighty Consequences that were to be expected from it. It is said to have
been written by those among 'em whom they looked upon as their most celebrated
Wits and Politicians, and was dispersed into all Quarters of the Nation with
great Industry and Expense. Who would not have expected, that at least the
Rules of Decency and Candor would be observed in such a Performance? But
instead of this, you saw all the great Men, who had done eminent Services to
their Country but a few Years before, draughted out one by one, and baited in
their Turns. No Sanctity of Character, or Privilege of Sex, exempted Persons
from this barbarous Usage. Several of our Prelates were the standing Marks of
public Raillery, and many Ladies of the first Quality branded by Name for
Matters of Fact, which as they were false, were not heeded, and if they had
been true, were innocent. The Dead themselves were not spared. And here I
cannot forbear taking Notice of a Kind of Wit which has lately grown into
Fashion among the Versifiers, Epigrammatists, and other Authors, who think it
sufficient to distinguish themselves by their Zeal for what they call the
High-Church, while they sport with the most tremendous Parts of Revealed
Religion. Every one has seen Epigrams upon the deceased Fathers of our Church,
where the whole Thought has turned upon Hellfire. Patriots, who ought to be
remembered with Honor by their Posterity, have been introduced as Speakers in
a State of Torments. There is something dreadful even in repeating these
execrable Pieces of Wit, which no Man who really believes in another Life, can
peruse without Fear and Trembling. It is astonishing to see Readers who call
themselves Christians, applauding such Diabolical Mirth, and seeming to rejoice
in the Doom which is pronounced against their Enemies, by such abandoned
Scriblers. A Wit of this Kind, may with great Truth be compared to the Fool in
the Proverbs, who plays with Arrows, Firebrarnds and Death, and says, am I not
in Sport?

I must, in Justice to the more sober and considerate of that Party, confess,
that many of them were highly scandalized at that Personal Slander and
Reflection which was flung out so freely by the Libellers of the last Reign, as
well as by those profane Liberties which have been since continued. And as for
those who are either the Authors or Admirers of such Compositions, I would have
them consider with themselves, whether the Name of a good Churchman can atone
for the want of that Charity which is the most essential Part of Christianity.
They would likewise do well to reflect, how, by these Methods, the Poison has
run freely into the Minds of the Weak and Ignorant; heightened their Rage
against many of their Fellow Subjects; and almost divested them of the common
Sentiments of Humanity.

In the former Part of this Paper, I have hinted that the Design of it is to
oppose the Principles of those who are Enemies to the present Government, and
the main Body of that Party who espouse those Principles. But even in such
general Attacks there are certain Measures to be kept, which may have a
Tendency rather to gain, than to irritate those who differ with you in their
Sentiments. The Examiner would not allow such as were of a contrary Opinion to
him, to be either Christians or Fellow Subjects. With him they were all
Atheists, Deists, or Apostates, and a separate Commonwealth among themselves,
that ought either to be extirpated, or, when he was in a better Humor, only to
be banished out of their Native Country. They were often put in mind of some
approaching Execution, and therefore all of them advised to prepare themselves
for it, as Men who had then nothing to take care of, but how to die decently.
In short, the Examiner seemed to make no distinction between Conquest and
Destruction.

The Conduct of this Work has hitherto been regulated by different Views, and
shall continue to be so; unless the Party it has to deal with, draw upon
themselves another kind of Treatment. For if they shall persist in pointing
their Batteries against particular Persons, there are no Laws of War, that
forbid the making of Reprisals. In the mean time, this Undertaking shall be
managed with that generous Spirit which was so remarkable among the Romans, who
did not subdue a Country in order to put the Inhabitants to Fire and Sword,
but to incorporate them into their own Community, and make them happy in the
same Government with themselves.

No. 20. Monday, February 27.
Privatus illis Census erat brevis,
Commune magnum -- Hor.

IT is very unlucky for those who make it their Business to raise Popular
Murmurs and Discontents against His Majesty's Government, that they find so
very few and so very improper Occasions for them. To show how hard they are set
in this Particular, there are several, who for want of other Materials, are
forced to represent the Bill which has passed this Session, for laying an
additional Tax of Two Shillings in the Pound upon Land, as a kind of Grievance
upon the Subject. If this be a Matter of Complaint, it ought in Justice to fall
upon those who have made it necessary. Had there been no Rebellion, there would
have been no Increase of the Land Tax; so that in Proportion as a Man declares
his Aversion to the one, he ought to testify his Abhorrence of the other. But
it is very remarkable that those, who would persuade the People that they are
aggrieved by this additional Burden, are the very Persons who endeavor, in
their ordinary Conversation, to extenuate the Hainousness of the Rebellion, and
who express the greatest Tenderness for the Persons of the Rebels. They show a
particular Indulgence for that unnatural Insurrection which has drawn this Load
upon as, and are angry at the Means which were necessary for suppressing it.
There needs no clearer Proof of the Spirit and Intention with which they act: I
shall therefore advise my Fellow-Free-Holders to consider the Character of any
Person who would possess them with the Notion of a Hardship that is put upon
the Country by this Tax. If he be one of known Affection to the present
Establishment, they may imagine there is some Reason for Complaint. But if on
the contrary he be one, who has shown himself Indifferent as to the Success of
the present Rebellion, or is suspected as a private Abettor of it, they may
take it for granted, his Complaint against the Land Tax is either the Rage of a
disappointed Man, or the Artifice of one who would alienate their Affections
from the present Government.

The Expense which will arise to the Nation from this Rebellion, is already
computed at near a Million. And it is a melancholy Consideration for the
Freeholders of Great Britain, that the Treason of their Fellow Subjects should
bring upon them as great a Charge as the War with France. At the same Time
every reasonable Man among them will pay a Tax with at least as great
Cheerfulness for stifling a Civil War in its Birth, as for carrying on a War in
a Foreign Country. Had not our first Supplies been effectual for the crushing
of our Domestic Enemies, we should immediately have beheld the whole Kingdom a
Scene of Slaughter and Desolation: Whereas, if we had failed in our first
Attempts upon a distant Nation, we might have repaired the Losses of one
Campaign by the Advantages of another, and after several Victories gained over
us, might still have kept the Enemy from our Gates.

As it was thus absolutely necessary to raise a Sum that might enable the
Government to put a speedy Stop to the Rebellion, so could there be no Method
thought of for raising such a Sum more proper, than this of laying an
additional Tax of Two Shillings in the Pound upon Land.

In the first Place: This Tax has already been so often tried, that we know the
exact Produce of it, which in any new Project is always very doubtful and
uncertain. As we are thus acquainted with the Produce of this Tax, we find this
adequate to the Services for which (...) is designed, and that the additional
Tax is proportioned to the Supernumerary Expense, which falls upon the Kingdom
this Year by the unnatural Rebellion, as it has been above stated.

In the next Place: No other Tax could have been thought of, upon which so much
Money would have been immediately advanced as was necessary in so critical a
Juncture for pushing our Successes against the Rebels, and preventing the
Attempts of their Friends and Confederates both at Home and Abroad. No Body
cares to make Loans upon a new and untried Project; whereas Men never fail to
bring in their Money upon a Land Tax, when the Praemium or ^nterest allowed
them, is suited to the Hazard ^hey run by such Loans to the Government. And
here one cannot but bewail the Misfortune of our Country, when we consider,
that the House of Commons had last Year reduced this ^nterest to Four per Cent.
by which Means there was a considerable Saving to the Nation; but that this
Year they have been forced to give Six per Cent. as well knowing the fatal
Consequences that might have ensued, had there not ^een an Interest allowed,
which would certainly encourage the Lender to venture, in such a Time of
Danger, what was indispensably necessary for the Exigences of the Public.

Besides; This is a Method for raising a Sum of Money, that, with the ordinary
Taxes, will in all Probability defray the whole Expense of the Year: So that
there is no Burden laid upon our Posterity, who have been sufficiently loaded
by other Means of raising Money; nor any Deficiency to be hereafter made up by
our selves; which has been our Case in so many other Subsidies.

To this we may add; That we have no Example of any other Tax, which in its
Nature would so particularly affect the Enemies to His Majesty's Government.
Multitudes of Papists and Nonjurors will be obliged to furnish a double
Proportion out of their Revenues toward the clearing of that Expense, which by
their open and secret Practices they have been Instrumental in bringing upon
their Fellow Subjects.

I shall only mention one Consideration more; That no other Tax is so likely to
cease as this is, when there is no farther Occasion for it. This Tax is
established by a House of Commons, which, by Virtue of an Act of Parliament
passed a few Years ago, must consist for the most Part of Landed Men; so that a
great Share of the Weight of it must necessarily fall upon the Members of their
own Body. As this is an Instance of their Public Spirit, so we may be sure
they would not have exerted it, had there not been an absolute Necessity: Nor
can we doubt, that for the same Reasons, when this Necessity ceases, they will
take the first Opportunity of easing themselves in this Particular as well as
those whom they represent. It is a celebrated Notion of a Patriot, who signally
distinguished himself for the Liberties of his Country, That a House of
Commons should never grant such Subsidies as are easy to be raised, and give no
Pain to the People, lest the Nation should acquiesce under a Burden they did
not feel, and see it perpetuated without repining. Whether this Notion might
not be too refined, I shall not determine; but by what has been already said, I
think we may promise our selves, that this additional Tax of Two Shillings in
the Pound will not be continued another Year, because we may hope the Rebellion
will be entirely ended in This.

And here, I believe, it must be obvious to every one's Reflection, that the
Rebellion might not have concluded so soon, had not this Method been made use
of for that End. A foreign Potentate trembles at the Thought of entering into a
War with so wealthy an Enemy as the British Nation, when he finds the whole
Landed Interest of the Kingdom engaged to oppose him with their united Force;
and at all Times ready to employ against him such a Part of their Revenues, as
shall be sufficient to baffle his Designs upon their Country: Especially when
none can imagine, that he expects any Encouragement from those, whose Fortunes
are either lodged in the Funds, or employed in Trade.

The Wisdom therefore of the present House of Commons has by this Tax, not only
enabled the King to subdue those of his own Subjects who have been actually in
Arms against him, but to divert any of his Neighbors from the Hopes of lending
them a competent Assistance.

No. 21. Friday, March 2. 1716.
Qualis in Eurotae ripis, aut per juga Cynthi,
Exercet Diana choros; quam mill secutae
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades: illa pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque Deas supereminet omnes. Virg.

IT is not easy for any one, who saw the Magnificence of Yesterday in the Court
of Great Britain, to turn his Thoughts for some time after on any other
Subject. It was a Solemnity every way suited to the Birthday of a Princess,
who is the Delight of our Nation, and the Glory of her Sex. Homer tells us,
that when the Daughter of Jupiter presented herself among a Crowd of Goddesses,
she was distinguished from the rest by her graceful Stature, and known by her
superior Beauty, notwithstanding they were all beautiful. Such was the
Appearance of the Princess of Wales among our British Ladies; or (to use a more
solemn Phrase) of the King's Daughter among her honorable Women. Her Royal
Highness in the midst of such a Circle raises in the Beholder the Idea of a
fine Picture, where (notwithstanding the Diversity of pleasing Objects that
fill up the Canvas) the principal Figure immediately takes the Eye, and fixes
the Attention.

When this excellent Princess was yet in her Father's Court, she was so
celebrated for the Beauty of her Person, and the Accomplishments of her Mind,
that there was no Prince in the Empire, who had room for such an Alliance, that
was not ambitious of gaining her into his Family, either as a Daughter, or as a
Consort. He, who is now the Chief of the Crowned Heads in Europe, and was then
King of Spain, and Heir to all the Dominions of the House of Austria, sought
her in Marriage. Could her Mind have been captivated with the Glories of this
World, she had them all laid before her; but she generously declined them,
because she saw the Acceptance of them was inconsistent with what she esteems
more than all the Glories of this World, the Enjoyment of her Religion.
Providence however kept in Store a Reward for such an exalted Virtue; and, by
the secret Methods of its Wisdom, opened a Way for her to become the Greatest
of her Sex, among those, who profess that Faith to which she adhered with so
much Christian Magnanimity.

This her illustrious Conduct might, in the Eye of the World, have lost its
Merit, had so accomplished a Prince as his Royal Highness declared his Passion
for the same Alliance at that time: It would then have been no Wonder that all
other Proposals had been rejected. But it was the Fame of this heroic
Constancy that determined his Royal Highness to desire in Marriage a Princess
whose personal Charms, which had before been so universally admired, were now
become the least Part of her Character. We of the British Nation have reason to
rejoice, that such a Proposal was made and accepted; and that her Royal
Highness, with regard to these two successive Treaties of Marriage, showed as
much Prudence in her Compliance with the one, as Piety in her Refusal of the
other.

The Princess was no sooner arrived at Hanover, than she improved the Luster of
that Court, which was before reckoned among the Politest in Europe; and
increased the Satisfaction of that People, who were before looked upon as the
Happiest in the Empire. She immediately became the Darling of the Princess
Sophia, who was acknowledged in all the Courts of Europe the most accomplished
Woman of the Age in which she lived, and who was not a little pleased with the
Conversation of one in whom she saw so lively an Image of her own Youth.

But I shall insist no longer on that Reputation which Her Royal Highness has
acquired in other Countries. We daily discover those admirable Qualities for
which she is so justly famed, and rejoice to see them exerted in our own
Country, where we our selves are made happy by their Influence. We are the
more pleased to behold the Throne of these Kingdoms surrounded by a numerous
and beautiful Progeny, when we consider the Virtues of those from whom they
descend. Not only the Features, but the Mind of the Parent is often copied out
in the Offspring. But the Princess we are speaking of, takes the surest Method
of making her Royal Issue like herself, by instilling early into their Minds
all the Principles of Religion, Virtue and Honor, and seasoning their tender
Years with all that Knowledge which they are capable of receiving. What may
(...) not hope from such an uncommon Care in (...) Education of the Children of
Great Britain, (...) are directed by such Precepts, and will be (...)ed by such
an Example!

The Conjugal Virtues are so remarkable in her Royal Highness, as to deserve
those just and generous Returns of Love and Tenderness, for which the Prince
her Husband is so universally celebrated.

But there is no Part of her Royal Highness's Character which we observe with
greater Pleasure, than that Behavior by which she has so much endeared herself
to His Majesty; though indeed we have no Reason to be surprised at this mutual
Intercourse of Duty and Affection, when we consider so wise and virtuous a
Princess possessing, in the same sacred Person, the kindest of Fathers, and the
best of Kings. And here it is natural for us to congratulate our own good
Fortune, who see our Sovereign blessed with a numerous Issue, among whom are
Heirs Male in two direct Descents, which has not happened in the Reign of any
English King since the Time of His Majesty's Great Ancestor Edward III. and is
a Felicity not enjoyed by the Subjects of any other of the Kings of Europe who
are his Contemporaries. We are like Men entertained with the View of a spacious
Landscape, where the Eye passes over one pleasing Prospect into another, till
the Sight is lost by degrees in a Succession of delightful Objects, and leaves
us in the Persuasion that there remain still more behind.

But if we regard her Royal Highness in that Light which diffuses the greatest
Glory round a Humane Character, we shall find the Christian no less conspicuous
than the Princess. She is as eminent for a sincere Piety in the Practice of
Religion, as for an inviolable Adherence to its Principles. She is constant in
her Attendance on the daily Offices of our Church, and by her serious and
devout Comportment on these solemn Occasions, gives an Example that is very
often too much wanted in Courts.

Her Religion is equally free from the Weakness of Superstition, and the
Sourness of Enthusiasm. It is not of that uncomfortable melancholy Nature which
disappoints its own End, by appearing unamiable to those whom it would gain to
its Interests. It discovers itself in the genuine Effects of Christianity, in
Affability, Compassion, Benevolence, Evenness of Mind, and all the Offices of
an active and universal Charity.

As a cheerful Temper is the necessary Result of these Virtues, so it shines
out in all the Parts of her Conversation, and dissipates those Apprehensions
which naturally hang on the Timorous or the Modest, when they are admitted to
the Honor of her Presence. There is none that does not listen with Pleasure to
a Person in so high a Station, who condescends to make herself thus agreeable,
by Mirth without Levity, and Wit without Ill Nature.

Her Royal Highness is, indeed, possessed of all those Talents which make
Conversation either delightful or improving. As she has a fine Taste of the
elegant Arts, and is skilled in several modern Languages, her Discourse is not
confined to the ordinary Subjects or Forms of Conversation, but can adapt
itself with an uncommon Grace to every Occasion, and entertain the politest
Persons of different Nations. I need not mention, what is observed by every
one, that agreeable Turn which appears in her Sentiments upon the most ordinary
Affairs of Life, and which is so suitable to the Delicacy of her Sex, the
Politeness of her Education, and the Splendour of her Quality.

It would be vain to think of drawing into the Compass of this Paper, the many
eminent Virtues which adorn the Character of this Great Princess; but as it is
one chief End of this Undertaking to make the People sensible of the Blessings
which they enjoy under His Majesty's Reign, I could not but lay hold on this
Opportunity to speak of That which ought in Justice to be reckoned among the
greatest of them.

No. 22. Monday, March 5.
Studiis rudis, sermon barbarus, impetu strenuus, manu promptus, cogitatione
celer. Vell. Paterc.
FOR the Honor of His Majesty, and the Safety of His Government, we cannot but
observe, that those who have appeared the greatest Enemies to both, are of that
Rank of Men, who are commonly distinguished by the Title of Fox-hunters. As
several of these have had no Part of their Education in Cities, Camps, or
Courts, it is doubtful whether they are of greater Ornament or Use to the
Nation in which they live. It would be an everlasting Reproach to Politics,
should such Men be able to overturn an Establishment which has been formed by
the wisest Laws, and is supported by the ablest Heads. The wrong Notions and
Prejudices which cleave to many of these Countrey-Gentlemen, who have always
(...) out of the way of being better informed, are not easy to be conceived by
a Person who has never conversed with them.

That I may give my Readers an Image of these Rural Statesmen, I shall without
farther Preface, set down an Account of a Discourse I chanced to have with one
of them some Time ago. I was Traveling toward one of the remote Parts of
England, when about Three a-Clock in the Afternoon, seeing a Countrey-Gentleman
trotting before me with a Spaniel by his Horse's Side, I made up to him. Our
Conversation opened, as usual, upon the Weather; in which we were very
unanimous; having both agreed that it was too dry for the Season of the Year.
My Fellow-Traveller, upon this, observed to me, that there had been no good
Weather since the Revolution I was a little startled at so extraordinary a
Remark, but would not interrupt him till he proceeded to tell me of the fine
Weather they used to have in King Charles the Second's Reign. I only answered
that I did not see how the Badness of the Weather could be the King's Fault;
and, without waiting for his Reply, asked him whose House it was we saw upon a
Rising-Ground at a little Distance from us. He told me it belonged to an old
Fanatical Cur, Mr. Such a one, You must have heard of him, says he, He Is one of
the Rump. I knew the Gentleman's Character upon hearing his Name, but assured
him that to my Knowledge he was a good Churchman: Ay! says he with a kind of
Surprise, We were told in the Country, that he spoke twice in the Queen's Time
against taking of the Duties upon French Claret. This naturall^ led us into the
Proceedings of late Parliaments* upon which Occasion he affirmed roundly, tha^
there had not been one good Law passed sinc^ King William's Accession to the
Throne, excep^ the Act for preserving the Game. I had a mind to see him out,
and therefore did not care for contradicting him. Is it not hard, says he, that
honest Gentlemen should be taken into Custody of Messengers to prevent them
from acting according to their Consciences? But, says he, what can we expect
when a Parcel of Factious Sons of Whores -- He was going on in great Passion,
but chanced to miss his Dog, who was amusing himself about a Bush, that grew at
some Distance behind us. We stood still till he had whistled him up; when he
fell into a long Panegyric upon his Spaniel, who seemed indeed excellent in
his Kind: But I found the most remarkable Adventure of his Life was, that he
had once like to have worried a Dissenting-Teacher. The Master could hardly sit
on his Horse for laughing all the while he was giving me the Particulars of
this Story, which I found had mightily endeared his Dog to him, and as he
himself told me, had made him a great Favorite among all the honest Gentlemen
of the Country. We were at length diverted from this Piece of Mirth by a
Post-Boy, who winding his Horn at us, my Companion gave him two or three
Curses, and left the Way clear for him. I fancy, said I, that Post brings News
from Scotland. I shall long to see the next Gazette. Sir, says he, I make it a
Rule never to believe any of your printed News. We never see, Sir, how Things
go, except now and then in Dyer' s Letter, and I read that more for the Style
than the News. The Man has a (...) Pen it must be owned. But is it not (...)
that we should be making War upon Church (...) England Men, with Dutch and
Swiss Soldiers, Men of Antimonarchical Principles? These Foreigners will never
be loved in England, Sir; they have not that Wit and Good-Breeding that we
have. I must confess I did not expect to hear my new Acquaintance value himself
upon these Qualifications, but finding him such a Critic upon Foreigners, I
asked him if he had ever Traveled; He told me, he did not know what Traveling
was good for, but to teach a Man to ride the Great Horse, to jabber French, and
to talk against Passive-Obedience: To which he added, that he scarce ever knew
a Traveller in his Life who had not forsook his Principles, and lost his
Hunting-Seat. For my Part, says he, I and my Father before me have always been
for Passive-Obedience, and shall be always for opposing a Prince who makes use
of Ministers that are of another Opinion. But where do you intend to Inn to
Night? (for we were now come in Sight of the next Town) I can help you to a
very good Landlord if you will go along with me. He Is a lusty jolly Fellow,
that lives well, at least three Yards in the Girt, and the best Church of
England Man upon the Road. I had a Curiosity to see this High-Church
Innkeeper, as well as to enjoy more of the Conversation of my
Fellow-Traveller, and therefore readily consented to set our Horses together
for that Night. As we rode Side by Side through the Town, I was let into the
Characters of all the principal Inhabitants whom we met in our Way. One was a
Dog, another a Whelp, another a Cut, and another the Soa of a Bitch, under
which several Denominations were comprehended all that Voted on the Whi Side in
the last Election of Burgesses. As for those of his own Party, he distinguished
then by a Nod of his Head, and asking them how they did by their Christian
Names. Upon on Arrival at the Inn, my Companion fetch' out the jolly Landlord,
who knew him by his Whistle. Many Endearments, and private Whispers passed
between them; though it was easy to see, by the Landlord's scratching his Head,
that Things did not go to their Wishes. The Landlord had swelled his Body to a
prodigious Size, and worked up his Complexion to a standing Crimson by his Zeal
for the Prosperity of the Church, which he expressed every Hour of the Day, as
his Customers dropped in, by repeated Bumpers. He had not time to go to Church
himself, but as my Friend told me in my Ear, had headed a Mob at the pulling
down of two or three Meeting Houses. While Supper was preparing, he enlarged
upon the Happiness of the neighboring Shire; For, says he, there is scarce a
Preshyterian in the whole County, except the Bishop. In short, I found by his
Discourse that he had learned a great deal of Politics, but not one Word of
Religion, from the Parson of his Parish; and, indeed, that he had scarce any
other Notion of Religion, but that it consisted in Hating Presbyterians. I had
a remarkable Instance of his Notions in this Particular. Upon seeing a poor
decrepid Old Woman pass under the Window where we fate, he desired me to take
Notice of her; and afterward informed me, that she was generally reputed a
Witch by the Country People, but that, for his Part, he was apt to believe she
was a Presbyterian.

Supper was no sooner served in, than he took occasion, from a Shoulder of
Mutton that lay before us, to cry up the Plenty of England, which would be the
happiest Country in the World, provided we would live within our selves. Upon
which, he expatiated on the Inconveniences of Trade, that carried from us the
Commodities of our Country, and made a Parcel of Upstarts as rich as Men of
the most ancient Families of England. He then declared frankly, that he had
always been against all Treaties and Alliances with Foreigners; Our Wooden
Walls, says he, are our Security, and we may bid Defiance to the whole World,
especially if they should attack us when the Militia is out. I ventured to
reply, that I had as great an Opinion of the English Fleet as he had; but I
could not see how they could be paid and manned, and fitted out, unless we
encouraged Trade and Navigation. He replied, with some Vehemence, That he would
undertake to prove, Trade would be the Ruin of the English Nation. I would
fain have put him upon it; but he contented himself with affirming it more
eagerly, to which he added two or three Curses upon the London Merchants, not
forgetting the Directors of the Bank. After Supper he asked me if I was an
Admirer of Punch; and immediately called for a Sneaker. I took this Occasion to
insinuate the Advantages of Trade, by observing to him, that Water was the only
Native of England that could be made use of on this Occasion: But that the
Lemons, the Brandy, the Sugar, and the Nutmeg, were all Foreigners. This put
him into some Confusion; but the Landlord, who overheard me, brought him off,
by affirming, That for constant use, there was no Liquor like a Cup of English
Water, provided it had Malt enough in it. My Squire laughed heartily at the
Conceit, and made the Landlord sit down with us. We sat pretty late over our
Punch; and, amidst a great deal of improving Discourse, drank the Healths of
several Persons in the Country, whom I had never heard of, that, they both
assured me, were the ablest Statesmen in the Nation: And of some Londoners,
whom they extolled to the Skies for their Wit, and who, I knew, passed in Town
for silly Fellows. It being now Midnight, and my Friend perceiving by his
Almanac that the Moon was up, he called for his Horses, and took a sudden
Resolution to go to his House, which was at three Miles distance from the Town,
after having bethought himself that he never slept well out of his own Bed. He
shook me very heartily by the Hand at parting, and discovered a great Air of
Satisfaction in his Looks, that he had met with an Opportunity of showing his
Parts, and left me a much wiser Man than he found me.

No. 23. Friday, March 9.
Illis ira modum supra est, et saepe venenum
Morsibus inspirant. -- Virg.

IN the Wars of Europe which were waged among our Forefathers, it was usual for
the Enemy, when there was a King in the Field, to demand by a Trumpet in what
Part of the Camp he resided, that they might avoid firing upon the Royal
Pavillion. Our Party-Contests in England were hertofore managed with the same
kind of Decency and Good-Breeding. The Person of the Prince was always looked
upon as Sacred; and whatever severe Usage his Friends or Ministers met with,
none presumed to direct their Hostilities at their Sovereign. The Enemies of
our present Settlement are of such a coarse kind of Make, and so equally void
of Loyalty and Good Manners, that they are grown Scurrilous upon the Royal
Family, and treat the most exalted Characters with the most opprobrious
Language.

This Petulance in Conversation is particularly observed to prevail among some
of that Sex where it appears the most unbecoming and the most unnatural. Many
of these act with the greater Licentiousness, because they know they can act
with the greater Impunity. This Confideration, indeed, engages the most
generous and well-bred even of our She Malcontents, to make no ill Use of the
Indulgence of our Lawgivers; and to discover in their Debates at least the
Delicacy of the Woman, if not the Duty of the Subject. But it is generally
remarked, that every one of them who is a Shrew in domestic Life, is now
become a Scold in Politics. And as for those of the Party, who are of a
superior Rank and unblemished Virtue, it must be a melancholy Reflection for
them to consider that all the Common Women of the Town are of their Side; for
which Reason they ought to preserve a more than ordinary Modesty in their
Satirical Excursions, that their Characters may not be liable to Suspicion.

If there is not some Method found out for allaying these Heats and Animosities
among the Fair Sex, one does not know to what Outrages they may proceed. I
remember a Hero in Scarron, who finding himself opposed by a mixed Multitude
of both Sexes with a great deal of virulent Language, after having brought them
to a Submission, gave Order (to keep them from doing farther Mischief) that the
Men should be disarmed of their Clubs, and that the Women should have their
Nails pared. We are not yet reduced to the Necessity of applying such violent
Remedies; but as we daily receive Accounts of Ladies batteling it on both
Sides, and that those who appear against the Constitution make War upon their
Antagonists by many unfair Practices and unwarrantable Methods, I think it is
very convenient there should be a Cartel settled between them. If they have not
yet agreed upon any thing of this Nature among themselves, I would propose to
them the following Plan, in which I have sketched out several Rules suited to
the politest Sex in one of the most civilized Nations.

THAT in every Political Rencounter between Woman and Woman, no Weapon shall be
made use of but the Tongue.

That in the Course of the Engagement, if either of the Combatants, finding
herself hard pressed by her Adversary, shall proceed to personal Reflections or
Discovery of Secrets, they shall be parted by the Standers by.

That when both Sides are drawn up in a full Assembly, it shall not be lawful
for above Five of them to talk at the same Time.

That if any shall detract from a Lady's Character, (unless she be absent) the
said Detractness shall be forth with ordered to the lowest place of the Room.

That none presume to speak disrespectfully of His Majesty, or any of the Royal
Family, on Pain of three Hours Silence.

That none be permitted to talk spightfully of the Court, unless they can
produce Vouchers that they have been there.

That the making use of News which goes about in Whisper, unless the Author be
produced, or the Fact well attested, shall be deemed Fighting with white
Powder, and contrary to the Laws of War.

That any one who produces Libels or Lampoons, shall be regarded in the same
manner as one who shoots with poisoned Bullets.

That when a Lady is thoroughly convinced of the Falsehood of any Story she has
related, she shall give her Parole not to tell it for a certain Truth that
Winter.

That when any Matter of Doubt arises, which cannot otherwise be decided,
Appeal shall be made to a Toast, if there be any such in the Company.

That no Coquette, notwithstanding she can do it with a good Air, shall be
allowed to Sigh for the Danger of the Church, or to shiver at the Apprehensions
of Fanaticism.

That when a Woman has talked an Hour and a half, it shall be lawful to call
her down to Order.

As this Civil Discord among the Sisterhood of Great Britain is likely to
engage them in a long and lingering War, consisting altogether of Drawn Battles,
it is the more necessary that there should be a Cartel settled among them.
Besides, as our English Ladies are at present the greatest Stateswomen in
Europe, they will be in danger of making themselves the most unamiable Part of
their Sex, if they continue to give a Loose to intemperate Language, and to a
low kind of Ribaldry, which is not used among the Women of Fashion in any other
Country.

Discretion and good Nature have been always looked upon as the distinguishing
Ornaments of Female Conversation. The Woman, whose Price is above Rubies, has
no Particular in the Character given of her by the Wise Man, more endearing,
than that she opens her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongne is the Law of
Kindness. Besides, every fierce She-Zealot should consider, that however any of
the other Sex may seem to applaud her as a Partisan, there is none of them who
would not be afraid of associating himself with her in any of the more private
Relations of Life.

I shall only add, that there is no Talent so pernicious as Eloquence, to those
who have it not under Command: For which Reason, Women who are so liberally
gifted by Nature in this Particular, ought to study with the greatest
Application, the Rules of Female Oratory, delivered in that excellent Treatise,
entitled The Government of the Tongue. Had that Author foreseen the Political
Ferment which is now raised among the Sex, he would probably have made his Book
larger by some Chapters than it is at present: But what is wanting in that
Work, may, I hope, in some Measure, be supplied by the above-written Cartel.

No. 24. Monday, March 12.
Bellum importunum, cives, cum gente deorum,
Invictisque viris geritis -- Virg.

A Physician makes Use of various Methods for the Recovery of sick Persons; and
though some of them are painful, and all of them disagreeable, his Patients are
never angry at him, because they know he has nothing in View besides the
restoring of them to a good State of Health. I am forced to treat the
disaffected Part of His Majesty's Subjects in the same Manner, and may
therefore reasonably expect the same Returns of Good Will. I propose nothing to
my self but their Happiness as the End of all my Endeavors; and am forced to
adapt different Remedies to those different Constitutions, which are to be
found in such a distempered Multitude. Some of them can see the unreasonable,
and some of them the ridiculous Side of wrong Principles, and, according to the
different Frame of their Minds, reject an Opinion as it carries in it either
the Appearance of Wickedness, or of Danger, or of Folly.

I have endeavored to expose in these several Lights the Notions and Practices
of those who are the Enemies to our present Establishment. But there is a Set
of Arguments, which I have not yet touched upon, and which often succeed, when
all others fail. There are many who will not quit a Project, though they find it
pernicious, or absurd: But will readily desist from it, when they are convinced
it is impracticable. An Attempt to subvert the present Government is, God be
thanked, of this Nature. I shall therefore apply the Considerations of this
Paper rather to the Discretion than the Virtue of our Malcontents, who should
act in the present Juncture of Affairs like experienced Gamesters, that throw
up their Cards when they know the Game is in the Enemy's Hand, without giving
themselves any unnecessary Vexation in playing it out.

In the Reign of our two last British Sovereigns, those who did not favor
their Interest might be ungenerous enough to act upon the Prospect of a Change,
considering the precarious Condition of their Health, and their Want of Issue
to succeed them. But at present we enjoy a King of a long-lived Family, who is
in the Vigor of his Age, and blessed with a numerous Progeny. To this we may add
his remarkable Steadiness in adhering to those Schemes which he has formed upon
the maturest Deliberation, and that submissive Deference of his Royal Highness
both from Duty and Inclination to all the Measures of his Royal Father. Nor
must we omit that personal Valor so peculiar to His Majesty and his
Illustrious House, which would be sufficient to vanquish, as we find it
actually deters, both his foreign and domestic Enemies.

This Great Prince is supported by the whole Protestant Interest of Europe, and
strengthened with a long Range of Alliances that reach from one End of the
Continent to the other. He has a great and powerful King for his Son-in-Law;
and can Himself command when he pleases the whole Strength of an Electorate in
the Empire. Such a Combination of Sovereigns puts one in Mind of the Apparition
of Gods which discouraged Aeneas from opposing the Will of Heaven. When his
Eyes were cleared of that mortal Cloud which hung upon them, he saw the several
Celestial Deities acting in a Confederacy against him, and immediately gave up
a Cause which was excluded from all Possibility of Success.

But it is the greatest Happiness, as well as the greatest Pleasure of our
Sovereign, that his chief Strength lies in his own Kingdoms. Both the Branches
of our Legislature espouse his Cause and Interest with a becoming Duty and
Zeal. The most considerable and wealthy of his Subjects are convinced, that the
Prosperity of our Sovereign and his People are inseparable: And we are very
well satisfied, that his Majesty, if the Necessity of Affairs should require
it, might find, among the most dutiful of his Subjects, Men celebrated for
their military Characters, above any of the Age in which they live. There is no
Question but his Majesty will be as generally valued and beloved in his British
as he is in his German Dominions, when he shall have Time to make his Royal
Virtues equally known among us. In the mean while we have the Satisfaction to
find, that his Enemies have been only able to make ill Impressions upon the low
and ignorant Rabble of the Nation; and to put the Dregs of the People into a
Ferment.

We have already seen how poor and contemptible a Force has been raised by
those who have dared to appear openly against his Majesty, and how they were
headed and encouraged by Men whose Sense of their Guilt made them desperate in
forming so rash an Enterprise, and dispirited in the Execution of it. But we
have not yet seen that Strength which would be exerted in the Defense of His
Majesty, the Protestant Religion, and the British Liberties, were the Danger
great enough to require it. Should the King be reduced to the Necessity of
setting up the Royal Standard, how many Thousands would range themselves under
it! What a Concourse would there be of Nobles and Patriots! We should see Men
of another Spirit than what has appeared among the Enemies to our Country, and
such as would outshine the rebellious Part of their Fellow Subjects as much in
their Gallantry as in their Cause.

I shall not so much suspect the Understandings of our Adversaries, as to think
it necessary to enforce these Considerations, by putting them in Mind of that
Fidelity and Allegiance which is so visible in His Majesty's Fleet and Army, or
of many other Particulars which, in all humane Probability, will perpetuate our
present Form of Government, and which may be suggested to them by their own
private Thoughts.

The Party, indeed, that is opposite to our present happy Settlement, seem to
be driven out of the Hopes of all human Methods for carrying on their Cause,
and are therefore reduced to the poor Comfort of Prodigies and old Women's
Fables. They begin to see Armies in the Clouds, when all upon the Earth have
forsaken them. Nay, I have been lately shown a written Prophecy that is handed
among them with great Secresy, by which it appears their chief Reliance at
present is upon a Cheshire Miller that was born with two Thumbs upon one hand.

I have addressed this whole Paper to the Despair of our Malcontents, not with
a Design to aggravate the Pain of it, but to use it as a Means of making them
happy. Let them seriously consider the Vexation and Disquietude of Mind that
they are treasuring up for themselves, by struggling with a Power which will be
always too hard for them; and by converting His Majesty's Reign into their own
Misfortune, which every impartial Man must look upon as the greatest Blessing
to his Country. Let them extinguish those Passions, which can only imbitter
their Lives to them, and deprive them of their Share in the Happiness of the
Community. They may conclude that His Majesty, in Spite of any Opposition they
can form against him, will maintain his just Authority over them; and whatever
Uneasiness they may give themselves, they can create none in him, excepting
only because they prevent him from exerting equally his natural Goodness and
Benevolence to every Subject in his Dominions.

No. 25. Friday, March 17.
Quid est Sapientiae? semper idem velle atque idem nolle. Senec.
IF we may believe the Observation which is made of us by Foreigners, there is
no Nation in Europe so much given to Change as the English. There are some who
ascribe this to the Fickleness of our Climate; and Others to the Freedom of our
Government. From one or both of these Causes their Writers derive that Variety
of Humors which appears among the People in general, and that Inconsistency of
Character which is to be found in almost every particular Person. But as a Man
should always be upon his Guard against the Vices to which he is most exposed,
so we should take a more than ordinary Care not to lie at the Mercy of the
Weather in our moral Conduct, nor to make a capricious Use of that Liberty
which we enjoy by the Happiness of our Civil Constitution.

This Instability of Temper ought in a particular Manner to be checked, when it
shows itself in Political Affairs, and disposes Men to wander from one Scheme
of Government to another: Since such a Fickleness of Behavior in public
Measures, cannot but be attended with very fatal Effects to our Country.

In the first Place; It hinders any great Undertaking, which requires Length of
Time for its Accomplishment, from being brought to its due Perfection. There is
not any Instance in History which better confirms this Observation, than that
which is still fresh in every one's Memory. We engaged in the late War with a
Design to reduce an exorbitant Growth of Power in the most Dangerous Enemy to
Great Britain. We gained a long and wonderful Series of Victories, and had
scarce any Thing left to do; but to reap the Fruits of them: When on a sudden
our Patience failed us; we grew tired of our Undertaking; and received Terms
from those, who were upon the Point of giving us whatever we could have
demanded of them.

This Mutability of Mind in the English, makes the ancient Friends of our
Nation very backward to engage with us in such Alliances as are necessary for
our mutual Defense and Security. It is a common Notion among Foreigners, that
the English are good Confederates in an Enterprise which may be dispatched
within a short Compass of Time; but that they are not to be depended upon in a
Work which cannot be finished without Constancy and Perseverance. Our late
Measures have so blemished the National Credit in this Particular, that those
Potentates who are entered into Treaties with His present Majesty, have been
solely encouraged to it by their Confidence in His personal Firmness and
Integrity.

I need not, after this, suggest to my Reader the Ignominy and Reproach that
falls upon a Nation, which distinguishes it self among its Neighbors by such a
wavering and unsettled Conduct.

This our Inconsistency in the Pursuit of Schemes which have been thoroughly
digested, has as bad an Influence on our Domestic as on our Foreign Affairs.
We are told, that the Famous Prince of Conde used to ask the English
Ambassador, upon the Arrival of a Mail, Who was Secretary of State in England
by that Post? as a Piece of Raillery upon the Fickleness of our Politics. But
what has rendered this a Misfortune to our Country, is, that Public Ministers
have no sooner made themselves Masters of their Business, than they have been
dismissed from their Employments; and that this Disgrace has befallen very many
of them, not because they have deserved it, but because the People love to see
new Faces in High Posts of Honor.

It is a double Misfortune to a Nation, which is thus given to Change, when
they have a Sovereign at the Head of them, that is prone to fall in with all
the Turns and Veerings of the People. Sallust, the Gravest of all the Roman
Historians, who had formed his Notions of Regal Authority from the Manner in
which he saw it exerted among the Barbarous Nations, makes the following
Remark: Plerumque Regiae Voluntates, uti vehementes, sic mobiles, saepe ipsae
sibi advorsae. The Wills of Kings, as they are generally vehement, are likewise
very fickle, and at different Times opposite to themselves. Were there any
Color for this general Observation, how much does it redound to the Honor of
such Princes who are Exceptions to it*

The natural Consequence of an unsteady Government, is the perpetuating of
Strife and Faction among a divided People. Whereas a King who persists in those
Schemes which He has laid, and has no other View in them but the Good of His
Subjects, extinguishes all Hopes of Advancement in those who would grow Great
by an Opposition to His Measures, and insensibly unites the Contending Parties
in their Common Interest.

Queen Elizabeth, who makes the greatest Figure among our English Sovereigns,
was most eminently remarkable for that Steadiness and Uniformity which ran
through all Her Actions, during that long and Glorious Reign. She kept up to
Her chosen Motto in every Part of Her Life; and never lost Sight of those Great
Ends, which She proposed to Herself on Her Accession to the Throne, the
Happiness of Her People, and the strengthening of the Protestant Interest. She
often interposed Her Royal Authority to break the Cabals which were forming
against her First Ministers, who grew old and died in those Stations which they
filled with so great Abilities. By this Means she baffled the many Attempts of
her foreign and domestic Enemies, and entirely broke the whole Force and
Spirit of that Party among her Subjects, which was popishly affected, and which
wasnot a little Formidable in the Beginning of her Reign.

The frequent Changes and Alterations in public Proceedings, the Multiplicity
of Schemes introduced one upon another, with the Variety of short-lived
Favorites, that prevailed in their several Turns under the Government of Her
Successors, have by Degrees broken us into those unhappy Distinctions and
Parties, which have given so much Uneasiness to our Kings, and so often
endangered the Safety of their People.

I question not but every Impartial Reader has been beforehand with me, in
considering on this Occasion, the Happiness of our Country under the
Government of his present Majesty; who is so deservedly Famous for an
inflexible Adherence to those Counsels which have a visible Tendency to the
public Good, and to those Persons who heartily concur with Him in promoting
these His generous Designs.

A Prince of this Character will be dreaded by his Enemies, and served with
Courage and Zeal by his Friends; and will either instruct us by his Example, to
fix the Unsteadiness of our Politics, or by his Conduct, hinder it from doing
us any Prejudice.

Upon the Whole, as there is no Temper of Mind more unmanly in a private
Person, nor more pernicious to the Public in a Member of a Community, than
that Changeableness with which we are too justly branded by all our Neighbors,
it is to be hoped that the sound Part of the Nation will give no farther
Occasion for this Reproach, but continue steady to that happy Establishment
which has now taken place among us. And as Obstinacy in Prejudices which are
detrimental to our Country, ought not to be mistaken for that virtuous
Resolution and Firmness of Mind which is necessary to our Preservation, it is
to be wished that the Enemies to our Constitution, would so far indulge
themselves in this National Humor, as to come into one Change more, by falling
in with that Plan of Government which at present they think fit to oppose. At
least we may expect they will be so wise as to show a Legal Obedience to the
best of Kings, who profess the Duty of Passive Obedience to the Worst.

No. 26. Monday, March 19.
Bella Viri pacemque gerant, queis bella gerenda. Virg.
WHen the Athenians had long contended against the Power of Philip, he demanded
of them to give up their Orators, as well knowing their Opposition would be
soon at an end if it were not irritated from Time to Time by these
Tongue-Warriors. I have endeavored for the same Reason to gain our Female
Adversaries, and by that Means to disarm the Party of its principal Strength.
Let them give us up their Women, and we know by Experience how inconsiderable a
Resistance we are to expect from their Men.

This sharp political Humor has but lately prevailed in so great a Measure as
it now does among the beautiful Part of our Species. They used to employ
themselves wholly in the Scenes of a domestic Life, and provided a Woman could
keep her House in Order, she never troubled herself about regulating the
Commonwealth. The Eye of the Mistress was wont to make her Pewter shine, and to
inspect every Part of her Household Furniture as much as her Looking Glass. But
at present our discontented Matrons are so conversant in Matters of State, that
they wholly neglect their private Affairs: for we may always observe that a
Gossip in Politics, is a Slattern in her Family.

It is indeed a melancholy Thing to see the Disorders of a Household that is
under the Conduct of an angry Stateswoman, who lays out all her Thoughts upon
the Public, and is only attentive to find out Miscarriages in the Ministry.
Several Women of this Turn are so earnest in contending for Hereditary Right,
that they wholly neglect the Education of their own Sons and Heirs; and are so
taken up with their Zeal for the Church, that they cannot find Time to teach
their Children their Catechism. A Lady who thus intrudes into the Province of
the Men, was so astonishing a Character among the old Romans, that when Amaesia
presented herself to speak before the Senate, they looked upon it as a Prodigy,
and sent Messengers to inquire of the Oracle, what it might portend to the
Commonwealth?

It would be manifestly to the Disadvantage of the British Cause, should our
pretty Loyalists profess an Indifference in State Affairs, while their
disaffected Sisters are thus industrious to the Prejudice of their Country;
and accordingly we have the Satisfaction to find our She-Associates are not
idle upon this Occasion. It is owing to the good Principles of these His
Majesty's fair and faithful Subjects, that our Countrey-Women appear no less
amiable in the Eyes of the Male-World, than they have done in former Ages. For
where a great Number of Flowers grow, the Ground at a Distance seems entirely
covered with them, and we must walk into it, before we can distinguish the
several Weeds that spring up in such a beautiful Mass of Colors. Our great
Concern is, to find that Deformity can arise among so many Charms, and that the
most lovely Parts of the Creation can make themselves the most disagreeable.
But it is an Observation of the Philosophers, that the best Things may be
corrupted into the worst; and the Ancients did not scruple to affirm, that the
Furies and the Graces were of the same Sex.

As I should do the Nation and themselves good Service, if I could draw the
Ladies, who still hold out against His Majesty, into the Interest of our
present Establishment, I shall propose to their serious Consideration, the
several Inconveniences which those among them undergo, who have not yet
surrendered to the Government.

They should first reflect on the great Sufferings and Persecutions to which
they expose themselves by the Obstinacy of their Behavior. They lose their
Elections in every Club where they are set up for Toasts. They are obliged by
their Principles to stick a Patch on the most unbecoming Side of their
Foreheads. They forego the Advantage of Birthday Suits. They are insulted by
the Loyalty of Claps and Hisses every Time they appear at a Play. They receive
no Benefit from the Army, and are never the better for all the young Fellows
that wear Hats and Feathers. They are forced to live in the Country and feed
their Chicken; at the same Time that they might show themselves at Court, and
appear in Brocade, if they behaved themselves well. In short, what must go to
the Heart of every fine Woman, they throw themselves quite out of the Fashion.

The abovementioned Motive must have an Influence upon the gay Part of the
Sex; and as for those who are acted by more sublime and moral Principles, they
should consider, that they cannot signalize themselves as Malcontents, without
breaking through all the amiable Instincts and softer Virtues, which are
peculiarly Ornamental to Womankind. Their timorous, gentle, modest Behavior;
their Affability, Meekness, Good-Breeding, and many other beautiful
Dispositions of Mind must be sacrificed to a blind and furious Zeal for they do
not know what. A Man is startled when he sees a pretty Bosom heaving with such
Party-Rage, as is disagreeable even in that Sex which is of a more coarse and
rugged Make. And yet such is our Misfortune, that we sometimes see a Pair of
Stays ready to burst with Sedition; and hear the most masculine Passions
expressed in the sweetest Voices. I have lately been told of a
Countrey-Gentlewoman, pretty much famed for this Virility of Behavior in
Party-Disputes. who, upon venting her Notions very freely in a strange Place,
was carried before an honest Justice of Peace. This prudent Magistrate
observing her to be a large black Woman, and finding by her Discourse that she
was no better than a Rebel in a Riding-Hood, began to suspect her for my Lord
Nithisdale; till a Stranger came to her Rescue, who assured him, with Tears in
his Eyes, that he was her Husband.

In the next Place our British Ladies may consider, that by interesting
themselves so zealously in the Affairs of the Public, they are engaged,
without any necessity, in the Crimes which are often committed even by the Best
of Parties, and which they are naturally exempted from by the Privilege of
their Sex. The worst Character a Female could formerly arrive at, was of being
an ill Woman; but by their present Conduct, she may likewise deserve the
Character of an ill Subject. They come in for their Share of political Guilt,
and have found a Way to make themselves much greater Criminals, than their
Mothers before them.

I have great Hopes that these Motives, when they are assisted by their own
Reflections, will incline the Fair Ones of the adverse Party to come over to
the National Interest, in which their own is so highly concerned; especially if
they consider, that by these superfluous Employments which they take upon them
as Partisans, they do not only dip themselves in an unnecessary Guilt, but are
obnoxious to a Grief and Anguish of Mind, which does not properly fall within
their Lot. And here I would advise every one of these exasperated Ladies, who
indulges that opprobrious Eloquence which is so much in fashion, to reflect on
Aesop's Fable of the Viper. This little Animal, says the old Moralist, chancing
to meet with a File, began to lick it with her Tongue till the Blood came;
which gave her a very silly Satisfaction, as imagining the Blood came from the
File, notwithstanding an the Smart was in her own Tongue.

No. 27. Friday, March 23.
-- dii Visa secundant. Luc.
IT is an old Observation, that a Time of Peace is always a Time of Prodigies;
for as our News-Writers must adorn their Papers with that which the Critics
call, The Mavelous, they are forced in a dead calm of Affairs, to ransack
every Element for proper Amusements, and either to astonish their Readers from
Time to Time with a strange and wonderful Sight, or be content to lose their
Custom. The Sea is generally filled with Monsters when there are no Fleets upon
it. Mount Aetna immediately began to rage upon the Extinction of the Rebellion:
And woe to the People of Catanea, if the Peace continues; for they are sure to
be shaken every Week with Earthquakes, till they are relieved by the Siege of
some other great Town in Europe. The Air has likewise contributed its Quota of
Prodigies. We had a Blazing Star by the last Mail from Genea; and in the
present Dearth of Battles have been very opportunely entertained, by Persons of
undoubted Credit, with a Civil War in the Clouds, where our sharp-sighted
Malcontents discovered many Objects invisible to an Eye that is dimmed by
Whig-Principles.

I question not but this Paper will fall in with the present Humor, since it
contains a very remarkable Vision of a Highland Seer, who is famous among the
Mountains, and known by the Name of Second-Sighted-Sawney. Had he been able to
Write, we might probably have seen this Vision sooner in Print; for it happened
to him very early in the late hard Winter; and is transmitted to me by a
Student of Glasgow, who took the whole Relation from him, and stuck close to
the Facts, though he has delivered them in his own Style.

Sawney was descended of an ancient Family, very much renowned for their Skill
in Prognostics. Most of his Ancestors were Second-Sighted, and his Mother but
narrowly escaped being burnt for a Witch. As he was going out one Morning very
early to steal a Sheep, he was seized on the sudden with a Fit of Second-Sight.
The Face of the whole Country about him was changed in the Twinkling of an
Eye, and presented him with a wide Prospect of new Scenes and Objects, which he
had never seen till that Day.

He discovered at a great Distance from him a large Fabric, which cast such a
glistering Light about it, that it looked like a huge Rock of Diamond. Upon the
Top of it was planted a Standard, streaming in a strong Northern Wind, and
embroidered with a Mixture of Thisles and Flower-de-luces. As he was amusing
himself with this strange Sight, he heard a (...) at some Distance behind him,
and, turning about, saw a General, who seemed very much animated with the Sound
of it, marching toward him at the Head of a numerous Ar^^. He learnt, upon
Enquiry, that they were (...) Procession to the Structure which stood (...),
and which he found was the Tem^ (...). He immediately struck in with (...)
described this March to the Temple with so much Horror, that he shivered every
Joint all the while he spoke of it. They were forced to clamber over so many
Rocks, and to tread upon the Brink of so many Precipices, that they were very
often in danger of their Lives. Sawney declared, that, for his own Part, he
walked in fear of his Neck every Step he took. Upon their coming within a few
Furlongs of the Temple, they passed through a very thick Grove, consecrated to
a Deity who was known by the Name of Treason. They here dispersed themselves
into abundance of Labyrinths and covered Walks which led to the Temple. The
Path was so very slippery, the Shade so exceeding gloomy, and the whole Wood so
full of Echoes, that they were forced to march with the greatest Wariness,
Circumspection and Silence. They at length arrived at a great Gate, which was
the principal Avenue to that magnificent Fabric. Sawney stood some Time at the
Entrance to observe the Splendor of the Building, and was not a little
entertained with a prodigious Number of Statues, which were planted up and down
in a spacious Court that lay before it; but, upon examining it more nicely, he
found the whole Fabric, which made such a glittering Appearance, and seemed
Impregnable was composed of Ice, and that the several Statues which seemed at a
distance to be made of the whitest Marble, were nothing else but so many
Figures in Snow. The Front of the Temple (...) very curiously adorned with
Stars and Garters* Ducal Coronets, General's Staffs, and many other Emblems of
Honor wrought in the (...) beautiful Frost-Work. After having stood at ga^^
some Time before this great Gate, he discovered on it an Inscription,
signifying it to be (...) Gate of Perjury. There was erected near it a great
Colossus in Snow that had two Faces, and was dressed like a Jesuit, with one of
its Hands upon a Book, and the other grasping a Dagger. Upon entering into the
Court, he took a particular Survey of several of the Figures. There was
Sedition with a Trumpet in her Hand, and Rapine in the Garb of a Highlander:
Ambition, Envy, Disgrace, Poverty, and Disappointment, were all of them
represented under their proper Emblems. Among other Statues, he observed that
of Rumor whispering an Idiot in the Ear, who was the Representative of
Credulity; and Faction embracing with her hundred Arms an old-fashioned Figure
in a Steeple-Crown'd Hat, that was designed to express a cunning old Gipsy,
called Passive-Obedience. Zeal too had a Place among the rest, with a Bandage
over her Eyes, though one would not have expected to have seen her represented in
Snow. But the most remarkable Object in this Courtyard, was a huge Tree that
grew up before the Porch of the Temple, and was of the same kind with that,
which Virgil tells us flourished at the Entrance of the infernal Regions. For
it bore nothing but Dreams, which hung in Clusters under every Leaf of it. The
Travelers refreshed themselves in the Shade of this Tree before they entered
the Temple of Rebellion, and after their Frights and Fatigues, received great
Comfort in the Fruit which fell from it. At length the Gates of the Temple flew
open, and the Crowd rushed into it. In the Center of it was a grim Idol, with a
Sword in the Right Hand, and a Firebrand in the Left. The Forepart of the
Pedestal was curiously embossed with a Triumph, while the Back-part, that lay
more out of Sight, was filled with Gibbets and Axes. This dreadful Idol is
worshipped like several of old, with human Sacrifices, and his Votaries were
consulting among themselves, how to gratify him with Hecatombs; when, on a
sudden, they were surprised with the Alarm of a great Light which appeared in
the Southern Part of the Heavens, and made its Progress directly toward them.
This Light appeared as a great Mass of Flame, or rather Glory, like that of the
Sun in its Strength. There were three Figures in the midst of it, who were
known by their several Hieroglyphics, to be Religion, Loyalty, and Valor. The
last had a graceful Air, a blooming Countenance, and a Star upon its Breast,
which shot forth several pointed Beams of a peculiar Luster. The Glory which
encompassed them, covered the Place, and darted its Rays with so much Strength,
that the whole Fabric and all its Ornaments began to melt. The several Emblems
of Honor, which were wrought on the Front in the brittle Materials
abovementioned, trickled away under the first Impressions of the Heat. In
short, the Thaw was so violent, that the Temple and Statues ran off in a sudden
Torrent, and the whole Winter-Piece was dissolved. The covered Walks were laid
open by the Light which shone through every Part of them, and the Dream-Tree
withered like the famous Gourd, that was smitten by the Noonday Sun. As for
the Votaries, they left the Place with the greatest Precipitation, and
dispersed themselves by Flight into a Thousand different Paths among the
Mountains.

No. 28. Monday, March 26.
-- Incendia lumen
Praebebant, aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo. Ov. Met.

SIR Francis Bacon, in the Dedication before his History of Henry the Seventh,
observes, that peaceable Times are the best to live in, though not so proper to
furnish Materials for a Writer: As hilly Countries afford the most entertaining
Prospects, though a Man would choose to travel through a plain One. To this we
may add, That the Times, which are full of Disorders and Tumults, are likewise
the fullest of Instruction. History indeed furnishes us with very distinct
Accounts of Factions, Conspiracies, Civil Wars and Rebellions, with the fatal
Consequences that attend them: But they do not make such deep and lasting
Impressions on our Minds, as Events of the same Nature, to which we have our
selves been Witnesses, and in which we or our Friends and Acquaintance have
been Sufferers. As Adversity makes a Man Wise in his private Affairs, civil
Calamities give him Prudence and Circumspection in his public Conduct.

The Miseries of the Civil War under the Reign of King Charles the First, and
the Consequences which ensued upon them, did, for many Years, deter the
Inhabitants of our Island from the Thoughts of engaging anew in such desperate
Undertakings; and convinced them, by fatal Experience, that nothing could be so
pernicious to the English, and so opposite to the Genius of the People, as the
Subversion of Monarchy. In the like Manner we may hope that the great Expenses
brought upon the Nation by the present Rebellion; the Sufferings of innocent
People, who have lived in that Place which was the Scene of it; with that
dreadful Prospect of Ruin and Confusion which must have followed its Success;
will secure us from the like Attempts for the future, and fix His Majesty upon
the Throne of Great Britain; especially when those who are prompted to such
wicked Practices reflect upon the Punishments to which the Criminals have
exposed themselves, and the Miseries in which they have involved their
Relations, Friends and Families.

It will be likewise worth their while to consider, how such Tumults and Riots,
as have been encouraged by many, who, we may hope did not propose to themselves
such fatal Consequences, lead to a Civil War: and how naturally that seditious
kind of Conversation, which many seem to think consistent with their Religion
and Morality, ends in an open Rebellion. I question not but the more virtuous
and considerate Part of our Malcontents are now stung with a very just Remorse
for this their Manner of Proceeding, which has so visibly tended to the
Destruction of their Friends, and the Sufferings of their Country. This may,
at the same Time, prove an instructive Lesson to the Boldest and Bravest among
the Dissaffected, not to build any Hopes upon the talkative Zealots of their
Party; who have shown by their whole Behavior, that their Hearts are equally
filled with Treason and Cowardice. An Army of Trumpeters would give as great a
Strength to a Cause, as this Confederacy of Tongue-Warriours; who like those
military Musicians, content themselves with animating their Friends to Battle,
and run out of the Engagement upon the first Onset.

But one of the most useful Maxims we can learn from the present Rebellion, is,
That nothing can be more contemptible and insignificant, than the Scum of a
People, when they are instigated against a King, who is supported by the Two
Branches of the Legislature. A Mob may pull down a Meeting House, but will
never be able to over-turn a Government, which has a courageous and wise Prince
at the Head of it, and one who is zealously assisted by the great Council of
the Nation, that best know the Value of him. The Authority of the Lords and
Commons of Great Britain, in Conjunction with that of their Sovereign, is not
to be controlled by a tumultuary Rabble. It is big with Fleets and Armies, can
fortify itself with what Laws it shall judge proper for its own Defense, can
command the Wealth of the Kingdom for the Security of the People, and engage
the whole Protestant Interest of Europe in so good and just a Cause. A
disorderly Multitude contending with the Body of the Legislature, is like a Man
in a Fit under the Conduct of one in the Fullness of his Health and Strength.
Such a one is sure to be overruled in a little Time, though he deals about his
Blows, and exerts himself in the most furious Convulsions while the Distemper
is upon him.

We may farther learn from the Course of the present Rebellion, who among the
foreign States in our Neighborhood are the true and natural Friends of Great
Britain, if we observe which of them gave us their Assistance in reducing our
Country to a State of Peace and Tranquillity; and which of them used their
Endeavors to heighten our Confusions, and plunge us into all the Evils of a
Civil War. I shall only take Notice under this Head, that in former Ages it was
the constant Policy of France to raise and cherish intestine Feuds and Discords
in the Isle of Great Britain, that we might either fall a Prey into their
Hands, or that they might prosecute their Designs upon the Continent with less
Interruption. Innumerable Instances of this Nature occur in History. The most
remarkable One was that in the Reign of King Charles the First. Though that
Prince was married to a Daughter of France, and was personally beloved and
esteemed in the French Court, it is well known that they abetted both Parties
in the Civil War, and always furnished Supplies to the weaker Side, lest there
should be an End put to those fatal Divisions.

We might also observe, that this Rebellion has been a Means of discovering to
His Majesty, how much he may depend upon the Professions and Principles of the
several Parties among his own Subjects; who are those Persons that have
espoused his Interests with Zeal or Indifference; and who among them are
influenced to their Allegiance by Places, Duty, or Affection. But as these, and
several other Considerations, are obvious to the Thoughts of every Reader. I
shall conclude, with observing how naturally many of those, who distinguish
themselves by the Name of the High-Church, unite themselves to the Cause of
Popery; since it is manifest that all the Protestants concerned in the
Rebellion, were such as gloried in this Distinction.

It would be very unjust, to charge all who have ranged themselves under this
new Denomination, as if they had done it with a Design to favor the Interests
of Popery. But it is certain that many of them, who at their first setting out
were most averse to the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, have by the Cunning of
our Adversaries, been inspired with such an unreasonable Aversion to their
Protestant Brethren, and taught to think so favorably of the Roman Catholic
Principles, (not to mention the Endeavors that have been used to reconcile the
Doctrines of the Two Churches, which are in themselves as opposite as Light and
Darkness) that they have been drawn over insensibly into its Interests. It is
no wonder, therefore, that so many of these deluded Zealots have been engaged
in a Cause which they at first abhorred, and have wished or acted for the
Success of an Enterprise, that might have ended in the Extirpation of the
Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, and in all Europe. In short, they are like
the Syrians, who were first smitten with Blindness, and unknowingly led out of
their Way into the Capital of their Enemy's Country; insomuch that the Text
tells us, When they opened their Eyes, they found themselves in the midst of
Samaria.

No. 29. Friday, March 30.
Dis te minorem quod geris, imperas.
Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum.
Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae. Hor.

THis being a Day in which the Thoughts of our Countrymen are, or ought to be
employed on serious Subjects, I shall take the Opportunity of that Disposition
of Mind in my Readers, to recommend to them the Practice of those Religious and
Moral Virtues, without which all Policy is vain, and the best Cause deprived of
its greatest Ornament and Support.

Common Sense, as well as the Experience of all Ages, teaches us, that no
Government can flourish which does not encourage and propagate Religion and
Morality among all its particular Members. It was an Observation of the ancient
Romans, that their Empire had not more increased by the Strength of their Arms,
than by the Sanctity of their Manners: And Cicero, who seems to have been
better versed than any of them, both in the Theory and the Practice of
Politics, makes it a Doubt, whether it were possible for a Community to exist
that had not a prevailing Mixture of Piety in its Constitution. Justice,
Temperance, Humility, and almost every other Moral Virtue, do not only derive
the Blessings of Providence upon those who exercise them, but are the natural
Means for acquiring the public Prosperity. Besides; Religious Motives and
Instincts are so busy in the Heart of every reasonable Creature, that a Man who
would hope to govern a Society without any regard to these Principles, is as
much to be contemned for his Folly, as to be detested for his Impiety.

To this we may add, that the World is never sunk into such a State of
Degeneracy, but they pay a natural Veneration to Men of Virtue; and rejoice to
see themselves conducted by those, who act under the Awe of a supreme Being,
and who think themselves accountable for all their Proceedings to the great
Judge and Superintendent of human Affairs.

Those of our Fellow Subjects, who are sensible of the Happiness they enjoy in
His Majesty's Accession to the Throne, are obliged, by all the Duties of
Gratitude, to adore that Providence which has so signally interposed in our
Behalf, by clearing a Way to the Protestant Succession through such
Difficulties as seemed insuperable; by detecting the Conspiracies which have
been formed against it; and, by many wonderful Events, weakening the Hands and
baffling the Attempts of all His Majesty's Enemies, both foreign and domestic.

The Party, who distinguish themselves by their Zeal for the present
Establishment, should be careful, in a particular Manner, to discover in their
whole Conduct such a Reverence for Religion, as may show how groundless that
Reproach is which is cast upon them by their Enemies, of being averse to our
national Worship. While others engross to themselves the Name of The Church,
and, in a Manner, ex-communicate the best Part of their Fellow Subjects; let us
show our selves the genuine Sons of it, by practicing the Doctrines which it
teaches. The Advantage will be visibly on our Side* if we stick to its
Essentials; while they triumph in that empty Denomination which they bestow
upon themselves. Too many of them are already dipped in the Guilt of Perjury and
Sedition* and as we remain unblemished in these Particulars, let us endeavor
to excel them in all the other Parts of Religion, and we shall quickly find,
that a regular Morality is, in its own Nature, more popular, as well as more
meritorious, than an intemperate Zeal.

We have likewise, in the present Times of Confusion and Disorder, an
Opportunity of showing our Abhorrence of several Principles which have been
ascribed to us by the Malice of our Enemies. A Disaffection to Kings and Kingly
Government, with a Proneness to Rebellion, have been often very unjustly
charged on that Party which goes by the Name of Whigs. Our steady and continued
Adherence to His Majesty and the present happy Settlement, will the most
effectually confute this Calumny. Our Adversaries, who know very well how
odious Commonwealth Principles are to the English Nation, have inverted the
very Sense of Words and Things, rather than not continue to brand us with this
imaginary Guilt: For with some of these Men, at present, Loyalty to our King is
Republicanism, and Rebellion Passive-Obedience.

It has been an old Objection to the Principles of the Whigs, that several of
their Leaders, who have been zealous for redressing the Grievances of
Government, have not behaved themselves better than the Tories in domestic
Scenes of Life: But at the same time have been public Patriots and private
Oppressors. This Objection, were it true, has no Weight in it, since the
Misbehaviour of particular Persons does not at all affect their Cause, and
since a Man may act laudably in some Respects, who does not so in others.
However, it were to be wished, that Men would not give occasion even to such
Invectives; but at the same time they consult the Happiness of the Whole, that
they would promote it to their utmost in all their private Dealings among those
who lie more immediately within their Influence. In the mean while I must
observe, that this Reproach, which may be often met with both in Print and
Conversation, tends in reality to the Honor of the Whigs, as it supposes that
a greater Regard to Justice and Humanity is to be expected from them, than from
those of the opposite Party: And it is certain we cannot better recommend our
Principles, than by such Actions as are their natural and genuine Fruits.

Were we thus careful to guard our selves in a particular Manner against these
groundless Imputations of our Enemies, and to rise above them as much in our
Morality as in our Politics, our Cause would be always as flourishing as it is
just. It is certain, that our Notions have a more natural Tendency to such a
Practice, as we espouse the Protestant Interest in Opposition to that of
Popery, which is so far from advancing Morality by its Doctrines, that it has
weakened or entirely subverted, many of the Duties even of Natural Religion.

I shall conclude, with recommending one Virtue more to the Friends of the
present Establishment, wherein the Whigs have been remarkably deficient; which
is a general Unanimity and Concurrence in the Pursuit of such Measures as are
necessary for the well-being of their Country. As it is a laudable Freedom of
Thought which unshackles their Minds from the poor and narrow Prejudices of
Education, and opens their Eyes to a more extensive View of the public Good;
the same Freedom of Thought disposes several of them to the embracing of
particular Schemes and Maxims, and to a certain Singularity of Opinion which
proves highly prejudicial to their Cause; especially when they are encouraged
in them by a vain Breath of Popularity, or by the artificial Praises which are
bestowed on them by the opposite Party. This Temper of Mind, though the Effect
of a noble Principle, very often betrays their Friends, and brings into Power
the most pernicious and implacable of their Enemies. In Cases of this Nature,
it is the Duty of an honest and prudent Man, to sacrifice a doubtful Opinion to
the concurring Judgment of those whom he believes to be well intentioned to
their Country, and who have better Opportunities of looking into all its most
complicated Interests. An honest Party of Men acting with Unanimity, are of
infinitely greater Consequence than the same Party aiming at the same End by
different Views: As a large Diamond is of a thousand Times greater Value whilst
it remains entire, than when it is cut into a Multitude of smaller Stones,
notwithstanding they may, each of them, be very curiously set, and are all of
the same Water.

No. 30. Monday, April 2. 1716.
-- I, verbis virtutem illude superbis. Virg.
AS I was some Years ago engaged in Conversation with a Fashionable French Abbe
upon a Subject which the People of that Kingdom love to start in Discourse, the
comparative Greatness of the two Nations; he asked me, How many Souls I thought
there might be in London? I replied, being willing to do my Country all the
Honor I fairly could, That there were several who computed them at near a
Million: But not finding that Surprise I expected in his Countenance, I
returned the Question upon him, How many he thought there might be in Paris? To
which he answered, with a certain Grimace of Coldness and Indifference, About
ten or twelve Millions.

It would, indeed, be incredible to a Man who has never been in France, should
one relate the extravagant Notion they entertain of themselves and the mean
Opinion they have of their Neighbors. There are certainly (notwithstanding the
visible Decay of Learning and Taste which has appeared among them of late
Years) many particular Persons in that Country, who are eminent in the highest
Degree for their Good Sense, as well as for their Knowledge in all the Arts and
Sciences. But I believe every one, who is acquainted with them, will allow,
that the People in general fall far short of those, who border upon them, in
Strength and Solidity of Understanding. One would therefore no more wonder to
see the most shallow Nation of Europe the most Vain, than to find the most
empty Fellows in every distinct Nation more conceited and censorious than the
rest of their Countrymen. Prejudice and Self-Sufficiency naturally proceed
from Inexperience of the World, and Ignorance of Mankind. As it requires but
very small Abilities to discover the Imperfections of another, we find that
none are more apt to turn their Neighbors into Ridicule, than those who are
the most Ridiculous in their own private Conduct.

Those among the French, who have seen nothing but their own Country, can
scarce bring themselves to believe, that a Nation, which lies never so little
North of them, is not full of Goths and Vandals. Nay those among them who
travel into foreign Parts are so prejudiced in favor of their own imaginary
Politeness, that they are apt to look upon every thing as barbarous in
Proportion as it deviates from what they find at Home. No less a Man than an
Ambassador of France being in Conversation with our King of glorious Memory,
and willing to encourage his Majesty, told him, that he talked like a
Frenchman. The King smiled at the Encomium which was given him, and only
replied, Sir, I am sure you do. An eminent Writer of the last Age was so
offended at this Kind of Insolence, which showed itself very plentifully in one
of their Travelers who gave an Account of England, that he vindicated the
Honor of his Country in a Book full of just Satyr and Ingenuity. I need not
acquaint my Reader, that I mean Bishop Sprat's Answer to Sorbiere.

Since I am upon this Head, I cannot forbear mentioning some profound Remarks
that I have been lately shown in a French Book, the Author of which lived it
seems, some Time in England. The English, says this curious Traveller, very
much delight in Pudding. This is the favorite Dish not only of the Clergy, but
of the People in general. Provided there be a Pudding upon the Table, no matter
what are the other Dishes; they are sure to make a Feast. They think themselves
so happy when they have a Pudding before them, that if any one would tell a
Friend he is arrived in a lucky Juncture, the ordinary Salutation is, Sir, I am
glad to see you; you are come in Pudding-Time.

One cannot have the Heart to be angry at this judicious Observer,
notwithstanding he has treated us like a Race of Hottentots, because he only
taxes us with our inordinate Love of Pudding, which it must be confessed, is
not so elegant a Dish as Frog and Sallat. Every one who has been at Paris,
knows that Un gros Milord Anglois is a frequent Jest upon the French Stage; as
if Corpulence was a proper Subject for Satyr, or a Man of Honor could help his
being Fat, who Eats suitable to his Quality.

It would be endless to recount the Invectives which are to be met with among
the French Historians, and even in Mezeray himself, against the Manners of our
Countrymen. Their Authors in other Kinds of Writing are likewise very liberal
in Characters of the same Nature. I cannot forbear mentioning the learned
Monsieur Patin in particular; who tells us in so many Words, That the English
are a People, whom he naturally abhors: And in another place, That he looks
upon the English among the several Nations of Men, as he does upon Wolves among
the several Species of Beasts. A British Writer would be very justly charged
with want of Politeness, who in return to this Civility, should look upon the
French as that Part of Mankind which answers to a Species in the Brute
Creation, whom we call in English by the Name of Monkies.

If the French load us with these Indignities, we may observe, for our Comfort,
that they give the rest of their Borderers no better Quarter. If we are a dull,
heavy, phlegmatic People, we are it seems no worse than our Neighbors. As an
Instance, I shall set down at large a remarkable Passage in a famous Book
entitled Chevraeana, written many Years ago by the celebrated Monsieur
Chevreau; after having advertised my Reader that the Duchess of Hanover, and
the Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia, who are mentioned in it, were the late
excellent Princess Sophia and her Sister.

Tilenus pour un Allemand, parle and ecrit bien Francois, dit Scaliger: Gretzer
a bien de l'esprit pour un Allemand, dit le Cardinal du Perron: Et le P.
Bouhours met en question, Si un Allemand peut etre bell esprit? On ne doit juger
ni bien ni mal d'une Nation par un particulier, ni d'un particulier par sa
Nation. Il y a des Allemands, comme des Francois, qui n'ont point d'esprit; des
Allemands, qui ont scu plus d' Hebreu, plus de Grec, que Scaliger and le
Cardinal du Perron: J'honore fort le P. Bouhours, qui a du merit; mais J'ose
dire, que la France n'a point de plus bell Esprit que Madame la Duchess de
Hanovre d'aujourdhui, ni de person plus solidement savante en Philosophy que
l'etoit Madame la Princess Elizabeth de Boheme, sa Soeur: Et je ne croi pas
que 'on refuse le meme titre a beaucoup d'Academiciens d'Allemagne don't les
Ouvrages meriteroient bien d'etre traduits. Il y a d'autres Princesses en
Allemagne, qui ont infiniment de l'esprit. Les Francois disent ce'st un
Allemand, pour exprimer un homme pesant, brutal: and les Allemands comme les
Italiens, c'est un Francois, pour dire un fou and un etourdi. C'est aller trop
loin: comme le Prince de Sale dit de Ruyter, Il est honnete homme, c'est bien
dommage qu'il soit Chretien. Chevraeana, Tom. I.

' Tilenus, says Scaliger, speaks and writes well for a German. Gretzer has a
great deal of Wit for a German, says Cardinal Perron. And Father Bouhours makes
it a Question, Whether a German can be a Wit? One ought not to judge well or
ill of a Nation from a particular Person, nor of a particular Person from his
Nation. There are Germans, as there are French, who have no Wit; and Germans
who are better skilled in Greek and Hebrew than either Scaliger or the Cardinal
du Perron. I have a great Honor for Father Bouhours, who is a Man of Merit;
but will be bold to say, that there is not in all France, a Person of more Wit
than the present Duchess of Hanover; nor more thoroughly knowing in
Philosophy, than was the late Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia her Sister; and I
believe none can refuse the same Title to many Academicians in Germany, whose
Works very well deserve to be translated into our Tongue. There are other
Princesses in Germany, who have also an infinite deal of Wit. The French say of
a Man, that he is a German, when they would signify that he is dull and heavy;
and the Germans, as well as the Italians, when they would call a Man, a
Hair-brained Coxcomb, say he is a French Man. This is going too far, and is
like the Governor of Sally's Saying of De Ruyter, the Dutch Admiral, He Is an
honest Man, it is great Pity he is a Christian.' Having already run my Paper out
to its usual Length, I have not room for many Reflections on that which is the
Subject of it. The last cited Author has been before hand with me in its proper
Moral. I shall only add to it, that there has been an unaccountable Disposition
among the English of late Years, to fetch the Fashion from the French, not only
in their Dress and Behavior, but even in their Judgments and Opinions of
Mankind. It will however be reasonable for us, if we concur with them in their
Contempt of other neighboring Nations, that we should likewise regard our
selves under the same View in which they are wont to place us. The
Representations they make of us, are as of a Nation the least favored by them;
and, as these are agreeable to the natural Aversion they have for us, are more
disadvantageous than the Pictures they have drawn of any other People in Europe.

No. 31. Friday, April 6.
Omnes homines, P. C. qui de rehus dubiis consultant, ab (...), amicitia, ira,
atque misericordia vacuos esse decet. Caesar ap Sallust.
I Have purposely avoided, during the whole Course of this Paper, to speak any
thing concerning the Treatment which is due to such Persons as have been
concerned in the late Rebellion, because I would not seem to irritate Justice
against those who are under the Prosecution of the Law, nor incense any of my
Readers against unhappy though guilty Men. But when we find the Proceedings of
our Government in this Particular traduced and misrepresented, it is the Duty
of every good Subject to set them in their proper Light.

I am the more prompted to this Undertaking by a Pamphlet entitled, An
Argument to prove the Affections of the People of England to be the best
Security of the Government; humbly offered to the Consideration of the Patrons
of Severity, and applied to the present Juncture of Affairs. Had the whole
Scope of the Author been answerable to his Title, he would have only undertaken
to prove what every Man in his Wits is already convinced of. But the Drift of
the Pamphlet is to stir up our Compassion toward the Rebels, and our
Indignation against the Government. The Author, who knew that such a Design as
this, could not be carried on without a great deal of Artifice and Sophistry,
has puzzled and perplexed his Cause, by throwing his Thoughts together in such
a studied Confusion, that upon this Account, if upon any, his Pamphlet is, as
the Party have represented it, Unanswerable.

The famous Monsieur Bail compares the answering of an immethodical Author to
the Hunting of a Duck: When you have him full in your Sight, and fancy your
self within reach (...), he gives you the Slip, and becomes in^^ble. His
Argument is lost in such a Varie^ of Matter, that you must catch it where you
(...) as it rises and disappears in the several (...) of his Discourse.

The Writer of this Pamphlet could, doubtless, have ranged his Thoughts in much
bette^ Order, if he had pleased: But he knew very well, that Error is not to be
advanced by Perspicuity. In order therefore to answer this Pamphlet, I must
reduce the Substance of it under proper Heads; and disembroil the Thoughts of
the Author, since he did not think fit to do it himself.

In the first Place I shall observe, that the Terms which the Author makes use
of are loose, general, and undefined, as will be shown in the Sequel of this
Paper; and what less becomes a fair Reasoner, he puts wrong and invidious Names
on every thing to color a false Way of Arguing. He allows that the Rebels
indisputably merit to be severely Chastised; that they deserve it according to
Law; and that if they are punished they have none to thank but themselves, (p.
7.) How can a Man after such a Concession make use sometimes of the Word
Cruelty, but generally of Revenge, when he pleads against the Exercise of what,
according to his own Notion, is at the most but rigid Justice! Or why are such
Executions, which, according to his own Opinion, are legal, so often to be
called Violences and Slaughter? Not to mention the Appellations given to those
who do not agree with him in his Opinion for Clemency, as the Blood-thirsty,
the Political Butchers, State Chirugeons, and the like.

But I shall now speak of that Point, which is the great and reigning Fallacy
of the Pamphlet, and runs more or less through every Paragraph. His whole
Argument turns upon this single Consideration; Whether the King should exert
Mercy or Justice toward those who have openly appeared in the present
Rebellion? By Mercy he means a general Pardon, by Justice a general Punishment:
So that he supposes no other Method practicable in this Juncture, than either
the Forgiving All, or the Executing All. Thus he puts the Question, Whether it
be the Interest of the Prince to destroy the Rebels by Fire, Sword, or Gibbet?
(p. 4.) And, speaking of the Zealots for the Government, he tells us, They
think no Remedy so good, as to make clear Work; and that they declare for the
utter Extirpation of All who are its Enemies in the most minute Circumstance:
As if Amputation were the sole Remedy these political Butchers could find out
for the Distempers of a State; or that they thought the only Way to make the
Top flourish, were to lop off the Under Branches. (p. 5.) He then speaks of the
Coffee-house Politicians, and the Casuists in Red-Coats; Who, he tells us, are
for the utmost Rigor that their Laws of War or Laws of Convenience can inspire
them with. (p. 5.) Again, It is represented, says he, that the Rebels deserve
the highest Punishment the Laws can inflict. (p. 7.) And afterward tells us,
The Question is, Whether the Government shall show Mercy, or take a Reverend
Divine's Advice, to slay Man and Woman, Insant and Suckling? (p. 8) Thus again
he tells us, The Friends to severe Counsels allege, that the Government ought
not to be moved by compassion; and that the Law should have its Course. (p. 9.)
And in another Place puts these Words in their Mouths, He may still retain
their Affection, and yet let the Laws have their Course in punishing the
Guilty. (p. 18.) He goes upon the same Supposition in the following Passages;
It is impracticable in so general a Corruption, to destroy All who are
infected; and unless you destroy All you do nothing to the purpose (p 10.)
Shall our Rightful King show himself less the true Father of his People, and
afford his Pardon to None of those People, who (like King Lear to his
Daughters) had so great a Confidence in his Virtue as to give him All. (p. 25.)
I shall only add, that the concluding Paragraph, which is worked up with so
much artificial Horror, goes upon a Supposition answerable to the whole Tenor
of the Pamphlet; and implies, that the Impeached Lords were to be Executed
without Exception or Discrimination.

Thus we see what is the Author's Idea of that Justice against which all his
Arguments are levelled. If, in the next Place, we consider the Nature of that
Clemency which he recommends, we find it to be no less universal and
unrestrained.

He declares for a General Act of Indemnity. (p. 20.) and tells us, It is the
Sense of every dispassionate Man of the Kingdom, that the Rebels may, and ought
to be Pardoned, (p. 19.) One popular Act, says he, would even yet retrieve all,
(p. 21.) He declares himself not over-fond of the Doctrines of making Examples
of Traitors. (ibid.) And that the Way to prevent Things from being brought to
an Extremity, is to deal mildly with those unfortunate Gentlemen engaged in the
Rebellion.

The Reader may now see in how fallacious a Manner this Writer has stated the
Controversy: He supposes there are but two Methods of treating the Rebels; that
is, by cutting often every one of them to a Man, or pardoning every one of them
without Distinction. Now it there be a third Method between these two Extremes,
which is on all Accounts more eligible than either of them, it is certain that
the whole Course of his Argumentation comes to nothing Every Man of the
plainest Understanding will easily conclude, that in the Case before us, as in
most others, we ought to avoid both Extremes; that to destroy every Rebel would
be an excessive Severity, and to forgive every one of them an unreasonable
Weakness. The proper Method of Proceeding, is that which the Author has
purposely omitted: Namely, to temper Justice with Mercy; and, according to the
different Circumstances that aggravate or alleviate the Guilt of the Offenders,
to restrain the Force of the Laws, or to let them take their proper Course.
Punishments are necessary to show there is Justice in a Government, and Pardons
to show there is Mercy; and both together convince the People, that our
Constitution under a good Administration does not only make a Difference
between the Guilty and the Innocent, but even among the Guilty between such as
are more or less criminal.

This middle Method which has been always practiced by wise and good Governors,
has hitherto been made use of by our Sovereign. If, indeed, a Stranger, and one
who is altogether unacquainted with His Majesty's Conduct, should read this
Pamphlet, he would conclude that every Person engaged in the Rebellion was to
die by the Sword, the Halter, or the Axe; nay, that their Friends and Abettors
were involved in the same Fate. Would it be possible for him to imagine, that
of the several Thousands openly taken in Arms, and liable to Death by the Laws
of their Country, not above Forty have yet suffered? How would he be surpised
to hear, that, notwithstanding His Majesty's Troops have been Victorious in
every Engagement, more of His Friends have lost their Lives in this Rebellion,
than of His traitorous Subjects; though we add to those who have died by the
Hand of Justice those of them who fell in Battle? And yet we find a more
popular Compassion endeavored to be raised for the Deaths of the Guilty, who
have brought such Calamities on their Country, than for the Innocent who
perished in the Defense of it.

This middle Method of Proceeding, which has been pursued by His Majesty, and
is wilfully overlooked by the Author, best answers the Ends of Government;
which is to maintain the Safety of the Public by Rewards and Punishments. It
is also incumbent on a Governor, according to the received Dictates of
Religion: Which instructs us, That he bears not the Sword in vain; but ought
to be a Terror to Evil-doors, and a Praise to them that do Well. It is likewise
in a particular manner the Duty of a British King, who obliges himself by his
Coronation Oath to execute Justice in Mercy, that is, to mix them in his
Administration, and not to exercise either of them to the total Exclusion of
the other.

But if we consider the Arguments which this Author gives for Clemency, from
the good Effects it would produce, we shall find, that they hold true only when
applied to such a Mercy as serves rather to mitigate than exclude Justice. The
Excellence of that unlimited Clemency which the Author contends for, is
recommended by the following Arguments.

First, That it endears a Prince to his People. This he descants on in several
Parts of his Book. Clemency will endear his Person to the Nation; and then they
will neither have the Power nor Wi^^ to disturb him. (p. 8.) Was there ever a
cruel Prince, that was not hated by his Subjects? (p. 24.) A merciful
good-natured Disposition is of all others the most amiable Quality, and in
Princes always attended with a popular Love, (p. 18.)

It is certain, that such a popular Love will always rise toward a Good
Prince, who exercises such a Mercy as I have before described, which is
consistent with the Safety of the Constitution, and the Good of his Kingdom.
But if it be thrown away at random, it loses its Virtue, lessens the Esteem and
Authority of a Prince, and cannot long recommend him, even to the weakest of
his Subjects, who will find all the Effects of Cruelty in such an ill-grounded
Compassion. It was a famous Saying of William Rufus, and is quoted to his
Honor by Historians. "Whosoever spares perjured Men, Robbers, Plunderers and
Traitors, deprives all good Men of their Peace and Quietness, and lays a
Foundation of innumerable Mischiefs to the Virtuous and Innocent."

Another Argument for unlimited Clemency, is, that it shows a courageous
Temper: Clemency is likewise an Argument of Fearlessness; whereas Cruelty not
only betrays a weak, abject, depraved Spirit, but also is for the most part a
certain Sign of Cowardice. (p. 19.) -- He had a truly great Soul, and such will
always disdain the Coward's Virtue, which is Fear; and the Consequence of it,
which is Revenge. (p. 27.) This Panegyric on Clemency, when it is governed by
Reason, is likewise very right; but it may so happen, that the putting of Laws
in Execution against Traitors to their Country may be the Argument of
Fearlessness, when our Governors are told that they dare not do it; and such
Methods may be made use of to extort Pardons, as would make it look like
Cowardice to grant them. In this last Case the Author should have remembered his
own Words, that then only Mercy is meritorious when it is voluntary, and not
extorted by the Necessity of Affairs, (p. 13.) Besides the Author should have
considered, that another Argument which he makes use of for his Clemency, are
the Resentments that may arise from the Execution of a Rebel: An Argument
adapted to a cowardly, not a fearless Temper. This he infers from the
Disposition of the Friends, Well-wishers, or Associates of the Sufferers, (p.
4.) Resentment will inflame some; in others Compassion will, by degrees, rise
into Resentment. This will naturally beget a Disposition to overturn what they
dislike, and then there will want only a fair Opportunity, (p. 12.) This
Argument like most of the others, pleads equally for Malefactors of all kinds,
whom the Government can never bring to Justice, without disobliging their
Friends, Well-wishers, or Associates. But, I believe, if the Author would
Converse with any Friend, Well-wisher, or Associate of these Sufferers, he
would find them rather deterred from their Practices by their Sufferings, than
disposed to rise in a new Rebellion to revenge them. A Government must be in a
very weak and melancholy Condition, that is not armed with a sufficient Power
for its own Defense against the Resentment of its Enemies, and is afraid of
being overturned if it does Justice on those who attempt it. But I am afraid
the main Reason, why these Friends, Well-wishers and Associates are against
Punishing any of the Rebels, is that which must be an Argument with every wise
Governor for doing Justice upon some of them; namely, that it is a likely Means
to come at the Bottom of this Conspiracy, and to detect those who have been the
private Abettors of it, and who are still at work in the same Design; if we
give Credit to the Suggestions of our Malcontents themselves, who labor to
make us believe that there is still Life in this wicked Project.

I am wonderfully surprised to see another Argument made use of for a general
Pardon, which might have been urged more properly for a general Execution. The
Words are these; The Generality will never be brought to believe, but that
those who suffer only for Treason have very hard Measure, nor can you with all
your Severity undeceive them of their Error. If the Generality of the English
have such a favorable Opinion of Treason, nothing can cure them of an Error so
fatal to their Country as the Punishment of those who are guilty of it. It is
evident, that a General Impunity would confirm them in such an Opinion: For the
Vulgar will never be brought to believe, that there is a Crime where they see
no Penalty. As it is certain no Error can be more destructive to the very Being
of Government than this, a proper Remedy ought to be applied to it: And I would
ask this Author, Whether upon this Occasion, The Doctrine of making Examples of
Traitors be not very seasonable; though he declares himself not overfond of it.
The way to awaken Men's Minds to the Sense of this Guilt, is to let them see by
the Sufferings of some who have incurred it how heinous a Crime it is in the
Eye of the Law.

The foregoing Answer may be applied likewise to another Argument of the same
Nature. If the Faction be as numerous as is pretended; if the Spirit has spread
itself over the whole Kingdom; if it has mixed with the Mass of the People;
then certainly all bloody Measures will but whet Men the more for Revenge. If
Justice inflicted on a few of the most flagrant Criminals, with Mercy extended
to the Multitude, may be called bloody Measures, they are without doubt
absolutely necessary, in case the Spirit of Faction be thus spread among the
Mass of the People; who will readily conclude, that if open Rebellion goes
unpunished, every Degree of Faction which leads to it must be altogether
innocent.

I am come now to another Argument for Pardoning all the Rebels, which is, that
it would inspire them all with Gratitude, and reduce them to their Allegiance.
It is truly Heroic to overcome the Hearts of one's Enemies; and when it is
compassed, the Undertaking is truly Politic. (p. 8.) He has now a fair
Opportunity of Conquering more Enemies by one Act of Clemency, than the most
successful General will be able to do in many Campaigne. (p. 9.) Are there not
infinite Numbers who would become most Dutiful upon any fair Invitation, upon
the least Appearance of Grace? (p. 13.) Which of the Rebels could be ungrateful
enough to resist or abuse Goodness exemplified in Practice, as well as extolled
in Theory? (p. 20.) Has not His Majesty then shown the least Appearance of
Grace in that generous Forgiveness which he has already extended to such great
Numbers of his Rebellious Subjects, who must have died by the Laws of their
Country, had not his Mercy interposed in their Behalf? But if the Author means
(as he does, through this whole Pamphlet by the like Expressions) an universal
Forgiveness, no unprejudiced Man can be of his Opinion, that it would have had
this good Effect. We may see how little the Conversion of Rebels is to be
depended on, when we observe that several of the Leaders in this Rebellion were
Men who had been pardoned for Practices of the same Nature: And that most of
those who have suffered, have avowed their Perseverance in their Rebellious
Principles, when they spoke their Minds at the Place of Execution,
notwithstanding their Professions to the contrary while they solicited
Forgiveness. Besides, were Pardon extended indifferently to All, which of them
would think himself under any particular Obligation? Whereas by that prudent
Discrimination which His Majesty has made between the Offenders of different
Degrees, He naturally obliges those whom he has considered with so much
Tenderness, and distinguished as the most proper Objects of Mercy. In short,
those who are pardoned would not have known the Value of Grace, if none had
felt the Effects of Justice.

I must not omit another Reason which the Author makes use of against
Punishments; Because, he says, those very Means, or the Apprehensions of them,
have brought Things to the pass in which they are, and consequently will reduce
them from bad to worse, (p. 10.) And afterward, This Growth of Dissaffection
is in a great Measure owing to the groundless Jealousies Men entertained of the
present Administration, as if they were to expect nothing but Cruelty under it.
If our Author would have spoken out, and have applied these Effects to the real
Cause, he could ascribe this Change of Affections among the People to nothing
else but the Change of the Ministry: For we find that a great many Persons lost
their Loyalty with their Places; and that their Friends have ever since made
use of the most base Methods to infuse those groundless Discontents into the
Minds of the Common People, which have brought so many of them to the Brink of
Destruction, and proved so detrimental to their Fellow Subjects. However, this
Proceeding has shown how dangerous it would have been for His Majesty to have
continued in their Places of Trust a Set of Men, some of whom have since
actually joined with the Pretender to His Crown: While others may be justly
suspected never to have been faithful to Him in their Hearts, or, at least,
whose Principles are precarious, and visibly conducted by their Interest. In a
Word, if the Removal of these Persons from their Posts has produced such
popular Commotions, the Continuance of them might have produced something much
more fatal to their King and Country, and have brought about that Revolution,
which has now been in vain attempted. The Condition of a British King would be
very poor indeed, should a Party of his Subjects threaten Him with a Rebellion
upon his bringing Malefactors to Justice, or upon his refusing to employ those
whom he dares not trust.

I shall only mention another Argument against the Punishment of any of the
Rebels, whose Executions he represents as very shocking to the People, because
they are their Countrymen, (p. 12.) And again, The Quality of the Sufferers,
their Alliances, their Characters, their being Englishmen, with a thousand
other Circumstances, will contribute to breed more ill Blood than all the
State-Chirurgeons can possibly let out, (p. 12.) The Impeached Lords likewise,
in the last Paragraph of the Pamphlet, are recommended to our Pity, because
they are our Countrymen. By this way of Reasoning, no Man that is a Gentleman,
or born within the three Seas should be subject to Capital Punishment. Besides,
who can be guilty of Rebellion that are not our Countrymen? As for the
endearing Name of Englishman, which he bestows upon every one of the Criminals,
he should consider, that a Man deservedly cuts himself off from the Affections
as well as the Privileges of that Community, which he endeavors to subvert.

These are the several Arguments which appear in different Forms and
Expressions through this whole Pamphlet, and under which every one that is urged
in it may be reduced. There is indeed another Set of them, derived from the
Example and Authority of Great Persons, which the Author produces in Favor of
his own Scheme. These are William the Conqueror, Henry IVth of France, our late
King William, King Solomon, and the Pretender. If a Man were disposed to draw
Arguments for Severity out of History, how many Instances might one find of it
among the greatest Princes of every Nation? But as different Princes may act
very laudably by different Methods in different Conjunctures, I cannot think
this a conclusive Way of Reasoning. However, let us examine this Set of
Arguments, and we shall find them no less defective than those abovementioned.

One of the greatest of our English Monarchs, says our Author, was William the
Conqueror; and he was the greater, because he put to Death only one Person of
Quality that we read of, and him after repeated Treacheries; yet he was a
Foreigner, had Power sufficient, and did not want Provocations to have been
more bloody. (p. 27.) This Person of Quality was the Earl Waltheof, who being
overtaken with Wine, engaged in a Conspiracy against this Monarch, but
repenting of it the next Morning, repaired to the King who was then in
Normandy, and discovered the whole Matter. Notwithstanding which, he was
beheaded upon the Defeat of the Conspiracy for having but thus far tampered in
it. And as for the rest of the Conspirators, who rose in an actual Rebellion,
the King used them with the utmost Rigor, he cut off the Hands of some, put
out the Eyes of others, some were hanged upon Gibbets, and those who fared the
best, were sent into Banishment. There are indeed, the most dreadful Examples
of Severity in this Reign: Though it must be confessed, that, after the Manner of
those Times, the Nobility generally escaped with their Lives, though Multitudes
of them were punished with Banishment, perpetual Imprisonment, Forfeitures, and
other great Severities: While the poor People, who had been deluded by these
their Ringleaders, were executed with the utmost Rigor. A Partiality which I
believe no Commoner of England will ever think to be either just or reasonable.

The next Instance is Henry the IVth of France, who (says our Author) so
handsomely expressed his Tenderness for his People, when, at signing the Treaty
of Vervins, he said, That by one Dash of his Pen he had overcome more Enemies,
than he could ever be able to do with his Sword. Would not an ordinary Reader
think that this Treaty of Vervins was a Treaty between Henry the IVth and a
Party of his Subjects? For otherwise how can it have a Place in the present
Argument? But instead of that it was a Treaty between France and Spain; so that
the Speech expressed an equal Tenderness to the Spaniards and French; as
Multitudes of either Nation must have fallen in that War, had it continued
longer. As for this King's Treatment of Conspirators, (though he is quoted thrice
in the Pamphlet as an Example of Clemency) you have an eminent Instance of it
in his Behavior to the Marshall de Biron, who had been his old faithful
Servant, and had contributed more than any one to his Advancement to the
Throne. This Marshall, upon some Discontent, was entered into a Conspiracy
against his Master, and refusing to open the whole Secret to the King, he was
sent to the Bastile, and there beheaded, notwithstanding he sought for Mercy
with great Importunities, and in the most moving Manner. There are other
Instances in this King's Reign, who notwithstanding was remarkabable for his
Clemency, of Rebels and Conspirators who were hanged, beheaded, or broken alive
on the Wheel.

The late King William was not disturbed by any Rebellion from those who had
once submitted to him. But we know he treated the Persons concerned in the
Assassination-Plot as so horrid a Conspiracy deserved. As for the Saying which
this Author imputes to that Monarch, it being a Piece of secret History, one
does not know when it was spoken, or what it alluded to, unless the Author had
been more particular in the Account of it.

The Author proceeds in the next Place to no less an Authority, than that of
Solomon: Among all the general Observations of the wisest Princes we know of, I
think there is none holds more universally than Mercy and Truth preserve a
King, and his Throne is established in Mercy. (p. 18.) If we compare the
different Sayings of this wise King, which relate to the Conduct of Princes, we
cannot question but that he means by this Mercy, that kind of it, which is
consistent with Reason and Government, and by which we hope to see his
Majesty's Throne established. But our Author should consider that the same wise
Man has said in another Place, that "An evil Man seeks Rebellion, therefore a
cruel Messenger shall be sent against him." Accordingly his Practice was
agreeable to his Proverb: No Prince having ever given a greater Testimony of
his Abhorrence to Undertakings of this treasonable Nature. For he dispatched
such a cruel Messenger as is here mentioned to those who had been engaged in a
Rebellion many Years before he himself was on the Throne, and even to his elder
Brother, upon the bare Suspicion that he was projecting so wicked an Enterprise.

How the Example of the Pretender came into this Argument, I am at a Loss to
find out. The Pretender declared a general Pardon to All: And shall our
rightful King show himself less the true Father of his People, and afford his
Pardon to none, etc. (p. 25.) The Pretender's general Pardon was to a People
who were not in his Power; and had he ever reduced them under it, it was only
promised to such as immediately joined with him for the Recovery of what he
called his Right. It was such a general Pardon as would have been consistent
with the Execution of more than nine Parts in ten of the Kingdom.

There is but one more Historical Argument which is drawn from King Philip's
Treatment of the Catalans. I think it would not be unseasonable for some Men to
recollect what their own Notions were of the Treatment of the Catalans; how
many Declamations were made on the Barbarity used toward them by King Philip,
etc. (p. 29.) If the Author remembers these Declamations, as he calls them were
not made so much on the Barbarity used toward them by King Philip, as on the
Barbarity used toward them by the English Government. King Philip might have
some Color for treating them as Rebels, but we ought to have regarded them as
Allies; and were obliged by all the Ties of Honor, Conscience, and public
Faith, to have sheltered them from those Sufferings, which were brought upon
them by a firm and inviolable Adherence to our Interest. However, none can draw
into a Parallel the Cruelties which have been inflicted on that unhappy People,
with those few Instances of Severity which our Government has been obliged to
exert toward the British Rebels. I say no Man would make such a Parallel,
unless his Mind be so blinded with Passion and Prejudice, as to assert, in the
Language of this Pamphlet, That no Instances can be produced of the least
Lenity under the present Administration from the first Hour it commenced to
this Day, (p. 20.) with other astonishing Reflections of the same Nature, which
are contradicted by such innumerable Matters of Fact, that it would be an
Affront to a Reader's Understanding to endeavor to confute them. But to return
to the Catalans; During the whole Course of the War, says the Author, which
ever of them submitted to Discretion, were received to Mercy, (p. 22.) This is
so far from being truly related, that in the beginning of the War, they were
executed without Mercy. But when in Conjunction with their Allies, they became
Superior to King Philip's Party in Strength, and extended their Conquests up to
the very Gates of Madrid, it cannot be supposed the Spanish Court would be so
infatuated as to persist in their first Severities, against an Enemy that could
make such terrible Reprizals. However, when this Reason of State ceased, how
dreadful was the Havoc made among this brave, but unhappy People! The whole
Kingdom without any Distinction to the many Thousands of its innocent
Inhabitants, was stripped of its Immunities, and reduced to a State of Slavery.
Barcelona was filled with Executions; and all the Patriots of their ancient
Liberties either beheaded, stowed in Dungeons, or condemned to work in the
Mines of America.

God be thanked we have a King who punishes with Reluctance, and is averse to
such Cruelties as were used among the Catalans, as much as to those practiced
on the Persons concerned in Monmouth's Rebellion. Our Author indeed, condemns
these Western Assizes in King James's Reign, (p. 26.) And it would be well if
all those who still adhere to the Cause of that unfortunate King, and are
clamorous at the Proceedings of his present Majesty, would remember, that
notwithstanding that Rebellion fell very much short of this both in the Number
and Strength of the Rebels, and had no Tendency either to destroy the National
Religion, to introduce an Arbitrary Government, or to subject us to a Foreign
Power; not only the Chief of the Rebels was beheaded, but even a Lady, who had
only harbored one of the Offenders in her House was in her extreme old Age put
to the same kind of Death: That about two hundred and thirty were hanged,
drawn, and quartered, and their Limbs dispersed through several Parts of the
Country, and set up as Spectacles of Terror to their Fellow Subjects. It would
be too tedious a Work to run through the numberless Fines, Imprisonments,
Corporal Punishments, and Transportations, which were then likewise practiced
as wholesome Severities.

We have now seen how fallaciously the Author has stated the Cause he has
undertaken, by supposing that nothing but unlimited Mercy, or unlimited
Punishment, are the Methods that can be made use of in our present Treatment of
the Rebels: That he has omitted the middle way of Proceeding between these two
Extremes: That this middle Way is the Method in which His Majesty, like all
other wise and good Kings, has chosen to proceed: That it is agreeable to the
Nature of Government, Religion, and our British Constitution: And that every
Argument which the Author has produced from Reason and Example, would have been
a true one, had it been urged for that restrained Clemency which His Majesty
has exercised: But is a false one, when applied to such a general,
undistinguishing Mercy as the Author would recommend.

Having thus answered that which is the main Drift and Design of this Pamphlet,
I shall touch upon those other Parts of it, which are interwoven with the
Arguments, to put Men out of Humor with the present Government.

And here we may observe, that it is our Author's Method to suppose Matters of
Fact which are not in being, and afterward to descant upon them. As he is very
sensible that the Cause will not bear the Test of Reason, he has indeed every
where chosen rather Topics for Declamation than Argument* Thus he entertains
us with a labored Invective against a standing Army. But what has this to do
in the present Case? I suppose he would not advise his Majesty to disband his
Forces while there is an Army of Rebels in his Dominions. I cannot imagine he
would think the Affections of the People of England a Security of the
Government in such a Juncture, were it not at the same time defended with a
sufficient Body of Troops. No Prince has ever given a greater Instance of his
Inclinations to rule without a Standing-Army, if we consider, that upon the
very first News of the Defeat of the Rebels, he declared to both Houses of
Parliament, that he had put an immediate Stop to the Levies which he had begun
to raise at their Request, and that he would not make use of the Power which
they had entrusted him with, unless any new Preparations of the Enemy should
make it necessary for our Defense. This Speech was received with the greatest
Gratitude by both Houses; and it is said, that in the House of Commons a very
can did and honorable Gentleman (who generally votes with the Minority)
declared, that he had not heard so gracious a Speech from the Throne for many
Years last past.

In another Place, he supposes that the Government has not endeavored to gain
the Applause of the Vulgar, by doing something for the Church; and very gravely
makes Excuses for this their pretended Neglect. What greater Instances could
His Majesty have given of his Love to the Church of England, than those he has
exhibited by his most solemn Declarations; by his daily Example; and by his
Promotions of the most eminent among the Clergy to such Vacancies as have
happened in his Reign. To which we must add, for the Honor of his Government
in this Particular, That it has done more for the Advantage of the Clergy, than
those, who are the most zealous for their Interest, could have expected in so
short a Time; which will farther appear, if we reflect upon the valuable and
Royal Donative to one of our Universities, and the Provision made for those who
are to officiate in the Fifty New Churches. His Majesty is, indeed, a Prince of
too much Magnanimity and Truth, to make use of the Name of the Church for
drawing his People into any thing that may be prejudicial to them; for what our
Author says, to this Purpose, redounds as much to the Honor of the present
Administration, as to the Disgrace of others. Nay, I wish with all my Soul they
had stooped a little ad captum vulgi, to take in those shallow fluttering
Hearts, which are to be caught by any thing baited with the Name of Church, (p.
11.)

Again; The Author asks, Whether Terror is to become the only National
Principle? With other Questions of the same Nature: And in several Parts of his
Book, harangues very plentifully against such a Notion. Where he talks in
Generals upon this Topic, there is no question but every Whig and Tory in the
Kingdom perfectly agree with him in what he says. But if he would insinuate, as
he seems to do in several Places, that there should be no Impressions of Awe
upon the Mind of a Subject, and that a Government should not create Terror in
those who are disposed to do ill, as well as encourage those that do their
Duty: In short, if he is for an entire Exclusion of that Principle of Fear
which is supposed to have some Influence in every Law, he opposes himself to
the Form of every Government in the World, and to the Common Sense of Mankind.

The Artifice of this Author in starting Objections to the Friends of the
Government, and the foolish Answers which he supposes they return to them is so
very visible, that every one sees they are designed rather to divert his
Reader, than to instruct him.

I have now examined this whole Pamphlet, which, indeed, is written with a
great deal of Art, and as much Argument as the Cause would bear: And after
having stated the true Notion of Clemency, Mercy, Compassion, Goodnature,
Humanity, or whatever else it may be called, so far as it is consistent with
Wisdom, and the Good of Mankind, or, in other Words, so far as it is a moral
Virtue, I shall readily concur with the Author in the highest Panegyricks that
he has bestowed upon it. As likewise, I heartily join with him in every thing
he has said against Justice, if it includes, as his Pamphlet supposes, the
Extirpation of every Criminal, and is not exercised with a much greater Mixture
of Clemency than Rigor. Mercy, in the true Sense of the Word, is that Virtue
by which a Prince approaches nearest to Him, whom he represents; and whilst he
is neither remiss nor extreme to animadvert upon those who offend him, that
Logic will hold true of him which is applied to the Great Judge of all the
Earth; With thee there is Mercy, therefore shall thou be Feared.

No. 32. Monday, April 9.
Heu miserae Cives! non hostem, inimicaque castra
Argivum; vestras spes uritis -- Virg.

I Question not but the British Ladies are very well pleased with the
Compliment I have paid them in the Course of my Papers, by regarding them, not
only as the most amiable, but as the most important Part of our Community. They
ought, indeed, to resent the Treatment they have met with from other Authors,
who have never troubled their Heads about them, but addressed all their
Arguments to the Male Half of their Fellow Subjects; and taken it for granted,
that if they could bring these into their Measures, the Females would of Course
follow their political Mates. The Arguments they have made use of, are like
Hudibras's Spur, which he applied to one Side of his Horse, as not doubting but
the other would keep Pace with it. These Writers seem to have regarded the Fair
Sex but as the Garniture of a Nation; and when they consider them as Parts of
the Commonwealth, it is only as they are of use to the Consumption of our
Manufacture. Could we persuade our British Women (says one of our eminent
Merchants in a Letter to his Friend in the Country upon the Subject of
Commerce) to cloth themselves in the comely Apparel which might be made out of
the Wool of their own Country; and instead of Coffee, Tea and Chocolate, to
delight in those wholesome and palatable Liquors which may be extracted from our
British Simples; they would be of great Advantage to Trade, and therein to the
Public Weal.

It is now, however, become necessary to treat our Women as Members of the Body
Politic; since it is visible that great Numbers of them have of late eloped
from their Allegiance, and that they do not believe themselves obliged to draw
with us, as Yoke-Fellows in the Constitution. They will judge for themselves;
look into the State of the Nation with their own Eyes; and be no longer led
Blindfold by a Male Legislature. A Friend of mine was lately complaining to me,
that his Wife had turned off one of the best Cook-Maids in England, because the
Wench had said something to her Fellow Servants, which seemed to favor the
Suspension of the Habeas-Corpus Act.

When Errors and Prejudices are thus spread among the Sex, it is the hardest
thing in the World to root them out. Arguments, which are the only proper Means
for it, are of little use; They have a very short Answer to all Reasonings that
turn against them, Make us believe That, if you can; which is in Latin, if I
may upon this occasion be allowed the Pedantry of a Quotation, Non persuadebis,
etiamsi persuaseris. I could not but smile at a young University Disputant, who
was complaining the other Day of the Unreasonableness of a Lady with whom he
was engaged in a Point of Controversy. Being left alone with her, he took the
opportunity of pursuing an Argument which had been before started in Discourse,
and put it to her in a Syllogism: Upon which, as he informed us with some Heat,
she granted him him both the Major and the Minor, but denied him the Conclusion.

The best Method, therefore, that can be made use of with these polemical
Ladies, who are much more easy to be Refuted than Silenced, is to show them the
ridiculous Side of their Cause, and to make them laugh at their own Politics.
It is a kind of ill Manners to offer Objections to a fine Woman; and a Man
would be out of Countenance that should gain the Superiority in such a Contest.
A Coquette Logician may be railly'd but not contradicted. Those who would make
use of solid Arguments and strong Reasonings to a Reader or Hearer of so
delicate a Turn, would be like that foolish People whom Aelian speaks of, that
worshipped a Fly, and sacrificed an Ox to it.

The Truth of it is, a Man must be of a very disputatious Temper, that enters
into State-Controversies with any of the fair Sex. If the Malignant be not
Beautiful, she cannot do much Mischief; and if she is, her Arguments will be so
enforced by the Charms of her Person, that her Antagonist may be in danger of
betraying his own Cause. Milton puts this Confession into the Mouth of our
Father Adam; who though he asserts his Superiority of Reason in his Debates with
the Mother of Mankind, adds, -- Yet when I approach
Her Loveliness, so absolute she seems,
And in herself Complete; so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher Knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in Discourse with her
Loses, discount'nanc'd, and like Folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait --


If there is such a native Loveliness in the Sex, as to make them Victorious
even when they are in the wrong, how resistless is their Power when they are on
the Side of Truth! And indeed, it is a peculiar good Fortune to the Government,
that our Fair Malcontents are so much over-matched in Beauty, as well as
Number, by those who are Loyal to their King, and Friends to their Country.

Every Paper, which I have hitherto addressed to our beautiful Incendiaries,
has been filled with Considerations of a different Kind; by which Means I have
taken Care that those, who are Enemies to the Sex, or to my self, may not
accuse me of Tautology, or pretend that I attack them with their own Weapon.
For this Reason I shall here lay together a new Set of Remarks, and observe the
several Artifices by which the Enemies to our Establishment do raise such
unaccountable Passions and Prejudices in the Minds of our discontented Females.

In the first Place; it is usual among the most Cunning of our Adversaries, to
represent all the Rebels as very handsome Men. If the Name of a Traitor be
mentioned, they are very particular in describing his Person; and when they are
not able to extenuate his Treason, commend his Shape. This has so good an
Effect in one of our Female Audiences, that they represent to themselves a
thousand poor, tall, innocent, fresh-coloured young Gentlemen, who are
dispersed among the several Prisons of Great Bretain; and extend their generous
Compassion toward a Multitude of agreeable Fellows that never were in being.

Another Artifice is, to instill Jealousies into their Minds of Designs upon
the Anvil to retrench the Privileges of the Sex. Some represent the Whigs as
Enemies to Flanders-Lace: Others had spread a Report that in the late Act of
Parliament for four Shillings in the Pound upon Land, there would be inserted a
Clause for raising a Tax upon Pin-Money. That the Ladies may be the better upon
their Guard against Suggestions of this Nature, I shall beg Leave to put them
in mind of the Story of Papirius, the Son of a Roman Senator. This young
Gentleman, after having been present in public Debates, was usually teazed by
his Mother to inform her of what had passed. In order to deliver himself from
this Importunity, he told her one Day, upon his Return from the Senate House,
that there had been a Motion made for a Decree to allow every Man two Wives.
The good Lady said nothing; but managed Matters so well among the Roman
Matrons, that the next Day they met together in a Body before the Senate House,
and presented a Petition to the Fathers against so unreasonable a Law. This
groundless Credulity raised so much Raillery upon the Petitioners, that we do
not find the Ladies offered to direct the Lawgivers of their Country ever
after.

There has been another Method lately made use of, which has been practiced
with extraordinary Success; I mean the spreading abroad Reports of Prodigies,
which has wonderfully gratified the Curiosity, as well as the Hopes of our fair
Malignants. Their Managers turn Water into Blood for them; frighten them with
Sea Monsters; make them see Armies in the Air; and give them their Word, the
more to ingratiate themselves with them, that they signify nothing less than
future Slaughter and Desolation. The disloyal Part of the Sex immediately hug
themselves at the News of the Bloody Fountain; look upon these Fish as their
Friends; have great Expectations from the Clouds; and are very angry with you,
if you think they do not All portend Ruin to their Country.

Secret History and Scandal have always had their Allurements; and I have in
other Discourses shown the great Advantage that is made of them in the present
Ferment among the fair Ones.

But the Master Engine, to overturn the Minds of the Female World, is the
Danger of the Church. I am not so uncharitable as to think there is any thing
in an Observation made by several of the Whigs, that there is scarce a Woman in
England who is troubled with the Vapors, but is more or less affected with
this Cry: Or, to remark with others, that it is not uttered in any part of the
Nation with so much Bitterness of Tongue and Heart, as in the Districts of
Drury Lane. On the contrary, I believe there are many devout and honorable
Women who are deluded in this Point by the Artifice of designing Men. To these,
therefore, I would apply my self, in a more serious Manner, and desire them to
consider how that laudable Piety, which is natural to the Sex, is apt to
degenerate into a groundless and furious Zeal, when it is not kept within the
Bounds of Charity and Reason. Female Zeal, though proceeding from so good a
Principle, has been infinitely detrimental to Society, and to Religion itself.
If we may believe the French Historians, it often put a Stop to the Proceedings
of their Kings, which might have ended in a Reformation. For, upon their
breaking with the Pope, the Queens frequently interposed, and by their
Importunities, reconciled them to the Usurpations of the Church of Rome. Nay,
it was this vicious Zeal which gave a remarkable Check to the first Progress of
Christianity, as we find it recorded by a sacred Historian in the following
Passage, which I shall leave to the Consideration of my Female Readers. But the
Jews stirred up the devout and honorable Women and the chief Men of the City,
and raised a Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of
their Coasts.

No. 33. Friday, April 13.
Nulli adversus Magistratus ac Reges gratiores sunt; nec immerito, nullis enim
plus praestant quam quibus frui tranquillo otio licet. Itaque hi, quibus ad
propositum been vivendi confert Securitas publica necesse est auctorem hujus
boni ut parentem colant. Senec. Ep. 73.
WE find by our public Papers, the University of Dublin have lately presented
to the Prince of Wales, in a most humble and dutiful Manner, their Diploma for
constituting His Royal Highness Chancellor of that Learned Body; and that the
Prince received this their Offer with the Goodness and Condescension which is
natural to his illustrious House. As the College of Dublin have been long
famous for their great Learning, they have now given us an Instance of their
Good Sense; and it is with Pleasure that we find such a Disposition in this
famous Nursery of Letters to propagate sound Principles, and to act, in its
proper Sphere, for the Honor and Dignity of the Royal Family. We hope that
such an Example will have its Influence on other Societies of the same Nature;
and cannot but rejoice to see the Heir of Great Britain vouchsafing to
Patronize in so peculiar a Manner that Noble Seminary, which is perhaps at this
Time training up such Persons as may hereafter be Ornaments to his Reign.

When Men of Learning are acted thus by a Knowledge of the World as well as of
Books, and show that their Studies naturally inspire them with a Love to their
King and Country; they give a Reputation to Literature, and convince the World
of its Usefulness. But when Arts and Sciences are so perverted as to dispose
Men to act in Contradiction to the rest of the Community, and to set up for a
kind of separate Republic among themselves, they draw upon them the
Indignation of the Wise, and the Contempt of the Ignorant.

It has indeed, been observed, that Persons, who are very much esteemed for
their Knowledge and Ingenuity in their private Characters, have acted like
Strangers to Mankind, and to the Dictates of right reason, when joined together
in a Body. Like several Chemical Waters, that are each of them clear and
transparent when separate, but ferment into a thick troubled Liquor when they
are mixed in the same Vial.

There is a Piece of Mythology which bears very hard upon Learned Men; and
which I shall here relate, rather for the Delicacy of the Satyr, than for the
Justness of the Moral. When the City of Athens was finished, we are told that
Neptune and Minerva presented themselves as Candidates for the Guardianship of
the Place. The Athenians, after a full Debate upon the Matter, came to an
Election, and made choice of Minerva. Upon which, Neptune, who very much
resented the Indignity, upbraided them with their Stupidity and Ignorance; that
a Maritime Town should reject the Patronage of him who was the God of the Seas,
and could defend them against all the Attacks of their Enemies. He concluded
with a Curse upon the Inhabitants, which was to stick to them and their
Posterity; namely, That they should be all Fools. When Minerva their Tutelary
Goddess, who presides over Arts and Sciences, came among them to receive the
Honor they had conferred upon her, they made heavy Complaints of the Curse
which Neptune had laid upon the City; and begged her, if possible, to take it
off. But she told them it was not in her Power; for that one Deity could not
reverse the Act of another. However, said she, I may alleviate the Curse which
I cannot remove: It is not possible for me to hinder you from being Fools, but
I will take care that you shall be Learned.

There is nothing which Bodies of Learned Men should be more careful of, than,
by all due Methods, to cultivate the Favor of the Great and Powerful. The
Indulgence of a Prince is absolutely necessary to the Propagation, the Defense,
the Honor and Support of Learning. It naturally creates in Men's Minds an
Ambition to distinguish themselves by Letters; and multiplies the Number of
those who are dedicated to the Pursuits of Knowledge. It protects them against
the Violence of Brutal Men; and gives them Opportunities to pursue their
Studies in a State of Peace and Tranquillity. It puts the Learned in
Countenance; and gives them a Place among the fashionable Part of Mankind. It
distributes Rewards; and encourages Speculative Persons, who have neither
Opportunity nor a Turn of Mind to increase their own Fortunes, with all the
Incentives of Place, Profit and Preferment. On the contrary, nothing is in
itself so pernicious to Communities of Learned Men, nor more apprehended by
those that wish them well, than the Displeasure of their Prince, which those
may justly expect to feel, who would make use of his Favor to his own
Prejudice, and put in Practice all the Methods that lie within their Power to
vilify his Person, and distress his Government. In both these Cases, a Learned
Body is in a more particular Manner exposed to the Influence of their King, as
described by the wisest of Men, The Wrath of a King is as the Roaring of a
Lion; but his Favor is as the Dew upon the Grass.

We find in our English Histories, that the Empress Matilda, (who was the great
Ancestor of His present Majesty, and whose Granddaughter of the same name has
a Place upon several of the Hanover Medals) was particularly favored by the
University of Oxford, and defended in that Place, when most Parts of the
Kingdom had revolted against her. Nor is it to be questioned, but an University
so famous for Learning and sound Knowledge, will show the same Zeal for her
illustrious Descendent, as they will every Day discern His Majesty's Royal
Virtues, through those Prejudices which have been raised in their Minds by
artful and designing Men. It is with much Pleasure we see this great Fountain
of Learning already beginning to run clear, and recovering its Natural Purity
and Brightness. None can imagine that a Community which is taxed by the worst
of its Enemies, only for overstraining the Notions of Loyalty even to bad
Princes, will fall short of a due Allegiance to the best.

When this happy Temper of Mind is fully established among them, we may justly
hope to see the largest Share of His Majesty's Favors fall upon that
University, which is the Greatest, and upon all Accounts the most Considerable
not only in his Dominions, but in all Europe.

I shall conclude this Paper with a Quotation out of Cambden's History of Queen
Elizabeth, who, after having described that Queen's Reception at Oxford, gives
an Account of the Speech which she made to them at her Departure; concluding
with a Piece of Advice to that University. Her Counsel was, That they would
first serve God, not after the Curiosity of some, but according to the Laws of
God and the Land, that they would not go before the Laws, but follow them; nor
dispute whether better might be prescribed, but keep those prescribed already;
obey their Superiors; and lastly embrace one another in Brotherly Piety and
Concord.

No. 34. Monday, April 16.
-- saevus apertam
In rabiem coepit verti jocus -- Hor.

IT is very justly, as well as frequently observed, that if our Nation be ever
ruined, it must be by itself. The Parties and Divisions which reign among us
may several Ways bring Destruction upon our Country, at the same Time that our
united Force would be sufficient to secure us against all the Attempts of a
foreign Enemy. Whatever Expedients therefore can be found to allay those Heats
and Animosities, which break us into different Factions and Interests, cannot
but be useful to the Public, and highly tend to its Safety, Strength, and
Reputation.

This dangerous Dissension among us discovers itself in all the most
indifferent Circumstances of Life. We keep it up, and cherish it with as much
Pains, as if it were a kind of National Blessing. It insinuates itself into all
our Discourses, mixes in our Parties of Pleasure, has a Share in our
Diversions, and is an Ingredient in most of our public Entertainments.

I was not long ago at the Play called Sir Courtly Nice, where to the eternal
Reproach of good Sense, I found the whole Audience had very gravely ranged
themselves into two Parties, under Hot-head and Testimony. Hot-head was the
applauded Hero of the Tories, and Testimony no less the Favorite of the Whigs.
Each Party followed their Champion. It was wonderful to see so polite an
Assembly distinguishing themselves by such extraordinary Representatives, and
avowing their Principles as conformable either to the Zeal of Hot-head, or the
Moderation of Testimony. Thus the two Parts which were designed to expose the
Faults of both Sides, and were accordingly received by our Ancestors in King
Charles the Second's Reign, meet with a kind of Sanction from the Applauses
which are respectively bestowed on them by their wise Posterity. We seem to
imagine that they were written as Patterns for Imitation, not as Objects of
Ridicule.

This Humor runs so far, that most of our late Comedies owe their Success to
it. The Audience listens after nothing else. I have seen little Dicky place
himself with great Approbation at the Head of the Tories for five Acts
together, and Pinky espouse the Interest of the Whigs with no less Success. I
do not find that either Party has yet thrown themselves under the Patronage of
Scaramouch, or that Harlequin has violated that Neutrality, which, upon his
late Arrival in Great Britain, he professed to both Parties, and which it is
thought he will punctually observe, being allowed on all Sides to be a Man of
Honor. It is true, that upon his first Appearance, a violent Whig Tradesman in
the Pit begun to compliment him with a Clap, as overjoyed to see him mount a
Ladder, and fancying Him to be dressed in a Highland Plad.

I question not but my Readers will be surprised to find me animadverting on a
Practice that has been always favorable to the Cause which now prevails. The
British Theater was Whig even in the worst of Times; and in the last Reign did
not scruple to testify its Zeal for the Good of our Country, by many
magnanimous Claps in its lower Regions, answered with loud Huzzas from the
upper Gallery. This good Disposition is so much heightened of late, that the
whole Neighborhood of the Drury Lane Theater very often shakes with the
Loyalty of the Audience. It is said, that a young Author, who very much relies
on this prevailing Humor, is now writing a Farce to be called A Match out of
Newgate, in Allusion to the Title of a Comedy called A Match in Newgate; and
that his chief Person is a round-shoulder'd Man with a pretty large Nose and a
wide Mouth, making his Addresses to a lovely black Woman that passes for a
Peeress of Great Britain. In short, the whole Play is built upon the late
Escape of General Forster, who is supposed upon the Road to fall in Love with
my Lord Nithisdale, whom the Ingenious Author imagines to be still in his
Riding-Hood.

But notwithstanding the good Principles of a British Audience in this one
Particular, it were to be wished that every thing should be banished the Stage
which has a Tendency to exasperate Men's Minds, and inflame that Party Rage
which makes us such a miserable and divided People. And that in the first
Place, because such a Proceeding as this disappoints the very Design of all
public Diversions and Entertainments. The Institution of Sports and Shows was
intended by all Governments, to turn off the Thoughts of the People from
busying themselves in Matters of State, which did not belong to them; to
reconcile them to one another by the common Participations of Mirth and
Pleasure; and to wear out of their Minds that Rancour which they might have
contracted by the interfering Views of Interest and Ambition. It would
therefore be for the Benefit of every Society, that is disturbed by contending
Factions, to encourage such innocent Amusements as may thus disembitter the
Minds of Men, and make them mutually rejoice in the same agreeable
Satisfactions. When People are accustomed to sit together with Pleasure, it is
a Step toward Reconciliation: But as we manage Matters, our politest
Assemblies are like boisterous Clubs, that meet over a Glass of Wine, and
before they have done, throw Bottles at one another's Heads. Instead of
multiplying those desirable Opportunities where we may agree in Points that are
indifferent, we let the Spirit of Contention into those very Methods that are
not only foreign to it, but should in their Nature dispose us to be Friends.
This our Anger in our Mirth is like Poison in a Perfume, which taints the
Spirits instead of chearing and refreshing them.

Another manifest Inconvenience which arises from this Abuse of public
Entertainments, is, that it naturally destroys the Taste of an Audience. I do
not deny, but that several Performances have been justly applauded for their
Wit, which have been written with an Eye to this predominant Humor of the
Town: But it is visible even in these, that it is not the Excellence, but the
Application of the Sentiment, that has raised Applause. An Author is very much
disappointed to find the best Parts of his Productions received with
Indifference, and to see the Audience discovering Beauties which he never
intended. The Actors, in the midst of an innocent old Play, are often startled
with unexpected Claps or Hisses; and do not know whether they have been talking
like good Subjects, or have spoken Treason. In short, we seem to have such a
Relish for Faction, as to have lost that of Wit; and are so used to the
Bitterness of Party Rage, that we cannot be gratified with the highest
Entertainment that has not this kind of Seasoning in it. But as no Work must
expect to live long, which draws all its Beauty from the Color of the Times;
so neither can that Pleasure be of greater Continuance, which arises from the
Prejudice or Malice of its Hearers.

To conclude; Since the present Hatred and Violence of Parties is so
unspeakably pernicious to the Community, and none can do a Better Service to
their Country than those who use their utmost endeavors to extinguish it, we
may reasonably hope, that the more elegant Part of the Nation will give a good
Example to the rest; and put an end to so absurd and foolish a Practice, which
makes our most refined Diversions detrimental to the Public, and, in a
particular Manner destructive of all Politeness.

No. 35. Friday, April 20.
Atheniensium res gestae, sicut ego existumo, satis amplae magnificaeque fuere,
verum aliquanto minores tamen quam fama feruntur: Sed, quia provenere ibi magna
Scriptorum ingenia, per terrarum orbem Atheniensium facta pro maxumis
celebrantur. Ita eorum, qui ea fecere, virtus tanta habetur, quantum verbis ea
potuere extollere praeclara ingenia. Sallust.
GRATIAN, among his Maxims for raising a Man to the most consummate Character
of Greatness, advises first to perform extraordinary Actions, and in the next
Place to secure a good Historian. Without the last, he considers the first as
thrown away; as indeed they are in a great Measure by such illustrious Persons,
as make Fame and Reputation the End of their Undertakings. The most shining
Merit goes down to Posterity with Disadvantage, when it is not placed by
Writers in its proper Light.

The Misfortune is, that there are more Instances of Men who deserve this kind
of Immortality, than of Authors who are able to bestow it. Our Country, which
has produced Writers of the first Figure in every other kind of Work, has been
very barren in good Historians. We have had several who have been able to
compile Matters of Fact, but very few who have been able to digest them with
that Purity and Elegance of Style, that Nicety and Strength of Reflection, that
Subtilty and Discernment in the Unravelling of a Character, and that Choice of
Circumstances for enlivening the whole Narration, which we so justly admire in
the ancient Historians of Greece and Rome, and in some Authors of our
neighboring Nations.

Those who have succeeded best in Works of this kind, are such, who, besides
their natural good Sense and Learning, have themselves been versed in public
Business, and thereby acquired a thorough Knowledge of Men and Things. It was
the Advice of the great Duke of Schomberg, to an eminent Historian of his
Acquaintance, who was an Ecclesiastic, That he should avoid being too
particular in the drawing up of an Army, and other Circumstances of the Day of
Battle; for that he had always observed most notorious Blunders and Absurdities
committed on that Occasion, by such Writers as were not conversant in the Art
of War. We may reasonably expect the like Mistakes in every other kind of
Public Matters, recorded by those who have only a distant Theory of such
Affairs. Besides; it is not very probable, that Men, who have passed all their
Time in low and vulgar Life, should have a suitable Idea of the several
Beauties and Blemishes in the Actions or Characters of Great Men. For this
Reason I find an old Law quoted by the famous Monsieur Bail that no Person
below the Dignity of a Roman Knight should presume to write an History.

In England there is scarce any one, who has had a Tincture of Reading or
Study, that is not apt to fancy himself equal to so great a Task; though it is
plain, that many of our Countrymen, who have tampered in History, frequently
show, that they do not understand the very Nature of those Transactions which
they recount. Nay, nothing is more usual than to see every Man, who is versed
in any particular Way of Business, finding fault with several of these Authors,
so far as they treat of Matters within his Sphere.

There is a Race of Men lately sprung up among this sort of Writers, whom one
cannot reflect upon without Indignation as well as Contempt. These are our
Grub-Street Biographers, who watch for the Death of a great Man, like so many
Undertakers, on purpose to make a Penny of him. He is no sooner laid in his
Grave, but he falls into the Hands of an Historian; who, to swell a Volume,
ascribes to him Works which he never wrote, and Actions which he never
performed; celebrates Virtues which he was never famous for, and excuses Faults
which he was never guilty of. They fetch their only authentic Records out of
Doctors Commons; and when they have got a Copy of his last Will and Testament,
they fancy themselves furnished with sufficient Materials for his History. This
might indeed enable them in some Measure to write the History of his Death; but
what can we expect from an Author that undertakes to write the Life of a Great
Man, who is furnished with no other Matters of Fact, besides Legacies; and
instead of being able to tell us what he did, can only tell us what he
bequeathed? This manner of exposing the private Concerns of Families, and
sacrificing the Secrets of the Dead to the Curiosity of the Living, is one of
those licentious Practices which might well deserve the Animadversion of our
Government, when it has Time to contrive Expedients for remedying the many
crying Abuses of the Press. In the mean while, what a poor Idea must Strangers
conceive of those Persons, who have been famous among us in their Generation,
should they form their Notions of them from the Writings of these our
Historiographers! What would our Posterity think of their illustrious
Forefathers, should they only see them in such weak and disadvantageous Lights!
But to our Comfort, Works of this Nature are so short-lived, that they cannot
possibly diminish the Memory of those Patriots which they are not able to
preserve.

The Truth of it is, as the Lives of Great Men cannot be written with any
tolerable Degree of Elegance or Exactness, within a short Space after their
Decease; so neither is it fit that the History of a Person, who has acted among
us in a public Character, should appear, till Envy and Friendship are laid
asleep, and the Prejudice both of his Antagonists and Adherents be, in some
Degree, softened and subdued. There is no question but there are several eminent
Persons in each Party, however they may represent one another at present, who
will have the same Admirers among Posterity, and be equally celebrated by
those, whose Minds will not be distempered by Interest, Passion, or Partiality.
It were happy for us, could we prevail upon our selves to imagine, that one,
who differs from us in Opinion, may possibly be an honest Man; and that we
might do the same Justice to one another, which will be done us hereafter by
those who shall make their Appearance in the World, when this Generation is no
more. But in our present miserable and divided Condition, how just soever a
Man's Pretensions may be to a great or blameless Reputation, he must expect his
Share of Obloquy and Reproach; and, even with regard to his Posthumous
Character, content himself with such a kind of Consideration, as induced the
famous Sir Francis Bacon, after having bequeathed his Soul to God, and his Body
to the Earth, to leave his Fame to foreign Nations; and after some Years, to
his own Country.

No 36. Monday, April 23.
-- Illa se jactet in Aula. Virg.
AMONG all the Paradoxes in Politics which have been advanced by some among
us, there is none so absurd and shocking to the most ordinary Understanding, as
that it is possible for Great Britain to be quietly governed by a Popish
Sovereign. King Henry the Fourth found it impracticable for a Protestant to
reign even in France, notwithstanding the Reformed Religion does not engage a
Prince to the Persecution of any other; and notwithstanding the Authority of
the Sovereign in that Country is more able to support it self, and command the
Obedience of the People, than in any other European Monarchy. We are convinced
by the Experience of our own Times, that our Constitution is not able to bear a
Popish Prince at the Head of it. King James the Second was endowed with many
Royal Virtues, and might have made a Nation of Roman Catholics happy under his
Administration. The Grievances we suffered in his Reign proceeded purely from
his Religion: But they were such as made the whole Body of the Nobility,
Clergy, and Commonalty, rise up as one Man against him, and oblige him to quit
the Throne of his Ancestors. The Truth of it is, we have only the Vices of a
Protestant Prince to fear, and may be made happy by his Virtues: But in a
Popish Prince we have no Chance for our Prosperity; his very Piety obliges him
to our Destruction; and in Proportion as he is more Religious, he becomes more
Insupportable. One would wonder, therefore, to find many who call themselves
Protestants, favoring the Pretensions of a Person who has been bred up in the
utmost Bitterness and Bigotry of the Church of Rome; and who, in all
Probability, within less than a Twelvemonth, would be opposed by those very
Men that are industrious to set him upon the Throne, were it possible for so
wicked and unnatural an Attempt to succeed.

I was some Months ago in a Company, that diverted themselves with the
Declaration which he had then published, and particularly with the Date of it,
In the Fourteenth Year of our Reign. The Company was surprised to find there
was a King in Europe who had Reigned so long and made such a Secret of it. This
gave occasion to one of them, who is now in France, to enquire into the History
of this remarkable Reign, which he has digested into Annals, and lately
transmitted hither for the Perusal of his Friends. (...) have suppressed such
Personal Reflections as are mixed in this short Chronicle, as not being to the
Purpose; and find that the whole History of his Regal Conduct and Exploits may
be comprised in the remaining Part of this Half-Sheet.

The History of the Pretender's Fourteen Years Reign digested into Annals.
ANno Regni 1o. He made Choice of his Ministry, the First of whom was his
Confessor. This was a Person recommended by the Society of Jesuits, who
represented him as one very proper to guide the Conscience of a King, that
hoped to rule over an Island which is not within the Pale of the Church. He
then proceeded to name the President of his Council, his Secretaries of State,
and gave away a very honorable Sine-cure to his principal Favorite, by
constituting him his Lord-High-Treasurer. He likewise signed a dormant
Commission for another to be his High-Admiral, with Orders to produce it
whenever he had Sea-Room for his Employment. Anno Regni 2o. He perfected
himself in the Minuet Step. Anno Regni 3o. He grew half a Foot. Anno Regni 4o.
He wrote a Letter to the Pope, desiring him to be as kind to him as his
Predecessor had been, who was his Godfather. In the same Year he ordered the
Lord-High-Treasurer to pay off the Debts of the Crown, which had been
contracted since his Accession to the Throne; particularly, a Milk-Score of
three Years standing. Anno Regni 5o. He very much improved himself in all
Princely Learning, having read over the Legends of the Saints, with the History
of those several Martyrs in England, who had attempted to blow up a whole
Parliament of Heretics. Anno Regni 6o. He applied himself to the Arts of
Government with more than ordinary Diligence; took a Plan of the Bastile with
his own hand; visited the Galleys; and studied the Edicts of his great Patron
Louis XIV. Anno Regni 7o. Being now grown up to Years of Maturity, he resolved
to seek Adventures; but was very much divided in his Mind, whether he should
make an Expedition to Scotland, or a Pilgrimage to Loretto; being taught to
look upon the latter in a religious Sense, as the Place of his Nativity. At
length he resolved upon his Scotch Expedition; and, as the first Exertion of
that Royal Authority, which he was going to assume, he Knighted himself. After
a short Piece of Errantry upon the Seas, he got safe back to Dunkirk, where he
paid his Devotions to St. Antony, for having delivered him from the Dangers of
the Sea, and Sir George Byng. Anno Regni 8o. He made a Campaign in Flanders,
where, by the Help of a Telescope, he saw the Battle of Oudenarde, and the
Prince of Hanover's Horse shot under him; being posted on a high Tower with two
French Princes of the Blood. Anno Regni 9o. He made a second Campaign in
Flanders; and, upon his Return to the French Court, gained a great Reputation,
by his Performance in a Rigadoon. Anno Regni 10o. The Pope having heard the
Fame of these his Military Achievements, made him the Offer of a Cardinal's
Cap; which he was advised not to accept, by some of his Friends in England.
Anno Regni 11o. He retired to Lorrain, where every Morning he made great Havoc
among the Wild-Fowl, by the Advice, and with the Assistance of his
Privy Council. He is said, this Summer to have shot with his own Hands fifty
Brace of Pheasants, and one wild Pig; to have set thirty Coveys of Partridges;
and to have hunted down forty Brace of Hares; to which he might have added as
many Foxes, had not most of them made their Escape, by running out of his
Friend's Dominions, before his Dogs could finish the Chase. He was particularly
animated to these Diversions by his Ministry, who thought they would not a
little recommend him to the good Opinion and kind Offices of several British
Fox-Hunters. Anno Regni 12o. He made a Visit to the Duke d'Aumont, and passed
for a French Marquis in a Masquerade. Anno Regni 13o. He visited several
Convents, and gathered Subscriptions from all the well-disposed Monks and Nuns,
to whom he communicated his Design of an Attempt upon Great Britain. Anno Regni
14o. He now made great Preparations for the Invasion of England, and got
together vast Stores of Ammunition, consisting of Relics, Gunpowder and
Cannon-Ball. He received from the Pope a very large Contribution, one Moiety in
Money, and the other in Indulgences. An Irish Priest brought him an authentic
Tooth of St. Thomas a Becket, and it is thought, was to have for his Reward,
the Archbishopric of Canterbury. Every Monastery contributed something: One
gave him a thousand Pound; and another as many Masses.
This Year containing farther the Battles which he fought in Scotland, and the
Towns which he took, is so fresh in every one's Memory, that we shall say no
more of it.

No. 37. Friday, April 27.
-- quod si
Frigida curarum fomenta relinquere posses;
Quo te coelestis sapientia duceret, ires.
Hoc opus hoc studium parvi properemus and ampli,
Si patriae volumus, si nobis vivere cari. Hor.

IT is a melancholy Reflection, that our Country, which in times of Popery was
called the Nation of Saints, should now have less appearance of Religion in it,
than any other neighboring State or Kingdom; whether they be such as continue
still immersed in the Errors of the Church of Rome, or such as are recovered
out of them. This is a Truth that is obvious to every one, who has been
conversant in foreign Parts. It was formerly thought dangerous for a young Man
to Travel, lest he should return an Atheist to his native Country: But at
present it is certain, that an Englishman, who has any tolerable Degree of
Reflection, cannot be better awakened to a Sense of Religion in general, than
by observing how the Minds of all Mankind are set upon this important Point;
how every Nation is serious and attentive to the great Business of their Being;
and that in other Countries a Man is not out of the Fashion, who is bold and
open in the Profession and Practice of all Christian Duties.

This Decay of Piety is by no Means to be imputed to the Reformation, which in
its first Establishment produced its proper Fruits, and distinguished the whole
Age with shining Instances of Virtue and Morality. If we would trace out the
Original of that flagrant and avowed Impiety, which has prevailed among us for
some Years, we should find that it owes its Rise to that opposite Extreme of
Cant and Hypocrisy, which had taken Possession of the People's Minds in the
Times of the great Rebellion, and of the Usurpation that succeeded it. The
Practices of these Men, under the Covert of a feigned Zeal, made even the
Appearances of sincere Devotion ridiculous and unpopular. The Raillery of the
Wits and Courtiers, in King Charles the Second's Reign, upon every thing which
they then called Precise, was carried to so great an Extravagance, that it
almost put Christianity out of Countenance. The Ridicule grew so strong and
licentious, that from this time we may date that remarkable Turn in the
Behavior of our fashionable Englishmen, that makes them Shame-faced in the
Exercise of those Duties which they were sent into the World to perform.

The late Cry of the Church has been an Artifice of the same Kind with that
made use of by the Hypocrites of the last Age, and has had as fatal an
Influence upon Religion. If a Man would but seriously consider how much greater
Comfort he would receive in the last Moments of his Life from a Reflection that
he has made one virtuous Man, than that he has made a thousand Tories, we
should not see the Zeal of so many Good Men turned off from its proper End, and
employed in making such a kind of Converts. What Satisfaction will it be to an
Immoral Man, at such a Time, to think he is a good Whig! Or to one that is
conscious of Sedition, Perjury, or Rebellion, that he dies with the Reputation
of a High-Churchman!

But to consider how this Cry of the Church has corrupted the Morals of both
Parties. Those, who are the loudest in it, regard themselves rather as a
political, than a religious Communion; and are held together rather by
State-Notions, than by Articles of Faith. This fills the Minds of weak Men, who
fall into the Snare, with groundless Fears and Apprehensions, unspeakable Rage
toward their Fellow Subjects, wrong Ideas of Persons whom they are not
acquainted with, and uncharitable Interpretations of those Actions of which
they are not competent Judges. It instills into their Minds the utmost
Virulence and Bitterness, instead of that Charity, which is the Perfection and
Ornament of Religion, and the most indispensable and necessary Means for
attaining the End of it. In a Word, among these mistaken Zealots, it sanctifies
Cruelty and Injustice, Riots and Treason.

The Effects which this Cry of the Church has had on the other Party, are no
less manifest and deplorable. They see themselves unjustly aspersed by it, and
vindicate themselves in Terms no less opprobrious, than those by which they are
attacked. Their Indignation and Resentment rises in Proportion to the Malice of
their Adversaries. The unthinking Part of them are apt to contract an
unreasonable Aversion even to that Ecclesiastical Constitution to which they
are represented as Enemies; and not only to particular Persons, but to that
Order of Men in general, which will be always held Sacred and Honorable, so
long as there is Reason and Religion in the World.

I might mention many other Corruptions common to both Parties, which naturally
flow from this Source; and might easily show, upon a full Display of them, that
this Clamor, which pretends to be raised for the Safety of Religion, has
almost worn out the very Appearance of it; and rendered us not only the most
divided, but the most immoral People upon the Face of the Earth.

When our Nation is overflowed with such a Deluge of Impiety, it must be a
great Pleasure to find any Expedient take Place, that has a Tendency to recover
it out of so dismal a Condition. This is one great Reason why an honest Man may
rejoice to see an Act so near taking effect, for making Elections of Members to
serve in Parliament less frequent. I find my self prevented by other Writings
(which have considered the Act now depending, in this particular Light) from
expatiating upon this Subject. I shall only mention two short Pieces which I
have been just now reading, under the following Titles, Arguments about the
Alteration of the Triennial Elections of Parliament: And, The Alteration in the
Triennial Act considered.

The Reasons for this Law, as it is necessary for settling His Majesty in his
Throne; for extinguishing the Spirit of Rebellion; for procuring foreign
Alliances; and other Advantages of the like Nature; carry a great Weight with
them. But I am particularly pleased with it, as it may compose our unnatural
Feuds and Animosities, revive an honest Spirit of Industry in the Nation, and
cut off frequent Occasions of brutal Rage and Intemperance. In short, as it
will make us not only a more safe, a more flourishing, and a more happy, but
also a more Virtuous People.

No. 38. Monday April 30.
-- Longum, formosa, Vale -- Virg.
IT is the Ambition of the Male-Part of the World to make themselves Esteemed,
and of the Female to make themselves Beloved. As this is the last Paper which I
shall address to my Fair Readers; I cannot perhaps oblige them more, than by
leaving them as a kind of Legacy a certain Secret which seldom fails of
procuring this Affection, which they are naturally formed both to Desire and to
Obtain. This Nostrum is comprised in the following Sentence of Seneca, which I
shall translate for the Service of my Countrey-women. Ego tibi monstrabo
Amatorium sine medicamento, sine herba, sine ullius Veneficae carmine: si vis
Amari, Ama. I will discover to you a Philter that has neither Drug nor Simple,
nor Enchantment in it. Love, if you would raise Love. If there be any Truth in
this Discovery, and this be such a Specific as the Author pretends, there is
nothing which makes the Sex more unamiable than Party-Rage. The finest Woman,
in a Transport of Fury, loses the Use of her Face. Instead of charming her
Beholders, she frights both Friend and Foe. The latter can never be smitten by
so bitter an Enemy, nor the former captivated by a Nymph, who, upon Occasion,
can be so very Angry. The most endearing of our beautiful Fellow Subjects, are
those whose Minds are the least imbittered with the Passions and Prejudices of
either Side; and who discover the native Sweetness of the Sex in every part of
their Conversation and Behavior. A lovely Woman, who thus flourishes in her
Innocence and Good Humor, amidst that mutual Spite and Rancour which prevails
among her exasperated Sisterhood, appears more amiable by the Singularity of
her Character; and may be compared, with Solomon's Bride, to a Lilly among
Thorns.

A Stateswoman is as ridiculous a Creature as a Cott-Quean. Each of the Sexes
should keep within its particular Bounds, and content themselves to excel
within their respective Districts. When Venus complained to Jupiter of the
wound which she had received in Battle, the Father of the Gods smiled upon her,
and put her in mind, that instead of mixing in a War, which was not her
Business, she should have been officiating in her proper Ministry, and carrying
on the Delights of Marriage. The Delicacy of several modern Critics has been
offended with Homer's Billingsgate Warriors; but a scolding Hero is, at the
worst, a more tolerable Character than a Bully in Petticoats. To which we may
add, that the keenest Satyrist, among the Ancients, looked upon nothing as a
more proper Subject of Raillery and Invective, than a Female Gladiator.

I am the more disposed to take into Consideration these Ladies of Fire and
Politics, because it would be very monstrous to see Feuds and Animosities kept
up among the soft Sex, when they are in so hopeful a Way of being composed
among the Men, by the Septennial Bill, which is now ready for the Royal Assent.
As this is likely to produce a Cessation of Arms, till the Expiration of the
present Parliament, among one half of our Island, it is very reasonable that
the more beautiful Moiety of His Majesty's Subjects should establish a Truce
among themselves for the same Term of Years. Or rather it were to be wished,
that they would summon together a kind of Senate, or Parliament of the fairest
and wisest of our Sister Subjects, in order to enact a perpetual Neutrality
among the Sex. They might at least appoint something like a Committee, chosen
from among the Ladies residing in London and Westminster, in order to prepare a
Bill to be laid before the Assembly upon the first Opportunity of their
Meeting. The Regulation might be as follows:

'That a Committee of Toasts be forthwith appointed; to consider the present
State of the Sex in the British Nation.

'That this Committee do meet at the House of every respective Member of it on
her Visiting-Day; and that every one who comes (...) it shall have a Vote, and
a Dish of Tea

'That the Committee be empowered to (...) for Billets-doux, Libels, Lampoons,
Li^^, Toasts, or any other the like Papers and R^cords.

'That it be an Instruction to the said Committee, to consider or proper Ways
and M^thods to reclaim the obstinately Opprobrious and Virulent; and how to
make the Ducking-Stool more useful.'

Being always willing to contribute my Assistances to my Countrey-women, I
would propose a Preamble, setting forth, 'That the late Civil War among the Sex
has tended very much to the Lessening of that ancient and undoubted Authority,
which they have claimed over the Male Part of the Island; to the Ruin of good
Houswifery; and to the Betraying of many important Secrets: That it has
produced much Bitterness of Speech, many sharp and violent Contests, and a
great Effusion of Citron-Water: That it has raised Animosities in their Hearts,
and Heats in their Faces: That it has broke out in their Ribbons, and caused
unspeakable Confusions in their Dress: And above all, That it has introduced a
certain Frown into the Features, and a Soureness into the Air of our British
Ladies, to the great Damage of their Charms, and visible Decay of the National
Beauty.'

As for the enacting Part of the Bill, it may (...) of many Particulars, which
will naturally arise from the Debates of the Tea-Table; and must, therefore, be
left to the Discretion and Experience of the Committee. Perhaps it might not be
amiss to enact, among other Things,

'That the Discoursing on Politics shall be (...) upon as dull as Talking on
the Wea^^^.

'That if any Man troubles a Female Assembly with Parliament-News, he shall be
marked out as a Blockhead, or an Incendiary.

'That no Woman shall henceforth presume to stick a Patch upon her Forehead,
unless it be in the very middle, that is, in the neutral part of it.

'That all Fans and Snuff-Boxes, of what Principles soever, shall be called in:
And that Orders be given to Motteux and Mathers, to deliver out, in exchange
for them, such as have no Tincture of Party in them.

'That when any Lady bespeaks a Play, she shall take effectual Care, that the
Audience be pretty equally checquered with Whigs and Tories.

'That no Woman of any Party presume to influence the Legislature.

'That there be a general Amnesty and Oblivion of all former Hostilities and
Distinctions, all public and private Failings on either side: And that every
one who comes into this Neutrality within the Space of Weeks, shall be allowed
an Ell extraordinary, above the present Standard, in the Circumference of her
Petticoat.

'Provided always nevertheless, That nothing herein contained shall extend, or
be construed to extend, to any Person or Persons, Inhabiting and Practicing
within the Hundreds of Drury, or to any other of that Society in what Part
soever of the Nation in like manner Practicing and Residing; who are still at
liberty to Rail, Calumniate, Scold, Frown and Pout, as in afore-times, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.'

No. 39. Friday May 4. 1716.
Prodesse quam Conspici.
IT often happens, that extirpating the Love of Glory, which is observed to
take the deepest Root in noble Minds, tears up several Virtues with it; and
that suppressing the Desire of Fame, is apt to reduce Men to a State of
Indolence and Supineness. But when, without any Incentive of Vanity, a Person
of great Abilities is zealous for the Good of Mankind; and as solicitous for
the Concealment, as the Performance of illustrious Actions; we may be sure that
he has something more than ordinary in his Composition, and has a Heart filled
with Goodness and Magnanimity.

There is not perhaps, in all History, a greater Instance of this Temper of
Mind, than what appeared in that excellent Person, whose Motto I have placed at
the Head of this Paper. He had worn himself out in his Application to such
Studies as made him useful or ornamental to the World, in concerting Schemes
for the Welfare of his Country, and in prosecuting such Measures as were
necessary for making those Schemes effectual: But all this was done with a View
to the Public Good that should rise out of these generous Endeavors, and not
to the Fame which should accrue to himself. Let the Reputation of the Action
fall where it would; so his Country reaped the Benefit of it, he was
satisfied. As this Turn of Mind threw off in a great Measure the Oppositions of
Envy and Competition, it enabled him to gain the most Vain and Impracticable
into his Designs, and to bring about several great Events for the Safety and
Advantage of the Public, which must have died in their Birth, had he been as
desirous of appearing Beneficial to Mankind, as of being so.

As he was admitted into the secret and most retired Thoughts and Counsels of
his Royal Master King William, a great Share in the Plan of the Protestant
Succession is universally ascribed to him. And if he did not entirely project
the Union of the two Kingdoms, and the Bill of Regency, which seem to have been
the only Methods in Humane Policy, for securing to us so inestimable a
Blessing, there is none who will deny him to have been the chief Conductor in
both these glorious Works. For Posterity are obliged to allow him that Praise
after his Death, which he industriously declined while he was Living. His Life
indeed seems to have been prolonged beyond its Natural Term, under those
Indispositions which hung upon the latter part of it, that he might have the
Satisfaction of seeing the happy Settlement take Place, which he had proposed
to himself as the principal End of all his public Labors. Nor was it a small
Addition to his Happiness, that by this Means he saw those who had been always
his most intimate Friends, and who had concerted with him such Measures for the
Guaranty of the Protestant Succession, as drew upon them the Displeasure of Men
who were averse to it, advanced to the highest Posts of Trust and Honor under
His present Majesty. I believe there are none of these Patriots, who will think
it a Derogation from their Merit to have it said, that they received many
Lights and Advantages from their Intimacy with my Lord Summers: Who had such a
general Knowledge of Affairs, and so tender a Concern for his Friends, that
whatever Station they were in, they usually applied to him for his Advice in
every Perplexity of Business, and in Affairs of the greatest Difficulty.

His Life, was in every Part of it, set off with that graceful Modesty and
Reserve, which made his Virtues more beautiful, the more they were cast in such
agreeable Shades.

His Religion was sincere, not ostentatious; and such as inspired him with an
universal Benevolence toward all his Fellow Subjects, not with Bitterness
against any Part of them. He showed his firm Adherence to it as modeled by our
national Constitution, and was constant to its Offices of Devotion, both in
Public and in his Family. He appeared a Champion for it with great Reputation
in the Cause of the seven Bishops, at a Time when the Church was Really in
Danger. To which we may add, that he held a strict Friendship and
Correspondence with the Great Archbishop Tillotson, being acted by the same
Spirit of Candor and Moderation; and moved rather with Pity than Indignation
toward the Persons of those, who differed from him in the unessential Parts of
Christianity.

His great Humanity appeared in the minutest Circumstances of his Conversation.
You found it in the Benevolence of his Aspect, the Complacency of his
Behavior, and the Tone of his Voice. His great Application to the severer
Studies of the Law, had not infected his Temper with any thing positive or
litigious. He did not know what it was to wrangle on indifferent Points, to
triumph in the Superiority of his Understanding, or to be Supercilious on the
Side of Truth. He joined the greatest Delicacy of Good-Breeding to the greatest
Strength of Reason. By approving the Sentiments of a Person, with whom he
conversed, in such Particulars as were just, he won him over from those Points
in which he was mistaken; and had so agreeable a Way of conveying Knowledge,
that whoever conferred with him grew the wiser, without perceiving that he had
been instructed. We may probably ascribe to this masterly and engaging Manner
of Conversation, the great Esteem which he had gained with the late Queen,
while she pursued those Measures which had carried the British Nation to the
highest Pitch of Glory; notwithstanding she had entertained many unreasonable
Prejudices against him, before she was acquainted with his personal Worth and
Behavior.

As in his political Capacity we have before seen how much he contributed to
the Establishment of the Protestant Interest, and the Good of his Native
Country, he was always true to these great Ends. His Character was uniform and
consistent with itself, and his whole Conduct of a Piece. His Principles were
founded in Reason, and supported by Virtue; and therefore did not lie at the
Mercy of Ambition, Avarice, or Resentment. His Notions were no less steady and
unshaken, than just and upright. In a Word, he concluded his Course among the
same well-chosen Friendships and Alliances, with which he began it.

This Great Man was not more Conspicuous as a Patriot and a Statesman, than as
a Person of universal Knowledge and Learning. As by dividing his Time between
the public Scenes of Business, and the private Retirements of Life, he took
care to keep up both the Great and Good Man; so by the same Means he
accomplished himself not only in the Knowledge of Men and Things, but in the
Skill of the most refined Arts and Sciences. That unwearied Diligence, which
followed him through all the Stages of his Life, gave him such a thorough
Insight into the Laws of the Land, that he passed for one of the greatest
Masters of his Profession, at his first Appearance in it. Though he made a
regular Progress through the several Honors of the Long Robe, he was always
looked upon as one who deserved a Superior Station to that he was possessed of;
till he arrived at the highest Dignity to which those Studies could advance him.

He enjoyed in the highest Perfection two Talents, which do not often meet in
the same Person, the greatest Strength of good Sense, and the most exquisite
Taste of Politeness. Without the first, Learning is but an Encumbrance; and
without the last, is ungraceful. My Lord Summers was Master of these two
Qualifications in so eminent a Degree, that all the Parts of Knowledge appeared
in him with such an additional Strength and Beauty, as they want in the
Possession of others. If he delivered his Opinion of a Piece of Poetry, a
Statue, or a Picture, there was something so just and delicate in his
Observations, as naturally produced Pleasure and Assent in those who heard him.

His Solidity and Elegance, improved by the reading of the finest Authors both
of the Learned and Modern Languages, discovered itself in all his Productions.
His Oratory was masculine and persuasive, free from every thing trivial and
affected. His Style in Writing was chaste and pure, but at the same time full
of Spirit and Politeness; and fit to convey the most intricate Business to the
Understanding of the Reader, with the utmost Clearness and Perspicuity. And
here it is to be lamented, that this extraordinary Person, out of his natural
Aversion to Vainglory, wrote several Pieces as well as performed several
Actions, which he did not assume the Honor of: Though at the same time so many
Works of this Nature have appeared, which every one has ascribed to him, that I
believe no Author of the greatest Eminence would deny my Lord Summers to have
been the best Writer of the Age in which he lived.

This noble Lord, for the great Extent of his Knowledge and Capacity, has been
often compared with the Lord Verulam, who had also been Chancellor of England.
But the Conduct of these two extraordinary Persons, under the same
Circumstances, was vastly different. They were both Impeached by a House of
Commons. One of them, as he had given just Occasion for it, sunk under it; and
was reduced to such an abject Submission, as very much diminished the Luster of
so exalted a Character: But my Lord Summers was too well fortified in his
Integrity to fear the Impotence of an Attempt upon his Reputation; and though
his Accusers would gladly have dropped their Impeachment, he was instant with
them for the Prosecution of it, and would not let that Matter rest till it was
brought to an Issue. For the same Virtue and Greatness of Mind which gave him a
Disregard of Fame, made him impatient of an undeserved Reproach.

There is no question but this wonderful Man will make one of the most
distinguished Figures in the History of the present Age; but we cannot expect
that his Merit will shine out in its proper Light, since he wrote many things
which are not published in his Name; was at the Bottom of many excellent
Counsels, in which he did not appear; did Offices of Friendship to many
Persons, who knew not from whom they were derived; and performed great Services
to his Country, the Glory of which was transferred to others: In short, since
he made it his Endeavor rather to do worthy Actions than to gain an
illustrious Character.

No. 40. Monday, May 7.
Urit enim fulgore suo qui praegravat arts
Infra se positas: extinctus amabitur idem. Hor.

IT requires no small Degree of Resolution, to be an Author in a Country so
Facetious and Satirical as this of Great Britain. Such a one raises a kind of
Alarm among his Fellow Subjects, and by pretending to distinguish himself from
the Herd, becomes a Mark of public Censure, and sometimes a standing Object of
Raillery and Ridicule. Writing is indeed a Provocation to the Envious, and an
Affront to the Ignorant. How often do we see a Person, whose Intentions are
visibly to do Good by the Works which he publishes, treated in as scurrilous a
Manner, as if he were an Enemy to Mankind? All the little Scramblers after Fame
fall upon him, publish every Blot in his Life, depend upon Hearsay to defame
him, and have recourse to their own Invention, rather than suffer him to erect
himself into an Author with Impunity. Even those who write on the most
indifferent Subjects, and are conversant only in Works of Taste, are looked
upon as Men that make a kind of Insult upon Society, and ought to be humbled as
Disturbers of the public Tranquillity. Not only the Dull and the Malicious,
which make a formidable Party in our Island, but the whole Fraternity of
Writers rise up in Arms against every new Intruder into the World of Fame; and
a thousand to one, before they have done, prove him not only to be a Fool, but
a Knave. Successful Authors do what they can to exclude a Competitor, while the
Unsuccessful with as much Eagerness lay in their Claim to him as a Brother.
This natural Antipathy to a Man who breaks his Ranks, and endeavors to
signalize his Parts in the World, has very probably hindered many Persons from
making their Appearance in Print, who might have enriched our Country with
better Productions in all kinds than any that are now extant. The Truth of it
is, the active Part of Mankind, as they do most for the Good of their
Contemporaries, very deservedly gain the greatest Share in their Applauses;
whilst Men of Speculative Endowments, who employ their Talents in Writing, as
they may equally benefit or amuse succeeding Ages, have generally the greatest
Share in the Admiration of Posterity. Both good and bad Writers may receive
great Satisfaction from the Prospects of Futurity; as in After-ages the former
will be remembered and the latter forgotten.

Among all Sets of Authors, there are none who draw upon themselves more
Displeasure, than those who deal in political Matters, which indeed is very
often too justly incurred; considering that Spirit of Rancour and Virulence,
with which Works of this Nature generally abound. These are not only regarded
as Authors, but as Partisans, and are sure to exasperate at least one half of
their Readers. Other Writers offend only the Stupid or Jealous among their
Countrymen; but these, let their Cause be never so Just, must expect to
irritate a supernumerary Party of the self-interested, prejudiced, and
ambitious. They may however comfort themselves with considering, that if they
gain any unjust Reproach from one Side, they generally acquire more Praise than
they deserve from the other: and that Writings of this kind, if conducted with
Candor and Impartiality, have a more particular Tendency to the Good of their
Country, and of the present Age, than any other Compositions whatsoever.

To consider an Author farther, as the Subject of Obloquy and Detraction. We
may observe with what Pleasure a Work is received by the invidious Part of
Mankind, in which a Writer falls short of himself, and does not answer the
Character which he has acquired by his former Productions. It is a fine Simile
in one of Mr. Congreve's Prologues, which compares a Writer to a Buttering
Gamester, that stakes all his Winnings upon every Cast: So that if he loses the
last Throw, he is sure to be undone. It would be well for all Authors, if, like
that Gentleman, they knew when to give over, and to desist from any farther
Pursuits after Fame, whilst they are in the full Possession of it. On the other
Hand there is not a more melancholy Object in the Learned World, than a Man who
has written himself down. As the Public is more disposed to Censure than to
Praise, his Readers will ridicule him for his last Works, when they have forgot
to applaud those which preceded them. In this Case, where a Man has lost his
Spirit by old Age and Infirmity, one could wish that his Friends and Relations
would keep him from the use of Pen, Ink and Paper, if he is not to be reclaimed
by any other Methods.

The Author indeed often grows old before the Man, especially if he treats on
Subjects of Invention, or such as arise from Reflections upon Human Nature: For
in this case, neither his own Strength of Mind, nor those Parts of Life which
are commonly unobserved, will furnish him with sufficient Materials to be at
the same Time both pleasing and voluminous. We find even in the outward Dress
of Poetry, that Men, who write much without taking Breath, very often return to
the same Phrases and Forms of Expression, as well as to the same Manner of
Thinking. Authors, who have thus drawn off the Spirit of their Thoughts, should
lie still for some Time, till their Minds have gathered fresh Strength, and by
Reading, Reflection and Conversation, laid in a new Stock of Elegancies,
Sentiments, and Images of Nature. The Soil, that is worn with too frequent
Culture, must lie fallow for a while, till it has recruited its exhausted
Salts, and again enriched itself by the Ventilations of the Air, the Dews of
Heaven, and the kindly Influences of the Sun.

For my own Part, notwithstanding this general Malevolence toward those who
communicate their Thoughts in Print, I cannot but look with a friendly Regard
on such as do it, provided there is no Tendency in their Writings to Vice and
Profaneness. If the Thoughts of such Authors have nothing in them, they at
least do no harm, and show an honest Industry and a good Intention in the
Composer. If they teach me any thing I did not know before, I cannot but look
upon my self as obliged to the Writer, and consider him as my particular
Benefactor, if he conveys to me one of the greatest Gifts that is in the Power
of Man to bestow, an Improvement of my Understanding, an innocent Amusement, or
an Incentive to some moral Virtue. Were not Men of Abilities thus
communicative, their Wisdom would be in a great Measure useless, and their
Experience uninstructive. There would be no Business in Solitude, nor proper
Relaxations in Business. By these Assistances, the retired Man lives in the
World, if not above it; Passion is composed; Thought hindered from being barren;
and the Mind from preying upon itself. That Esteem, indeed, which is paid to
good Writers by their Posterity, sufficiently shows the Merit of Persons who
are thus employed. Who does not now more admire Cicero as an Author, than as a
Consul of Rome! And does not oftener talk of the celebrated Writers of our own
Country, who lived in former Ages, than of any other particular Persons among
their Contemporaries and Fellow Subjects!

When I consider my self as a British Freeholder, I am in a particular Manner
pleased with the Labors of those who have improved our Language with the
Translation of old Latin and Greek Authors; and by that Means let us into the
Knowledge of what passed in the famous Governments of Greece and Rome. We have
already most of their Historians in our own Tongue: And what is still more for
the Honor of our Language, it has been taught to express with Elegance the
Greatest of their Poets in each Nation. The illiterate among our Countrymen,
may learn to judge from Dryden's Virgil of the most perfect Epic Performance:
And those Parts of Homer, which have already been published by Mr. Pope, give
us reason to think that the Iliad will appear in English with as little
Disadvantage to that immortal Poem.

There is another Author, whom I have long wished to see well translated into
English, as his Work is filled with a Spirit of Liberty, and more directly
tends to raise Sentiments of Honor and Virtue in his Reader, than any of the
poetical Writings of Antiquity. I mean the Pharsalia of Lucan. This is the only
Author of Consideration among the Latin Poets, who was not explained for the
Use of the Dauphin, for a very obvious Reason; because the whole Pharsalia
would have been no less than a Satyr upon the French Form of Government. The
Translation of this Author is now in the Hands of Mr. Row, who has already
given the World some admirable Specimens of it; and not only kept up the Fire
of the Original, but delivered the Sentiments with greater Perspicuity, and in
a finer Turn of Phrase and Verse.

As Undertakings of so difficult a Nature require the greatest Encouragements,
one cannot but rejoice to see those general Subscriptions which have been made
to them; especially since if the two Works last mentioned are not finished by
those masterly Hands, which are now employed in them, we may despair of seeing
them attempted by others.

No. 41. Friday, May 11.
Dissentientis conditionibus
Foedis, et exemplo trahenti
Perniciem veniens in aevum. Hor.

AS the Care of our National Commerce redounds more to the Riches and
Prosperity of the Public, than any other Act of Government, it is pity that we
do not see the State of it marked out in every particular Reign with greater
Distinction and Accuracy, than what is usual among our English Historians. We
may however observe in general, that the best and wisest of our Monarchs have
not been less industrious to extend their Trade, than their Dominions; as it
manifestly turns in a much higher Degree to the Welfare of the People, if not
to the Glory of the Sovereign.

The first of our Kings who carried our Commerce, and consequently our
Navigation to a very great Height, was Edward the Third. This victorious
Prince, by his many excellent Laws for the Encouragement of Trade, enabled his
Subjects to support him in his many glorious Wars upon the Continent, and
turned the Scale so much in Favor of our English Merchandise, that, by a
Balance of Trade taken in his Time, the Exported Commodities amounted to Two
Hundred Ninety Four Thousand Pounds, and the Imported but to Thirty Eight
Thousand.

Those of his Successors, under whose Regulations our Trade flourished most,
were Henry the Seventh, and Queen Elizabeth. As the first of these was for his
great Wisdom very often styled the English Solomon, he followed the Example of
that wise King in nothing more, than by advancing the Traffic of his People.
By this Means he reconciled to him the Minds of his Subjects, strengthened
himself in their Affections, improved very much the Navigation of the Kingdom,
and repelled the frequent Attempts of his Enemies

As for Queen Elizabeth, she had always the Trade of her Kingdom very much at
Heart, and we may observe the Effects of it through the whole Course of her
Reign, in the Love and Obedience of her People, as well as in the Defeats and
Disappointments of her Enemies.

It is with great Pleasure that we see our present Sovereign applying his
Thoughts so successfully to the Advancement of our Traffic and considering
himself as the King of a Trading Island. His Majesty has already gained very
considerable Advantages for his People and is still employed in concerting
Schemes and forming Treaties, for retrieving and enlarging our Privileges in
the World of Commerce.

I shall only in this Paper take Notice of the Treaty concluded at Madrid on
the 14th of December last, 1715; and by comparing it with that concluded at
Utrecht on the 9th of December, 1713, show several particulars in which the
Treaty made with his present Majesty is more advantageous to Great Britain,
than that which was made in the last Reign; after this general Observation,
that it is equally surprising how so bad a Treaty came to be made at the end of
a glorious and successful War; and how so good a One has been obtained in the
Beginning of a Reign disturbed by such intestine Commotions. But we may learn
from hence, that the Wisdom of a Sovereign, and the Integrity of his Ministers,
are more necessary for bringing about Works of such Consequence for the public
Good, than any Juncture of Time, or any other the most favorable Circumstance.

We must here premise that by the Treaty concluded at Madrid in 1667, the
Duties of Importation payable upon the Manufactures and Products of Great
Britain, amounted upon the established Valuation in the Spanish Book of Rates,
(after the Deduction of the Gratia's). In Andalusia to 11 per Cent. in
Valentia, to 5 per Cent. and in Catalonia to about 7 per Cent. or less; and
consequently upon the whole aforesaid Trade, those Duties could not exceed 10
per Cent. in a medium.

After this short Account of the State of our Trade with Spain, before the
Treaty of Utrecht under the late Queen, we must observe, that by the
explanatory Articles of this last mentioned Treaty, the Duties of Importation
upon the Products and Manufactures of Great Britain were augmented in Andalusia
to 27 per Cent at a Medium.

But by the late Treaty made with His present Majesty at Madrid, the said
Duties are again reduced according to the aforesaid Treaty of 1667 And the
Deduction of the Gratia's is established as an inviolable Law, whereas, before,
the Gratia's of the Farmers particularly were altogether precarious, and
depended entirely upon Courtesy.

That the common Reader may understand the Nature of these Gratia's, he must
know that when the King of Spain had laid higher Duties upon our English Goods,
than what the Merchants were able or willing to comply with, he used to abate a
certain Part: which Indulgence, or Abatement, went under the Name of a Gratia.
But when he had Farmed out these his Customs to several of his Subjects, the
Farmers, in order to draw more Merchandise to their respective Ports, and
thereby to increase their own particular Profits, used to make new Abatements,
or Gratia's to the British Merchants, endeavoring sometimes to outvy one
another in such Indulgences, and by that Means to get a greater Proportion of
Custom into their own Hands.

But to proceed: The Duties on Exportation may be computed to be raised by the
Utrecht Treaty, near as much as the foresaid Duties of Importation: Whereas, by
the Treaty made with His present Majesty, they are reduced to their ancient
Standard.

Complaint having been made, that the Spaniards after the Suspension of Arms
had taken several New England and other British Ships gathering Salt at the
Island of Tertuga, a very full and just Report concerning that Affair was laid
before Her late Majesty, of which I shall give the Reader the following
Extract: 'Your Majesty's Subjects have, from the first Settlement of the
Continent of America had a free Access to this Island; and have without
Interruptions, unless in Time of War, used to take what Salt they pleased
there: And we have Proofs of that Usage for above 50 Years, as appears by
Certificates of Persons who have been employed in that Trade.

'It does not appear, upon the strictest Enquiry, that the Spaniards ever
inhabited or settled on the said Island; nor is it probable they ever did, it
being all either barren Rock, or dry Sand, and having no fresh Water or
Provisions in it.

'We take Leave to lay before Your Majesty, the Consequence of Your Majesty's
Subjects being prohibited to fetch Salt at Tertuga; which will in part appear
from the Number of Ships using that Trade, being, as we are informed, one Year
with another about 100 Sail.

'The Salt carried from thence to New England is used chiefly for curing of
Fish, which is either Cod, Scale-Fish, or Mackrel: The former of which is the
principal Branch of the Returns made from the Continent to Great Britain by Way
of Spain, Portugal, and the Straits, for the Woollen and other Goods sent from
this Kingdom thither. Besides which, the Scale-Fish and Mackrel are of such
Consequence, that the Sugar Islands cannot subsist without them, their Negroes
being chiefly supported by this Fish: So that if they were not supplied
therewith from New England, (which they cannot be, if Your Majesty's Subjects
are prohibited from getting Salt at Tertuga) they would not be able to carry on
their Sugar Works. This has been confirmed to us by several considerable
Planters concerned in those Parts.

'Upon the whole, Your Majesty's Subjects having enjoyed an uninterrupted Usage
of gathering Salt at Tertuga ever since the first Settlement of the Continent
as aforesaid, we humbly submit to Your Majesty the Consequence of preserving
that Usage and Right upon which the Trade of Your Majesty's Plantations so much
depends.'



Notwithstanding it appears from what is above-written, that our Sugar-Islands
were like to suffer considerably for want of Fish from New England, no Care was
taken to have this Matter remedied by the Explanatory Articles, which were
posterior to the above mentioned Report.

However in the Third Article of the Treaty made with His present Majesty, this
Business is fully settled to our Advantage.

The British Merchants having had several Hardships put upon them at Bilboa,
which occasioned the Decay of our Trade at that Place the said Merchants did
make and execute in the Year 1700, a Treaty of Privileges with the Magistrates
and Inhabitants of St. Ander, very much to the Advantage of this Kingdom, in
order to their removing and settling there: The Effect of which was prevented
by the Death of King Charles the Second of Spain, and the War which soon after
ensued. This Matter it seems, wa^ slighted or neglected by the Managers of the
Utrecht Treaty: For, by the 14th Article of tha^ Treaty, there is only a
Liberty given to the Bri+ tish Subjects to settle and dwell at St. Ander, upon
the Terms of the 9th and 30th Articles of the Treaty of 1667, which are
general. But no Regard was had to the forementioned Treaty of Privileges in
1700; whereas by the Second Article of the Treaty now made with His present
Majesty, the forementioned Treaty of Privileges with St. Ander is confirmed and
ratified.

Another considerable Advantage is, that the French, by the Treaty made with
His present Majesty, are to pay the same Duties at the Dry-Ports, through which
they pass by Land-Cartiage, as we pay upon Importation or Exportation by Sea:
Which was not provided for by the Utrecht Treaty.

By the Cedula's annexed to the Treaty of 1667, the valuable Privilege of
having Judge-Conservators (appointed to make a more speedy and les expensive
Determination of all Controversies arising in Trade) was fully established. But
by the 15th Article of Utrecht that Privilege was in effect given up. For it is
therein only stipulated, That in case any other Nation have that Privilege, we
shall in like Manner enjoy it. But by the 5th Article of the Treaty now made
with his present Majesty it is stipulated, that We shall enjoy all the Rights,
Privileges, Franchises, Exemptions, and Immunities whatsoever, which we enjoyed
by virtue of the Royal Cedula's or Ordinances by the Treaty of 1667. So that
hereby the Privilege of Judge-Conservators is again confirmed to us.

As nothing but the Reputation of His Majesty in foreign Countries, and of his
fixed Purposes to pursue the real Good of His Kingdoms, could bring about
Treaties of this Nature: So it is impossible to reflect with Patience on the
Folly and Ingratitude of those Men, who labor to disturb Him in the midst of
these His Royal Cares, and to misrepresent His generous Endeavors for the Good
of His People.

No. 42. Monday, May 14.
O Fortunatos Mercatores! -- Hor.
SEveral Authors have written on the Advantage of Trade in general; which is
indeed so copious a Subject, that as it is impossible to exhaust it in a short
Discourse, so it is very difficult to observe any thing new upon it. I shall,
therefore, only consider Trade in this Paper, as it is absolutely necessary and
essential to the Safety, Strength, and Prosperity of our own Nation.

In the first Place, as we are an Island accommodated on all Sides with
convenient Ports, and encompassed with navigable Seas, we should be
inexcusable, if we did not make these Blessings of Providence and Advantages of
Nature turn to their proper Account. The most celebrated Merchants in the
World, and those who make the greatest Figure in Antiquity, were situated in
the little Island of Tire, which, by the prodigious Increase of its Wealth and
Strength at Sea, did very much influence the most considerable Kingdoms and
Empires on the neighboring Continent, and gave birth to the Carthaginians, who
afterward exceeded all other Nations in Naval Power. The old Tire was indeed
seated on the Continent, from whence the Inhabitants, after having been
besieged by the Great King of Assyria for the Space of thirteen Years, withdrew
themselves and their Effects into the Island of Tire; where, by the Benefit of
such a Situation, a Trading People were enabled to hold out for many Ages
against the Attempts of their Enemies, and became the Merchants of the World.

Further; as an Island, we are accessible on every Side, and exposed to
perpetual Invasions; against which it is impossible to fortify ourselves
sufficiently, without such a Power at Sea, as is not to be kept up, but by a
People who flourish in Commerce. To which we must add, that our inland Towns
being destitute of Fortifications, it is our indispensable Concern to preserve
this our Naval Strength, which is as a general Bulwark to the British Nation.

Besides; as an Island, it has not been thought agreeable to the true British
Policy to make Acquisitions upon the Continent. In lieu, therefore, of such an
Increase of Dominion, it is our Business to extend to the utmost our Trade and
Navigation. By this means, we reap the Advantages of Conquest, without Violence
or Injustice; we not only strengthen ourselves, but gain the Wealth of our
Neighbors in an honest Way; and, without any Act of Hostility, lay the several
Nations of the World under a kind of Contribution.

Secondly, Trade is fitted to the Nature of our Country, as it abounds with a
great Profusion of Commodities of its own Growth very convenient for other
Countries, and is naturally ^^^titute of many Things suited to the Exigences,
Ornaments and Pleasures of Life, which may be fetched from foreign Parts. But,
that which is more particularly to be remarked, our British Products are of
such Kinds and Quantities, as can turn the Balance of Trade to our Advantage,
and enable us to sell more to Foreigners, than we have occasion to buy from
them.

To this we must add, that by extending a well-regulated Trade, we are as great
Gainers by the Commodities of many other Countries, as by those of our own
Nation; and by supplying foreign Markets with the Growth and Manufactures of
the most distant Regions, we receive the same Profit from them, as if they were
the Produce of our own Island.

Thirdly, We are not a little obliged to Trade, as it has been a great Means of
civilizing our Nation, and banishing out of it all the Remains of its ancient
Barbarity. There are many bitter Sayings against Islanders in general,
representing them as fierce, treacherous, and inhospitable. Those who live on
the Continent have such Opportunities of a frequent Intercourse with Men of
different Religions and Languages, and who live under different Laws and
Governments, that they become more kind* benevolent, and open-hearted to their
Fellow Creatures, than those who are the Inhabitant^ of an Island, that has
not such Conversation^ with the rest of the Species. Caesar's Observation upon
our Forefathers is very much to (...) present Purpose; who remarks, That those
(...) 'em that lived upon the Coast, or in Sea Port Towns, were much more
Civilized, tha^ those who had their Dwellings in the Inlan^ Country, by reason
of frequent Communications with their Neighbors on the Continent.

In the last Place. Trade is absolutely necessary for us, as our Country is
very populous. It employs Multitudes of Hands both by Sea and Land, and
furnishes the poorest of our Fellow Subjects with the Opportunities of gaining
an honest Livelihood. The skilful or industrious find their Account in it: And
many, who have no fixed Property in the Soil of our Country, can make
themselves Masters of as considerable Estates, as those who have the greatest
Portions of the Land descending to them by Inheritance.

If what has been often charged upon us by our Neighbors has any Truth in it,
That we are prone to Sedition and delight in Change, there is no Cure more
proper for this Evil than Trade, which thus supplies Business to the Active,
and Wealth to the Indigent. When Men are easy in their Circumstances, they are
naturally Enemies to Innovations: And indeed we see in the Course of our
English Histories, many of our popular Commotions have taken their Rise from
the Decay of some Branch of Commerce, which created Discontents among Persons
concerned in the Manufactures of the Kingdom. When Men are sowred with Poverty,
and unemployed, they easily give into any Prospect of Change, which may better
their Condition, and cannot make it much worse.

Since therefore it is manifest, that the promoting of our Trade and Commerce
is necessary and essential to our Security and Strength, our Peace and
Prosperity, it is our particular Happiness to see a Monarch on the Throne, who
is sensible of the true Interest of his Kingdoms, and applies himself with so
much Success to the Advancement of our National Commerce.

The Reader may see, in my last Paper, the Advantages which His Majesty has
gained for us in our Spanish Trade. In this, I shall give a short Account of
those procured for us from the Austrain Low Countries, by Virtue of the 26th
Article of the Barrier Treaty made at Antwerp the 15th of November last.

This Branch of our Trade was regulated by a Tariff, or Declaration of the
Duties of Import and Export in the Year 1670. which was superseded by another
made in 1680. that continued till this last Tariff settled in 1715. with His
present Majesty. As for the two former, those who are at the Pains of perusing
them will find, the Tariff of 1670. laid higher Duties on several considerable
Branches of our Trade, than that of 1680, but in many Particulars, was more
favorable to us than the latter. Now, by the present Tariff of 1715. these
Duties are fixed and regulated for the future by those which were most
favorable in either of the former Tariffs: And all our Products and
Manufactures (one only excepted, which I shall name by and by) settled upon
rather an easier foot than ever.

Our Woollen Cloths, being the most profitable Branch of our Trade into these
Countries, have by this means gained a very considerable Advantage. For the
Tariff of 1680. having laid higher Duties upon the finer sorts, and lower
Duties on ordinary Cloth, than what were settled in the Tariff of 1670. His
Majesty has, by the present Treaty, reduced the Duties on the finer sorts to
the Tariff of 1670. and confirmed the Duties on ordinary Cloth according to the
Tariff of 1680. Insomuch that this present Tariff of 1^15. considered, with
relation to this valu+ able part of our Trade, reduces the Duties at least one
sixth Part, supposing the Exportation of all sorts to be equal. But as there is
always a much greater Exportation of the ordinary Cloth, than of the finer
sorts, the Reduction of these Duties becomes still much more considerable.

We must farther observe, that there had been several Innovations made to the
Detriment of the English Merchant since the Tariff of 1680. all which
Innovations are now entirely set aside upon every Species of Goods, except
Butter, which is here particularly mentioned, because we cannot be too minute
and circumstantial in Accounts of this Nature. This Article however is
moderated, and is rated in proportion to what has been, and is still to be,
paid by the Dutch.

As our Commerce with the Netherlands is thus settled to the Advantage of our
British Merchants, so is it much to their Satisfaction: And if His Majesty, in
the several succeeding Parts of his Reign (which we hope may be many Years
prolonged) should advance our Commerce in the same Proportion as he has already
done, we may expect to see it in a more flourishing Condition, than under any
of His Royal Ancestors. He seems to place his Greatness in the Riches and
Prosperity of his People; and what may we not hope from him in a Time of Quiet
and Tranquillity? Since, during the late Distractions, he has done so much for
the Advantage of our Trade, when we could not reasonably expect he should have
been able to do any thing.

No. 43. Friday, May 18.
Hoc font derivata clades
In patriam populumque fluxit. Hor.

ONE would wonder how any Person endowed with the ordinary Principles of
Prudence and Humanity, should desire to be King of a Country, in which the
Established Religion is directly opposite to that which he himself professes.
Were it possible for such a one to accomplish his Designs, his own Reason must
tell him, there could not be a more uneasy Prince, not a more unhappy People.
But how it can enter into the Wishes of any private Persons to be the Subjects
of a Man, whose Faith obliges him to use the most effectual means for
extirpating their Religion, is altogether incomprehensible, but upon the
Supposition that whatever Principles they seem to adhere to, their Interest,
Ambition, or Revenge, is much more active and predominant in their Minds, than
the Love of their Country, or of its National Worship.

I have never heard of any one particular Benefit, which either the Pretender
himself, or the Favorers of his Cause, could promise to the British Nation
from the Success of his Pretensions; though the Evils which would arise from
it, are numberless and evident. These Men content themselves with one general
Assertion which often appears in their Writings, and in their Discourse; That
the Kingdom will never be Quiet till he is upon the Throne. If by this Position
is meant, that those will never be quiet who would endeavor to place him
there, it may possibly have some Truth in it; though we hope even these will be
reduced to their Obedience by the Care of their Safety, if not by the Sense of
their Duty. But on the other side, how ineffectual would this strange Expedient
be, for establishing the public Quiet and Tranquillity, should it ever take
place! for, by way of Argument, we may suppose Impossibilities. Would that
Party of Men which comprehends the most wealthy, and the most valiant, of the
Kingdom, and which, were the Cause put to a Trial, would undoubtedly appear the
most numerous, (for I am far from thinking all those who are distinguished by
the Name of Tories, to be Favorers of the Pretender) can we, I say, suppose
these Men would live Quiet under a Reign which they have hitherto opposed, and
from which they apprehend such a manifest Destruction to their Country? Can we
suppose our present Royal Family, who are so powerful in foreign Dominions, so
strong in their Relations and Alliances, and so universally supported by the
Protestant Interest of Europe, would continue Quiet, and not make vigorous and
repeated Attempts for the Recovery of their Right, should it ever be wrested
out of their Hands? Can we imagine that our British Clergy would be Quiet under
a Prince, who is zealous for his Religion, and obliged by it to subvert those
Doctrines, which it is their Duty to defend and propagate? Nay, would any of
those Men themselves, who are the Champions of this desperate Cause, unless
such of them as are professed Roman Catholics, or disposed to be so, live
Quiet under a Government which at the best would make use of all indirect
Methods in favor of a Religion, that is inconsistent with our Laws and
Liberties, and would impose on us such a Yoke, as neither We nor our Fathers
were able to bear? All the Quiet that could be expected from such a Reign, must
be the Result of absolute Power on the one Hand, and a despicable Slavery on
the other: And I believe every reasonable Man will be of the Roman Historian's
Opinion, That a disturbed Liberty is better than a quiet Servitude.

There is not indeed a greater Absurdity than to imagine the Quiet of a Nation
can arise from an Establishment, in which the King would be of one Communion,
and the People of another; especially when the Religion of the Sovereign
carries in it the utmost Malignity to that of the Subject. If any of our
English Monarchs might have hoped to Reign quietly under such Circumstances, it
would have been K. Charles II. who was received with all the Joy and Goodwill
that are natural to a People, newly rescued from a Tyranny which had long
oppressed them in several Shapes. But this Monarch was too wise to own himself
a Roman Catholic, even in that Juncture of Time; or to imagine it practicable
for an avowed Popish Prince to govern a Protestant People. His Brother tried
the Experiment, and every one knows the Success of it.

As Speculations are best supported by Facts, I shall add to these domestic
Examples one or two parallel Instances out of the Swedish History, which may be
sufficient to show us, that a Scheme of Government is impracticable in which
the Head does not agree with the Body, in that Point, which is of the greatest
Concern to reasonable Creatures. Sweden is the only Protestant Kingdom in
Europe besides this of Great Britain, which has had the Misfortune to see
Popish Princes upon the Throne; and we find that they behaved themselves as we
did, and as it is natural for Men to do, upon the same Occasion. Their King
Sigismond having, contrary to the Inclinations of his People, endeavored by
several clandestine Methods, to promote the Roman Catholic Religion among his
Subjects, and shown several Marks of Favor to their Priests and Jesuits, was,
after a very short Reign, deposed by the States of that Kingdom, being
represented as one who could neither be held by Oaths nor Promises, and
overruled by the Influence of his Religion, which dispenses with the Violation
of the most sacred Engagements that are opposite to its Interests. The States,
to show farther their Apprehensions of Popery, and how incompatible they
thought the Principles of the Church of Rome in a Sovereign were with those of
the Reformed Religion in his Subjects, agreed that his Son should succeed to
the Throne, provided he were brought up a Protestant. This the Father seemingly
complied with; but afterward refusing to give him such an Education, the Son
was likewise set aside, and for ever excluded from that Succession. The famous
Queen Christina, Daughter to the Great Gustavus, was so sensible of those
Troubles which would accrue both to her self and her People, should she avow
the Roman Catholic Religion while she was upon the Throne of Sweden; that she
did not make an open Profession of that Faith, till she had resigned her Crown,
and was actually upon her Journey to Rome.

In short, if there be any political Maxim, which may be depended upon as sure
and infallible, this is one; that it is impossible for a Nation to be happy,
where a People of the Reformed Religion are governed by a King that is a
Papist. Were he indeed only a nominal Roman Catholic, there might be a
possibility of Peace and Quiet under such a Reign; but if he is sincere in the
Principles of his Church, he must treat Heretical Subjects as that Church
directs him, and knows very well, that he ceases to be Religious, when he
ceases to be a Persecutor.

No. 44. Monday, May 21.
Multaque praeterea variarum monstra ferarum
Centauri in foribus stabulant, Scyllaeque biformes,
Et centum-geminus Briareus, ac bellua Lernae
Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata Chimaera,
Gorgones, Harpyiaeque, et forma tricorporis umbrae.
Corripit hic subita trepidus formidine ferrum
Aeneas, strictamque aciem venientibus offert.
Et, ni docta comes tenues sine corpore vitas
Admoneat volitare cava sub imagine formae,
Inruat, et frustra ferro diverberet umbras. Virg.

AS I was last Friday taking a Walk in the Park, I saw a Country Gentleman at
the side of Rosamond's Pond, pulling a Handful of Oats out of his Pocket, and
with a great deal of Pleasure, gathering the Ducks about him. Upon my coming up
to him, who should it be but my Friend the Fox-hunter, whom I gave some Account
of in my 22d Paper! I immediately joined him, and partook of his Diversion,
till he had not an Oat left in his Pocket. We then made the Tour of the Park
together, when after having entertained me with the Description of a Decoy-Pond
that lay near his Seat in the Country, and of a Meeting House that was going
to be rebuilt in a neighboring Market Town, he gave me an Account of some
very odd Adventures which he had met with that Morning; and which I shall lay
together in a short and faithful History, as well as my Memory will give me
Leave.

My Friend, who has a natural Aversion to London, would never have come up, had
not he been subpaena'd to it, as he told me, in order to give his Testimony for
one of the Rebels, whom he knew to be a very fair Sports-man. Having traveled
all Night, to avoid the Inconveniences of Dust and Heat, he arrived with his
Guide, a little after break of Day, at Charing Cross; where, to his great
Surprise, he saw a running Footman carried in a Chair, followed by a Water-man
in the same kind of Vehicle. He was wondering at the Extravagance of their
Masters, that furnished them with such Dresses and Accommodations, when on a
sudden he beheld a Chimney-Sweeper, conveyed after the same manner, with three
Footmen running before him. During his Progress through the Strand, he met with
several other Figures no less wonderful and surprising. Seeing a great many in
rich Morning-Gowns, he was amazed to find that Persons of Quality were up so
early: And was no less astonished to see many Lawyers in their Bar-Gowns, when
he knew by his Almanac the Term was ended. As he was extremely puzzled and
confounded in himself what all this should mean, a Hackney-Coach chancing to
pass by him, Four Batts popp'd out their Heads all at once, which very much
frighted both him and his Horse. My Friend, who always takes Care to cure his
Horse of such starting Fits, spurred him up to the very side of the Coach, to
the no small Diversion of the Batts; who, seeing him with his long Whip,
Horse-hair Perriwig, Jockey Belt, and Coat without Sleeves, fancied him to be
one of the Masqueraders on Horseback, and received him with a loud Peal of
Laughter. His Mind being full of idle Stories, which are spread up and down the
Nation by the Disaffected, he immediately concluded that all the Persons he saw
in these strange Habits were Foreigners, and conceived a great Indignation
against them, for pretending to laugh at an English Countrey-Gentleman. But he
soon recovered out of his Error, by hearing the Voices of several of them, and
particularly of a Shepherdess quarrelling with her Coachman, and threatening to
break his Bones in very intelligible English, though with a masculine Tone. His
Astonishment still increased upon him, to see a continued Procession of
Harlequins, Searamouches, Punchinello's, and a thousand other merry Dresses, by
which People of Quality distinguish their Wit from that of the Vulgar.

Being now advanced as far as Somerset House, and observing it to be the great
Hive whence this Swarm of Chimeras issued forth from Time to Time, my Friend
took his Station among a Cluster of Mob, who were making themselves merry with
their Betters. The first that came out was a very venerable Matron, with a Nose
and Chin, that were within a very little of touching one another. My Friend, at
the first View fancying her to be an old Woman of Quality, out of his good
breeding put off his Hat to her, when the Person pulling off her Masque, to his
great Surprise appeared a Smock-faced young Fellow. His Attention was soon
taken off from this Object, and turned to another that had very hollow Eyes and
a wrinkled Face, which flourished in all the Bloom of Fifteen. The Whiteness of
the Lilly was blended in it with the Blush of the Rose. He mistook it for a
very whimsical kind of Masque; but upon a nearer View he found that she held
her Vizard in her Hand, and that what he saw was only her natural Countenance,
touched up with the usual Improvements of an aged Coquette.

The next who showed her self was a Female Quaker, so very pretty, that he
could not forbear licking his Lips, and saying to the Mob about him, It Is ten
thousand Pities she is not a Church-Woman. The Quaker was followed by half a
dozen Nuns, who filed off one after another up Catherine-street, to their
respective Convents in Drury Lane.

The 'Squire observing the Preciseness of their Dress, began now to imagine
after all, that this was a Nest of Sectaries; for he had often heard that the
Town was full of them. He was confirmed in this Opinion upon seeing a Conjurer,
whom he guessed to be the Holder-forth. However, to satisfy himself he asked a
Porter, who stood next him, What Religion these People were of? The Porter
replied, They are of no Religion; it is a Masquerade. Upon that, says my Friend,
I began to smoke that they were a Parcel of Mummers; and being himself one of
the Quorum in his own County, could not but wonder that none of the Middlesex
Justices took Care to lay some of them by the Heels. He was the more provoked
in the Spirit of Magistracy, upon discovering two very unseemly Objects: The
first was a Judge, who rapp'd out a great Oath at his Footman; and the other a
big bellied Woman, who upon taking a Leap into the Coach, miscarried of a
Cushion. What still gave him greater Offense was a drunken Bishop, who reeled
from one side of the Court to the other, and was very sweet upon an Indian
Queen. But his Worship, in the midst of his Austerity, was mollify'd at the
Sight of a very lovely Milk-maid, whom he began to regard with an Eye of Mercy,
and conceived a particular Affection for her, 'till he found to his great
Amazement, that the Standers by suspected her to be a Duchess.

I must not conclude this Narrative without mentioning one Disaster which
happened to my Friend on this Occasion. Having for his better Convenience
dismounted, and mixed among the Crowd, he found upon his Arrival at the Inn,
that he had lost his Purse and his Almanac. And though it is no Wonder such a
Trick should be played him by some of the curious Spectators, he cannot beat it
out of his Head, but that it was a Cardinal who picked his Pocket, and that
this Cardinal was a Presbyterian in Disguise.

No. 45. Friday, May 25.
Nimium Risus pretium est si Probitatis impendio constat. Quintil.
I Have lately read with much Pleasure, the Essays upon several Subjects
published by Sir Richard Blackmore; and though I agree with him in many of his
excellent Observations, I cannot but take that reasonable Freedom, which he
himself makes use of, with regard to other Writers, to dissent from him in some
few particulars. In his Reflections upon Works of Wit and Humor, he observes
how unequal they are to combat Vice and Folly; and seems to think, that the
finest Raillery and Satyr, though directed by these generous Views, never
reclaimed one vicious Man, or made one Fool depart from his Folly.

This is a Position very hard to be contradicted, because no Author knows the
Number or Names of his Converts. As for the Tatlers and Spectators in
particular, which are obliged to this ingenious and useful Author for the
Character he has given of them, they were so generally dispersed in single
Sheets, and have since been printed in so great Numbers, that it is to be hoped
they have made some Proselytes to the Interests, if not to the Practice of
Wisdom and Virtue, among such a Multitude of Readers.

I need not remind this learned Gentleman, that Socrates, who was the greatest
Propagator of Morality in the Heathen World, and a Martyr for the Unity of the
Godhead, was so famous for the Exercise of this Talent among the politest
People of Antiquity, that he gained the Name of ((...)) the Drole.

There are very good Effects which visibly arose from the abovementioned
Performances and others of the like Nature; as, in the first Place, they
diverted Raillery from improper Objects, and gave a new Turn to Ridicule, which
for many Years had been exerted on Persons and Things of a sacred and serious
Nature. They endeavored to make Mirth instructive, and if they failed in this
great End they must be allowed at least to have made it Innocent. If Wit and
Humor begin again to relapse into their former Licentiousness, they can never
hope for Approbation from those who know that Raillery is Useless when it has
no Moral under it, and Pernicious when it attacks any thing that is either
unblameable or praiseworthy. To this we may add, what has been commonly
observed, that it is not difficult to be merry on the side of Vice, as serious
Objects are the most capable of Ridicule; as the Party, which naturally favor
such a Mirth, is the most numerous; and as there are the most standing Jests
and Patterns for Imitation in this kind of Writing.

In the next Place: Such Productions of Wit and Humor, as have a Tendency to
expose Vice and Folly, furnish useful Diversions to all kinds of Readers. The
good, or prudent Man may, by these Means, be diverted, without Prejudice to his
Discretion, or Morality. Raillery under such Regulations, unbends the Mind from
serious Studies and severer Contemplations, without throwing it off from its
proper Bias. It carries on the same Design that is promoted by Authors of a
graver Turn, and only does it in another manner. It also awakens Reflection in
those who are the most indifferent in the Cause of Virtue or Knowledge, by
setting before them the Absurdity of such Practices as are generally
unobserved, by reason of their being Common or Fashionable: Nay, it sometimes
catches the Dissolute and Abandoned before they are aware of it; who are often
betrayed to laugh at themselves, and upon Reflection find, that they are merry
at their own Expense. I might farther take Notice, that by Entertainments of
this Kind, a Man may be cheerful in Solitude, and not be forced to seek for
Company every Time he has a Mind to be merry.

The last Advantage I shall mention from Compositions of this Nature, when thus
restrained, is, that they show Wisdom and Virtue are far from being
inconsistent with Politeness and good Humor. They make Morality appear amiable
to People of gay Dispositions, and refute the common Objection against
Religion, which represents it as only fit for gloomy and melancholy Tempers. It
was the Motto of a Bishop very eminent for his Piety and good Works in King
Charles the Second's Reign, Inservi Deo et Laetare, Serve God and be cheerful.
Those therefore who supply the World with such Entertainments of Mirth as are
instructive, or at least harmless, may be thought to deserve well of Mankind;
to which I shall only add, that they retrieve the Honor of polite Learning,
and answer those sower Enthusiasts who affect to stigmatize the sinest and most
elegant Authors, both ancient and modern, (which they have never read) as
dangerous to Religion, and destructive of all sound and saving Knowledge.

Our Nation are such Lovers of Mirth and Humor, that it is impossible for
detached Papers, which come out on stated Days, either to have a general Run,
or long Continuance, if they are not diversified, and enlivened from Time to
Time, with Subjects and Thoughts, accommodated to this Taste, which so prevails
among our Countrymen. No Periodical Author, who always maintains his Gravity,
and does not sometimes sacrifice to the Graces, must expect to keep in vogue
for any considerable Time. Political Speculations in particular, however Just
and Important, are of so dry and austere a Nature, that they will not go down
with the Public without frequent Seasonings of this Kind. The Work may be well
performed, but will never take, if it is not set off with proper Scenes and
Decorations. A mere Politician is but a dull Companion, and, if he is always
wise, is in great Danger of being tiresome or ridiculous.

Besides, Papers of Entertainment are necessary to increase the Number of
Readers, especially among those of different Notions and Principles; who by
this Means may be betrayed to give you a fair Hearing, and to know what you
have to say for your self. I might likewise observe, that in all political
Writings there is something that grates upon the Mind of the most candid
Reader, in Opinions which are not conformable to his own Way of thinking; and
that the Harshness of Reasoning is not a little softened and smoothed by the
Infusions of Mirth and Pleasantry.

Political Speculations do likewise furnish us with several Objects that may
very innocently be ridiculed, and which are regarded as such by Men of Sense in
all Parties; of this Kind are the Passions of our States-women, and the
Reasonings of our Fox-hunters.

A Writer who makes Fame the chief End of his Endeavors, and would be more
desirous of pleasing than of improving his Readers, might find an inexhaustible
Fund of Mirth in Politics. Scandal and Satyr are never-failing Gratifications
to the Public. Detraction and Obloquy are received with as much Eagerness as
Wit and Humor. Should a Writer single out particular Persons, or point his
Raillery at any Order of Men, who by their Profession ought to be exempt from
it; should be slander the Innocent, or satyrize the Miserable; or should he,
even on the proper Subjects of Derision, give the full Play to his Mirth,
without regard to Decency and good Manners; he might be sure of pleasing a
great Part of his Readers, but must be a very ill Man, if by such a Proceeding
he could please himself.

No. 46. Monday, May 28.
-- male nominatis
Parcite verbis:
Hic dies, vere mihi festus, atras
Eximet curas; ego nec tumultum
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente
Caesare terras. Hor.

THE usual Salutation to a Man upon his Birth day among the ancient Romans was
Multos et Foe^ices; in which they wished him many happy Returns of it. When
Augustus celebrated the Secular Year, which was kept but once in a Century, and
received the Congratulations of his People on that Account, an eminent
Court-Wit saluted him in the Birth day Form (Multos et Foe^ices) which is
recorded as a beautiful Turn or Compliment, expressing a Desire that he might
enjoy a happy Life of many Hundreds of Years. This Salutation cannot be taxed
with Flattery, since it was directed to a Prince, of whom it is said by a great
Historian, It had been happy for Rome, if he had never been (...) he had never
died. Had he never been born. Rome would, in all Probability, have recovered
its former Liberty: Had he never died, it would have been more happy under his
Government, than it could have been in the Possession of its ancient Freedom.

It is our good Fortune that our Sovereign whose Nativity is celebrated on this
Day, gives us a Prospect, which the Romans wanted under the Reign of their
Augustus, of his being succeeded by an Heir, both to his Virtues and his
Dominions. In the mean Time it happens very luckily, for the Establishment of a
new Race of Kings upon the British Throne, that the first of this Royal Line
has all those high Qualifications which are necessary to fix the Crown upon his
own Head, and to transmit it to his Posterity. We may indeed observe, that
every Series of Kings who have kept up the Succession in their respective
Families, in spite of all Pretensions and Oppositions formed against them, has
been headed by Princes famous for Valor and Wisdom. I need only mention the
Names of William the Conqueror, Henry II. Henry IV. Edward IV. and Henry VII.
As for King James I. the Founder of the Stuart Race, had he been as well turned
for the Camp, as the Cabinet, and not confined all his Views to the Peace and
Tranquillity of his own Reign, his Son had not been involved in such fatal
Troubles and Confusions.

Were an honest Briton to wish for a Sovereign, who in the present Situation of
Affairs would be most capable of advancing our national Happiness, what could
he desire more than a Prince mature in Wisdom and Experience; renowned for his
Valor and Resolution; successful and fortunate in his Undertakings; zealous
for the Reformed Religion; related or allied to all the most considerable
Protestant Powers of Europe; and blessed with a numerous Issue! A Failure in any
one of these Particulars has been the Cause of infinite Calamities to the
British Nation; but when they all thus happily concur in the same Person, they
are as much as can be suggested, even by our Wishes, for making us a happy
People, so far as the Qualifications of a Monarch can contribute to it.

I shall not attempt a Character of his present Majesty, having already given
an imperfect Sketch of it in my second Paper; but shall choose rather to observe
that cruel Treatment which this excellent Prince has met with from the Tongues
and Pens of some of his disaffected Subjects. The Baseness, Ingratitude, and
Injustice of which Practice will appear to us, if we consider,

First, that it reflects highly upon the good Sense of the British Nation, who
do not know how to set a just Value upon a Prince, whose Virtues have gained
him the universal Esteem of foreign Countries. Those Potentates who, as some
may suppose, do not wish well to his Affairs, have shown the greatest Respect
to his personal Character, and testified their Readiness to enter into such
Friendships and Alliances as may be advantageous to his People. The Northern
Kings solicit him with Impatience to come among them, as the only Person
capable of settling the several Claims and Pretensions, which have produced
such unspeakable Calamities in that Part of the World. Two of the most remote
and formidable Powers of Europe have entertained Thoughts of submitting their
Disputes to his Arbitration. Every one knows His ancient Subjects had such a
long Experience of his Sovereign Virtues, that at his Departure from them his
whole People were in Tears; which were answered with all those Sentiments of
Humanity, that arise in the Heart of a good Prince on so moving an Occasion.
What a Figure therefore must we make among Mankind, if we are the only People
of Europe who derogate from his Merit, that may be made happy by it! and, if in
a Kingdom which is grown glorious by the Reputation of such a Sovereign, there
are Multitudes who would endeavor to lessen and undervalue it.

In the next Place; such a Treatment from any part of our Fellow Subjects, is
by no means answerable to what we receive from His Majesty. His Love and Regard
for our Constitution is so remarkable, that, as we are told by those whose
Office it is to lay the Business of the Nation before him, it is his first
Question, upon any Matter of the least Doubt or Difficulty, whether it be in
every Point according to the Laws of the Land? He is easy of Access to those
who desire it, and is so gracious in his Behavior and Condescension on such
Occasions, that none of his Subjects retire from his Presence without the
greatest Idea of his Wisdom and Goodness. His continued Application to such
public Affairs as may conduce to the Benefit of his Kingdoms, diverts him from
those Pleasures and Entertainments which may be indulged by Persons in a lower
Station, and are pursued with Eagerness by Princes who have not the Care of the
Public so much at Heart. The least Return, which we can make to such a
Sovereign, is that Tribute which is always paid by honest Men, and is always
acceptable to great Minds, the Praise and Approbation that are due to a
virtuous and noble Character. Common Decency forbids opprobrious Language, even
to a bad Prince; and common Justice will exact from us, toward a good Prince,
the same Benevolence and Humanity with which he treats his Subjects. Those who
are influenced by Duty and Gratitude, will rise much higher in all the
Expressions of Affection and Respect, and think they can never do too much to
advance the Glory of a Sovereign, who takes so much Pains to advance their
Happiness.

When we have a King, who has gained the Reputation of the most unblemished
Probity and Honor, and has been famed, through the whole Course of his Life,
for an inviolable Adherence to his Promises, we may acquiesce (after his many
solemn Declarations) in all those Measures which it is impossible for us to
judge rightly of, unless we were let into such Schemes of Council and
Intelligence as produce them; and therefore we should rather turn our Thoughts
upon the Reasonableness of his Proceedings, than busy our selves to form
Objections against them. The Consideration of His Majesty'd Character should at
all Times suppress our Censure of his Conduct: And since we have never yet
seen, or heard of any false Steps in his Behavior, we ought in Justice to
think, that he governs himself by his usual Rules of Wisdom and Honor, 'till
we discover something to the contrary.

These Considerations ought to reconcile to His Majesty the Hearts and Tongues
of all His People: But as for those who are the obstinate, irreclaimable,
professed Enemies to our present Establishment, we must expect their Calumnies
will not only continue, but rise against him in proportion as he pursues such
Measures as are likely to prove successful, and ought to recommend him to his
People.

No. 47. Friday, June 1. 1716.
-- cessit furor, et rabida ora quierunt. Virg.
I Question not but most of my Readers will be very well pleased to hear, that
my Friend the Fox-hunter, of whose Arrival in Town, I gave Notice in my 44th
Paper, is become a Convert to the present Establishment, and a good Subject to
King GEORGE. The Motives to his Conversion shall be the Subject of this Paper,
as they may be of use to other Persons who labor under those Prejudices and
Prepossessions, which hung so long upon the Mind of my worthy Friend. These I
had an Opportunity of learning the other Day, when, at his Request, we took a
Ramble together to see the Curiosities of this great Town.

The first Circumstance, as he ingenuously confessed to me (while we were in
the Coach together) which helped to disabuse him, was seeing King Charles I. on
Horseback, at Charing Cross; for he was sure that Prince could never have kept
his Seat there, had the Stories been true he had heard in the Country, that
Forty One was come about again.

He owned to me that he looked with Horror on the new Church that is half built
in the Strand, as taking it at first sight to be half demolished: But upon
enquiring of the Workmen, was agreeably surprised to find, that instead of
pulling it down, they were building it up; and that Fifty more were raising in
other Parts of the Town.

To these I must add a third Circumstance, which I find had no small Share in
my Friend's Conversion. Since his coming to Town, he chanced to look into the
Church of St. Paul, about the middle of Sermon-time, where having first
examined the Dome, to see if it stood safe, (for the Screw-Plot still ran in
his Head) he observed, that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and City Sword were a
part of the Congregation. This Sight had the more Weight with him, as by good
Luck not above two of that Venerable Body were fallen a-sleep.

This Discourse held us till we came to the Tower; for our first Visit was to
the Lions. My Friend, who had a great deal of Talk with their Keeper, enquired
very much after their Health, and whether none of them had fallen sick upon the
taking of Perth, and the Flight of the Pretender? and hearing they were never
better in their Lives, I found he was extremely startled: For he had learned
from his Cradle, that the Lions in the Tower were the best Judges of the Title
of our British Kings, and always sympathized with our Sovereigns.

After having here satiated our Curiosity, we repaired to the Monument, where
my Fellow-Traveller, being a well-breathed Man, mounted the Ascent with much
Speed and Activity. I was forced to halt so often in this perpendicular March,
that, upon my joining him on the Top of the Pillar, I found he had counted all
the Steeples and Towers which were discernible from this advantageous
Situation, and was endeavoring to compute the Number of Acres they stood upon.
We were both of us very well pleased with this part of the Prospect; but I
found he cast an evil Eye upon several Warehouses, and other Buildings, that
looked like Barns, and seemed capable of receiving great Multitudes of People.
His Heart misgave him that these were so many Meeting Houses, but, upon
communicating his Suspicions to me, I soon made him easy in this particular.

We then turned our Eyes upon the River, which gave me an Occasion to inspire
him with some favorable Thoughts of Trade and Merchandise, that had filled the
Thames with such Crowds of Ships, and covered the Shore with such Swarms of
People.

We descended very leisurely, my Friend being careful to count the Steps, which
he registered in a blank Leaf of his new Almanac. Upon our coming to the
bottom, observing an English Inscription upon the Basis, he read it over
several Times, and told me he could scarce believe his own Eyes, for that he
had often heard from an old Attorney, who lived near him in the Country, that
it was the Presbyterians who burned down the City; whereas, says he, this
Pillar positively affirms in so many Words, that the burning of this ancient
City was begun and carried on by the Treachery and Malice of the Popish
Faction, in order to the carrying on their horrid Plot for extirpating the
Protestant Religion, and old English Liberty and introducing Popery and
Slavery. This Account, which he looked upon to be more authentic, than if it
had been in Print, I found, made a very great Impression upon him.

We now took Coach again, and made the best of our Way for the Royal Exchange,
though I found he did not much care to venture himself into the Throng of that
Place; for he told me he had heard they were, generally speaking, Republicans,
and was afraid of having his Pocket picked amongst them. But he soon conceived
a better Opinion of them, when he spied the Statue of King Charles II. standing
up in the middle of the Crowd, and most of the Kings in Baker's Chronicle
ranged in order over their Heads; from whence he very justly concluded, that an
Antimonarchical Assembly could never choose such a Place to meet in once a Day.

To continue this good Disposition in my Friend, after a short stay at Stocks
Market, we drove away directly for the Meuse, where he was not a little edified
with the Sight of those fine Sets of Horses which have been brought over from
Hanover, and with the Care that is taken of them. He made many good Remarks
upon this Occasion, and was so pleased with his Company, that I had much ado to
get him out of the Stable.

In our Progress to St. James's Park (for that was the end of our Journey) he
took Notice, with great Satisfaction, that, contrary to his Intelligence in the
Country, the Shops were all open and full of Business; that the Soldiers
walked civilly in the Streets; that Clergymen, instead of being affronted, had
generally the Wall given them; and that he had heard the Bells ring to Prayers
from Morning to Night, in some Part of the Town or another.

As he was full of these honest Reflections, it happened very luckily for us
that one of the King's Coaches passed by with the three young Princesses in it,
whom by an accidental Stop we had an Opportunity of surveying for some Time: My
Friend was ravished with the Beauty, Innocence, and Sweetness, that appeared in
all their Faces. He declared several Times that they were the finest Children
he had ever seen in all his Life; and assured me that, before this Sight, if
any one had told him it had been possible for three such pretty Children to
have been born out of England, he should never have believed them.

We were now walking together in the Park, and as it is usual for Men who are
naturally warm and heady, to be transported with the greatest Flush of
Goodnature when they are once sweetened; he owned to me very frankly, he had
been much imposed upon by those false Accounts of things he had heard in the
Country; and that he would make it his Business, upon his Return thither, to
set his Neighbors right, and give them a more just Notion of the present State
of Affairs.

What confirmed my Friend in this excellent Temper of Mind, and gave him an
inexpressible Satisfaction, was a Message he received, as we were walking
together, from the Prisoner, for whom he had given his Testimony in his late
Trial. This Person having been condemned for his Part in the late Rebellion,
sent him word that His Majesty had been graciously pleased to Reprieve him,
with several of his Friends, in order, as it was thought, to give them their
Lives; and that he hoped before he went out of Town they should have a cheerful
Meeting, and drink Health and Prosperity to King George.

No. 48. Monday, June 4.
Tu tamen, si habes aliquam spem de Republica sive desperas; ea para, meditare,
cogita, quae esse in eo cive ac viro debent, qui sit Rempublicam afflictam et
oppressam miseris temporibus ac perditis moribus in veterem dignitatem ac
libertatem vindicaturus. Cicer.
THE Condition of a Minister of State is only suited to Persons, who, out of a
Love to their King and Country, desire rather to be useful to the Public,
than easy to themselves. When a Man is posted in such a Station, whatever his
Behavior may be, he is sure, beside the natural Fatigue and Trouble of it to
incur the Envy of some, and the Displeasure of others; as he will have many
Rivals, whose Ambition he cannot satisfy, and many Dependents whose Wants he
cannot provide for. These are Misfortunes inseparable from such public
Employments in all Countries; but there are several others which hang upon this
Condition of Life in our British Government, more than any other Sovereignty in
Europe: As in the first Place, there is no other Nation which is so equally
divided into two opposite Parties, whom it is impossible to please at the same
Time. Our Notions of the public Good, with relation both to our selves and
Foreigners, are of so different a Nature, that those Measures which are
extolled by one half of the Kingdom, are naturally decryed by the other.
Besides, that in a British Administration, many Acts of Government are
absolutely necessary, in which one of the Parties must be favored and obliged,
in opposition to their Antagonists. So that the most perfect Administration,
conducted by the most consummate Wisdom and Probity, must unavoidably produce
Opposition, Enmity, and Defamation, from Multitudes who are made happy by it.

Farther, It is peculiarly observed of our Nation, that almost every Man in it
is a Politician, and has a Scheme of his own, which he thinks preferable to
that of any other Person. Whether this may proceed from that Spirit of Liberty
which reigns among us, or from those great Numbers of all Ranks and Conditions,
who from Time to Time are concerned in the British Legislature, and by that
Means are let into the Business of the Nation, I shall not take upon me to
determine. But for this Reason it is certain, that a British Ministry must
expect to meet with many Censurers, even in their own Party, and ought to be
satisfied, if, allowing to every particular Man that his private Scheme is
wisest, they can persuade him that next to his own Plan that of the Government
is the most eligible.

Besides, We have a Set of very honest and well-meaning Gentlemen in England,
not to be met with in other Countries, who take it for granted, they can never
be in the wrong, so long as they oppose Ministers of State. Those, whom they
have admired through the whole Course of their Lives for their Honor and
Integrity, though they still persist to act in their former Character, and
change nothing but their Stations, appear to them in a disadvantageous Light,
as soon as they are placed upon State-Eminences. Many of these Gentlemen have
been used to think there is a kind of Slavery in concurring with the Measures
of Great Men, and that the Good of the Country is inconsistent with the
Inclinations of the Court: By the Strength of these Prejudices, they are apt to
fancy a Man loses his Honesty, from the very Moment that it is made the most
capable of being useful to the Public; and will not consider that it is every
whit as honorable to assist a good Minister, as to oppose a bad one.

In the last Place, We may observe, that there are greater Numbers of Persons
who solicit for Places, and perhaps are fit for them, in our own Country, than
in any other. To which we must add, That, by the Nature of our Constitution, it
is in the Power of more particular Persons in this Kingdom, than in any other,
to distress the Government when they are disobliged. A British Minister must
therefore expect to see many of those Friends and Dependents fall off from him,
whom he cannot gratify in their Demands upon him; since, to use the Phrase of a
late Statesman, who knew very well how to form a Party, The Pasture is not
large enough.

Upon the Whole: The Condition of a British Minister labors under so many
Difficulties, that we find in almost every Reign since the Conquest, the chief
Ministers have been New Men, or such as have raised themselves to the greatest
Posts in the Government, from the State of private Gentlemen. Several of them
neither rose from any Conspicuous Family, nor left any behind them, being of
that Class of eminent Persons, whom Sir Francis Bacon speaks of, who, like
Comets or blazing Stars, draw upon them the whole Attention of the Age in which
they appear, though no Body knows whence they came, not where they are lost.
Persons of Hereditary Wealth and Title have not been over forward to engage in
so great a Scene of Cares and Perplexities, nor to run all the Risques of so
dangerous a Situation. Nay, many whose Greatness and Fortune were not made to
their Hands, and had sufficient Qualifications and Opportunities of rising to
these high Posts of Trust and Honor, have been deterred from such Pursuits by
the Difficulties that attend them, and chose rather to be Easy than Powerful;
or, if I may use the Expression, to be Carried in the Chariot than to Drive it.

As the Condition of a Minister of State in general is subject to many Burdens
and Vexations; and as that of a British Minister in particular is involved in
several Hazards and Difficulties peculiar to our own Country: so is this high
Station exposed more than ordinary to such Inconveniences in the present
Juncture of Affairs; first, as it is the beginning of a new Establishment among
us; and secondly, as this Establishment has been disturbed by a dangerous
Rebellion.

If we look back into our English History, we shall always find the first
Monarch of a new Line received with the greatest Opposition, and reconciling to
himself by Degrees the Duty and Affection of his People. The Government, on
such Occasions, is always shaken before it settles. The Inveteracy of the
Peoples Prejudices, and the Artifices of domestic Enemies, compelled their
Rulers to make use of all Means for reducing them to their Allegiance, which
perhaps, after all was brought about rather by Time than by Policy. When
Commotions and Disturbances are of an extraordinary and unusual Nature, the
Proceedings of the Government must be so too. The Remedy must be suited to the
Evil, and I know no Juncture more difficult to a Minister of State, than such
as requires uncommon Methods to be made use of; when at the same Time no others
can be made use of, than what are prescribed by the known Laws of our
Constitution. Several Measures may be absolutely necessary in such a Juncture,
which may be represented as hard and severe, and would not be proper in a Time
of public Peace and Tranquillity. In this Case Virgil's Excuse, which he puts
in the Mouth of a fictitious Sovereign upon a Complaint of this Nature, has
the utmost force of Reason and Justice on its Side. Res dura et regni Novitas
me talia cogunt.

The Difficulties I meet with in the beginning of my Reign make such a
Proceeding necessary.



In the next Place: As this Establishment has been disturbed by a dangerous
Rebellion, the Ministry has been involved in many additional and supernumerary
Difficulties. It is a common Remark, that English Ministers never fare so well
as in a Time of War with a foreign Power, which diverts the private Feuds and
Animosities of the Nation, and turns their Efforts upon the common Enemy. As a
foreign War is favorable to a Ministry, a Rebellion is no less dangerous; if
it succeeds, they are the first Persons who must fall a Sacrifice to it; if it
is defeated, they naturally become odious to all the secret Favorers and
Abettors of it. Every Method they make use of for preventing or suppressing it,
and for deterring others from the like Practices for the future, must be
unacceptable and displeasing to the Friends, Relations and Accomplices of the
Guilty. In Cases where it is thought necessary to make Examples, it is the
Humor of the Multitude to forget the Crime and remember the Punishment.
However, we have already seen, and still hope to see, so many Instances of
Mercy in his Majesty's Government, that our chief Ministers have more to fear
from the Murmurs of their too violent Friends, than from the Reproaches of
their Enemies.

No. 49. Friday, June 8.
-- jam nunc sollennes ducere pompas
Ad delubra juvat -- Virg.

YEsterday was set apart as a Day of Public Thanksgiving for the late
extraordinary Successes, which have secured to us every Thing that can be
esteemed, and delivered us from every Thing that can be apprehended, by a
Protestant and a Free People. I cannot but observe, upon this Occasion, the
natural Tendency in such a National Devotion, to inspire Men with Sentiments of
religious Gratitude, and to swell their Hearts with inward Transports of Joy
and Exultation.

When Instances of Divine Favor, are great in themselves, when they are fresh
upon the Memory, when they are peculiar to a certain Country, and commemorated
by them in large and solemn Assemblies; A Man must be of a very cold or
degenerate Temper, whose Heart does not burn within him in the midst of that
Praise and Adoration, which arises at the same Hour in all the different Parts
of the Nation, and from the many Thousands of the People.

It is impossible to read of Extraordinary and National Acts of Worship,
without being warmed with the Description, and feeling some Degree of that
Divine Enthusiasm, which spreads it self among a joyful and religious
Multitude. A Part of that exuberant Devotion, with which the whole Assembly
raised and animated one another, catches a Reader at the greatest Distance of
Time, and makes him a kind of Sharer in it.

Among all the public Solemnities of this Nature there is none in History so
glorious as that under the Reign of King Solomon, at the Dedication of the
Temple. Besides the great Officers of State, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
all the Elders and Heads of Tribes, with the whole Body of the People ranged
under them, from one end of the Kingdom to the other, were summoned to assist
in it. We may guess at the prodigious Number of this Assembly from the
Sacrifice on which they feasted, consisting of a Hundred and Twenty Thousand
Sheep, and Two Hundred and Twenty Hecatombs of Oxen. When this vast
Congregation was formed into a regular Procession to attend the Ark of the
Covenant, the King marched at the Head of his People, with Hymns and Dances to
the new Temple, which he had erected for its Reception. Josephus tells us, that
the Levites sprinkled the Way as they passed with the Blood of Sacrifices, and
burned the holy Incense in such Quantities as refreshed the whole Multitude
with its Odours, and filled all the Region about them with Perfume. When the
Ark was deposited under the Wings of the Cherubims in the holy Place, the great
Consort of Praise began. It was enlivened with a Hundred and Twenty Trumpets,
assisted with a proportionable Number of other kinds of musical Instruments,
and accompanied with innumerable Voices of all the Singers of Israel, who were
instructed and set apart to religious Performances of this kind. As this mighty
Chorus was extolling their Maker, and exciting the whole Nation thus assembled
to the Praise of his never-ceasing Goodness and Mercy, the Shekinah descended:
Or to tell it in the more emphatical Words of holy Writ, It came to pass, as
the Trumpets and Singers were as one, to make one Sound to be heard in praising
and thanking the Lord, and when they lift up their Voice with the Trumpets and
Cymbals, and Instruments of Music, and praised the Lord saying, For he is
good, for his Mercy endures for ever; that then the House was filled with a
Cloud. The Priests themselves, not able to bear the Awfulness of the
Appearance, retired into the Court of the Temple, where the King being placed
upon a brazen Scaffold, so as to be seen by the whole Multitude, blessed the
Congregation of Israel, and afterward, spreading forth his Hands to Heaven,
offered up that Divine Prayer which is twice recorded at length in Scripture,
and has always been looked upon as a Composition fit to have proceeded from the
wisest of Men. He had no sooner finished his Prayer, when a Flash of Fire fell
from Heaven and burned up the Sacrifice which lay ready upon the Altar. The
People, whose Hearts were gradually moved by the Solemnity of the whole
Proceeding, having been exalted by the religious Strains of Music, and awed by
the Appearance of that Glory which filled the Temple, seeing now the miraculous
Consumption of the Sacrifice, and observing the Piety of their King, who lay
prostrate before his Maker, bowed themselves with their Faces to the Ground
upon the Pavement, and worshipped and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good,
for his Mercy endures for ever.

What Happiness might not such a Kingdom promise to itself, where the same
elevated Spirit of Religion ran through the Prince, the Priests, and the
People! But I shall quit this Head, to observe that such an uncommon Fervor of
Devotion showed itself among our own Countrymen, and in the Persons of three
Princes, who were the greatest Conquerors in our English History. These are
Edward the Third, his Son the Black Prince, and Henry the Fifth. As for the
first, we are told that, before the famous Battle of Cressy, he spent the
greatest Part of the Night in Prayer, and in the Morning received the Sacrament
with his Son, the chief of his Officers, and Nobility. The Night of that
glorious Day was no less piously distinguished by the Orders, which he gave out
to his Army, that they should forbear all insulting of their Enemies, or
boasting of their own Valor, and employ their Time in returning Thanks to the
great Giver of the Victory. The Black Prince, before the Battle of Poictiers,
declared, that his whole Confidence was in the Divine Assistance; and after
that great Victory, behaved himself in all Particulars like a truly Christian
Conqueror. Eight Days successively were appointed by his Father in England, for
a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving; and when the young Prince returned in
Triumph with a King of France as his Prisoner, the Pomp of the Day consisted
chiefly in extraordinary Processions, and Acts of Devotion. The Behavior of
the Black Prince, after a Battle in Spain, whereby he restored the King of
Castile to his Dominions, was no less remarkable. When that King, transported
with his Success, flung himself upon his Knees to thank him, the generous
Prince ran to him, and, taking him by the Hand, told him it was not He who
could lay any Claim to his Gratitude, but desired they might go to the Altar
together, and jointly return their Thanks to whom only it was due.

Henry V. (who at the Beginning of his Reign, made a public Prayer in the
Presence of his Lords and Commons, that he might be cut off by an immediate
Death, if Providence foresaw he would not prove a just and good Governor, and
promote the Welfare of his People) manifestly derived his Courage from his
Piety, and was scrupulously careful not to ascribe the Success of it to
himself. When he came within Sight of that prodigious Army, which offered him
Battle at Agincourt, he ordered all his Cavalry to dismount, and with the rest
of his Forces, to implore upon their Knees a Blessing on their Undertaking. In
a noble Speech, which he made to his Soldiers immediately before the first
Onset, he took Notice of a very remarkable Circumstance, namely, that this very
Day of Battle was the Day appointed in his own Kingdom, to offer up public
Devotions for the Prosperity of his Arms, and therefore bid them not doubt of
Victory, since at the same Time that they were fighting in the Field, all the
People of England were lifting up their Hands to Heaven for their Success. Upon
the close of that memorable Day, in which the King had performed Wonders wirh
his own Hand, he ordered the CXVth Psalm to be repeated in the midst of his
victorious Army, and at the Words, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy Name
be the Praise, He himself, with his whole Host, fell to the Earth upon their
Faces, ascribing to Omnipotence the whole Glory of so great an Action.

I shall conclude this Paper with a Reflection, which naturally rises out of
it. As there is nothing more beautiful in the Sight of God and Man, than a King
and his People concurring in such extraordinary Acts of Devotion, one cannot
suppose a greater Contradiction and Absurdity in a Government, than where the
King is of one Religion and the People of another. What Harmony or
Correspondence can be expected between a Sovereign and his Subjects, when they
cannot join together in the most joyful, the most solemn, and most laudable
Action of reasonable Creatures; in a word, where the Prince considers his
People as Heretics, and the People look upon their Prince as an Idolater!

No. 50. Monday, June 11.
O quisquis volet impias
Caedes, et rabiem tollere civicam:
Si quaeret pater urbium
Subscribi statuis; indomitam audeat
R^^^^are licentiam
Clarus posigenitis -- Hor.

WHEN Mahomet had for many Years endeavored to propagate his Imposture among
his Fellow-Citizens, and, instead of gaining any Number of Proselytes, found
his Ambition frustrated, and his Notions ridiculed; he forbad his Followers the
Use of Argument and Disputation in the advancing of his Doctrines, and to rely
only upon the Scimeter for their Success. Christianity, he observed, had made
its way by Reason and Miracles, but he professed it was his Design to save Men
by the Sword. From that time he began to knock down his Fellow-Citizens with a
great deal of Zeal, to plunder Caravans with a most exemplary Sanctity, and to
fill all Arabia with an unnatural Medly of Religion and Bloodshed.

The Enemies of our happy Establishment seem at present to copy out the Piety
of this seditious Prophet, and to have Recourse to his laudable Method of Club
Law, when they find all other Means for enforcing the Absurdity of their
Opinions to be ineffectual. It was usual among the ancient Romans, for those,
who had saved the Life of a Citizen, to be dressed in an Oaken Garland; but among
us, This has been a Mark of such well-intentioned Persons, as would betray
their Country, if they were able, and beat out the Brains of their
Fellow Subjects. Nay, the Leaders of this poor unthinking Rabble, to show their
Wit, have lately decked them out of their Kitchen Gardens in a most insipid
Pun, very well suited to the Capacity of such Followers.

This manner of proceeding has had an Effect quite contrary to the Intention of
these ingenious Demagogues: For by setting such an unfortunate Mark on their
Followers, they have exposed them to innumerable Drubs and Confusions. They
have been cudgelled most unmercifully in every part of London and Westminster;
and over all the Nation have avowed their Principles, to the unspeakable Damage
of their Bones. In short, if we may believe our Accounts both from Town and
Country, the Noses and Ears of the Party are very much diminished, since they
have appeared under this unhappy Distinction.

The Truth of it is, there is such an unaccountable Frenzy and Licentiousness
spread through the basest of the People, of all Parties and Denominations, that
if their Skirmishes did not proceed to too great an Extremity, one would not be
sorry to see them bestowing so liberally, upon one another, a Chastisement
which they so richly deserve. Their Thumps and Bruises might turn to account,
and save the Government a great deal of Trouble, if they could beat each other
into good Manners.

Were not Advice thrown away on such a thoughtless Rabble, one would recommend
to their serious Consideration what is suspected, and indeed known, to be the
Cause of these popular Tumults and Commotions in this great City. They are the
Popish Missionaries, that lie concealed under many Disguises in all Quarters of
the Town, who mix themselves in these dark Scuffles, and animate the Mob to
such mutual Outrages and Insults. This profligate Species of Modern Apostles
divert themselves at the Expense of a Government, which is opposite to their
Interests, and are pleased to see the broken Heads of Heretics, in what Party
soever they have listed themselves. Their Treatment of our silly Countrymen,
puts me in mind of an Account in Tavernier's Travels through the East Indies.
This Author tells us, there is a great Wood in those Parts very plentifully
stocked with Monkies; that a large Highway runs through the middle of this
Wood; and that the Monkies who live on the one Side of this Highway, are
declared Enemies to those who live on the other. When the Inhabitants of that
Country have a Mind to give themselves a Diversion, it is usual for them to
set these poor Animals together by the Ears; which they do after this Manner.
They place several Pots of Rice in the middle of the Road, with great Heaps of
Cudgels in the Neighborhood of every Pot. The Monkies, on the first Discovery
of these Provisions, descend from the Trees on either Side in prodigious
Numbers, take up the Arms, with which their good Friends have furnished them,
and belabour one another with a Storm of Thwacks, to the no small Mirth and
Entertainment of the Beholders. This Mob of Monkies act however so far
reasonably in this Point, as the victorious Side of the Wood find, upon the
Repulse of their Enemies, a considerable Booty on the Field of Battle; whereas
our Party-Mobs are betrayed into the Fray without any Prospect of the Feast.

If our common People have not Virtue enough left among them, to lay aside this
wicked and unnatural Hatred which is crept into their Hearts against one
another, nor Sense enough to resist the Artifice of those Incendiaries, who
would animate them to the Destruction of their Country; it is high time for
the Government to exert it self in the repressing of such seditious Tumults and
Commotions. If that extraordinary Lenity and Forbearance which has been
hitherto shown on those Occasions, proves ineffectual to that Purpose, these
Miscreants of the Community ought to be made sensible, that our Constitution is
armed with a sufficient Force for the Reformation of such Disorders, and the
Settlement of the public Peace.

There cannot be a greater Affront to Religion, than such a tumultuous Rising
of the People, who distinguish the Times set apart for the National Devotions
by the most brutal Scenes of Violence, Clamor, and Intemperance. The Day
begins with a Thanksgiving, and ends in a Riot. Instead of the Voice of mutual
Joy and Gladness, there is nothing heard in our Streets but opprobrious
Language, Ribaldry and Contention.

As such a Practice is scandalous to our Religion, so it is no less a Reproach
to our Government. We are become a Byword among the Nations for our ridiculous
Feuds and Animosities, and fill all the public Prints of Europe with the
Accounts of our Midnight Brawls and Confusions.

The Mischiefs arising to private Persons from these vile Disturbers of the
Common wealth are too many to be enumerated. The Great and Innocent are
insulted by the Scum and Refuse of the People. Several poor Wretches, who have
engaged in these Commotions, have been disabled, for their Lives, from doing
any Good to their Families and Dependents; nay, several of them have fallen a
Sacrifice to their own inexcusable Folly and Madness. Should the Government be
wearied out of its present Patience and Forbearance, and forced to execute all
those Powers with which it is invested for the Preservation of the public
Peace; what is to be expected by such Heaps of turbulent and seditious Men!

These and the like Considerations, though they may have no Influence on the
headstrong unruly Multitude, ought to sink into the Minds of those who are
their Abettors, and who, if they escape the Punishment here due to them, must
very well know that these several Mischiefs will be one Day laid to their
Charge.

No. 51. Friday, June 15.
Quod si in hoc erro libenter erro; nec mihi hunc errorem, quo delector, dum
vivo, extorqueri volo. Cicer.
AS there is nothing which more improves the Mind of Man, than the reading of
ancient Authors, when it is done with Judgment and Discretion; so there is
nothing which gives a more unlucky Turn to the Thoughts of a Reader, when he
wants Discernment, and loves and admires the Characters and Actions of Men in a
wrong Place. Alexander the Great was so inflamed with false Notions of Glory,
by reading the Story of Achilles in the Iliad, that after having taken a Town,
he ordered the Governor, who had made a gallant Defense, to be bound by the
Feet to his Chariot; and afterward dragged the brave Man round the City,
because Hector had been treated in the same barbarous manner by his admired
Hero.

Many Englishmen have proved very pernicious to their own Country, by
following blindly the Examples of Persons to be met with in Greek and Roman
History, who acted in Conformity with their own Governments, after a quite
different manner, than they would have acted in a Constitution like that of
ours. Such a Method of proceeding is as unreasonable in a Politician, as it
would be in a Husbandman to make use of Virgil's Precepts of Agriculture, in
managing the Soil of our Country, that lies in a quite different Climate, and
under the Influence of almost another Sun.

Our Regicides in the Commission of the most execrable Murder used to justify
themselves from the Conduct of Brutus, not considering that Caesar, from the
Condition of a Fellow-Citizen, had risen by the most indirect Methods, and
broken through all the Laws of the Community, to place himself at the Head of
the Government, and enslave his Country. On the other side, several of our
English Readers, having observed that a Passive and Unlimited Obedience was
paid to Roman Emperors, who were possessed of the whole Legislative, as well
as Executive Power, have formerly endeavored to inculcate the same kind of
Obedience, where there is not the same kind of Authority.

Instructions therefore to be learned from Histories of this Nature, are only
such as arise from Particulars agreeable to all Communities, or from such as
are common to our own Constitution, and to that of which we read. Atenacious
Adherence to the Rights and Liberties transmitted from a wise and virtuous
Ancestry, Public Spirit and a Love of ones Country, Submission to established
Laws, impartial Administrations of Justice, a strict Regard to National Faith,
with several other Duties, which are the Supports and Ornaments of Government
in general, cannot be too much admired among the States of Greece and Rome,
nor too much imitated by our own Community.

But there is nothing more absurd, than for Men, who are conversant in these
Ancient Authors, to contract such a Prejudice in favor of Greeks and Romans,
as to fancy we are in the wrong in every Circumstance whereby we deviate from
their Moral or Political Conduct. Yet nothing has been more usual, than for
Men of warm Heads to refine themselves up into this kind of State-Pedantry:
Like the Country Schoolmaster, who, being used for many Years to admire
Jupiter, Mars, Bacchus and Apollo, that appear with so much Advantage in
Classick Authors, made an Attempt to revive the Worship of the Heathen Gods. In
short, we find many worthy Gentlemen, whose Brains have been as much turned by
this kind of reading, as the grave Knight's of Mancha were by his unwearied
Application to Books of Knight-Errantry.

To prevent such Mischiefs from arising out of Studies, which, when rightly
conducted, may turn very much to our Advantage, I shall venture to assert, that
in our perusal of Greek or Roman Authors, it is impossible to find a Religious
or Civil Constitution, any way comparable to that which we enjoy in our own
Country. Had not our Religion been infinitely preferable to that of the
ancient Heathens, it would never have made its way through Paganism, with that
amazing Progress and Activity. It Is Victories were the Victories of Reason
unassisted by the Force of human Power, and as gentle as the Triumphs of Light
over Darkness. The sudden Reformation which it made among Mankind, and which
was so justly and frequently boasted of by the first Apologists for
Christianity, show how infinitely preferable it is to any System of Religion,
that prevailed in the World before its Appearance. This Pre-eminence of
Christianity to any other general Religious Scheme, which preceded it, appears
likewise from this Particular, that the most eminent and the most enlightened
among the Pagan Philosophers disclaimed many of those superstitious Follies,
which are condemned by revealed Religion, and preached up several of those
Doctrines which are some of the most essential Parts of it.

And here I cannot but take Notice of that strange Motive which is made use of
in the History of Free-thinking, to incline us to depart from the revealed
Doctrines of Christianity, as adhered to by the People of Great Britain,
because Socrates, with several other eminent Greeks, and Cicero, with many
other learned Romans, did in the like Manner depart from the religious Notions
of their own Contrymen. Now this Author should have considered, that those
very Points, in which these wise Men disagreed from the Bulk of the People, are
Points in which they agreed with the received Doctrines of our Nation. Their
Free-thinking consisted in asserting the Unity and Immateriality of the
Godhead, the Immortality of the Soul, a State of future Rewards and
Punishments, and the necessity of Virtue, exclusive of all silly and
superstitious Practices, to procure the Happiness of a separate State. They
were therefore only Free-thinkers, so far forth as they approached to the
Doctrines of Christianity, that is, to those very Doctrines which this kind of
Authors would persuade us, as Free thinkers, to doubt the Truth of. Now I would
appeal to any reasonable Person, whether these great Men should not have been
proposed to our Imitation, rather as they embraced these divine Truths, than
only upon the Account of their breaking loose from the common Notions of their
Fellow-Citizens. But this would disappoint the general Tendency of such
Writings.

I shall only add under this Head, that as Christianity recovered the Law of
Nature out of all those Errors and Corruptions, with which it was overgrown in
the Times of Paganism, our National Religion has restored Christianity it self
to that Purity and Simplicity in which it appeared, before it was gradually
disguised and lost among the Vanities and Superstitions of the Romish Church.

That our Civil Constitution is preferable to any among the Greeks or Romans,
may appear from this single Consideration; that the greatest Theorists in
Matters of this Nature, among those very People have given the Preference to
such a Form of Government, as that which obtains in this Kingdom, above any
other Form whatsoever. I shall mention Aristotle, Polybius and Cicero, that is,
the greatest Philosopher, the most impartial Historian, and the most consummate
Statesman of all Antiquity. These famous Authors give the Pre-eminence to a
mixed Government consisting of three Branches, the Regal, the Noble, and the
Popular. It would be very easy to prove, not only the Reasonableness of this
Position, but to show, that there was never any Constitution among the Greeks
or Romans, in which these three Branches were so well distinguished from each
other, invested with such suitable Proportions of Power, and concurred together
in the Legislature, that is, in the most sovereign Acts of Government, with
such a necessary Consent and Harmony, as are to be met with in the Constitution
of this Kingdom. But I have observed, in a foregoing Paper, how defective the
Roman Commonwealth was in this Particular, when compared with our own Form of
Government, and it will not be difficult for the Reader, upon singling out any
other ancient State; to find how far it will suffer in the Parallel.

No. 52. Monday, June 18.
An tu Populum Romanum esse illum putas qui constat ex iis, qui mercede
conducuntur? qui impelluntur, ut vim afferant magistratibus? ut obsideant
senatum? optent quotidie caedem, incendia, rapinas? quem tu tamen populum nisi
tabernis clausis, frequentare non poteras: Cui populo Duces Lentidios, Lollios,
Sergios, praefeceras. O speciem, dignitatemque Populi Romani, quam Reges, quam
Nationes exterae, quam Gentes ultimae pertimescunt; Multitudinem hominum ex
servis conductis, ex facinorosis, ex egentibus congregatam! Cicer.
THERE is in all Governments a certain Temper of Mind, natural to the Patriots
and Lovers of their Constitution, which may be called State-Jealousy. It is
this which makes them apprehensive of every Tendency in the People, or in any
particular Member of the Community, to endanger or disturb that Form of Rule,
which is established by the Laws and Customs of their Country. This political
Jealousy is absolutely requisite in some degree for the Preservation of a
Government, and very reasonable in Persons who are persuaded of the Excellency
of their Constitution, and believe that they derive from it the most valuable
Blessings of Society.

This publick-spirited Passion is more strong and active under some
Governments, than others. The Commonwealth of Venice, which has subsisted by
it for near fourteen hundred Years, is so jealous of all its Members, that it
keeps continual Spies upon their Actions; and if any one of them presume to
censure the established Plan of that Republic, or touch upon any of its
Fundamentals, he is brought before a Secret Council of State, tried in a most
rigorous manner, and put to Death without Mercy. The usual way of proceeding
with Persons who discover themselves unsatisfied with the Title of their
Sovereign in Despotick Governments, is to confine the Malecontent, if his
Crimes are not Capital, to some Castle or Dungeon for Life. There is indeed no
Constitution, so tame and careless of their own Defense, where any Person dares
to give the least Sign or Intimation of being a Traitor in his Heart. Our
English History furnishes us with many Examples of great Severities during the
Disputes between the Houses of York and Lancaster, inflicted on such Persons as
showed their Disaffection to the Prince who was on the Throne. Every one knows,
that a factious Innkeeper, in the Reign of Henry the Seventh, was hanged,
drawn, and quartered for a saucy Pun, which reflected, in a very dark and
distant manner, upon the Title of that Prince to the Crown. I do not mention
the Practice of other Governments, as what should be imitated in ours, which
God be thanked, affords us all the reasonable Liberty of Speech and Action,
suited to a Free People; nor do I take Notice of this last Instance of Severity
in our own Country, to justify such a Proceeding, but only to display the
Mildness and Forbearance made use of under the Reign of His present Majesty. It
may, however, turn to the Advantage of those, who have been instrumental in
stirring up the late Tumults and Seditions among the People, to consider the
Treatment which such a lawless ungoverned Rabble would have met with in any
other Country, and under any other Sovereign.

These Incendiaries have had the Art to work up into the most unnatural
Ferments, the most heavy and stupid part of the Community; and, if I may use a
fine Saying of Terence upon another Occasion, to convert Fools into Madmen.
This Frenzy has been raised among them to such a degree, that it has lately
discovered it self in a Sedition which is without a Parallel. They have had the
Fool-hardiness to set a Mark upon themselves on the Pretender's Birthday, as
the declared Friends to his Cause, and professed Enemies to their King and
Country. How fatal would such a distinction, of which every one knew the
meaning, have proved in former Reigns, when many a Circumstance of less
Significancy has been construed into an Overt Act of High Treason! This
unexampled Piece of Insolence will appear under its just Aggravations, if we
consider in the first place, that it was aimed personally at the King.

I do not remember among any of our popular Commotions, when Marks of this
Nature have been in Fashion, that either Side were so void of common Sense, as
to intimate by them an Aversion to their Sovereign. His Person was still held
as sacred by both Parties. The Contention was not who should be the Monarch
over them, but whose Scheme of Policy should take Place in his Administration.
This was the Conduct of Whigs and Tories under King Charles the Second's Reign,
when Men hung out their Principles in different colored Ribbons. Nay, in the
Times of the Great Rebellion, the avowed Disaffection of the People always
terminated in evil Counselors. Such an open Outrage upon Majesty, such an
Ostentation of Disloyalty, was reserved for that infamous Rabble of Englishmen,
who may be justly looked upon as the Scandal of the present Age, and the most
shameless and abandoned Race of Men that our Nation has yet produced.

In the next Place. It is very peculiar to this Mob of Malcontents, that they
did not only distinguish themselves against their King, but against a King
possessed of all the Power of the Nation, and one who had so very lately
crushed all those of the same Principles, that had Bravery enough to avow them
in the Field of Battle. When ever was there an Instance of a King who was not
contemptible for his Weakness, and want of Power to resent, insulted by a few
of his unarmed dastard Subjects?

It is plain from this single Consideration, that such a base ungenerous Race
of Men could rely upon nothing for their Safety in this Affront to His Majesty,
but the known Gentleness and Lenity of his Government. Instead of being
deterred by knowing that he had in his Hands the Power to punish them, they
were encouraged by knowing that he had not the Inclination. In a word, they
presumed upon that Mercy, which in all their Conversations they endeavor to
depreciate and misrepresent.

It is a very sensible Concern to every one, who has a true and unfeigned
Respect for our National Religion, to hear these vile Miscreants calling
themselves Sons of the Church of England, amidst such impious Tumults and
Disorders; and joining in the Cry of High-Church at the same Time that they
wear a Badge, which implies their Inclination to destroy the Reformed Religion.
Their Concern for the Church always rises highest, when they are acting in
direct opposition to its Doctrines. Our Streets are filled at the same Time
with Zeal and Drunkenness, Riots and Religion. We must confess, if Noise and
Clamor, Slander and Calumny, Treason and Perjury, were Articles of their
Communion, there would be none living more punctual in the Performance of their
Duties; but if a peaceable Behavior, a love of Truth, and a Submission to
Superiors, are the genuine Marks of our Profession, we ought to be very
heartily ashamed of such a profligate Brotherhood. Or if we will still think
and own these Men to be true Sons of the Church of England, I dare say there is
no Church in Europe who will envy her the Glory of such Disciples. But it is to
be hoped we are not so fond of Party, as to look upon a Man, because he is a
bad Christian, to be a good Church of England Man.

No. 53. Friday, June 22.
-- Bellua Centiceps. Hor.
THERE is scarce any Man in England, of what Denomination soever, that is not a
Free-thinker in Politics, and has not some particular Notions of his own, by
which he distinguishes himself from the rest of the Community. Our Island,
which was formerly called a Nation of Saints, may now be called a Nation of
Statesmen. Almost every Age, Profession, and Sex among us, has its Favorite
Set of Ministers, and Scheme of Government.

Our Children are initiated into Factions before they know their Right Hand
from their Left. They no sooner begin to speak, but Whig and Tory are the first
Words they learn. They are taught in their Infancy to hate one half of the
Nation; and contract all the Virulence and Passion of a Party, before they come
to the Use of their Reason.

As for our Nobility, they are Politicians by Birth; and though the Commons of
the Nation delegate their Power in the Community to certain Representatives,
every one reserves to himself a private Jurisdiction, or Privilege, of
censuring their Conduct, and rectifying the Legislature. There is scarce a
Fresh-man in either University, who is not able to mend the Constitution in
several Particulars. We see 'Squires and Yeomen coming up to Town every Day, so
full of Politics, that, to use the Thought of an ingenious Gentleman, we are
frequently put in mind of Roman Dictators, who were called from the Plough. I
have often heard of a Senior Alderman in Buckinghamshire, who, at all public
Meetings, grows drunk in Praise of Aristocracy, and is as often encountered by
an old Justice of Peace who lives in the Neighborhood, and will talk you from
Morning till Night on the Gothic Balance. Who has not observed several Parish
Clerks, that have ransacked Hopkins and Sternbold for Staves in favor of the
Race of Jacob; after the Example of their Politic Predecessors in Oliver's
Days, who on every Sabbath were for binding Kings in Chains, and Nobles in
Links of Iron! You can scarce see a Bench of Porters without two or three
Casuists in it, that will settle you the Right of Princes, and state the Bounds
of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, in the drinking of a Pot of Ale. What is
more usual than on a Rejoicing Night to meet with a drunken Cobbler bawling out
for the Church, and perhaps knocked down a little after, by an Enemy in his own
Profession, who is a Lover of Moderation!

We have taken notice in former Papers of this Political Ferment being got into
the Female Sex, and of the wild Work it makes among them. We have had a late
most remarkable Instance of it in a Contest between a Sister of the White Rose,
and a beautiful and loyal young Lady, who to show her Zeal for
Revolution-Principles, had adorned her pretty Bosom with a Sweet William. The
Rabble of the Sex have not been ashamed very lately to gather about Bonfires,
and to scream out their Principles in the Public Streets. In short, there is
hardly a Female in this our Metropolis, who is not a competent Judge of our
highest Controversies in Church and State. We have several Oister-women that
hold the Unlawfulness of Episcopacy; and Cinder wenches that are great
Sticklers for indefeasible Right.

Of all the Ways and Means by which this Political Humor has been propagated
among the People of Great Britain, I cannot single out any so prevalent and
universal, as the late constant Application of the Press to the publishing of
State-Matters. We hear of several that are newly erected in the Country, and
set apart for this particular Use. For, it seems, the People of Exeter,
Salisbury, and other large Towns, are resolved to be as great Politicians as
the Inhabitants of London and Westminster; and deal out such News of their own
Printing, as is best suited to the Genius of the Market-People, and the Taste
of the County.

One cannot but be sorry, for the sake of these Places, that such a pernicious
Machine is erected among them; for it is very well known here, that the making
of the Politician is the breaking of the Tradesman. When a Citizen turns a
Machiavel, he grows too cunning to mind his own Business; and I have heard a
curious Observation, that the Woollen Manufacture has of late Years decayed in
Proportion as the Paper Manufacture has increased. Whether the one may not
properly be looked upon as the Occasion of the other, I shall leave to the
Judgment of Persons more profound in political Enquiries.

As our News-writers record many Facts which, to use their own Phrase, afford
great Matter of Speculation, their Readers speculate accordingly, and by their
variety of Conjectures, in a few Years become consummate Statesmen; besides, as
their Papers are filled with a different Party-Spirit, they naturally divide
the People into different Sentiments, who generally consider rather the
Principles, than the Truth of the News-writer. This Humor prevails to such a
Degree, that there are several well-meaning Persons in the Nation, who have
been so misled by their favorite Authors of this kind, that in the present
Contention between the Turk and the Emperor, they are gone over insensibly from
the Interests of Christianity, and become Well-wishers to the Mohammedan Cause.
In a word, almost, every News-writer has his Sect, which (considering the
natural Genius of our Countrymen to mix, vary, or refine in Notions of State)
furnishes every Man, by Degrees, with a particular System of Policy. For,
however any one may concur in the general Scheme of his Party, it is still with
certain Reserves and Deviations, and with a Salvo to his own private Judgment.

Among this innumerable Herd of Politicians, I cannot but take Notice of one
Set, who do not seem to play fair with the rest of the Fraternity, and make a
very considerable Class of Men. These are such as we may call the Afterwise,
who, when any Project fails, or has not had its desired Effect, foresaw all
the Inconveniences that would arise from it, though they kept their Thoughts
to themselves till they discovered the issue. Nay, there is nothing more usual
than for some of these wise Men, who applauded public Measures, before they
were put in Execution, to condemn them upon their proving unsuccessful. The
Dictators in Coffee-houses are generally of this Rank, who often give shrewd
Intimations that Things would have taken another Turn, had They been Members of
the Cabinet.

How difficult must it be for any Form of Government to continue undisturbed,
or any Ruler to live uncensured, where every one of the Community is thus
qualified for modelling the Constitution, and is so good a Judge in Matters of
State! A famous French Wit; to show how the Monarch of that Nation, who has no
Partners in his Sovereignty, is better able to make his Way through all the
Difficulties of Government, than an Emperor of Germany, who acts in concert
with many inferior Fellow-Soveraigns; compares the first to a Serpent with many
Tails to one Head; and the other to a Serpent with one Tail to many Heads; and
puts the Question, which of them is like to glide with most Ease and Activity
through a Thicket? The same Comparison will hold in the Business of a Nation
conducted by a Ministry, or a whole Kingdom of Politicians.

No. 54. Monday, June 25.
-- Tu, nisi ventis
Debes ludibrium, cave.
Nuper solicitum quae mihi taedium,
Nunc desiderium, curaque non levis. Hor.

THE general Division of the British Nation is into Whigs and Tories, there
being very few, if any, who stand Neuters in the Dispute, without ranging
themselves under one of these Denominations. One would therefore be apt to
think, that every Member of the Community, who embraces with Vehemence the
Principles of either of these Parties, had thoroughly sifted and examined them,
and was secretly convinced of their Preference to those of that Party which he
rejects. And yet it is certain, that most of our Fellow Subjects are guided in
this particular, either by the Prejudice of Education, private Interest,
personal Friendships, or a Deference to the Judgment of those, who, perhaps in
their own Hearts disapprove the Opinions which they industriously spread among
the Multitude. Nay, there is nothing more undoubtedly true, than that great
Numbers of one side concur in reality with the Notions of those whom they
oppose, were they able to explain their implicit Sentiments, and to tell their
own Meaning.

However, as it becomes every reasonable Man to examine those Principles by
which he acts, I shall in this Paper select some Considerations, out of many,
that might be insisted on, to show the Preference of what is generally called
the Whig-Scheme, to that which is espoused by the Tories.

This will appear in the First place, if we reflect upon the Tendency of their
respective Principles, supposing them carried to their utmost Extremity. For
if, in this case, the worst Consequences of the one are more eligible than the
worst Consequences of the other, it is a plain Argument, that those Principles
are the most eligible of the two, whose Effects are the least pernicious. Now
the Tendency of these two different Sets of Principles, as they are charged
upon each Party by its Antagonists, is as follows. The Tories tell us, that the
Whig-Scheme would end in Presbyterianism and a Commonwealth. The Whigs tell us
on the other side, that the Tory-Scheme would terminate in Popery and Arbitrary
Government. Were these Reproaches mutually true; which would be most preferable
to any Man of common Sense, Presbyterianism and a Republican Form of
Government, or Popery and Tyranny? Both Extremes are indeed dreadful, but not
equally so; both to be regarded with the utmost Aversion by the Friends of our
Constitution, and Lovers of our Country: But if one of them were inevitable,
who would not rather choose to live under a State of excessive Liberty, than of
Slavery, and not prefer a Religion that differs from our own in the
Circumstantials, before one that differs from it in the Essentials of
Christianity!

Secondly, Let us look into the History of England, and see under which of
these two Schemes the Nation has enjoyed most Honor and Prosperity. If we
observe the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James I. (which an impudent
Frenchman calls the Reigns of King Elizabeth and Queen James) We find the
Whig-Scheme took place under the first, and the Tory-Scheme under the latter.
The first, in whom the Whigs have always gloried, opposed and humbled the most
powerful among the Roman Catholic Princes; raised and supported the Dutch;
assisted the French Protestants; and made the Reformed Religion an Over-balance
for Popery through all Europe. On the contrary, her Successor aggrandized the
Catholic King; alienated himself from the Dutch; suffered the French Power to
increase, till it was too late to remedy it; and abandoned the Interests of the
King of Bohemia, Grandfather to His present Majesty, which might have spread
the Reformed Religion through all Germany. I need not describe to the Reader
the different state of the Kingdom* as to its Reputation, Trade, and Wealth,
under these two Reigns. We might, after this, compare the Figure in which these
Kingdoms, and the whole Protestant Interest of Europe, were placed by the
Conduct of King Charles the Second, and that of King Wiliam; and every one
knows which of the Schemes prevailed in each of those Reigns. I shall not
impute to any Tory Scheme the Administration of King James the Second, on
Condition that they do not reproach the Whigs with the Usurpation of Oliver; as
being satisfied that the Principles of those Governments are respectively
disclaimed and abhorred by all the Men of Sense and Virtue in both Parties, as
they now stand. But we have a fresh Instance which will be remembered with Grief
by the present Age and all our Posterity, of the Influence both of Whig and
Tory Principles in the late Reign. Was England ever so glorious in the Eyes of
Europe, as in that Part of it when the first prevailed? Or was it ever more
contemptible than when the last took Place.

I shall add, under this Head, the Preference of the Whig-Scheme, with regard
to Foreignners. All the Protestant States of Europe, who may be considered as
Neutral Judges between both Parties, and are Well wishers to us in general, as
to a Protestant People, rejoice upon the Success of a Whig-Scheme; whilst all
of the Church of Rome, who contemn, hate and detest us as the great Bulwark of
Heresy, are as much pleased when the opposite Party triumphs in its Turn. And
here let any impartial Man put this Question to his own Heart, whether that
Party does not act reasonably, who look upon the Dutch as their genuine Friends
and Allies, considering that they are of the Reformed Religion, that they have
assisted us in the greatest Times of Necessity, and that they can never
entertain a Thought of reducing us under their Power. Or, on the other hand,
let him consider whether that Party acts with more Reason, who are the avowed
Friends of a Nation, that are of the Roman Catholic Religion, that have
cruelly persecuted our Brethren of the Reformation, that have made Attempts in
all Ages to conquer this Island, and supported the Interest of that Prince, who
abdicated the Throne, and had endeavored to subvert our Civil and Religious
Liberties.

Thirdly, Let us compare these two Schemes from the Effects they produce among
our selves within our own Island; and these we may consider, first with regard
to the King, and secondly with regard to the People.

1st. With regard to the King. The Whigs have always professed and practiced an
Obedience which they conceive agreeable to the Constitution; whereas the Tories
have concurred with the Whigs in their Practice, though they differ from them
in their Professions; and have avowed a Principle of Passive-Obedience to the
Temptation, and afterward to the Destruction, of those who have relied upon
it. Nor must I here omit to take Notice of that firm and zealous Adherence
which the Whig-Party have shown to the Protestant Succession, and to the Cause
of His present Majesty. I have never heard of any in this Principle, who was
either guilty or suspected of Measures to defeat this Establishment, or to
overturn it, since it has taken effect. A Consideration, which it is hoped, may
put to silence those who upbraid the Whig-Schemes of Government, with an
Inclination to a Commonwealth, or a Dissaffection to Kings.

2dly With regard to the People. Every one must own, that those Laws which have
most conduced to the Ease and Happiness of the Subject, have always passed in
those Parliaments, which their Enemies branded with the Name of Whig, and
during the Time of a Whig-Ministry. And, what is very remarkable, the Tories
are now forced to have Recourse to those Laws for Shelter and Protection: by
which they tacitly do Honor to the Whig-Scheme, and own it more accommodated
to the Happiness of the People, than that which they espouse.

I hope I need not quality these Remarks with a Supposition which I have gone
upon through the whole Course of my Papers, that I am far from considering a
great Part of those who call themseves Tories, as Enemies to the present
Establishment; and that by the Whigs I always mean those who are Friends to our
Constitution, both in Church and State. As we may look upon these to be, in the
main, true Lovers of their Religion and Country, they seem rather to be
divided by accidental Friendships and Circumstances, than by any essential
Distinction.

No. 55. Friday, June 29.
-- caestus artemque repono. Virg.
A Rising of Parliament being a kind of Cessation from Politics, the
Freeholder cannot let his Paper drop at a more proper Juncture. I would not be
accessory to the continuing of our Political Ferment, when Occasions of Dispute
are not administered to us by Matters depending before the Legislature; and
when Debates without Doors naturally fall with those in the two Houses of
Parliament. At the same time a British Freeholder would very ill discharge his
Part, if he did not acknowledge, with becoming Duty and Gratitude, the
Excellency and Seasonableness of those Laws, by which the Representatives of
Men in his Rank have recovered their Country in a great measure out of its
Confusions, and provided for its future Peace and Happiness under the present
Establishment. Their unanimous and regular Proceeding, under the Conduct of
that honorable Person who fills their chair with the most consummate
abilities, and has justly gained the Esteem of all sides by the Impartiality
of his Behavior; the absolute Necessity of some Acts which they have passed,
and their Dis-inclination to extend them any longer, than that Necessity
required; Their manifest Aversion to enter upon Schemes, which the Enemies of
our Peace had insinuated to have been their Design; together with that Temper
so suitable to the Dignity of such an Assembly, at a Juncture when it might
have been expected that very unusual Heats would have arisen in a House of
Commons, so zealous for their King and Country; will be sufficient to quiet
those groundless Jealousies and Suspicions, which have been industriously
propagated by the Ill wishers to our Constitution.

The Undertaking, which I am now laying down, was entered upon in the very
Crisis of the late Rebellion, when it was the Duty of every Briton to
contribute his utmost Assistance to the Government, in a manner suitable to his
Station and Abilities. All Services, which had a Tendency to this End, had a
Degree of Merit in them, in proportion as the Event of that Cause which they
espoused was then doubtful. But at present they might be regarded, not as
Duties of private Men to their endangered Country, but as Insults of the
successful over their defeated Enemies.

Our Nation indeed continues to be agitated with Confusions and Tumults; but,
God be thanked, these are only the impotent Remains of an unnatural Rebellion,
and are no more than the After-tossings of a Sea when the Storm is laid. The
Enemies of His present Majesty, instead of seeing him driven from his Throne,
as they vainly hoped, find him in a Condition to visit his Dominions in
Germany, without any Danger to himself or to the Public; whilst his dutiful
Subjects would be in no ordinary Concern upon this occasion, had they not the
Consolation to find themselves left under the Protection of a Prince who makes
it his Ambition to copy out his Royal Father's Example; and who, by his Duty to
His Majesty, and Affection to His People, is so well qualified to be the
Guardian of the Realm.

It would not be difficult to continue a Paper of this kind, if one were
disposed to resume the same Subjects, and weary out the Reader with the same
Thoughts in a different Phrase, or to ramble through the Cause of Whig and
Tory, without any certain Aim or Method, in every particular Discourse. Such a
Practice in Political Writers, is like that of some Preachers taken Notice of
by Dr. South, who being prepared only upon two or three Points of Doctrrine,
run the same Round with their Audience, from one end of the Year to the other,
and are always forced to tell them, by way of Preface, These are Particulars of
so great Importance, that they cannot be sufficiently inculcated. To avoid this
Method of Tautology, I have endeavored to make every Paper a distinct Essay
upon some particular Subject, without deviating into Points foreign to the
Tenor of each Discourse. They are indeed most of them Essays upon Government,
but with a View to the present Situation of Affairs in Great Britain; so that
if they have the good Fortune to live longer than Works of this Nature
generally do, future Readers may see in them, the Complexion of the Times in
which they were written. However, as there is no Employment so irksome, as that
of transcribing out of one's self, next to that of transcribing out of others,
I shall let drop the Work, since there do not occur to me any material Points
arising from our present Situation, which I have not already touched upon.

As to the Reasonings in these several Papers, I must leave them to the
Judgment of others. I have taken particular Care that they should be
conformable to our Constitution, and free from that Mixture of Violence and
Passion, which so often creeps into the Works of Political Writers. A good
Cause does not want any Bitterness to support it, as a bad one cannot subsist
without it. It is indeed observable, that an Author is scurrilous in proportion
as he is dull; and seems rather to be in a Passion, because he cannot find out
what to say for his own Opinion, than because he has discovered any pernicious
Absurdities in that of his Antagonists. A Man satirized by Writers of this
Class, is like one burnt in the Hand with a cold Iron: There may be ignominious
Terms and Words of Infamy in the Stamp, but they leave no Impression behind
them.

It would indeed have been an unpardonable Insolence for a Fellow-Subject to
treat in a vindictive and cruel Style, those Persons whom His Majesty has
endeavored to reduce to Obedience by Gentle Methods, which he has declared
from the Throne to be most agreeable to his Inclinations. May we not hope that
all of this kind, who have the least Sentiments of Honor or Gratitude, will be
won over to their Duty by so many Instances of Royal Clemency, in the midst of
so many repeated Provocations! May we not expect that Cicero's Words to Caesar,
in which he speaks of those who were Caesar's Enemies, and of his Conduct
toward them, may be applied to His Majesty; Omnes enim qui fuerunt, aut sua
pertinacia vitam amiserunt, aut tua Misericordid retinuerunt; ut aut nulli
supersint de inimicis, aut qui superfuerunt, amicissimi sint. -- Quare gaude
tuo (...) tam excellenti bono, et fruere cum fortuna, et gloria, tum etiam
natura, et moribus tuis. Ex quo quidem maximus est fructus, jucunditasque
sapienti -- Nihil habet nec fortuna tua majus, quam ut possis, nec natura tua
melius, quam ut velis, quamplurimos conservare.

As for those Papers of a gayer Turn, which may be met with in this Collection,
my Reader will of himself, consider, how requisite they are to gain and keep up
an Audience to Matters of this Nature; and will perhaps be the more Indulgent
to them, if he observes, that they are none of them without a Moral, nor
contain any thing but what is consistent with Decency and Good Manners.

It is obvious that the Design of the whole Work, has been to free the Peoples
Minds from those Prejudices conveyed into them by the Enemies to the present
Establishment against the King and Royal Family, by opening and explaining
their real Characters; to set forth His Majesty's Proceedings, which have been
very grossly misrepresented, in a fair and impartial Light; to show the
Reasonableness and Necessity of our opposing the Pretender to his Dominions, if
we have any Regard to our Religion and Liberties: And, in a word, to incline
the Minds of the People to the Desire and Enjoyment of their own Happiness.
There is no Question, humanly speaking, but these great Ends will be brought
about insensibly, as Men will grow weary of a fruitless Opposition; and be
convinced by Experience, of a Necessity to acquiesce under a Government which
daily gathers Strength, and is able to disappoint the utmost Efforts of its
Enemies. In the mean while, I would recommend to our Malcontents, the Advice
given by a great Moralist to his Friend upon another Occasion; that he would
show it was in the Power of Wisdom to compose his Passions; and let that be the
Work of Reason which would certainly be the Effect of Time.

I shall only add, that if any Writer shall do this Paper so much Honor, as to
inscribe the Title of it to others, which may be published upon the laying down
of this Work; the whole Praise, or Dispraise of such a Performance, will belong
to some other Author; this 55th being the last Paper that will come from the
Hand of the Freeholder.

The END.
ERRATA
PAge 33. l. 2. for Jesuists. r. Jesuits. p. 35. l. 3. for Oaths r. Oath. p.
42. l. 36. for the r. their. p. 47. l. 13. for Name r. Names. p. 49. l. 8. for
reduce the method r. reduce to method. p. 52. l. 27. for shall r. should. p.
79. l. 13. for Consequences r. Consequence.


