OBSERVATIONS On the CURE of WILLIAM TAILOR, THE BLIND BOY of Ightham, in Kent;
Who being born with Cataracts in both Eyes, was at Eight Years of Age, brought
to Sight, on the 8th of October, 1751, By Mr. JOHN TAILOR, junr. OCULIST, in
Hatton Garden.

CONTAINING His strange Notions of Objects upon the first Enjoyment of his new
Sense: Also, some Attestations thereof, in a Letter written by his Father, Mr.
WILLIAM TAILOR, Farmer, in the same Parish. Interspersed with several curious
Examples and Remarks, historical and philosophical thereupon.

DEDICATED TO Dr. MONSEY, Physician to the Royal Hospital at C^^lsea.

ALSO Some ADDRESS to the PUBLIC, for a Contribution toward the Foundation of
an HOSPITAL for the BLIND, Already begun by some NOBLE PERSONAGES.

Printed by E. OWEN, in Hand-Court, Holborn, 1753.

A LIST OF THE Noblemen and eminent Persons who have ^mitted their Names to be
mentioned for Encouragement of this Treatise.
HIS Grace the Duke of Ancaster. The Duchess of Ancaster. The Rev. Gilbert
Affleck Harbord Astley, Esquire Mr. Arnaud, Surgeon Mr. Adderly Mr. Alexander Mrs.
Alexander Tho. Bladen, Esquire Mr. Briggs Mr. Burrow The Rev. Mr. Clendon --
Carter, Esquire Mr. Robert Cliff Mr. Chapman Mr. Dingley Mr. Drissield Mr. Dickens
Sir John Evelyn Col. Elleson Mr. De Ellens, a Swiss ^^^tleman, blind of (...)
Eyes, was lately co^^^ and restored to Sig^^ (...) Mr. Tailor, Oculi^^ (...)
Hatton-Garden, (...) Presence of Mr. (...) Fontaine, an emine^^ ^^^geon, in
Meard's (...) Dean-Street, Soho; (...) what is very remar^^^ had not the least
I^^^^mation during his (...) Simon Fanshaw, Esquire Wm. Fauquier, Esquire Mrs. Fauquier
Mr. De la Fontaine, S^ (...) Farran, French Teacher (...) Foot, Apothecary
(...) Froling Hogmagog (...) Grace the Duke of ^rafton (...) Right Honorable
the^^rl of Godolphin (...) ^d Garrick, Esquire (...) de Gray, Esquire (...) Honorable
William ^arvey, Esquire (...) ^am Harvey, Esquire of ^igwell (...) Hall (...) Johnson
of Eltham (...) Johnson (...) T. Johnson of Norwich (...) Grace the Duke of
^^ds (...) Grace the Duchess of ^^ds (...) Honorable James ^^nley, Esquire (...)
Rev. Mr. Love (...) Thomas Life, Surgeon, ^^^market (...) ^atham, Apothecary,
^^itham (...) Right Honorable ^^d John Murray ^^^m Mellish, Esquire (...) Mellish,
Esquire Mr. Mantineau, Watchmaker Miss Mautineau Francis Naylor, Esquire Piercy Windham
Obryen, Esquire T. Salter, Esquire Miss Oldfield Tho. Panton, Esquire Mrs. Panton Mr.
Francis Pit, Newmarket Mr. Palmer Wm. Robinson, Esquire Joseph Richardson, Esquire
Sleigh Soame, Esquire Mr. Shillingfleet Mr. Surman The Rev. Dr. James Tailor Philip
Ryley Tailor, Esquire Mrs. Tailor -- Tilson, Esquire Oliver Tilson, Esquire Hil-Street
James Trimmer, Esquire The Right Honorable the Earl of Waldgrave William Windham,
Esquire of Fellrig John Windham, Esquire Mr. Thomas Worlige, Painter Mr. Wilton
TO Dr. MONSEY.
SIR,
UNderstanding that you have been a singular Friend to Mr. Tailor, junr. in
recommending him to several Patients; and in particular, that you are
acquainted with his having had the Honor to attend his Grace the Duke of
Ancaster; and also of his having performed a remarkable Cure on one of his
Grace's Family, I am induced to take the Freedom of begging your Confirmation
thereof. I have been also informed, that you saw the Boy of Ightham, of whom
there will be a short Treatise speedily published; and if you made any Remarks
upon him, which you think may be serviceable to the Public, I should be very
proud of such Communication thereof, as may illustrate, and also confirm the
same; which will be looked upon as a great Honor conferred upon

SIR, Your obedient humble Servant, WM. OLDYS.
Sept. 20, 1720.

TO Mr. OLDYS.
SIR,
THAT I have been a Friend to Mr. TAILOR, jun. I am very ready to own, and wish
my Friendship could have been of more Service than I fear it has been, because
I think he deserves it; and I shall be glad to give him all the Assistance in
my Power for the Future.

I CAN attest the Truth not only of his having performed a very remarkable Cure
on one of his Grace the Duke of Ancaster's Family; but that he also had the
Honor of being twice sent for, from Town, by the Duke himself, to his Grace's
Seat at Grimesthorpe, in Lincolnshire,; where he attended his Grace under a
violent Inflammation in his Eyes; which Mr. Tailor treated with all due Care
and Judgment, 'till he effected a complete Recovery.

THE principal Observation I made upon the Ightham Boy, was, his confirming the
Phoenomenon in Vision, of Objects being painted, inverted upon the Retina; for
when a Pin was held upright before him, he constantly directed his Finger to
the Head, instead of the Point, and so, vice versa: How the Mind turns it
afterward, is a Question of another Kind, and very hard to be resolved.

I have been a Witness to several other very deplorable Cases, in which, he has
given surprising Relief; and if it were proper, I could name some other Persons
of the highest Rank and Quality, to whom he has given the fullest Satisfaction.

I have but one Thing more to add; which is, That my worthy Friend Mr.
Chiselden, in his Lifetime, gave this Man all the Encouragement in his Power;
and for this good Reason; because as he told me, he very well deserved it;
which I think too, or else I had saved you, and myself the Trouble of this
Answer.

I am, SIR, Your obliged, though unknown humble Servant, M. MONSEY.
Chelsea Hospital, Sept. 20, 1752.

TO Dr. MONSEY, Physician to the ROYAL HOSPITAL at Chelsea.
SIR,
AS great Weights may hang upon small Lines, we know not to what extensive
Benefit, the within proposed Foundation of an HOSPITAL for the BLIND, may
arrive; since the Constitution of such a necessary and desirable Charity, has
already been so generously patronized by his Grace the Duke of ANCASTER, and
the Right Honorable the Earl of GODOLPHIN, besides other noble and
publick-spirited Persons of Rank and Distinction, who have also signified their
favorable Disposition, as well to establish and maintain the same, as to
appropriate some reasonable Salary for the Encouragement of his Deserts, who
first offered this laudable Scheme thereof, and his Attendance upon the
Patients to be admitted therein.

Indeed, Merit is a Plant, not always of such a hardy and independent Nature,
as will rise to any eminent Head of its own Strength, and spread itself forth,
or flourish to the Notice, and fructify to the Advantage of Mankind, without
some Assistance: On the contrary, we see Virtue often like the Vine, apt to
droop with the Weight of its own vigorous Fertility, and even to trail, or
creep only along the Ground, till it withers and consumes away, or is trampled
on, and crushed under Foot, without some friendly and fostering Hand to rear,
conduct, and display it, to the cherishing Beams of the Sun: Then will it
produce its Fruits to Maturity in Abundance, and adorn its Supporters with many
a generous Cluster.

Upon these Considerations, it is with the greatest Satisfaction that I
perceive, in your courteous Answer to my Letter annexed, how cordially you
have, by your benevolent Recommendations, promoted the Practice and Interest of
Mr. Tailor, who first proposed the Foundation of the Hospital aforesaid, and
among the many other Distempers of the Eyes by him relieved, performed the
remarkable Cure that is the Subject of the following Discourse, which I beg
leave to offer the Public, under the Shelter and Protection of your Name. Had
you been in Town, I would have personally entreated the Favor of this Liberty,
as a further Proof of your Friendship, to the Performer of that Cure, and of
its great Influence, if it should extenuate the Imperfections in this
Representation of it. But as the Impression is so nearly finished, I hope you
will pardon the Presumption of this Address, as also that of publishing my
Letter to you, with your Answer; since others may be confirmed thereby, in the
Contents of it, no less than,

SIR, Your obliged humble Servant, WM. OLDYS.


OBSERVATIONS On the CURE of William Tailor, THE BLIND BOY Of IGHTHAM.
SINCE our merciful Creator has condescended to render himself more visible in
his Operations, than his Essence, what an invaluable Blessing ought we to
esteem it, that he has assisted our Reason, with such an admirable Sense, as
that of Sight, through such curious Organs as the Eyes! Whereby we may every
Moment confirm ourselves in the Omnipotence and Eternity of his Being, by the
continual Wonders of his Works; whereby, all those, who rationally behold the
Miracles of his Creation, must be illuminated in their Souls, with those
Attributes of their Creator, though these Luminaries of the Body.

AND as it is a Satisfaction unexpressible, in Minds divinely exalted, to enjoy
those ocular Confirmations, what miserable Darkness must it be, to be deprived
of them? But to what Strait, what narrow Limits must their Knowledge and Ideas
be contracted, who have been led about, in this State of Obscurity, from the
Time of their Birth, for the whole Night of their Lives? What a comfortless
Condition, to think, that all Places and Things, are to them alike dismal, and
the whole Universe itself but a Dungeon! But on the other hand, to consider,
what a Feast of Felicities must be spread before them, in having such Loss
repaired; such Want supplied, and that inestimable Benefit of Sight, from which
the Eyes of the Blind, had been, by natural Defects, Diseases, or Accidents, so
long debarred, suddenly, by the skilful Hand of their Fellow Creature, bestowed
upon them! When he draws the Curtain of Darkness from before them, and opens at
once, as it were a new Creation of Images and Objects, in moving and still
Life; at once, a most spacious and opulent Prospect, of all Varieties, on every
Side, in this lower World, and innumerable Worlds themselves, glittering in the
vast Expance above! For all which serviceable, delightful, glorious and
mavelous Scenes, to be made Partaker, what Reward, what Recompense can be
adequate? And yet of so much Happiness, how long will some remain unpossess'd?
because their penurious and enthralled Souls cannot give them Liberty to make
any reasonable Return of Gratitude, but will rather constrain them to continue
moping on, in perpetual Pain or Darkness, than let them bestow any thing for
the Enjoyment of their Sight. Some again are deterred from seeking any Redress,
through a Prejudice raised by Ignorance against it, under the distasteful Notion
of trying Practices, and dabbling or tampering with their Eyes: So through their
diffident, obstinate, or indolent Delay, in admitting timely and proper
Applications to disperse, or assuage their Disorder, at the Beginning of its
first and unsettled Invasion, or Encroachment upon them, submit to, as what
could not be prevented, the daily Depravation of their Sight; or perhaps at
last, permit themselves to be quite blinded, even by those very ignorant
People, who dissuaded them from attempting to be restored, by such as have the
greatest Skill, and are best qualified to relieve them. And lastly, how long
will others refrain from applying for such Relief, through the fear of some
little short, or sudden Smart, which the diseased Organ may endure in the
Recovery; so let their Maladies grow stronger and more stubborn, as the Organ
itself, its Spirits, Humors, or Muscles grow weaker, and more decayed or
corrupted, till by Inflammations, and other dangerous Consequencies, they become
incureable; when the lightest Brushing over the Eye, with the Corner of an
Handkerchief, a little Dust, a Pinch of Snuff blown into it, or the bare
washing it with any strong Liquor, no less than the more violent Wounds, Blows,
and Distempers, which blind it, shall often be more painful than the Operations
by which the gentle and careful Hand of an experienced Oculist restores it to
Sight.

WHEN we read among the many Volumes which have been written upon the Eyes,
that there are above Two hundred and forty Diseases, with their Complications,
to which they, and their relative Parts are incident, we cannot but perceive,
there are room and Business enough, for several ingenious Men to make this
beautiful Orb, minute as it is, with the Preservation, or Restoration of its
most precious Sense, their sole Study and Practice: And as it may be Employment
enough, to devote their whole Time to it, so there ought to be Encouragement
enough in these, as in France and other Countries, to engage them assiduously
in the Attainment of a successful Proficiency therein. If many, from the
meanest Excrescences, by keeping our Hair, our Corns, and Nails in due and
convenient Retrenchment, have established very comfortable Ocupations, and cut
themselves out very decent Livelyhoods, independent of Physic, Surgery,
Anatomy, or Pharmacy, for the Ease chiefly of our Feet; how much more deserve
they, who, besides the Merit of being acquainted with the nobler, more
considerable and important Objects of their Practice, can by the Knowledge and
Aid also of those Sciences, joined with their own Experience, preserve or
recover our Sight, by which those very Feet are guided, and we are assisted to
exercise them? If many Hospitals and Infirmaries have been charitably erected,
and endowed, for the Lame, why none for the Blind? Since the Blind may be as
well Lame as they, incapable as they are, of using their Arms or Legs to any
Effect; or as unable to walk without a Leader, as a Cripple without a Crutch;
and since, the Cure of the Blind requires longer Experience, deeper Penetration
into the Nature of its Object, and more delicate Operations than the Lame.

IT is less difficult to attain a superficial Knowledge of the Disorders that
affect the Body of Man in general, than a profound Knowledge of those which
distress some Parts in particular, whereof the Eye is the Chief; complicated as
it is, of such fine solid, as well as subtle and spiritous Matter; consisting
of such various Compositions, such different Substances, Teguments, Films,
Fluids, Muscles, Nerves, Veins, and Fibers; such an elementary Labyrinth of
concordant Parts, mutually reflecting all Images to the Organ of Sight, and all
in such close Compact and circular Confines: Yet is it also, of such a refined
Frame and Texture, of such a tender and sensible Nature, that it is subject to
numerous Defects, Distempers and Disasters, which often lie so intricately
involved, or internally concealed, as to be even undiscernable to ordinary
Inspection, and sometimes almost inaccessible to proper Applications for its
Relief, without creating Disorders, greater than are attempted to be cured.
Upon the mature Consideration hereof, we may well agree with that learned and
ingenious Gentleman, who has observed that, "Those Defects and Diseases, so
numerous, are more than sufficient to employ the whole Study and Attention of
any one Person, be his Abilities ever so great, or his Knowledge ever so
extensive. Hence it is, That Patients commonly meet with such bad Success, from
their Application to Gentlemen whose Judgment and Skill, in other Parts of the
human Body, may indeed be unexceptionable, but whose Practice is too general,
to permit them to make any considerable Improvement in the Knowledge of this
one Organ, the Structure of which is so delicate, and its Parts so exquisitely
fine and minute, that it will hardly bear any Mistakes in the Treatment of its
Diseases, since the first false Step in these Cases, is always of dangerous,
and very often of fatal Consequence."

BUT there are other Difficulties and Disadvantages, which are apt to divert,
or deter a Student from practicing with Success, upon this most necessary,
comprehensive, and elegant Organ: For, besides that the Transition of Studies
and Experiments, from one ailing Part of the Body to another, external and
internal, as well for healing as restoring of Health, is more engaging to the
Curiosity of a Practitioner, through the Diversity of Objects and Operations,
than a constant and confined Attachment to any one Organ of Sense, that
contains a greater Variety, in a more contracted Compass, and requires Methods
of Treatment more nice and curious, dexterous and difficult; there is this
further Discouragement, attending the said more particular Attachment to the
Relief of this, or any other Sense, that, as there are fewer Patients, and more
indigent Objects, there is less Prospect of Profit from professing to restore
only one little Part, how useful or important soever, of the human Frame, than
those usually meet with, who promise, and undertake to cure all Diseases, in
every Part of every Body.

These, among other Reasons, render our Obligations the greater, to those few
who have so circumscribed their Experience, and so confined themselves to this
distinct and more unbeaten Path, as to acquire the most acurate Skill and
Expertness, in the said more difficult, and less advantageous Branch of the
Practice; which therefore, so much more deserves the Encouragement of the
Public, as the Patients are more unfrequent, and dispersed, less acquainted,
where they may repair for Assistance, and less able to recompense in any
Proportion, of their own single Substance, or Abilities, the whole Application,
Time and Attendance, of an expert Oculist, in his more private Situation. That
this is a very seasonable and promising Juncture, to solicit such a needful
Benefaction, may be presumed, in that there have been so many others of late
Years established, which flourish with Success, and however laudable, are not
more necessary. Therefore it is to be hoped, that Charity will remain no longer
liable to the Suspicion of being any ways defective in her own Eyes, by
overlooking the most effectual Means of Relief to those which are blind: Those,
whose most wretched Lives are lingering on, in the most helpless, destitute and
deplorable Condition, of Darkness, Beggary and Want: But that she will also
stretch her Hands, no less extensively forth, as to many others, so to these
most unhappy Objects of Compassion, who have hitherto so much escaped the
bountiful and unanimous Contributions of her gracious and generous Votaries.
"The Imperfections however, of whose good Designs, in the Foundations they have
encouraged, are not," as a judicious Author has lately observed, "more glaring
in any Instance, than in that great Number we continually meet with, of poor
People, who are either totally blind, or else labor under such Diseases in the
Eyes, as for want of proper Assistance, from such, whose whole Study and
Practice are confined to this one Organ, do, notwithstanding general
Application, still continue in a State of Misery, and must ever remain, unless
relieved by Those who are willing to encourage and promote their Recovery, by
commending them to such particular Practitioners, who are most likely to effect
it". Wherefore we are assured, as the same Author continues, "It is with this
Consideration, that several Persons of Quality and Distinction, have agreed to
contribute to the Relief of such unhappy Sufferers, by a generous SUBSCRIPTION:
whereby they who labor under any ocular Disorder, may without the least
Expense, have the Assistance of Mr. JOHN TAILOR, jun. Oculist, in Hatton
Garden, and be supplied with every Thing needful to their Cure, though their
Cases require ever so much Time and Attendance, and their Circumstances are too
narrow to support the Expense that would otherwise necessarily attend Cures of
this Nature".

UNDER this Gentleman then, and such other Co-operators, as shall be appointed
with competent Salaries, we may hence hope to see the beneficent Foundation
here proposed, effectually pursued, and brought to an honorable Conclusion, by
a Number of such noble and generous Subscribers, as, in Consequence of the
worthy Examples begun, will procure a Patent for the same, and elect such
Governors to form the Plan, proportion the Expense, and provide such commodious
Habitation, or settled Place of Abode, that, besides even those of better Rank,
a Number of neglected and forlorn Patients also, who are now led about half
naked, and starving, as Vagabonds, may know where to apply themselves, and meet
with the soundest Advice, most sovereign Medicines, and other Administrations;
or such further humane Provision, Tendance and Assistance, as may be found
requisite, for their being admitted either within Doors, or supplied with all
proper Means of Redress without, as the Nature of their Conditions,
Circumstances, and Cases, or the Extent of the Charity will admit. Under such
Patronage, we hope to see such a Benefaction established, which has been so
hopefully proposed by Mr. Tailor, who has already, toward bringing the same to
Perfection, met with the Encouragement of some noble Persons, for his Knowledge
and Success in ocular Diseases; as having had five Years Education in France,
been regularly trained under the great Practice of his Father, and also had
Experience of his own, for nine Years successively in London. Among his many
extraordinary Cures, that which he performed the last Year upon William Tailor,
the blind Boy of Ightham in Kent, being not the least memorable, or worthy of
Observation, I shall here, so far as good Vouchers will authorize, be somewhat
particular thereon.

As there was no Prospect of procuring this Boy any Relief that might restore
him to his Sight, in the Country, where he lived, he was recommended to the
Care of the said Mr. John Tailor, the Younger, at London; who soon found him so
lively and active, that he would not suffer his Eyes to be even examined,
without much struggling: But after some serious and affecting Expostulations
with him; after the strongest Assurances given him, that if he did not
patiently comply with the only Means that were to be used for his Cure, he
would be deprived of all Ways to get his Livelihood; must be a Beggarboy, in
want of Clothes and Victuals, and be led about, to seek his Bread, from Door to
Door, like such a one, of whom he had heard, and have nothing to depend upon,
but the cold, scanty, and precarious Relief of an hard-hearted World; he
thereupon consented to undergo any Trial that should be made upon him, at his
Father's House in the Country. Accordingly the Oculist went thither; but being
apprehensive that his Patient would not lie so still on the Table, as such a
tender and steady Operation of his Hand required, he told him that he must be
tied fast down, from stirring or winching: But he, as he could see no Danger,
felt no Fear; therefore absolutely promised, he would, without any Constraint,
lie unmoved; which he did, with his Hands in his Pockets, till the Obstruction
in his right Eye, was, in little more than a Minute, entirely removed, without
the least starting or Complaint. As soon as the inside of his Eye was cleared
of its little thick, white, cloudy Spot, by that delicate Depression of it,
with the Needle, which is called Couching, so that it quite subsided, and did
no longer intercept the Light, or Admission of Objects to the Organs of Vision,
he, being asked by some of the Company, for there were sixteen of his
Neighbors present. What he saw? Answered, with a Kind of wild Transport, and
Wonder, at the strange Shapes, Forms, and Colors of many Things, so
incomprehensible about him, that He beheld the Room full of Lights, and Moons.
For, as I understand, his Eyes were not so totally dark'ned by the Cataracts,
but that he had some faint Discernment, or glimmering Sensation of luminous
Bodies, admitted round the Pupil; as in the most ordinary Eclipses of the Sun,
the Moon's Disk does not so entirely over-shadow and obscure it, but that some
Edgings of its Light will irradiate, or break out at its Sides, or
Circumference; the like of which, might help the Boy to describe some shining
Utensils he now saw, by those Names: For next Time, upon the Dressing of his
Eye, he declared, as it is attested in a Letter of his Father's, That he saw
the Pewter on the Shelf, with the Clock, and its Case; that all these Things
the Boy knew before by Feeling, and, I dare say, adds he, that now he can see
the abovementioned Things.

THESE are his Father's Words; and they have been construed to signify, that
the Boy distinctly named those several Pieces of Furniture, upon his first
beholding them, from the Knowledge he before had by Feeling them, without
having felt them again, after the Use of his Sight. But such a familiar
Acquaintance instantly with Objects never before seen, how frequently so ever
before felt, has been much disputed by some Oculists and Opticians, who have
deeply considered the Properties and Powers of Sight, so long kept an utter
Stranger to those Objects. Indeed the Clock might be discoverable to him, by
the Help of his Hearing; as from the Vibrations of its Pendulum, striking, and
other Sounds; but the Dishes, Plates, Shelves, and other Things, though perhaps
often handled, could as it is thought, scarcely be named, upon the first Sight
only of them; at least, without Feeling again, and a better Knowledge of those
Parts and Places in the Room, where he might before feel them, than he could
receive in his State of Blindness, or retain, and refer to, at first Sight.

HOWEVER, there is an ingenious Author, the Reverend Mr. Edward Sing, the same
I take it, who was the late Archbishop of Tuam, in Ireland, who has argued
that, the Images of Things shall be so well known to the Sense of Seeing, how
newly soever brought to use, only by the Ideas conceived of them, through the
Sense of Feeling, that the Patient shall be able instantly to know, and name
them, without feeling them any more, to inform or confirm his Sight. His
Arguments are drawn from a Problem, that was sent by Mr. William Molyneux, to
Mr. Lock, who has honored it with a Place in his Essay on Human Understanding
Page 67.
: The Case stands thus, in the said Mr. Synge's Letter to Dr. Quayl Vide The
Familliar Letters between Mr. Lock, and several of his Friends. 8vo. 1708, p.
135.
. "A Man born perfectly Blind, has a Globe and a Cube given into his Hands, and
instructed, as much as he is capable of, in the Notion of each of these
Figures, and the Difference between them. Let us now suppose, this Man to be
suddenly endowed with the Sense of Seeing, and the Question is, Whether the
Globe and the Cube, being placed before his Eyes, he would be able, by his
Sight alone, and without touching them, to tell which was the Globe, and which
the Cube?" Then, one of his Arguments is, -- " If immediately, upon the Sight
of the Globe and the Cube, there be Grounds enough for such a Person clearly to
perceive the Agreement and the Difference, between his pre-concived Ideas, and
newly conceived Images of those Figures; then may he be able to know, which is
the Globe, and which the Cube, without touching them again, after he has seen
them. For the Agreement which he may find between his Idea, and his Image of a
Globe, and the Difference of the Idea of a Globe, from the Image of a Cube, et
sic vice versa, will be a sufficient Direction: If," as he repeats again,
"there be a sufficient Ground, immediately to perceive the said Agreement and
Difference". So, without clearing this Doubt, which he has twice suggested, he
concludes, such Distinction may be made by Sight alone, and the Patient be
thereby rendered able to know, and name one Object from the other. But Mr.
Molyneux, in a Letter of his to Mr. Lock, wherein he incloses that of Mr.
Sing, tells him; "You will find thereby, that what I say, of its puzling some
ingenious Men, is true; and you will easily discover, by what false Steps this
Gentleman is led into his Error" Idem. p. 133.
. And in another "Letter before, to Mr. Lock, wherein Mr. Molyneux first
states this Problem", he assures him that, "He had proposed it to diverse
ingenious Men, and could hardly ever meet with one that, at first Dash, would
give me the Answer to it, which I think true, till by hearing my Reasons, they
were convinced." Then having delivered the Problem, to the Sense above
repeated, with the Question, "Whether by his Sight, before he touched them, he
could now distinguish, and tell which is the Globe, which the Cube?" He answers
himself, in the Negative, and gives his own Reason in these Words: "For, though
he has obtained the Experience, how a Globe, how a Cube affects his Touch; yet,
he has not yet attained the Experience, that what affects my Touch, so or so,
must affect my Sight, so or so; or, that a protuberant Angle in the Cube, that
pressed his Hand unequally, shall appear to his Eye, as it does in the Cube"
Ibid. p. 37, 38.
.

IT may be considered, whether this Opinion upon that Problem, might not
receive some further Confirmation, from the Mistake of a certain blind Man,
who, as it is reported, upon his being first brought to Sight, could not
distinguish, by that Sense, a plain Superficies, from a prominent Body; or the
Figures of Men painted in Colors, all even, upon a Canvas, or Wainscot
Picture, from those of living Persons; but was greatly surpised at his
Disappointment, that he could not find those Figures, as Men, by feeling, no
less than he though he had found them such, by his Sight: And being told they
were only the artificial Imitations of Men, in their Size, Shapes and
Proportions, by the well-disposed Lights, and Shades of Colors, he asked, Why
then, which of the Two is the lying Sense? He meant, the deceived Sense, not
yet having had the Experience of knowing the Proverb, That Seeing is believing,
but Feeling, the Truth. And it may still be further considered, whether
external Objects, when rendered visible, by the Cure of a blind Person, may not
contradict, or at least confound the internal Conceptions he had of them,
before he could see; and whether they may not, to the Eye, which is first
brought to the Sight of them, become thereby rather less known; more
incomprehensible and confusing, through the vast Variety of their new, and
strange Forms, Dimensions, and Complexions, without any Assistance from any
other Sense; and consequently, less able to be named, than some of them might
have been, by the Intelligence of some other Sense, during the former Privation
of Sight? Therefore the Boy of Ightham, as he discovered much Consternation
upon the first Sight of the various Objects about him, might, if he felt not
the Things mentioned in his Father's Letter, above cited, before he named them,
have them inadvertently named to him, in the very Questions that were put to
him, Whether he saw them? As thus, -- What do you see? Can you see the Pewter
Dishes here, on this Shelf? The Plates on that? The Clock there, its Case,
Glass? etc. The Enquirer pointing to the Places where they stood; and the Boy
might answer yes, name those several Things, as he heard them named, and saw
them; and also point out the Places where they stood, as he had been led the
Way. Which may be a truer Interpretation of his Father's Words, That he
declared he saw the Pewter on the Shelf, etc. than that he first named the
Pewter, and other Things himself, as soon as he first saw them.

THIS being presumed the Case, it may render his Nomination of those Things
accountable, and clear him from the Objection that was made to the Beggar of
St. Albans; who pretending to have been miraculously endowed with perfect
Sight, though blind from his Birth, upon offering up his Prayers at the Shrine of
that Saint, was brought before the sagacious Duke Humphrey, and asked by him,
of what Colors the Gowns of several Persons present, and other Things were,
that were pointed out to him; which, he naming truly, was justly, as an
Impostor, sent to the Stocks; for he could no more know the Names of all
Colors, by barely once seeing them, than he could those, of all the Men
present, only at first Sight; as Sir Thomas More has very judiciously observed
In his Dialogue on the Worship of Images and Relics, praying to Saints, etc.
From whence Shakespeare has brought the Story of the said Impostor, under the
Name of Simcox, upon the Stage, in one Part of his Play of King Henry VI.
. Indeed had that Beggar, while he was blind, if he was ever so, been taught to
name the Colors of Things, with the Things themselves, he might, after he was
brought to Sight, upon having those Things produced, and named to him, name, by
the Help of his Memory, the Colors also, whose Names had been combined with,
or annexed to them; and from thence likewise, the same Colors in different
Things. For Example, had he heard, in the State of Blindness, some Things
called Blood-red, others Sky-blue, or Grass-green; some Coal-black, and others
Milk-white; he probably, when he was brought to the Sense of seeing, upon being
showed some Milk, and told its Name, and asked what else it was called, would
answer, it was White; though the Meaning of the Word, he could not explain; but
being told it was its Color, which distinguished it from others to the Eye,
and from thence being referred to a Piece of clean Linen, or some white Paper,
he would say it was of the same Color; and so of the rest: Otherwise, for a
Man to name all Colors, which he had never before seen, is a greater Miracle,
than that of being brought to the Sight of them, only by the Intercession,
here, in that Cure, at the Shrine of St. Alban pretended. But to return:

At the next opening of the Boy's Eye, the Persons attending to dress it, said
it appeared very clear; and then, besides the Things within Doors, he took
Notice of the Barn, and other Outhouses; and, in the Letter of his Father's
aforesaid, I find it attested that, He had never felt any Pain, since the first
Operation. A few Days after, he was set before a Looking-glass, and was greatly
delighted with the little Man he saw in it, whom he would have to be his own
Man, because he so obediently imitated, or repeated all the Motions and
Gestures, which he made, with his Head, Mouth, and Hands; but said, He would
not close his Eyes, till he himself did first; and whenever he went abroad, he
wanted, and asked for his little Man, to go along with him. It Is in this View
or Prospect, of that surprising and agreeable Figure, that his Sculpture was
preferred to be represented, with an oval Glass in his Hand, by that ingenious
Artist, Mr. Thomas Worlige, who lately published a Print of him, which he has
etch'd upon Copper, in a small Octavo Size. But to many other Images he could
not so soon reconcile himself: For, when he saw any large Utensil, Piece of
Furniture, or Apparel, that stood, or lay near him, he discovered himself so
perplexed to go forward, that he would not stir, till he was told what it was,
how far off, and how to avoid, or pass by it; herein agreeing exactly with the
Behavior of the blind Youth of Newington, when he was first brought to Sight
by Mr. Grant, in the latter Part of Queen Anne's Reign, as the ingenious Author
of the Tatler, among other curious Circumstances, has remarked Vol. 2d. Edit.
1712. P. 31.
; where we are informed that, "When he offered to move, he seemed afraid of
every Thing around him". Yet, one Evening, this young Patient of Ightham, then
residing, for some time at Mr. Taylor's, in Hatton Garden, stole up to the Top
of the House, and clamber'd out at Window, along the leaden Gutter, without any
Apprehension of Danger; but being discovered, brought down, and asked, what
induced him to hazard his Life, if by a Slip of his Foot, he had tumbled to the
Ground? He replied that, He only went thither to catch the Moon. When I saw
him, some Weeks after he had received this new Sense, I observed, the Eye which
was brought to Light, was, in all due Motion and Symetry, very clear, lively,
and brisk; but it seemed more infantine, or as if it belonged to a Body,
younger than one even of his Years; not looking methought, so strong, bold, and
ample in the Pupil, as if it had been longer exercised in the Reception of
various Objects. He is a Lad of a pleasant Aspect, fair Complexion, with
Features soft, and agreeable; also of a sprightly and cheerful Temper; and has
a quick or ready Ear for Music; insomuch that, to several Tunes played before
him, on the German Flute, he would join in Concert with his Hands, by drumming
them over, at the same Time, upon the Table.

WHETHER he was, as yet, but short-sighted, through the Want of some transparent
Humor, in the room of that which was depressed, or he only appeared so, through
his Ignorance of the proper Space, at which he might distinguish his Objects, I
will not decide; but it was remarked that, when some Money was laid on the
Table; Gold, Silver, and Copper; and he was bid to take up a Guinea, or a
Shilling, he would look, as it were, first for the Table; then, upon several
Parts of it, before he found where the Money lay; and when he perceived it, by
holding his Head down very near it, he would offer to snatch at the Piece he
aimed at, two or three Times before he could reach it, because he could have no
Notion of Distances; which made him before so little afraid of being at the Top
of the House, and think, from thence, of catching the Moon.

IT is credibly attested that, the ingenious Mr. King, who reads Lectures upon
Optics, and other Parts of Philosophy, has asserted that, all Objects, to a
Person who is first brought from Blindness to Sight, do appear inverted; and
that, he confirmed himself in the same Opinion, by some Experiments which he
made upon this Boy; who having a Pin held up before him, of which he had been
taught to distinguish the Point from the Head, and being bid to touch the Head,
he laid his Finger upon the Point of it. The same Mistake he committed in three
several Attempts; upon which, the Gentleman who made the Experiments smiled,
and said, He knew it would be so. Those who have seemed unwilling this Mistake
should be ascribed to the Objects appearing to the Boy inverted, are not
satisfied belike in some Doubts; as First, Whether the Boy's Mistake was not
owing, in this Trial, no less to his Ignorance of Situations, as to higher and
lower, or right and left, than it was in others before, to his Ignorance in the
Distances of Things, further or nearer? And Secondly, they thought it very
extraordinary, that the Eye, framed, and intended by Nature, most exactly and
constantly, to reflect and report, the true unperverted, Positions of Objects,
should, as in Submission to one of her most capricious Operations, be at first,
so unnaturally disposed, as to behold those Objects in the most false,
unfaithful, and preposterous Positions; and yet, so change to the utmost
Extreme, as to reverse, rather than ratify the Habit, by further Practice of
the same Organs, in the same Manner, upon the same Objects; so that those
Things which appeared to the same Eye, one while upside down, shall appear at
other Times, or at all Times after, upright, and on their proper Basis! Whether
such Appearances of Objects in the Reverse, might be owing to any Insufficiency
in one of the Humors, upon the Vacancy made by the Removal of the opaque and
phlegmatic Obstruction; whether to some Irregularity, some Indisposition in the
Retina, or in any other Mediums to the Sensory in the Brain, which were not yet
settled in their due Place or Proportion, by Exercise, and Experience in proper
Distances, for a true Reflection of Objects, we need not here so much consider,
as whether some Light into the Cause, might not be reflected from the usual
Experiments, with an ordinary Unequal Glass; which being held to any Characters
or Images near at hand, shall only magnify, but not reverse them; and yet the
same Glass, held almost at Arms Length, toward those Objects, at a further
Distance, shall both diminish, and turn them all topsy-turvy.

So that to see Things first in this Manner, how much soever it may have of
Truth or Fact in it, and therefore may be less rare and uncommon; yet is it no
less remarkable, in this Boy, and all in his Case, to have been endowed with
that Faculty really, which was long since observed apparently, in another Boy,
mentioned by old Dr. William Bulleyn In his Dialogue of the Pestilence. 80.
1569. Fol. 55. b.
, who tells us, He had two Sights in one Eye. And if such the Property be, or
Objects do after that Manner, appear inverted, at their first Admission to the
so long obstructed Organ of Sight, it may possibly illustrate the blind Man's
Similitude in the Gospel; who being brought to the Use of that Sense, and
asked, if he could see any Thing, answered that, He saw Men like Trees,
walking. Mark viii. 24.
For, however he knew the Trees at first Sight, enough to name them, Men
reversed, or standing upon their Heads, with their Arms and Legs, as it were,
branching uppermost, are more like Trees, and in that supposed Posture have
oftener of old been compared to them, than when they stand upon their Feet. And
what makes it more credible, that this Man was at first confused with the Sight
of those Men in such perverted Attitudes, is, that in the very next Verse, it
is said, after he had been touched again, by the same all-healing Hand, that He
was restored, and saw every Man clearly: That is, distinctly and perfectly, in
his real, and proper Posture.

OTHER, and more remarkable Observations might perhaps have been made, had any
Thoughts of preserving and recommending them to public Application or
Intelligence, been designed at the first bringing of this Boy to Sight; and
several philosophical Elucidations in the Doctrine of Vision, might also
perhaps be further made, from the Particulars above, were it necessary or
convenient to be more extensive and circumstantial in this Place thereon.

TO Mr. JOHN TAILOR, junior, BY Mr. BOYCE.
WHILE modest Merit does its Rays conceal,
Let the just Muse draw the injurious Veil;
It Is here is, fair Truth, distinguished to display,
And place by Virtue, in its native Day.
Then take rare Oculist, these artless Lays,
As the free Tribute of unpurchas'd Praise.
No longer timid, in Retirement pine,
But claim the Notice that is justly Thine.
SAY, of the Blessings to Mankind decreed,
From great Hippocrates, to greater Mead,
The sovereign Secrets of their Godlike Art,
Which often have warded Fate's approaching Dart;
Can any with thy noble Science vie?
Which guards that guiding Lamp of Life, the Eye;
Gives us the heavenly Joys of Light to know,
For what is Darkness, but infernal Woe!
And clear from Clouds, redeems the visual Ray,
To bless the Blind, who wish in vain for Day.
RARE Oculist! could thou restore aright
But intellectual, as Organic Sight;
Could thy enlightening Needle but advance,
The Cataracts to remove, of Ignorance;
Unveil the Films, couch the distorted Eyes
Of squinting Envy, scoulding Prejudice;
Art would, with Praise, and Wealth embroidered be,
And Worth, no more dwell with Obscurity;
Thy Cures, with Fame's best Quills, she should record
Thy Lights, through Men, should glorify their Lord,
Thy Skill, all Eyes, from deepest Darkness free;
Though none so blind, as those who will not see.
A SPECIMEN OF SOME Of the MANY Remarkable CURES, OF Various Diseases in the
EYES and EYELIDS; PERFORMED BY Mr. JOHN TAILOR, jun. OCULIST, IN HATTON
GARDEN, since the Year, 1743. Containing a List of the Patients Names, and
their respective Places of Abode.

LONDON: Printed by E. OWEN, in Hand-Court, Holborn, 1752.

A SPECIMEN OF REMARKABLE CURES.
PATIENTS.

WIlliam Tailor, Son of Mr. William Tailor, Farmer, at Ightham, in Kent, a Boy
Eight Years old, born blind, with Cataracts in both Eyes, and brought to Sight
in October, 1751,

Mr. Austine, Master of the Breakfasting-house, opposite Sadlers-Wells,
Islington; upwards of 65 Years of Age.

DISEASES.

An Abscess in the Left Eye, occasioned by a long and violent Inflammation, and
attended with a total Loss of Sight.

N. B. This Patient had been under the Care of an eminent Surgeon, and an
Apothecary; by both of whom his Case was deemed incurable.

(...) John Jarrat, Horse-bridle Founder, in Hosier-(...) West-Smithfield;
about 40 Years old.

A thick Opacity (or Speck) on the Cornea, entirely obstructing Sight, attended
with the most excruciating Torment, and an Inflammation so violent as to deprive
the Patient of Rest for the Space of five Weeks: For the Cure of which,
Application was first made to the Surgeons, etc. of St. Bartholomew's, and by
them all the Patient's Sight was unanimously judged to be irretrievably lost.

A Daughter of Mr. Gardner, an eminent Butcher, in Hollis-Street, Clare-Market;
a Child of about five Years of Age.

Two large Albugines, (or White Films) one on each Eye, attended with no
Inflammation nor Pain, but a total Deprivation of Sight.

N. B. This Child had likewise been a considerable Time under the Care of an
eminent Surgeon.

A Child about five or six Years old, Daughter to Mr. Roybold, Master of the
Bell Inn, in West-Smithfield.

An Albugo, (or White Film) over one Eye, attended with Inflammation and Loss
of Sight.

Mrs. Orneau's in Brook-Street, Holborn; a young Lady of about 22 Years of Age.

An Oedema, (or Wenn) on the upper Eyelid of her left Eye, about the Magnitude
of a large Nut, the Weight of which had caused the Eyelid to fall, so as to
cover half of the Pupil. This Cure was performed without the least Hazard or
Loss of the natural Motion of the Eyelid.

A little Boy about five or six Years old, a Son of Mr. Rook, an eminent
Farrier, in Salisbury-Court, Fleet Street.

An Oedema (or Wenn) on the upper Eyelid, about half the Bigness of that
abovementioned, and like it in every other Particular, except that this had
the additional Disadvantage of being attended with an Inflammation in the Eye.

A Maid Servant at the Queen's Head, in Albermarle-Street.

An Ectropion (or Eversion) of the lower Eyelid, occasioned by a large Tumor
about the Size of a Pidgeon's Egg, attended with an intolerable inflammatory
Pain in the Eye.

This Cure was performed with such happy Success, that not only the Excresence
was removed; but the Eyelid was likewise restore to its pristine State.

Mr. Rapson, Watch-maker, near Goldsmith's-Hall.

A terrible Opthalmia (or Inflammation) occasioned by a Blow in the left Eye,
so violent, that for some Time it quite deprived the Patient of Vision.

A Child about six Years of Age, Daughter to a Servant belonging to the Earl of
Godolphin, in Stable Yard, St. James's.

An Opthalmia (or Inflammation) in each Eye, proceeding from an internal Cause,
together with Opacities in both Eyes, greatly obstructing Vision.

James Dowset, Labourer, of Rumford in Essex.

Two Guttae Serenae, one in each Eye; a Disease which has hitherto, by most
Practitioners been judged incurable. Nevertheless, this poor Man is so well
recovered to Sight, that he is capable not only of guiding himself, but of
performing his daily Labor as before.

PATIENTS restored to Sight of different Diseases.
THE Daughter of Mr. Drowater, Master of the Red Lion, at Islington. Miss
White, Niece of Mr. Newton, ^^ing Lime-street Church, Fenchurch-street. Mr.
Giles, a Coffin-plate Make^(...) W^^d-street. The Son of Mr. Hushing,
Watchmaker, in Bishop's- Court, Clerkonwell Greeen. The Daughter of Mrs.
Summerfield, Mantua-maker, in Charles-street, Covent Garden. Mr. Dicken's Wife,
Stationer, near Smithfield-bars. The Mistress of the Brown Bear Publick-house,
in Broad St. Giles's. The Wife of Mr. Duplex, Peruke-maker, in Quaker street,
Spittlefields. Mr. Harvey, Poulterer, in Newgate-Market. The Son of Mr. Silby,
an eminent Linnen-draper, in Smithfield, the Sign of the Queen's- head. WHereas
I was greatly afflicted with a terrible Pain in my left Eye, upwards of fifteen
Weeks, made Application to several eminent Surgeons without Success, at last
happily applied to Mr. Tailor, Oculist, in Hatton Garden, who soon discovered
the Cause of my Disorder was nothing but a little Bit of Stone which
accidentally flew into my Eye at my Work, which being extracted, I received
immediate Ease, and am now perfectly recovered. Witness my Hand John Baldry,
late Journeyman to Mr. Morris, Gardener, at Clapham, in Surry.

