A PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAY ON MAN.

BEING AN ATTEMPT TO INVESTIGATE THE PRINCIPLES AND LAWS OF THE RECIPROCAL
INFLUENCE OF SOUL AND BODY.

VOL. II.

Unde animi constet natura, videndum. LUCR. DE NOT. RER. LONDON: Printed for J.
RIDLEY, in St. James's Street; and T. PAIN, at the Mews Gate.

MDCCLXXIII.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK III.
ON the reciprocal influence of the soul and body, -- page 1
SECTION I.
Of the power of the body on the soul, Of sleeping, -- page 7 Of waking, --
page 10
SECTION II.
Of the power of the soul over the body, page 36
BOOK IV.
Wherein the influence of the soul on the body, and of the body on the soul is
accounted for, -- page 62
SECTION I.
Influence of the soul on the body, -- page 66 How the different effects of joy
and sadness on the body are produced, from page 66 to page 67 How those of
fear, -- p. 78 How those of love, -- p. 80 How those of friendship, -- p. 81
How those of hatred, -- p. 81 How those of the compound passions, p. 82 How the
passions are expressed on the physiognomy, -- p. 86 How the power of the
understanding is exercised on the body, -- p. 88 How the power of the
imagination, p. 89 How the sentiments of the soul are rendered durable by the
influence of the body, p. 92
SECTION II.
Influence of the body on the soul, -- p. 95
CHAP. I.
The influence of organization on the affections, -- p. 100 The sensibility of
the soul ever proportionate to that of the organs, -- p. 100 Why the
sensibility of the soul appears more powerful than the sensibility of the body,
-- p. 102 Why Man is more sensible to pain than pleasure, -- p. 103 Why the
character of the soul is ever congrous to the state of the body, p. 104 In what
manner the disposition of the body varies the prospect of Nature, -- p. 115
Organization renders the temper constant, p. 116 Organization renders man
volatile or thoughtful, talkative or silent, p. 117 Organization renders man
morose, cruel, communicative or benign, p. 218 Organization renders man
suspicious and mistrustful, -- p. 121 Organization characterises the
affections, p. 123 How organization renders man open-hearted, p. 140
Observations on the manner in which organization renders man obdurate and
cruel, or compassionate and humane, -- -- p. 142 Organization characterises the
manners, p. 147 Further observations on the manner in which organization
renders man frank and hasty, or timid and deceitful, p. 148 Organization
determines the force of the soul, -- p. 149
CHAP. II.
Influence of organization on the mind, p. 150 Organization determines the
capacity of the mind, -- p. 153 Organization characterises the mind, p. 167
Organization assistant or an hindrance to the unfolding of the mental faculties
p. 169 Organization renders the understanding either just, extensive, celicate,
profound; or superficial, confined, erroneous and gress, -- p. 175 Organization
renders man rational or insane, p. 190 Organization renders imaglnation the
predominant character of the mind, p. 225 Organization characterises the
thoughts, p. 229 Remembrance and recollection depend on organization, -- p. 235
Organization renders man intelligent or stupid, -- p. 241 Organization renders
man sagacious or dull, sedate or volatile, and the judgment clear or confused,
-- p. 347 Organization contributes to render man either prudent or
inconsiderate, -- p. 253 Why man appears to lose some of his mental faculties
without losing the others, p. 254
BOOK III. ON THE RECIPROCAL INFLUENCE OF THE SOUL AND BODY.
HITHERTO we have examined the different functions and mechanism of the body;
we have considered the soul in its faculties; we have followed these faculties
in their unfolding and exercise: in a word, we have endeavored to discover the
nature of the soul and body by their effects.

Although this does not convey the full science of Man, it is yet its proper
ground work; and without it, we should in vain attempt to explain the arcana of
human nature; so that the greatest philosophers, without this guide, may be
said to wander amidst thick darkness. A philosophic enquirer will indeed at
times perceive some feeble glimmerings of light, but will never acquire a
perfect knowledge of the subject; he will only collect some scattered ideas,
and unconnected truths, without any relation the one to the other. Having
therefore considered Man in the different substances of which he is composed;
let us now consider Man properly so called, try to discover the reciprocal
influence of these two substances, and endeavor to investigate the causes of
their wonderful relations. But before we attempt to reason on the causes, we
must first ascertain the effects. We shall therefore confine ourselves to a
precise and simple exposition, and reduce our observations to those facts which
are clear and well supported.

All the parts of nature are connected; air, water, earth, plants, minerals,
animated and inanimate substances, are all linked together by some
correspondence between causes and effects: every being in the universe is
related to some other, and even the great Author of nature himself. But in no
possible union of beings have any two been joined of more opposite natures, or
whose connection is more intimate, than the soul and body; neither have any two
beings a greater or more extraordinary reciprocal influence.

All beings act one upon the other, not by a blind and fortuitous energy, but
by constant and immutable laws; of this nature is the action of the soul on the
body, and of the body on the soul, in all animals.

How plainly soever this influence may appear, it has not been examined with
sufficient care and attention: although on such an enquiry depends the
knowledge of the principles and laws of this mysterious influence. I shall
therefore apply myself to a cateful examination of these relations; and as
neither the soul nor the body is a simple being, as each of these substances is
in itself compound I say compound, and desire the reader not to be alarmed. The
soul is undoubtedly a compound being, although metaphysicians maintain it to be
a simple one, but not compound in the same sense with the body; its component
parts are the different faculties: moreover observe, that the term compound
does not imply materiality, nor any way contradict the spirituality of the soul.
and as their constituent parts do not all act together, that I may not proceed
without a plan, I shall distinguish their particular influence, and treat them
as distinct objects. In the prodigious multitude of observations which may be
made on this subject, I shall range, in the same class, all those which have
one common object, connect particular observations with those which are
general, and, collecting them into one whole, endeavor to give a concise yet
complete history of the reciprocal influence of these two very different
substances.

SECTION I. Of the Power of the BODY on the SOUL.
Man has two modes of existence, viz. sleeping and waking.

Sleep is properly only a mode of the existence of the body, in which every
function of its organs is suspended, except that of the organs of life: in
waking, every spring of the machine is, or may be in action. In both these
states the soul perceives, thinks, recollects, and all its faculties are in
exercise; but their exercise is performed differently in each of these states.
Let us therefore examine the relations of the soul to the body, and of the body
to the soul, both when sleeping and waking.

Of SLEEPING.
Observation I. As sleep approaches, the vivacity of our motions decays, the
weary limbs relax and yield to their own weight, the head gradually declines on
the shoulder, a sentiment of pleasure steals on evety organ, and we seem to
feel the gentle motion of the blood as it flows through the veins. The senses
are now inactive, but no part is yet asleep; sensibility gradually leaves the
organs, at length the eyes yield to the pleasing influence of the God, and a
refreshing calm reigns throughout the body. The soul likewise partakes in this
enchanting stillness, forgets every thing, even itself, and imperceptibly sinks
into insensibility. But in this universal repose, the mind is not inactive, its
operations are only less sensible; the sensations are weak, so likewise are the
sentiments and ideas, and the more so in proportion as the sleep is deep.

Freed from the power of the senses, the soul now enjoys its liberty; it
thinks, but its thoughts are irregular, incoherent, unconnected; and from their
assemblage are formed those phantastic images, those whimsical representations,
those phantoms, and flitting shades, which constitute our nocturnal illusions.

II. In sleep, thought freely rambles over all kinds of objects, and
imagination appears to be the only acting power. Although the soul at that time
appears to be entirely freed from all subjection to the body, the disposition
of the corporeal organs always determine the nature of the dream. If the
sensation then felt by the body be agreeable, there is a continual series of
pleasing illusions and flattering images. On the contrary, if the sensation be
painful, a succession of frightful ideas and hideous objects, haunt us during
sleep; monstrous phantoms, scenes of blood and death appear; ghosts, goblins,
and horrible specter terrify us.

The influence of the body is not confined to the nature of the objects of our
dreams; it likewise regulates their continuance. If the body is afflicted with
any languishing disorder, these specter and these phantoms seldom disappear,
and seem to haunt us continually. On the contrary, if the body is affected by
any acute disorder, the illusions are transient, the phantoms assume many
different forms, and succeed each other very rapidly.

There is something yet more wonderful in the analogy between the dream and the
then present sensation.

If we at any time experience, during sleep, those pleasing titillations, which
the semen, when redundant, produces on the organs of pleasure, we fancy we see
agreeable objects; that we hold converse with beautiful fair ones, in enchanted
groves; they that expose all their virgin charms to our fight, and withhold
nothing from our desires. In painful sensations, appear phenomena equally
surprising, whereof every one doubtless has had experience, against his will.

When we lie in an uneasy posture, whereby respiration is oppressed, and the
circulation of the fluids obstructed, we dream of being pursued by enemies,
specter, sorcerers, devils, whilst we have not the power to fly.

In the heat of a fever, we dream that we are perishing with thirst, that we
traverse immense regions in search of fountains, without finding any, and that
when we have found one, we apply our parched lips to it, but the water flies
back, and all our efforts to allay our thirst are in vain; so that like
Tantalus, we perish through want amidst the greatest abundance.

III. In dreams, we think much, feel more, and reflect little; the sensations
and images succeed each other with rapidity, but the soul neither compares nor
remembers them.

IV. Although in general the soul reflects but very little during sleep, the
degree of reflection is not the same in every individual. The ideas, which
strongly affect us whilst awake, are retraced in the mind during sleep, and we
continue to combine them. Thus geometricians form and combine figures, poets
make verses, and philosophers reason.

Of WAKING.
V. When the body has been refreshed by rest, the organs of sense insensibly
resume their functions, the pulse gradually quickens, the face regains its
color, and by degrees all those vain images, enchanted regions, and ideal
objects disappear; in fine, Man opens his eyes, and is conscious where he is.

I have said, that the exercise of the faculties of the soul is not performed
during sleep, as when we are awake; and even when we are awake, it is not
always performed invariably in the same manner.

VI. The soul grows weary just as the body does. When fatigued with too intense
or too long application, it loses in some degree the faculty of applying itself
to one subject; the ideas become weak and languid, there are no more sallies of
wit, no more flights of genius. In this state, should we force attention,
immediately every thing in the mind is effaced, we no longer think, we fall
into a kind of lethargy, and a kind of insensibility.

When the body is fatigued, its motions no longer retain their vigor, all its
functions are weakly performed, external objects produce only weak impressions
on its organs, and the sensations have neither force nor vivacity.

VII. The mind not only becomes fatigued like the body, but what is most
singular, they become both fatigued at the same time. The fatigue of the body
is always accompanied by the fatigue of the soul, and the fatigue of the soul,
by that of the body: the one is never unattended by the other; and what is no
less strange, the weariness of these two substances is equal in its extreme
degree only.

Is the body fatigued to excess, the mind cannot give attention to any object,
its perceptions are weak, and as if passive to the objects which are presented,
it no longer thinks nor reflects; it recollects nothing, and frequently
remembers not the impression received but the moment before; the desires of the
soul are weak, it wills nothing strongly, and seems not to retain the power of
determining itself; in short, the soul is in a kind of drowsiness, and, as it
were, in a reverie which wears outwardly the appearance of meditation. Is the
mind fatigued to excess, external objects produce only weak impressions on the
senses, and these impressions produce only weak sensations on the soul; motion
is painful, and all the organs are in a stupor.

VIII. In diseases of the body, we frequently observe reason lost, and a
delirium overtakes the soul; this is evident in the hysteric affection, that
terrible disorder which afflicts the fair sex, and is so singular in its
symptoms.

Often when the soul is engrossed by pleasure, their gaiety gradually
disappears, and a profound sadness succeeds; the sight grows dim, involuntary
tears flow, the mouth is half open, every part of the face is convulsed, the
limbs lose their flexibility, are violently distended, and the body is strongly
contorted: when these violent agitations, which are of no long continuance,
cease, an extreme stupor ensues, and the countenance wears the livid hue of
death: when the complexion has recovered its color, insensibly the other
extreme succeeds, and the countenance appears inflamed; the pulsation of the
temporal arteries is very great, respiration is no longer oppressed, the
unhappy patient fetches deep sighs, opens her eyes, and stares wildly round
her. She at last recovers her voice; and the disagreeable scene sometimes
concludes in immoderate fits of laughter, often in shedding tears and in
shrieks, and always with incoherent talk.

IX. Another proof of the disorder of the mind in diseases of the body, is seen
in a case which at present offers itself to my observation.

The gay, the agreeable D --, blessed with the gifts of fortune, the beloved
husband of a most amiable woman, was suddenly affected with extreme sadness,
the consequence of immoderate venery. Disgusted at every thing as if by
enchantment, his soul receives no pleasure from the most agreeable objects;
nothing can engage his attention; what he formerly eagerly sought after, he now
as eagerly avoids; he shuns company, and betakes himself to solitude, shutting
himself up alone in his chamber; sometimes from a pensive silence he starts
with terror; at others, he mutters some extravagant discourse to himself;
lastly, when sleep has closed his eyes wearied with watching, he enjoys no
rest; then hideous specter appear, he cries out for help, and awakes in
extreme terror.

For ever either quite silent or raving, his complexion at times is of a very
lively color, his eyes protuberant, as if ready to start from their sockets,
his looks wild, his limbs violently agitated, he vents his rage on himself, and
is ready to tear himself in pieces; his eyes afterward appear sad, his head
reclines on his breast, his arms hang down, his whole body is affected with a
stupor, again he falls into a sullen silence and melancholy, bursts into
involuntary tears, and fetches deep sighs.

But how many instances have we of this sad truth in those evils to which
nature has subjected us? How slight a cause is sufficient to deprive man of
reason!

X. A simple wound shall sometimes render the soul delirious.

The unhappy person, who has been run through the body with a sword, feels an
acute pain in the wounded part, the pain increases, and is insensibly extended
to every part. The body is at first slightly convulsed, by degrees respiration
is oppressed, the countenance is inflamed, the eyes are swollen, he stares wildly
round him, and his limbs are violently convulsed. This disorder of the
corporeal organs is instantly communicated to the soul, every idea is
disturbed; in this unversal confusion, the unfortunate sufferer knows neither
the voice of his friends, nor the features of his parents, who stand round his
bed, attempting to awaken sentiment, and recall life.

In these disorders, a foreign power presses on the soul and subdues it, the
limbs are in an involuntary agitation, nor can the soul keep down its unruly
emotions, or restrain its transports.

XI. To behold the manner in which the soul partakes of the affections of the
body, we should almost be induced to believe it material.

In our recovery after a long and high fever, which has consumed the principle
of strength, the soul is as weak as the body; the sensations have no vivacity,
sentiment is dull, desire languid, and we receive no pleasure from the most
agreeable objects; recollection is likewise decayed, and we scarcely remember
an action done the moment before: the understanding is principally affected
with this languor: with difficulty we compare the most simple objects, we
cannot reflect, all the faculties of the soul are in a stupor. The more this
disorder of the body prevails, the weaker is the soul; as the organs regain
their force, conception gradually returns, and is not in its vigor till the
body is perfectly recovered.

XII. Acute diseases are always attended with weak conception, weak
remembrance, and weak recollection; chronical diseases are accompanied with the
same symptoms; but this decay of recollection, conception, and remembrance, is
more sensible in that affection of the ductus medullae spinalis, called the
spina bifida, when the tumor is opened, and yet more in lethargies.

A considerable loss of the spermatic fluid produces the same phenomena. Hard
drinkers commonly become stupid in length of time, and lose all sentiment,
remembrance, and recollection.

The unhappy persons who have been obliged to undergo the operation of the
trepan, apoplectics, and those who have been restored to life after hanging,
remain for a long time stupid, without remembrance, without conception, and
sometimes continue for ever after of a dull understanding, and unfaithful
memory; not even remembering the pain they felt when they suffered.

XIII. The same effects, which are produced by diseases on the soul, are
sometimes produced by violent passions, and sometimes by extreme application.
How many are rendered insensible by fear! How many by too great attention to
some particular object!

Tasso, the celebrated Italian poet, became insane by extreme application to
study; in some measure surviving himself, forgetting both his name and his
works.

Gallus Vibius, the famous mimic mentioned by Seneca Lib. 2. Controv. 9.
, lost his reason, by too earnestly applying himself to the imitation of folly.

XIV. Finally, by a kind of prodigy, we observe some persons to lose one part
of the powers of the soul, and retain the other: some lose the faculties of
meditation, and reflection, without losing the judgment; others lose the
recollection, yet retain the remembrance, as if these different powers of the
mind depended on particular organs of the body.

XV. The Microcephali have less memory, less brilliancy of wit, less
penetration than common persons: whilst Macrocephali possess these qualities in
a very eminent degree; as if the soul were too much confined in the heads of
the former, and that the spiritual faculties were ever proportionate to the
volume of the organs, in which they reside.

XVI. It is frequently observed, on the relations between the body and the
soul, that very corpulent persons have commonly no imagination, no sagacity, no
delicacy of wit, they have only good sense. When the degree of corpulency is
prodigious, dullness nearly approaches stupidity; the soul then appears to be
oppressed by the redundancy of matter.

XVII. The following singular relations between the soul and body, have been
constantly verified by experience.

A quick and penetrating mind is ever united to a Let it be remembered, that
when I term a body sensible, I mean a body endued with an high degree of
sensibility.
sensible and vigorous body; and vice versa.

A profound and sublime mind is united to a body vigorous and strong I speak
not here of the extent of our knowledge, or of the number of ideas. I speak of
their characters only.
. There will certainly appear some signs of a vigorous mind in a man, whose
body is sensible and vigorous; none but those persons only, who, together with
vigor, enjoy strength of constitution, know how to deliver their ideas with
energy and continued force. Only such could compose the Pharsalia of Lucan, the
Dramas of Shakespeare, and the energetic writings of the author of Emilius.

XVIII. If delicate and feeble persons have no vivacity either of body or mind,
and if this vivacity of mind ever accompany vigor of body, it is likewise
certain, that a body extremely delicate and sensible, is ever united to an
erroneous and inconsistent mind; whilst we see that, on the contrary, a body,
which is robust and less sensible, ever contains a mind that is proportionably
the reverse.

The body influences the soul several ways; we not only observe striking
relations between it and our solids, we observe very singular ones between the
mind and the circulation of our fluids'.

XIX. Whilist the blood circulates with great velocity, man is agitated with a
kind of phrenzy, raves, loses his remembrance and reason; his ideas are
confounded, and in the universal disorder which prevails in his soul he forgets
his friends, wife, children, and even his name.

In proportion as the circulation is less quick, so much the weaker are the
motions of the soul; a gentle calm succeeds these furious transports, it
recovers recollection and reason, and the thoughts fall again into their
natural order.

XX. Whenever the operations of the soul are well performed, and the soul acts
with entire liberty, the blood flows with moderate velocity; on the contrary,
it circulates with great rapidity in frenzies, in strong agitations of the
mind, and when the lamp of wisdom is extinct.

XXI. When the body is violently agitated, it drives rest from the soul;
persons in fevers continue sleepless many days; in vain they seek for repose,
their firmness is exhausted, and their souls soon yield to a mortal languor.

The relations observed between the state of the body, and the character of the
mind, are likewise observed between the state of the body, and the character of
the passions.

XXII. A body sensible and strong is united to a soul, susceptible of violent
and most durable passions.

A body robust and but little sensible is united to a soul, susceptible of
moderate, yet durable passions.

A body delicate and sensible is joined to a soul subject to passions, strong,
but of short duration.

A person delicate and of strong sensations is easily kindled into rage, but
this is of very short continuance. A vigorous and robust person is not easily
inflamed, but his passion when excited is of long duration: the rage of the
first is a fire which blazes, and is soon extinguished; that of the other is
like the waters of the ocean, which at first oppose great resistance to the
fury of the winds, but retain their motion a considerable time when once
excited.

Finally, a body feeble, and but of weak sensations, is united to a peaceful
soul, entirely exempt from ardor, which experiences only the weak impulses of
an indetermined will, and knows no more of the passions than their name; and
vice versa.

XXIII. An impetuous soul is ever united to a sensible and vigorous body: a
peaceful soul to a body robust, or endued with little sensibility.

But there are observed yet other relations between the state of the body, and
the character of the soul.

XXIV. In chronic disorders, and during a state of convalescence after acute I
mean those acute diseases, which disorder all the functions of the animal
economy; not those that affect a part only.
diseases, the soul is languid like the body, nor can any thing give it
pleasure; objects, which delighted before, no longer excite any emotion, the
mind is melancholy, thoughtful, and sullen; whilst Man, in vigorous health, is
gay, lively and fickle. Excessive loss of semen in the male likewise affects
the soul with sadness and languor.

You can hardly know, under that dejected, that pensive and melancholy air,
effects of immoderate venery, the man who before was so sprightly and so gay.

The fire which sparkled in his eyes is extinguished; the liveliness of his
complexion is gone, and his countenance demonstrates the languor of his soul;
the days pass unperceived, nothing engages his attention, his drooping soul
finks into that forlorn state, which is the type of death. Whence does this
metamorphosis proceed? From the loss of a small quantity of the nervous fluid.

XXV. Diseases not only render man thoughtful and sad, they sometimes steel the
heart and beget inhumanity; for you frequently see persons, who are by nature
amiable and gay, rendered by some distemper, restless, suspicious, distrustful,
ill natured and peevish; they grieve for the most trifling cause, and are
displeased with every thing said or done.

XXVI. The gay seek after agreeable, diverting and comic amusements; the sad,
those which are mournful, and of a tragic nature; to these joy is displeasing;
they would have every thing wear a face of mourning This observation takes
place, when the soul is a prey to grief, and before it receives any motive of
consolation; but it is never more conspicuous than in men of a melancholy
temper.
about them, they tell and hear told, with a kind of pleasure, tragic
adventures; they shun the company of the gay, and retire to forests, woods,
caves, rocks, deserts, and to savage nature, like those reptiles which feed on
herbs which are poison to others.

XXVII. Whilst all the functions of our organs are well performed, whilst the
fluids circulate within us easily, and with a moderate velocity, the body is in
health; in this state the soul enjoys all the vigor it is capable of. Are the
functions of the body changed? Is the circulation of our fluids languid or
difficult? The body is diseased, man is then subject to great weakness, his
powers are inactive, his soul is incapable of any great undertaking, he fears
every thing, and attempts nothing.

Man in health is intrepid, without it, he is pusillanimous.

XXVIII. Immoderate coition is attended with the same effects with disease; we
moreover observe that males, who have been deprived of the parts characteristic
of the sex before they were perfectly developed, ever retain an effeminate
disposition, are less vivacious, less brave, and less fierce, than those who
have not been mutilated in this manner.

They, who have one testicle only, are less lively, less intrepid than those
who have two; they, who have three, are proportionably more lively.

XXIX. But the manner, in which the affections of the soul follow the state of
the body, is yet more surprising. When a soldier, in the heat of an engagement,
receives a mortal wound, he becomes the more impetuous; at the sight of his
blood, he is inspired with a violent passion, and with new force; but he soon
perceives his strength to fail, a freezing cold shoots through his veins, all
his powers decay, a mortal languor succeeds; his courage fails, and his rage
declines as the blood slows from his wound.

There are other relations between the constitution of the organs and the
mental character.

XXX. Boldness and openness of temper ever accompany strength and vigor of
body. To obtain their desires, the weak use stratagem; the strong, open force.
This may be observed even among brute animals; the weak practice cunning,
whilst the lion goes straight to his prey and attacks it openly.

But between firmness and constitution, we observe relations opposite to those
observed between constitution and boldness. A delicate, yet vigorous body,
never contains a soul endued with fortitude. Those fine gentlemen, who are so
brave at the head of their company, have no firmness when they suffer any acute
pain. Women are more courageous, but less firm than men. How many heroes have
confronted all the dangers of undaunted war, and yet have shed tears through
extreme pain?

XXXI. A very apparent relation between the constitution and mental character
is, that weakness of mind always accompanies weakness of body.

Age, infancy and disease, are credulous; women, more than men: they believe in
witchcraft, reading of dreams, palmestry, old wives tales, spirits, phantoms;
in a word, all the extravagancies of human reason.

XXXII. To an attentive examiner, there appears a constant relation between the
organization of the body and the affections of the soul.

The soul united to gross organs, delights in very lively amusements and noisy
pleasures: united to delicate organs, it loves calm refined amusements. Lively
colors are most agreeable to robust men; such delight in warlike music,
pungent odours, and strong liquors: delicate persons on the contrary love light
colors, soft music, the gentle persumes of the rose and jasmin. The same
observation may be made with regard to the pleasures of the mind; delicate
persons are averse to the noisy amusements of the robust; they are fond of the
softer pleasures, the sweet overflowings of the soul, tetes a tetes, and all
the enjoyments which arise from the tender emotions of the heart.

XXXIII. If a great loss of semen involve the soul in sadness, and sometimes in
a kind of stupid insensibility, the loss of a small quantity of the nervous
fluid weakens the motions of the soul, and turns sentiment into tenderness.
After the first enjoyments the lover is without any lively emotion, though in
the full possession of that felicity, with which he was inebriated a few
moments before. To his former violent transports succeeds a pleasing stillness;
his love for his mistress continues, but his passion has lost its ardour; he
still presses her to his bosom, but no longer devours her charms; his caresses
are more tender, more affectionate, and his mind being entirely engaged by
pleasure, views, with delight, those beauties which had so violently enchanted
his senses.

XXXIV. If the body strongly influence the soul, the aliments affect it in a
manner no less surprising.

What a power has wine over this immaterial substance! By this beneficent
liquor, a calm is restored to our troubled minds, it drives away pain, fear,
suspicion, and introduces hope and joy in their stead. By wine, misfortune
forgets its evils, and consuming cares give place to pleasing illusions and
agreeable ideas. By wine, joy presides at banquets, gets possession of the
hearts of the guests, and breaks out in songs and merriment.

XXXV. The power of wine is not confined to the inspiring hope and joy; it
likewise inspires love, and renders the mind bold and free. The soldier, whom
water could not have kept from flight, having drank wine, boldly meets death,
and bravely fights. By wine, are begotten witty sallies, and happy turns of
expression spontaneously come from the lips; thus wine has been esteemed the
pegasus of poets, and fable has combined Bacchus with the Paphian queen,
regarding wine as a principal support of love's empire.

XXXVI. But if this beneficent liquor, when drank with moderation, relieves our
inquietudes, inspires bravery, gaiety and candor; what terrible effects are
produced by its excess! Convulsive motions, palpitation of the heart,
contortion of the whole body, violent agitations of the soul, fury, alienation
of mind, loss of sentiment, of remembrance and wisdom, these are its too common
effects.

XXXVII. What power have other aliments likewise on the soul! Let the Man, who
burns for amorous embraces, and whose imagination is busied with the charms of
the fair sex, be fed for twenty days only with aliments impregnated with acid
or nitrous particles; and you will observe his passion to decay with his
strength. Give him afterward gelatinous and spirituous aliments, immediately
his imagination is revived and his passion renewed with its former force.

XXXVIII. Aliments affect not the soul by their quality only, but by their
quantity likewise.

On rising from a plentiful table, Man is not the same as when he first sat
down thereto.

After eating, the pulse becomes quicker, we feel a pressure at the region of
the stomach, the body is dull and listless, the mind becomes sad and heavy, it
is no longer adapted for meditation, or sallies of wit; we yawn, and at last
fall fast asleep.

XXXIX. The effect produced on the soul by excess of wine, is occasioned
likewise by a small quantity of the solanum verum.

Scarce is it dissolved in the stomach, when the members become convulsed, the
gestures wild and the looks full of fury; the Risus Sardonicus succeeds and
tears begin to flow; in the mean time, the wretched sufferer stammers out many
extravagant expressions, is furious, and endeavors to bite or tear any object
that happens to be near him.

The semina hyosciami and aturae indicae, deprive the person that eats them of
the use of his senses: he sees not, even though his eyes are open; he hears
not, is stupid, without ideas, without sentiment; he is not even sensible of
his own existence.

Were I to recount the different virtues of other plants and flowers, which
produce similar effects in the soul, and which render the wisest furious, and
the most ingenious stupid; I should never have done.

The prospect of nature produces on the soul impressions very different,
according to the objects which offer themselves to the sight.

XL. Who can be insensible to the pleasing sentiments which arise in the soul
from the prospect of a beautiful landscape, from the view of a fine country,
enlightened with the parting rays of the sun in the evening of a serene day? We
feel a sudden joy, a satisfaction which cannot be expressed. The rich foliage
of the trees, the enamel and persumes of the flowers, the harmonious chant of
birds, and the coolness of the evening breeze, insensibly beget gaiety in the
heart, we feel a sweet serenity steal upon the mind, we undergo a kind of
enchantment, which it is impossible to resist I know we are not at all times in
an equal disposition to receive this joy, to feel these pleasing emotions;
there are moments in which we tenaciously retain in the heart some perplexing
sentiment of sadness, which we continually carry about with us.
.

XLI. As the prospect of a fine country, of a pleasing rural recess, is adapted
to inspire us with joy; so the prospect of a dismal desert, is adapted to
inspire us with sadness.

Plains without flowers, without herbage, covered with arid sand; trees blasted
or obscured with gloomy foliage; enormous masses of rocks divested of verdure
and grown black with age; the noise of torrents rushing from the summit of
mountains, together with the croaking of ravens and mournful cries of eagles,
are hideous objects, which convey sadness to the heart though all the senses.

XLII. As the prospect of nature, so the air affects the soul in different
manners, according to its different temperature.

Is the atmosphere thick and heavy? We feel a sadness at the heart, which
vanishes as soon as the air is restored to its wonted serenity. In the most
delightful retirement, we are obnoxious to the influence of the atmosphere, and
are gay or sad, according as the heavens are cloudy or serene. The air even
affects our sensibility and understanding: in cold and dry weather, the mind is
much more active, more penetrating than when it is hot or humid Milton's genius
was sublime during the first and last months of the year only; at other times,
his imagination was oppressed; he was then not superior to other men.
.

Thus seeing that the soul is subject to physical laws, and is under the
influence of the heavens and earth, we might be induced to believe that Man is
wholly material. Feeble sport of the air, and seasons! The sun and clouds, heat
and cold, dry and humid: these regulate his character, the complexion of his
mind and his genius; and he is gay or sad, sagacious or stupid, according to
the influence of the winds and meteors.

XLIII. Agreeable sensations not only generate a sentiment of love or of joy in
our hearts, they likewise produce a pleasing calm.

If fatigued during the heat of summer, we repose ourselves beneath the
branches of a tree, which, by its thick foliage, defends us from the rays of
the sun; employed in viewing the enamel of the meadows and a variety of
delightful objects which then present themselves to our sight, the gentle
zephyrs with their cooling breezes refresh us, the murmur of brooks, the sweet
perfume of flowers, the amorous chant of birds delight the ear, and the whose
soul is drowned in pleasure: engrossed by sweet sensations, the mind gradually
ceases to contemplate the objects of its delights; already thought has
abandoned it, the other faculties are suspended, and, by an unknown charm, we
sink into a voluptuous repose: the body partakes in this enchanting calm; and,
as if it were incapable of watching one moment without its companion, the head
reclines, the eyes close, and sleep creeps on all the senses.

Let this examination of the influence of the body on the soul suffice; I shall
now proceed to examine the influence of the soul on the body.

SECTION II. Power of the SOUL over the BODY.
If the power of the body over the soul be very great, the power of the soul
over the body is very great likewise. By a simple act of volition, the soul
moves the limbs either separately or all together. In passions, it affects the
body in a thousand different manners; at one time, it contracts either every
part at once, or some particular parts only; at another, it relaxes them, and
deprives them of their tone, and sometimes it so far agitates our organs,
disturbing and varying their economy, as wholly to destroy it.

The power of the soul over the body, is as immediate as that of the body over
the soul, but not as complete. It has, indeed, a direct power on the organs of
voluntary motion, but not on those of life; if at any time it affect these, it
is only indirectly by their connection with the organs subject to the will, or
by the correspondence of the nervous system.

Neither is the power of the soul over the body as continual as that of the
body over the soul; the influence of the body on the soul is permanent; the
influence of the soul on the body only momentary; and what is surprising, the
body is never subordinate to the whole soul, but only to some one of its
faculties exclusively.

I shall therefore examine the influence of the soul on our organs in its
different points of view, neglecting that of the will, of which I have already
treated when discoursing of the mechanism of the human body.

The passions cannot continue confined within the heart: they manifest
themselves outwardly in the sound of the voice, in the rapidity of the speech,
in the gesture, in the posture of the body, in the state of its functions; and
always differently, according to the nature of the motions agitating the soul.

XLIV. Love, whose empire extends over universal nature; that violent and
tender sentiment, so celebrated by the poets, so well known to lovers, produces
strong emotions in the organs of pleasure, excites a gentle heat in the region
of the diaphragm In those vascular and nervous parts, termed by anatomists
plexus cardiacus.
, tender looks, quick pulsation, adds luster to the eyes, envilens the
complexion, embellishes the countenance, animates the features, and
communicates a grace to all our motions.

XLV. In friendship, the soul affects the body in the same manner, the symptoms
of the organs of pleasure excepted We must not confound friendship with love.
Till the time when the organs of sex are perfectly developed, Man knows only
the first of these sentiments; he may indeed love a female, but his affection
is only such as he has for his friends; it being only by the secret emotions of
the organs of pleasure that he has the knowledge of this sweet attraction of
the sexes to seek each other's company, and to unite in procreative pleasures.
; nor is it strange it should, friendship and love being the same affection of
the soul, and differing only in their object.

XLVI. Joy produces nearly the same effects with happy love. Whilst the soul is
under the influence of this agreeable sentiment, the countenance wears a
gracious smile, the complexion is lively, the eyes shine with redoubled luster,
respiration is more free, the body receives new vigor, sensibility is
increased, and we feel a voluptuous emotion about the heart. Joy, in the same
manner with love, embellishes the countenance, animates its features, gives
expression to its graces, and vivacity to all our actions; it appears likewise
in our motions, the legs, the arms, the head, are diversely agitated, as if the
body and soul were not sufficiently capacious to contain its transports.

Such are the effects of moderate joy; when the passion is extreme, they are
terrible: an excess of pleasure affects us with languor, stupifies the senses,
disorders the motion of our organs, and nearly deprives us of all sentiment;
for Man faints through excess of joy, as he does through extreme pain.

XLVII. How different are the effects of moderate joy from those of sadness! Is
the soul overwhelmed with sadness? The countenance is pallid, the eyes lose
their vivacity, the muscles of the face relax; we feel a tension in the region
of the heart, a weight on the diaphragm; the circulation is impeded and becomes
languid, our strength fails us, and all the body is affected with a stupor.

XLVIII. The effects of fear on the body are analogous to those of sadness. In
fear, the limbs are affected with a violent tremor, the blood congeals in its
vessels, our strength fails us, the use of the senses is suspended, the voice
dies away on the lips, languor arrests our motions, our organs are in a stupor,
and all their economy is disordered.

When fear is extreme, it gives youth the marks of decrepitude The hair of some
persons has been observed to turn gray instantaneously through extreme fear.
; it extinguishes the lamp of life. In some, this passion has anticipated the
executioner and the enemy. The Man who has had his irons knocked off after
condemnation to receive a pardon, has been found dead through excess of fear.
Another falls lifeless at the sight of an enemy, whom he is going to encounter.

XLIX. If, when the body is extremely agitated, the soul enjoys no repose; so
neither does the body enjoy any when the soul is strongly affected.

When night has wrapped all things in her sable mantle, Man is not always sure
of rest. Whilst all other creatures enjoy the blessings of repose, or seek the
gratification of present wants, Man is the only one to whom care denies sleep.
The black despair and heart-corroding remorse, which agitate his soul during
the day, accompany him amidst the obscurity of the night, will not suffer him
to close his eyes, and harrass his body continually.

When the soul is strongly affected, want of sleep exhausts the last remains of
bodily strength. Thus the tender mother, when her only son languishes on the
bed of sickness, passes whole nights and days watching her beloved child, and
will admit of no consolation. A prey to grief, she enjoys no repose; her body
is exhausted by fatigue, and a mortal languor succeeds.

If every passion makes different impressions on the body; the soul, at once
agitated by different emotions, produces likewise on our organs particular
impressions, as may be remarked in terror, fear, hopeless love, and in the
other compound passions.

L. The tender virgin who sees her lover struck dead at her feet, at once
seized by fear and sadness, continues immovable; a cold sweat flows down her
face, her discolored lips are affected with an involuntary tremor, her cheeks
lose their color, her arms are extended, her tearless eyes are immoveably
fixed on the lifeless body; she stands speechless, astonished, immovable, as
if contemplating the greatness of her misery. To see her mournful looks, and to
view her in this extremity of grief, who would not imagine her insensible? Soon
her organs become less tense, her pulse concentrated gradually becomes more
free, her breast heaves with frequent sighs, she flings herself on the dead
corpse, bedews it with her tears, kisses those eyes which are now closed in the
sleep of death, clasps within her arms his cold remains, and fills the air with
her lamentation.

There are cases, wherein the effects of this passion on the body are yet more
strong.

In the war which Ferdinand made on the queen of Hungary, a young warrior, who
had greatly distinguished himself in an engagement near Buda, was carried dead
from the field; Rasciac, an officer in the same army, on viewing the body,
perceives it to be his own son, grows pale and expires See the Essays of
Montaigne.
.

LI. In attention, that is, in curiosity mixed with hope or fear, we are
agitated, we hear, we observe every circumstance. At the least noise the heart
beats, the eyes are sometimes fixed, and sometimes wandering. Should the object
appear, we are seized with a palpitation of heart yet more violent, respiration
is obstructed, the voice faulters, and the functions of the senses are
interrupted.

LII. Anger, that singular affection wherein grief, hatred and desire of
revenge are confounded, produces very different effects on the organs,
according to the sentiments then affecting the soul. At one time, it spreads a
death-like paleness over the countenance, and agitates the body with convulsive
motions and involuntary tremors. At others, it gives elasticity to our muscles,
lends us new force, and for some moments raises us above ourselves. These
impetuous motions of the soul are most strongly expressed in the countenance,
the looks are wild and furious, the mouth foams, the voice is interrupted and
hoarse, the brow severe, the whole face is inflamed and wears a menacing air.

In rage or excessive anger Man becomes frantic, his motions impetuous, his
limbs lose their flexibility, and his body is violently contorted: the soul at
that time raises a ferment in the blood, just as impetuous winds rouse the
waves of the sea.

LIII. Terror, that painful emotion excited in the soul by fearful
exclamations, the cries of fury or the sight of imminent danger, and always
compounded of dread of the object terrifying us, and an unconquerable desire to
avoid it, produces likewise very different effects on the soul. At times, we
feel an universal tremor, an extreme weakness, a general stupor, which disable
the body from obeying the soul, and suspend the use of our sensations; the
voice faulters and dies on the lips, we make many ineffectual efforts to fly,
languor prevents us from moving, and this stupor of the organs sometimes,
though but seldom, destroys their mechanism. At other times, instead of being
thus disordered, this passion gives us vigor, renders us more alert, and endues
us with a more than common force.

LIVE. And here let us observe, that every violent passion, which begins by
increasing the strength of the body, in the end affects it with languor: rage
at first makes a surprising addition to our strength; but this force soon fails
us, we experience a weakness, which deprives us both of the will and of the
power of making new efforts; at that time, being incapable of any vigorous act,
we become languid and dejected.

LV. How different is happy and unhappy love! The hapless fair one, at once
possessed with love and filled with despair, consumed with eager desires, and
deprived of him who alone can make her happy, abandoned to her melancholy
thoughts, condemned to spend her life in bewailing her hopeless passion, and in
feeding on her own afflictions, at first perceives a tension about the
diaphragm, a violent heat in the region of the heart, and a fever is kindled up
in her veins. When the heat of her passion subsides, her soul succumbs under
its misery, a consuming fire rages within, and deprives her of the sweets of
repose, her strength fails her, grief preys upon her bloom and impairs her
health. The fire which once sparkled in her eyes is now extinguished, grown
heavy and dim, the light seems odious and painful, her limbs tremble and sink
under her weight, and she can hardly support herself; the roses and lillies
leave her wan cheeks, her forehead is covered with wrinkles, and her face wears
the marks of age. Sometimes her whole countenance is flustered with a glowing
red, involuntary tears trickle down her cheeks; and so excessive is her misery,
that she is wholly engrossed by the sense of her sufferings, and is insensible
to every thing besides.

LVI. The violent passions not only affect the economy of our organs; they
appear outwardly in involuntary motions, and mechanical impressions. The arms,
legs, head, and even the whole body take different positions, according to the
different motions which actuate us. In shame, the head inclines forward; in
sadness on one side; in pride it is erect, it is drawn back in astonishment,
and in hatred and indignation it moves from side to side in different ways. In
anger, as in joy, the whole body is agitated with various precipitate motions.

LVII. The passions do not always act in concert; they sometimes act in
opposition to each other; accordingly, in these conflicts, they affect the body
in different ways.

Observe that man, under some affliction of mind, which he would fain smother
within his own breast. In this state, the violence of the motions which actuate
him, and the efforts he makes to conceal his trouble, occasion a burning heat,
a sensation of heaviness in the head, and a kind of ebriety which makes hi
scarcely know himself. His eyes sparkle with rage, his countenance is inflamed,
he feels an oppression at his breast, which obstructs respiration. Should he,
during this inward struggle, meet with any thing which aggravates his trouble;
unable to resist the emotions of his soul, his limbs are variously agitated, he
gives way to his fury, and utters terrible cries with a broken and faultering
voice. This frenzy is frequently succeeded by more violent symptoms; whilst the
paroxysm lasts, he reels, falls, remains motionless, becomes insensible, and
has not even any sense of what he suffers.

LVIII. Although in these different passions the soul affects differently every
part of the body, yet in none are they more visible than in the countenance, in
none they display themselves with greater energy.

When the soul is calm, all the parts of the countenance are in a state of
rest; their union then produces a pleasing harmony, which corresponds with the
calm within. But when the soul is agitated, the face becomes a living table,
whereon every passion is delineated in the different features with equal
exactness and expression.

In joy, the eyes acquire new luster, the complexion brightens, the brows
become more arched, the nostrils expand, the corners of the mouth somewhat
recede from each other, the cheeks are gently contracted, and the lips formed
into a gracious smile.

In sadness, the eyes become dead and fixed, the pupil is half raised and half
hid by the eyelid, which is a little depressed, the cheeks are pale, the
corners of the mouth fall, the lower lip is protruded upwards, the other
muscles of the face are relaxed, the visage is lengthened, the eyes are swollen,
and dimmed by a copious moisture which is afterward discharged in tears.

In shame and in modesty, the muscles of the face are contracted, the eyes are
turned downwards, and covered with the eyelids, the mouth is somewhat open,
and the complexion of a deeper red.

If every passion is expressed on the countenance by different lineaments, the
concourse of these different lineaments is properly adapted to express the
mixed passions.

In terror and affright, the forehead becomes wrinkled, the eyebrows are
elevated in the parts toward the temples, and are depressed at the other
extremity; the eyelids are wide open, leaving the pupil and half the white
bare, the lips are drawn back at their extremities, the mouth is open, and all
the muscles of the face appear contracted and strongly marked. In contempt and
derision, the upper lip is drawn somewhat on one side, so that the teeth
appear; in the other is observed a small motion, faintly resembling a smile,
the nose is drawn to the same side with the upper lip, the eye on that side is
half shut; whilst the other continues unchanged, the pupil of both being
depressed as when we look downwards.

Of all the parts of the face, the eye is the most expressive. This is the only
organ wherein Man cannot conceal the passion in his breast. The different
passions are expressed by a sudden alteration in the eyes; in these appear
complacency, envy, rage, fury, contempt, trouble, anxiety, despair, in all
their various gradations This expression of the eye is owing in great part to
the different movements of the Palpebrae and the adjacent parts.
. In these too we may read vexation, and discouragement; in a word, every
affection of the soul is reflected by these admirable organs, as the images of
objects by a well polished mirror; even the most secret emotions of the heart
are manifested by them.

Every one must have observed the restraint of two lovers on the intrusion of a
third person. When they cannot freely indulge the mutual emotion of their
hearts, what expression! What eloquence in the eye; at that time the sole
interpreter of their sentiments! How instantaneously does the soul display
itself in the motions of these organs? Their passions, their designs, their
hopes, their fears are expressed in a single glance.

But it is time to leave the consideration of the influence of the sensibility
of the soul on the body, and to examine that of the understanding thereon.

LIX. Reflection fatigues the mind incomparably more, and much sooner than
musing or revery. The exercise of reason is to the soul, what voluntary motion
is to the body, a state of contention and constraint.

LX. When the soul is concentrated within itself, and wrapped in profound
thought, we perceive a tension in the plexus cordiacus, in the membranes of the
brain, but especially in the parts surrounding the eyes. This tension is
accompapanied with a sensation of heat, which may be removed by the action of
the cold air; the pulse is quicker than common, the countenance becomes more
florid, and the breast heaves with strong respiration, as may be remarked in
studious persons, or in men of strong sensations, when under any violent
affection of the mind, and when they are obliged to retire within themselves,
to enjoy some secret pleasure or to feast upon their sorrow.

In a more continual application, the mind is affected with a stupor, or a kind
of ebriety, the power of the soul on the organs of voluntary motion is
diminished, and the will loses its empire over the body.

LXI. How great is the power likewise which the imagination has over the body!
How singular the relation between this faculty of the soul and our organs!

It is by this that a good mimic affects the susceptible spectator, and makes
him follow his motions, his gestures, his actions mechanically, just as if his
body were subject to be moved by the motions of the other.

It is by this the idea of delicate meats sets the organs of taste in motion,
and, as it is commonly expressed, makes the mouth water. It is by this we
experience that insupportable sensation, which we feel when we are touched even
on those parts which are the least sensible, with design to excite titillation.
It is the imagination, which, inflamed by voluptuous ideas and images, or by
the sight of beauty, quickens the pulse, increases the luster of the eye,
excites strong emotions in the organs of pleasure The erection of the penis in
man, and of the Clytoris in woman, are not voluntary motions. This mechanism of
the parts absolutely depends on the imagination: how many men are languid and
impotent in the company of a woman, for whom they have no affection;
notwithstanding every effort of the will, and sometimes every aid of art!
, and causes palpitation of the heart.

It is this, which in love kindles our desires, produces on the lips of lovers
that sensation of a lambent flame, which accompanies their kisses, and renders
their touch similar to that of fire.

It is this, which causes that tremor the lover experiences at the approaching
enjoyment of his mistress.

It is this which, in the ardour of youth, gratisies the voluptuousness of
desire, in our dreams.

But the power of the imagination is not confined to any particular organ, it
is extended over the whole body. There have been convulsionists, who, by the
help of a warm imagination, have raised themselves by degrees to fury: their
eyes were inflamed, the face disfigured by a violent contraction of its
muscles, the mouth foaming, and all their members convulsed.

However great this power which imagination has over the body may be,
philosophers have fancied it much greater than it really is. Not content with
the prodigies of nature, they have attributed to it others, which are merely
ideal.

Led aside, on one hand, by appearances; on the other, by the love of the
mavelous, like the stupid vulgar, they have adopted ridiculous prejudices,
and employed their pens in defending them.

We are told of a pregnant woman in Germany, who being struck with the sight of
a picture of John Baptist, which hung in her bedchamber, was afterward
delivered of an infant with its whole body hairy, and some physiologists,
treating this absurdity as an assured fact, concluded, that the imagination
could change the form of the solids, the features of the countenance, and the
color of the skin.

This opinion was implicitly believed, and is at present universally received.
From thence it is pretended, that whatever affects the mother, affects the
foetus likewise; that the affections of the soul of the one, act on the body of
the other; to this energy are atributed the resemblance of children to their
parents, those blemishes on the skin, and all those monstrous productions
wherein nature appears to have forgotten the wisdom of her own laws. They even
carry their love of the mavelous so far as to assert, that the foetus bears
the real marks and representation of the longings of the mother, as of fruits
and the like which she may have eagerly desired. But if we attentively examine
these marks and blemishes, these pretended signs of the mother's distempered
imagination, we shall perceive them to be only sanguinestains, and yellow or
reddish spots These marks are always yellow or of a red or violet color, tints
which the blood naturally gives to the skin; when it enters in too great
quantity into its vascular texture, and when it is more or less fluid, thick,
or bilious, and likewise according to its mixture with the nervous fluid, or
some other of the liquors of the body.
, more or less strongly expressed, produced by some change in the texture of
the skin. These spots have assuredly some figure; because every spot must have
one, and this figure must necessarily bear a resemblance to something: but they
have neither the form of any fruit, nor that of any object which the mother
could desire. I have seen many such pretended representations of the mother's
longings, but could never observe in them any thing more.

By investigating the causes of these prejudices, we shall find, as I have
already remarked, that erroneous observations only could have given birth
thereto. Not only the facts are false, but even supposing they were true, they
cannot be produced by the causes to which they have been attributed.

I will not say, to prove this, that as our sensations resemble not their
objects, it is impossible that desire can produce physical representations of
those objects; I have more convincing proofs to adduce.

The soul affects the body undoubtedly in every passion, and always
differently, according to the diversity of its emotions; but it has been
evidently demonstrated, that the soul has no influence on the body, but by the
nervous fluid; that this power over the body is reduced to the dilating or
contracting our solids, to the accelerating or retarding the oscillatory motion
of the organs of circulation in different degrees, sometimes even so as to
destroy the motion of the whole machine; and that it has no other power over
the fluid of the nerves, but to alter its quality and deprave it, that is, to
render it caustic or destroy its energy. Now the empire of the soul over the
body which it inhabits, being thus limited, can it be more extensive over a
body to which it is not so closely united? For it is well known, that the
foetus has no direct or immediate communication with the mother; whilst it is
in the womb, it is enclosed within membranes, which adhere not to the uterus in
the first months of pregnancy, nor is their adhesion very great when pregnancy
is farther advanced. The placenta being connected to the uterus by papillae on
the external part of the membranes inserted into the small foramina of this
organ and joined by a mucilaginous matter, which possesses so small a degree of
adhesion, that it scarcely appends to the matrix; the foetus therefore, in some
respects, is entirely independent of the mother.

It has been for a long time believed, that the blood of the mother passes into
the body of the foetus, by means of the placenta and funis umbilicalis; it has
been supposed likewise, that the blood vessels of the uterus open into these
foramina, and the vessels of the placenta into these papillae, and that their
vessels communicate with each other. But experience has convinced us of the
error of this opinion; for, by injecting the arteries of the funis umbilicalis,
the liquor injected wholly returns by the veins, nor does the least part of it
escape into those parts, with which they are supposed to communicate. Besides,
we may easily detract these papillae from their foramina, without producing any
efflux of blood, either from the uterus or the placenta, there being discharged
from one to the other a lacteal fluid only, which serves for nourishment to the
foetus.

The foetus therefore has nothing in common with the mother but this nutritive
lymph. They have distinct and separate organs and functions; nor has the mother
any influence over the foetus, but by means of this liquor. Every alteration of
this nutritive, received from the mother, is therefore communicated to the
foetus: if it be corrupt, the solids and fluids of the foetus are so likewise;
but the fluids of the mother cannot otherwise affect it, It is not therefore to
the imagination of the mother that we must attribute those resemblances, those
mutilations, those duplicities of part, those cutaneous blemishes which infants
bring with them into the world, and which have been commonly regarded as true
representations of the depraved appetites of women, during pregnancy.

LXII. Let us conclude with one important observation. If we compare the power
of the different faculties of the soul over the body, we shall be convinced,
that this power is not equal in every one: that of sensibility is much greater
than that of the understanding, and this much greater than that of the will. If
the powers of these faculties be not equally great, so neither are they equally
extensive. Those of sensibility and understanding are universal; they extend
not only to the nervous fibers, but also to the fibrillae of which they are
composed, that is, to the organs of sense and those of motion: the empire of
the will, on the contrary, is confined to this latter, since those two
faculties can augment or extinguish our vigor, whilst the will can only extend
our organs and contract our muscles.

Such is in general the influence of the soul on the body, and of the body on
the soul; such the reciprocal relations of those two substances.

Although these relations are very evident, many of them have escaped
observation; and of those who have observed any, the greater number have been
content with only observing them. Some philosophers have attempted in vain to
account for these phenomena: others, disgusted at the ill success of the
former, have regarded them as impenetrable mysteries, so that every one is
satisfied at present, with simply observing and admiring this influence; they
cry it up as prodigy, as if we were prohibited to pass beyond the line which
those sages have drawn; they likewise attribute their ill success to the nature
of the discovery, rather than to the erroneous methods which they have employed
in pursuit of it.

After the vain efforts of so many great geniuses, notwithstanding so great a
combination of prejudices, and the ridicule inseparable from such an
undertaking, I will venture to attempt the explanation of these mysteries,
enter this dark labyrinth, sound this immense abyss, and carry light into those
regions of darkness: I shall assign the reasons of this prodigious influence of
the soul on the body, and of the body on the soul, display the unknown
principles of their relations, and determine the laws of these phenomena; in a
word, reduce to fixed principles a science, wherein every thing is yet
hypothetic, obscure and mysterious.

BOOK IV. WHEREIN THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOUL ON THE BODY, AND OF THE BODY ON THE
SOUL, IS ACCOUNTED FOR.
THE union of the soul with the body is subject of much admiration; for in what
manner can two substances, so different from each other, be united? How can
matter act upon the mind, or the mind upon matter? This is a mystery
impenetrable to human understanding. Who is so presumptuous as to undertake the
explanation? Human reason can never conceive the first principles of this
intimate union, of this primitive correspondence of the soul with the body: let
us not seek to know after what manner two beings, so different in their nature
and properties, can act on each other; we must admit the fact simply, since it
is unquestionable, but the cause is wholly unknown.

Yet these different substances have singular reciprocal relations, and these
relations themselves must needs have causes and principles. These principles,
hitherto unknown, I endeavor to discover and demonstrate; those relations,
hitherto obscure and incomprehensible, I attempt to account for.

This subject appears at first sight incomparably more difficult than those we
have treated of already: in these we arrive at truth, by a direct and short
way; in the other, on the contrary, concerning which we have hitherto only
vague and absurd conjectures, and where demonstration appears to be impossible,
we may pass from hypothesis to hypothesis, and blindly pursue truth in the
ocean of opinions, without ever attaining it. Yet this is not so difficult a
task as it appears. The influence of the soul on the body, and of the body on
the soul, being invariably the same, in the same circumstances, in every
individual, and the relations of these two substances being similar, they are
therefore the effects of causes which operate in a fixed and invariable manner.
As the phenomena are subordinate to certain laws, to discover those laws we
must ascend from the effects to the cause, following the chain of the principal
phenomena, collecting similar facts, comparing and examining them, selecting
the properties they possess in common, from those peculiar to each. Only by
this method we can arrive at those causes; without it, the mind wanders in
darkness, perpetually fluctuating between prejudice and probability, ignorant
of the principles of things, and ever confounding the opinions of men with the
laws of nature. Such is the method I shall pursue in the investigation of the
causes of the reciprocal influence of the soul and body. I shall therefore
collect the chief phenomena, compare them, select those which are similar, and
endeavor to present to the mind a certain number of analogous facts in a
single point of view. I shall likewise attempt to discover their identity, and
the cause of their analogy; and finally, draw from the assemblage of these
different combinations, light sufficient to investigate the causes and laws of
the admirable harmony subsisting betwixt the soul and the body, so as to
conduct us to the important knowledge of Man.

These topics being so complicated and so different in their nature, I shall be
under a kind of necessity to pay my principal attention to the great and
leading objects, reducing the phenomena to some general heads, avoiding to
descend into minute particulars, a labor as troublesome to a writer as it is
unprofitable to his readers, who are thus continually put to the trouble of
collecting them, whilst, after all, they receive only confused and imperfect
ideas of the subject. Besides, the mind fatigued with a multitude of objects,
loses itself in the perplexity of its own thoughts, and throws a darkness on
that which it endeavors to elucidate. I shall therefore confine myself to the
solution of the phenomena, collecting them into one general point of view,
disregarding those minutiae or particular questions, which might cause me to
lose sight of the main scope, interrupt the thread of the subject, and rob
demonstration of its evidence.

I shall likewise endeavor to present my ideas in an order equally easy to
comprehend, and interesting to pursue.

I am sensible how much my system would be improved by an abler pen; but if,
notwithstanding the mediocrity of my talents, I can render it acceptable to the
reader, by the mere force of that evidence which attends it, I shall both think
the opinion I have endeavored to establish better grounded, and my
satisfaction will be the more complete.

SECTION I. Influence of the SOUL on the BODY.
WHEN the soul is affected by any sentiment, it instantly affects the body,
always in the same manner in every individual, and ever differently according
to the nature of its emotions.

The soul has no direct power over our corporeal organs; the soul and body are
distinct beings, without any necessary connection, and are united by the nervous
fluid only See the article on the structure of the nerves, Book I.
. Thus, in whatsoever manner these substances reciprocally affect each other,
the soul never acts on the body, nor the body on the soul, without the
intervention of this fluid, and never without some impulse being communicated
by one to the other See the Art. on the action of the soul on the fluid of the
nerves, Book I.
. On the impulse communicated to this fluid, on its different degrees of force,
combined with the elasticity of the fibers, and the different organs affected,
depend the different phenomena observed in the influence of the soul on the
body. Let us apply this principle to the effects of the passions on our organs.

In joy, the countenance acquires a more lively color, the eyes sparkle with
an unusual luster, and the face wears a perpetual smile; a gentle emotion is
felt in the regions of the heart and plexus nervosi; respiration is more free,
circulation more easy and quick; we receive fresh vigor, all the functions are
more perfectly performed, and the whole body is full of life.

As the joy is more violent, these effects are more strong; the arms, legs,
head, every member is strongly agitated; the body can scarcely contain itself.

The vivacity of the complexion, the luster of the eyes, the liberty and force
of the circulation, the freedom of respiration, and the vigor of the whole
body, clearly evince, that in joy the soul forcibly impels a large quantity of
the nervous fluid into the organs of motion. This impulse of the fluid of the
nerves into these organs, occasioning a small intumescence of the muscular
fibers These fibers are the particular organs of motion, as we have already
explained when treating of the mechanism of the human body, under the Art. on
the structure of the muscles, Book I.
, and slightly compressing the fluid which is contained in the fibrillae
whereof they are composed, gives them the whole of their organic elasticity;
yet causes not the least degree of rigidity. Hence the muscular motion is ample
and strong, the heart and the arteries forcibly impel the blood into the
smallest capillaries, and thus communicate to the skin that slight
intumescence, which then so greatly conduces to beauty, and to that clear and
lively color, which is so greatly ornamental. The humors of the eye receive a
fresh supply of spirits, and their tunics are more fully distended, whereby
they reflect a greater quantity of rays, and acquire greater luster. In the
muscles of the cheeks, this impulse is principally to be seen; being them
supplied with a larger quantity of the nervous fluid, they gently contract, and
with the help of the lips express an agreeable smile.

But if the fluid of the nerves, instead of causing a slight intumescence of
the muscular fibers, should violently precipitate itself in great quantity, as
it happens in extreme joy; the fibers, being then too greatly distended, cannot
re-act, but they oppose a too great resistance to the elasticity of the fluid
contained in their fibrillae. These fibrillae are therefore in a state of
rigidity, their fluid is inactive, and the entire organ without organic
elasticity.

Hence the reason why excess of pleasure stupifies the senses, affects the body
with languor, and even destroys the action of our organs, when this state of
rigidity is extreme.

But in moderate joy, although the soul is not affected with sufficient force
to occasion a rigidity of the fibers, these emotions of the soul produce no
durable impressions on the body; this singular vigor, this flourishing state
of the machine is of no long continuance, and languor immediately succeeds.
This is easy to be conceived, however strange these phenomena may appear: for
the vigor we experience whilst affected with joy, springs only from the strong
influx of the nervous fluid into the organs of motion; this fluid ceases to be
determined thereto, when the soul ceases to experience these agreeable
emotions; the fibers thus distended, decrease and collapse when the fluid with
which they were distended is dissipated, and our muscles are without either
tone or elasticity.

It is by a similar mechanism that the handling of the breasts of females
deprives them of their globular swell; it excites a voluptuous emotion in the
soul, and inflames the imagination, which determines the spirits thither in
great abundance, distends their fibers, increases their volume, and gives them
greater firmness; but as this determination of spirits is not continual, if the
handling be repeated, when this supply has ceased, the breasts presently
collapse and lose their solidity.

When the soul is overwhelmed with sadness, the complexion becomes wan and
pallid, the eyes dull, a tension is felt about the diaphragm, the head inclines
forwards, the arms hang down, unable to support their own weight, the whole
body is affected with languor, we sigh, the eyes are suffused with tears, sighs
are repeated, and tears flow in abundance.

The greater the affliction, the more evident are these its effects; there is a
point to which this passion is capable of arriving, and where its violence
sometimes extinguishes the lamp of life.

If in joy the soul gives a greater elasticity to the muscles, by determining
thereto the fluid of the nerves with impetuosity and in abundance; on the
contrary, in sadness it appears to relax the same organs, causing them to
collapse, by withdrawing the energetic fluid.

But this is nothing but appearance only; all effects of the soul on the body
in this passion, as in all the others, are produced by the influx of the
nervous fluid, determined into different ducts. In joy, the fluid is impelled
from the brain into the cavities of the muscular fibers. In sadness, it is
impelled into the fibrillae of which these fibers are formed, and which we have
shown to be the proper organs of sense. In this case the nervous fluid distends
the fibrillae, increases their diameter, compresses that of the fibers, and
destroys the equilibrium, causing it to incline to the fibrillae: hence only a
small quantity flows at that time into the organs of motion, and even that can
have but little action.

Hence proceeds the weakness of the muscles, the languid action of the organs,
the paleness of the countenance, the diminished vivacity of the eyes, and the
stupor then affecting the whole body.

These are however only the effects of a moderate impulse; when this impulse is
violent, it occasions an extreme rigidity of the muscular fibers This rigidity
may likewise be produced by the irritating quality of the nervous fluid,
contracted during this passion. But it is evident that nature does not take
this method: for in sadness, relaxation immedietely sollows this rigidity;
whereas the irritating quality of the nervous fluid would have produced a
permanent rigidity.
; this rigidity instantly produces a total cessation of the functions of the
body, and consequently death.

But to conceive the effects of sadness properly, we must distinguish those
which accompany the impulse of the nervous fluid into our organs, from those
which succeed it.

The rigidity of the muscular fibers is the immediate effect of this impulse,
but to this rigidity immediately succeeds an equal degree of relaxation. The
universal tremor affecting us upon hearing of any misfortune, the paleness of
countenance, the difficulty of respiration, the oppression of the diaphragm,
concentrated circulation, and the general stupor of the whole body, are
evidently the effects of a slight rigidity of the fibers. The feebleness of the
motions, the decayed luster of the eyes, the relaxation of the muscles, the lax
state of the skin, and the languor of all the functions of the body, are the
consequences of that inelasticity which necessary succeeds this rigidity. Hence
it appears, that rigidity and relaxation are the causes of all the phenomena
produced by the influence of the soul on the body in sadness.

Hence Man, in violent affliction, is subject to extreme weakness; hence
silence and consternation are the language of the soul when strongly, affected;
as are cries and tears, when moderately worked upon.

Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Hence extreme pain deprives us of
sense, of motion, and of life itself.

Although the soul affect the whole body in different passions, yet it affects
not all its organs equally: at one time it acts most upon these, at another
upon those; but the soul principally exercises its power on the plexus cardiaci.

These plexus are united to the most considerable blood vessels, such as the
trunks of the vessels of the stomach, liver, spleen, heart, and mesentery,
which they line with their ramifications. They have likewise a direct connection
with the brain and organs of sense.

In sadness, when these plexus are violently contracted, they forcibly compress
the trunks of the blood vessels which they surround, causing the blood to be
collected in them, and even occasioning a total stoppage of the circulation.

Hence that compression of the heart, that pressure about the diaphragm, those
syncopes accompanying the paroxysms of extreme sadness, and hence even death,
which sometimes ensues.

But when these ramifications of the nervous plexus are only slightly
contracted, as in moderate joy, they slightly compress the vessels round which
they are wound, but principally the veins, whose coats oppose the least
resistance; hereby the blood in circulation is somewhat restrained,
particularly in its return to the heart.

Hence the emotions we experience in joy in the region of the diaphragm, and
that liveliness of complexion which always accompanies it.

When the emotions produced on the plexus nervosi have a certain degree of
force, they communicate to the diaphragm, to which these plexus are united by
the diaphragmatic nerve, a transient convulsive motion which produces bursts of
laughter: for laughter, which is a sound suddenly interrupted, and frequently
resumed, is always produced by a tremor of the diaphragm. This motion of the
diaphragm affects the lungs, which it precipitately elevates and depresses;
every time the lungs are depressed, the air is expelled through the mouth, with
a certain noise; this is that sound of the voice, which is so often repeated in
laughter.

That sudden starting likewise, and internal constriction, which we experience
when we first begin to think of some evil affecting us, is produced by the
contraction of the diaphragm, which participates of the nature of the spasm
affecting the plexus nervosi. This constriction of the diaphragm raises the
lungs, and occasions that strong expiration, called a sigh. Whilst the soul
continues to think upon any sorrowful subject, it communicates different
motions to the plexus, and sighs are frequently repeated. But when new impulses
succeed immediately one after the other, the air rushes suddenly, and by
intervals, into the lungs, produces frequent expirations, and every expiration
occasions a sound stronger than sighing: this sound frequently repeated is what
is commonly termed sobbing.

When the spasms begin gradually to diminish, the air is not expelled so
readily from the lungs, expiration is repeated at greater intervals, and
produces a louder sound, called groaning; for a groan is only a continued sob.
Finally, when relaxation succeeds to these spasms, tears begin to flow.

Tears are lymph, distilled from the lachrymal glands, situated in the orbit
above the lesser canthus of the eye.

Each gland has six or seven ducts, which pass between the membranes of the
eyelids, and open into one common orifice near the cilia. From this orifice
distills a saline lymph, which is absorbed by the puncta lachrymalia, and
discharged by its proper duct into the nose. But these glands express not this
liquor till they begin to relax after contraction: hence is the reason why
moderate grief causes tears to flow, and why excessive grief suspends them.

We commonly regard tears as a sign of sadness, but without reason. They are
the effects of every passion which contracts our fibers; fear, anger, and even
joy excite them, as well as sadness and pity.

In fear, as in sadness, there is an universal tremor, a constriction of the
heart, pallor of the countenance, sinking of the muscles, relaxation of the
skin, imbecility and stupor. These similar effects are produced by the same
mechanism.

Hence lovers, overpowered by their good fortune, remain inactive during the
night of their marriage, and recover not their vigor till their astonishment
is dissipated.

Hence extreme fear suspends tears, and moderate grief abundantly excites them.

Hence fear chills us, stupifies our organs, and arrests our motion.

When fear is extreme, the nervous fluid, being violently precipitated into the
fibrillae which form the muscular fibers, destroys the equilibrium between the
resistance of these fibers and its action, interrupts the regularity of the
organs of motion, and even at times disorders all their functions.

Hence that tremor and numbness, which deprives us of the use of our limbs:
hence the reason why a rope-dancer cannot perform those feats at the height of
thirty yards, which he performs with ease at the height of fifteen feet: why
some persons walk without danger over the roofs of houses, whilst asleep;
whereas they would have fallen had they been awake, and sensible of their
danger.

Hence the bird, which with its warbling chears the night in the spring season,
when it perceives the viper beneath, attentively watching to devour it, an
extreme tremor seizes its feeble organs, a languor deprives them of motion,
till at length it can no longer support itself, but falls, as if by
enchantment, into the open jaws of that deadly reptile.

I have said, that the effects of sadness on the body are similar to those of
fear; there is however this difference between them. In fear we almost always
perceive a palpitation of heart, which is not perceived in sadness. This
difference is wholly to be attributed to the greater or less interval, which
passes in these passions, between the different impulses of the nervous fluid
into our organs, and to the greater or less impetuosity of these impulses.

When fear is moderate, the soul is successively affected by the same sentiment
at very short intervals, and at every reproduction of this sentiment it impels
into the nerves (particularly into the plexus nervosi) a fresh supply of fluid,
which produces a slight spasm; the blood vessels are likewise successively
obstructed by the ramifications of the plexus which surround them, and the
circulation is at intervals interrupted. When the spasm ceases, the blood is
violently impelled into the heart, which then becomes overcharged; whereby the
circulation is rendered irregular, and the pulse feeble and intermitting. Hence
proceeds the cause of this tension at the region of the diaphragm, and of this
palpitation of the heart.

In love the eyes glister, the complexion is more lively, we feel strong
agitations in the organs of pleasure, a heat in the region of the heart, and an
increase of vigor in the whole body.

From the analogy between the effects of love and those of joy, it is evident,
that in love the soul abundantly supplies the organs of motion, and principally
the plexus nervosi with the nervous fluid, and more especially the plexus with
which the arteries are interwoven: for the heat, which we then experience about
the heart, is produced by the arterial blood collected in this part, by the
slight contraction of the ramifications of the plexus which invelope these
vessels.

The soul very singularly affects the organs of pleasure, in love; it even
appears, that these organs are the principal scene of the effects of this
passion.

These parts have, it is well known, an intimate corre spondence with the
semilunar plexus, one of the plexus cardiaci, by means of the spermatic
vessels; the nervous fluid is abundantly supplied thereto, animates the musculi
erectores penis, produces strong agitations in these parts, and gives the whole
organ that tension, that turgidness, so necessary to the design of nature, and
to the pleasures of love.

In friendship the soul affects the body in the same manner as in love; the
organs of pleasure however experience no particular emotion; except this, the
state of the body is equal, and its mechanism is the same.

Hatred produces effects contrary to those of love. When that passion is
extreme, at the sight of the object of our aversion we feel a sudden tremor of
the whole body, a weight on the diaphragm, a stupor of all our organs, and a
tension of the muscles of the face, paleness covers the countenance and the
eyes wander.

These effects are analogous to those of fear, and are produced by the same
causes.

Hence ugliness renders us impotent; whilst beauty, on the contrary, inspires
new vigor in the combats of love.

In the compound passions, the influence of the soul on the body is the same as
in the simple. This may also be affirmed of its mechanism. Hence the effect of
these passions is the sum of the particular effects of the different sentiments
which unite and are confounded therein.

But these passions must produce different effects, according to the relative
force of these different sentiments.

Hence in terror, when fear predominates, we experience all the effects of this
passion, that numbness which deprives us of the use of our senses, that languor
which brings us back to the state of infancy, that stupor which disorders the
action of our organs, and sometimes prevails so far as to destroy it. When it
is moderate, its impressions on the body are very slight, nor can we
distinguish them from those of the desire of self-preservation: the soul at
that time impels the fluid of the nerves into the organs of motion, as in joy,
increases their vigor, and augments their elasticity.

Hence that force which is produced by the sight of danger, the last efforts of
a sensible and intelligent being, who endeavors to defend life, or assure his
own happiness.

Rage produces likewise different effects on the body, according to the nature
of the sentiment then reigning in the soul.

In sentiments of hatred and sadness, which are the most early in their effects
on the body, the soul forcibly impels the nervous fluid into the fibrillae of
the muscular fibers, extremely dilates their tube, contracts that of the
fibers, and renders them somewhat rigid. Hence the diameter of the vessels is
diminished, and the circulation so imperfect, that the blood is not impelled to
the arterial capillaries; hence the pallor of countenance and stupor of the
limbs. The plexus nervosi are likewise violently contracted, and particularly
the diaphragmatic nerve; hence that pressure at the region of the heart, that
weight which then so grievously affects the stomach, and nearly destroys
respiration.

But these effects are not of a long continuance; to the sentiments of sadness
and of hatred presently succeeds a strong desire of revenge, which afterward
reigns singly in the soul; the nervous fluid is then forcibly impelled into the
muscular fibers, whereby their diameter is greatly enlarged; this influx
likewise compresses the fluid of the fibrillae, augments their elasticity and
envigorates the muscles.

By the same principle, the nervous fluid produces in the vascular system an
aptitude to the most powerful oscillation; the blood is thereby impelled to the
extremities of the cutaneous capillaries, and into the organs of motion, which
it renders susceptible of vigorous action: hence the impetuous motions of rage,
and the prodigious force of phrenetics. Such is the manner in which nature, who
has established between individuals different degrees of power, sometimes
renders weakness equal to strength by means of despair.

This influx of the fluid of the nerves into the fibers produces in the plexus
nervosi, especially in the ramifications wound round the trunks of the veins, a
small degree of rigidity; these vessels are thereby somewhat obstructed, and
the return of the blood to the heart is attended with difficulty, whilst it is
carried from the center to the circumference with its usual freedom: the
vessels are thereby greatly distended at the surface of the body; whence
springs that redness of countenance, that fire of the eyes which ever accompany
rage.

As this influx of the nervous fluid into the organs of motion is
instantaneous, these organs are not affected with a degree of tension equally
violent or equally durable; the ease and perfection of their motion is thereby
necessarily destroyed: hence the tremor of the whole body, the hoarse, loud and
interrupted speech, ever observed in anger.

The passions, which are founded on hatred, add force to the natural strength
of Man; but this additional vigor is only momentary, and rage, as the other
violent passion, having elevated Man for a few moments above himself, reduces
him to an equal degree in the opposite extreme. On one part, weakening the
fibers by violent distension and contraction, it diminishes their primitive
elasticity; on the other, exhausting by reiterated efforts that fluid which is
the principle of vigor, it affects the body with extreme weakness, which
destroys both the power and the will to make any future effort.

I leave to the curious the examination of the effects of the soul on the body
in the other passions, the explanation is simple and easy, by pursuing the
principles here established.

The passions produce very singular effects on the body, and display themselves
by some outward mark or other to the attentive observer; but they are no where
so apparent as in the countenance. In the passions, the face is the living
tablet whereon every emotion of the soul is represented with equal energy and
force.

By removing the teguments of the face, we observe it to be composed of a great
number of small muscles, which adjoin to and unite every part by their tendons.
These muscles form all the expressions of physiognomy, and display every
affection of the soul. The repose of all the muscles expresses serenity of
mind, and their different motions, its different passions.

In the same passion, the same muscles are always contracted, and that in the
same manner in every individual. When the soul passes rapidly from one
sentiment to another, the features they form by their contraction are
successively effaced; but when the soul is habitually resigned to any one
passion, the features are constant, and become the characteristics of the
physiognomy.

Every part of the face contributes to the beauty of the whole, but every part
contributes not to its expression. Beauty consists in harmony and regularity of
parts; physiognomy in their motion. The nose, though the most protuberant
feature of the face, contributes the least to physiognomy, it having very
little motion. For the same reason the ears, the chin and the temples
contribute less to physiognomy than to beauty. On the contrary, the lips, the
mouth, the cheeks, the eyelids and the eye brows, conduce much to expression,
by the different appearances they assume. But no part is more expressive than
the eyes; in these admirable organs, the soul principally appears; in these it
expresses the most tumultuous emotions, and the most agreeable sentiments; in
these it expresses them in all their force, in all their purity, and displays,
by the most energetic lineaments, the image of its secret agitations. The cause
of this phenomenon may, without difficulty, be discovered.

As the eye is formed of many nerves, or rather, as it is only a large nerve
expanded, and as it abounds with nervous fluid, to this organ therefore the
impressions of the soul must be principally determined. It being likewise very
contiguous to the brain, and moreover diaphanous, the power of the soul must be
there less weak and more apparent: hence it is evident, that the passions will
be represented in this organ with the greatest energy.

The power of the understanding over the body is exercised by the same
mechanism as that of sensibility; that is, ever by an impulse communicated to
the nervous fluid. By determining a greater quantity of this fluid to the
nervous fibers, it produces a greater degree of tension; thus it happens to all
our muscles, to the plexus cardiaci, and especially to the meninges during
meditation. This increase of the organic elasticity of the fibers strengthens
the oscillatory motion of the vessels, and renders the circulation more rapid.
When meditation is deep in the extreme, this tension of the fibers is extreme
likewise, and the circulation becomes vehement; the contraction of the nervous
plexus enveloping the blood vessels, at that time arrests the arterial and
venous blood: whence arises that heat and those anxieties, which ever accompany
profound application.

By impelling a greater quantity of fluid into the nervous fibers, the soul
renders them more sensible, and prepares our organs to contract at the
slightest impression. Such is the method imagination uses to strengthen our
sensations.

Hence arises that intolerable sensation which is produced by the touch of
others, with a view to excite titillation. Hence is the cause of that tension
of the organs of pleasure, which arises from the sight or idea of lascivious
objects, and of those emissions which are experienced when the influx of the
nervous fluid into the musculi erectores penis, and the vesiculoe seminales is
very rapid.

This fluid, when determined to the organs of digestion and salival glands, by
contracting them, excites the secretion of saliva and gastric lymph. Such is
the method by which the imagination, from the sight of delicate meats,
occasions the same motion in the organ of digestion, as when they are supplied
with the aliments themselves.

But if at any time the imagination impel this fluid into the muscular fibers,
it at other times determines it to their fibrillae, produces there a degree of
rigidity, which destroys the action of the muscles and disorders the whole body.

Hence those shiverings, that imbecility, which sometimes render us unable to
consummate the work of love.

The passions not only display themselves in the countenance, not only dilate
and contract the fibers; but the arms, the legs, the head, nay, the whole body,
assume different postures, according to the different sentiments affecting us.
By exciting the same sentiments, actors and mimics communicate to us their
port, their gesture, and their action.

The influx of the nervous fluid into the fibers of the nerves and muscles or
into their fibrilloe, a small degree of tension, rigidity or relaxation of
these fibers or of these fibrilloe, are therefore the true and sole causes of
all the phenomena of the influence of the soul on the body.

But for what reason does the soul impel the nervous fluid into the muscular
fibers, rather than into their fibrillae? Why into one organ or muscle rather
than into another? Why in shame does the head incline forwards, in sadness and
in languor, on either side? Why in love do the organs of pleasure experience
strong emotions exclusively of others? Why does imagination, excited by the
ideas of exquisite meats, affect the organs of digestion rather than those of
love? By what means does the soul, in the different passions, impel the nervous
fluid into any particular nerve, any particular muscle, or any particular organ
exclusively; whilst every part of the body partakes of nerves, which are common
to all, whose fibers are ever exposed to the influence of this fluid which
incessantly pervades them? These singular relations between particular
faculties of the soul and certain organs of the body; this surprising
correspondence Another phenomenon equally surprising, which has not been more
attended to than those already mentioned, is the faculty, which the soul
possesses uninstructed by experience, of discerning whence it receives its
sensations.
, which has been so little attended to, is to me an enigma, an incomprehensible
mystery, which I relinquish entirely to any one who is willing to undertake the
solution of it, if it can be accomplished by the human mind.

Let us here conclude with some important observations on the influence of the
soul on the body.

Every different emotion of the soul affects the plexus nervosi, which appear
to be the principal organ wherein the passions exercise their power. There we
feel that inexpressible anguish, which pity excites in the heart, when we hear
the groans of the unfortunate, or the cries of the oppressed; there fear and
terror intrude their terrible anxieties; there joy introduces its sweet
transports, and there the soul leaves its most durable impressions The nervous
fluid, impelled by the soul, is precipitated in great quantity into their
narrow and delicate tubes, distends them, and sometimes ruptures their coats,
which are too weak to surmount its resistance.
.

All the passions domineer in the soul; but the body, particularly the plexus
nervosi, is the wretched theater of their conflict.

Sentiment is only a transient emotion of the soul, which endures only whilst
the understanding is fixed on the object by which it was produced; sentiment,
when produced, is sometimes so early extinguished that it escapes attention.

The soul possesses the power of fixing our sentiments at pleasure, it
sometimes preserves them in opposition to the will. When a passion is agreeable
to us, we entertain its object exclusively, and the soul is delighted in its
contemplation; let us then be ever so willing to attend to other objects,
pleasure constantly attaches us to this only; the love of happiness, ever
present to the mind, always determines it to that which administers delight.

Thus the unhappy lover, separated from his mistress, looks languishingly
around him, and incessantly engrossed by the beloved object, takes no interest
in others: sweetly melancholy, he seeks silence and solitude, where, without
interruption and free from importunate cares, he indulges his delightful
revery, and resigns himself wholly to the contemplation of the object he loves.

The will and the love of pleasure, can fix any particular sentiment in the
soul; but when they fix none therein, when the mind chooses to lose sight of
importunate objects, and begins to neglect them, it is the physical cause which
detains us with that upon which we are then engaged. It is the sense of the
impression produced on our organs, and principally on the plexus nervosi, which
recalls us thereto. It is this which, amidst sports and entertainments, calls
back the unfortunate to their grief and tears.

It is therefore only by aid of the impressions produced on these plexus, that
the transient emotions of the soul become permanent, that they acquire any
duration in our hearts after their causes have ceased, that they consume us,
and continually prey on the mind, even in despite of ourselves.

It is likewise by aid of the different impressions of sentiments on the body,
that contrary passions appear to be co-existent in the soul.

Let us however observe, that as these impressions are produced in contrary
passions by opposite causes, they are commonly destroyed one by another; when,
of the series of different sentiments to which the soul is resigned, the last
becomes the most powerful: but how strong or how feeble soever these
impressions may be, they mutually weaken each other. Hence we never observe, at
one time, on the physiognomy, the violent transports of joy, and the
destructive languor of despair, although we frequently discover sadness veiled
with a gentle smile.

SECTION II. Influence of the BODY on the SOUL.
SEnsibility, desires, passions, remembrance, recollection, wit, talents of
every kind, even the most inferior qualities of the soul, are different in
every individual. Are souls, then, in their nature, different? Are there as
many species of souls as there are of moss Pope's Essay on Man.
; or are they the same and unvaried in all men? This mysterious truth is
equally unknown to the learned and unlearned. It is a secret impenetrable to
Man, and known only to the great Author of Nature. But as we are able to
account for the diversity of souls by the difference of bodies to which they
are united, and by the different circumstances of individuals, the possibility,
even the facility of a physical explanation of the diversity of characters,
passions, minds, induces us to believe, that souls are not essentially
different from each other. But were souls different in their nature, their
diversity would be of no effect, so long as they continue united to the body:
when once entered therein, they instantly become subject to physical laws, and
receive their character from organization Character is to the soul what
physiognomy is to the countenance; it is what distinguishes one soul from
another.
. Let us examine in what manner the body characterises the soul, and to what
the varieties observed between men are to be imputed.

Authors who have hitherto treated this subject, not considering the dignity of
their undertaking, have, instead of investigating the laws of the influence of
the body on the soul, employed their imagination in the invention of new ones;
instead of laboring to discover the causes of phenomena by their effects, have
confounded the whole; by attributing to the body the properties of the soul,
they have made the faculties of the thinking substance so many corporeal
faculties, which they have distributed to particular organs, viz. the nervous
fluid and the fibers of the brain: by the motion of these fibers, by the
modification of these organs and of this fluid, they have accounted for ideas
See Bonnet's Palingenesie. Haller's Physiology, etc.
, prejudices, desires, passions, intrepidity, courage, memory and thought.

By attributing to the brain functions so sublime, by regarding this viscus as
the organ allotted for the production of ideas, as formed to represent the
series of intellectual See Le Cat's Treatise in the Sensations. Buffon's
Natural History, etc.
operations by a serics of particular fibers and sibrillae differently
modified, these sages have supposed, in opposition to facts Although we cannot
perceive the cavity of the fibers which form the substance of the brain, its
structure and its use are however very well known. It is undoubtedly a compound
of many extremely small vessels, whose direction is visible, allotted for the
secretion of the nervous fluid from the blood. This supposed mavelous
structure of the brain can serve no purpose, if we restore to the soul those
qualities which are without reason attributed to that organ.
, a particular construction which it has not, an admirable structure superior
to all we can conceive or imagine, where the Deity can read as in a book the
different thoughts of Man. Some have even strained the mavelous, or rather
the ridiculous, to measure the volume of the medullary substance, and to
determine the number of ideas which a grain of the medulla contains. Having
made the desires, passions, memory, imagination, etc. merely corporeal
faculties; having given to each of these organic fibers a mavelous structure,
they have tortured their minds to apply them to the different phenomena, Robert
Hook in the Philosophical Transactions.
but finding themselves unable to make any just application, they have made one
which is absurd and unintelligible: by these forced and puerile explanations,
by occult causes not in the least satisfactory, they have involved in darkness
that which they desired to explain, rendering themselves ridiculous in the
opinion of men of genius, and unintelligible to inferior capacities.

Every one hitherto has fallen into these errors, and, as if it were impossible
to arrive at truth, has neglected that which alone could conduct him thither.
But if, amidst so many successless enquirers, a few attained to the discovery
of some truths, they knew not how to improve them, they only guessed, not
demonstrated.

Thus, ignorant of every true principle, they undertook to explain these
phenomena, but not being able to complete their design, abandoned it, imputing
their inability to the intricate nature of the subject. So that hitherto no
advantage has been obtained from any observations made on the influence of the
body on the soul, toward forming a fixed and regular system. Every thing as
yet written on this subject is vague and absurd; I shall therefore endeavor to
dispel this darkness, or rather attempt to reduce this science to its
principles.

CHAP. I. Influence of ORGANIZATION on the AFFECTIONS.
EVERY mind is endued with the same faculties; in this respect, all are
similar: but these faculties are more or less extensive, more or less
susceptible of improvement, and some have their peculiar propensities; but in
these, all minds vary. This diversity is wholly produced by the body.

The Sensibility of the SOUL ever Proportionate to that of the ORGANS.
There is a constant relation between the sensibility of the soul and that of
the body, a determinate invariable relation.

Is the body endued with great sensibility? The soul is so likewise: does it
possess but little of it? The soul ever possesses it in the same degree.

The cause of this phenomenon is very simple.

However sensible the soul may be in itself, the measure of that sensibility is
undiscoverable by us, and is, in fact, wholly obliterated, even supposing the
mind to have been pre-existent to the body, and that all its faculties were
active before its union with matter: for the soul being once united to
corporeal organs, there remains not the least vestige of its former state,
every thing is forgotten. When united See Book II. Art. of the unfolding of the
faculties of the soul.
, the soul receives no sensations but by the body; like a sheet of white paper,
whereon objects are represented after having passed through different
intervening mediums, the soul receives its sensations by the organs of sense;
its sensations therefore are founded on impressions made on the body. But as
the sensibility of the soul is a purely passive faculty, the different degrees
of which are not known to us by any immediate method, and as the sensations of
the soul are all founded on those of the body; the vivacity of the sensations
of the soul therefore depends on that of the sensations of the body. The
sensibility of these two substances must be equal.

Thus the degree of the sensibility of the soul depends on purely physical
causes See Book I. Art. the organs of sense considered with regard to their
different degrees of sensibility.
.

Why the Sensibility of the SOUL appears more powerful than the Sensibility of
the BODY.
The sensibility of the soul is ever proportionate to that of the body, and the
sensations are ever more strong at the instant they are received from the
object, than when remitted from the memory See Book II. Art. on the exercise of
the memory.
. Hence it appears, that the most powerful artificial pleasures, the most
lively paintings of the imagination, must necessarily be weaker than the
impressions of the senses. However, when we compare the representations of
fancy with those of nature, the brilliant paintings of love in the Adonis of
Marini, with the merely physical pleasures of that passion, we are much more
strongly affected by the former than by the latter.

Whence arises this phenomenon? It is not that the sensibility of the soul is
more strong than that of our organs, as might be inferred from these examples;
but that the senses, in their enjoyment, being ever confined to their objects,
can neither add to, nor take from them; whilst the imagination being free in
the choice of its colors and its lineaments, incessantly passes from object to
object, selecting that which is most brilliant, and most engaging, and from
thence forms its images, as the be its honey from the most delicious parts of
flowers. The lineaments which are dispersed in sensual enjoyments, are
collected, or rather concentrated in our imaginary pleasures, and acquire force
from this concentration, as the rays of light collected in the focus of a
mirror.

The paintings of imagination must therefore appear more powerful than the
pleasures of the senses; although they receive their whole force from the
sensations of the body.

Why MAN is more sensible to Pain than Pleasure.
Painful sensations affect us incomparably more strongly than the agreeable;
for violent pain destroys all sensations of pleasure, but the most powerful
sensation of pleasure cannot silence a strong sensation of pain.

However surprising this phenomenon may appear, it is not difficult to assign
the cause of it.

Notwithstanding we are ignorant of the mechanism of the sensations, it is
however certain, that their force is ever proportionate to the affection of the
nervous fibers of which their organs are formed. In the agreeable sensations,
these fibers are slightly affected; it may be said, that objects of pleasure
pass only gently over them; whilst, in painful sensations, the same fibers are
violently compressed, are ever rendered extremely tense and often broken.

Hence Man is less sensible to pleasure than pain; hence more strongly affected
by the representation of Tartarus than by that of Elysium; hence the attraction
of pleasure, the pleasingness of hope, always yield to the fear of torment and
to the horror of despair.

Why the Character of the SOUL is ever congruous to the State of the BODY.
There is a constant relation between the disposition or humor of Man, and the
constitution of the corporeal organs.

Is the body affected with disease? The soul is sad Is the body in health? The
soul is gay. Is the former in vigor? The latter is vivacious. Is that Ianguid?
This is so too.

Sadness, gaiety, vivacity, languor, these dispositions, these sentiments, are
experienced by the soul often when it is ignorant of their subject, ignorant
even of their source. Like two harmonic machines, the soul constantly
corresponds to the state of the body; the same phenomenon is observed at all
times and in all places: the light does not more regularly follow the
revolutions of the sun, than the soul the revolutions of the body.

Let us explain this phenomenon.

Although the sensations be not the cause of the passions, and although no
mechanism whatever can produce in the heart a sentiment of sadness or of joy,
it is nevertheless a law of nature, that when some particular sensation is
received, some particular sentiment should arise in the soul; that See Book II.
Art. origin of our sentiments.
pleasure should excite joy, and pain sadness.

Pleasure and pain spring from three different sources,

From external objects, by the senses.

From ideas, by thought.

From the internal parts of the body, by the general organs of feeling.

The agreeable and painful sensations which arise from the two first of these
sources, are momentary; because the senses are not always affected, nor is the
understanding constantly in exercise: but the soul constantly receives
sensations from the third source, if it be only that of the state of the body.

Joy and sadness, sentiments which have an immediate relation to agreeable and
painful sensations, must therefore prevail in the soul in proportion as the one
or the other of these sensations results from the disposition of our organs.

The impressions of pleasure and pain, which we receive from the two first
sources, are the cause of those transient fits of exultation and sadness, which
we so frequently experience, whose subject is ever known; those, we receive
from the last, are the cause of that gaiety and sadness with which we are at
all times more or less affected, frequently imperceptibly to ourselves, but
much oftener without our knowing their principle: these form the basis of the
humor of Man.

Whilst the body is in health, whilst all the functions are perfectly
performed, and the fluids circulate with freedom and ease, this motion of the
fluids produces on the plexus nervosi, which envelope the vessels, an agreeable
sensation, a slight and vague emotion, more easily selt than described: this
sensation passes into the soul by the nerves: hence joy, which springs from
pleasure and incessantly accompanies it, must necessary arise therein together
with this agreeable sensation. Thus gaiety and good humor are necessary
attendants on health.

On the contrary, are the functions of the animal machine disordered? Are our
fluids too dense, too acrid, in too large or too small a quantity? Is their
circulation violent or difficult? The disorder within, produces in the soul a
disagreeable sensation, ever accompanied with sadness.

When all the functions of the animal machine are easily performed, Man is gay;
when with difficulty, he is melancholy and sad.

When an easy or irregular performance of the functions is the natural state of
the body, we are gay or sad by constitution. But as easy circulation results
from the equilibrium between our fluids and solids; as this equilibrium may be
easily destroyed in a machine so complex and so feeble as the human body,
incessantly exposed to shocks from external objects, from the impulse of fluids
penetrating it in every part, often so pernicious in their nature, and almost
always with so little proportion to its delicacy, it may be easily conceived,
that the state which produces gaiety, must seldom exist; but that which
produces sadness, very often.

That voluptuous sensation, which arises from the easy motion of the organs, is
likewise much more restrained than the disagreeable ensation which springs from
a defect in their harmony. The former varies very little, because one cause
only produces it; the latter, on the contrary When this equilibrium is
destroyed and the fluids prevail, the blood circulates with difficulty; we then
feel a kind of stupor and indeterminate pain, like that which men of pleasure
experience when exhausted by enjoyment When it is destroyed, and the solids
prevail, it forms that sense of agitation we call inquietude; add to this every
kind of pain accompanying the discases and infirmities attached to nature.
, is of different kinds, and each kind is differently diversified. Thus the gay
character is ever uniform, whilst the melancholy humor has as many gradations,
as are found between the slightest and deepest melancholy.

Although the voluptuous sensation, produced by the perfect state of the
functions of the body, be single in its kind, it has however its gradations. As
this equilibrium between the solids and fluids is more or less perfect, the
agreeable sensation which results from it is more or less powerful, and the
gaiety of temper more or less apparent.

The sensations therefore of pleasure or pain have their different degrees; but
these degrees approximate insensibly; there is a point where these sensations
are so greatly weakened, that they are no longer distinct, but become
confounded one with the other. This point depends on that disposition of the
body, which constitutes uniformity, or rather serenity of temper; an indecisive
character, and so much the more indecisive, as these sensations are the more
confounded.

Finally, as the mechanism of the body, to which these sensations of pleasure
or of pain, which are the source of a melancholy temper, are to be imputed, is
changeable, so the temper varies likewise. Observe however that the agreeable
sensation, which depends on the perfect state of the machine, can be easily
destroyed; whilst the disagreeable sensation, which results from the primitive
constitution of the solids, is in the other extreme. Thus it is not unfrequent
that gaiety yields to sadness, but a melancholy temper seldom gives way to
mirth.

Hitherto we have discoursed of the temper only; let us examine that vivacity
and that languor of the soul, which ever accompany the vigor or languor of the
body, one of which wears so strong an appearance of gaiety, and the other of
sadness.

We must consider the languor of the soul, less as a weak degree of sadness,
although it has all the appearance of it, than as a state of indetermination,
wherein Man possesses not sufficient power to determine himself. Objects ever
remain the same; they likewise act on our senses by the same mechanism: but
whilst the body is affected with a languor, their impression on our organs See
Book I. Art. the organs of sense considered with regard to their different
degrees of sensibility.
is much weakened by the deficiency of the organic elasticity of the fibers.
Thus weakened, the sensations communicate an impression, too feeble I shall
hereafter demonstrate, that the sensations and sentiments, when re-produced,
are not more powerful.
to excite any strong emotion in the soul.

There is a surprising relation in Man, as in every other animal, between
sensation, sentiment and action. External objects act upon the senses, the
senses modify their impression, convey it to the soul, and the soul
consequently re-acts on the body. Thus in the animal economy, the action of
external objects on the senses is ever succeeded by the re-action of the soul
on our organs. The one is the cause, the other the effect; this cause and this
effect are ever proportionate. The gesture of the body, the tone of the voice,
the rapidity of the speech, and every mechanical motion, by which the soul
externally displays its emotions, have necessarily a force proportionate to the
vivacity of these emotions.

In voluntary motion the same relation is observed.

Man cannot see his own good without making some efforts to obtain it, nor be
exposed to any evil without attempting to avoid it, and that ever with an ardor
proportionate to the greatness of the good he seeks, and of the evil he would
avoid. Thus when the vigor of the body decays, the sentiments are destitute of
vivacity.

The first cause of the languor and vivacity of the soul is in the organs,
which receive the impression of external objects; the second in the soul, which
experiences this impression, and re-acts upon the organs. In the former case,
these impressions on the body have but little effect on the soul; in the
latter, the emotions of the soul have but little effect on the body.

The force of the sensations of the body, and of the emotions of the soul, is
ever absolutely necessary to the vivacity of the temper and character; but
these causes alone are not sufficient; for the soul and the body are without
any immediate communication. Thus, however powerful the sensations of the body,
and the emotions of the soul may be, they are ineffectual, when not propagated
reciprocally from one of these substances to the other. The nervous fluid being
the medium of communication between these two substances, it follows, that the
impulses, transmitted by either, are very much modified by the action of this
fluid; and their force is ever in proportion to the vivacity of this action.

Whilst the body is languid, this action is feeble; for the same causes which
produce the vivacity of the impressions of objects, continue it whilst it is
propagated; and the same causes, which are necessary to transmit to the soul
the vivacity of the sensations of the body, are so likewise, to transmit to the
body the vivacity of the emotions of the soul.

Hence Macrocephali are more vivacious than others, and Microcephali less so.

Hence, likewise, extreme fatigue seems to extinguish in our hearts all
sentiments and desires. Hence, after a considerable haemorrhage, the emotions
of the soul are See Book I. page Art. of the necessity of arterial blood to
motion.
without vivacity, and when our strength is dissipated, we feel only the gentle
emotions of an indecisive will; hence rage and courage decrease with the blood.
When enquiring into the causes of vigor of body, and of the force of
sensations, I proved, that three causes contribute thereto See Book I. Art. the
organ of sense considered in regard to their different degrees of sensibility.
, the primitive elasticity of the fibers, the large diameter of their cavity,
and a sufficient quantity of the nervous fluid. These concur to produce that
vivacity of our desires and actions, which forms the sprightly character;
whilst the lax texture of our fibers, their small diameter, and a deficiency of
the nervous fluid form the effeminate and indolent.

Such are the causes of that analogy, of that harmony which is ever observed
between the temper of the soul and the organization of the body, or, so to
express myself, between the state of the body and the state of the soul.

Hitherto we have seen in what manner the body characterises the soul; but the
influence of the corporeal on the immaterial part in Man, ends not

In what Manner the Disposition of the BODY varies the Prospect of NATURE.
The soul is ever in a disposition analogous to that of our organs: this I have
already proved: it has likewise been shown See Book II. Art. Some singular
phenomena explained, concerning the effect of the passions on the understanding.
, that there is a constant analogy between the impression of external objects
and the internal disposition; that those objects are pleasing and agreeable,
when the soul is affected with joy; much less so when it is affected with
grief: consequently the mechanism of the body changes the prospect of nature,
the reason of which has been already assigned.

Organization renders the Temper constant.
Although the temper be variable, it nevertheless is not equally subject to
change in every individual. We have seen how the state of the body forms its
character; but the heart has other fources of joy and sadness than these.

If the soul experiences agreeable or painful sensations, which arise from the
state of the body, it likewise experiences others which are independent of it;
these must change its natural state, when they are contrary to those which are
transmitted from the general organ of feeling, and with so much the more force,
as they have greater vivacity. The soul united to a sensible and vigorous body
must therefore be of a temper the most inconsistent: but more especially if it
be not determined by the constitution of the body; for at that time the
sensations affecting it preserve all their energy, and as if it had no
character, its temper varies with the impressions it receives.

On the contrary, vexations change not the temper of the gay; such feel them
only as slight pains, which ceasing, the soul re-admits the sweet impressions
of pleasure See Observations 24 and 46, Book III.
, and instantly re-assumes its wonted gaiety.

On the other hand, pleasure makes very slight impressions on the sad;
constantly concentrated within themselves Ibidem.
, they are sensible only to grief, and never admit any strong impulse of joy.

Thus, by diffusing their colors over objects, our sentiments acquire longer
duration; joy contributes to perpetuate joy in the heart, and sadness to
perpetuate sadness.

The mechanism of the body, therefore, in characterising the temper,
contributes likewise to fix it.

Organization renders MAN volatile or thoughtful; talkative or silent.
If we observe the influence of the passions on the body, we shall perceive,
that joy shows itself externally by precipitate motions See Book III, Observat.
46 and 47.
; on the contrary, sadness renders the limbs motionless, and appears immoveably
Ibidem.
fixed in the heart. This latter recalls Man's thoughts within himself, whilst
the former continues to act outwardly: thus organization, by fixing the temper
of the soul, renders the gay volatile and unsettled; the sad reserved and
thoughtful.

Organization renders MAN morose, cruel, communicative or benign.
Sadness incessantly centers the mind within itself. He whose thoughts are
wholly on himself, and who separates his interest from that of others, knows
neither pity nor generosity. Thus that organization*, which renders Man sad,
renders him likewise obdurate and cruel; that which renders Man gay, on the
contrary, It is not my design to exclude the influence of moral causes on the
character of men. What I undertake in this work, is only to show how
organization characterises the soul.
renders him communicative, benevolent and compassionate. The disposition of
the organs likewise produces these effects by another principle; for to the
sad, ever centered within themselves by the sentiment of their own misfortunes,
nature appears covered with a gloom, all their ideas are mournful and
melancholy: if they speak of happiness, it is to complain of the want of it;
they seem never to have enjoyed any of the pleasures of life.

The sight of the happy causes the melancholy sufferer to feel the full weight
of his miseries; it increases his sufferings, by irritating his sensibility,
and wounding his self-love. Thus he is grieved at the sight of those pleasures
he cannot enjoy, and is envious of that felicity which flies from him and is
possessed by others; he would willingly see all beings groaning around, and
tormented with him: as if the number of his sufferings were diminished by those
which he inflicts upon others This is a kind of consolation by which self-love
beguiles our grief.
, he takes delight in disturbing their pleasures, poisoning their happiness,
and becomes cruel and malevolent This is the cause why affliction hardens the
heart, and why misfortune generates cruelty.
.

How different the joyful Man? The soul ever engrossed by agreeable sentiments,
pleasing images, flattering ideas, is but seldom afflicted; sadness has but
little power over a mind so disposed: ever ready to take all things in good
part, its affliction must be very severe, if it be obliged to grieve. Thus that
disposition of the organs, which produces gaiety, gives at the same time an
amiable character to the soul, and likewise generates benevolence.

The Man of a gay disposition, being contented with his lot, is unenvious of
others, and so far from desiring to render their lives unhappy, he endeavors
to prevent their being so; not from pity to them, but from love to himself: his
heart overflowing with joy, reluctantly supports whatever would afflict it, and
hastens to remove every painful impression, which either prevents its
amusements or interrupts its natural gaiety.

Organization renders MAN suspicious and mistrustful.
I cannot quit a subject so extensive: the simple disposition of the machine
which characterises the temper, characterises the human heart in so many other
respects, that it seems to be inexhaustible.

The sad are suspicious and mistrustful; they imagine every person that
approaches them ready to deceive: in proportion as their grief is more acute,
their suspions are increased, and nature is covered with a darker veil.

Whence does this proceed? We are not, as is commonly done, to account for it,
by saying, that mistrust is natural to a deceitful mind, and that no one can be
suscipious who is incapable of deceiving. This maxim is true with regard to men
absolutely ignorant, but not with regard to those who have been instructed by
experience: besides, we have no proof, that the sad are less just than the
joyful; on the contrary, if we observe misanthropes, souls gloomy by
constitution, we shall find that plain dealing is one of their characteristic
qualities; we know with what liberty they indulge themselves in offensive
expressions, and how little trouble it gives them to speak the most
disagreeable truths.

It is not in that so often repeated maxim, but in the state of the body, that
we must look for the cause of this phenomenon. External objects ever take their
colorings from the sentiments which the soul at that time experiences, and it
has been demonstrated, that the prospect of nature is in the mind only: now
that particular organic disposition which produces a melancholy temper,
occasions likewise loss of vigor. Weakness and pain generate sadness and
timidity, and from these two dispositions of the soul united, naturally result
mistrust and suspicion: for the feeble, being more obnoxious to danger than the
strong, more assiduously seek to avoid it, are more provident and better
prepared against snares, obstacles, and every kind of evil. On the other hand,
the sad collect in their minds every difficulty, exaggerate subjects of fear,
easily despair, and believe every thing to be gloomy around them.

Besides, the pensive character of the sad, and the natural succession of their
ideas, incessantly exciting in the mind thoughts analogous to the sentiment of
sadness then present, creates obstacles, objections, subjects of fear and
terror.

Organization characterises the AFFECTIONS.
There is a constant determinate relation between the organization and the
affections of the heart.

In the languor of disease, the prospect of Nature excites no emotion: the
amorous chant of birds, the cool refreshing breeze, the enamel of flowers, no
longer transport the soul; insusceptible of joy, the image of pleasure charms
it no more. At that time, therefore, we are feebly determined to action See
Book IV. Art. Why the character of the soul is ever congruous to the state of
the body.
, and if roused thereto, are unable to continue; we sink under it, and sigh for
repose. But when the fibers are sensible, elastic, and abundantly supplied with
the nervous fluid, the smallest objects make strong impressions on the organs,
and forcibly affect the soul. The soul at such time can re-act on the body with
equal vivacity, and the repression of its emotions is as ungrateful as action
in the preceding.

The soul, when united to a sensible and vigorous body, is therefore inactive,
and less patiently endures inaction than exercise; but when united to organs
composed of lax fibers, it is indolent and effeminate.

The soul, united to gross organs, loves lively amusements and noisy pleasures;
to delicate organs, refined pleasures and peaceable amusements.

Brilliant colors are pleasing to robust persons; such are passionately fond
of warlike music, penetrating odours and spirituous liquors. Persons of
delicate texture and great sensibility, on the contrary, love light colors,
soft music and sweet odours. In the pleasure of the mind the same diversity
appears; the delicate and the sensible, fly those noisy amusements in which the
robust and vigorous so greatly delight; they love refined enjoyments, the sweet
effusions of the mind, tetes a tetes, and every pleasure which arises from the
tender union of hearts.

The cause of this phenomenon is, on one hand, the relation observed between
the sensibility of our organs and the force of the impression of objects; on
the other, the organic disposition which characterises the temper.

With the impressions we receive from objects, constantly concur two analogous
sentiments of the soul; love, with agreeable sensations; and hatred, with
painful.

All men seek pleasure and fly from pain; in this they all accord: but we never
seek objects but from the relation which they have to ourselves, that is, from
the degree of pleasure they can communicate.

The sentiments of love and hatred must therefore change with these relations.

A weak sight, or rather an eye extremely sensible, delights not in glaring
colors; such being prejudicial to it. A delicate ear, delights not in violent
noises for the same reason: whatever is injurious to the senses, is pleasing to
no one. On the other part, every being loves to be sensible of its own
existence. Thus, whenever any one avoids too violent sensations, he seeks those
only which have a certain degree of vivacity.

Hence the soul, which is united to gross organs, being too weakly affected by
gentle and delicate sensations, loves those which are violent and strong; such
as spirituous liquors, glaring colors, the sound of the horn, trumpet, drums,
and all kinds of noisy amusements: whilst the soul, which is united to a
delicate and sensible constitution, delights only in gentle sensations, tender
colors, expressive music, in a word, in every kind of refined and delicate
pleasure.

But in these relations between the affections of the soul and organization,
there is a more than simple proportion between the force of the impression of
objects and the delicacy of the senses; for many moderate pleasures are devoid
of tenderness, and a great number of amusements which cannot be classed with
the noisy, excite no gentle emotion.

What then determines the soul, which is united to delicate organs, to
tenderness? It is the constitution of the body, but considered in another point
of view.

I have demonstrated, that the state of the body, which renders the temper gay,
likewise renders Man a lover of dissipation; whilst that, which renders it
melancholy, renders him pensive. But that disposition, in which the functions
of the organs are easily performed, and is the medium between vigor and
imbecility, affects the soul with an agreeable languor, which pleasingly
allures it back within itself; such is the state of the body after the moderate
loss See Observation 33. Book III.
of spirits; such is the last stage of convalescence when it just borders on
perfect health, and such is the habitual disposition of bodies which are
delicate and sensible. The gentle languor we then experience, and which is a
disposition to tenderness, conveys to the soul an agreeable sensation with
which we desire to be affected, and which we cherish in the heart. Hence we
delight in every thing which tends to preserve it; as, affecting music, amorous
discourses, and every pleasure productive of tenderness and love.

But the affections of the soul are determined by the organization in a manner
yet more particular.

The prevailing passion, in those affections of the soul which have a physical
object, is ever fixed by that sense which is the best constituted, and by the
most sensible organ. He whose organs of pleasure possess sensibility superior
to that of his other senses, is libertine and lascivious. He whose palate, or
rather whose tongue, is the most delicate of his organs, is a drunkard or a
glutton. He whose hearing is exquisite, is passionately fond of music.

I have said, that the reigning passion is ever determined by that organ which
is the most sensible: this is evident, since Man seeks pleasure with an ardour
proportionate to its vivacity. But if, of these enjoyments which he attains,
one part exclude another, he ever prefers that which is the most engaging. The
more sensible the organs, the greater the pleasure; for we can at all times
proportion objects to the senses when too delicate; but we can never proportion
the organ to objects when it is deficient in sensibility.

The gay love joy and seek comic or mirthful amusements; the sad, on the
contrary, delight only in those which are sad and mournful; they delight to
relate and hear related tragic adventures, shun gay company, fly to deserts,
woods, caves, gloomy forests, and savage nature.

It is easy to conceive why the gay delight in joy, this being of itself
agreeable; but by what caprice do the sad delight in sadness, in tragic and
mournful amusements? If we attentively consider it, we shall find the cause of
this surprising phenomenon in the disposition which the soul receives from the
body, combined with self-love. I have said, that we seek after those things
only which have some relation to ourselves; this is true in more than one
respect. The sad by constitution, being incessantly affected by a disagreeable
sensation, vexed that he is only conscious of his existence by his sufferings,
envious and jealous of what he does not possess, and what if he were possessed
of, he could not enjoy, hates those who are less unhappy than himself; and by a
natural consequence, shuns all society where there is the least appearance of
gaiety. The idea that himself is not the only miserable being, alleviates his
torments; the thought that others participate his sufferings gives him ease;
thus he recounts tragic adventures, and is pleased at the sight of another's
misfortunes. As the only pleasure he can enjoy is that of afflicting the happy,
and as the only mean he possesses of relieving his own misery, is the indulging
himself in reflecting on the sufferings of others, he flies to solitude, to
savage and desert nature, where he may, without interruption, indulge the
gloomy reflections of his soul. Thus the physical sways the moral part in Man,
and the constitution of the body generates the affections of the mind.

I shall now prove, that the force and duration of these affections depend
wholly on mechanical causes.

The relations, which are observed between the sensibility of the body and that
of the soul, are likewise observed between the state of our organs and the
character of our sentiments.

The force, the vivacity, the duration, the violence of the sentiments of the
soul, are all of them effects of organization.

The sensations are undoubtedly not the cause of the passions; but sensibility
is the measure of their force; for the desire of being happy, which blindly
leads us in quest of pleasure, and prompts us to fly from pain, ever carries us
thither with an ardour proportioned to the greatness of the good we pursue, or
of the evils we avoid.

As the degree of the good and of the evil is ever determined by that of
sensibility, the passions must draw their force from the organization; the
sensibility of the soul being ever determined by that of the body.

There is a surprising relation in Man between sentiment and action. He cannot
perceive his good without making some effort to acquire it, nor be exposed to
evil, without attempting to avoid it. This I have already observed, but there
is a necessity of repeating it here. If it be evident, as undoubtedly it is,
that Man ever yields to sentiment, and that the degree of the good and the evil
is determined in every individual by that of sensibility, it is plain, that the
more sensible Man is, the greater efforts he will make to enjoy that good, or
avoid that evil.

But this relation between sentiment and action is not restrained to voluntary
motion; the action of external objects on the soul is ever followed by the
re-action of the soul on the body. Unable to restrain the emotions agitating it
within, the soul displays them externally by impressions purely mechanical, and
ever with a force proportioned to that of its sentiments. Thus in the violent
passions, we are ever transported with strong and precipitate motions; but when
all is placid and quiet within, all is calm and serene without.

Yet the man, who is ardent in his desires, is not ever impetuous in his
actions. Vivacity of motion supposes only great organic elasticity of the
fibers: impetuosity requires not only great organic elasticity of the fibers,
but force and solidity of the organs likewise.

The duration of a passion is determined by its objects. The sensual are ever
momentaneous: those, which have some natural want for their cause, continue not
after this want is supplied; the others are not more durable. But those, which
are produced by the imagination, are incomparably more constant; they reign
throughout the day, and disappear not at night; they attend us when we retire
to rest, and reign in the mind when all the senses are locked in sleep. This
duration of the artificial passions, so long when compared to that of the
sensual, depends on the organization combined with the nature of their
different objects.

It is the property of our pleasures mutually to destroy each other, on
enjoyment, and to have no continuance without the assistance of novelty. The
objects of sensual pleasures are extremely confined, compared to those which
are imaginary; for the first are determined by nature, whilst imagination, ever
active, can incessantly modify its objects, and present them under new
appearances. Moreover, in the sensual passions, the sentiments which then
engage the mind, are felt only by means of external objects; when these objects
cease to act, the sentiment immediately becomes extinct. Thus in sensual love,
the sweet emotions of the soul, and the spirits, are lost together: but in the
artificial passions, the heated imagination exaggerates objects, adorns and
embellishes them; the soul, seized with an enthusiastic ardor, affects the body
with strong emotions, and thereby retains its tender sentiments, even when
pleasure is extinct.

Nature cannot long support the violence of an extremely active passion; the
sentiments forming this passion vanish, and instantly re-appear. The cause of
this phenomenon is physical. In every passion, whilst the soul is fixed on its
objects, the Sea Observation 6, Book III.
organs are tense; this is observed even during sleep, when the commerce of the
soul with the body appears to be interrupted. In the agitation of a troublesome
dream, the pulse becomes quicker, the complexion more lively, the body is
variously agitated, Man awakes and finds himself in his bed, exhausted by
fatigue, and wet with sweat and with his tears. In the passions, tension of the
body ever accompanies tension of the soul. This tension of the sentient
substance is not only determined by that of the organs of the body, but wholly
depends on it; for when the body is affected with languor, the soul receives no
strong sensation, it is insusceptible of it See a preceding Article. Why the
character of the soul is ever congruous to the state of the body. Book IV.
.

Let us then conclude, that if the soul cannot long sustain very strong
emotions, it is because the fibers of the body cannot endure great tension for
any length of time.

The violent passions consist in a series of sentiments, which are interrupted,
one instant, and renewed the next; the succession of these sentiments is
perceived only at intervals.

The duration of each particular sentiment, and that of their total
successions, depend on the organization. For if the soul always requires the
mediation of the body, to receive any strong sensation; if it be unable to fix
itself without the concurrence of the other; it plainly appears, that the
duration of every strong emotion of the mind, and that of all these emotions
which are successively experienced, depends on that faculty of the body,
whereby it continues tense a longer or shorter time; a faculty dependent on the
different degrees of organic elasticity and solidity of the fibers.

Thus the soul, which is united to strong and elastic organs, is subject to
violent and durable passions; that which is united to delicate organs, unable
to endure long continued tension, passes incessantly from one impression to
another; and never experiences any which is lasting.

In the violent passions, the soul is truly passionate, only when engaged with
its objects; when it ceases to be affected thereby, the passion expires; yet
the same internal disposition continues, even when the soul is engaged with a
new sentiment. The cause of this phenomenon has been already shown to be in
that impression See the conclusion of the 1st Section, Book IV.
, which sensibility produces on the body, and which in its turn, from an effect
becomes a cause, preserving in the soul the sentiment which produced it, and
recalling it there, if at any time its object disappear.

But this impression which the passions produce on our organs is not equally
durable in every individual. The more strong these emotions are, so much the
more apparent is this effect; for the more strong is the impulse communicated
to the nervous fluid by the soul, and the more extreme the tension of the
fibers, so much the more is their elasticity weakened, the equilibrium between
these two powers of the circulation destroyed, and the circulation itself
obstructed. At this time the nervous fluid produces, especially in the plexus
nervosi, a very great constriction, proper to continue the emotions of the soul.

The duration of this impression is at first, therefore, in a direct ratio of
the degree of sensibility, afterward in an inverse; for the more elastic the
fibers are, so much the more they yield to the action of the nervous fluid, the
more forcible likewise is their re-action, and the equilibrium much sooner
re-established. In estimating these relations, we find the duration of this
impression to gain less by an excess of sensibility in the organs, than it is
prejudiced by an excess of organic elasticity.

In a body delicate and vigorous, the soul must therefore be subject to
passions the most violent and the least durable; in a body indelicate and
robust, to those which are the most constant.

Hence the reason why men of great sensibility are easily provoked to anger,
whilst the indelicate and robust are with difficulty inflamed. Hence the reason
why the anger of the former is like a fire of stubble, which blazes and is soon
extinguished; while that of the others is of long continuance: once excited to
fury, their souls cannot be appeased, resentment remains after revenge is gone,
like the agitated ocean, which subsides not to a calm till a considerable space
after the storm. But the duration of the passions is produced by many other
causes. Whilst Man is intent upon the object of his passion, as he is ever
surrounded with beings adapted to distract him, he easily loses sight of it:
this very frequently happens. During these moments of distraction, if the
sensation which occasioned it be not very interesting, the passion must be
regarded as a latent fire, which instantly blazes forth on the least admission
of air.

If the soul be strongly affected by these new objects, the passion revives
not, but yields to some other sentiment. Thus the more sensible a man is, the
more he is exposed to the impression of external objects, and the more easily
will his passions be extinguished.

This is the cause why the virtue of the sprightly is neither regular nor
constant; it appears only at intervals, by starts, as if it had no source in
the persons themselves; they being obliged to be frequently recalled to the
practice of it: while the virtue of the sedate and robust has the appearance of
constant habit.

On the other hand, while the passion is extremely violent, and any sentiment
tyrannizes in the soul, other objects have not power to disengage the attention.

The passions therefore, if they are, on one side, less constant in proportion
as Man is more sensible; they are, on the other, more constant in proportion as
he possesses greater sensibility.

This is observed more especially in the passions which have a sentiment of
love for their basis: when the soul believes that its own happiness depends on
the possession of some object, nothing can disengage it from thence; the
powerful attractives of pleasure keep it intent on the beloved object, and
admits of no interruption.

From these observations let us conclude, that,

A Man of extreme sensibility, who has only slight affections, must be the most
fickle of human kind; he is never so constant, as when violently excited by
some passion.

The force of the passions therefore depends on the sensibility of the fibers;
their violence on their extreme sensibility, and their impetuousity on their
sensibility combined with their force: the duration of the passions depends
equally on the sensibility and elasticity of the fibers, and on their force and
solidity. It is thus the physical part in Man gives character to our sentiments
and passions.

How Organization renders MAN open-hearted, or a Dissembler.
To the preceding truths, I add another which arises immediately from them.

The same organic elasticity, which causes the extreme force of the passions,
renders Man frank and open-hearted; for the soul cannot conceal its emotions,
they rush out precipitately, and appear in his gesture, speech and voice;
finally, the repressing of these emotions is ever painful, and even impossible,
when the soul is strongly affected. Reserve is peculiar to souls united to
organs of lax or very gross fibers; frankness, to souls united to organs of
extreme organic elasticity.

Men of great sensibility and liveliness, always speak the language which
springs from the heart, the language of truth; thus it is by warming the heart
of him who is naturally cold, that is, by augmenting his sensibility, by
increasing the elasticity of his fibers, that wine banishes reserve and lays
open the heart.

Thus no credit is to be given to persons of known dissimulation and habitual
reserve, unless in the paroxysms of passion. Then only are their words without
disguise; in these moments, the violence of the emotions of the soul augments
the tension of the fibers, affects them with a slight rigidity, frees them from
the empire of the will See observations 62, Book III.
, makes them drop the mask and appear without disguise.

When you press the chaste mistress of your heart to lay open her mind to you,
although she submits with regret to the lessons of her mother, and to the
severe laws of modesty, she nevertheless divulges not her true sentiments; she
allows she has a friendship for you, and nothing more. But when wearied out
with a long and painful resistance, the dissembling fair permits her lover to
triumph; while love fires her veins; while she embraces her beloved with
transports; clasps him in her arms; presses him to her eager bosom, and her
humid lips attract and distill pleasure; her voice is broken and faultering,
scarcely can she articulate a few words -- expressions of tenderness and love.

Observations on the Manner in which Orgaganization renders MAN obdurate and
cruel, compassionate and humane.
Let us again examine the effects of the primitive and organic elasticity of
the fibers; for what a diversity in the moral character is produced by the
different degrees of these corporeal faculties! What surprising phenomena, of
which they are the cause! Principles the most fertile! Principles! whose
extent, when fully known, demonstrate them to be almost inexhaustible.

We do not compassionate the miserable, but from an idea of his sufferings; we
have no idea of pain till we have experienced it ourselves: if, therefore, to
bemoan others, we must have suffered ourselves, sensibility is a disposition
absolutely necessary to pity.

If united to gross organs, or to fibers too solid or too lax, the soul becomes
obdurate and inflexible; when united to organs delicate, elastic and vigorous,
it becomes compassionate and tender. Hence pity, although an artificial
sentiment, is nevertheless, in every individual, modified by the organization.

The greater the sensibility of Man, he may thence be the more humane; and by a
very singular consequence, he may thence be the more cruel. For if, to bemaon
others, we must be sensible ourselves, it is equally true, that we discover
only that sensibility for others which we want not ourselves. The more sensible
any one is, the more assiduous is he to avoid pain, the more eager after
pleasure, the more engrossed by himself, and the less concerned for others. If,
in these cases, sensibility be fixed on the sensual or artificial passions,
which have neither generosity, clemency, nor goodness, for their object; the
voice of pleasure drowns that of pity; the heart is contracted and shrunk
within itself, the soul, full of the object of its desires, denies its
attention to every thing besides, and is no long either clement or humane. If
the well-being of others be inconsistent with our own, these affections become
more extreme; for if it be a consequence of the love of ourselves, to love
those things which are beneficial, so likewise it must be, to hate those which
are prejudicial to us. Thus they, whom we now look upon with indifference,
become the object of our most extreme hatred, when we regard them as enemies;
in the heat of passion we treat them with the greatest virulence, relentlessly
seek their ruin, aggravate their misery, and view their sufferings with an eye
of satisfaction.

The more sensible likewise Man is, the more fearful he is of pain, and the
more timid; the fear of his enemy prompts him to complete his destruction,
whenever opportunity offers. Let us therefore conclude, that the more sensible
a Man is, the more he is obnoxious to hatred, his cruelty is greater, and the
more atrocious his character.

Another reason, which modifies pity in our hearts, is drawn from that
disposition of the body which characterises the temper of the mind.

I have shown that the melancholy humor, by centering Man's thoughts in
himself, renders him unsociable, obdurate and cruel.

That, which constitutes good humor, is much more favorable to pity; yet in
some particular instances less so. In the gay, the sentiment of pleasure, ever
predominant in the soul, nourishes therein ideas of joy, and the sight of the
unhappy generates those of sadness. These therefore are weakened by the former,
and consequently make not their full impression.

The disposition of the body, which constitutes serenity of temper, is much
more favorable; as it leaves Man the entire liberty of his mental faculties,
and changes not the impression of objects.

But of all dispositions of the body, that is the most favorable which
constitutes the tender character, that disposition of the soul which determines
it to compassion.

The Man who is constitutionally sad may be just and sincere; the gay may be
equitable and meek; and a Man of a serene temper may possess the virtues of
both. But it is only to the Man of a delicate constitution of body, that Nature
has given a compassionate heart; on him only has she bestowed that noble
propensity to clemency, that generosity of soul, which takes pleasure in
mingling tears with the afflicted, in melting at another's woe, and relieving
the oppressed.

Let us add, that it is the same disposition of body which generates in our
hearts, that goodness which prevents the requests of others, and that easy
communicability of heart, which, in a moment, contracts the most durable
friendships, produces that sensibility and tendency of mind, whose first
emotions determine our lot, and decide the destiny of our lives.

Organization characterises the Manners.
I constantly return to the sensibility of our organs; so fertile is this
principle, so many and so mavelous are its phenomena!

The love of happiness is the great and only principle of all our actions, but
sensibility is the source, or rather the standard, of our vices and of our
virtues.

Men of the greatest sensibility may be the most cruel, the most vicious; but
to them likewise has Nature given souls of the greatest virtue, of the noblest
sentiments, grandeur and magnanimity.

Men of a little sensibility are beings without virtue, lifeless carcasses
wherein you can discover neither fire nor activity.

Farther Observations on the Manner in which Organization renders MAN frank and
hasty, or timid and deceitful.
The sensations, which the soul receives from the general organ of feeling, are
not confined to agreeable and painful impressions, the soul likewise perceives
the vigor or languor of the body; and this sense of vigor and languor greatly
diversifies the moral character of Man.

The sense of vigor The causes, which constitute the sensibility of our
organs, are the same with those which constitute vigor of body; but besides
these common causes, sensibility has others which are peculiar to it, as I
shall hereafter demonstrate in treating of the influence of climates on the
moral character: it is this which obliges me here to distinguish these two
faculties.
, combined with sensibility, renders Man ardent in his desires, precipitate in
his designs, and impetuous in his actions; whilst that of languor renders him
weak in his desires, slow in his resolutions, and indolent in his conduct.

Those who are vigorous and of great sensibility are therefore furious,
vindictive, audacious and inconsiderate.

Those who are weak and of little sensibility are timid, crafty, indolent and
patient.

Organization determines the Force of the SOUL.
It has been already observed, that a delicate body contains not a mind endued
with force.

In treating of the force of the soul, I have destroyed the sophistry which has
been used in the application of this term. I have proved, that, properly
speaking, there are no minds endowed with force, since every Man is
irresistibly subject to sensibility, and held in subjection by the passions. I
have shown, likewise, that in every individual, the force of the passions is
ever in proportion to sensibility, and that the sensibility of the soul is ever
determined by that of the body. Finally, I have demonstrated, that the force of
the soul, if we choose to make use of that expression, is in an inverse ratio of
the sentient faculty.

The soul therefore is more in subjection in a body of delicate and great
sensibility, than in a body which is indelicate and robust.

CHAP. II. Influence of ORGANIZATION on the Mind.
WHAT an astonishing variety of minds! How different their characters!

All men compare and combine their sensations to a certain degree; but every
one is not equally capable of comparing and generalizing them, and of forming
therefrom ideas and new combinations. All have not the gift of invention, nay,
not even that of perfecting what is already invented. How few are able to think
of themselves! How many others, yet more confined, who cannot think at all, but
are ever chained down to imitation, never doing any thing but what they have
seen done before, nor saying any thing but what they have heard said, as if
endowed with instinct only, and entirely destitute of judgment!

In distinguishing the operations of the mind relatively to their objects, we
find, that the greatest part of mankind are consined to the combination of
sensations, and that but very few can attain to that of ideas; but amongst the
small number of those who think, what diversity appears!

There are some whose activity of soul is such, that they can never seize any
principle, without tracing it to its most distant consequences. There are
others, and of these the number is very great, whose less active souls let
every consequence escape them, which has not a certain degree of evidence at
first sight, and seize those only which present themselves.

How different likewise their character! In one, judgment is the chief power of
the mind; in another, imagination; this is fertile in ideas; that other has
solidity of judgment; this is more impetuous, superior in argument; that
reasons more closely, and is more concise; this excites admiration by his
lively fallies, that by the force and solidity of his eloquence silences,
guides and governs us.

The cause of this diversity of minds has been ineffectually sought; but if any
one sufficiently attends, he will discover this, as well as the character of
the heart, to proceed from the disposition of the corporeal organs.

The impetuous Eschylus, the agreeable Horace, the sublime Milton, the
judicious Bacon, the profound Newton, the sagacious Montesquieu, in a word,
every man owes the turn and character of his mind to the constitution of his
body.

But not to rest content with merely asserting this truth, I proceed to
demonstrate it, to determine the dispositions of our organs, which occasion the
diversity of mind, and develope the unknown laws of their mysterious influence.
In order to account for those phenomena, I shall not follow the tract of those
who have attempted it before me, nor will I have recourse to forced
explanations, which are neither convincing nor satisfactory: while the natural
proofs arise spontaneously and lead us, as it were, by the hand, to the scope
of our pursuit. Here shall be no enquiry concerning the complicated and
wonderful structure of the brain, nor the obscure and chimerical modifications
of fibers and fibrillae, which are exceedingly magnified by some authors. These
phenomena are produced by the most admirable laws; by causes so simple, and so
evident, that it is really astonishing no one should have discovered them till
now.

Organization determines the Capacity of the MIND.
There are some men, whose active souls receive few sensations without
comparing them; these are the most ingenious.

There are others who compare only a certain kind of sensations; these are less
ingenious than the former, and so much the less so, as their souls have a less
propensity to compare their sensations, and to form ideas therefrom. The souls
of others again are so little active, and so greatly averse to thinking, that
they neither compare nor combine any thing at first sight; they require
sensations which are both strong, and many times repeated, before they are
brought to compare them, and to form any idea: such, being more or less stupid,
differ not from the weak minds, but in the small number of their ideas, which
they so laboriously produce.

No man desires to know, but because he desires to be happy: he who is without
desires, and without fears, will certainly not give himself the trouble of
comparing his sensations, of combining his ideas, and reasoning therefrom.

Passion therefore is the cause of this activity of soul, this perpetual
fermentation of reason The curiosity of children, and those decisive
propensities, which many suppose natural, and which some philosophers pretend
to deduce from instinct, have no other source. This curiosity arises from their
having been taught to look upon science as happiness, and consequently that it
was greatly their interest to acquire knowledge. These propensities arise from
the pleasure men find in particular employments.
; without it, the mind, unaffected, unsupported, falls into a languor, and is
immersed in sloth.

The mind therefore thinks only when it has an interest in thinking: this
interest may be of many kinds; one finds it in the pleasure which he receives
from the knowledge of things; another in the pleasure he takes in displaying
his learning, and attracting regard; a third in the means of procuring the
conveniences of life by his knowledge. But whatever the object may be, the
passions ever actuate the mind; by their activity its faculties unfold and rise
to perfection. To arrive at excellence of any kind, Man must be animated by
some passion; and the more violent his eagerness to succeed, the more
efficacious are his efforts for that purpose. For only the violent passions
produce illustrious, heroic and great men: he who is animated by no passion,
does nothing to render himself illustrious, and is wholly insignificant. Men
therefore are more or less ingenious, as they possess greater or less
sensibility.

The human understanding is undoubtedly greatly indebted to the passions; but
if the passions are necessary to render the mind active, they are not
sufficient to produce a creative imagination, or a great genius: they can
indeed render Man eager after success; but they supply not the qualities, which
are necessary to the acquisition of it. Some physical dispositions therefore
are required, together with the sensibility of our organs.

Let us inquire into the nature of these dispositions.

At our birth none of the mental faculties is unfolded, none in exercise See
Book II. Art. Of the unfolding of our mental faculties.
, not even instinct. But whether the soul existed before its union with the
body, or whether it had any peculiar method of acquiring knowledge or not, it
is most certain, that when once it has become subject to the laws of this
union, it no longer retains aught of its former state, not even the remembrance
of it.

Every man possesses the power of judging; but even although we suppose that
every man possessed it alike, the minds of individuals would not be less
different; for the understanding can never proceed alone; but requires the
concurrence of the sensitive faculty, or rather that of the sensations.

Examine the productions of the human mind, the most singular works of
imagination, even those which have the least analogy to nature; all have for
their subject, sensible objects, or relations of these objects. Almost all our
thoughts are corporeal images, and of the most abstract ideas there is none
which is not fixed by the senses; there is not throughout all nature a work of
the pure intellect. If we desired, for instance, to form any idea of the Deity,
or his attributes, we should consider him under human relations; at one time,
as a beneficent father: at another, as a glorious King; now, as a benevolent
master; then, as an offended Judge.

He who would rise to the first of Beings, and contemplate him in his essence
without the aid of corporeal images, perceiving no relation between God and
himself, knows not how to form any notion of him, and is lost in the sublimity
of the idea. Thus all religions are supported by a gross worship, which
interposes material objects between the supreme Being and Man. One contemplates
the Deity in his works, another worships him under an imaginary resemblance;
for the heart, as well as the mind, is ever fixed by the intervention of the
senses.

Thus likewise, when we form to ourselves a notion of the soul, we ever
represent it as a thin shade, or subtle matter; in short, as a corporeal being,
if we form any image of it at all.

Whatsoever object we choose, the case is the same; for let us employ our utmost
efforts to form ideas wholly intellectual, or to conceive pure spirituality,
the only consequence of the attempt is to involve the mind in greater darkness
and confusion.

Every idea therefore is formed from the true or false relations of sensible
objects; whence the understanding never operates without the concurrence of the
sensations: in proportion as they are removed from their objects, the ideas we
would convey become unintelligible; without their assistance our ideas either
escape us, or they are never formed at all.

Let us conclude from the preceding, that the sensations are the basis of all
our knowledge.

What a variety of minds therefore must be produced by the different structure
of the organs of the senses, the only means whereby we can have communication
with the various beings which surround us.

Our knowledge is neither increased nor perfected but by the comparing our
sensations. The greater the number of sensations to be compared, so much the
more numerous are our ideas; the more distinct these sensations, so much the
more clear are our conceptions, and the more exact these comparisons, the more
perfect our knowledge must be. On the contrary, the smaller the number of our
sensations, the more confined is the sphere of mental activity, and the less
numerous our ideas; not only from the privation of those ideas which are
founded on the sensations of the sense we are without: but from the privation
of many others; for it is evident that, as all the parts of hature are
connected, the sensations of one sense often serve to discover the relations of
the sensations of another sense.

The number of our ideas must therefore be relative to the number and structure
of these organs: whence Man must be less intelligent, less ingenious, in
proportion as he possesses a smaller number of senses, and as his senses are
less exquisite.

Although there is an intimate relation between the number of sensations and
that of ideas, this relation is not equal with regard to every sense; one sense
may be confined whilst another is less so.

From a calculation of the number of the objects of the senses, the organ of
smelling appears to be the most confined, and that of seeing the least so. The
eye is of all the bodily organs the most comprehensive, and takes in the
greatest number of objects; forms, dimensions, colors, are all within its
district; the varieties it perceives in each of these modifications of matter
infinitely surpass all those within the cognizance of the taste, smelling,
hearing, and feeling; that is, of sounds I consider not the car as the organ of
sounds, the conventional signs of our thoughts, and I look upon the eye in the
same light. For if Man, deaf from his birth, receives no advantage from
conversation, so the Man that is blind receives none from reading: and if it be
possible to supply the defect of hearing, by the sight, so it is likewise that
of seeing, by the ear: every thing is therefore in this respect equal, the
difference between the number of their sensations continuing the same.
, savours, odours, and sensations from the touch. This is evident during sleep;
for the many sensations which are retraced in the mind during rest, are so many
images of visible objects. The sight therefore contributes more to knowledge
than any of our other senses.

With regard to the nature of our sensations, it is very evident, that, from
the different structure of the senses in different individuals, there must be a
great diversity in their respective impressions.

Every object must naturally produce on Man, an agreeable or painful
impression; for every Man is a sensible being, and every sensible being must be
susceptible of either pleasure or pain; but it does not therefore follow, that
the same object should produce, in every individual, the same sensation; their
respective senses not being of similar organization. In whatever manner
material objects affect the senses, it is certain, that the same objects affect
them not equally in every individual, and consequently produce not in the soul
the same impressions. The lilly is not beautiful to every eye, neither is the
anana pleasant to every palate, nor the song of the nightingale to every ear. I
shall not speak here of these diversities in the sensations of individuals, as
their cause is utterly unknown; but shall attend to those which are more
evident and better understood.

The chief differences between the sensations of different individuals consist
in their delicacy, in the greatness of their image, and in the number of the
objects composing the picture; the two last species of these differences are
peculiar to the organ of sight, the other is common to all the senses.

The more delicate an organ is, the better it perceives those minute objects
which escape organs which are less so. The delicacy of the senses is often
necessary to the acquisition of many sorts of knowledge; we are indebted for
the discovery of the Satellites of Jupiter, and other celestial bodies, of the
animalcula in liquors, and of the minutiae of anatomy, to those instruments
which have been contrived to supply the imperfection of our senses. These
supplements have advanced our knowledge in many respects beyond the point to
which it had arrived a few ages ago, and have, in our times, conduced to the
discovery of many great and important truths. But as a delicate organ is more
susceptible of irritation, and less distinctly receives strong sensations than
another that is less so, it loses on one side what it gains on another, and
sometimes more. To what use would the faculty of seeing in the dark serve, if
the light of day be painful to the sight; it is very evident, that a person so
circumstanced would lose by the exchange. With an eye, likewise, which
comprehends only a small prospect, we can discover particular beauties more
distinctly, than with an eye which takes in an extensive circuit; but we see
not so well the harmony of the whole It is because attention is weakened by
being applied to many objects.
. A too comprehensive organ sees detached parts imperfectly: an organ not
sufficiently so discerns not their relations.

By entering into an examination of the sensations which are employed in the
several sciences, we might determine what particular structure of the senses is
best adapted for each; but, in general, organs moderately delicate, adapted to
comprehend a moderate number of objects, and possessed of every faculty (if I
may be allowed the expression) in a mean proportional degree, are the most
advantageously constructed. In cases where penetration depends on the number
and distinctness of the sensations, and on the comparing the sensations
together, he whose senses are best constructed, must therefore have the
greatest natural qualifications.

But we perceive not, says a celebrated philosopher Buffon's Natural History,
Vol. 4. 12mo edit.
, that persons whose senses are dull, sight imperfect, hearing thick, and
smelling greatly if not wholly decayed, have slower capacities than others.

The observation is just, if understood of civilized nations; for how is it
possible to perceive the advantage of a superior organization of the senses in
society, where Man can easily find means to supply the imperfection of his
senses? What defect is there of the organs, for which art affords not some
remedy? The short-sighted are furnished with telescopes which bring near the
most distant objects; the weak-sighted are supplied with microscopes,
angiscopes, and other glasses, which make them distinguish minute objects which
would otherwise escape them. To persons of dull hearing, are given acoustic
instruments; for those in whom the sense of smelling is decayed, or taste
imperfect, are prepared concentrated odours, savours, juices and quintessences.
Supplied with these substitutes, is it strange that men, whose senses are
imperfect, should become, in this respect, equal to those who have received
from nature the most perfect organs? Take your observations from persons
desstitute of these resources of art, and then determine.

Nevertheless, he replies, Man is not the more ingenious for having exercised
his ears and eyes.

I shall prove hereafter (in opposition to the vulgar opinion) that our senses
are not rendered more perfect by use: but supposing it to be true, what would
our philosopher infer from his vague assertion against the advantage of well
organized senses? Without doubt Man may have exercised his eyes and ears, yet
not be more ingenious than another who has not; he may even possibly be less
so: for the mere exercise of our senses can never increase our knowledge; they
must have been also exercised on subjects which are not only important, but
relative to some science.

Were a man to spend his whole life in examining grains of sand, he would not
be less ignorant, although he might know their different configuration, than
when he first began; but if, instead of this unprofitable and barren
occupation, he had passed the same length of time in examining plants,
animalcula, and in forming such observations upon natural history, as have
rendered Malpighi, Lewenhoeck and Muschenbroek so famous; do you suppose he
would have profited nothing by this exercise? Do you imagine, that his
knowledge would neither have been increased, nor his understanding improved?
The least reflection would have discovered the futility of these objections.
However, it was necessary to employ some time in the refutation of them; as the
celebrity of the objector may be of great weight to the generality of readers.
Let us conclude, that the better constituted the senses are, the more ingenious
Man is, caeteris paribus.

Organization characterises the MIND.
Men not only differ one from another in the number of their ideas, but
likewise in the nature of their knowledge. The difference of minds therefore
depends not wholly on the multitude of its judgments, but on the manner in
which they are formed.

Does a man judge without much reflection, does he form his ideas upon
relations which are apparent only? He is then superficial. Does he form his
ideas upon true relations? He is a Man of sound understanding. Does he
mis-improve these relations? He is in this case of an erroneous understanding.
Does he forge chimerical relations, which have neither reality nor probability?
He is a fool. Does he too negligently compare his sensations? He is weak. Does
he exercise his judgment only upon refined ideas? He is a wit Wit, is a habit
of discerning those relations which are not obvious to every Man: good sense, a
habit of discerning those which are true but obvious to all: genius, which
appears to possess the middle station between reason and imagination, is a
habit of discerning relations which are latent and difficult to be discovered.
. Does he exercise it on ideas difficult to be acquired? He is profound.

He, who has received from Nature the most exquisite, has no advantage over him
who has received an inferior organization, unless he cultivate his mind. But if
animated with the same passion, they both apply themselves to study, their
efforts will be attended with very different success. Whilst the former,
without difficulty, surmounts the greatest obstacles, advances with a rapid
flight in his progress toward truth, and easily penetrates the secrets of
Nature; the attempts of the latter will be vain, he meets obstructions every
moment, and proceeds with tardy steps in the vast career of science.

I have already assigned some physical causes of the difference of minds; but
many others far more important remain yet to be discovered.

Organization assistant or an Hindrance to the unfolding of the MENTAL
FACULTIES.
It is unknown whether the soul, when disunited from the body, can perceive,
think, or remember its sensations and ideas or not; but it is certain, that,
when once it is united to the body, the unfolding of its faculties depends
entirely on the state of the body with which it is yoked. Let us endeavor to
discover the latent reasons of this important truth.

Without sensations there can be no ideas, as has been already demonstrated;
but if all our ideas are founded on the sensations, they likewise depend on the
understanding by which they are formed. The mind cannot form them in the same
manner in every individual, nor can it form them always in the same manner in
the same person.

When the impressions of objects are made on the organ, and the sensations are
received by the soul, all the functions of the senses are discharged, but not
all the functions of the body.

To judge of the relations of objects, we must distinguish these objects with
care, examine and compare them under their different appearances: this requires
attention.

Attention is the parent of all knowledge: attention, by applying the mind to
the consideration of beings, discovers to us their different properties:
attention, by fixing it upon the different phenomena of Nature, investigates
its unknown laws and its secret relations, which otherwise escape us: attention
produces, from the various combinations of our observations, those sublime
discoveries, those admirable inventions, those prodigies of science, those
productions of genius, which have been in so many various ways beneficial to
mankind. Without attention every phenomenon in nature is lost to us; in vain is
the soul endued with such noble faculties, in vain does the universe offer its
vast and wonderful volume to our sight.

Attention is strengthened by being concentrated; it then suspends all the
other faculties of the mind, and seems to have entire possession of the soul.
On the contrary, it is weakened by being divided: when it has got half way in a
geometrical demonstration, if any singular object affect our organs, the mind
is instantly distracted, suffers itself to be engrossed by this object, and
after it has wandered a while, endeavors in vain to resume the thread of its
former thoughts. Thus every sensation foreign to the object present in the
mind, diverts and destroys the attention.

To examine objects, to reflect, to meditate, the mind must be perfectly calm;
no sensation, no foreign sentiment, must then affect the soul. The first thing
therefore necessary to the free exercise of thought, and to the unfolding of
the intellectual faculties, is that the soul be united to a body, whose vital
functions See Book IV. Art. How organization renders Man fickle, thoughtful,
volatile or taciturn.
are performed with ease, moderation, and regularity; that is, that the powers
which cause circulation have a degree of organic elasticity, proportionate to
the volume and consistence of the fluids.

But it is not enough that the soul be united to a body in perfect health, and
exempt from disease; for, that the body may not distract the soul from the
objects on which it is intent, the sensation which results from the action of
our organs must be imperceptible. Thus the disposition most favorable to the
reflection, is that state of the machine which constitutes serenity of temper:
that, which causes gaiety, allures the mind toward outward objects See Book
IV. the same Art.
; that, which causes sadness, attracts it within: the one prevents it from
examining objects, the other from combining their impressions; both distract
it, and interrupt the series of its thoughts. Besides, with that disposition
which constitutes serenity, we can contemplate Nature with the greatest
advantage, and discern what she really is.

It is only in retirement, and when the passions are at rest, that the soul can
resign itself to profound meditation: it is only in those tranquil moments,
when the soul retires within itself and is wrapped in silence, that we can
meditate to advantage.

They who have great sensibility, enjoy least of this liberty of mind; being
continually exposed to be acted on by objects, and being strongly affected by
their slightest impressions, they are almost always engaged by externals. This
extreme sensibility, I allow, may be in some measure remedied by shunning every
kind of noise, avoiding the light of day, and retiring to silence and solitude
of the country, or by taking advantage of the stillness of the night. But these
precautions are practicable in certain cases only; yet, though every precaution
should be used, the sensible will still be more obnoxious to distraction: for
the delicate and sensible are subject to more wants, more indispositions, and
consequently to more frequent distractions, than those who are robust and of
strong constitutions. Thus almost incessantly influenced by their various
wants, and as constantly engaged in the gratification of them, as if
unavoidably attached to present objects, they easily lose the remembrance of
the past, together with the power of considering and meditating on those
objects which present themselves to the mind, or rather they never possess it.
For during the perpetual flux of tumultous sensations which incessantly attract
the attention outwardly, they can neither examine nor meditate upon any subject
whatever.

It is therefore extremely difficult, if not impossible, for a soul united to
very delicate organs, to employ itself in profound meditation, and to enjoy
that liberty which is so necessary to the study of Nature.

Reflection is a state of the mind which requires a sufficient degree of
sensibility to be strongly affected, but not enough to make it be irresistibly
attracted by present objects. Only the Man whose soul is united to organs of
moderate sensibility, can meditate at liberty and study with success.

Organization renders the Understanding either just, extensive, delicate,
profound; or superficial, confined, erroneous and gross.
Our intellectual faculties are neither developed nor improved, but in
proportion as the mind compares its sensations. The more it compares them, the
more it discovers their relations, and the more numerous are our ideas; the
more carefully it examines them, so much the more perfect is our knowledge.

I have distinguished two powers of the understanding, that of perceiving and
considering objects, and that of pronouncing on their relations. The first is
the basis of the second, and necessarily precedes it. What then is requisite to
enable the mind to form a sound judgment of things? An accurate perception of
them. It is therefore on the greater or less degree of attention we employ in
examining objects, or rather on the different aptitude of the mind for
attention, combined with the time it is able to support it, that the justness
of our judgments and the character of our ideas depend.

To acquire profound ideas, we must for a long time, and without distraction,
contemplate the same objects, consider their relations, their difference,
examine, compare and combine them in many different shapes, that we may
afterward consider them under unobserved appearances, and discover their
hidden relations.

I will not however say, that every great discovery has been made by gradual
series of combinations and complicated observations. Sometimes the mind
overlooks the intermediate space, and perceives its object at a distance amidst
surrounding darkness: but if in this manner it arrive at truth, it must
nevertheless return to observation, to experience, and to this gradual series
of combinations, to verify these new ideas, and connect them to others which
have been already acquired. Thus having at once traversed an immense space, it
is afterward obliged to pass over every intermediate degree which separates
the two extremes, returning circularly to the point from whence it at first set
out. Such is the progress of the human mind in discoveries of every sort.

Thus a person desirous to acquire new knowledge, or verify that which he has
already acquired, can never accomplish his design, but by a long and close
examination of the phenomena of nature.

It is therefore only to attention more or less strong, more or less continued
This attention is not the same with that which is required in studying the
languages; in this latter, every thing is unconnected; in the former, every
thing is connected: in the one, the mind relieves itself by employing attention
but at intervals, when prompted by the will, and by passing from one object to
another; but in the other, the same subject requires continued attention, the
soul cannot examine and repose itself alternately. He who desires to divide his
time between the examination of objects and repose, is ever at a stand in his
observations, is constantly distracted in his thoughts, is perpetually obliged
to recommence the same labor, and never profits by his pains.
, that we owe the superficiality or profundity of ideas.

This different aptitude of the mind for attention, and the space of time it is
able to support it, absolutely depend on organization: for the mind becomes
fatigued just as the body does, and both at the same time.

It is unknown whether the soul is really fatigued; for our knowledge of things
is not sufficient to demonstrate whether an immaterial substance is, or is not,
naturally susceptible of lassitude; but without the least doubt, the soul, when
once it is united to the body, and during the whole continuance of its union
therewith, experiences a sense of fatigue as frequently as the body.

Might I have leave to offer my opinion upon so delicate a subject as this is,
I would declare for the negative, and would support it thus.

Since the sense of lassitude is common to both soul and body when united, it
is evident, that the soul must become fatigued together with the body.

The lassitude of the mind is partly the lassitude of the body itself Lassitude
of body is only an unpleasing sensation, which arises from the too frequent and
too continued tension of the fibers, by which the nervous fluid which distends
them is exhausted, their organic elasticity decreased, a languor seizes the
senses, and the whole body is affected with stupor.
, which is communicated to it by the general organ of feeling, and probably it
is no more than this; for since the mind, to be intent, requires the fibers to
be tense, and as the fibers are ever fatigued by their tension, it is not to be
wondered at that the soul should cease to be intent, when the fibers cease to
be tense, or, which is the same, the mind ever appears fatigued when the body
is tired, and the body is tired at all times when the mind is fatigued.
Besides, we have no idea of the lassitude of the soul, but by the weakness of
its thoughts and emotions, and by their short continuance on the same subject.
When the body is tired, that is, when the organs are affected with languor, the
functions of the soul must needs be languid, the ideas scarcely distinct, and
the vivacity of the sentiments decayed See Book IV. Art. the character of the
soul ever congruous to the state of the body.
. This has been already explained.

It is therefore evident to me, that the lassitude of the soul is only
lassitude of the body If our fatigue be somewhat diminished by a change of
objects, it is not because the soul then acts upon others fibers, as a modern
writer has supposed, but that the soul, roused by this new object, experiences
a fresh pleasure, which partly conceals the prior sense of fatigue, and
likewise, because this new object often requires a less degree of attention,
which diminution administers some sort of relaxation and repose. But if this
new object require greater attention, so far from relieving the fatigue of the
soul, it very sensibly augments it. This we experience when we change the study
of history, for that of geometry, or the superficial perusal of a romance, for
some deep problem in mathematics.
, and that in this phenomenon, as in many others, the reality is concealed by
the appearance.

But whether it be so or not, this is certain, that the mind is fatigued
together with the body. This is an observation which universally prevails, yet
no one has hitherto thought proper to deduce the natural consequences from it.

When the body is fatigued, admitting that the soul really fatigues the body by
application, let us be ever so desirous to continue our meditation, and make
whatever efforts we please, we cannot long keep the mind fixed on the same
object, nor fix it there for any time strongly. The soul therefore cannot
continue its attention, when the fibers have lost their tension.

It is therefore erroneous to suppose, as many philosophers have done, that our
aptitude for attention solely depends on the power of the passions. It is true,
that the greater interest we take in applying ourselves to any particular
study, the longer we can support attention; passion can then employ the whole
strength of the body, but nothing more: hence let the passion be ever so
violent, attention is always proportionate to the elasticity and force of the
fibers.

Besides, forced attention is more prejudicial than favorable to our study. In
the first place, it cannot be very strong, from the painful sensation which
ever accompanies it: its duration likewise is very short; for when the organs
are once wearied, they act but with little force; besides, the body is
exhausted by those violent efforts, and Man loses by its disordered state all
the time which he endeavors to gain by this prolongation of attention, and
sometimes even more.

Such are the physical causes of many diversities of mind; causes which have
hitherto been unnoticed by philosophers, although they so naturally arise on
examining the phenomena I have now undertaken to explain. And here let us
repeat our first principle, in order to a combination of its effects, and that
we may deduce its proper consequences.

Attention is ever proportionate to the organic elasticity and force of the
fibers. To produce profoundideas, the mind therefore must be united to organs
composed of fibers which are both strong and elastic; the mind, if united to
in-elastic and weak organs, is trifling and supercifial in its operations. Thus
a Man, whose constitution is delicate and sensible, is not capable of profound
disquisitions: too weak to sustain long meditation, and too sensible to lead a
contemplative life, he beholds Nature without attending to particular parts,
incessantly flies from object to object, glances upon them, and dips not
beneath the surface.

However, I do not pretend to say, that every man of strong and vigorous
constitution is thus profound; for, besides this physical disposition, his
talents must be cultivated; all I would be understood to say is, that only a
man of such a constitution of bodily organs can arrive at this state; others
may, indeed, have a great number of just and solid ideas, but never those which
are profound and well connected. That sublime knowledge, which is derived from
the constant study of Nature, is what they are unable to acquire of themselves;
on the contrary, they must be initiated in it by others: their minds may be
congenial with the minds of Pope and Voltaire, but will never rise to the
dignity of Newton's or de Montesquieu's; they may be called men of wit and
learning, but never men of depth.

To be just, our ideas must be distinct; but these qualities are not always
united. To conceive distinctly, it is sufficient that our sensations be well
expressed, and that the mind be exact in pronouncing on their apparent
relations; but to conceive justly, there is required a perfect knowledge of
every relation necessary to form a solid judgment. Thus ideas may be distinct,
yet not be just.

We may therefore from this cause, reason justly upon one article and falsely
upon another; but in every case, where to discover the true relations of
beings, it is requisite that we attentively examine them; in every case where
the knowledge of things is the result of a great number of complicated
combinations; in every case where truth is difficultly obtained, and where
there is a necessity of seeing much, if we desire to see well, the justness of
our judgments depends on the capacity of the mind, and on its profoundness, or
rather, justness and profoundness require the same degree of attention of the
soul, and the same organic disposition of the body. With feeble and delicate
organs, therefore, Man is incapable of this justness of judgment: too weak to
consider objects under their various appearances successively, and too feeble
to pursue the connection of things, and to collect a multiplicity of ideas in
the same point; he suffers many things to escape, from an inability to retain
them, and examines hastily those which remain: thus passing slightly over many
objects, and judging of the whole by his imperfect knowledge of a part, he
forms deductions necessarily false and inconclusive.

Ideas are particular or general relatively to their object. The same
disposition of organs which is necessary to the acquisition of profound ideas,
is likewise necessary to the acquisition of those which are universal: for the
universality of ideas results from the multitude of relations, which the
understanding perceives, unites and collects into one and the same point of
view. The faculty of comprehending the system of Nature is therefore given only
to those, whose fibers are endued with force and great organic elasticity.

Another effect of this organization of the body, which we could never have
suspected and scarcely believe, although it is demonstrated, is, that it is
absolutely necessary to delicacy of sensations and ideas.

It is an opinion universally received by philosophers, that the senses are
perfected by use, and that they are improved by seeing, feeling, tasting, etc.
just as the mind is improved by reasoning.

A painter, says one, sees, at first sight, the defects of a drawing, and the
different tints in a picture, although invisible to other eyes.

A shepherd, accustomed to number his flock, knows them from those of another,
by marks which none but himself can discover.

A man of a nice palate in liquors, distinguishes in the flavours of wines
differences which are unnoticed by others.

The ear of the musician who leads the orchestra is sensible of the least
dissonance.

And the words of a foreign language appear to one unaccustomed thereto, but a
confusion of articulate sounds, which become afterward distinct, by hearing
them frequently repeated?

If we maturely consider these phenomena, we shall find this pretended
improvement of the senses The errors which philosophers have been guilty of,
relating to the organs of our sensations, are really surprising: one pretends,
that our senses continually deceive us; another, that they are perfected by
exercise; a third, that they possess not the least degree of certainty, and
that each organ requires to be rectified by some other: phenomena which have
been hitherto attributed to the organs, though they wholly belong to the
understanding, and are mere mental illusions.
, which is attributed to exercise, to be very erroneous; for exercise neither
changes the texture of our organs, nor adds to their delicacy. It is true that,
by exercising the senses, a greater quantity of nervous fluid is determined
into their organs, whereby their sensibility is increased: but he, who
endeavors to view minute objects for the first time, has the organ of sight
equally tense with him who is accustomed to distinguish them at the first
glance, although he can neither see nor remark any thing. It is not therefore
to the organ but to the soul which receives the sensation, that we are to
attribute the cause of this phenomenon.

This pretended delicacy of the senses arises only from the attention which the
mind gives to the smallest impressions of objects affecting it; for whether we
exercise our organs or not, the delicacy of the senses continues the same. But
the mind, being attentive to the sensations it receives, gradually becomes able
to discern the smallest differences, which are too weak to be perceived by a
single effort of the attention. Besides, it is not in the organs of sense that
the soul perceives, but in itself; there the prospect of nature exists. We must
therefore look on sensibility as a tablet, upon which are represented the
images of the objects which affect us, and wherein the understanding perceives
them. As these representations have parts of astronger or weaker coloring,
more or less luminous, more or less distinct: so some of these See Book II.
Art. Exercise of the Understanding.
more strongly engage the mind than others; those which are weakly colored,
and are the representations of very minute objects, are almost imperceptible;
such are not perceived at first sight, but must be sought for with attention
before they are found. If a painter perceive at the first glance the defects of
a painting; if a shepherd easily distinguish his sheep; this proceeds from no
other cause, than that both are accustomed to turn their attention to these
objects more frequently than to any other. Thus a very great number of delicate
sensations, received by a soul united to strong and elastic organs, are lost
when united to organs destitute both of strength and vigor.

What I have said of the sensations is true in regard to ideas likewise; for it
is only by long continued attention that we can make those delicate
observations, and acquire those refined ideas which escape the generality of
men.

Thus the difference of the force and elasticity of our fibers is a new source
of the diversity of minds.

Hitherto we have seen in what manner the corporeal influences the spiritual
part, how the constitution of the body forms the character of the mind; but we
have not yet concluded: let us make further researches into this subject, and
endeavor to discover truths hitherto enveloped with extreme darkness.

The more we study the soul, the more we trace its progress in the exercise of
its faculties, and the more we examine its operations; the more shall be forced
to acknowledge the powerful influence of the corporeal on the intellectual part
in Man.

Organization renders MAN rational or insane.
The mind undoubtedly possesses the faculty of thinking; and although all men
were equally endowed therewith, organization would not the less regulate the
exercise of this faculty: for thinking, when our thoughts are in regular
succession, requires tension of the fibers; the mind never can proceed alone,
but requires the concurrence of the organs to form a sound judgment of things,
or to reflect. Thus depending on the senses for its unfolding, on the organic
elasticity and force of the fibers for the character of its ideas; it likewise
depends on the same organic elasticity of these organs, for the order of its
thoughts and the mode of their succcession; this last dependency of the soul on
the body is the cause of the principal diversities in minds.

Regular thought ever requires a certain aegree of tension of the fibers; the
mind can never proceed alone, but needs the concurrence of our organs to form a
sound judgment of things, or to reflect.

This principle, the importance whereof all who think justly must needs feel,
now first presents itself; besides, it is so closely connected with the
subject, that it requires to be fully explained, and to be established on the
most demonstrative proofs. I therefore proceed to consider Nature in a manner
never attempted before.

The mind is endued with the faculty of judging, but judges not always in the
same manner; at one time its thoughts are connected with each other; at another
they are without either continuance or connection; sometimes they succeed each
other with rapidity, and sometimes the reverse.

Philosophers have attributed these phenomena to the soul, never supposing,
what now appears a certain truth, that they wholly depend on the body. The mind
judges not in any particular manner, but by means of some particular relations
between it and the disposition of our organs; this disposition determines the
character of our thoughts.

Although ideas arise without our consent, and sometimes in opposition thereto,
the mind always requires the assistance of the body to dispose them in
succession, and determine them to some particular end.

When the body is exhausted with fatigue, when the head inclines forward on the
breast, when the eyes are heavy and yield to the pleasing power of sleep, the
blood steals through the veins with a gentle current, the sensations grow
weaker by degrees, the senses lose their vivacity, and the mind traces out
faint images only, resembling the almost imperceptible contours drawn by a very
light hand.

In sleep, all our faculties are in action, although the imagination appears to
be the only acting power; but the sensations follow, and the thoughts succeed
each other with rapidity and confusion, and we neither compare nor are
conscious of them: the mind, at that time, in appearance disengaged from
matter, rambles after different objects, and from their irregular assemblage,
forms those empty images which compose our nocturnal illusions. On the
contrary, in inflammatory fevers, when the blood rapidly circulates in the
vessels, the sensations and ideas are strongly marked; nevertheless they
succeed each other in confusion, whilst the soul neither compares nor is
conscious of them. But with persons both healthy and awake, the sensations have
a moderate degree of force, the ideas are distinct, the soul compares them, and
disposes them in a regular and orderly succession.

If we maturely consider these phenomena, we shall discover their cause to
consist in the different tone of the fibers, whilst asleep or awake, in a
healthy or diseased state of the body. In sleep, this tone is too feeble to
promote the justness of our thoughts, and the regularity of their succession;
in an inflammatory fever, the tone is, on the contrary, too strong: a regular
succession of thoughts, therefore, always requires a certain degree of tension,
or rather a moderate degree of organic elasticity.

As these ideas are too singular, these principles too new, to be received
without farther confirmation, I shall proceed to give the clearest evidence of
their truth. Man has two modes of existence, sleeping and waking; in this
latter every spring of the machine is in action; in the former, those only
which are allotted for the continuation of the vital functions.

Sleep is essential to Man; it is the necessary consequence of his
constitution, and of the laws of the animal economy: by these laws he passes
from a sleeping to a waking state; by these laws likewise the time of waking
necessarily succeeds that of repose, and both are independent of every external
cause. For Man can subsist for a determinate space only, in either of these
states: by continual watching, the incessant motion of the fibers would destroy
their organic elasticity, and prevent their future reparation; so by continual
sleeping, though the fibers are not fatigued, the nervous fluid would be
gradually exhausted by the action of the organs of life, and would never be
repaired.

The continuance of either of these two modes of existence, would therefore
necessarily be attended with a total cessation of vital motion.

At the approach of sleep, the muscles relax, the neck seems unable to support
the head, the arms yield to their own weight, the senses become inactive, the
whole body sinks into repose, and the blood circulates with a slow and gentle
pace. By attending to the disposition of the organs of a man asleep, and to the
phenomena accompanying it, we discover, that this state is produced by the
defect of the organical elasticity of the fibers. This relaxation is even
sensible to the touch, the skin of one asleep being more moist, and the fibers
softer than when awake. But were this relaxation imperceptible by the senses,
the simple examination of the causes of sleep will be sufficient to confirm the
truth of the principle here established.

It is an incontestible fact, that every thing which impairs the organic
elasticity of the fibers, occasions sleep; and that every thing which increases
this elasticity prevents it. The loss of nervous fluid in coition is
immediately followed by a slight drowsiness: after the conflicts of love, the
vivacity of our motions is diminished, our desires are extinct, and we
gradually sink into repose.

The loss of the same fluid by labor produces the same effect.

Though this loss of the nervous fluid be a principal cause of sleep, it is not
the only one; let us repair it ever so much by fresh supplies of aliments,
sleep will not be the less necessary; this may prevent it for a short time, but
afterward suffers it to return with new force. Thus the loss of nervous fluid
is not alone productive of it; since, not being exhausted of this fluid, Man
sleeps not the less; sleep therefore is occasioned by a disposition peculiar to
the solids; and this disposition is no other than the lassitude of the organs,
produced by the tension of the fibers when awake, or by the reiterated
extension and contraction of the muscles in motion.

Sleep therefore is caused by the diminution of the organic elasticity of the
solids, and by the diminution of their primitive elasticity; for it is certain,
that an elastic body loses its primitive elasticity by frequent contraction.
The fibers, after extreme tension, relax, and their organic elasticity being
impaired, the circulation is slowly performed, the secretion of the nervous
fluid is obstructed, as likewise its influx into the organs of sense and
motion; whence result a diminution of sensibility, a weakness, and a general
languor of the sensations, desires and ideas See a preceding Art. the
disposition of the soul is ever congruous to that of the body.
.

Although all communication between the soul and the body appears interrupted
during sleep, these two substances however have a constant relation one to the
other. The senses are ever open to the action of external objects, and their
slightest impressions are conveyed to the soul; but too weak to engage it, they
only glance thereon without leaving any vestige behind; strong sensations only
can awaken and engage it. These are phenomena peculiar to sleep, and proper to
confirm what has been already said concerning its causes.

These truths however are supported by other phenomena. The fibers of persons
greatly disposed to sleep are feeble, and it is by sleep that our existence
commences. The infant, whose fibers are endued but with a very small degree of
organic elasticity, sleeps continually; children, whose fibers are very weak,
sleep more than they wake; in proportion as they advance in years, that is, in
proportion as their fibers acquire strength and elasticity, they endure more
easily the want of repose; women, less strong and less vigorous than men, have
likewise more occasion for sleep. Phlegmatic men It is remarked, that geldings
are less vigorous than horses, and likewise sleep more.
, whose fibers have but a small degree of organic elasticity, consume the half
of life in that state, and people, when recovering from any disease, sleep
almost continually.

Another cause is, that every thing which impairs the force of the circulation
by decreasing the elasticity of the fibers, as heat, emollient liquors, and
whatever benumbs the solids, as sulphurous vapors, spirituous liquors and
opium, ever produces sleep.

In subjects which have died of a lethargy, or of any sleepy disease, we find
the head disordered, and the other parts sound.

Bonet See the Sepuleretum Anatomicum.
, who has collected a vast number of observations of this kind, found a great
quantity of extravasated serosities in the brain of one who had died of a
lethargy, so that the cortical substance and the meninges were covered
therewith. In another subject, that had never been attacked but once with any
sleepy affection, the internal part of the cerebrum was full of extravasated
serosities. In others, he found scirruses and tumors in the cortical part of
this viscus. Finally, in some that had been affected with an habitual lethargy,
the substance of the brain was found dry, and the vessels of the pia matter
extremely distended with thick and grumous blood.

These observations prove, that this continual numbness is caused by the
diminution, or even by the total suppression of the influx of the nervous fluid
into the organs of motion and sense; a natural effect of its vicious secretion,
during the distension of the cortical substance of the brain, of the defect of
the oscillatory motion of the distended meninges, of the compression of the
medullary substance by the extravasated serosities, or the defect of this fluid
as in a siccity of the brain. Besides it is well known, that the simple
pressure of this viscus, after the removal of the cranium, produces sleep, by
preventing the influx of the nervous fluid into the origin of the nerves, and
consequently by weakening the organic elasticity of the fibers, as the
preceding causes I have many times experienced this after the operation of the
Trepan: the slight pressure on the brain ever produced an obscurity of sight
and a noise in the ears; a pressure somewhat more strong was followed by
drowsiness, and afterward by perfect sleep; all these symptoms ceased upon
discontinuing the pressure.
. But the most conclusive reason is, that sleep cannot take place whilst the
body is violently agitated, either by a fever, or by any violent passion,
equally capable of producing a tension of the fibers.

If the relaxation of the fibers be the cause of sleep, the re-establishment of
their organic elasticity by repose must be the cause of waking. This cause,
which is necessarily deduced from the nature of things, I shall demonstrate by
its phenomena.

On the conclusion of undisturbed sleep, the fibers insensibly become more
tense, the complexion more lively, the circulation more quick, the impressions
of objects on the senses more strong, and the soul again communicates with
external objects. When we have once fallen into a deep sleep, we are not
awakened from it but by very lively sensations; but when the usual space of
time allotted for rest is nearly expired, the least noise awakes us, and ever
more easily, the nearer we are to the hour of awaking: so that the first degree
of sleep is scarcely to be distinguished from waking, and its last degree is
confounded therewith. Sleep, therefore, comes on and goes off by insensible
degrees; similar, in this respect, to the obscurity of night, which gradually
increases till it arrives at midnight darkness, and afterward decreases by the
same gradation. Let us therefore conclude, that the fibers possess a greater
degree of organic elasticity in Man when awake than when asleep. It is then
obvious, that whilst the fibers are relaxed, there is no regular series of
thoughts; the mind passes without any regularity over the sensations it has
received, its thoughts succeed each other in confusion; and, if at any time
they form a regular series, it is only whilst the fibers are tense. In the
agitations of a painful dream, the thoughts are somewhat regular; but in the
mean time, Man is greatly disturbed, and, when he afterward awakes, finds
himself oppressed with fatigue, and wet with sweat and tears.

Thus it is only by the relaxation of the organic elasticity of our fibers,
that sleep interrupts the succession of our ideas; the order of our thoughts
therefore depends on the state of the body.

I imagine, the proofs already offered in support of this will be found
satisfactorily conclusive; but that no proof may be wanting, and that the
principle may be incontrovertibly established, let us examine the state of the
body relatively to the succession of the ideas in madmen, those living examples
of the vagaries, or, if you will, of the rovings of this distempered state of
human reason.

There are many species of madness, in every one of which the mind forms wrong
judgments of things. In each species of madness, sensations and ideas of every
kind are produced, but have neither order nor connection; and in this incoherent
succession, in this chaos of sensations and thoughts, the will acts not, but
lets the images of things succeed each other in disorder. Attention not being
sufficiently strong, the soul is not conscious of its thoughts; so that
illusion is often admitted amongst, and intimately connected with them.

This, however, may be observed with respect to the several species of madness;
that state of the soul, which is accidental in the one, is natural and constant
in the other sorts: but all equally result from an inability to attend; this
inability I shall demonstrate to be wholly dependent on the constitution of the
body.

Physiologists have sought in dead animals the causes of this disordered state
of the soul in living animals, as if it proceeded from the unnatural
conformation of some organ, which must necessarily always exist, never dreaming
that it might be occasioned by some change in the organic elasticity of the
solids, the only principle by which these phenomena can be explained. A
striking example of the ill-success of most physiological enquiries, and a
proof that our efforts to discover truth serve often to mislead us, and to
remove us to a great distance from it!

By comparing the state of the body of one that died in perfect enjoyment of
reason, with that of one who died in a state of madness, we shall undoubtedly
discover many considerable differences; such as the distension of the vessels
of the meninges; the inflammation of these membranes; the extravasation of
lymph into the sinuses of the brain; the siccity of this viscus, and of the
origin of the nerves; appearances commonly seen in the bodies of the latter,
but never in those of the former. This difference, which is here supposed to be
the cause, is only the effect. Considered as the effect, it may conduct us to
the knowledge of the true principle; but in our enquiries we shall proceed with
greater success, by comparing the state of the solids of a man in perfect
reason, with that of the solids of one who has lost it.

The different species of madness may be reduced to two; which are to be
distinguished not by those vagaries of reason which are common to both, but by
the character of the thoughts; they are designed under two general
denominations; furious madness, when the thoughts are daring, and the emotions
of the soul vehement; insanity or idiotism, when the emotions of the soul and
the thoughts are weakly expressed.

There is a rigidity of the nervous system, when the rovings of the soul are
attended with fury, as in frenzy, inflammatory fevers, drunkenness, and the
hysteric affection; there is a debilitation thereof, when the same rovings are
indicated in a tranquil and languid manner, as in insanity, dotage, and in that
melancholy madness, which is occasioned by the use of narcotics. Every one may
be convinced of this, by simply inspecting a body in these different states,
and by examining the phenomena.

With regard to that affection of the mind which is produced by drunkenness, it
is obvious, that spirituous liquors are peculiarly adapted to produce a
rigidity in the fibers.

The saline particles with which these liquors are impregnated, and the spirits
with which they abound, when received into the stomach, first irritate its
membranes, and, being conveyed into the intestines, irritate their coats: this
irritation is immediately followed by a spasm of these organs, propagated
throughout the body, by the correspondence of the nervous system which affects
every part, but more especially the meninges.

This violent tension of the meninges is presently after produced in a more
direct manner: the salts and the spirits gradually pass into the fluids, and,
being conveyed to the brain with the blood, increase the tension of its
membranes, and the circulation is rendered more impetuous. This violent spasm,
at intervals, compresses the cavity of the nerves, and interrupts, in whole or
in part, the perflux of their fluid: hence proceed those irregular and
convulsive motions of the muscles, that staggering and total loss of sense and
motion, observed in persons who have died in a state of inebriation. By
comparing the tone of the solids of a drunkard, with that of the solids of a
temperate person, we find the fibers moderately tense in the latter, and
extremely so in the former. In drunkenness, the countenance appears inflamed,
the eyes red and fiery, the vessels of the face distended, the limbs at first
are flexible, afterward they are stiff and convulsed; the regularity of
muscular motion is destroyed, the body is unstable, the senses are dull, the
sight is troubled, and the objects looked upon seem to waver. Here, if we may
judge by the senses, is an extreme tension of the fibers, which very nearly
approaches to rigidity, and this rigidity is proved on the testimony of facts.

If this spasm be so visible in the strong and gross organs, what must it be in
the fibers of the meninges, which are incomparably more delicate and more
sensible!

The effects, which are produced in the solids in drunkenness, by the
irritating and caustic particles of the liquors which have been drunk, are
produced in fevers in a much higher degree They who are acquainted with the
constitution of the human body and the causes of diseases, know that fevers are
always produced by a spasm of the irri^ated nervous parts.
. In the hysteric passion, the spasm of the nervous system is ever considerably
greater than in fevers; but this spasm arises not instantaneously: at first, a
numbness is felt about the hips and loins, the abdomen and stomach are
distended, a painful oppression is felt at the breast, anxieties at the heart,
a general numbness and shivering of the whole body, violent pain is felt in the
head, a tension in the forehead and temples, the sight is troubled, involuntary
tears flow, respiration is difficult, the navel is drawn inwards, the heart
palpitates, the pulse is hard and unequal, the extremities become cold, the
oesophagus is closed, respiration interrupted, the voice dies away, the mouth
is convulsed, the arms and hands are violently contracted, the body is
contorted, and every limb agitated with convulsive motions.

Finally, if we carefully examine the body of a madman, we shall find the
fibers to be tense, the pulse extremely hard and unequal, the eyes fiery, as in
rage, and the body affected with convulsive motions, more or less strong,
according to the force of the frenzy, but less apparent than in the diseases
mentioned above; nor is their fury so extreme. This extraordinary vigor, these
impetuous motions, these terrible convulsions which accompany drunkenness, the
hysteric passion, frenzy, and inflammatory fevers, are evidently the effects of
the violent influx of the nervous fluid into the muscles, occasioned by the
violent and irregular contraction of the irritated meninges, That there is a
spasm, a rigidity in every case of this kind, is obvious from the attendant
symptoms, and from the state of the organs of subjects which have not survived
this disorder.

In the dissection of hysteric women, we almost always find every part of the
body unaffected, the organs of generation excepted See Vesalius, L. 5. c. 15.
De humani corporio fabrica. Riolanus, Antropol. Lib. 2. page 35. Binninganus,
cent. Q. cap. 90. Manezeta, Miscellan. Curios. Nature. dec. 1. obs. 32.
Diembroeck, Lib. 1. Cap. 24.
: In some the testes have been found distended with a thick and yellowish
liquor, of a very offensive smell; in others the testes, spermatic vessels, and
vessels of the uterus, were distended with a whitish lymph, viscous and of a
very pungent smell; in others, were found polypous excrescences adjoining to
the uterus; the uterus itself has been observed nearly filled with a fluid, in
color as if tinged with saffron and corrupted; sometimes the membranes have
been inflamed and distended with grumous and thick blood.

From the symptoms accompanying this disease, it is evident, that the spasm of
the nervous system, occasioning the disorder of the functions of the body,
begins at the uterus, which is irritated by the corrupted liquor contained in
the spermatic vessels, and is afterward gradually propagated by the nerves to
the other parts, even to the membranes of the brain, where it sometimes leaves
visible marks of irritation.

In subjects which have died of inflammatory fevers or of madness, many
ramifications of the meninges have been found distended, and these membranes
themselves inflamed See Miscellan. Curios, Not. dec. 2. page 234. Anno 6. and
dec. 2. page 162. Anno 4.
; in others have been discovered many sanious serosities in the ventricles of
the brain, many vesicles, or rather varices full of sanious lymph, and the
plexus choroides inflamed: in others the vessels of the meninges were livid and
full of thick blood, many serosities were found in the ventricles of the brain,
and a livid polypous concretion in the sinus falci-formis; the other parts of
the body were sound, the brain alone being affected. This dilatation of the
blood vessels, these varices, these distensions, these extravasations of
sanious serosities, and inflammations of the membranes of the brain, are
evidently the effects of violent, irregular, and obstructed circulation,
occasioned by the spasm of the nervous system, and of the solids in general.
For when a part is affected with a spasm, the vessels of which it is composed
are violently contracted; and as the coats of the arteries are more strong than
those of the veins, so much the more they resist their contraction; the blood
continues to flow on to that part with ease, but in its return is obstructed;
whereby it accumulates in these vessels, and excessively distends them: hence
these inflammations, distensions and varices. When the distension is extreme,
the vessels permit their contained fluid to permeate their coats: hence those
extravasations of the lymph, blood, and those polypous excrescences which
proceed therefrom. Finally, if we observe that caustic acrids, as the
hyosciamum, solanum verum, and generally every thing that irritates the nerves
and renders them rigid, either taken internally or applied outwardly, produce
the most terrible delirium and madness; whilst lenients and antispasmodic
medicines restore reason, we shall be convinced, that this perturbed state of
the mind is wholly produced by the spasm of the nervous system, but more
especially by that of the membranes of the brain. Hence it is evident, that
furious madness proceeds from a rigidity of the fibers; I shall now show that
insanity or idiotism is occasioned by their relaxation.

Insanity often succeeds madness, and that instantaneously; this phenomenon is
very natural, as the violent tension of the fibers must be followed by their
relaxation: when this debilitation is considerable, and the organic elasticity
of the fibers is so greatly impaired, that it requires some considerable time
before it can be restored, the mind recovers not the tone adapted for reason;
it only changes the species of its folly. This is more particularly observed in
inflammatory fevers, where furious madness opens the disease, and idiotism
concludes it. Whilst the nerves are convulsed, and the circulation is vehement,
Man acts with violence, his ideas are confused, he loses all knowledge, and
utters, with a furious aspect, incoherent expressions: but when the morbid
humors have taken another course, when the black poison which occasions his
disease is discharged from his vessels; weakened by the violence his
transports, he remains a long time destitute of strength, deprived of reason,
insensible either of the evil or danger of his condition, and is reduced to a
state of infancy, which is of so much the longer duration, andthe debilitation
of the elasticity of his fibers is more extreme; for in these cases the effect
is ever equal to the cause.

To the foregoing may be added the analogy between the disposition of the soul
and body during sleep, and the disposition of these two substances during
insanity. For this state of the soul, whilst Man is awake, perfectly
corresponds to that whilst Man is asleep; the succession of sensations is the
same; the exercise of thinking, and the action of the organs are the same
likewise; in both, the fibers are relaxed, and the circulation languid: whence
it appears, that these two states have similar causes.

This kind of insanity is oftentimes produced by excessive study, by violent
passions, by a considerable loss of semen, and by every thing which debilitates
the organic elasticity of the fibers. This is confirmed by comparative anatomy:
for the state of dotage, that is, when the sensations and ideas are combined
without order, is precisely the same as when the body is feeble, the strength
is exhausted, and the organs are inelastic. It is therefore obvious, that this
alienation of mind is the effect of the extreme impairing of the organic
elasticity of our solids

Furious madness proceeds from the rigidity of the fibers; idiotism or insanity
from their relaxation; and the slate adapted for reason from their moderate
elasticity: such are the secret causes of the order which obtains in our
thoughts. Hence it appears, that a greater or less degree of tension of the
fibers can make a man either rational or insane. Reason and madness must
therefore depend on the mechanism of the body, and not in the least on the
soul, as philosophers have falsely supposed.

Having contemplated these rovings of the soul, and discovered their causes in
the different tones of the fibers, let us proceed to assign the reason of these
phenomena.

A regular series of thoughts ever requires, in order to its formation, that
the mind be intent on the object of its judgments; this intenseness of the mind
is ever accompanied by that of the body. During meditation, the pulse beats
more strongly than when we do not meditate, and so much the more strongly, as
the soul is the more deeply engaged in meditation. Thus in cataleptics, whilst
the soul is involved in the most profound reflections, the blood circulates
with greater freedom and force, the complexion becomes more lively, respiration
more free, and every function of the body is more perfectly performed. During
meditation the whole body is violently tense, but particularly the plexus
nervosi, and the membranes of the brain.

Too great or too long application increases this tension, even so far as to
excite a stupor in the head, and kindle up a fever in the veins: studious
persons frequently experience this, I myself have, many times.

The soul, during meditation, not only affects the body with a degree of
tension, but without its concurrence cannot operate alone. In chronic diseases,
during a state of convalescence, and after a considerable loss of semen, we can
neither reflect nor meditate, whatever efforts we make; we think very little,
and our ideas are vague and unconnected. Even immediately after profound
meditation, the mind being fatigued, indulges itself in roving, although the
will oppose; we indeed continue to think, but our thoughts are altogether
irregular; we remain awake, but experience the effects of sleep; imagination
traces the same airy semblances, the same fugitive shades as during sleep.

No regular series of thoughts can be formed without a tension of the fibers:
this tension has fixed bounds, determined limits, beyond which the succession
of our ideas cannot proceed. When the fibers are too tense, as in drunkenness,
in fevers, and in violent head aches, let us ever so much attempt to reflect,
all our efforts are vain, the soul is either in a delirium or in a stupor. It
has been proved, that in regular thought the understanding See Book II. Art.
Exercise of the understanding.
is subject to the will; that this exercise of reason requires a certain tone
of the solids; and that the tone of the solids necessary to reason has a
certain extent: this tone, therefore, must be constantly existent in Man,
whilst his organs are obedient to the will; but is not found either in a state
of rigidity or relaxation, two states of the fibers which have this in common,
that they both equally free the body from subjection to the will.

If we notice the power which certain aliments, fruits, and liquors have on the
body, we shall be convinced that it is superior, or at least equal to that of
the soul over the material substance to which it is united. Again, if we
compare the empire of the different faculties of the soul over the body, we
shall be convinced See Book III. Obs. 62.
, that the power of sensibility is much greater than that of the will, and
incomparably more so than that of the understanding or imagination. That of
sensibility and imagination is universal; that is, it influences both the
muscular fibers and their fibrillae, the organs of sense and motion; whilst
that of the will is restrained to the latter of these only. But none of these
faculties has any power over the body, but by the nervous fluid; when this is
deficient, or when it has lost its energy, or even when the elasticity of the
fibers is impaired, it is obvious, that the power of the will is at an end.
Even when this fluid is violently impelled into the muscular fibers, either by
sensibilty or by some other cause, with greater impetuosity than the will can
impel it; it is evident, that the rigidity is not removed, but confirmed
thereby, if it proceed from a violent influx of the nervous fluid into the
fibers.

Hence the reason why the violent passions, as rage, fear, terror, affect us
with a kind of momentary madness; why the efforts we make to reflect, when
fatigued by meditation, only serve to increase our inability to think; in a
word, why the rigidity and total relaxation of the solids deprive the soul of
the free exercise of its faculties, and are the causes of madness, the degree
and force whereof is proportioned to that of their principle.

Let us therefore conclude, that as the mind cannot act alone, it ever requires
the concurrence of the corporeal organs to reflect and meditate, and that the
unfolding of its faculties entirely depends upon organzation.

I have now only to offer a few observations on the subsequent phenomena, to
confirm what has been said on the same subject elsewhere See Book II. Art. Some
singular phenomena explained, concerning the effects of the passions on the
understanding.
. Certain hypochondriacs see visions at midday, and with their eyes open: some
fancy they behold a continued series of phantoms and hideous specter, rapidly
succeeding each other; others, a series of agreeable objects, flitting shades,
female forms, magnificent scenes, which offer themselves in succession, and are
seen like objects really existing; so that the deception of these visionary
representations is so strong, that they believe them to be realities.

When speaking of the colorings which the sentiments of the soul communicate
to objects, and of the illusions of the passions analogous to the facts related
above, I observed, that physiologists had attributed these phenomena to the
nervous fluid; and that, to account for it, they had imagined, that this fluid,
which is naturally subject to the empire of the soul, becomes its superior in
these affections; that in the organ of sight particularly, it assumes every
successive modification representative of objects, which had before affected
it. I demonstrated, that physiologists improperly confound the operations of
the senses with those of the mind; I likewise proved this phenomenon to be very
simple, and only mysterious from our misapprehension of it. I observe now, as I
did then, that these visions of hypochondriacs are only sensations renewed from
the memory, the empty phantoms of a soul violently agitated, wholly engrossed
and misled by its pleasures or its pains, and unable to return within itself to
examine objects.

I have already proved, that the soul, when strongly affected by any object, is
blind to every other, it being no longer able to attend thereto; I shall now
offer a physical reason of this phenomenon.

It is only by attention, that we can distinguish in the soul the real
impressions of things from sensations re-produced. Besides, the presence of
mind necessary to reflection, requires in the fibers a certain degree of
tension, the medium between rigidity and relaxation. In inflammatory fevers,
and in the hypochondriac disease, there is the same rigidity as in the
inflammation of the stomach, contracted by the use of some acrid aliment, or by
poison: for the irritation of this viscus affects the whole nervous system, and
more especially the membranes of the brain. In all these cases, reason is
extinct; for the will has no longer any power over the organs, as has been
already shown. Thus, abandoned to itself, the mind employs itself in reviewing
the objects which formerly affected it; but wanting the attention necessary to
discern whether their image be re-produced or not, it mistakenly imagines them
present, and really existing.

When the spasm ceases, the mind instantly recovers its reason, these imaginary
objects disappear, the deception ceases, the patient finds himself in his
chamber, surrounded by his disconsolate friends, and relates to them the
subject of his visions.

The same effects which are produced by acrid humors on the body in severs,
and by irritating aliments in the inflammation of the stomach, are likewise
produced by an inflamed imagination, and by violent passions; examples, which
confirm this, daily occur to our observation.

When the soul is engrossed by any violent passion, when the imagination forms
a lively picture of the charms of a favorite object, represents it as the idol
of the heart, adorns it with every attractive grace, and suffers it to make a
deep impression on the mind; by degrees the charms, in which we have clothed
and decked it, dazzle the sight, and impose even on ourselves: then wholly
engaged thereby, we are insensible to every other object, and misled fo these
phantoms, we take our visions for realities.

Thus, in the extreme anxieties of a soul tormented by remorse, the guilty
wretch continually revolves in his mind every crime he has committed, and
remains a miserable victim to despair. Should sleep close his eyes; his sleep
is only a frightful delirium, the consciousness of his crimes preys upon his
heart, and terrifies him with horrid visions. He dreams he hears the groans of
those he has destroyed, thinks he sees their ghosts rising from their tombs,
and imprecating the justice of heaven on him; the darkness of hell covers the
face of the earth, the furies hiss in his ears, shake their torches at him, and
pursue and haunt him wherever he goes; devils, fiends, every moniter in fable
beset his soul; harrassed with these horrible visions, the wretch awakes in
affright, vents loud cries, starts back with horror at the approach of his
friends, whom now he knows not, and clasps the next thing he finds in his arms,
and fancies he clings to the altar.

Thus it is that the passions produce visions and trances; thus it is that
enthusiasm is changed into a delirium, and thus it is that fanatic minds
sometimes fancy themselves inspired.

This discourse on the succession of our ideas, and the order which obtains in
our thoughts, recalls me to the point from whence I first set out. I then
proved that the depth, the justness and sublimity of ideas, required fibers
strong and greatly elastic, and that these characters of our ideas varied
together with the organization: but the different degrees of the strength and
elasticity of these organs in different individuals, which at first appeared of
so little consequence, produce other very surprising effects. This principle,
simple as it is, abounds in consequences; it is this which enables us to
discover truths, hitherto concealed from the learned, and involved in profound
darkness. Let us endeavor to draw from this hidden source some additional
knowledge, which may throw light on some very obscure subjects, and scatter
flowers over the thorny paths of philosophy.

Organization renders Imagination the predominant Character of the MIND.
The exercise of regular thought is to the mind, what voluntary motion is to
the body; that is, a state of constraint which the soul commonly yields to with
reluctance, and ever endures with pain.

If we follow the mind in its operations, we shall observe, that when abandoned
to its own activity, it acts without rule and without method; it never acts
with order, but when necessity See Book II. Art. Regular thought considered
relatively to the degree of attention which it requires.
obliges it thereto, and returns to its former state immediately, when freed
from restraint. What renders the regular exercise of thought more fatiguing
than the irregular, is the attention which it requires; the difficulty of
fixing objects in the mind, in order to consider them Ibidem.
without distraction, and the efforts which are necessary to discern their
different relations; efforts so much the more painful as the objects happen to
be naturally volatile, and fall not within the cognizance of the senses. But
what renders these efforts painful, is that tension of the fibers which this
intenseness of the mind requires; for the tension of the fibers ever produces
in the soul an unpleasing sentiment more or less strong, but ever proportionate
to its force. We must therefore constantly recur to physical causes, to account
for these phenomena of the mind.

By following the mind in its operations, it is easy to discover, that when it
ceases to consider objects attentively, it no longer judges of their true
relations; in this case thought becomes imagination. Thus, of all the sciences,
geometry requires the least aid from imagination, as it continually fixes the
attention on one particular object It is not that he who discovers a
demonstration has no occasion for invention; but that the demonstration being
once discovered, others have only to pursue it: only the inventor of a science
has occasion to reason; those who succeed him have no more to do than to repeat
his reasonings.
.

I have demonstrated, that regular thought fatigues the mind much more See Book
II. Art. Regular thought considered relatively to the degrees of attention
which it requires.
, and much sooner than revery; I have likewise shown, that when the mind is
fatigued, it no longer fixes upon any object, and ceases to consider
attentively Book III. Obs. 6.
; I have shown, that the attention of the mind is ever proportionate Book IV.
Art. Organization renders the understanding extensive, just, superficial,
confined, erroneous or gross, etc.
to the strength and organic elasticity of the fibers. Whence let us conclude,
that a soul united to a delicate and feeble body must possess more imagination
than judgment.

The transition from reason to imagination is very easy. If the mind, during
reflection, be distracted by any sensation, it loses sight of its objects, is
engaged by some analogous relation, and wanders from one to another, till it
entirely loses its first engagement; it at length perceives itself bewildered
in the labyrinths of imagination, even whilst it fancies itself attentively
pursuing its former reflections. The greater the sensibility, the more
difficult it is to prevent these wanderings: whence it follows, that the Man
whose organs are delicate and greatly sensible must possess more imagination
than judgment.

If the transition from reason to imagination be very easy, it is likewise very
natural. Whatever our thoughts may be' some secret attractive, some hidden
charm, recalls the mind to its favorite subject. The soul, ever delighted with
pleasing sentiments, resigns itself wholly thereto, and its natural love of
happiness prompts it to perpetuate the pleasure it takes therein. The mind thus
relishing those pleasures, wishes to increase them; wherefore it successively
occupies itself in examining, one after another, all the agreeable objects
which are in any way connected with those which affect it with delight, and
thus thought becomes imagination. Man therefore has perpetual need to be on his
guard against these wanderings, and the more so in proportion to his greater
share of sensibility; for in this case the atattraction of pleasure is most
powerful. In this respect therefore, the soul which is united to very sensible
and elastic organs, possesses more of imagination than of judgment.

Organization characterises the THOUGHTS.
Organization not only determines our aptitude either for imagination or for
judgment, but also often forms the character of our thoughts.

When the exercise of the understanding is wholly imagination, the nature of
its images and ideas is ever determined This is very evident in the furor
uterinus, a disease produced by the irritating quality of the semen, depraved
by a too long continuance in the secretory vessels, and in the incubus or
nightmare.
by that of the sensation or sentiment, then affecting the mind. If this
sentiment or sensation be agreeable, there is a series of pleasing illusions
and agreeable images: if painful, there is a succession of sad and hideous
representations. The same phenomenon is also evident during sleep: our dreams
are pleasing or terrifying, according to the sensations we then experience.

If we take a retrospective view of what we have said concerning the succession
of our ideas, when speaking of the exercise of our mental faculties, we shall
find this phenomenon very simple. The mind, if left to itself, ever proceeds by
analogies: the thoughts therefore must be gay, when the soul is affected with
pleasure, and sad when affected with pain.

The impressions received by the organs of the body are conveyed to the soul,
fix there, and serve as a point of departure, from whence it sets out when it
commences its future operations; from this time forwards it is engaged by
analogous images and analogous thoughts only.

And as the soul ever perceives the disposition of the body during sleep,
although it appears to be then freed from its subjection to the senses; the
same analogy must be observed in man asleep, as when awake. Hence the reason
why the nature of dreams is ever analogous to the state of the body, and to the
sensation then affecting the mind. Hence too, the reason why, when the
sensation is agreeable, we enjoy during sleep a series of pleasing deceptions
and agreeable images; but, when it is painful, are terrified with dismal
thoughts and frightful illusions.

What has been said above concerning the imagination, is properly applicable to
irregular thought only; its regular productions require the same physical
disposition which reason does.

The mind must compare and combine its sensations and its thoughts in many
different shapes, to form new productions therefrom; this requires attention,
and consequently force and elasticity in the fibers. Thus imagination is
weakened by degrees, together with the organic elasticity of the fibers: in
proportion as they become more lax or more rigid, the mind cannot compare or
combine its sensations, and becomes inactive; even so far as to be no longer
able either to imagine or to invent; it then ceases to draw consequences from
principles, and only acts by the aid of the senses.

Nevertheless, if regular imagination requires the elasticity of our organs, it
requires it in a less degree than reason; for its objects are neither
necessarily dependant on each other, nor closely connected its productions are
only detached parts, where the mind has nothing to do but to weave them into
one tissue. Finally, because their connection depends not on the combination of
a great number of thoughts or ideas which are naturally profound and difficult
to be investigated, as those of reason commonly are; a single stroke of the
pencil shall frequently serve to connect the parts of which the group is to be
composed. And although regular imagination may be a state of constraint like
reason, it nevertheless fatigues the soul much less; for imagination has ever
the choice of its subjects, and this choice is ever directed toward agreeable
objects; whilst reason, ever tied down to follow nature, must needs frequently
find an irksomeness from painful researches and dry reflections, and is ever
busied in a disgustful employment. Imagination therefore not only requires less
attention than reason, but also possesses many pleasing attractives besides.

Imagination requires less force of the organs than reason, but a greater share
of organic elasticity of the fibers, or rather a greater share of sensibility.
For it is not always by a careful examination of objects, nor by a series of
many successive combinations, that the imagination forms new productions: the
most happy strokes of fancy often present themselves to the mind spontaneously,
when we least think, and are never the fruit of pains or plodding. It is
therefore only by vaiously combining objects, by leaving (if I may be allowed
the expression) the mind to rove at will, and by employing no more attention
than is necessary to collect the result of its thoughts, and to select
therefrom such as are for its purpose. The greater our sensibility, the more
liable we are to distraction, the more affected by analogies, the less attached
to material objects, and the more capable of those happy, but fortuitous
combinations, the true source of ingenious sallies, and of the noblest
productions of the human mind.

Thus therefore men who have but little sensibility, and are of robust organs,
can possess but a small share of imagination: men, who are but little sensible,
and yet delicate, must possess more. They, who are feeble and of great
sensibility, yet greater: and they who are extremely vigorous and extremely
sensible, most of all. Eager to rise above the sphere of the senses, these can
alone soar above this low world, and with a bold wing traversing the boundless
tracts of ether transport themselves to worlds unexplored before.

I have proved, that reason is not essential to the soul, and that the
imagination depends on the elasticity and force of the fibers, I shall now
demonstrate, that remembrance and recollection are modes of the soul's
existence, and wholly dependent on organization.

Remembrance and Recollection dependent on Organization.
Memory is almost always confounded with remembrance and recollection,
qualities very different, and which ought to be carefully distinguished See
Book II. Art Of remembrance and recollection.
Memory, or the faculty of retaining our sensations and ideas, is peculiar to
the soul, and independent of every physical cause: but remembrance and
recollection (the one whereof is the faculty of discerning our sensations and
ideas, when re-produced to be those which we have before received; and the
other, that of re-producing them at will) although intellectual powers,
nevertheless wholly depend on organization.

Acute diseases of a long continuance ever impair both remembrance and
recollection; chronic diseases are ever accompanied with the same phenomenon;
but more especially the hernia spinalis, when the tumor is opened, and even
still more than this, those sleepy diseases which ensue from a considerable
loss of semen See Book III. Observations 12 and 15.
. Great drinkers, apoplectics, those unfortunate persons who have undergone the
operation of the trepan, those who have been covered after hanging, frequently
pass the residue of life, unable either to remember or to recollect.

The microcephali, whose brain is of smaller dimensions than common, are
generally destitute of these faculties.

Finally, in the history of the academy of sciences of Paris, Annee 1701, page
57. we find the case of a child, eight years of age, that lost its Even here
remembrance and recollection are signified, as I observed above, although the
term memory be made use of.
memory by the excessive heats of summer, and never recovered it whilst the
heats continued.

Since the influence of the body on the soul has fixed and constant relations,
the decay and loss of remembrance or recollection are therefore produced by
causes common to every instance abovementioned. By what these cases have in
common, it clearly appears, that the cause of this decay, and loss of these
powers, is only the diminution of the organic elasticity of the nervous system,
but more especially of the membranes of the brain; a diminution common to every
subject here noticed, but produced in different ways. In the one, by a defect
of the nervous fluid, as in microcephali, and those who have been exhausted by
immoderate coition: in others, by a violent tension of the fibers, as in
apoplectics, those who have been recalled to life after hanging, and those who
have under gone the operation of the trepan: in others, by these two causes
united, as in persons affected with acute or chronic diseases.

We shall be fully convinced of this truth, if we consider, that every thing
which impairs the tone of the solids, either by vitiating the secretion of the
nervous fluid in the brain, or restraining its action, produces the same
effect. The immoderate use of cooling liquors, spirits, opium, hyosciamum, and
other narcotics, long and profound sadness, fear, terror, and every other
violent passion of the soul, too long continued watching, and too profound
meditation, all which are adapted to destroy the elasticity of the fibers,
occasion the loss of remembrance and recollection. Finally, the decay, and even
the loss of these powers, are often occasioned by excessive heat; in this case,
it is visibly produced by the diminution of organic elasticity. Every thing
concurs to establish the loss of elasticity, as the cause of this phenomenon,
as I have observed, in collecting the different observations made upon this
subject, and reducing to fixed points their numerous variations.

If more proofs were required, I would here repeat what has been said elsewhere
concerning the order of our thoughts. On the approach of sleep, and at the
close of wearisome meditation, when the fibers relax and the circulation is
languid, when the senses are inactive and every organ is at rest, the soul
appears to be then detached from the body, and wanders without any scope;
remembrance is lost, we recollect nothing, not even things which are the most
familiar. When sleep closes the eyes, objects which affect us whilst awake are
retraced in the mind, but the mind remembers them not, and this forgetfulness
is so much the more extreme as the sleep is more profound, that is, as the
fibers are more relaxed; the mind recovers not these powers, till the
elasticity of the fibers is re-established by repose.

But if the loss of remembrance and recollection be often produced by the
relaxation of the fibers; it is sometimes occasioned by their rigidity. In
inflammatory fevers, in drunkenness, nothing is remembered, nothing
recollected. How frequently are seen persons when affected with either of
these, that know not their friends, children, wives, and even forget their own
name! How many have been reduced to the same miserable state from the
irritation of the meninges by splinters of the cranium, or by some extraneous
body!

Remembrance and recollection, therefore, require a moderate degree of tension
of the fibers, as does the regular exercise of thought. The reason of this
phenomenon is easily comprehended. Memory is a passive faculty; but remembrance
and recollection are the Sea Book II. Art. Of recollection and remembrance.
results of our several intellectual faculties combined. The one is the state
of reflecting on the sensations and the ideas deposited in the memory: the
other is a state of intenseness, by which the soul forces itself to recall
these sensations and these ideas. Remembrance and recollection therefore of
necessity require attention, and consequently a moderate degree of organic
elasticity in the fibers. It is therefore obvious, that when the subjects of
our observations have not the power of rendering the fibers tense, the mind is
devoid of these powers.

Hence we must conclude, that remembrance and recollection are determined by
the tone of the solids, and even depend on organization.

Hitherto I have shown how the different degrees of the elasticity of the
fibers contribute to the diversity of minds, and how this mechanism explains
these phenomena, reconciles them to Nature, if I may be allowed the expression,
and divests them of the mavelous; this cause, however simple it may appear,
produces many other very surprising effects.

Organization renders MAN intelligent or stupid.
Penetration, that noble faculty of the mind, by which we discern truth amidst
the darkness surrounding it, by which we discover the most remote relations of
things, depends on the tone of the fibers, and on the state of the body,
equally with remembrance and recollection; for being wholly owing to the
capacity of the mind See Book II. Art. Penetration, stupidity, etc.
, and to the number of ideas and sensations, it consequently must depend on the
number of the senses, and on their good organization. Nevertheless the senses
of an idiot appear sound and well constituted; he has likewise, as other
persons have, sensations of every kind, and he arranges them in the same order,
when he acts like others: but he has but very few ideas, and is deficient in
judgment and penetration.

Penetration depends on the number of the senses, and their good organization;
but depends not wholly thereon. To discover the relations of things, it is not
sufficient to have a great number of sensations, there is also necessary the
power of calling them to mind when occasion requires. Without this faculty, the
sensations deposited in the memory would be useless; without it, the mind could
compare its present sensations only, all its judgments would be determined by
the senses, and Man no longer act as Man, but as the most stupid of beasts.
Besides, the number of the senses and their good organization, penetration
likewise requires the same elasticity and force in the fibers as recollection.

But even this will not suffice. To discover the relations of things, the mind
must compare them in their different aspects, and variously combine them.
Except this, admitting every other qualification, the best organized senses,
the most ardent desire of attaining perfection; yet so long as Man continues
unable to combine his sensations, it will be impossible for him to acquire
knowledge. Penetration therefore requires the same organic elasticity of the
fibers as reflection.

Every man has a certain number of sensations, but all men have not equally the
power of recalling, comparing, combining, and arranging them; qualities
indispensibly necessary to the discovery of concealed relations. These
qualities idiots have not; and this inability to recollect or reflect, is to be
wholly attributed to the state of their organs.

If we compare the body of an idiot with the body of a rational person, we
shall find many considerable diversities between them. The most conspicuous is
the small dimensions of the cerebrum. Microcephali See Book III. Obs. 15, 16.
are idiots by nature; they have neither conception nor judgment: on the
contrary, macrocephali are very ingenious.

Another difference is the bulk of the body, in comparison of the size of the
head. Extremely large and fat persons, are commonly but a small remove from
stupidity; whilst small and lean persons are generally the reverse.

But all idiots are not so by nature; some gradually arrive at that state, the
most ingenious equally with others. Acute diseases of long continuance See Book
III. Obs. 12.
, and likewise chronic diseases, impair the penetration. The considerable loss
of nervous fluid, either by coition, by its discharge from the tumor of the
hernia spinalis, or by extensive exercise, produces the same effects. Great
drinkers, apoplectics, they who have undergone the operation of the trepan,
they who have been recovered after hanging, remain very long without conception
and without judgment.

Let us attend to the reason of these phenomena.

Microcephali are idiots, macrocephali very sagacious. But if penetration be
ever proportionate to the dimensions of the brain, it is not from any
particular organization of this viscus, as some have imagined. The brain is
only an organ of secretion, and is without relation to the soul, except by its
secreting a greater or less quantity of the nervous fluid; and as its volume
might more or less obstruct the origin of the nerves, by compressing the
membranes which surround it; it is only in these respects, that the brain can
influence penetration.

It has been already shown, that the exercise of regular thought, such as is
necessary to penetration, requires a tension of the fibers, particularly of
those of the meninges. This tension, this augmentation of the organic
elasticity of the solids, arises from the immediate influx of the nervous fluid
impelled into these organs by the will. The more this fluid, so immediately
subject to the soul in voluntary motion See Book I. Art. Of the different
motions of the body.
, abounds, the more strongly Man can apply his mind to reflection, and the
longer continue it: for the power of the will on our organs, never prevails so
far as to render them rigid. Hence it is evident, that microcephali, who are
not abundantly supplied therewith, must necessarily be stupid; and that
macrocephali, who possess it in great abundance, must be perfectly the reverse.
Hence it is, that large and very fat persons have in general but little
sagacity; for the bulk of the body continually increases, and the size of the
brain continues the same. This enormous bulk of body, compared to the dimension
of the brain, places them in the same class with microcephali.

This inability in microcephali, and in those who are extremely fat, to
increase the organic elasticity of their fibers, often destroys the penetration
of the most sagacious. To this is owing that stupidity which affects those who
have been recovered after hanging, apoplectics, those who have suffered the
operation of the trepan, and hard drinkers. It is this, likewise, which, after
acute and chronic diseases, deprives men of the faculty of conception, and
reduces them to a state of infancy.

Hence is the reason that, when an inflammatory fever has consumed the nervous
fluid, and fatigued our organs by violent and precipitate motions, the mind is
affected with a stupor, all its faculties are disordered, and all knowledge
lost: this returns not, but in proportion as the body acquires strength, and
arrives not to its former perfect state, till the body has entirely recovered
its former vigor.

Hence the reason why the violent passions, profound sadness, and narcotics,
produce a kind of momentary stupidity.

Hence the reason why some persons have become stupid, by imitating too
affidiously the gestures of folly.

It is therefore evident, that the extreme impair of the organic elasticity of
the fibers generates stupidity, and that the penetration of every individual
depends on his organization.

Organization renders MAN sagacious or dull, sedate or volatile, and the
Judgment, clear or confused.
Nature has greatly varied the degrees of the delicacy and vivacity of minds.
Sagacity, that quickness of understanding, in discerning the reason of things,
that admirable faculty of comprehending at once a multitude of objects, or
rather of reviewing them with rapidity, and penetrating in an instant the most
remote relations, observes not the same gradation as penetration. This
increases and decays by insensible degrees; the other has no progression, but
has its existence confined, as it were, to an indivisible point.

Sagacity consists in readily discovering remote relations. Thus, besides the
number and order of our sensations and ideas necessary to discover those
relations, it requires quick apprehension; hence, not only the same physical
disposition is necessary as in penetration, that is, force and organic
elasticity of the fibers, but also the most perfect degree of this elasticity,
or which is the same thing, that degree which is best adapted to second the
activity of the will: for the exercise of the understanding in penetration is
voluntary. The regular exercise of thought, requires a certain organic tone of
the fibers; but this tone is not limited to one particular point, it has a
certain extent contained between the opposite extremes of relaxation and
rigidity. Madness and stupidity are produced by the extremes, wisdom holds the
middle station, and its various degrees occupy the whole interval between them:
there are therefore different degrees in this intermediate space, in every one
of which the soul may possess penetration. It is in that degree of elasticity,
where the fibers have a greater aptitude to yield obedience to the will, that
the disposition to sagacity consists. Thus the abundance of nervous fluid This
is true even with respect to the instinct of animals, where nature seems to
prompt every action: for although they have particular inclinations, although
one may be more or less savage, more or less cruel than another, we shall
nevertheless find them to be all stupid, in proportion as they are in want of
this fluid; and that the sagacity of every one is according to the dimensions
of the brain.
, the primitive elasticity of the fibers, and that degree where the equilibrium
between these two powers is most perfect, must be the principle of sagacity, of
invention, of that divine enthusiasm which animates genius, and distinguishes
those who possess it from the herd of common wits. Sagacity therefore falls to
the lot of those who are endued both with vigor and sensibility. These are the
qualities which alone actuate those towering minds which soar to the first
principles of science, and rapidly rush to the goal; whilst others lag far
behind, and advance with slow and tardy steps.

In proportion as this equilibrium between these two powers is destroyed, the
mind necessarily loses its sagacity; but in a different manner; if the balance
be in favor of the solids, if the fibers be either too lax or too rigid, the
mind is less apt to recall the sensations and ideas deposited in the memory, or
to compare them, and less readily discovers their remote relations. The mind is
therefore less active, takes up longer time in its reflection, and is slower in
tracing any analogy, or investigating any truth. Man, thus organized, may
possess judgment, but not wit. The farther he is from this perfect degree of
organic elasticity, the more his activity of mind is diminished; he may even be
at such a distance from it, as to possess no powers of imagination at all. In
this state he can pronounce on the relations of those objects only which
immediately act on the senses; and principles, to such a person, are without
consequences. Hence the reason why sallies of wit, happy flights of any kind,
never occur to us when the mind is fatigued.

But when this equilibrium between the fibers and nervous fluid, which forms
Man's disposition to sagacity, is destroyed, and the scale inclines to the
latter, vivacity of mind becomes volatility. The soul being then strongly
affected by the most minute See Book I. Art. Of the organs of sense considered,
relatively to their different degrees of sensibility.
objects, re-acts See Book IV. Art. Why the character of the soul is ever
congruous to the state of the body.
on the body with a force proportionate thereto, communicates to this fluid a
very strong impulse which, acting upon weak fibers, renders them rigid, and
destroys sagacity, together with the free exercise of the understanding.

To this sensibility add the delicacy, which is inseparable from it, and which
renders us incapable of sustaining for any long time that laborious attention,
which is often necessary to the discovery of remote relations. Thus too hasty
in pronouncing on the relations of things, the mind always falls short of the
end which it desires to attain, forms forced reasonings, and continues for ever
ignorant.

The ideas, to be just, must be distinct, although these qualities are not
inseparable. Thus in every case where justness of our ideas requires them to be
numerous, the mind, if united to a body of very delicate texture and extreme
sensibility, can scarce conceive any thing distinctly. In a man so
circumstanced, the mind has not time to examine thoroughly any of the objects as
they offer: they shift so fast, that he has hardly time to perceive them.

Hence the mind can have only imperfect notions of things, and all its
knowledge is but a confused huddle of errors and absurdities.

Organization contributes to render MAN either prudent or inconsiderate.
The soul united to weak, elastic and delicate organs, being continually acted
upon by strong sensations and sentiments, displays them the moment it is
affected by them See Book IV. How organization renders Man open-hearted or a
dissembler.
. Such a person therefore is incapable of dissimulation. Endued with too great
sensibility to dissemble, he is likewise too much so to reflect, to secure his
purposes, to comply with, and bend to circumstances, or patiently pursue a
scheme, till he finds some clue, which may serve to guide him. Hence he is
incapable of that circumspection, which conceals hidden resources, till it sees
a fit occasion to make use of them; he knows not what to conceal, but tells the
whole of what he knows, and thus betrays his own secrets. Imprudent in
discourse, he is so likewise in his designs and actions; his ardor ever carries
him to lengths little suited to his strength, and by the improper use he makes
of it, almost all his efforts prove ineffectual; in a word, he is neither fit
for executing nor for counsel.

Prudence therefore depends on that state of the machine, on that tone of the
fibers which promotes the free exercise of thinking, by moderating the vivacity
of the sensitive faculty. Only the Man, whose organs are thus formed, can be
severe, yet gentle, tender, though not weak, and high-spirited without being a
bravado; he alone can conceal his designs under the veil of silence, and be at
once communicative and discreet. This calm, this external serenity proceeds
therefore from a natural coolness of temper; and it is to the want of
sensibility in our organs, that this boasted wisdom, this prudence we value
ourselves so much upon are owing.

Why MAN appears to lose some of his mental Faculties without losing the others.
Some men lose the power of meditating, yet retain their other faculties. Some
lose remembrance, imagination, the power of reflection, yet retain that of
recollection and judgment: some forget one kind of ideas, one sort of
knowledge, without prejudice to others: in a word, some seem to lose every
mental power, instinct excepted.

The most celebrated philosophers, to account for these phenomena, have
imagined a system, plausible at first sight, but in reality exceedingly absurd.
They have first supposed, contrary to truth, that each faculty of the soul has
some particular organ for its seat, entirely disjoined from, and without
relation to the others. They have afterward laid it down as a maxim, that,
when one of these organs is vitiated, the faculty resident therein is depraved
likewise. Finally, to make this system quadrate with facts, they have
concluded, that in the general disarrangement of the machine, every part of
which is intimately connected, these different organs, seats of the different
faculties See the Physiology of Le Cat, tome I. page 221. Paris edition.
are not all affected at the same time.

To elucidate these phenomena, I shall not undertake a mysterious explanation,
which supposes us to be endowed with knowledge which we have not; nor imitate
the explanations of others, which are equally repugnant to reason and
experience. All these phenomena, which appear so whimsical, and so impossible
to account for, according to the system of these philosophers, are so very
simple, according to that which is here established, that the only thing to be
wondered at is their simplicity. We have seen that reason, imagination,
remembrance, recollection, penetration, sagacity, etc. are powers of the mind,
dependent on the different tones of the organic elasticity of the fibers. It is
therefore evident, that these effects must disappear with their causes. I shall
attempt farther to develope this principle, and give it the clearest evidence
of truth.

These faculties of the soul, viz. sensibility, will, memory, and
understanding, have different functions, as has been already proved; but these
faculties unite and combine in many different manners: from these their
combinations result thought, and the different operations of the mind. But
unless they act conjunctly, Man has neither sentiments nor ideas; their
separation destroys every operation of the mind, and, in appearance,
annihilates the faculties themselves.

Although these different faculties mutually combine, they however combine not
all in the same act: according as their combination varies, so much the more
different are their results. Besides, though our intellectual faculties are the
sole principles of the operations of the soul, and although some are active of
themselves, their exercise is nevertheless entirely dependent on the body. The
mind cannot proceed alone: it ever requires a certain degree of organic
elasticity in the fibers, to think, reflect, meditate, etc. From these
different degrees of the organic elasticity of the fibers, results every
diversity in the operations of the mind.

Regular thought ever requires a tension of the fibers: but to think on some
particular subjects, there is required a much greater degree of organic
elasticity in the fibers, than to think on some others; as on metaphysical
subjects, than on those of elementary geometry; there is likewise required a
much greater degree of organic elasticity to meditate than to reflect, to
imagine something new, than to judge of simple facts. Thus with one degree of
organic elasticity Man can reflect, with another meditate; so with one he can
imagine, and with another weaker degree, which leaves him unable to recall the
ideas and sensations formerly deposited in the memory, he can pronounce on his
present sensations only, and seems to have lost every faculty but instinct:
with a degree, yet weaker than this, he is unable to combine two single
sensations, and is destitute of every sentiment, even that of his own existence.

Thus Man may lose the power of meditation, and retain that of reflection; he
may lose imagination, sagacity, and penetration, and retain good sense; lastly,
he may lose judgment, and yet retain instinct.

Both remembrance and recollection require the organic elasticity of the
fibers; but not in an equal degree. Recollection requires the greater degree of
tension of the two, as any one may be convinced by the efforts which a mind,
exhausted by study, or during the state of convalescence or drowsiness, vainly
makes to recall the most familiar ideas, such as when called to mind by being
mentioned by others, it remembers to have before received. This is very
natural; for it requires more attention to fix on an absent object, than on one
which is present; to recall an analogy without the aid of the senses, as in
remembrance by the assistance of objects, than to discover its identity: Man
therefore may lose recollection and yet retain remembrance.

Finally, a greater degree of organic elasticity is required to recall
extraordinary ideas, than to recollect those which are familiar; and abstract
ideas than simple: so likewise Man may forget one particular sort of ideas, and
yet retain another. Thus the different degrees of organic elasticity of the
fibers produce new combinations, which interrupt the succession of our
thoughts, disorder the chain of our ideas, and seem even to annihilate some of
ous mental faculties, while they leave us the free exercise of others. This is
the simple and manifest cause of these singular phenomena.

The different degrees of organic elasticity required in the different
operations of the mind, may be determined by comparing the course of the
fluids, the number of pulsations, their different degrees of force and
vivacity, in one man during meditation, in another during reflection, and in
another during revery; and by comparing the course of the fluids, the number of
pulsations, their different degrees of force and vivacity in the same man in
all these different states.

Thus having shown the principles of these phenomena in the different tones of
the fibers, having discovered the truth of these laws in Nature, we may easily
proceed to estimate their effects: notwithstanding this subject may be
extremely complicated, and may appear to have but little connection with
mathematics, it is possible to determine their relations, and to subject them
to a precise evaluation; the balance has been already pointed out, it now
remains only to take the amount.

From what has preceded, it is certain that the propensities, the affections
and character of the soul, folly, wisdom, stupidity, prudence, reason,
imagination, recollection, remembrance, penetration, delicacy, sublimity,
depth, sagacity and genius, are not qualities inherent in the mind, but modes
of the soul's existence, depending on the state of the organs of the body; as
for instance, colors, sounds, heat, cold, etc. are not essential attributes of
matter, but qualities dependent on its texture, and on the motion of its
constituent corpuscles. It is therefore evident, that organization alone causes
almost Let it be once more noticed, that I pretend not to subject the whole to
physical laws; I am well assured, that the soul partly receives its character
from moral causes.
every difference which is observed between souls; that they receive their
principal characteristics from the corporeal organs; and that, supposing them
really in their nature different from each other, this difference would be of
no effect, so long as they continue united to the body.

Thus every thing in Nature is influenced by physical laws.

Corporeal sensibility, the regular or disordered course of our fluids,
primitive or organic elasticity, the rigidity or relaxation of the fibers, the
force or volume of the organs, are the causes of the surprising diversities in
souls, and the secret principles of that great influence of the soul on the
body, and of the body on the soul, hitherto deemed an impenetrable mystery.

Such are the secret causes of that singular harmony, which philosophers have
observed between the two substances which form our being, but were unable to
explain.

Such, in a word, are the true foundations, the solid basis of a science,
wherein every thing appeared arbitrary, obscure and mysterious.

I would here conclude my work, were philosophers only to be my readers: to
such it might be sufficient to explain the principles on which I ground my
doctrine, and I might have spared myself the trouble of entering into these
particulars which are necessary to elucidate them. But this were lost labor:
since, for one reader who can develop the whole of a system by the mere
outlines, there are a thousand who must see the whole chain of reasoning, in
order to comprehend the principles on which it is established.

To these it is necessary to enter into a minute discussion: it is not enough
that they have given them a clue to guide them to the truth, and have the path
pointed out to them; they must be, as it were, led by the hand through all the
mazes of the labyrinth; otherwise they must unavoidably be bewildered in it.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
ERRATA.
Page 34, line 2, for though, read through. Page 72, l. 4. f. causing it to, r.
causing the scale to. Page 109, l. 3, f. ever uniform, r. pretty uniform. Page
115, l. 8, f. ends not, r. ends not here. Page 121, l. 23, f. less just, r.
less righteous. Page 124, l. 10, f. inactive, r. active. Page 142, l. in the
title, f. observations, r. farther observations. Page 144, l. 11, f. no long,
r. no longer. Page 162, l. 17, f. of their image, r. of the images Page 187, l.
6, their sensibility, r. their tension, and consequently their sensibility.
Page 219, l. 10 f. fibers, r. fibrillae. Page l. 12, f. impel it, r. impel it
into the tube they form. Page 226, last line, f. sentiment, r. sense. Page 232,
l. 14, f. elasticity, r. strength. Page 236, l. 11, f. covered, r. recovered.
Page 238, l. 2, dele spirits. Page 240, l. 16, f. tense, r. tense to such a
degree. Page 244, l. 6, f. gradually, r. accidentally,

