AN ESSAY ON THE METHODS OF SUPPRESSING HAEMORRHAGES FROM DIVIDED ARTERIES.

By THOMAS KIRKLAND, Surgeon.

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, in Pall Mall.

M DCC LXIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NOtwithstanding much has been lately wrote upon this subject, yet no one seems
to have considered it thoroughly. The author therefore begs leave to offer the
result of his enquiries concerning this matter, imagining, if he has gone
farther than other writers, that he is doing some service to the Art of
Surgery, though this Essay should (as it probably will) fall short of
perfection.

INTRODUCTION.
WHOEVER takes a view of the late well-intended attempts to recommend a less
painful method of suppressing the haemorrhage from divided arteries, than is
generally practiced, will find that these writers have omitted to ascertain by
proper experiments the principles on which the suppression depends; and upon
enquiry the different theories which have been invented by other writers will
appear to be greatly deficient, and destitute of any fact or experiment
sufficient to evince their truth.

Indeed Mr. Gooch Cases, p. 140. London 1758.
has considered this affair nearly in its true light; but as what he says is
only conjectural, it seems not to have gained preference to the other
hypotheses which have been advanced; a very ingenious surgeon at this time
adopting the opinion of Pouteau Mr. White on Sponge.
.

In fact, this part of practice has always been defective, by not learning from
nature the true intentions to be answered. Hence, from not acting upon right
principles, remedies have been applied at random; and nature has often effected
a cure, in opposition to the most barbarous and improper applications. The
different specifics which have been cried up and in vogue, and the multiplicity
of remedies, sufficiently point out the uncertainty with which this subject has
been treated; for had the principles on which we were to proceed been
ascertained, the most effectual applications would easily have been discovered,
and the rest discarded as useless. And though since the needle and ligature
were introduced, we have been more steady in our practice, yet I apprehend we
have, even in this particular, been not quite free from imperfection. -- And
were we not so unsettled, as to be near giving it up for remedies recommended
with only supposed advantages?

The following essay is therefore intended to supply these defects; and I hope,
by proper experiments, and giving a new light to several facts, I have both
ascertained the principles on which a suppression of the flux from divided
arteries depends, and what method most safely and effectually, under different
circumstances, answers this purpose.

AN ESSAY ON THE METHODS OF SUPPRESSING HAEMORRHAGES FROM DIVIDED ARTERIES.
CHAP. I. Of the natural or spontaneous suppression of Haemorrhages from
divided arteries.
WHEN agaric of the oak was first introduced in England, for suppressing the
haemorrhage from divided arteries, I made several experiments to try in what
manner it produced its effects; and I was soon convinced, that it had no other
property than that of adhering close to the mouth of the vessel: this
circumstance, together with considering how often the smaller arteries close
themselves by their own natural contraction, and that it was common for very
considerable arteries to be closed in the same manner, when the impulse of the
blood was abated by the swooning of the patient See Baron Van Swieten's Comm.
vol. ii, p. 34. and Phil. Trans. No 449. p. 313.
, led me to imagine that the same thing must of course happen in the large
arteries, provided the passage of the blood through them be first intercepted
for a time, and that the close contraction which was observed in those arteries
Warner's Cases, p. 136.
to which the agaric had been applied, was entirely owing to the course of the
blood being impeded by blocking up the end of the vessel.

Every day's experience confirmed me in this opinion; for I found that the flux
from very considerable arteries was easily and effectually suppressed by only
making a perpendicular pressure a few minutes upon the end of the vessel. --
But, in order to be more certain about this matter, in the latter end of the
year 1755 I made the following experiment.

After tying a large horse down, Mr. Peale of Maidstone, then with me, took off
one of his hind legs about the middle of the thigh: immediately upon the bone
being divided, the horse drew the stump toward his body, at which time the
tourniquet slipped off, and five arteries, the least of them about the size of a
wheat-straw, some near as large as a goosequill, and one much larger, poured
out with great vehemence; but an immediate stop was put to the flux by a person
pressing with both hands upon the wound; and by continuing this pressure
fifteen minutes, the vessels became so firmly closed as not to discharge the
least drop of blood. However I passed a needle and thread round one of the
largest, intending to make an experiment with the ligature.

The pulsation at first was very plainly seen at their extremities; but after
some time it became less perceptible, and the wound was covered with tow, which
was kept on with very slight bandage.

The horse was kept alive forty-eight hours after the operation; and though he
tumbled about and struggled much in attempting to raise himself up, yet there
was not any return of the haemorrhage, nor did there appear the least pulsation.

After he was killed we dissected the thigh, and found that the bleeding was
not suppressed by congealed blood, but by all the vessels being quite close
contracted for near an inch or more from their extremity.

After this I made more experiments of the same kind upon brutes with the same
success, and always found, upon dissection, the ends of the vessels close
contracted for a considerable way: by removing my fingers from time to time,
while I pressed upon the vessel, it was easy to discover this contraction
taking place by a gradual decrease of the stream of blood; but in August 1757
the following case gave a further light to this matter.

Jos. Air of Caudwell, about twenty years of age, in being bled had the
misfortune to have the humeral artery opened along with the basilic vein, and
the operator with much difficulty suppressed the haemorrhage by bandage:
however a tumor with great pulsation soon began to arise in the part wounded,
which in six or seven weeks increased to the size of a pullet's egg.

The nature of the tumor was at once evident, and an eschar on the upper part
of it being upon the point of separation, determined me to perform the
operation for the aneurism.

The impulse of the blood against the ligature at the time of the operation was
very great; and as part of the artery (whose diameter was considerably
enlarged) was exposed, its pulsation was remarkably visible: but upon removing
the dressings the third day afterward, the pulsation could neither be seen nor
felt nearer to the ligature than an inch and half; whence I was led to
conclude, that the artery had collapsed and gradually closed itself up to the
nearest lateral branches, as the resistance toward the ligature abated from
the blood passing through those vessels. -- And it appeared to me self-evident
that nature always took this step to suppress the haemorrhage from divided
arteries, when I reflected that the same circumstance constantly happens, when
the umbilical vessels are divided at the birth of the foetus.

However, as I did not look for the lateral branches in the experiments
mentioned, I cut off another horse's tail near his body, and suppressed the
haemorrhage by pressing a few minutes with my fingers; and by a careful
dissection the next day after he was killed, I found that the conclusion I had
drawn was (in this subject at least) perfectly right.

Is it not owing to this cause that an haemorrhage does not follow those
mortifications, where the greatest part of the limb is destroyed and separates?
For if the great vessels were closed no farther than where the mortification
ends, a flux of blood must of course ensue upon the coming away of the dead
parts. Is not this evinced in a case lately published by Mr. Antrobus Med.
Observe. and Inq. vol. ii. p. 152.
? where, though the mortification stopped only two inches above the ancle, yet
it is probable that the large arteries closed themselves as far at least as
where the femoral artery divides below the knee; because neither pulsation nor
haemorrhage appeared when the leg was taken off.

It will not, I imagine, appear at all surprising, that the closing of the end
of the vessel an inch only, or perhaps less, should be sufficient to resist the
force of the circulation, when it is considered, that this impulse against the
end of the artery immediately becomes less, and soon entirely ceases, from the
blood upon meeting with resistance dilating and passing through the nearest
lateral branches; as is fully evident from the gradual decrease, and at length
the total disappearance, of pulsation.

Nor is this contraction of the artery and the alteration in the course of the
blood long in taking place, as appears from the experiments mentioned: and
besides these, in many instances I have observed, that arteries as large as
those we commonly meet with in cutting for the stone, or in taking off
schir^ous breasts, etc. will for the most part, if they are wholly divided, be
effectually closed by pressure in three or four minutes. And if in taking off a
leg, we intercept the course of the blood longer than is usually done, most of
the arteries will often be closed, if the patient is in a tolerable good habit,
as I have learnt by tying the large vessels without loosening the tourniquet.

I took off a woman's leg near the middle of her thigh, and tied the large
artery without loosening the tourniquet; upon setting it at liberty, we
observed some blood draining down the muscles from one artery only, and though
it had contracted itself so much as scarce to admit the passage of any blood,
yet by the pulsation it appeared to be a very considerable vessel, and on this
account the ligature was used.

Several more, which did not bleed, were discovered by a strong pulsation at
their extremities; and therefore, instead of immediately dressing the patient,
we waited ten or fifteen minutes, and gave her wine to raise her spirits, so
that we might see whether they would bleed or not, and thereby prevent our
being alarmed with a fresh haemorrhage after she was put to bed: but during
this time the pulsation gradually disappeared, and the bleeding was effectually
stopped.

Indeed, since I have attended to this circumstance I have seen it so often
happen, that I am well convinced in amputations larger vessels have been
trusted with lint and flour than has generally been imagined; and that when a
fresh haemorrhage returns some hours after an operation, it is not from small
arteteries being dilated by an increased motion in the blood, as has generally
been thought, but to the principal lateral branches which had closed themselves
being again forced open.

That the large arteries are also closed in a very little time, does not only
appear from the experiment made upon the horse's leg, but likewise in several
of those cases where the course of the blood was intercepted, either by the
application of agaric or other fungous substances, especially a case related by
Mr. Warner Cases, p. 147, 148.
, where, "in an hour after the operation, the mouths of the vessels were found
totally contracted, so as to resist the whole force of the circulation;" after
which they probably, like the umbilical vessels, shrink into a perfect cord,
and become impervious. -- And does not nature seem to point out, that
intercepting the passage of the blood for a while, is all that is required from
art; as some animals by instinct, in separating their young from the placenta,
lacerate the cord with their teeth, whence probably the ragged fibers stop up
the end of the vessel by collapsing over each other?

Seeing then that nature suppresses the haemorrhage from divided arteries by
the natural contraction of their circular fibers, when the impediment to this
contraction is removed, by intercepting the impulse of the blood, let us fairly
enquire what method best answers this purpose, beginning with the ligature, on
account of its having been long in general use.

CHAP. II. Of the Ligature.
THE success which has hitherto in general attended the ligature, is a full
proof of its efficacy; and it is evident nothing can more powerfully intercept
the course of the blood, provided it can be properly applied: and though it
seems to have been a general opinion, that the vessel only unites in that part
where the stricture is made, and preference has on that account been lately
given to other remedies Philos. Trans. vol. xlvii. art. 94.
; yet I imagine, from what has been said, it will readily be conceived that it
is also in this case closed by its own natural contraction, and which will be
found true, if the end of the artery can be discovered.

But this is often difficult, it being at first commonly covered with the
swelled muscles, and after some time sends out (like all other parts) new
flesh, and cannot be distinguished: therefore as a proof, I shall observe that
the artery which was tied in the horse's leg, was net only closed below, but
also at least half an inch above the ligature; so that every advantage
possible, in regard to stopping the blood, is obtained, provided the end of the
vessel does not separate and come away with the ligature; for though no
inconvenience will follow, if the stricture is made some distance from the
lateral branches; yet, if it happens to be very near, a fresh flux of blood
must ensue, which is probably one reason why there are some few instances to be
met with of the arteries bleeding again some time after they have been tied.

But, from attending several years to this particular, I find that the end of
the vessel does not so often come away as is imagined, and that a separation
may be generally avoided, as it only happens when the ligature is thin, and
very little substance is comprised along with the vessel in the noose; whereas
when we take in a proper quantity of the circumjacent parts to defend it, and
the ligature is of a proper size, upon digestion coming on it becomes loose and
slips off, leaving the vessel firmly closed and entire.

However, that we may avoid with as much certainty as possible the separation
of the end of the vessel, I would advise that the ligature should be made of
long twelve-penny flax, without either being the least twisted or waxed further
than just the end, to make it pass through the eye of the needle; and if it is
rubbed over with some soft digestive, it will slip easily through the flesh.

This will be found sufficiently strong for the purpose for which it is wanted,
without the least danger of its injuring the vessel; nor need the compressure
be greater than is just necessary to intercept the passage of the blood, which
will still add to the security in this respect, and at the same time produce
other advantages, as will be observed in their proper place.

And further, if the ligature can be properly applied, it is equally effectual,
whether the artery be only in part or entirely divided; whether it is at
liberty to retract itself, or adheres to an undivided muscle or the bone. And
if the needle can be passed a proper depth into the adjacent parts, no accident
can remove it, if they are sound, till the state of contraction and
inflammation is over; when, in general, all will have been done that is
necessary, the pressure of the swelled muscles most effectually assisting the
closing of the vessels.

Nevertheless, along with these advantages it must be confessed, that great
pain often accompanies the use of the ligature; which, where it cannot be
avoided, would make us prefer any other remedy that is equally safe and
unattended with this inconvenience. But it very fortunately happens, that where
the ligature is most wanted, it may be applied with very little or no pain, if
properly managed; for the large arteries are commonly surrounded with a
considerable quantity of cellular membrane; and if we only take in with the
vessel this nearly insensible substance, the patient seems undisturbed during
the operation See Monro, Ed. Med. Ess. vol. iv. p. 264.
: and upon enquiring of several at the time of tying the vessel, whether they
felt much pain, I have always been answered in the negative; and though the
nerve which accompanies the artery is enclosed in the noose, it makes no
difference in regard to this circumstance.

Perhaps it may seem strange to those who have not considered this matter, that
great pain should not arise upon a nerve, which is an organ of sensation, being
compressed; but there are several instances in the practice of surgery, besides
this, which lead us to imagine that the nerves are incapable of being
irritated, till they are divested of their coverings, unless you penetrate
through their coats down to the medullary substance In performing the operation
upon an aneurism some time since, I accidentally had an opportunity of
observing the difference betwixt pricking and tying a nerve. In passing the
needle under the artery it penetrated the nerve, upon which the patient
instantly cried out of great pain all down his arm, which ceased when the
needle was withdrawn. But though the same nerve was afterward enclosed in the
ligature along with the artery, the patient told me he only felt a prickling
and numbness, which soon went off.


consequently, when they are also defended by the artery, fat, and cellular
membrane, they will still be less liable to be affected.

This may be illustrated by reflecting on the situation of the nerves in the
bones, tendons, membranes, and the like; where they seem to be rendered
insensible and incapable of being irritated by the compactness of the parts
which invest them It does not hence follow, that "wounds of the tendons are the
most easily cured of all others only by the help of nature, without any trouble
or bad symptom," as an author of eminence has asserted: and as it will explain
part of what is hereafter said about convulsions, we shall just observe, that
though the tendons in their natural state are void of sensibility, yet, when
they become swelled and tense, more painful and troublesome symptoms generally
arise in these than in other wounds; probably from the particular structure of
the part, by which the obstruction rises higher and is long in terminating, and
the nerves during this state are put more upon the stretch than in any other
part of the body. But this does not hold good when a tendon is much lacerated,
or a large wound is made in any other tendinous part; for then they remain
insensible, and give no other disturbance than from the length of time they
take to separate; very likely from the obstructed fluids being freely
discharged, and the nerves being in a state of relaxation.
, as appears from the new flesh which follows their being wounded, being
sensible, and again losing its sensibility, as the part acquires its natural
texture.

With this we may observe that numbness, the usual consequence of compressing a
nerve, cannot here give any uneasiness, because the parts to which the nerves
were distributed are removed.

However, when the vessels are so situated that muscular fibers must of course
be enclosed, the ligature will unavoidably be attended with considerable pain;
owing probably to the nerves being divested of their coverings, and their
medullary substance alone expanded over every fiber of a muscle; not, I
imagine, in the form of papillae, but in the same manner, though much thinner,
as the retina in the bottom of the eye If I am not much mistaken, in tracing
the nerves through the muscles I have seen them become a perfect mucus in this
manner; and whoever will compare, by the help of a proper glass, the medullary
part of the brain or a nerve cut open, with muscular fibers, which are not
dried by being exposed to the air, will find that they are covered with a kind
of pulp that has exactly the same appearance. And does not an observation of
Haller's (Sensib. and Irritab. p. 59.) seem to confirm this opinion; for in
attempting to prove that irritability resides in the glutinous mucus, he says,
"the most irritable parts are deprived of that quality only by robbing them of
this mucus by drying;" which is easily explained, if instead of mere gluten,
this proves to be the medullary part of the nerve. Hence too we may easily see,
how every part of the body (except those which are secured by a particular
structure) is liable to be affected by the point of the finest needle. And how
pain is carried by consent of parts all over the body, neither of which can be
well accounted for, if the nerves are supposed to continue distinct cords to
their extremities.


.

But this pain is only momentary, because whatever is enclosed becomes nearly
insensible upon the stricture being made. If the ligature recommended is used,
the parts will be less irritated; and whether the absolute security against a
future haemorrhage does not fully compensate for the uneasiness the patient
feels on this account, may be gathered from what follows.

But it is thought, "that the ligature, by compressing the adjacent nerve, is
sometimes productive of convulsions." Now as no facts are brought to support
this opinion, and as I have never yet seen any accident of this kind happen,
though I have always, without regarding the nerve, freely used the needle and
ligature; nor, upon strict enquiry, found one instance of its happening amongst
an extensive chirurgical acquaintance, I am induced to think with Mr. Sharp
Crit. Inq. p. 291.
, that the doctrine of convulsions being caused by the tying of a nerve is
merely speculative, and seems, though the theory is changed, to have taken its
rise from the arguments brought against Parey, when he first introduced the
practice of tying the arteries, and since to have been copied from one to
another by succeeding writers.

But is it not probable that in this instance, as well as many others in
surgery, by quite altering the meaning of the word NERVUS we have made those
symptoms follow the tying of a nerve, which should have been considered only as
the consequence of pricking a tendon? for long after Parey's time NERVUS was
used to signify TENDON, and by "nervosam aliquam partem, vel nervum Nam si acu
nervosam aliquam partem, vel nervum ipsum pupugerit, dum ita novo and inusitato
modo venam absurd conatur constringere, nova inflammatio necessario
consequetur, a quo convulsio, and a convulsione cita mors. See Parey's Surgery,
p. 1133.
," etc. there is great reason to think Parey's adversary meant a tendon or any
tendinous part; especially as he supports his opinion by showing, that for fear
of the accidents described, Galen durst not stitch transverse wounds till he
had first discovered the aponeurosis of the muscles.

However, we will consider this matter in the light it now stands; and for this
purpose we may observe, that the ligature seems only capable of irritating and
of totally obstructing the nerves.

Now as the nerves upon the muscular fibers are very easily irritated, a theory
plausible enough may be invented to show, that in certain habits convulsions
will come on upon their being tied; but then this would most probably happen at
the very time they were irritated See Sharp's Crit. Inq. p. 292.
: so far from this, no one that I know of has even pretended to say, that he
has seen any patient fall into convulsions at the time the stricture was made.
It is true there are instances where convulsions have instantly been brought on
by irritation See Van Swieten's Comm. vol. ii. p. 47.
; but they seem not to have any analogy with the case in hand: for the parts
were diseased, and in all probability had a more acute feeling than ever
happens to the nerves in their natural state, and consequently different
effects would arise. -- May not the pain in this case, as it is smart and of
short duration only, somewhat in the manner of volatiles applied to the nose,
rather enliven the spirits than bring on convulsions?

On the other hand, if convulsions arose in consequence of the nerve being
obstructed, instead of being a symptom that but very rarely happens, they would
either in a greater or less degree appear almost every time a large one was
tied; for if these are, as is generally believed, distinct cords from their
origin, the obstruction and its effects would be always nearly the same. But so
far from this, convulsions of any kind are not more frequent where the large
nerves are enclosed in the ligature, than in slight injuries where it is not
used.

Lately Le Dran Op. Surgery, p. 428.
seems to have biassed the minds of people Mr. Warner's Cases, p. 146.
in favor of this doctrine; but unfortunately his practice immediately
contradicts his theory: for speaking of those who, in performing the operation
for the aneurism, enclose the adjacent flesh within the ligature, he says Loc.
cit. p. 409.
, "though by this method they tie the nerve together with the artery, yet it is
very seldom any ill consequences ensue from thence, as the quantity of flesh
included by the ligature prevents the nerve from being much compressed." And
does not the same reasoning hold good, as is already shown in amputations,
where as great a quantity of the neighboring parts is commonly enclosed?
Besides, when he tells us, "that tying the nerve along with the vessel,
sometimes brings on convulsions some days after the ligature is made." He also
informs us, "that there will not be any danger of this happening, if we apply a
button of vitriol when the dressings are first removed;" which, he says,
"gradually forms an eschar that includes the ligature, and renders it useless."

Now in a few days the ligature becomes loose spontaneously, and is no longer
capable of doing injury. The parts being now inflamed and more sensible,
vitriol will act with great violence upon the nerves; so that if no ill effects
arose from this complicated treatment, much less could they arise from the
ligature alone.

If the convulsions then were not the consequence of the dying state of the
patient Sharp's Crit. Inq. p. 292.
, is it not probable they were owing to the nerves being irritated, either with
acrid matter or some other cause? for it is well known after the inflammation
comes on the nerves become tense, and acquire a more acute feeling, and
sometimes, where the fluids are very acrid, in few days are rendered so
extremely sensible, as to bring on convulsions upon the slightest touch: and
this seems to hold equally good in regard to the locked jaw, which within these
few years has been said, "sometimes to come on in consequence of the stricture
made upon the arteries and their neighboring parts by ligatures;" for in all
the cases of this kind which have come to my knowledge, it appears not to have
happened till the injured part has been inflamed and painful. In wounds it has
often come on, when there has been the greatest reason to believe that the
habit was become bad Dr. Clephane says, "In all the cases of the locked jaw I
ever saw, the blood appeared of a loose texture, never sizey." Med. Ob. and
Inq. vol. i. p. 59.
, and the parts extremely sensible from a long continued flux of acrid matter
falling upon them. But it seems most frequently to have occurred in wounds of
the joints and other membranes See Hippoc. de Morb. Popular. lib. v. p. 334.
ver. 9. and p. 339. ver. 405 and 412. Cornarii Versione. Parey, lib. xii. p.
464. Baron Van Swieten's Comm. Boerha. vol. iv. p. 182. Ranby on Gunshot
Wounds, p. 70 and seq. Warner's Cases, case 13. Neal on Agaric, p. 32. Med.
Inq. vol. i. case 1 and 7. and vol. 2. case 24.
, where the nerves being put more upon the stretch are more liable to produce
this terrible symptom, which seems only to differ from other convulsions in its
degree of violence, and affects those, probably, where the whole nervous system
is in a most extreme degree of irritability, as appears by the large and
repeated doses of opium necessary to quiet the spasms.

From the whole then of what has been said, there is reason to acquit the
ligature of being productive of those convulsions which sometimes have happened
to attend a wound wherein it has been used.

Another kind of spasms, that are partial and attended with pain, are said
constantly to attend the use of the needle and ligature; and it must be
confessed, that while the needle is piercing a muscle a spasm is often
produced: but it may with equal truth be observed, that it immediately ceases
when the parts enclosed are numbed with the ligature. And it seems more likely
that those spasms, which continue more or less for some time after the
operation, arise from the nerves being irritated by the knife, by the air, and
by the dressings; for whoever attends to this circumstance will find, that the
spasms which follow, for instance, an amputation of the leg, immediately seize
the muscles upon their being divided before any needle can be used. And we know
by experience they will continue some time after the irritating cause is
removed, in proportion as the nerves were more or less affected See Whytt on
vital and invol. Mot. p. 20 and 242.
. That a similar effect will be produced by the other causes assigned, there is
reason to conclude from observing, that even the muscles of animals,
immediately after death, are thrown into spasms by being exposed to the cold
air; and spasms are also often brought on by touching naked wounds with dry
lint.

Besides, spasms follow those amputations just in the same manner, where the
vessels are not tied Phil. Trans. vol. xlviii. part 2. p. 591.
; nor can the absence of this symptom with justice be ascribed to the omission
of the ligature in amputations of the breasts Ibid. p. 596.
, because in this case the muscles, which are the seat of spasms, are seldom
touched with the needle; the cellular and adipose membrane only being taken in
with the vessel, and which, from their small degree of sensibility, give but
little uneasiness: and out of many instances I do not remember any patient
attended with troublesome spasms after this operation, though the needle and
ligature were always used.

Another objection to the ligature is, "that it increases the symptomatic
fever, because its application gives violent pain:" but though it often gives
smart pain for an instant, it does not follow that it aggravates the
symptomatic fever, for the pain is only momentary, and whatever is included in
the ligature immediately becomes so insensible, as to give no future
disturbance. It is true, an inflammation will take place above the stricture;
but as an inflammation of equal degree would probably have occurred, though the
ligature was not used, very little difference of pain can arise from this
cause, as is evinced by the symptoms following an operation being much the
same, whether we use many ligatures or few.

But the symptomatic fever seems not to arise from the pain which accompanies
or immediately follows any part of the operation, but to the distension which
is caused by the obstruction and inflammation that comes on some time after in
consequence of the division of the parts; for that pain which arises from the
nerves being irritated and disordered in the operation, presently goes off, the
irritating cause being instantly removed. And does not the symptomatic fever
gradually come on, a few hours after the operation, as the parts about the
wound begin to swell, and again decline as the distension abates, from the
lymphatic vessels freely transmitting their contents?

Besides, from the account given us of the symptomatic fever following an
amputation of the leg, where the ligature was omitted, we see Phil. Trans. vol.
xlviii. part 2. p. 591. or Mr. Warner's Cases, case 29.
it came on about the usual time, and seems to have been nearly the same as
when it is used. And though the symptomatic fever has been slight in
amputations of the breasts Ibid.
, where the vessels were not tied, yet it does not appear to be a proof that it
is increased by the use of the ligature, because in this operation the
symptomatic fever is for the most part, if not always, slight; for the fat in
the cellular membrane easily melts down, and the reticular or membranous part
sends out new flesh without giving much disturbance, and in this case these,
with the skin, are the only parts wounded; for even when a schirrus adheres, it
is separated from the pectoral muscle without doing much injury, as this
operation, I imagine, is never practiced when the adhesion is otherwise than
slight.

With this we should remember, that the symptomatic fever is always slight
where the solids are relaxed and weak, in consequence of the small degree of
force with which the blood is carried against the obstructed vessels. And is it
not therefore more likely owing to this cause than to the omission of the
ligature, that a slight fever only followed in those whose legs were amputated
by Mr. Warner Loc. cit.
, as all these patients were much reduced previous to the operation? And is
not, in such habits, the symptomatic fever constantly slight, though the
ligature is used.

It is also said that abscesses are the consequence of using the ligature, and
that it sometimes remains fixed to the last, so as to retard the healing of the
wound; but these inconveniences only happen when the needle is passed very
deep, and may therefore be avoided by a contrary practice: nor is passing the
needle deep at all necessary (if the parts are sound) as a small quantity of
flesh or cellular membrane below the stricture will sufficiently prevent the
ligature being pushed off by the impulse of the blood. However I would caution
against extremes; for with passing the needle but a very little way the vessel
sometimes may not be tied, and cause unnecessary trouble; if we therefore pass
the needle only a moderate depth, the ligature will always come away in due
time without inconvenience, or at least it may be taken away long before the
wound is healed, without any danger of bringing on a fresh haemorrhage: for as
soon as digestion is complete, and the new flesh begins to rise, the ligature
makes not any pressure upon the vessel; and though new flesh may have covered
the noose, yet if we take the advice long since given by Monro Ed. Med. Ess.
vol. iv. p. 275.
, it may be removed without any hazard of cutting the artery.

This is the light in which I have been led to consider the use and abuse of
the needle and ligature in tying the blood vessels, and shall now proceed to
enquire into the method of suppressing the haemorrhage by fungous substances;
which, like the ligature, will appear to have their advantage and inconvenience.

CHAP. III. Of suppressing the haemorrhage by the application of fungous
substances, by coagulated blood, by astringents, and by perpendicular pressure.
THE late success which has attended the application of fungous substances is a
full proof that an haemorrhage from large arteries may often be effectually
suppressed by their use; and it at the same time points out the truth of the
doctrine advanced, and what little assistance in this case is wanting.

But the manner of applying funguses makes a material difference in regard to
success; for if they are pressed close against the end of the vessel, they
intercept the passage of the blood; and the artery closes itself up in the
manner described: whereas, when this circumstance is not observed, and they are
only laid near to the orifice, in the manner Cheselden Phil. Trans. No 478. p.
33.
used sponge, they suppress the haemorrhage by choking up the mouth of the
vessel with coagulated blood, which hinders its being closed; and though it
stops the bleeding at present, yet it may be the source of a future haemorrhage.

This is evident from the experiments made by La Fosse Philos. Trans. vol. xlix.
part. art. 10 and 11.
, where the coagulated blood, which filled the end of the artery, was formed
into a cone with its apex toward the heart; consequently, if the plug happens
to extend to the next collateral branch, a fresh flux of blood must ensue upon
its coming away; for it does not unite with the vessel, as some have imagined.

I know there are instances, where an orifice made in an artery has been
stopped with a clot of solid blood, which adhering firmly to the cicatrix of
the integuments, produced a considerable callosity, and which seems to have
given rise to this opinion. But it must be observed in these cases, the wound
was without coming to suppuration; whereas when the air has free access, we
well know a putrefaction of the coagulated blood, as well as digestion, is
always the consequence; and I make no doubt but the separation of coagulated
blood is one cause why a fresh bleeding has sometimes come on after the
inflammation was abated, and matter began to be freely discharged. In a very
late instance, where the bleeding from a divided artery had been suppressed by
coagulated blood, I saw it renewed again next day by taking this blood away;
the artery bleeding in the same manner as when it was first opened; but upon
pressing it betwixt my fingers it was soon effectually closed. Hence we may
observe, that the practice of laying alum, or any thing else, at the end of
the artery to coagulate the blood, is very improper, as every impediment to the
contraction of the vessel should on the contrary be removed.

This leads me to take notice of Petit's opinion, who imagined that the
haemorrhage from divided arteries was always suppressed by plugs of blood
within the vessel; because he found in some of them, after the death of the
patient, coagulated blood, which extended itself upwards a considerable way.

But notwithstanding this, it is very probable that the haemorrhage was stopped
by the natural contraction of the vessel; for we find in the two waggoners
mentioned by Mons. Faggot Philos. Trans. for 1753; or Mr. Warner's Cases, p. 136.
where, after death, coagulated blood was found in the same manner, "their
extremities were contracted and straitened, as if they had been tied." And in
the many experiments I have made on this occasion, I never found coagulated
blood but once; and then the extremity of the artery was close contracted It
was in the artery of a large dog which was strangled. -- The horses, etc. were
killed by being bled to death in the usual manner, which seems to prove that
the coagula are not formed while the blood circulates regularly, but when the
animal is near dying, or immediately after death.
.

Pouteau Melanges des Chirurg. p. 314.
opened several arteries, and never found any coagulum; nor is there any
coagulum found in the umbilical vessels of children after death: from all which
may we not conclude, that this circumstance is merely accidental, and no step
taken by nature, who is always uniform, if no impediment, is in the way?
Indeed, I think with some other writers, Gouch, Pouteau.
that it is of the same kind, and produced in the same manner as the fibrous
blood we often find in the great arteries near the heart: that which I saw had
exactly the same appearance; nor did it seem sufficient to have blocked up the
vessel. What is already said about coagulated blood preventing the contraction
of the vessel, here also takes place; and was it extended to the extremity of
the artery, putrefaction and its consequences must of course ensue, from its
being in contact with the air.

It follows then, that whatever fungus is used, it should be pressed close to
the end of the vessel; and that kind which adheres closest should be chosen.
Mr. White says Loc. cit.
that sponge is on this account preferable; and if his directions, in regard to
the choice, preparation, and manner of applying it, be observed, I believe he
says true; but even this sticks the fastest when it is least wanted; for though
after a while it adheres so firm, that it is removed with difficulty, yet, till
the parts begin to swell and become moist, the adhesion is very slight.

Bandage therefore must be carefully applied to preserve it in its proper
situation; and if this circumstance had been duly attended to, instead of
relying upon a specific property in agaric, better success would probably have
attended it when in vogue; for where agaric itself proved ineffectual, tight
bandage and common dressings suppressed the haemorrhage. And we might produce
innumerable instances which prove, that whatever is kept firm upon the end of
the vessel is sufficient for the purpose. -- However, if what is said about
tying the great arteries be true, most surgeons, I imagine, will still secure
them with the ligature; for no sort of bandage can with safety in amputations
be so applied, but the fungus may sometimes be displaced by spasms, coughing,
vomiting, or the like: and should an haemorrhage return from these vessels, we
know death may ensue from the loss of no very large quantity of blood. Mr.
Sharp's Phil. Trans. vol. xlviii. part 2. art. 78.
patient, in whom the vessels burst open three hours and half after he had
applied agaric, died in about twenty minutes with the loss of less than thirty
ounces of blood, including what was lost in the operation: nor could assistance
be speedy enough to prevent this catastrophe, though it was upon the spot when
the haemorrhage returned; and how much more likely is this to be the case in
private practice, especially in the country, where the person obliged to be
entrusted with our patient is often an entire stranger to chirurgical
operations?

But suppose our assistant should be so lucky as to compress the tourniquet
time enough to save the patient's life, yet it is probable a quantity of blood
will often be lost, that may be injurious to him; for though the loss of some
blood from this accident may be serviceable, when the patient is not much
reduced by the disease See Mr. Warner's Cases, case 44.
; on the other hand, the loss of a few ounces, when he is become weak, will be
very improper, and very likely retard the recovery of his health: and we may
observe, even in strong habits, that the discharge of blood ought not to be
committed to chance, but entirely directed by the judgment of the surgeon. And
though it should happen that very little blood is lost, the patient may not
only undergo great pain from the compressure, till the surgeon can be called,
perhaps from a considerable distance, but the parts may be much injured by the
fluids being so long in a state of stagnation.

But this inconvenience will for the most part attend the use of this remedy in
amputation of the limbs; for all agree that it is necessary to keep the limb
compressed a considerable time with the tourniquet, and which will also in all
probability overbalance the pain caused in using the needle and ligature. Nor
can we help thinking but some mistake happened in describing those cases, where
we are told, though the tourniquet was kept compressed for half an hour, that
the patient was remarkably easy during that time. Mr. Sharp's Phil. Trans. vol.
xlviii. part 2. art. 78.
patient, when he used agaric, complained grievously of pain arising from the
tourniquet; and my patients tell me, it is the worst part of the operation:
besides, I have observed when a piece of fungus adheres close, it gives very
considerable pain in being removed; so that upon the whole, this method of
securing the great vessels is attended with more pain and less safety, than the
ligature when properly applied.

This reasoning also holds good in regard to the lesser arteries, when they are
surrounded with the cellular or adipose membrane only; though it cannot be
extended to the tying of those which are situated amongst the muscles, because,
as is already observed, the ligature is here attended with considerable pain;
nor is the tourniquet in this case wanted; and I make no doubt, but these
vessels may in general be trusted with sponge, or any thing else that adheres
close to their extremities: but the sponge should be removed the first or
second dressing, otherwise the new flesh growing into its pores will cause an
increase of pain in the removal.

On the other hand, if the bleeding should happen to return, though on account
of the size of the vessels it might not be dangerous, yet even here more blood
might be discharged than it would be prudent to lose; a fresh haemorrhage is
always alarming to the patient; and as momentary pain seems to be the only
inconvenience, perhaps many surgeons will think it best to leave their patients
in perfect security: and we may just observe, that in many operations the
ligature must of course be used upon all the vessels, as it will be necessary
to stop the bleeding as we go on.

Nevertheless, when the flesh is become tender, and gives way to the ligature,
sponge seems to be the best remedy; for though the large vessels might be
pulled out, and tied in the manner Dionis He describes different methods, but
that is here referred to, where the thread is passed through the end of the
vessel to prevent its being pushed off by the impulse of the blood. See chap.
on Amputation.
describes, yet, being undefended, the end would commonly separate; and unless
the ligature was placed near its extremity, sometimes bring on a fresh
haemorrhage in the manner already observed. And this was most probably the
reason why Parey had more certain success, when he took in, along with the
vessel, some of the adjacent parts, than when he enclosed it alone in the
ligature.

Where the vessels are so deeply situated as not to be come at with the needle,
the same kind of application must have preference, if it can be laid close to
the mouth of the artery; and it succeeds better in this case, as the sides of
the wound assist in keeping it in its proper situation: but before it is
applied, it seems necessary to examine whether the artery is wholly divided;
for without this caution we may sometimes be disappointed in our expectation,
and ascribe insufficiency to this method, as was done to the agaric See Neal on
Agaric, p. 35.
, when the want of success was owing to the vessel being in part divided,
whence it was incapable of intercepting the passage of the blood. Nor should we
forget, that in wounds which admit of cure by an immediate union of their
divided parts, fungous substances are unnecessary, as the common method of
dressing effectually suppresses the bleeding, though it is from considerable
arteries.

However, if the artery is large, and any difficulty occurs, if the part will
admit of the practice of dilating the wound, perhaps it may seem more proper by
that means to use the ligature, especially if it adheres to an undivided muscle
or the bone, and bandage cannot be conveniently applied; and where the
principal trunk of a large artery is wounded in a longitudinal direction, Mr.
Lambert's Med. Inq. vol. ii. p. 360.
method of sewing it up should, I think, be tried.

When an haemorrhage arises from a thin state of the blood, and the discharge
is from the whole surface of the wound, puff ball seems preferable to sponge,
or the like, as the blood would probably escape through its pores. In this
case, with tight bandage it has answered my purpose, till internal medicines
had their proper effect: and if upon trial it should prove successful under the
like circumstances, will it not be more proper than styptics or astringents,
etc. as these harden the fibers, and prevent digestion, from which
inconvenience this remedy is free? Nor do I apprehend the bandage will be so
unartfully applied, as to bring on a flux of blood by compressing the veins, as
I imagine in general this obvious cause of an haemorrhage is well understood,
being pointed out by several writers on surgery, and clearly demonstrated by
Monro Ed. Med. Ess. vol. iv. p. 271.
.

Perhaps some will think that styptics and astringents will forward the
contraction of the vessels: but we may learn how little they are wanted, from
the artery in the young fellow's arm, which was evidently relaxed and weak,
closing itself without any assistance; and I am persuaded, from some
experiments I have made, that these applications, instead of assisting, would,
if they were not hindered by mixing with the blood in wounds, rather prevent
the collapsing of the vessel by harding its fibers. And however contrary this
doctrine may be to the generally received opinion, experience is certainly in
its favor; for though by coagulating the blood, they might succeed upon very
small arteries, yet, being applied to those which were large, they were always
found insufficient to suppress the bleeding, unless tight bandage was at the
same time used, and to which I think it is clear the success was owing: for
many of these compositions, which were thought to be astringents, had certainly
no other property as blood-staunchers than that of choking up the mouths of
the vessels See Parey, p. 328. Hildanus, p. 812. Clow's Surgery, p. 27.
.

It is obvious that the fungus, when used, must be kept in its proper situation
by bandage differently applied, according to the part wounded; and in this
matter every surgeon's own judgment will best direct him. However we may just
observe, that in amputations good slicking plaster, as advised by Mr. White
Essay on Sponge.
, and keeping the hand pressed harder against the part for a few hours, may
often be suffcient; though the machine recommended by Mr. Gooch Cases, p. 131
and 141.
will, probably, be more certain; and when this is not at hand, a circular
piece of leather may be made to answer nearly the same purpose.

This piece of leather must be large enough to cover the end of the stump, and
near its edge must be cut four slits in opposite directions, that will admit
each a fillet. -- Supposing a leg taken off below the knee, two fillets being
passed through these slits crossways, and under a roller or a piece of cloth
that goes round the thigh, above the knee, must be brought back again, and tied
upon the end of the stump, by which means the dressings will be fixed, and any
degree of pressure may be made: and this bandage, if it is kept from slipping
down, by being fastened with filleting to a roller round the waist, serves
equally well when we amputate above the knee. Nor do I recommend this method
without experience; for having amputated a leg, where the blood was extremely
poor, and the flesh very tender, the ligatures were forced off the vessels a
few hours after the operation, by a fit of coughing and vomiting; I immediately
applied the bandage abovementioned, with bolsters of dry lint, which
effectually answered the purpose: for, though the patient vomited and coughed
several times afterward, the haemorrhage did not return.

Indeed bandage seems hitherto to have proved less serviceable than it might
have been, merely from imagining it would be useless, unless the sides of the
vessels were brought together in close contact; whereas, had the pressure been
made only upon the end of the vessel, and just sufficient to resist; the
impulse of the blood, it might much oftener have been used without
inconvenience, and with better success, as there is reason to think from many
instances.

We have only further to add on this head, that where the wounded artery cannot
be come at, pressure is still the only remedy; and where things are so
circumstanced that we are obliged to choke up the mouths of the vessels with
coagulated blood, it seems necessary, for reasons already given, to make a
pressure, if it can be done, against the end of the artery, that the
contraction beyond the plug may more certainly take place.

CHAP. IV. Of suppressing haemorrhages by cauteries, caustics etc.
BESIDES the methods abovementioned, Mr. Warner Cases, p. 38.
has shown, that when an artery is opened in the roof of the mouth, the actual
cautery is sometimes necessary to stop the bleeding: and many years ago, after
extirpating a tumor from this part, I was obliged, for the same reasons, to
have recourse to the same remedy; but the iron was no hotter than just
sufficient to form the neighboring parts into an eschar upon the end of the
artery; by which means the course of the blood was intercepted, and the vessel
left at liberty to close itself up; whereas when the cautery is very hot, it
not only burns the end of the artery a considerable way, but hardening its
fibers beyond the eschar, renders it incapable of collapsing; so that it is no
wonder an haemorrhage should so often ensue upon the sepiration of the dead
parts.

However, the cautery is at all times a cruel application, and should be
avoided, if possible: nor do I now call to mind any other part where its use
can be wanted. But if this is cruel, the potential cautery is more so, as it
spreads itself further into the neighboring parts; and yet it is not very
uncommon for surgeons in performing operations to apply lint soaked in scalding
oil of turpentine, where the artery, though not very large, cannot be readily
come at: and this piece of cruelty is still aggravated, when we consider that a
few minutes pressure would, in all probability, have alone ^^en suffcient for
the purpose.

Caustics, etc. are, I believe, in general, laid aside in supperssing
haemorrhages; and therefore we need only observe, that, though they do not, by
hardening the sides of the a^^ery, render it incapable of collapsing above the
part destroyed, yet, by causing its end to (...) their (...) is (...) ^^^^rary
to right (...) advise ill, who give up every advantage gained by the ligature,
in afterward applying a piece of vitriol.

But all these errors in the choice of remedies, or their application, have
arose from the true principles of supperssing haemorrhages not being previously
investigated; it will therefore give great pleasure to the author of this
little essay, if it appears that he has set in its proper light this important,
though common operation.

THE END.

