WILD OATS; OR, THE STROLLING GENTLEMEN.

A COMEDY, IN FIVE ACTS, AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

By JOHN O'KEEFE, ESQUIRE.

DUBLIN: PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS.

1791

DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Sir George Thunder, Mr. Quick. Rover, Mr. lewis. Harry, Mr. Holman. John Dory,
Mr. Wilson. Banks, Mr. Hill. Gammon, Mr. Cubit. Ephraim Smooth, Mr. Munden.
Sim, Mr. Blanchard. Twitch, Mr. Roch. Lamp, Mr. C. Powell. Trap, Mr. Evait.
Zachariah, Mr. Rees. Three Sailors, Messrs. Farley, Thompson and Milbourne.
Landlord, Mr. Powel. Waiter, Master Simmons. Midg, Mr. Macready. Sheriff's
Officer, Mr. Cross.
Lady Amaranth, Mrs. Pope. Jane, Mrs. Wells. Amelia, Miss Chapman.
WILD OATS: OR THE STROLLING GENTLEMEN
ACT I.
Scene a Parlour in LADY ARAMANTH'S.
Enter SIR GEORGE THUNDER and JOHN DORY. SIR GEORGE. I Don't know whose house
we have got into here, John, but I think when he knows me, we may hope for some
refreshment. Zounds, I Am as dry as touchwood, and to sail at the rate of ten
knots an hour, ever stubble and farrow, from my own house, but half a league on
this side of Gosport, and not to catch these deserters that received the King's
bounty and run from their ships.


JOHN. You Have ill luck.


SIR GEO. Mine, you swab.


JOHN. Ah, you have money and gold, but grace and good fortune have shook hands
with you these nineteen years, for that rogue's trick you played Miss Amelia,
by deceiving her with a sham marriage, when you passd yourself for Capt.
Sevmor, then putting to sea, leaving her to break her heart, then marrying
another lady.


SIR GEO. But was I not forced to that by my father?


JOHN. Ay, because she had a great fortune -- her death was a judgment upon you.


SIR GEO. Why, you impudent dog-fish -- upbraid me for running into false bay,
when you was my pilot, was'n't you -- even got me the mock clergyman that
performed the sham marriage with Amelia?


JOHN. (Aside.) You think so* but I took care to bring a real clergyman.


SIR GEO. But is this a time or place for your lectures? -- at home, abroad, at
sea and land, will you still badger me? Mention my Wild Oats again, and -- you
scoundrel, since the night my bed-curtains took fire when you were my boatswain
aboard the Eagle, you have got me quite into leading-strings -- you snatched me
up on deck, tossed me into the sea to save me from being burnt, and I was
almost drowned.


JOHN. You would, but for me.


SIR GEO. Yes. you dragged me out by the ear, like a water dog. Last week,
because you saw the tenth bottle uncork'd, you rushed in among my friends, and
ran away with me. and the next morning Capt. O'Shanaghan sends me a challenge,
for quitting my chair when he was toast-master -- so to save me from the
headache, you would like to have got my brains blown out.


JOHN. Oh. very well -- be burnt in your bed, and tumble into the water, like a
tight fellow as you are, and promise yourself with sloe juice, see if John
cares a piece of moldy biscuit about it. But I thought you had laid yourself
up in ordinary, retired to live quiet upon your estate, and had done with sea
affairs.


SIR GEO. John, a man should forget his own convenience For his country's good,


JOHN. But I wish you had'n't made me your valet de chamber -- no sooner was I
got on shore, after five years dashing upon rocks, showls, and breakers, then
you set me upon a hard trotting cart-horse, that tossed me up and down like an
old bum-boat in the Bay of Biscay -- and here is nothing to drink after all.
Because at home you keep open house, you think every body else does the same.
-- Holloa, holloa -- I Will never cease piping till it calls a drop to wet my
whissle.


Exit. SIR GEO. Yes, as John Dory remarks, I fear my trip through life will be
attended with heavy squalls and foul weathers -- When my conduct to poor Amelia
comes athwart my mind, it is a hurricane for all that day, and when I turn in at
night the ballad of William and Margaret's Ghost sings! -- Oh, zounds, the
dismals are coming upon me, and I cannot get a cheering glass to -- Holloa!


Enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. Friend, what would thou have?


SIR GEO. Have -- why, I would have grog.


EPHESIANS. Neither man nor woman of that name abides here.


SIR GEO. Ha, ha, ha! Man nor woman -- then if you will bring me Mr. Brandy and
Mrs. Water, we'll couple them, and the first child probably will be Master Grog.


EPHESIANS. Thou do speak in parables, which I understand not.


SIR GEO. Sheer off with your sanctified poop, and send the gentleman of the
house.


EPHESIANS. The owner of this mansion is a maiden, and she approaches.


Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. Do I behold -- it is -- how do thou do, uncle?


SIR. GEO. Is it possible you can be my neice, Lady Amaranth Thunder?


LADY A. I Am the daughter of thy deceased brother, Loftus, called Earl Thunder,
but no Lady -- my name is Mary.


SIR GEO. But, zounds how is all this -- unexpectedly find you in a strange
house, of which old Sly tells me you're mistress, turned quaker, and disown
your title.


LADY A. Thou know the relation to whose care my father left me.


SIR GEO. Well, I know our cousin, old Dovehouse, was, a quaker, but did'n't
suspect he would have made you one.


LADY A. Being now gathered to his fathers, he did bequeath unto me his worldly
goods, amongst them this mansion, and the lands around it.


EPHESIANS. So thou becomest and continue one of the faithful. I Am executor of his
will, and by it cannot give thee possession of these goods but upon these
conditions.


SIR GEO. Tell me of your thee's and thou's, quaker's wills, and mansion, -- I
say, girl, though on the death on your father, my eldest brother, Loftus
Earl-Thunder, from your being a female, his title devolves to his next brother,
Robert; though as a woman you cannot be an Earl, nor as a woman you cannot make
laws for your sex nor for our sex, yet, as the Daughter of a peer, you are, and
by heavens shall be, called Lady Amaranth Thunder.


EPHESIANS. Thou make too much noise, friend.


SIR GEO. Dam'me, call me friend, and I Will bump your blockhead against the
capsturn.


EPHESIANS. Yea, this is a man of danger -- I will leave Mary to abide it.


SIR GEO. S'fire, my Lady.


LADY A. Title is vanity.


Enter ZACHARIAH. ZACH. Shall thy cook this day dress certain birds of the air
called woodcocks, and ribs of the oxen likewise?


LADY A. All -- my uncle sojourneth with me peradventure, and my meal shall be
a fealt, friend Zachariah.


ZACH. My tongue shall say so, friend Mary.


SIR GEO. Sir George Thunder bids thee remember to call thy mistress Lady
Amaranth.


( strikes him.) Zach. Verily, George.


SIR GEO. George, sirrah. -- Though a younger brother, the honor of Knighthood
was my reward for placing the glorious British flag over that of a daring enemy
-- therefore address me --


ZACH. Yea, good George.


SIR GEO. George and 'Mary -- here is levelling! -- here is abolition of title
with a vengeance! S'blood, in this house they think no more of an English
Knight, than if he was a French Duke.


LADY A. Kinsman, be patient; thou and thy son Henry, whom I have not beheld
these twelve years, shall be welcome to my dwelling. Where now abides you?


SIR GEO. At the Naval Academy, at Portsmouth.


LADY A. May I see the young man?


SIR GEO. What, to make a quaker of him? No, no -- but hold -- as she is a
wealthy heiress, her marrying my son Harry will keep up and preserve the title
in our family (aside). Would thou be really glad to see him. Thou shall Mary --
John Dory -- Ah, here is my valet de chamber.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. Sir.


SIR GEO. Avast, old man of war; you must instantly convoy my son from
Portsmouth.


JOHN. Then I must first convoy him to Portsmouth, for he happens to bo out of
dock already.


SIR GEO. What wind now?


JOHN. You must know, on our quitting harbor --


SIR GEO. Damn your sea jaw, you mavelous dolphin, give me the contents of
your log-book in plain English.


JOHN. Why then, the young 'Squire has cut and run.


SIR GEO. What?


JOHN. Got leave to come to you, and the master did not find out before
yesterday, that Instead of making for home he had sheer'd off toward London,
directly sent notice to you, and Sam has traced us all the way here to bring
you the news.


SIR GEO. What, a boy of mine quit his guns -- I Will grapple him -- come John.


LADY A. Order the carriage for mine uncle.


SIR GEO. No, thank'ye, my Lady, let your equipage keep up your own dignity --
I Have horses here, but will not knock them up -- next village is the channel for
the stage. My Lady, I Will bring the dog to you by the bowsprit, weigh anchor,
crowd fail, and after him.


Exit Sir Geo. and John. Re-enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. The man of noise does
not tarry -- then my spirit is glad.


LADY A. Let Sarah prepare chambers for my kinsman; and hire the maiden for me
that thou did mention.


EPHESIANS. I will, for this damsel is passing fair, and has found grace in mine
eyes, Mary, as thou art yet a stranger in this land, and just taken poffession
of this estate, the law of society does command thee to be on terms of amity
with thy wealthy neighbors.


LADY A. Yea; but while I entertain the rich, the hearts of the poor shall also
rejoice. I myself will now go forth into the adjacent hamlet, and invite all
that comes to good cheer.


EPHESIANS. Yea; and I will distribute among the poor good books.


LADY A. And meat and drink too, friend Ephraim, in the fullness of plenty --
they shall join in thanksgiving for those gifts of which I Am unworthy.


Exit. SCENE A ROAD. Enter HARRY and MIDG. MIDG. I say, Dick Buskin, harkee, my
lad,


HARRY. What keeps Rover?


MIDG. I Am sure I don't know: as you desired, I paid for our breakfast -- but
the devil's in that fellow, every inn we stop at he will always hang behind
chattering with the bar-maid or the chambermaid.


HARRY. Or any, or no maid -- but he is a worthy lad, and I love him better, I
think, than my own brother, had I one.


MIDG. Oh, but Dick, mind my boy.


HARRY. Stop, Midg. though 'twas my orders, when I set out on this scamp with the
players, the better to conceal my quality, for you before people to treat me as
your companion, yet for you at the same time should have had discretion enough
to remember when we are alone that I am your master, and son to Sir George
Thunder.


MIDG. Sir, I ask your pardon; but by making yourself my equal, I Have got so
used to familiarity, that I find it cursed hard to shake it off.


HARRY. Well, Sir. pray mind that familiarity is all over, my frolic is out, I
now throw off the player, and shall return directly. My father must by this
time have heard of my departure from the academy at Portsmouth, and though I was
deluded away by my rage for acting, 'twas bad of me to give the gay old fellow
any cause of uneasiness.


MIDG. And, Sir, shall I and you never act another scene together -- shall I
never again play Sir Harry Wildair for my own benefit, nor ever again have the
pleasure of caneing your honor in the character of Alderman Smuggler?


HARRY. In future, act the part of a smart coat and hat-brusher, or I shall
have the pleasure of caneing you in the character of one that gives mighty
blows. You were a good servant, but sirrah, I find by letting you crack your
jokes and sit in my company, you're grown quite a rascal.


MIDG. Yes, Sir, I was a modest well behaved lad, but evil communications
corrupt good manners.


HARRY. Run back and tell Rover to make haste. To bring you down, I Will clap a
livery on you -- wear that, or find another master.


MIDG. Well, Sir, I don't mind wearing a livery; but when one has so long had a
halbert, it is damned hard to be again put into the rank.


HARRY. Well, if my father but forgives me, this three months excursion with
the players has showed me some life, and a devilish deal of fun -- for one
circumstance, I shall ever remember it with pleasure -- it is bringing me
acquainted with Jack Rover -- how long he stays -- Jack (calls). In this
forlorn stroller I have discovered qualities that honor human nature, and
accomplishments that might grace a prince. My poor friend has often lent me his
money; though he supposed me a poor needy devil, that could never be able to
pay him. He shall not know who I am till it is in my power to serve him; only the
rogue always marred the grand design of my frolic -- I had no chance among the
pretty women where he was; he had the knack of winning their hearts by his
gaiety. Though so devilish pleasant in his quotations, which on the moment he
dashes in a parody whimsically opposite to every occasion as it happens, I hope
he will not find the purse I Have hid in his pocket before we part. I dread the
moment -- but it is come.


ROVER. (without) The brisk lightning I.


HARRY. Aye, there is the rattle -- hurried on by the impetuous flow of his own
volatile spirits, his life is a rapid stream of extravagant whim, and while the
serious voice of humanity prompts his heart to the best actions, his features
shine in laugh and levity. --


Enter ROVER. Studying Bays Jack.

ROVER. I Am the bold Thunder.


HARRY. I Am -- if he knew but all -- (Aside.) Keep one standing in the road.


ROVER. Beg your pardon, my dear Dick, all the fault of -- plague on on it, that
a man cannot sleep and breakfast at an inn, then return to his bedchamber for
his gloves, but there he must find chamber-maids thumping feathers and knocking
pillows about, and keep one, when one has affairs and business -- upon my soul
these girls' conduct to us is intolerable, the very thought brings blood into
my face, and when ever they attempt to serve and provoke me so -- Dam'me but I
will -- An't I right Dick?


HARRY. All in the wrong.


ROVER. No matter, that is the universal play all round the wreken. But you're
so conceited because, by this company we are going to join at Winchester, you're
engaged for high tragedy.


HARRY. And you for Ranger's plumes, and Poppington.


ROVER. Our first play is Lear -- I was devilish imperfect in Edgar to'ther
night at Lymington; I must look it over (takes out a book) "Away! the foul
friend follows me" -- Holloa! stop a moment, we shall have the whole country
after us.


HARRY. What now?


ROVER. That rosy-fac'd chambermaid put me in such a passion, that by heaven's
I walked out of the house and forgot to pay the bill.


HARRY. Never mind, Rover, it is paid.


ROVER. Paid! why neither you nor Midg had money enough.


HARRY. I tell you it is paid.


ROVER. You paid -- oh! very well, every honest fellow should be a flock purse.
Lets push on -- ten miles to Winchester -- we shall be there by eleven.


HARRY. Our trunks at the inn are book'd for the Winchester coach.


ROVER. Our hero, Tom Stately, slept into the chaise with his tragedy-phiz-ha,
ha, ha, -- rides Bottikin between our Thalia and Melpomene -- but I prefer
walking to the car of Thespis. What do you wait for now?


HARRY. Which is the way?


ROVER. Here.


HARRY. Then I go there. (point's opposite)


ROVER. Eh.


HARRY. My dear boy, on this spot, and at this moment, we must part.


ROVER. Part!


HARRY. Rover, you wish me well.


ROVER. Well, and suppose so -- part.


HARRY. Yes, part.


ROVER. What mystery and grand -- what are you at; do you forget, you, Midg,
and I are engaged to Truncheon the manager, and that the bills are already up
with our names to play to night at Winchester.


HARRY. Jack, you and I hope often to meet on the stage, in assumed characters,
if it is your wish we should ever meet again in our real ones of sincere
friends, without asking whither I go, or my motives for leaving you, when I
walk up this road, do you turn down that.


ROVER. Joke.


HARRY. I Am serious -- good bye,


ROVER. If you repent your engagement with Truncheon, I Will break off too, and
go with you wherever --


HARRY. Attempt to follow me, and even our acquaintance ends.


ROVER. Eh.


HARRY. Don't think of my reasons, only that it must be,


ROVER. Have I done any thing to Dick Buskin? leave me.


HARRY. I Am as much concerned as you. -- Good bye.


ROVER. I cannot even bid adieu, I wont either, if any cause could have been
given -- farewell.


HARRY. Bless my poor fellow -- adieu.


ROVER. Well-good -- oh damnation.


Exit Rover and Harry. END OF ACT THE FIRST. ACT II.
SCENE, a VILLAGE, with a COTTAGE and GARDEN. Enter GAMMON and EPHRAIM. GAM.
WELL, Master Ephraim, I may depend on thee, as you quakers never break your
word.


EPHESIANS. I have spoken to Mary, and she, at my request, consents to take thy
daughter Jane for her handmaid.


GAM. That Is hearty -- I intended to make a present to the person that does me
such a piece of service, but I shant afront you with it.


EPHESIANS. I am meek and humble, and must take affronts.


GAM. Then, here is a guinea, Master Ephraim.


EPHESIANS. I expected not this; but there is no harm in a guinea.


GAM. So, I shall get my children off my hands. My son Sim is robbing me day
and night, giving away my corn and what not among the poor; my daughter Jane --
when girls have naught to do, this mischief love creeps into their minds, and
then, hey, they are for kicking up their heels. -- Sim, son Sim.


Enter SIM. SIM. Yes, feyther.


GAM. Call your sister.


SIM. Jane, feyther wants you.


Enter JANE. JANE. Did you call me?


GAM. I often told you both, but its now settled -- you must go into the world
and work for your bread.


SIM. Feyther, whatever you think right must be so; and I am content.


JANE. And I Am sure, feyther, I Am willing to do any thing you would have me.


GAM. There Is ingratitude for you! -- when my wife, your mother, died, I
brought you up from the shell, and now that you're fledged, you want to fly off
and forsake me.


SIM. Why, no, I Am willing to live with you all my days.


JANE. And I Am sure, feyther, if its your desire. I Will never part from you.


GAM. Here Is an unnatural pair -- what, you want to hang upon me like a couple
of leeches, aye, to strip my branches, and leave me a withered hawthorn. See
who is yonder (Exit Sim.) Jane, Ephraim Smooth has hired you for Lady Amaranth.


JANE. La, then I shall live in the great house.


GAM. Her Ladyship has sent us all presents of good books, here, to read a
chapter in; it gives a man patience when he is in a passion. (gives her a book.)


JANE. Thank her good Ladyship.


GAM. My being incumbered with you both is the cause why old Banks here will not
give me his sister.


JANE. That Is a pity; if we must have a stepmother, madam Amelia would make us
a very good one -- but I wonder how she should refuse you, feyther, for I Am
sure she thinks you a very portly man, in your scarlet coat and new scratch.


Retires into the house. GAM. However, if Banks still refuses, I have him in my
power, I Will turn them out of their cottage yonder, and the bailiff shall
procure them a lodging. Here he comes. --


Enter BANKS from the Cottage. Well, neighbor Banks, once for all, am I to
marry your sister?

BANKS. That she best knows.


GAM. She says she will not.


BANKS. Then I dare say she will not; for though a woman, I never knew her to
prevaricate.


GAM. Then she will not have me. Fine thing that you and she, who is little better
than paupers, dare to be so damned saucy.


BANKS. Why, I confess we are poor, but while that is the worst our enemies can
say of us, we are content. Exit into garden.


GAM. Damn it, I wish I had a fair occasion to quarrel with him, I Would make him
content with a devil to him -- I Would knock him down, send him to goal, and -- but
-- I Will be up with him.


Enter SIM. SIM. Oh, feyther, here is one Mr. Lamp, a ringleader of the
shew-folks, come from Andover, to act in our villages -- he wants a barn to
play in, if you will hire him yours.


GAM. Surely, boy, I Will never refuse money; but least he should engage the
great room at the inn, run and tell him -- stop, I Will go myself, a short cut
through the garden --


BANKS. Why, you, or any neighbor is welcome to walk in it, or partake of any
thing it produces, but making it a common thoroughfare is --


GAM. Here, son, kick down that gate.


BANKS. What!


GAM. Does the lad hear?


SIM. Why, yes, yes.


GAM. Does the fool understand?


SIM. Dang't I Am but yet young, but if understanding teaches me how to wrong my
neighbors. I hope I may never live to years of discretion.


GAM. What, you cur, do you disobey your feyther -- burst open the garden gate,
as I command you.


SIM. Feyther, he that made both you and the garden gate, commands me not to
injure the unfortunate.


GAM. Here Is an ungracious rogue -- then I must do it myself.


BANKS. Hold, neighbor -- small as the spot is, its now my only posession, and
the man shall first take my life, who sets his foot in it against my will.


GAM. I Am in such a passion.


Enter JANE from the House. JANE. Feyther, if you're in a passion, read the
book you gave me.


GAM, Plague, O the wench, but you hussy I Will, -- and you unlucky bud.


Exeunt Sim and Jane. Gammon goes and stands at the door of the house. A STORM
OF RAIN. Enter ROVER. ROVER. Zounds, here is a pelting shower, and no shelter --
poor Tom's a-cold. I Am wet through; here is a good promising house. Going to
Gammon's house, Gammon prevents his entrance.


GAMMON. Hold, my lad, cannot let folks in till I know who they are; there is a
publick-house not above half a mile on.


BANKS. Step in here, young man, my fire is small, but it shall cheer you with
a hearty welcome.


ROVER. The poor cottager and the substantial farmer. (Kneels) Hear nature,
dear goddess, hear, if ever you design to make his corn-field fertile, change
your purpose; that from the blighted ears no grains may fall, to fat his
stubble goose. And when to town he drives his hogs (so like himself) oh let him
feel the soaking rain; then he may curse his crimes, to taste and know how
sharper than the serpent's tooth is his. -- Dam'me, but I Am spouting in the
rain all this time. Rises and enters into Banks's cottage.


GAMMON. Ah, neighbor, you will soon scracth a beggar's head, if you harbor
every mad vagrant, this may be one of the footpads that it seems have got about
the country, but I Will have an execution and seize on thy goods this day, my
honest neighbor. -- Eh -- the sun strikes out -- quite cleared up.


Enter JANE. JANE. La! Feyther if there is'nt coming down the village.


GAMMON. Oh! thou hussy.


JANE. Bless me, Feyther, no time for anger now, here is Lady Amaranth's
chariot, -- la it stops.


GAMMON. Her Ladyship is coming out and walks this way, she may wish to rest
herself in my house -- Jane we must always make rich folks welcome.


JANE. I Will run in and get all the things to rights, but Feyther your cravat
and wig is all --


Adjusts Gammon and then exit into the house. Enter TWICH. TWICH. Well, master
Gammon, as you desired me, I am come to serve this copy of a writ, and arrest
master Banks, where is he?


GAMMON. Yes! now I Am determined on it -- waunts, stand aside, I Will speak to you
a-non.


Enter LADY AMARANTH and ZACHARIAH. LADY A. Friend Jane, whom I have taken to
be my handmaid, is thy Daughter,


GAM. So her mother said, arn't please your Ladyship.


LADY A. Ephraim Smooth acquainted me, you are a wealthy yeoman, thy hamlet
to-behold with mine eyes, the distresses of my poor tenants, I wish to relieve
their wants.


GAM. Right, your Ladyship, for charity hides a deal of sin, how good of you to
think of the poor, that is so like me, I Am always contriving

how to relieve my neighbors -- you must lay Banks in prison to night.

Aside to Twich.
Enter JANE. JANE. And if it please you, will your Ladyship enter our humble
dwelling and rest your Ladyship.


GAM. Do my Lady, to receive so great a Lady from her chariot is an honor, I
dreamt not of, though -- for the hungry and weary-foot travelers my doors are
always open, and my morsel ready. Knock, and when he comes out touch him. aside
to Twich.


LADY A. Thou art benevolent, and I will enter thy doors with satisfaction.


Exeunt all but Twich into Gammon's house. TWICH. Eh, where is the writ (Knock's
at Banks's Door)


BANKS. Master Twich, what is your business with me?


TWICH. Only a little busness here against you.


BANKS. Me!


TWICH. Farmer Gammon has brought a thirty pound bank note of hand of yours


BANKS. I did not think his malice could have stretched so far; I thought the
love he possessed for my Sister might. Why it is true, master Twich -- to lend
our indigent cottagers small sums, when they where unable to pay their rent, I
got a lawyer Quick to procure me the money, and hoped their industry would have
put it in my power to take up the note before now; however I Will go round and
try what they can do, and call on you and settle it.

Rov. No, no, that will not do; you must go with me.


ROVER. [From the cottage.] Old gentleman come quick, or I Will draw another
bottle of your current wine.


TWICH. You Would better not make no noise, and go with me.


Enter ROVER. ROVER. Oh, you're here -- rain over -- quite fair, -- I Will take a
sniff of the open air too -- Eh! what is the matter?


TWICH. What Is that to you?


ROVER. What Is that to me? -- why you're very unmannerly.


TWICH. Here Is a rescue.


BANK. Nay, my dear Sir, I Would wish you not to bring yourself into trouble about
me.


TWICH, Now, since you don't know what is civil -- if the debt an't paid, to
jail you go.


ROVER. My kind hospitable, good old woman, to jail -- what is the sum you
scoundrel?


TWICH. Better words, or I Will --


ROVER. Stop -- after me, good or bad, except to tell me what is your demand
upon this Gentleman, and I Will give you the greatest beating, you ever had since
you commenced rascal.


TWICH. Why, master, I don't want to quarrel with you because --


ROVER. You Will get nothing by it, do you know, you villian, that I am this
moment the greatest man living.


TWICH. Who, pray?


ROVER. I am the bold Thunder, Sirrah -- know that I carry my prize of gold in
my coat pocket, though Dam'me if I know how it came there (aside, takes the purse
out.) There Is twenty pictures of his Majesty; therefore, in the Kings Name, I
free his legal subject, and now who am I?


TWICH. Ten pieces short, my master; but if you're a housekeeper, I Will take
this and your bail.


ROV. Then for bail you must have a housekeeper -- what is to be done? --


Enter GAMMON. Oh, here is old hospitality -- I know you're a housekeeper,
though your fireside was too warm for me. Look here, some rapacious griping
rascal has had this worthy gentleman arrested -- now, a certain
good-for-nothing rattling fellow has paid twenty guineas of the sum, you pass
your word for the other nine, we'll run back into the old gentleman's house,
and over his current wine, our first toast shall be, liberty to the honest
debtor, and confusion to the hard-hearted creditor.

GAM. I shant.


ROV. No -- what is your name?


GAM. Gammon. Exit.


ROV. Then, dam'me, you're the Hampshire hog. 'S^eath, what shall we do to
extricate? -- Damn the money.


Enter LADY AMARANTH from the House. LADY A. What tumult's this?


ROV. A lady -- Ma'am, your most obedient humble servant -- a quaker too --
they are generally kind and humane, and that face is a prologue to a play of a
thousand good acts -- may-be, she would help us here (aside). Ma'am, you must know
that I know this gentleman -- I mean, he got a little behind hand, from bad
crops, as every honest well-principled man may, and from rain lodging in his
corn, and his cattle from murrain and rot -- rot the murrain, you understand --
and then in steps I with my -- in short, Madam, I Am the most out of the way
story-teller in the world, when myself is the hero of the tale.


TWICH. Mr. Banks has been arrested for thirty pounds, and this gentleman has
paid twenty guineas of the sum.


BANKS. My litigious neighbor to expose me thus!


LADY A. The young man and maiden within have pictured thee as a man of
irreproachable morals, though unfortunate.


ROV. Madam, he is an honest fellow, I Have known him above forty years -- he is
the best hand at stirring a fire -- if you was to taste his current wine.


BANKS. Madam, I never aspired to an invincible rank in life, yet hirthe^^o to
pride and prudence kept me above the reach of pity -- but obligation from a
stranger --


LADY A. He really a stanger, and attempt to free thee. Friend, thou have
usurped a right, which here alone belongs to me; as I enjoy the blessing
which these lands produce, I own also the heart-delighting privilege of
dispensing those blessings to the wretched. Thou made thyself my worldly
banker, and no cash of mine in thy hands, but there I balance my account.
(takes a note from a pocketbook.)


ROV. Madam, my master pays me, our dare I take money from any other hand,
without injuring his honor, or disobeying his command.

Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree, The fair, the chaste, the inexpressive
she. Exit.


BANKS. (to Twich) But, Sir, I insist you will return him his money -- Stop.
(going).


TWICH. Aye, stop. (holds Banks)


LADY A. Where dwells he?


BANKS. I fancy, Ma'am, where he can; I understand, from his discourse, that he
is on his way to join a company of actors in the next town.


LADY A. A profane stage player with such a gentle generous heart, yet so
whimsically wild, like the unconscious rose, modestly striking from the
recollection of its own grace and sweetness.


Enter JANE, from Gammon's House. JANE. Now, my Ladyship, I Am fit to attend
your Ladyship.


LADY A. This maiden may find out for me whither he goes (aside.) Call on my
steward, and thy legal demands shall be satissied. To Twich, who exits.


JANE. Here, coachman, drive up my Lady's chariot nearer our door (calling off)


LADY A. Friend, be cheerful, thine and thy sister's sorrows shall be but as an
April shower.


Exit Banks into his house, Lady A. and Jane. SCENE, INSIDE OF AN INN. Enter
WAITER. ROV. Hilloa, friend, when does the coach set out for London?


WAIT. In about an hour, Sir.


ROV. Has the Winchester coach set out for London?


WAIT. No. Sir. Exit Waiter.


ROV. That Is lucky, my trunk is here still -- then I will not, since I Have lost
the fellowship of my friend Dick Buskin, I Will travel no more -- I Will try a
London audience -- who knows but I may get an engagement -- this celestial lady
quaker must be rich, and how ridiculous for such a poor dog as I am even to
think of her -- how Dick would laugh at me, if he knew.I dare say by this she
has released my kind host from the gripe -- I should like to be certain, though.


Enter LANDLORD. LAND. You Will dine here, Sir -- I Am honest Bob Johnson -- kept
the sun these twenty year; -- excellent dinner on table at two.


ROV. Yet my love indeed is appetite; I Am as hungry as the sea, I can digest as
much.


LAND. Hungry as the sea -- then you will not do for my shilling ordinary. Sir,
there is a very good ordinary at the s^racen's head at the end of the town. --
shou'd'n't have thought, indeed, of hungry foot travelers to eat like --
Coming, Sir. Exit.


ROV. I Will not join this company at Winchester -- no, I Will not stay in the
country, hopeless ever to expect a look, except of scorn, from this lady. I
wonder if she is found out that I Am a player -- I Will take a touch at the London
theater, the public there are candid and generous, and before my merit can have
time to create enemies, I Will save money, and a fig for the sultan and sophy.


Enter JANE, SIM following. JANE. Aye, that is he.


ROV. But if I fail, by heavens I Will overwhelm the manager, his empire, and
himself, in one prodigious ruin.


JANE. Ruin! O, Lord!


SIM. What can you expect else, when you follow the young men -- I Have dogged
you all the way.


JANE. Well, was'n't I sent.


SIM. O, yes, you were sent -- very likely -- who sent you?


JANE. I will not tell it is my Lady, because she bid me not (aside).


SIM. I Will keep you from shame -- A fine life I should have in the parish, rare
fleering, if a sister of mine should stand some Sunday at church in a white
sneet -- and to all their flouts what could I say?


ROV. Thus, I say -- My sister's wronged, my sister blows a bell^ born as high
and noble as the attorney; do her justice, or, by the gods, I Will lay a scene of
Mood shall make this hay-mow horrible to beadles. -- Say that* young Chamont.


SIM. Eg^d, I believe its full moon. You go home to your place, and mind your
business. (to Jane).


JANE. My Lady will be so glad I found him -- I don't wonder at it, he is a fine
spoken man.


SIM. Dang it, will you stand grinning here at the wild bucks.


JANE. Will you be quiet, the gentleman might wish to send her Ladyship a
compliment: Arnt please you, Sir, if it is even a kiss between you and me, it
shall go safe; for though you should give it to me, brother Sim can take it my
Lady.


SIM. La, will you go? (puts her off.)


ROV. To a nunnery, go -- to a nunnery, go, go -- I Am cursedly out of spirits
-- but hang sorrow, I may as well divert myself -- it is meat and drink for me
to see a clown -- Shepherd, was it ever at court?


SIM. Not I.


ROV. Then thou art damned.


SIM. Eh!


ROV. Yes, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side. Ah, little hospitality!


Enter GAMMON. GAM. Eh, where is the shewman that wants my barn? -- Ah, son Sim.


ROV. Is he your son, young Clodpole -- take him to your wheat-stacks, and
there teach him manners.


GAM. Oh, thou art the fellow that would bolt out of the dirty roads into
people's houses -- Sim's schooling is mightily thrown away, if he has not more
manners than thou.


SIM. Why, feyther, it is one of the players, he acted Tom Fool in King Larry,
the other night at Lymington -- I thought I know'd him, by the face, thof he had
a straw hat and a blanket about'n. -- Ha, how comical that was you said.


ROV. Pellicock sat upon Jellicock-hill -- pillo -- loc -- loc.


SIM. Why, feyther, that is it, he is at it again -- feyther, laugh.


GAM. Hold your tongue, boy, I believe he is no better than he should be; the
moment I saw him, says I to myself, he is a rogue.


ROV. There thou spoke truth to thyself for once in thy life.


GAM. I Am glad you confess it; but her Ladyship sall have all the vagrants wipt
out of the country.


ROV. Vagrants, wretch -- despite overwhelm thee -- only squint, and by heaven
I Will beat thy blown-up body till it rebound like a tennis ball.


SIM. Beat my feyther -- no, no -- thou must first beat me. (pulls off his
coat.)


ROV. Though love cool, friendship fall off, brothers divide, subjects rebel,
oh, never let the sacred bond be cracked betwixt son and father. Thou art an
bonest reptile -- (to Sim) I never a father's protection knew -- never had a
father to protest.


SIM. Ecod, he is not acting now.


Enter LANDLORD, with book, pen, and ink. GAM. Landlord, is this Mr. Lamp here?


LAND. I Have just opened a bottle for him in the other parlour. Exit Gam.


SIM. (to Rov.) G'is thy hand -- I like thee, I don't know how it is, I think I
could lose my life for him -- but mus'n't let feyther be lickt neither. Exit.


ROV. I Will make my entrance on the London stage boards in Bays; yes, I shall
have no competitor against me. Egad, its very hard, that a gentleman and an
author cannot come to teach them, but he must break his noise, and all that. So
the players are gone to dinner. (to Landlord.)


Enter COACHMAN. COACH. Any passengers for the fly?


LAND. No such people frequent the sun, I assure you, Sir.


ROV. Sun, moon, and stars -- now mind the eclipse, Mr. Johnson.


LAND. I heard nothing of it, Sir.


Enter WAITER. WAIT. Sir, twno gentlemen in the parlour wishes to speak with
you. (to Rov.)


ROV. I attend them with all respect and duty.


Exit Waiter. LAND. Sir, you go in the stage; as we book the passengers, what
name?


ROV. I Am the bold Thunder. Exit.


LAND. (writing) Mr.Thunder.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. I want two places in the stage coach, because I and
another gentleman are going a journey.


LAND. Just two vacant -- what name?


JOHN. Avast, I go upon deck, but let me see who is my master's messmates in
the cabin. (reads) Capt. M'Clallough, Councellor Flaherghan, Miss Gosling, Mr.
Thunder -- what is this -- speak, man, is there any person of that name going?


LAND. Book'd him this moment.


JOHN. If our voyage should be at an end before we begin; if this Mr. Thunder
should be my master's son -- what sort of a gentleman is he?


LAND. An odd sort of a gentleman -- I suspect he is one of the players.


JOHN. True, Sam said 'twas some of the players people forced him from
Portsmouth school -- it must be the 'Squire -- show me where he is moored, my
old purser. Exeunt.


SCENE, A ROOM. LAMP and TRAP discovered. TRAP. This same old Gammon seems a
surly spark.


LAMP. No matter; his barn will hold full thirty pounds, and if we can but
engage this young fellow, this Rover, he will cram it every night he plays --
he is certainly a very good actor. Now, Trap, you must enquire out a good
carpenter, and be brisk about the building. I thihk we shall have smart
business, as we stand so well for women too -- Oh, here he comes.


TRAP. Knap him on any terms.


Enter ROVER. ROV. Gentlemen, your most obedient -- the waiter told me --


ROV. Pra^, sit down, good Sir. Sir, to our better acquaintance. (drinks)


ROV. Hav'n't a doubt, Sir.


LAMP. Only suffer me to put up your name to play with us six nights, and
twelve gu neas are yours.


ROV. I thank you; I must confess your offer is liberal, but my friends have
flattered me into a sort of opinion, that encourages me to take a touch at the
capital.


LAMP. Oh, my dear Sir, a London theater is very dangerous ground.


ROV. Why, I may fail, and gods may groan, and lad^es cry, the awkward
creature; but should I t^p my part thus, shall not gods applaud, and ladies
sigh, the charming fellow, and the managers take me by the hand, and treasurers
smile upon me, as they count the shining guineas.


LAMP. But suppose --


ROV. Aye, suppose the contrary, I have a certain friend here in my coat pocket
-- (feels for it) -- Zounds, where is it -- Oh, the devil, I gave it to
discharge my kind host. Going to London, and not master of five shillings
(aside). Well, Sir, if you will make it twenty pounds.


LAMP. Well, be it so.


ROV. Sir, I engage with you; call a rchearsal when and where you please, and
I Will attend you.


LAMP. Sir, I Will step for the cast book, and you shall choose your characters.


TRAP. And I Will write the play-bill directly.


Exeunt Lamp and Trap. ROV. Since I must remain here some time, and hav'n't the
most distant hope of ever speaking to this goddess again, I wish I had enquired
her name, that I might know how to keep out of her way.


Enter LANDLORD and JOHN DORY. LAND. There Is the gentleman.


JOHN. Very well. (Exit Land.) What cheer, master 'Squire.


ROV. What cheer, eh, my hearty.


JOHN. The very face of his father -- And ar'n't you ashamed of yourself?


ROV. Why, yes, I am sometimes.


JOHN. Do you know, if I had you at the gangway, I Would give you a neater dozen
than ever you got from your school-master's cat-o-nine-tails.


ROV. You would not, sure.


JOHN. I would, sure.


ROV. Indeed, pleasant enough. Who is this genius?


JOHN. I Have dispatched a shallop to tell Lady Amaranth you're here.


ROV. You hav'n't.


JOHN. I have.


ROV. Now who the devil's this Lady Amaranth?


JOHN. I expect her chariot every moment, and when it comes, you will get into
it, and I Will set you down genteelly at her house, then I Will have obeyed my
orders, and hope your father will be satisfied.


ROV. My father -- who is he, pray?


JOHN. Psha, leave off your fun, and prepare to ask his pardon.


ROV. Ha, ha, ha, -- my worthy friend, you're quite wrong in this affair; --
upon my word, I Am not the person you take me for. (going.)


JOHN. You don't go, though you have got your name down in the stage-coach book,
Mr. Thunder.


ROV. Mr. Thunder -- stage-coach book -- this must be some curious mistake --
ha, ha, ha.


JOHN. Oh, my lad, your father, Sir George, will soon change your note.


ROV. Will he -- he must first give me one. Sir George -- then my father's a
Knight, it seems -- very good, faith -- ha, ha, ha. I Am not the gentleman you
think, upon my honor.


JOHN. I ought not to think you any gentleman, for giving your honor in a
false word.


Enter WAITER. WAIT. Her Ladyship's carriage is at the door, and I fancy, Sir,
it is you the coachman wants. (to John).


JOHN. Yes, it is me (exit Waiter). I attend your honor.


ROV. The choice is made, and I Have my Ranger's dress in my trank, Cousin of
Buckingham, thou sage grave man.


JOHN. What.


ROV. Since you will buckle fortune on my back, to bear the burden whether I
will or no, I must have patience to endure the load; but if black scandal, or
foul-fac'd --


JOHN. Black, foul-fac'd -- dam'me, my face was as fair as yours before I went
to sea.


ROV. Your mere enforcement shall acquaintance me.


JOHN. Man, don't stand preaching parson Palmer, come to the chariot.


ROV. Aye, to the chariot bear me -- Bucephalus among the billows. Exeunt.


END OF ACT II. ACT III.
SCENE, LADY AMARANTH's HOUSE. Enter LADY AMARANTH and EPHRAIM. LADY A. THOUGH
thou have settled that distressed gentleman's debts, let his sister come unto
me, and remit a quarter's rent to all my tenants.


EPHESIANS. As thou biddest it, I have discharged from the pound, the widow's cattle;
but shall I let the lawsuit drop against the farmer's son, who did shoot the
pheasant?


LADY A. Yea; but instantly turn from my service the gamekeeper's man that did
kill the fawn while it was eating from his hand -- we should hate guile, though
we love venison.


EPHESIANS. Since the death of old Dovehonse (who, though one of the faithful, was an
active man) this part of the country is infested with covetous men, called
rabbers; and I have, in thy name, said unto the people, whoever apprehends
one of these, I will reward, yea, with thirty pieces of gold. (knockiug
without.) That beating of one brass against another at thy door, proclaims
the approach of vanity, whose heart swells at an empty sound. Exit.


LADY A. But my heart is possessed with the idea of that wandering youth, whose
benevolence induced him to part with, perhaps his all, to free the unhappy
debtor. His person is amiable, his addresses (according to the worldly modes)
formed to pleasure and to delight -- but he is poor -- is that a crime? --
perhaps meanly born -- but one good action is an illustrious pedigree. -- I
feel I love him, and in that word are birth, fame, and riches.


Enter JANE. JANE. Oh, Madam, my Lady, an't please you.


LADY A. Did thou find the young man, that I may return him the money he
paid for my tenant?


JANE. I found him, Ma'am, and I found him, and he talked of what he said.


LADY A. What did he say?


JANE. He said, Ma'am, and says he -- I Will be hanged, Ma'am, if he did'n't talk
about ruin, now I think of that -- but if he had'n't gone to London in the
stage coach --


LADY L. Is he gone?


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. Oh, my Lady, mayhap John Dory is not the man to be sent
after young gentlemen that scamper from school, and run about the country a
play acting. Pray walk up stairs, Master Thunder.


LADY A. Have thou brought my kinsman hither?


JOHN, Well then, I have not -- will you only walk up, if you please, Master
Harry?


JANE. Will you walk up, if you please, Master Harry?


LADY A. Frienaship requires, yet I Am not disposed to communicate with company.


JANE. Oh, bless me, Ma'am, if it is'n't --


Enter ROVER, dressed. ROV. It Is I, Hamlet, the Dane -- thus far into the
bowels of the land have we marched on -- John, the bloody devouring beat.


JOHN. He called me bull in the coach.


ROV. This Lady Amaranth -- by heavens, the very angel quaker.


LADY A. The generous youth, my cousin Harry.


JOHN. He Is for you, make the most of him.


JANE. Oh, how happy my Lady is -- he looks so charming now he is fine.


JOHN. Harkee -- she is as rich as an India-man, and I tell you, your father
wishes you would grapple her by the heart. There Is an engagement between these
two vessels but little Cupid's the only man that is to take'em in tow, so come.
(to Jane.)


JANE. Ma'am, a'n't I to wait on you?


JOHN. No, my lass, you're to wait on me.


JANE. Wait on you! -- lack-a-day, am I?


JOHN. By this, Sir George is come to the inn. Without letting the younker
know, I Will bring him here, and surprise both father and son with a joyful
meeting (aside). Now court her, you mad devil (to Rover). Come, now usher me
down like a lady. (to Jane).


JANE. Yes, there is love between them, I see it in their eyes -- bless the dear
couple -- this way, Mr. Sailor gentleman. Exeunt Jane and John.


ROV. (aside) By heavens, a most delectable woman.


LADY A. Cousin, when I saw thee in the village free the sheep from the wolf,
why did not tell me thou were son to my uncle, Sir George?


ROV. Because, my Lady, I did not know it myself.


LADY A. Why would thou vex thy father, and quit thy school?


ROV. A truent disposition -- good my Lady brought me from Whittemberg.


LADY A. Thy father designs thee for his dangerous profession -- but is thy
inclination turned to the voice of trumpets and sounds of mighty slaughter?


ROV. Why, Ma am, as for old Boreas, my dad* when the blast of war blows in his
ears, he is a tiger in his fierce resentment; but, for me, I think it a pity --
so it is -- that villainous saltpetre should be dug out of the bowels of the
harmless earth, which many a good tall fellow has destroyed, with wound, and
guns, and drums -- Heaven save the mark!


LADY A. Indeed thou art tall, my cousin and grown of comely stature -- our
families have long been separated.


ROV. They have, since Adam, I believe (aside) -- then, lady, let that sweet
bud of love now ripen to a beauteous f^ower.


LADY A. Love!


ROV. Excellent wench -- perdition catch my soul -- but I do leve thee; and
when I love thee not -- Chaos is come again.


LADY A. Thou art of a happy disposition.


ROV. If I were now to die, it were to be happy! -- Let our senses dance in
concert to the joyful minutes, and this, and this, the only discord make
(embracing).


Enter JANE, with cake and wine. JANE. Ma'am, an't please you, Mr. Zachariah
bid me --


ROV. Why you fancy yourself Cardinal Woolsey in this family.


JANE. No, Sir, I Am not Cardinal Woolsey, I Am only my Lady's maid here.


ROV. A bowl of cream for your Catholic Majesty's.


JANE. Cream! no, Sir; -- that wine and water.


ROV. You get no water -- take the wine, great Potentate.


(Gives Lady A. a glass, and drinks). JANE. Madam, my father begs leave --


ROV. Go, go, thou shallow Pomona. Exit Jane.


Enter GAMMON and LAMP. ROV. Eh! Zouns, my Manager!


GAM. I hope her Ladyship hav'n't found out 'twas I had Banks arrested (aside).
Wou^d your Ladyship give leave for this honest man and comrades to act a few
plays in the town, cause I have let 'em my barn -- 'twill be some little help
to me, my Lady.


ROV. My Lady, I understand these affairs, leave me to settle them.


LADY A. True, these are delusions, as a woman, I understand not -- but by my
cousin's advice I will abide -- ask his consent.


GAM. So, I must pay my respects to the young 'Squire (aside). An't please your
honor, if a poor man, like me (bows) dare offer his humble duty.


ROV. Can thou bow to a vagrant, Eh, little Hospitality, Exit Gammon.


LAMP. Please your honor, if I may presume to hope, you will be graciously
pleased to take our little squadron under your honor's protection.


LADY A. What say thou, Henry.


ROV. Aye, where is Henry? -- true -- that is me -- strange I should always
forget my name, and not half an hour ago I was christened (aside). Hark ye, do
you play yourself, fellow?


LAMP. Yes, Sir, and I Have just now engaged a new actor, one Mr. Rover -- such
an actor.


ROV. If such it your best actor, you shall not have my permission -- my dear
Madam, the damndest fellow in the world -- get alone out of the town, or*
dam'me, I ll have you all, man, woman, and child, rag and fiddle-^^ick, clapped
into the whirligig.


LADY A. Good man, abide not here.


ROV. What, you scoundrel! -- now if this new actor you brag of, that crack of
your company, was any thing like a gentleman --


LAMP. Why since it is'n't --


ROV. It is, my dear friend, if I was really the poor strolling dog you thought
me, I should tread your four boards, and crow the cock of your barndoor fowl;
but, as Fate has ordained, I Am a gentleman, and son to Sir -- what the devil's
my father's name (aside). -- You must be content to murder Shakespeare, without
making me an accomplice.


LAMP. But, my most gentle Sir, I and my treasurer, Trap, have trumpeted your
fame ten miles round the country -- the bills are posted, the candles bought,
the stage built, the fiddlers engaged -- all on the tip-toe of expectation --
we should have tomorrow night an overflow -- ay, thirty pounds, dear worthy
Sir; you would not go to ruin a whole community and their families, that now
depends on the exertion of your brilliant talents.


ROV. I never was uniform but in one maxim, that is, though I do little good,
to hurt nobody but myself.


LADY A. Since thou have promised, much as I prize the adherance to the customs
in which I was brought up, thou shall not fully thy honor, by a breach of thy
word; for truth is more shining than beaten gold -- play, if it can bring good
to these people.


ROV. Shall I?


LADY A. This falls out well, for I have bidden all the gentry round unto my
house warning, and these pleasentries may afford them innocent and cheerful
entertainment.


ROV. True, my Lady, your guests an't Quakers, though you are; and when we ask
people to our house we study to please them, not ourselves; but if you do
furbish up a play or two, the Muses shall not honor that churlish fellow's barn.


LADY A. Barn! no, that gallery shall be thy theater; and, in spite of the
grave doctrine of Ephraim Smooth, my friends and I will behold and rejoice in
thy pranks, my pleasant cousin.


ROV. My kind, my charming Lady! -- Hey! -- brighten up bully Lamp, Carpenters,
Tailors, Managers, distribute your box tickets for my Lady's gallery -- come,
gentle cousin, the actors are at hand, and by their show you shall know all
that you are like to know. Exit Lamp. Exeunt Lady and Rover.


SCENE, AN APARTMENT IN AN INN. Enter HARRY and MIDG. HARRY. Though I went back
to Portsmouth Academy with a contrite heart to continue my studies, yet, from
my father's angry letter, I dread the woeful storm at our first meeting. I
fancy the people at the inn don't recollect me; it reminds me of my pleasant
friend, poor Jack Rover; I wonder where he is now.


MIDG. And brings to my mind a certain strolling acquaintance of mine, poor
Dick Buskin.


HARRY. Then I desire, Sir, you will turn Dick Buskin out of your head.


MIDG. Cannot, Sir, the dear, good-natured, wicked son of -- I beg your honor's
pardon.


HARRY. Midg, you must, soon as I Am dressed, step out and enquire whose house my
father is at -- I didn't think he had any acquaintance in this part of the
country; found what humor he is in, and how the land lies, before I venture
into his presence.


Enter WAITER. WAIT. Sir, the room is ready for you to dress.


Exit. HARRY. I shall only throw off my boots, and you will shake a little powder
in my hair.


MIDG. Then, hey puff, I shoulder my curling-irons.


Exeunt. Enter SIR GEORGE and LANDLORD. SIR GEO. I can hear nothing of these
deserters -- by my first intelligence, they will not venture up to London; they
must still be lurking about the country -- Landlords have any suspicious
looking person put in at your house?


LAND. Yes, Sir, now and then.


SIR GEO. What do you do with them?


LAND. Why, Sir, when a man calls for liquor, that I think has got no money, I
make him pay beforehand.


SIR GEO. Damn your liquor, you self-interested porpoise, chattering about your
own private affairs, when public good, or fear of general calamity, should be
the only compass; these fellows I am in pursuit of, run from their ships; and
if our navy is unmanned, what becomes of you and your house, you dunghill
cormorant?


LAND. This is a very abusive sort of a Gentleman, but he has a full pocket, or
he would not be so saucy (aside). Exit.


SIR GEORGE. This rascal, I believe, does not know I Am Sir George Thunder --
wind, still variable, blows my affairs athwart each other, to not know what is
become of my runagate son Harry -- and when my Lady niece, squeezing up the
plumage of our illustrious family in her little mean Quaker's bonnet -- I must
to town after -- Shood! when I catch my son Harry -- Oh, here is John Dory.


Enter JOHN. Have you taken the places in the London coach for me?

JOHN. Ha! -- Hey, your honor, is that yourself?


SIR GEO. No, I Am besides myselfmdash;where is my son?


JOHN. What Is o'clock?


SIR GEO. Why do you talk of clocks or time-pieces? -- all Glass's reckoning
and log-line are run wild with me.


JOHN. If it is two, your son is this moment walking with Lady Amaranth in her
garden.


SIR GEO. With Lady Amaranth?


JOHN. If half after, the're cast anchor to rest themselves among the posies;
if three, they are got up again; if four, they are picking a bit of crammed fowl;
and if half after, they are picking their teeth, and cracking walnuts over a
bottle of calcavella.


SIR GEO. My son! -- my dear friend, where did you find him?


JOHN. I found him where he was, and I found him where he is.


SIR GEO. What! and he come to Lady Amaranth's?


JOHN. No, I brought him there from this house, in her carriage -- I will not tell
him Master Harry went among the players, or he would never forgive him (aside). --
Oh, such a merry, civil, crazy, crack-brain'd -- the very picture of your
honor.


SIR GEO. What, he is in high spirits -- ha, ha, ha -- the dog -- I hope he had
discretion enough though to throw a little gravity over his mad humor, before
his prudent cousin.


JOHN. He threw himself upon his knees before her, and that did quite as well.


SIR GEO. Made love to her already! -- ha, ha, ha, -- oh the impudent, cunning
villain! -- what, and may be he --


JOHN. Indeed he did give her a smack.


SIR GEO. Indeed -- ha, ha, ha.


JOHN. Oh, he threw his arms about her as eager, as I would to catch a falling
decanter of Madeira.


SIR GEO. Huzza, victoria! -- here will be a juncture of two bouncing estates
-- but confound the money! -- John, you shall have a bowl for a jolly boat of
swim in. Roll in a puncheon of rum, a hogshead of sugar, shake an orchard of
oranges, and let the landlord drain his fish pond yonder -- a bumper, a bumper,
etc. (sings).


JOHN. Then, my good Master, Sir George, I Will order a bowl, since you're in the
humor for it.


Exit. SIR GEO. And so the wild rogue is this instant rattling up her prim
Ladyship? Eh, is'n't this he? Left her already!


Enter HARRY. HARRY. I must have left my cane in this room. -- Eh, my father!


SIR GEO. (Looking at his watch.) Just half after four: why, Harry, you have made
great haste in cracking your walnuts.


HARRY. Yes; he has heard of my frolics with the players. (Aside.) Dear father,
if you will but forgive me --


SIR GEO. Why, indeed, you have acted very bad.


HARRY. Sir, it should be considered I was but a no vice.


SIR GEO. However, I shall think of nothing now but your Benefit.


HARRY. Very odd his approving of -- (Aside.) I thank you, Sir; but if it is
agreeable to you, I have done with Benefits.


SIR GEO. If I was not the best of fathers, you might indeed hope none from me;
but no matter if you can but get the Fair Quaker --


HARRY. Or the Humors of the Navy. Sir.


SIR GEO. What! How dare you reflect on the Humors of the Navy? The navy has
very good humors, or I Would never see your dog's face again, you villain! But I Am
cool -- Eh, boy, a snug easy chariot.


HARRY. I Will order it; desire my father's carriage to draw up.


SIR GEO. Mine, you rogue, I Have none; I mean Lady Amaranth's.


HARRY. Yes, Sir, Lady Amaranth's chariot.


SIR GEO. What are you at? I mean that you left this life in.


HARRY. Sir, I left this house on foot.


SIR GEO. What, with John Dory?


HARRY. No, Sir; with Jack Rover.


SIR GEO. Why John has been a Rover to be sure; but now he is settled: I Have
made him my Valet de Chamber.


HARRY. Made him your Valet! Why, Sir, where did you meet with him?


SIR GEO. Zounds! I meet him abroad and meet him on shore -- in the cabin and
steerage -- gallery and forecastle. -- He sailed round the world with me.


HARRY. Strange this: I understood he had been in the East Indies, but he never
told me he knew you; but, indeed, he only knew me by the name of Dick Buskin.


SIR GEO. Then how came he to bring you to Lady Amaranth's?


HARRY. Bring me where?


SIR GEO. Answer me; a'n't you now come from her Ladyship's?


HARRY. Not I.


SIR GEO. Ha, this is a lie of John's to enhance his own services. Then you
have not been there?


HARRY. I don't know where you mean, Sir.


SIR GEO. Yes, it is all a brag of John's; but I Will --


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. The rum and sugar is ready; but as for the fish pond --


SIR GEO. I Will kick you into it, you thirsty old grampus.


JOHN. Will you? Then I Will make a comical roasted orange.


SIR GEO. How dare you say you brought my son to Lady Amaranth's?


JOHN. And who says I did'n't?


SIR GEO. He that best knows only, Dick Buskin here.


JOHN. Then, Mr. Buckskin mus'n't shoot off great guns for his amusement.


SIR GEO. There, what do you say to that?


HARRY. I say it is false.


JOHN. False! -- shiver my hulk, Mr. Buckskin, if you were a lyon's skin I Would
curry your hide for this.


Exit. SIR GEO. No, no -- John's honest -- I see through it now -- the puppy
has seen her; perhaps he has the impudence not to like her -- and so blow up
this confusion and perplexity only to break off a marriage.


HARRY. What does he mean -- I Will assure you --


SIR GEO. Damn your assurance, you ungrateful, disobedient -- but I Will not part
with you till I confront you with Lady Amaranth herself, face to face; and if I
prove you have been deceiving me, I Will launch you into the wide ocean of life,
without a rudder, compass, grog, or tobacco. Exeunt.


END of ACT III. ACT IV.
SCENE, LADY AMARANTH's HOUSE. Enter LADY AMARANTH, reading. LADY A. THE
fanciful flights of my pleasant cousin enchants my senses; this book he gave me
to read contains good morals, the man Shakespeare, that did write it, they
call immortal: he must indeed have been filled with divine spirit. I
understand, from my cousin, the origin of plays were religious mysteries; that,
freed from the superstition of early, and grossness of latter times, the stage
is now become the vehicle of delight and morality; if so, to hear a good play
is taking the wholesome draught of precept from a golden cup, embossed with
gems, yet giving my countenance to have one in my house, and even to act in it
myself, prove the ascendency my dear Harry has over my heart. Ephraim Smooth is
much scandalized at these doings.


Enter EPHRAIM SMOOTH. EPHESIANS. This mansion is now become the tabernacle of Baal.


LADY A. Then abide not in it.


EPHESIANS. It Is full of the wicked ones.


LADY A. Stay not among the wicked ones.


EPHESIANS. I must shut my ears. (loud laugh)


LADY A. And thy mouth also, good Ephraim; I have bidden my cousin Harry to my
house, and will not set bounds to his mirth, to gratify thy spleen, and show my
own inhospitality.


EPHESIANS. Why do thou suffer him to put into the hands of thy servants books of
tragedies, and books of comedies, preludes, and interludes -- yea, all ludes;
my spirit does wax wrath. I say unto thee, a playhouse is a school for the old
dragon, and a play-book the primmer of Beelzebub.


LADY A. This is one; mark. (reads) "Not the King's crown, nor the deputed
sword, the marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, becomes them with one
half so good a grace as mercy does. Oh! think on that, and mercy then will
breathe within your lives like men new made." Does Beelzebub speak such words?


EPHESIANS. Thy kinsman has made all thy servants actors.


LADY A. To act well is good service.


EPHESIANS. Here comes the damsel, for whom my heart yearneth.


Enter JANE, reading. JANE. Oh, Ma'am! his young honor, the 'Squire, says the
play's to be As You Like It.


EPHESIANS. I like it not.


JANE. He Is given me my character; I am to be Miss Audrey, and be there Sim's to
be William of the Forest, as it were; but how am I to get my part by heart?


LADY A. By often reading it.


JANE. Well, I don't know but that is as good as any other. -- I must study my
part -- the Gods give us joy. Exit.


EPHESIANS. Thy maidens skip like young kids.


LADY A. Then, do thou go skip along with them.


EPHESIANS. Mary, thou should'^t be obeyed in thine own house, and I will do thy
bidden.


LADY A. Ah, thou hypocrite, to obey is easy, when the heart commands.


Enter ROVER. ROVER. Oh, my charming cousin, how agree you and Rosalind? Are you
almost perfect? What old Clytus, why you're like any angry friend brok in
amongst the laughing Gods; come, come, I Will have nothing here but quips, and
cranks, and wreathed smiles


LADY A. He says we must not have this amusement.


ROV. But I have a voice potential, double as the Duke's, and I say we must.


EPHESIANS. Nay.


ROV. Yea, by Jupiter I swear -- Aye. (fiddle without.)


EPHESIANS. The man of sin rubbeth the hair of the horse to the bowels of the cat.


Enter LAMP with a Violin. LAMP. Now, if agreeable to your Ladyship, we'll go
over your song.


LADY A. I Am content.


[Lamp begins to play, Ephraim pushes his elbow, which puts him out of tune --
plays again -- Ephesians. joggs as before.] LAMP. What, Sir, do you mean?


ROV. Now do, my good friend, be quiet. -- Come, begin.


EPHESIANS. Friend, this is a land of liberty, and I Have as much right to move my
elbows, as thou have thine. (Rover pushes him) Why do thou do so, friend.


ROV, Friend, this is a land of liberty, and I have as much right to move my
elbows as thou have to move thine. (pushes him off.) A fanatical puppy.


LADY A. But, Harry, do you people of fashion act these folies themselves?


ROV. Aye, and scramble for the top parts as eager as for stars, ribbands,
place, or pension. Lamp, decorate the seats out smart and theatrical, and drill
the servants that I have given the small parts.


Exit Lamp. LADY A. I wished for some entertainment, in which people now take
delight, to please those I have invited, but will convert those folies into a
charitable purpose: Tickets of this play shall be delivered to my friends
gratis, but money to their amount I will, from my own purse (after rewarding
the assistants) distribute among the indigent of the village; thus, while we
amuse our friends, and perhaps please ourselves, we shall make the poor happy.
Exit.


ROV. An angel! -- If Sir George does'n't soon arrive to blow me, I may, I
think, marry her angelic Ladyship -- but will that be honest? -- she is nobly
born -- though I suspect I had ancestors too, if I knew who they were. -- I
entered this house the poorest wight in England, and what must she imagine when
I Am discovered? -- that I Am a scoundrel; and consequently, though I should
possess her hand and fortune, instead of loving, she will despise me. (sits) I
want a friend now to consult -- deceive her I will not -- poor Dick Buskin
wants money more than myself, yet this is a measure I Am sure he would scorn -- no,
no, I must not.


Enter HARRY. HARRY. Now, I hope my passionate father will be convinced that
this is the first time I was ever under this roof. What beau is here? --
astonishing! my old strolling friend. (sits down unperceived)


ROV. I don't know what to do.


HARRY. Nor what to say.


ROV. Dick Buskin, ha, ha, ha, -- my dear fellow -- think of the devil, and --
I was just thinking of you -- 'pon my soul, Dick, I am happy to see you.


HARRY. But, Jack, how the devil have you found me out?


ROV. Found you, I Am sure I wonder how the deuce you found me out -- oh, the
news of my intended play has brought you.


HARRY. He does not as yet know who I am, so I Will carry it on. (aside.) Then
you have broke your engagement with Truncheon, at Winchester? -- figuring away
in your stage clothes too, really. -- Tell me what you are at here, Jack?


ROV. Will you be quiet with your Jacking, I Am now 'Squire Harry.


HARRY. What!


ROV. I Have been pressed into this service by an old man of war, who found me at
the inn, and insisted I Am son to Sir George Thunder. In that character, I
flatter myself, I have won the heart of the charming lady of this house.


HARRY. Now the mystery is out -- (aside) -- then it is my friend Jack has been
brought here for me. -- Do you know the young gentleman they take you for?


ROV. Not I; but I flatter myself he is honored in his representative.


HARRY. Upon my soul, Jack, you're a tight fellow.


ROV. Now I can put some pounds in your pocket -- you shall be employed --
we are getting up As You Like It -- let us see in the cast, have I a part for you
-- egad, I Will take Touchstone from Lamp, you shall have it, my boy -- I Would
resign Orlando to you with any other Rosalind, but the lady of the mansion
plays it herself.


HARRY. The very lady my father intended for me. (aside) Do you love her, Jack?


ROV. To distraction -- but I Will not have her.


HARRY. No -- why?


ROV. She thinks me a gentleman, and I Will not convince her I Am a rascal; I Will
go on with our play, as the produce is appropriated to a good purpose, then lay
down my 'Squireship, bid adieu to my heavenly Rosalind, and exit for ever from
her house, poor Jack Rover.


HARRY. The generous fellow I ever thought him, and he shall not loose by it -- if
I could make him believe (aside) -- Well, this is the most whimsical affair --
you have anticipated me -- you will scarce believe that I Am come here purposely to
pass myself for this young Harry.


ROV. No.


HARRY. I am.


SIR. GEO. (without) Harry, where are you?


ROV. Who Is that?


HARRY. I Will try it -- my father will be cursedly vexed -- no matter. (aside)


ROV. Somebody called Harry -- zounds, if the real Simon Pure, that is, should
be arrived, I Am in a pure way.


HARRY. Be quiet, that is my confederate, he is to personate the father, Sir
George, he started the scheme -- having heard that an union was intended, and
Sir George immediately expected, our plan is, if I can, before his arrival,
flourish myself into the lady's good graces, and whip her up, as she is an
heiress.


ROV. So, you have turned fortune hunter. Then 't'was for this plan you parted
from me on the road, standing like a figure-post, you walk up this way, and
I Will walk down this -- why, Dick, I did not know you was so great a rogue.


HARRY. I did not know my fort lay that way, till convinced by this experienced
stranger.


ROV. He must be a damned impudent old scoundrel -- who is he, do I know him?


HARRY. Why, no, I hope not. (aside)


ROV. I Will step down stairs, and have the honor of kicking him.


HARRY. Stop, I wou'd'n't have him hurt, neither.


ROV. What Is his name?


HARRY. His name is Abrawang.


ROV. Abrawang, Abrawang -- I never heard of him -- but, Dick, why did you let
him persuade you into this affair?


HARRY. Why, faith, I would have been off it, but when once he takes a project
into his head, the devil cannot drive it out of him.


ROV. Yes, but the constables may drive him into Winchester goal.


HARRY. Your opinion of our intended exploit has made me ashamed of myself --
Harkee, Jack, do you punish and frighten my adviser, do you still keep up your
character of young 'Squire Thunder -- you can easily do that, as he, no more
than myself, has ever seen the 'Squire.


ROV. But, by heavens, I Will not be such a damned rogue.


HARRY. Yes, but Jack, if you can marry her, her fortune is a snug thing;
besides, if you love each other, I tell you --


ROV. Hang her fortune -- my love's more noble than the world, prizes not
quantity of ditty lands -- oh, Dick, she is the most lovely -- think of her
condescension -- why she consented to play in our play, and you shall see her,
you rogue, you shall. Her worth being mounted on the wind, Through all the
world bears Rosalind. Exit.


HARRY. Ha, ha, ha, this is the drollest adventure -- Rover little suspects
that I am the identical 'Squire Thunder that he personates -- I Will lend him my
character a little longer -- yes this offer is a most excellent opportunity of
making my poor friend's fortune, without injuring any body. If possible, he
shall have her, I cannot regret the loss of charms I never knew, and for an
estate, my father is competent to all my wishes. Lady Amaranth, by marrying
Jack Rover, will gain a man of honor, which, she might loose in an Earl -- it
may teaze my father a little at first, but he is a good old fellow in the main,
and when, I think, he comes to know my motive! -- Eh, this must be she -- an
elegant woman, faith -- now for a spanking lie, to continue her in the belief
that Jack is the man she thinks him.


Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. Who art thou, friend?


HARRY. Madam, I Have scarce time to warn you against the danger you're in, of
being imposed upon by your uncle, Sir George.


LADY A. How!


HARRY. He has heard of your Ladyship's partiality for his son, but is so
incensed at the irregularity of his conduct, he intends, if possible, to
disinherit him, and to present me hither, to pass me on you for him, designing
to treat the poor young gentleman himself as an imposter, in hopes you will
banish him from your heart and house.


LADY A. I thank thee, friend, for thy caution -- is Sir George such a parent
-- what is thy name?


HARRY. Richard Buskin, Ma'am, the stage is my profession -- in the 'Squire's
late excursion we contracted an intimacy, and I saw so many good qualities in
him, that I could not think of being the instrument of his ruin, nor deprive
your Ladyship of so good a husband as I am certain he will make you.


LADY A. Then Sir George intends to disown him.


HARRY, Yes Ma'am, I Have this moment told the young gentleman of it; he is
determined, for a jest, to return the compliment, by seeming to treat Sir
George himself as an imposter.


LADY A. Ha, ha, ha, 't'will be a just retaliation, and indeed what my uncle
deserves, for his cruel intentions both to his son and me.


SIR GEO. (with out.) What, has he run away again?


LADY A. That Is mine uncle.


HARRY. Yes, here is my father, and my standing out that I Am not his son, will
raise him into the heat of a battle, ha, ha. ha. (aside) Here he is, Madam, now
mind how he will dub me a 'Squire.


Enter SIR GEORGE. SIR GEO. Well, my Lady, was'n't it as my wild rogue set you,
all though calcavell as capers, you have been cutting in the garden. You see here I
have brought him into line of battle again -- you villain, why do you drop a
stern there, throw a salute shot, buss her bob-stays, bring to, and come down
straight as a mast, you dog.


LADY A. Uncle, who is this?


SIR GEO. Who is he -- egad, that is an odd question, to the fellow that has
been cracking your walnuts.


LADY A. He Is bad at his lesson.


SIR GEO. Certainly, when he ran from school -- why don't you speak, you
lubber, you are cursed modest -- before I came, 'twas all down among the
posies; here, my Lady, take from a father's hand, Harry Thunder.


LADY A. That is what I may not.


SIR GEO. There, I thought you would disgust her, you flat fish.


Enter ROVER. LADY A. (Takes Rover's hand.) Here, take from my hand Harry
Thunder.


SIR GEO. Eh!


ROVER. Oh, this is your sham Sir George, --

(Apart to Harry.)
HARRY. Yes, I Have been telling the Lady, and still seem to humor him.


ROVER. I shall not; though how do you Abrawang?


SIR GEO. Abrawang!


ROVER. You look like a good actor; aye, that is very well indeed. Never, never
loose sight of your character; you know Sir George is a noisy, rurbulent,
wicked old knave; bravo! Pout your under lip, purse your brows: -- Very well;
but damn it, Abrawang, you should have put a little red on your nose -- mind a
rule, never play an old man without a red nose.


SIR GEO. I Am in such a fury.


ROVER. Well we know that.


LADY A. Who is this?


ROVER. Some puppy unknown.


LADY A. And you don't know this gentleman?


ROVER. Excellent well! he is a fishmonger.


SIR GEO. Ah, What*


LADY A. Yes; father and son are determined not to know each other.


ROVER. Come, Dick, give the Lady a specimen of your talent Molteys, your only
wear, ha, ha, ha, a fool I met, a fool in the forest. Here comes Audry.


Enter JANE. JANE. La! warrent, what features!


SIR GEO. 'Sblood! what is this?


HARRY. A homely thing, Sir, but she is my own.


SIR GEO. Yours, you most audacious! -- What, this slut?


JANE. I thank the Gods for my slutishness.


LADY A. (To Rover.) You know this youth.


ROVER. My friend, Horatio; I wear him in my heart, yea, in my heart of hearts,
as I do this --


(kisses her.) SIR GEO. Such freedom with my niece, before my face. Do you know
that Lady? Do you know my son, Sir?


ROVER. Be quiet; Jassier has discovered the plot, and you cannot decieve the
senate.


HARRY. Yes, my conscience would not let me carry it through.


ROVER. Aye, his conscience hanging about the neck of his heart, says good
Lancelot and good Gobbo, or as aforesaid good Lancelot Gobbo, take to thy
heels and run away.


SIR GEO. Why, my Lady, explain -- scoundrel and puppy unknown.


JANE. Ma'am, I forgot to tell you our old neighbor Banks and his sister wants
you.


LADY ANN. I come -- Uncle, I Have heard thy father was kind to thee; return that
kindness to thy child -- if the lamb in wanton play does fall amongst the
waters, the shepherd takes him out, instead of plunging him in deeper till he
dies -- though thy hairs now be gray, I Am told once was flaxen; in short, he is
too old in folly, who cannot excuse youth. Exit.


SIR GEO. I Am an old fool! well, that is damned civil of you, Madam Niece; and
I Am a gray shepherd, with his lambs in the ditch -- but as for you, Mr. Goat,
I Will --


ROVER. My dear Abrawang, give up the game; her Ladyship in seeming to take you
for her uncle, has been only humming y u -- What, the devil, don't you think
the divine creature knows her own true-born uncle?


SIR GEO. Certainly, to be sure she knows me.


ROVER. Will you have done? -- Zounds, man, my honored father was here himself
this day -- her ladyship knows his person.


SIR GEO. Your honored father, and who the devil's your honored self?


ROVER. Now, by my father's son, that is myself, it shall be sun, or moon, or
Cheshire-cheese -- I budge still crop and cropp'd.


SIR GEO. What do you bawl out to me about Cheshire-cheese.


ROVER. And I say, as the saying is, your friend has told me all; but to
convince you of my forgiveness, in our play, as your'e rough and tough, I cast
your character the Wrestler -- I Will do Orlando, kick up your heels before the
whole court.


SIR GEO. I Will -- why, dam'me, I Will -- and you, you undutiful chick of an old
pelican (Lifts up his cane).


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. What are you at here, cudgeling people about? -- But,
Mr. Buckskin, I Have a word to say to you in private.


SIR GEO. Buckskin, take that (strikes him).


ROVER. Why, dam'me, Mr. Abrawang, you're a most obstinate drum, and very --


Enter LAMP, TRAP, JANE, and SERVANT MAID. LAMP. All the world's a stage, and
all men and women --


SIR GEO. The men are rogues, and the women hussies. (Beats them off, and
strikes Rover).


Exit all but Rover. ROVER. A blow, Essex, a blow, an old rascally imposter;
stigmatize me with a blow -- I must not put up with it. -- Z^unds! I shall be
tweak'd by the nose all round the country. If I can get the country lad to
steal me a pair of pistols, strike me, so may this arm dash him to the earth
like a dead dog, despise, pride, shame, and the name of villain light on me, if
I don't bring you Mr. Abrawang,


Exit. SCENE CHANGES TO ANOTHER ROOM. Enter LADY AMARANTH and BANKS. BANKS.
Madam, I would have paid the rent of my little cottage; but dare say it was
without your Ladyship's consent that your Steward has turned me ^ut and pu^ my
neighbor in possesion.


LADY A. My Steward oppress the poor! I did not know it indeed.


BANKS. The pangs of adversity I could bear; but the innocent partner of my
misfortunes, my unhappy sister --


LADY A. I did desire Ephraim to send for thy sister; did she dwell with thee,
and both now without a home? let her come to mine.


BANKS. The hand of misery has struck me beneath your notice.


LADY A. Thou do mistake; to need my assistance is the highest claim to my
attention -- let me see her. (Exit Banks.) I could chide myself that these
pasttimes have turned mine eyes from the house of woe. Ah, think ye proud and
happy a^^luent, how many in your dancing moments pine in want, drink the salt
tears -- their morsel the bread of misery, and shrinking from the cold blast
into their cheerless hovels!


Enter BANKS introducing AMELIA. Thou art welcome: I feel myself interested in
thy concern.

AME. Madam --


LADY A. I judge thou were not always unhappy, tell me thy condition, then I
shall better know how to serve thee; is thy brother thy sole kindred?


AME. I had a husband and a son.


LADY A. Widow, if it is real, not images, thou would forget -- impart to me
thy story, it is rumored in the village thy brother was a clergyman, tell me.


LADY A. Madam, he was; but he has lost his early patron, and he is now poor and
unbenesiced.


LADY A. But thy husband.


AME. By this brother's advice (now twenty years since) I was prevailed on to
listen to the addresses of a young sea officer, for my brother had been
chaplain in the navy; but, to our surprise and mortification, we discovered, by
the honesty of a sailor, in whom we put confidence, that the Captain's design
was only to decoy me into a seeming marriage; our humble friend entreated of us
to put the deceit on his master, by concealing from him that my brother was not
in orders; he, flattered with the hopes of procuring me an establishment, gave
into supposed imposition, and performed the ceremony.


LADY A. Duplicity, even with a good intent, is ill.


AME. Madam, the event has justified your confuse, for my husband, not knowing
himself really bound by any legal tie, abandoned me -- I followed him to the
Indies; distracted, till seeing him. I left my infant at one of our
settlements; but, after a fruitless search, on my return, I found the friend,
to whose care I committed my child, was compelled to retire from the ravages of
war, but where I could not hear -- rent with agonizing pangs, without a child
or husband, I again saw England, and my brother, who wounded himself with
remorse for being the cause of my misfortunes, secluded himself from all joys
of social life, and invited me to partake the comfort of solitude in that
asylum, from whence we have both just now been driven.


LADY A. My pity can do thee no good, yet must I pity thee; but resignation to
what must be, may restore peace; if my means can procure thee comfort, they are
at thy pleasure -- come let thy griefs subside -- instead of thy cottage,
accept thou and thy brother every convenience that my mansion can afford.


AME. Madam, I can only thank you with (weeps).


LADY A. My thanks are here -- come thou shall be cheerful -- I will introduce
thee to my sprightly cousin! Harry, and his father, my humourous uncle -- we
have delights going forward that may amuse thee.


AME. Kind Lady.


LADY A. Come, uncle, though a quaker, thou see I Am merry -- the sweetest
joy of wealth and power is to cheer one another's drooping heart, and wipe from
the pallid cheek the tear of sorrow.


END OF ACT THE IVth. ACT V.
SCENE, A ROAD. Enter three Men, dressed as Sailors. 1st SAILOR. WELL, lads,
what is to be done?


2d SAIL. We Have long been upon our shifts, and after all our tricks, twists,
and turns, as London was too hot for us, a trip to Portsmouth was a hit.


1st SAIL. Aye, but since the cash we touched upon pretending to be able bodied
seamen is now come to the last shilling, and as we deserted, means of fresh
supply must be thought on to take us to London.


2d SAIL. Aye, now to recruit the pocket, without hazarding the neck.


1st SAIL. By an advertisement posted on the stocks yonder, there are
collectors on this road, thirty guineas offered by the quaker lady, owner of
the estates round here -- I wish we could knap any straggler to bring before
her, a quaker will only require yea for an oath, we might pick up this thirty
guineas.


2d SAIL. Yes, but we must take care, if we fall into the hands of this
gentleman that is in pursuit of us -- 'Sdeath, is not that his man, the old
boatswain?


1st SAIL. Don't run, I think we three are a match for him.


2d SAIL. Let Us keep up our characters of sailors, we may get something out of
him; a pityful story makes such an impression on the soft heart of a true tar,
that he will open his hard hand and drop you his last guinea -- if we can but
make him believe we were pressed, we have him, only mind me.


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. To rattle my lanthorn, Sir George's temper now always
blows a hurricane.


2d SAIL. What cheer?


JOHN. Ha, boy.


1st SAIL. Bob up with your speaking trumpet.


2nd SAIL. Do You see, brother, this is the thing --


Enter SIR GEORGE behind, unseen. We three hands, just come home after a long
voyage, were pressed in the river, and without letting us see our friends
brought round to Portsmouth, and then we entered freely -- 'cause why, we had
no choice -- then we run -- we hear some gentleman's in chase of us, and as the
shots are all out, we'll surrender.

JOHN. Surrender -- then you have no shots left, indeed -- let us see (feeling
his pocket) I hav'n't the loading of a gun about me now, and this same Monsieur
Poverty is a bitter enemy.


SIR GEO. (aside) It Is the deserters I Am after.


JOHN. Meet me in an hour's time in the little wood yonder, I Will raise the wind
to blow you into a safe latitude -- Keep out to sea, my master's the rock
you will certainly split upon.


2d SAIL. This is the first time we ever saw you, but we'll steer by your
chart, for I never knew one seaman betray another. Exeunt Men.


SIR GEO. Then they have been pressed -- I cannot blame them so much for running
away.


JOHN. Yes, Sir George would certainly hang them.


SIR GEO. You lie; they shall eat beef and drink the King's health -- run and
tell them so -- stop, I Will tell them myself.


JOHN. Now you are yourself, and a kind gentleman, as you used to be.


SIR GEO. Since these idle rogues are inclined to return to their duty, they
shall not want sea stores; take this money -- but I Will meet them myself, and
advise them as I would my own children. Exeunt.


SCENE, A WOOD. Entrer ROVER, with pistols. ROV. Which way did this Mr.
Abrawang take? -- Dick Buskin, I think, has no suspicion of my intention, and
since Sim has, without making an alarm, procured these pistols, such a
choleric spark will fight, I dare say. If I fall, or even survive this affair,
I Will leave the field of love and the fair prize to the young gentleman I Have
personated, for I Am determined to see Lady Amaranth no more -- Oh, here comes
Abrawang.

Enter SIR GEORGE.
SIR GEO. Now to relieve these sea gulls -- they must be hovering about this
place -- Ha, puppy unknown.


ROV. You're the very man I was seeking for -- you're not ignorant. Mr.
Abrawang?


SIR GEO. Mr. What?


ROV. You Would not resign your title -- oh, very well, I Will indulge you -- Sir
George Thunder, you honored me with a blow.


SIR GEO. Did'n't hurt you.


ROV. 'Sdeath, Sir, but let me proceed like a gentleman; as it is my pride to
reject even favors, no man shall offer me an injury.


SIR GEO. Eh!


ROV. In rank we are equal.


SIR GEO. Are we, faith -- the English of all this is, we are to fight.


ROV. Sir, you have marked in me an indelible stain, only to be washed out by
my blood.


SIR GEO. Why, I Have only one objection to fighting you.


ROV. What Is that, Sir?


SIR GEO. That you're too brave a lad to be killed.


ROV. Brave, no, Sir, at present I wear the stigma of a coward.


SIR GEO. Zounds, I like a bit of fighting -- hav'nt had a morsel a long time
-- don't know when I smelt gunpowder, but to bringdown a woodcock.


ROV. Take your ground.


SIR GEO. I Am ready -- but are we to thrust with bull-rushes, like two frogs,
or like two squirrels, pelt one another with nut-shells, for I don't see any
other weapons here.


ROV. Oh, yes, Sir, here are the weapons.


SIR GEO. Well, this is bold work for a privateer to give battle to a King's
ship.


ROV. Try your charge, Sir, and take your ground.


SIR GEO. I wou'd'n't wish to sink, burn, or destroy what I thought was built
for good service, but dam'me if I don't bring wing to you, to teach you better
manners, so take care, or I Will put some red on your nose.

Enter three Men, without seeing Rover. 1st SAIL. Ah, here is the honest fellow
has brought us some cash.


2nd SAIL. We Are betrayed, it is the very gentleman that is in pursuit of us, and
this promise was only a decoy to throw us into his power -- the pistol! (aside)


SIR GEO. Good charge (trying the charge, the men rush forward, and one of them
smacks the pistol from him.)


SIR GEO. Ha, boys.


2nd SAIL. You Would have our lives, and we'll have yours. (Rover runs to his
assistance, and knocks the pistol out of his hand -- they run off.)


ROV. Rascals! (pursues them.)


SIR GEO. (takes up the pistol.) My brave lad, I Will -- (going.)


Enter JOHN DORY. JOHN. No, you shall not. (stops him.)


SIR GEO. The rogues will.


JOHN. Never mind the rogues. (a pistol fired without.)


SIR GEO. S'blood, must I see my preserver perish? (struggling.)


JOHN. I Am your preserver, and I will perish, but I Will bring you out of harm's
way.


SIR GEO. Though he would fight me himself --


JOHN. We all know you would fight the very devil.


SIR GEO. He saved my life.


JOHN. I Will save your life -- (whips him up) -- hawl up, my noble little
jolly-boat.

Exit, carrying Sir Geo. off.
SCENE, BANKS's HOUSE. Enter GAMMON, BANKS, and SIM. GAM. Boy, go on with the
inventory.


SIM. How unlucky, feyther, to lay hold on me, when I wanted to practice my
part.


BANKS. This proceeding is too severe -- to lay an execution on my wretched
trifling goods, when I thought --


GAM. Aye, you have gone up to the big house with your complaint -- her
Ladyship's steward, to be sure, has made me give back your cottage and farm,
but your goods I seized for my rent.


BANKS. Leave me but a few necessaries, by my own labor, and the goodness of
my neighbors, I may soon redeem what the law has put in your hands.


GAM. The affair is now in my lawyer's hands, and plaintiff and defendant
chattering about it is all smoke.


SIM. Feyther, don't be so cruel to Mr. Banks.


GAM. I Will mark what I may want for myself -- stay you and see that not a pin's
point be removed.

Exit.
SIM. (tearing the paper.) Dam'me, if I Will be a watch dog to bite the poor,
that I will not, Mr. Banks, as my feyther intends to put up your goods to auction,
if you could but get a friend to buy the choice of them for you again; sister
Jane has got steward to advance her a quarter's wages, and when I Have gone to
fell corn for feyther, I Have made a market penny now and then -- it is'n't much,
but every little helps. (offers a leather purse.)


BANKS. I thank you, my good natured boy, but keep your money.


SIM. I remember, about eight years ago you saved me from being drowned at
Black Poole -- if you will not take this I Will fling it into Black Poole directly.


BANKS. My kind lad, I Will not hurt your feelings, by opposing your liberality.
(takes the purse)


SIM. He, he, he! -- He Is given my heart such pleasure, as I never felt, nor
I Am sure my feyther before me.


BANKS. But, Sim, whatever may be his opinion of worldly prudence, still
remember he is your parent.


Exit. SIM. I will -- One elbow chair, one claw table. (crying out.)

Exit. Enter AMELIA.
AME. The confusion into which Lady Amaranth's family is thrown, by the sudden
departure and apprehended danger of her young cousin, must have prevented her
Ladyship from giving that attention to our affairs that I Am sure was her
inclination -- If I can but prevail on my brother to accept of her protection
-- Heavens, what is this?


Enter ROVER, fatigued and disordered. ROV. (panting, as out of breath.) What a
race -- I Have got clear of those bloodhounds at last; if Abrawang had but
followed and backed me, we'd have tickled their catas^rop, but three to one is
odds, so safe's the word. Who Is house is this I Have run into -- the friendly
cottage of my hospitable old gentleman -- are you at home? (calls) I had a hard
struggle for it, murder was certainly their intent -- it was well for me I was
born without brains -- I Am quite weak and faint.


AME. (comes forward.) Sir, a'n't you well?


ROV. Madam, I ask your pardonsyes, Madam, very well, I thank you, now
exceedingly well -- got into a kind of rumpus with some worthy gentlemen -- not
gentlemen, but simple farmers, who mistook me, I fancy, for a sheath of barley,
for they had me down, and their flails flew merrily about my ears, but I got
up, and when I could no longer fight like a mastiff, I run like a greyhound --
but, dear Madam, pray excuse me -- this is very rude, faith.


AME. You seem disturbed, will you take any refreshment?


ROV. Madam, you're very good -- only a glass of some current wine, if you
please; I think it stands somewhere thereabouts. (Ame. fetches a Bottle and
glass.) Madam, I Have the honor of drinking your health.


AME. I hope you're not hurt, Sir.


ROVER. A little better, but very faint still, I had a sample of this before,
and liked it so much that Ma'am will not you take another? (she declines.) Ma'am
if you would been fighting as I have, you would be glad of a drop (drinks again.) Now
I Am as well as any man in Illyria -- got a few hard knocks though.


AME. You Would better repose a little, you seemed much disordered coming in.


ROV. Why Madam you must know that it was. --


Enter SHERIFF's OFFICER. (Catches Amelia's Chair, she retires, alarmed) OFF.
Come Ma'am, Mr. Gammon wants this chair to make up the half dozen above.


ROVER. What Is all this?


OFF. Why, the furniture's seized on execution, and a man must do his duty.


ROVER. Then scoundrel know, that a man's first duty is civility and tenderness
to a woman.


AME. Heaven's where is my brother, this gentleman will bring himself into
trouble.


OFF. Master do you see I Am representative for his honor the High Sheriff.


ROV. Every High Sheriff should be a gentleman, and when he is represented by a
rascal he is dishonored; damn it, I might as well live about Covert Garden and
every night get beating the watch, for here among groves and meadows, I Am
always squabling with constables.


OFF. Come, come, I must. (sits down.)


ROV. As you say Sir, last Wednesday, so it was, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant, pray Sir have you ever been astonished?


OFF. What?


ROV. Because Sir, I intend to astonish you, (Takes a stick off a table and
beats him.) Now Sir, are you astonished?


OFF. Yes, but see if I don't suit you with an action.


ROV. Right -- suit the action to the word and the word to the action. See if
the gentleman be not affrighted, damme, but I Will make thee an example.


OFF. A fine example when goods are seized by the law.


ROV. Thou worm and maggot of the law, hop me over every kennel house, or you
shall hop without my custom.


OFF. I don't value your custom.


ROV. I have astonished, now I Will amaze you.


OFF. No Sir, I will not be amazed, but see if I don't.


ROV. [Exit Officer threatening.] Hop. Madam, these sort of gentry are but bad
company for a lady, so I Will just see him to the door -- Ma'am I Am your most
humble servant.

[Exit.]
AME. I feel a strange kind of curiosity to know who this young gentleman is. I
find my heart interested, I cannot account for it; he must know the house by the
freedom he took: but then his gaity, (without familiar rudeness) elegance of
manners and good breeding, seem to make him at home every where -- my brother I
think must know him.


Enter BANKS. BANKS. Amelia did you see the young gentleman that was here, some
russians have bound and dragged him from the door on the allegation of three
men who means to swear he has robbed them, and have taken him to Lady
Amaranth's.


AME. How! he did enter in confusion as if pursued, but I Will stake my life on
his innocence. I Will speak to her Ladyship, and in spite of calumny he shall
have justice; he wou'd'n't let me be insulted, because he saw me an unprotected
woman, without a husband or a son, and shall he want an advocate brother? come
--


[Exit.] SCENE, LADY AMARANTH'S. Enter JANE. JANE. I believe there is no soul
in the house but myself, my Lady has all the folks round the country, so seareh
after the young 'Squire; she will certainly break her heart if any thing happens
to him. I don't wonder, for sure he is a dear ^^cet gentleman. His going has
spoiled our play, and I had almost got my part by h^^rt, but must, must go and
do up the room for Mr. Banks's sister, whom my Lady has invited here --

Enter EPHRAIM.
EPHESIANS. The man John Dory has carried the man George here in his arms and he
locked him up; coming in they did look like a blue lobster with a shrimp in its
claw. Here is the damsal I love alone.


JANE. They say when folks look in the glass, they see the black gentleman,
[Loves in a glass,] La, there he is!


EPHESIANS. Thou art employed in vanity.

[Looks over her shoulder.]
JANE. Well, who are you?


EPHESIANS. It Is natural for woman to love man.


JANE. Yea, but not such ugly men as you are, why did you come in to frigh'en
me? when you know there is nobody here but ourselves?


EPHESIANS. I Am glad of that; I Am the elm, and you are the honey-suckle, let thine
arms entwine me.


JANE. What a rougue is here, but yonder comes my Lady. I show him off in his
true colors. [Aside.]


EPHESIANS. Clasp me round.


JANE. I will if you will pull off your hat and make me a low bow.


EPHESIANS. I cannot bend my knee, nor take off my beaver.


JANE. Then you're very impudent, go along.


EPHESIANS. To win thy savor, (moves his hat.)


JANE. Well now read me aspeech out of that fine play book.


EPHESIANS. Read a play book! abo-mi-na-tion! but will thou kiss me?


JANE. I kiss a man, abomination, but you may take my ha d.


EPHESIANS. Ch, 'its a comfort to the lip of the faithful.

[Kisses her hand,]
Enter LADY AMARANTH. LADY A. How! (taps him on the shoulder.) Ah, thou sly and
deceitful hypocrite!


EPHESIANS. Verily Mary I was buffotted by Satan in the shape of a damsal


LADY A. Be gone.


EPHESIANS. My spirit is sad though I move so nimbly.

Exit slowly.
LADY A. But oh, heaven's no tiding of my dearest Harry. Jane let them renew
their search.


JANE. Here Is Madam Amelia -- but I Will make brother Sim look for the young
'Squire.

Exit. Enter AMELIA.
AME. Oh, Madam might I implore your influence with --


LADY A. Thou art I Will accommodated here, but I hope thou will excuse it, my
mind is a sea of trouble, my peace is shipwrecked. Oh, had thou seen my
Cousin Harry! all who know him must be anxious for his safety! how unlucky,
this servant to prevent Sir George from giving him that assistance, which
paternal cares and indeed gratitude demanded, for 'twas filial affection had
him to pursue those wicked men, callous to every feeling of humanity -- they
may -- yes, my Henry in the opening bud of manliness is nipp'd!


JOHN. Heave ahead.

[John without.] Enter JOHN with SIR GEORGE.
SIR GEO. Rascal, whip me up like a pound of tea, dance about like a young
bear! make me quit the preserver of my life, yes, puppy unknown will think me a
paltroon, and that I was afraid to follow and second him.


JOHN. You may as well turn into your hamock, for out to night you shall not
go. (See's Amelia Mercy of heaven is'n't it -- only look.


SIR GEO. It Is my Amelia.


JOHN. Reef your foresail first, you cracked her heart by sheering off, and now
you will overset her by bringing too.


AME. Are you at length returned to me, my Seymour?


LADY A. Seymour! -- her mind's disturbed -- this is mine uncle, Sir George
Thunder.


JOHN. No, no, my Lady, she knows what she is saying, well enough.


SIR GEO. Niece, I have been a villain to this lady, I confess but, my dear
Amelia, providence has done you justice in part, for from the first month I
quitted you, I have never entered one happy hour on my journals -- hearing that
you foundered, and considering myself the cause, the worm of remorse has knaw'd
my timbers.


AME. You're not still offended with me.


SIR GEO. Me -- can you forgive me my offense, and condescend to take my hand
as an atonement?


AME. Your hand -- do you forget we are already ^arried?


SIR GEO. Aye, there was my rascality.


JOHN. You may say that.


SIR GEO. That marriage, my dear, I Am ashamed to own it -- but it was --


JOHN. As good as if done by the Chaplain of the Eagle.


SIR GEO. Hold your tongue, you impudent crimp, you pander, you bad adviser --
I Will strike my false colors, I Will acknowledge the chaplain you provided was --


JOHN. A good man, and a greater honor to his black, than your honor has been
to your blue cloth; by the word of a seaman, here he is himself.


Enter BANKS. SIR GEO. Your brother!


BANKS. Capt. Seymour! have I found you, Sir.


SIR GEO. My dear Banks, I Will make every reparation -- Amelia shall really be
my wife.


BANKS. That Sir, my sister is already, for when I performed the marriage
ceremony, which you took only as a cloak of your deception, I was actually in
orders.


JOHN. Now who is the crimp and the pander? -- I never told you this, because I
thought a man's own reflections were the best punishment for betraying an
innocent woman.


SIR GEO. (to John.) You shall be a Post Captain for this, sink me, if you
shall not.


LADY A. Madam, my inmost soul partaketh of thy gladness and joy for thy
reformation; (to Sir Geo.) but thy prior marriage to this lady annuls the
subsequent, and my cousin Harry is not now thy heir.


SIR GEO. So much the better, he is an unnatural cub -- but, Amelia, I flatter
myself I have an heir -- my infant boy.


AME. Ha, husband, you had, but --


SIR GEO. Gone -- well, well, I see I have been a miserable scoundrel -- I Will
adopt that brave kind lad, that wou'd'n't let any body ^^ll me but himself, he
shall have my estate, that is my own acquisition -- my lady marrying him --
(...) Unknown's a fine fellow! Amelia, only for him you would never have found your
husband. -- Captain Seymour is Sir George Thunder.


AME. What!


BANKS. Are you Sir George Thunder?

Enter LANDLORD and EPHRAIM.
LAND. Please you, Madam, they have got a foot-pad in custody.


EPHESIANS. I Am come to sit in judgment, for there is a bad man in thy house, Mary --
bring him before me.


SIR GEO. Before you, old Squintabus; perhaps you don't know I Am a magistrate.


EPHESIANS. I ll examine him.


SIR GEO. You be damned, I Will examine him myself -- tow him in here, I Will give
him a passport to Winchester bilbow.


AME. (kneels to Sir Geo.) Oh, Sir, as you hope for mercy, extend it to this
youth, and even should he be guilty, which from our knowledge of his benevolent
and noble nature, I think next to an impossibility, let the services he has
rendered us plead for him -- he protected your forsaken wife, and her unhappy
brother, in the hour of want and sorrow.


SIR GEO. What, Amelia plead for a robber! -- consider, my love, Justice is
above bias or partiality; if my son violated the laws of his country, l'd
deliver him up as a public victim to disgrace and punishment.


LADY A. Oh, my impartial uncle! Had thy country any laws to punish him, who
instead of paltry gold, would rob the artless virgin of her dearest treasure,
in the rigid judge I should now behold the trembling criminal.


Enter TWITCH, with two men, and ROVER bound. EPHESIANS. Speak thou.


SIR GEO. Hold thy clapper, thou -- you wretched person, who are the
prosecutors.


EPHESIANS. Call in.


SIR GEO. Will nobody stop his mouth (John carries him up the stage.) Where are
the prosecutors?


TWITCH. There, tell his worship the justice.


1st MAN. A justice -- oh, the devil! -- I thought we should have nothing but
quakers to deal with (aside)


SIR GEO. Come, how did this fellow rob you?


1st MAN. Why, your honor, I swear --


SIR GEO. Oh, ho!


1st MAN. Zounds, we are in the wrong, this is the very --


SIR GEO. Clap down the hatches, secure these sharks.


ROV. I Am glad to find you here, Abrawang, as I believe you have some knowledge
of these gentlemen.


LADY A. Heaven's, my Cousin Harry!


SIR GEO. The Devil! is'n't that my spear and shield?


JOHN. My young master, what have you been at here, (unbinds him,) this r^pe
may be wanted yet.


Enter HARRY. HARRY. My dear fellow are you safe?


ROVER. Yes, Dick, I was brought here very safe, I assure you.


HARRY. A confederate in custody has made a consession of their villainy, that
they concerted this plan to accuse him of a robbery, first for revenge, then in
hopes to share the reward for apprehending him; he also owns they are not
sailors but depredators on the public.


SIR GEO. What, could you find no jacket to disgrace by your wearing than that
of an English seaman, a character, whose bravery is even the admiration of his
enemies, and genuine honesty of heart, the glory of human nature? Keep them
safe.


JOHN. Aye, I knew the rope would be wanted,

(drives 'em off.)
SIR GEO. Not knowing that the Justice of Peace whom they brought the lad
before, is the very man they attacked, ha, ha, ha! the rogues have fallen into
their own snare.


ROV. What now you're a Justice of Peace -- well said, Abrawang.


AME. Then, Sir George, you know him too?


SIR GEO. Know him, to be sure I do.


ROVER. Still, Sir George -- what then you will not resign your Knighthood!
Madam, I Am happy to see you again. Ah, how do you do, my kind host? (to Banks)


LADY A. I rejoice at thy safety, be reconciled to him. (To Sir George.)


SIR GEO. Reconciled, if I don't love, respect and honor him, I should be
unworthy of the life he rescued -- but who is he?


HARRY. Sir, he is --


ROVER. Dick, I thank you for your good wishes, but I Am still determined not to
impose on this Lady. Madam, as I first told that well-meaning tar, when he
forced me to your house, I Am not the son of Sir George Thunder.


JOHN. Then I wish you was the son of an Admiral, and I your father.


HARRY. You refuse the lady -- to punish you, I have a mind to take her myself
my dear Cousin.


ROVER. Stop Dick, if I who adore her will not, you shall not no, no. Madam, never
mind what the fellow says, he is as poor as myself, is'n't he, Abrawang?


HARRY. Then, my dear Rover, since you are so obstinately interested, I Will no
longer ^eize my father, whom you here see, and in your strolling friend, his
very truant Harry that ran from Portsmouth Academy, and joined you and fellow
Comedians.


ROV. Indeed!


HARRY. Dear Cousin forgive me, if through my zeal for the happiness of my
friend, I endeavored to promote yours, by giving you a husband, more worthy
than myself.


ROV. Am I to believe, Madam, is your uncle Sir George Thunder in the room?


LADY A. He is.


ROV. It Is you in reality, what I Have had the impudence to assume, and have
perplexed your father with ray ridiculous effrontery. I told you, (to John) I
was not the person you took me for, but you must bring your damned Chariot -- I
am ashamed and mortised -- Madam, I take my leave.


EPHESIANS. Thou art welcome to go.


ROV. Sir George, as the father of my friend, I cannot lift my hand against
you, but I hope, Sir, you will apologize to me apart.


SIR GEO. Aye, with pleasure, my noble splinter. Now tell me from what dock you
were launched, my heart of oak?


ROV. I heard in England, Sir, but from my earliest knowledge, till within a
few years I Have been in the East Indies.


SIR GEO. Beyond seas -- well, and how?


ROV. It seems I was committed an infant to the care of a lady, who was herself
obliged by the gentle Hyder Ally to strike her toilet, and decamp without beat
of drumb, leaving me a chubby little fellow, squatted on a carpet; a serjeant's
wife alone returned, and snatched me off triumphant, through fire, smoke, cannon,
cries, and carnage.


LADY A. (to Amelia) Do thou mark?


AME. Sir, can you recollect the name of the town where --


ROV. Yes, Madam, the town, was Negapatnam.


AME. I thank you, Sir.


ROV. An officer, who had much rather act Hot-spur on the stage than in the
field, brought me up belind the scenes at the Calcutta theater, I was enrolled
on the boards, acted myself into favor of a colonel, promised a pair of
colors, but impatient to find my parents, hid myself in the steerage of a
homewardbound ship, assumed the name of Rover, from the uncertainty of my fate,
and having murdered more Poets than Rajars, stepped on English ground
unincumbered with rupees or pagodas. -- Ha, ha, ha, would thou have come
home so, little Ephraim?


EPHESIANS. I would bring myself home with some money.


AME. Excuse my curiosity, Sir -- what was the lady's name in whose care you
were left?


ROV. Oh, Madam, she was the lady of a Major Linstock, but I heard my mother's
name was Seymour.


SIR GEO. Why, Amelia!


AME. My son!


ROV. Madam!


AME. It is my Charles. (embraces him).


JOHN. Tol de lol! -- (dances a hornpipe step) -- Though I never heard it before,
my heart told me he was a chip of the old block. Your father, (to Rover, and
points to Sir Geo.)


Rov. Can it --


AME. Yes, my son, Sir George Thunder here is Captain Seymour, in search of
whom you may have heard I quitted England.


ROV. Heavens, then have I attempted to raise my hands against a parent's life.


SIR GEO. My brave boy -- then have I a son with spirit to fight me as a
sailor, yet defend me as a father.


LADY A. Uncle, you will recollect 'twas I frist introduced this son to thee.


SIR GEO. And I hope you will next introduce a grandson to me, young Slyboots. --
Harry, you have lost your fortune.


HARRY. Yes, Sir -- but I Have gained a brother, whose friendship, before I knew
him to be such, I prized before the first fortune in England.


ROV. My dearest Rosalind.


AME. Then, will you take our Charles?


LADY A. Yea; but only on conditions, thou bestowest thy fortune on his friend
and brother -- mine is sufficient for us both, is it not?


ROV. Angelic creature! to think of my generous friend. But now for As You Like
It; where is Lamp and Trap. I shall ever love a play, a spark from Shakespeare's
muse of fire was the star that guided me through my desolate and bewildered
maze of life, and brought me to these unexpected blessings.

To merit friends so good, so sweet a wife,
The tender husband be my part for life.
My Wild Oats sown, let candid Thespian laws
Decree that glorious harvest -- your applause.

FINIS.

