A NEW THEORY OF Continual FEVERS.

WHEREIN, Besides the Appearances of such Fevers, and the method of their Cure;
occasionally, the structure of the Glands, and the manner of Secretion, the
Operation of Purgative, Vomitive, and Mercurial Medicines, are Mechanically
explained.

-- Si propius stes
Te capiet magis.
Horat. de Art Poet. LONDON. Printed, and Sold by H. Newman at the Grasshopper
in the Poultrey, and J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1701.

THE PREFACE
TO write any thing tolerable about Fevers, or any thing worse than what has
already been advanced by some one or other on the Head, is perhaps no easy
matter. The ridiculous manner of accounting for their Causes and Symptoms, used
by some Pretenders to Medicine and Philosophy, has perhaps contributed (in its
way) to that contempt, to which (with such Expense of Satyr and Wit) they and
their Art have been exposed.

I have not the Arrogance to think the few following Sheets, will conduce any
thing to wipe it off; But of this I Am sure, if this Theory prove False, the
choices behind are fewer by one of the true Kind, which endeavors to account
from their Appearances from Mechanic Principles.

The Wiser part of Mankind are now persuaded, That this Machine we carry about,
is nothing but an Infinity of Branching and Winding Canals, filled with Liquors
of different Natures; and I am mightily out in my Conjunctures, if for the
Future any be heard about Theories of Diseases, or the manner of the Operation
of Medicines, who do not reason from these Data, and their necessary
Consequences. And seeing Continual Fevers, are only a Complication of Symptoms,
which naturally follow upon a general Obstruction of these Canals (or the
Glands which they constitute) and the necessary Effects thereof, as I reckon;
None, I hope, will be angry I have called such a manner of Accounting for them
New, seeing for any thing I know (as to the main thereof) it is really so.

For the structure of the Glands, and the business of Secretion, the Foundation
is Bellini's, but I hope it has lost nothing in my hands. I have added
somethings, extended others, and made all plain and consequential.

As to the other things here occasionally explained, which, adding what Bellini
had advanced about Blood-Letting, make up the great and principal Operations,
performed by Medicines on Animal Bodies; I have very frankly borrowed what of
them I found for my purpose, from Borelli, the foresaid Bellini, and another
Gentleman whom I reckon the Ornament of his Profession and Our Country: But
for the most part, pointing at Place and Person. And I shall reckon my self no
more a Plagiary for this, than a Lawyer is to be accounted one for quoting his
Code, or Pandects.

The occasion of entering upon those thoughts, was the noise and bustle has
been made among us about Vomiting in Fevers, about a Year ago: I Endeavored to
satisfy my self so as you may see, and had the Vanity to think there might be
some as great Fools as I, If I be mistaken it is not the first time

I have not been over nice in ranging the Particulars here contained, those who
read the whole will see their dependence, and for others I was not at the pains
to lay in.

The Language is that which most easily dropped from my Pen at first writing, the
Roughness of some terms of Art I could not avoid, and the purity of the English
Tongue is neither the growth of our Country, nor of my occasions, if it be
intelligible it is all (and perhaps some may say more than) I designed.

I neither expect nor desire any reputation from these Papers, for I
sufficiently know how few such things oblige. Besides, I Am dreadfully afraid
few will Read them, and not over many understand them, for want of the
necessary Qualifications, of a moderate attention, and a smattering of the
Mathematics. The first is absolutely necessary, but for the latter they may
even have a strong Faith, tho both for them and my self, I could wish it were
joined with Knowledge.

As for Censure, I am in no great dread of it; For I shall lie Secure (because
concealed) and see its adversaries (if it have the honor to provoke any) shoot
at rovers. If any shall take the pains to confute what I have here advanced, he
may do it very safely for his humble Servant, If he bungle it, he will do me an
honor, by showing it is not such as every Body is able to disprove; If he do
it to purpose he will do me a kindness, by freeing me from my errors. I design
for the future to meddle no more with it, than if it had dropped from the Clouds.

In fine, all my present concern is for the Bookseller; If he ben't a loser,
(which misfortune would be the most effectual confutation) it is indifferent to
me, whether it perish by a particular, or the general conflagration.

A NEW THEORY OF Continual FEVERS.
POSTULATA.
1. THAT the whole Body is nothing but a Congeries of Canals, the greatest (at
least a considerable) part of which is Glands, properly so called, designed for
the separation of some Fluid.

This is evident, when any part of the Body is Swelled, so that the
inconspicuous ones become Visible; and has been clearly demonstrated by
Malpigius, Leuvenhoeck and oothers.

2. That when a Machine is disordered, if we should see it righted by adjusting
such a particular Part, we might without scruple affirm, that it was some
injury done to that part, which had disordered the Machine; especially, if
after the whole was taken to Pieces, we should find them all sound, save that
particular one.

Thus, if we should see a Watchmaker, by adjusting only the Balance of a
Watch, make her go right; we might say the distortion of the Axe thereof had
occasioned her going wrong; especially, if all the other parts be found as they
should be.

LEMMA 1.
LEt there be a greater Distractile Cylindrical Canal, whose Orifice is ABCD,
through which a given quantity of Liquor passes in a given time; and a lesser
one EFGH, through which a proportionable Quantity of the same Liquor passes
with the same Celerity as in the former: Let now the greater ABCD be increased
or diminished by the lesser EFGH, So, as that in the increased or diminished
Cylindrical Canals, the same Quantities only pass, which passed in the same
time in the first supposed Canal ABCD: To find the quantity of the same Fluid
which will distract (and produce the other effects of increasing the quantity
of the passing Fluid, and consequently its Celerity) the Canal (by increasing
it is Diameter) first supposed, ABCD, after the same manner, only that the
increased (ABCD+EFGH) or diminished (ABCD-EFGH) Canals are now distracted.

Let the Quantity which in the first Supposition passes through the Canal ABCD
be called a, and the Quantity which passes through the Canal EFGH be called b*
Since in the first supposition the celerities are the same in both, their
Orifices will be as, a and b respectively. Likewise the increased and
diminished Canals (seeing their Altitude is supposed the same) will be as their
Orifices a+ b, and a-b; and the Quantities passing through them in the same
time, with the same celerity, would be likewise as a+ b and a- b: But (in the
second Supposition) the same quantity is supposed to pass in the increased
Canal ( a+ b) and diminished one ( a^ b) which pass^d in the first supposed
Canal ABC^, or ^; therefore now the quantities passing through the Canals,
increased or diminished, will be as a: wherefore, as a+ b, (the Quantity
passing through the increased or diminished Canals in the first supposition) is
to a; (the quantity passing through them in the second supposition) so is b,
(the quantity passing through the lesser Canal EFGH, in the first supposition)
to ^, the Proportional Quantity which passes through and will distract the
lesser Canal EFGH, after the same manner that the increased or diminished
Canals are distracted in the second Position. Adding or Substracting this
quantity from a, (which is as the quantity passing through, or distracting the
increased or diminished Canals) the Sum or difference ^ will be as the quantity
which will distract the First supposed Canal ABCD after the same manner, etc.
q. e. i.

SCHOLIUM.

THe whole Canals of the Body (save the Intestines and Lacteals) may be
considered as a concave Cylinder, whose Base is the Orifice of the Aorta at its
exit from the heart; and whose length is a mean Arithmetic Proportional
betwixt the longest and shortest Artery (I mean the whole length of the Artery
till it degenerat into a Vein; for the length of the Veins are of no
consideration here) It being their splitting into Branches which makes them not
Cylindrical. Now, by Postul. 1. the Vessels which make up the Glands may have
any proportion of minority to the whole of the Canals; Supposing then an
Obstruction or dilatation of the Glandular Vessels, it is evident the foresaid
concave Cylinder will be thereby diminished or encreasd in any given
Proportion: Suppose, e. g. the diameter of the Cylinder so Obstructed is to
that of the whole, as ^ is to the ^ 2; their Orifices will be as 1 to 2.
Suppose again, there are twenty pounds of Blood in a Man, seeing at the
Beginning of the Arterial Vessels (which constitute the Glands) the Velocity is
near the same, as proceeding from the same cause, the compression of the Heart:
Therefore divide 20 into two parts, which may be (in this case) as. 1. is to 2.
(which done by this general rule x=^, y=^ putting d for the 20 pounds, x for the
greater, and y for the lesser proportional Part, m to n their Ratio) The Parts
will be here 6, and 13 which are the proportional parts of 20 pounds of Blood,
which would naturaly pass in the obstruct-Canal, and in the Remainder thereof
which is passable. But if all the 20 pounds must now pass in the passable
Canals, then it shall be distracted as much as if the whole Canals were
passable; but that 30 pounds of Blood were forced through it in the same time
by the preceding Lemma. For in this case a=20, b=6, a- l=13; and therefore
^=30. If the Orifices were as 1 to 3. then b=5, a^ b=15 and ^=26 this supposing
an Obstruction. If there be a dilatation supposed in the same Proportions, then
^ will be in the first case 15, in the second 16. The same may be applied to
the Liquidum Nervorum, which passes in the Nervous Canals; For the Gland
consists of a complicated Nerve as well as Artery, and in an obstruction, or
dilatation of the same, both Artery and Nerve are supposed to be obstructed or
dilated.

The design of all this is to show, that in an Obstruction or Dilatation of the
Vessels, it is the same thing as if the Liquors therein contained were
augmented or diminished in a certain Proportion; as in the case of the
Bloodvessels, Supposing 20 pounds of Blood (which is the ordinary Quantity) in
a Man; and Supposing one half of the whole (by an Obstruction in any place of
the said) Vessels were rendered impassable, it is the same thing quam proxime,
as if the whole Blood Vessels were Passable; but that one half more of Blood
were forced through them in the same time, in which the 20 pounds passed. Of
the same nature is

LEMMA 2.
THe Blood being so corrupted, that the strength is impaired or increased, it
is the same thing as if it were in its natural estate, but that the quantity
thereof were diminished or increased in such a Proportion as is necessary for
producing this increase or decrease of strength.

This is 49 th Prop. of Bellini's Book de Motu Cordis etc. and its Converse;
The Proposition it self is there demonstrated, and its Converse may be
demonstrated after the same manner exactly.

What is here said of increasing or diminishing the strength, is likewise true
of all the necessary effects of lessening or increasing the quantity of the
Blood. These things premised, I come to

THE General Proposition.
THE General and most effectual cause of all Fevers, is the Obstruction or
Dilatation of (the complicated Nerve and Artery, the excretory Duct and
conservatory, one, or rather all these; which, as shall be afterward shown,
make up) the Glands, and they receive their denomination as these or those
Glands are more or less Obstructed or Dilated.

Other things may concur, but these are the most powerful causes.

It were a work of more time and pains than I can at present bestow, to apply
this Proposition to all particular kinds of Fevers; though I am sufficiently
satisfied it will account for All. I shall here only (as an earnest of the
rest) show how to apply it to continual Fevers, and therefore contract the
General into

The Particular Proposition.
THE most effectual Cause of continual Fevers, is an obstrution of the Glands,
which will necessarily augment the Quantity of the Blood and Liquidum Nervorum,
in the passable Canals and perhaps (by the Stagnation of the Fluids contained
in these) so vitiate their nature as that they may be reckoned to concur as a
partial cause of these Fevers: But I rely most on the First, to wit, the
augmentation of these Fluids. For a Demonstration of this, I shall First show
how it accounts for all the appearances of such Fevers, and then subjoyn
several Arguments to confirm the same.

Supposing the Glands Obstructed, the Quantity of the Blood in the Arteries,
and the Liquidum Nervorum in the Nerves, may thereby be supposed augmented in
any given proportion of minority to the whole mass of these Liquors, per Lemma
1. and its Scholium. Wherefore it will hence follow,

1. That the Pulses must be stronger and more frequent than ordinary, upon
these accounts (...). Seeing there is a greater Quantity (than ordinary) of
Blood in the Arteries, the Lateral Pression will be stronger; and seeing the
Arteries are distractile, they will be driven outward with greater force, and
make a stronger Ictus upon any thing applied to them. 2. Seeing the Quantity of
the Blood is augmented, i. e. the Quantity of the matter whence the Liquidum
Nervorum is generated, there must be a greater plenty thereof ( per poster.
part. Lemm. 2.) generated, and consequently it will flow more plentifully and
more quickly into the heart, and make it contract oftener and more violently. 3.
By the obstruction of the Gland, the influence of the Liquidum Nervorum
thereinto is likewise obstructed; and therefore, per Lemm. 1. there will be a
greater Quantity thereof left to flow in the passable Nerves, and it must flow
qua data porta. 4. Lastly, the Arteries on every siderunning upon and touching
the Medullar substance and Fiber of the Brain, will (they being more than
ordinarily distended) press them more than ordinarily and make a more powerful
and plentiful derivation of the Liquidum Nervorum into the places whither it
can flow.

2. From the same cause the inequality or Interruption of the Puises is
evident: For if the foresaid Pressions upon the Nervous Fibers of the Brain be
so strong, that it either partly or totally occludes the passage of the
Liquidum Nervorum; there must be a stop in the derivation, till there be such a
Quantity thereof collected, as shall be sufficient to overpower the
Impedimentum occasioned by this Pression, and so make an inequality or stop in
the contraction of the Heart. Moreover, when the Blood flows in such plenty and
with such violence from the Auricles into the Ventricles of the Heart, it may
force it is way before the Ventricle be entirely Contracted, and thereby cause
an irregularity in the Pulse. Add to these, what may proceed from the thickness
of the Blood (it being contracted into a less space) and evaporation of its
Humidity. All these, either singly or compounded, will account for the
irregularities of the Pulses which have hitherto been observed.

3. Great pains in the Head must ensue from the violent Distractions of the
tender Vessels of the Brain, and from the great pressure of the extended
Arteries upon the Fibers and Membranes thereof, all the Canals of every kind
being, Bowld'ned with their Respective Liquors; and that being the most
sensible place.

4. A violent and Burning Heat must be felt upon these accounts, 1. Because
there is a greater quantity than ordinary running in the passable Canals, there
must be a greater Motion than ordinary, and consequently a greater heat. 2
Merely upon the account of the increased Quantity, (without considering the
thereby produced greater Velocity) there must be felt a greater Heat. For
supposing the Heat in each single particle to be the same as before; Yet since
the particles are more numerous in the same Place, the heat must be greater
there too: As in Rays contracted by a Concave speculum. 3. The Glands being
obstructed, i. e. the passages of perspiration, the natural Heat must thereby
be kept in, and consequently the whole augmented per Lemm. 1. Hence proceeds
our unquenchable Thirst; the Humidity ( i. e. the thinnest parts) being more
ready to evaporate (since now the ordinary passages are obstructed) the rest
must be proportionally dryer.

5. The difficulty and frequency of Respiration, and the violence of
expiration, is hence easily accounted for: The quantity of Blood being
augmented, there must a proportional greater quantity thereof be derived into
the Arteries of the Lungs; and since every one of the little Vesicles of the
Bronchi lie betwixt two Arteries thus inflated, it will be harder to explicate
these Vesicles; and therefore one in such a state will naturally with all his
force endeavor to suck in the Air, which will be forced out again, both by
these inflated Arteries, and by the force of the Muscles of the Breast,
Diaphragm, and Lungs; which is vastly augmented, both by the greater quantity
of Blood and of the Liquidum Nervorum, and its more plentiful derivation; as
has been shown in 1. About the frequency and strength of the Pulses.

6. The Tongue is rough and discolored, because, by the violent motion of the
Blood, and the Obstruction of the common passages, the humidity is evaporated,
and the extraordinary Heat stiffens the Fibers thereof. For it is evident that
only heat and dryness discolor the Tongue. Vide 4.

7. Want of Sleep must follow both: Because there is such plenty of Blood, and
consequently of the Liquidum Nervorum (as is shown, 1.) that there is no need
of Sleep to generate more, which is one principal use thereof: and because of
diverse disorders of the Head (accounted for 3.) which will not allow that
tranquillity which is necessary to bring it on; but most of all because (by the
plenty of the Liquidum Nervorum) all the Muscles both involuntary and voluntary
(especially those who want Antagonists) are in continual violent motions which
must necessarily hinder Sleep.

8. Ravings proceed from the disorders in the Head, accounted for 3. The Nerves
being distracted by the abundance of their Liquor, the Heat and dryness of
their parts cannot perform these reciprocations which are necessary in sound
persons.

9. The clear and Flame-colour'd Urine proceeds from the velocity of the Blood,
which seperates thereby only the thinest of the mixed Fluid; as shall be shown
when we come to speak about Secretion.

10. The vast increase of strength, in persons laboring under high Fevers, is
evident from Lemm. 2.

11. Lastly, the ceasing and dissolution of Fevers by Purging, Sweating,
Vomiting and Abscesses, is wonderfully accounted for from this Theory. For if
they go off by the strength of Nature, then, seeing the greater Quantity and
Velocity of the Blood produce a greater Momentum, by the frequent concussions
and force of this, the Obstructions are shattered and washed away till the last
strokes carry away all together; and thereby go off in these or those,
according as these or those Glands were most obstructed. This will be better
understood when we come to speak of Mercurial Medicines. If by the assistance
of Medicines; then the Medicines must be such as are most proper for removing
these obstructions, as shall be afterward shown.

1. Thus I think I have accounted for all the appearances of Continual Fevers;
which I reckon one considerable argument for our Theory.

2. All we see done in the dissolution or ceasing of such Fevers, is the
opening the Glands, the driving out the stagnated Fluids therein contained,
which, per postul. 2. is another argument. And indeed one would hardly keep
himself from thinking, that if the removing these obstructions removed the
disease, then the putting them caused it: quo posito ponitur, and quo sublato
tollitur.

3. All that is observable upon opening persons cut off by Fevers, is (the rest
being sound and entire) an extraordinary Swelling and Lividity in the internal
Glands; Particularly, of the Lungs, the Liver, the Spleen and the Mesentery; as
has been observed by Borelli and others. Vide Borelli de Motu Animal. Part. 2.
prop. 227. This is one ocular demonstration of our Theory; and if the other
Glands were as conspicuous, I doubt not we should see the same in them.

4. A fourth Argument for our Theory is from what Dr. Pitoairne has
demonstrated in his Treatise of the Cure of Fevers: For since in Fevers the
Glands are obstructed, i. e. the conduits of insensible Perspiration, then by
removing this obstruction, i. e. by increasing the insensible Perspiration,
Fevers will be more probably cured, than by increasing all the sensible
evacuations: And that in the proportion the number of the Glands of the whole
Body has to the number of the Glands of the primae viae, or as the whole
outward and inward surfaces have to the surfaces of the primae viae proxime.

5. A fifth argument is from what Bellini has demonstrated in his third and
last Prop. in his Section, De Febribus. He there shows continued Fevers may
arise from a Vitiation in the Quantity, Quality, or Motion of the Blood; from
all or either of these. Moreover, from an increase or diminution of the
quantity of the Blood, there will necessarly arise an augmentation or
diminution of its velocity. The motion depends upon the Quantity multiplied
iuto the Velocity, and the Quality arises (for the most part) from a
Combination, or the necessary effects of these. Hence you see all that
necessarily follows upon the whole three, may be accounted for from the first
of these, to wit, the encreass or diminution of the quantity of the Blood.

6. Amputations, Wounds, Fractures, and the like, wonderfully confirm this
Doctrine. For there, a considerable number of the Bloodvessels are stopped, and
cannot make their Circle, and consequently increase the quantity of Blood in
the rest: So that generaly Fevers ensue, if the quantity be not lessened by
letting. It is true the violent Pain may concur, since all Pain is a Stimulus,
and all Stimulations occasion a more plentiful derivation of the Liquidum
Nervorum. But if the quantity of Blood be not supposed to be augmented, that
liquor must necessarily fail in a short time.

7. We may see visibly in Fevers from Cold, there is a violent Obstruction of
the Glands of the Skin, the Mouth, Larynx, Stomach; In a word, of all these
Glands to which the Cold Air is contiguous, and we can tell whence this
Obstruction proceeds; Besides this Fever may be increased to such a degree as
to differ little in its symptoms, violence, or duration, from other more
dangerous continual Fevers, which is a clear demonstration of our Doctrine; For
since an evident Obstruction of the Glands produces Fevers so very like the
most dangerous ones; why may we not conclude that some latent and unknown cause
may produce so general and strong an Obstruction, as is able to occasion all
the several more dangerous Fevers of this kind?

9. But that which I take to be alone (without any other Proofs) a
demonstration of our Theory, is, That in all Conntrys betwixt the Tropicks,
their Continual or Hot Fevers arise from a severe Cold Wind suddenly blowing
after excessive Gleams of Heat This is so true, that all Travelers assign this
as the cause, having constantly observed their Fevers to succeed such sudden
changes of the Air. A pregnant Instance of which we have in Phil. Trans. For
December. 1669 N. 259. In a Letter from Mr. Hugh Jones to Dr Woodroof, concerning
some observables in Maryland, His words are these The North-West Wind is very
sharp in Winter, and even in the Heat of Summer it mightily cools the Air; and
too often at that time a Sudden North-Western Wind strikes our laborers into a
Fever, when they are not caresul to provide for it, and put on their Garments
while they are at work. Thus he. And indeed the genuin account of the matter is
this; The excessive heat must necessarily dilate the Glands to which it is
contiguous, i. e all the Cutaneous Glands, the Glands of the Trachea, Bronchi,
Osophragus, Stomach, and of the Intetines; and it will not only Dilate them,
but (by the assistance of the natural action of these, which is Secretion)
Exhale their respective Liquors, making them still flow, so long as the
excessive Heat continues, and as there is Blood which may supply them: Now they
being thus dilated and (by the Efflux of their Liquors) soft'ned and made
spungy, a sudden excessive Cold supervening, must strongly contract their
Orifices and congeal their ^owing Liquors, and the greatness of their
contraction will be always in proportion to the violence of the former Heat and
supervening Cold conjunctly; as is known from the nature of Cold. And this
Contraction of their Orifices and Congelation of their Fluids, will obstruct
the motion of the Blood almost up to the Heart, at least to the next division
of the Artery which constitutes this Gland; whereby both the Blood will be
increased as to its Quantity, and perhaps (by this stagnation of a part of the
same) as to the Quality thereof likewise. All which is but a Corollary of our
Theory.

10. Hence we evidently see the reason of the frequency of our last Years
Fevers: For we were then exactly (in proportion to our Climats) in the state of
those betwixt the Tropicks. Our Summer-Day heats were more violent than had
been observed among us in the Memory of men, and our nights had no ways the
Heat proportionate to our days: Besides we had often sudden changes, which though
not so Violent as in these warmer Countries; Yet had the same (though a slower)
effect as among them: And therefore it was that frequent Vomitings were found
so useful, which (at least in such a degree as was found then necessary) is
not always so safe. The Practice was entirely agreeable to that of these
Southern Countries, and the necessity thereof will be understood when we come
to speak of Vomiting. The same practice obtains in Fevers occasioned by
surfeiting or Drunkenness; which is still to be suspected as a considerable
part of the cause of Fevers in adult Persons in great Cities.

And generally I should think either the above mentioned sudden changes (which
may happen a Thousand other ways different from the Season) or a direct
continued fit of violent Cold, or excesses in Eating or Drinking; one or all of
these, have a large share in most of our Continal Fevers.

11. Lastly, it is no ways accountable from any other Theory (as I think) how
these Liquors which are secreted from the Glands at the Dissolution of Fevers,
could be so different from the ordinary fluids which are there excern'd. From
ours it is evident, for an Obstruction of the Glands must necessarily make
their respective Liquors to stagnate, which will many ways alter their nature,
But from any other Hypothesis I do not see how this can come to pass; which
will lead me to consider one or two of the commonest Opinions about continual
Fevers.

The most common and generally obtaining Opinion about Fevers is, that they are
more immediately produced by some Morbifick matter; (like a Poison) which
mixing and circulating with the mass of the Blood, Produces all those frightful
Symtoms which we feel. This Opinion is sufficiently confuted, Prop. 222. 223.
224. 2 dae. part. of Borelli's Book De mot. Animal. whither I refer the reader;
only adding (to what he has there adduced) this one Argument.

When any Corrupt Matter is mixed with the Blood, so as to vitiate the whole
mass, (as Vinegar among Water) the way of Curing such a vitiation is either by
forming new Glands to derive the vicious part of the mixture; or by draining
the whole mixture good and bad, and Substituting new pure Blood in it is place:
Or lastly, by disposing the already formed Glands to secern the corrupted part.

The first of these is ridiculous.

Some thing like the second is done, when the Blood is really vitiate in the
whole; as inveterate Poxes, but that cure cannot here have a place as shall be
afterward shown.

As to the third way; let us consider,

1. How hard it is to think (when the whole Mass is supposed corrupted) that
the vicious part, all at once, or, in the space of a few Hours (in which time
we know, after a Crise, Fevers commonly leave People) should be entirely
evacuated. This is not like the actions of Nature, which works leisurely and by
degrees.

2. Let us consider, whence all the Glands (at least the greater part of them)
should be so altered (seeing their configurations are so different, and
naturally they secern so different Liquors) as, all at one time to separate the
same Morbifick matter. And,

3. How at the Crise only, and at no other time, they should be so disposed.

It will be very hard in any other Theory (in this more particularly) save
ours, to account for these things without recurring to miracles, or the absurd
Metaphorick Terms of Sympathy, Antipathy and the like. These then, with what
Borelli has brought against this Opinion in the forecited places, are
abundantly sufficient to show the ridiculousness thereof.

But there are several Physicians, who observing, that, in Fevers, there was
(by a Vomit) a tough viscid matter thrown out of the stomach, have thought this
matter, generated there, and mixing with the Mass of the Blood, might be a
considerable Part of the cause of Fevers; at least might considerably augment
the same; and have from thence brought Arguments for the necessity of Vomiting
in Fevers.

This Opinion supposes these things,

1. That the Quantity of the Morbifick matter excern'd by a Vomit, before the
Administration thereof, was existent in the cavity of the Stomach, after the
same manner that other things are, which are derived into the Mass of the
Blood, else it could never get thither. This I shall consider when I come to
speak of the Operation and effects of Vomiting.

2. That it is at least possible, this Morbifick matter may be derived into the
Mass of Blood; let us at present consider this.

I know no way any thing of any tolerable consistence, can get into the Mass of
the Blood; but by the Lacteal Veins. It is true, from the sudden effects of
some Spirits, Medicines, and strong Meats, we are certain, that the more
refined parts of these, may get into the Brain, without going the tedious
Circle of the Lacteals: But this is done by the Reciprocal motion of the
Nerves, the necessity and Mechanical Operation of which Borelli has
demonstrated, prop. 155. 157. 160. 2 dae. part. De motu Animalium. However, I
think none will pretend such a course for this viscuous Morbifick matter: And
therefore if it gets into the Mass of the Blood, it must go the common road of
the Lacteals.

To decide the matter, I must suppose my Reader to have considered the 2 last
prop. ( Ex ijs quae ad separationes) which Beilini has in his Preface to his
Book De Vrinis and Pulsibus, etc. and the 27. 28. and 40. of his last Book De
Motu Cordis, etc. where the construction of the Glands and the manner of
separations are demonstratively unfolded, which I take to be the noblest
discovery (in these matters) of this age. From these places it is clear that,

Prop. 1. A Gland is nothing but a great many complications and circumvolutions
of the Artery (all over the coats of which little branchings of Nerves pass,
designed principally for the Spiral Contortion thereof; that the Blood may be
the more easily propogated through the same: But this is common to all the
Arteries and Veins, whereby, without any Interruption of the same spire, the
propagation of the Blood, in the former, from the heart to the extremities of
the Body, and from the extremities to the heart back again, in the latter, is
assisted) which sends out from the sides thereof, little Secretory Canals,
which terminate in one common conduit, and is called the Emissary of the Gland;
or perhaps in a common Pelvis (as in the Kidneys;) and the same Artery after
these windings degenerates into a Vein.

Prop. 2. That separation or secretion is performed by the composition of two
motions in the Fluid; one propagated through the length of the Canal, another
transversly through its sides (for it is demonstrable that all Fluids press
undiquaque and that the direction of their pression is perpendicular in every
point to the sides of the containing vessel) The composition of which two, is
the motion (or rather direction) of the separated Fluid.

Prop. 3. That in a mixed Fluid, consisting of greater and lesser cohesion of
parts, of greater and lesser Fluidity: That which has the least cohesion and
greatest Fluidity, is first separated ( i. e. is separated in the Glands, whose
compounding Artery is shortest, or at least distance from the heart, or
Fountain of Motion) And these of the next cohesion, and next greatest Fluidity
is next separated; and so on: The distances from the Heart being in a
compounded proportion of these

Prop. 4. That the Intestines are really such a Gland, and the most visible one
in the Body; whose secretory Vessels, are the Lacteals; and whose common
conservatory or Pelvis, is the Recepaculum Chyli.

To these I shall add (because of its affinity) the following.

Prop. 5. The quantity separated in every Gland, is in a compounded proportion
of the celerity of the Fluid at the respective Orifices; And of the Orifices
themselves, of the separating Canals.

I shall here subjoyn the Demonstration of this Proposition; referring (that
of) the rest to their Author.

DEMONSTRATION.

THE Orifices being given, the quantity separated is as the celerities of the
Fluid: For in a greater celerity, there is a greater quantity separated; in a
less celerity, a lesser quantity. The Celerities being given, the quantity
separated is as the Orifices directly, for at a great Orifice there is greater
quantity separated, at a less Orifice a lesser quantity: And therefore neither
being given, the quantity separated is as the celerities, and the Orifices
conjuctly, q. e. d.

From all these, I draw the following

COROLLARIA.

1. THe separated Fluids differ only in their degrees of Cohesion and Fluidity.
per Prop. 2.

2. The reason why Fluids of different degrees of Cohesion and Fluidity, are
separated in such and such Glands, is the different degrees of the Velocity of
the Fluid at the respective Orifices of the separating Vessels, and the
differences of the Orifices themselves, per prop. 3.

3. The Glands themselves differ only in the length of the Artery, the
difference and number of its Complications and Convolutions, per prop. 1.

4. Each Gland (naturally and equally working) separates only the Fluid proper
to it self; i. e. peculiar to such lengths and complications, of such degrees
of Fluidity or Cohesion, to such bigness or smallness of the Orifices of the
separating Canals; per Prop. 3. and 5. But this last is of small consideration

5. That Secretion may be performed the most easily that may be, the insertion
of the separating Canal ought to be at an Angle of 45. degrees with the Artery,
per prop. 2. For let AB Represent the Artery (if it make a Right line) or its
Tangent (if it make a Curve) and let the motion of the Fluid be from A to B,
the right line AB will likewise represent its direction, propogated from the
Heart. Erect at A the perpendicular AC; this will represent the direction of
the lateral pression of the Fluid. Complete the Parallelogram ABCD. The
direction of the composition of these two motions will be the Diagonal AD, as
is known; which in the present case, makes an Angle of 45 degrees with the
Artery AB. This were well worth the observing (if it be possible) in Animals;
but it must be in live ones, before their parts have altered their Positions.
And here it were worth the examing likewise; whither what Mr. Newton has
demonstrated ( Scol. prop. 35. lib. 2. Princip. Phil. Mathem) about the
resistance of Conical Figures, obtains in Animal Bodies; For tho his
demonstration be only concerning Unequal Cones, yet the same obtains in Concave
ones; wherefore seeing the Artery betwixt any two Branchings is a Conus
Truncatus, it may be represented by the figure CEBGF; Now seeing the Diameter
CB of the base of this Conus truncatus, and the Diameter FG of the Base FDG of
the Conus abscissus FDGS, as likewise their Distance, O D, may all be had; it
is evident that the entire Cone CBGSH may be had likewise: Wherefore Bisect the
distance OD in Q; and if it be found (having drawn CQ) that QS is equal to QC,
then the Conus Truncatus CE BGF (among all of the same Base and Altitude) gives
the least resistance to the Blood flowing from O to D. I am inclined to think
this may obtain in the truncks of the great Arteries; (...) branchings (for no
further (...) considered.) This I recommend to be examined for the honor of
that great Man, who has crowded up in this Scholium (not to mention the rest of
his admirable Book) a vast number (if retail'd) of most Charming and useful
Truths.

To come now to the Business; The Testiculi Humani are granted by every one, to
be Glands; and Bellini has found the length of the complicated Artery in one of
them, to be 300 Else, and the Altitude of one of these Glands, (when freed of
its integuments) to be 1/16 Ell: Whence I conclude, there must be 4800
Plications, or Circumvolutions in one of these, Proxime. He likewise asserts,
That ( caeteris paribus) if two Fluids of the same Nature, with equal
Velocities, the one be forced into a Canal of the same Number and Lengths of
Complications, as are in the foresaid Gland, and the other into a straight
Canal of the same length; The Velocity (in or about their Exits) of the first
Fluid, to that of the second, will be as 1 to 4800. He has not indeed subjoined
the Demonstration; But if we suppose the Artery to lie in Plicae or solds of
such number and lengths, as we have just now determined; (which is perhaps not
far from truth:) and if we suppose the Turnings of the Plicae to be circular;
(which perhaps may follow from this, That seeing a Circle is the only ordinate
figure of an infinite number of equal Sides, and equal Angles; it must be the
only Curve, which can make (in all its parts) the Angle of Incidence equal to
the Angle of Reflection, and consequently the only Curve in which a Fluid would
most easily turn) and likewise the Arch in which they turn to be a Semicircle:
(which it must be, if the sides run Parallel after the turning; and
Universally, if the sides produc^d make any Angle from the quantity thereof,
the quantity of the Arch in which they turn, may be determined.) I say, from
these Data, the former Proportion may be by Calculation examined; or perhaps
more briefly by Experiment, thus.

Take a Pipe of Metal of any Diameter, and ^old it into any determined number
of Plicae, whose sides may run Parallel, and whose lengths may be 1/16 Ell:
Then by a weight force a liquor through it, and observe the time betwixt the
first entry of the Liquor into the complicated Canal, and its first appearance
at the other Orifice; Then take another straight one of the same length with
the former, and with the same weight force the Fluid through it; observing the
same way, the time of its passage, The Lengths being the same, the Velocities
shall be as the time of passing reciprocally, as is known. Having thus got the
Proportion of their Velocities in any one determined number of Plicae, we may
(by the rule of Three) have their Proportions in any assigned number thereof.
Supposing then that this great Man has found the truth of the foresaid
Proportion from some such way, as one of these; follows, That in every turning,
the volicity must be abated 1/4800 of the whole Proxime: (for 4800,
4800/48004800 1.) Now let us suppose the Proportion of the Cohesion and
Fluidity of the Fluid separated in the Testiculi Humani, to the Cohesion and
Fluidity in our Morbifick matter, now derived from the Stomach into the small
Intestines, to be as 1 to 2. (I mean the Cohesion and Fulidity of the Fluid
separated in the Testiculi Humani, as it is when immediately separated. For
when it has lodged any time in the Vesiculae spermaticae, we know by its
Ebullitions and the Evaporation of its thiner Parts, it loses a great deal of
its Fluidity.) And that this is a liberal allowance, is evident from
Leuvenhoek's Experiments scattered up and down the Phil. Trans. and Printed all
together at Amsterdam; where we may see from the Microscopial Observations he
has made on this Fluid, its Fluidity is little less than that of common Water:
And consequently, at least, Ten times more than that of our Morbifick matter.

And here I hope it will not be impertinent, to set down a Proposition to
compare the Viscidities of different Liquors.

PROPOSITION.

LET two Drops of two different Liquors fall into a pair of fine Scales; (a
Drop of the one Liquor into the one Scale, and a Drop of the other Liquor into
the other Scale) so that there fall no more than just their own Gravities carry
down: Thus you shall have, what I here call, their Comparative Gravities; and
by the ordinary Method, you may likewise have their Specific Gravities. These
being given; I say, their Viscidity and Cohesion shall be in a compounded
Proportion of their Specific Gravities reciprocally, and their comparative
Gravities directly. The Demonstration is easy from the Nature of Fluids.

Let us again suppose the length of the small Guts (for it is there only where
any thing is separated from the Intestines) to be 6 Yards; and that in every
1/16 of a Yard, there is a Plication: (And that these are likewise liberal
Allowances; any who have ever seen a Dissection will know.) Then there will be
96 Plications in the whole; and consequently the Fluid in these Intestines,
will lose but 96 parts of the whole Celerity it had at its entry.

Lastly, Let us suppose, That Celerity to be equal to the Celerity of the
Blood, when it first enters the Plications of the Testiculus Humanus; (which
all will readily grant, who consider, that there is never any thing found in
these small Guts, but a thin Liquor in wide Canal, thrust forward by the force
of the Fibers of the Stomach and Intestines) Let us call this Celerity a.

Now from Corol. 1. 2. and 3. about Separation; If a Viscidity, as 1 give 4800
Plications, then a Viscidity as 2 will give 9600 such: And therefore, that such
a Viscid Liquor should be separated, it is requisite it should lose 9600 parts
of the whole Celerity: But (as has been just now shown) by the Ilicae of the
Intestines, the Fluid will lose but 96 parts of the Celerity a. Whence it is
absolutely impossible that the Intestines should separate this Viscid matter,
unless they were a Hundred times longer than they are: For 9696001100. If the
Viscidity of the Fluid separated in the Testiculus Humanus, were to that of our
Morbifick as 1 to 10, then the small Intestines ought to be Five Hundred times
longer than they are. And indeed I believe the Proportion really not to be
under 1 to 50; and then they ought to be at least 25 Hundred times longer than
they are.

Thus we see the second thing (this Opinion supposes,) is false; and indeed, it
hardly could be otherwise; for, (in my Opinion) the Faeces themselves might
more probably get into the Mass of the Blood, than this viscid matter, the
parts of these being only united by a simple Contact: Whereas the parts of this
are joined by a very strong Nisus. And I remember, Dr. Lister, some where in
the Phil. Trans. relates how he tried to get in a very fine tinged Spirit into
the Lacteals of a live Dog, by cuting the small Guts, and injecting the Liquor,
then sewing all up again: But he could never get it done to his Satisfaction.
And here it is to be observed, that people may be deceived with Blue Tinctures;
for this is the Natural Color of these Lacteals when they are almost or
altogether empty.

If it be objected, 1. That the Concoction of the Stomach and Intestines may
fit this Morbifick matter, to be separated by the Lacteals. 2. That the
Peristaltick Motion and the Valves of the Intestines may hinder the quick
motion of the compounded Chylous matter. 3. That there are some Medicaments, as
Turpentine, etc. which we know, by their effects, get into the Mass of the
Blood, and yet are more viscid than our Morbifick matter. 4. That there is
rereally as viscid matter separated in some other Glands, as the Bile and the
Phlegm.

To these I answer,

1. As to the first; seeing triture is the only effect of the Stomach and
Intestines, there is no advantage to be reaped thence; for no beating nor
g^ating will dissolve the union of this Morbifick matter. Besides where it is
in any plenty, the effects of Concoction are very small, or none,

2. As to the Second; The Peritaltik motion being reciprocal, it adds as much
(to the motion of the Chylous matter) in it is descent toward the Rectum, as it
takes away, in its ascent toward the Stomach; and so cannot serve that end,
the Plicae and circumvolutions of these Intestines (which we have considered)
being only to be relied on, for this purpose. As to the Valv's, we know they
all open toward the Rectum, and serve only to stop the ascent of the Faeces in
the Peristaltick motion, and so cannot retard the motion of the Chylous matter.

3. As to the Third; We likewise know, that all these Medicaments are dissolved
into a thin Liquor by heat (as Turpentine, Butter, etc.) Besides that only the
most spritious and least viscid parts enter the Blood; which is not said of our
Morbifick matter.

4. As to the last; There is a great difference betwixt a Liquor immediately
after it is separated, and when it has Stagnated sometime in the Conservatory
of the Gland; for then the Aqueous and more humid Parts evaporate; and by its
stagnation it acquires an ineptitude to motion: And tho the Blood flows very
easily in the Arterys and Veins; yet I defy any to cause extravasat Blood enter
its Vessels again. But more particularly, we must consider the Liver to be a
very large Vessel, and (if it were evolv'd) to make an Artery many Thousand
times longer than that of the Canal of the small Intestines, or Testiculus
Humanus either; and so it is no wonder it separate a viscid matter; the motion
of the Blood there being very small: But still I assert it is not near so vicid
as our Morbifick matter. As to the Phlegm, we know it is not naturally
produced; and the Morbifick matter it self (against which we dispute) might be
as well objected; for it is only the Stagnation, Corruption and Evaporation of
the Humidity, which occasions both; the same might be said of the Purulent
matter which passes by Urine, but that we know it proceeds from an Ulcer in the
Kidney or Neck of the Bladder, and is not discerned with the Urine.

Having dwelt thus long on the Opinions of others, I come now to consider the
proper remedies of Fevers which I reduce to, 1. Blood letting, 2. Vomiting, 3.
Purging, And, 4. The Medicaments which increase the less Sensible Evacuations;
under which head I comprehend Sweating, Perspiration, and the like.

I do not here consider blistering and outward Applications; seeing (in my
Opinion) they are only useful to remove the accidental effects, and not the
cause of Fevers, without which they cannot be said to be truly cured.

1. As for Blood letting; The subject is so fully and learnedly treated by
Bellini in his forementioned Books together; that it were equally impossible as
impudent to offer at any additions: And therefore for entire satisfaction on
this head, I shall refer my Reader to these Books.

2. As to Vomiting; I shall comprehend all I have designed to say about it in
these particulars, 1. I shall show that Vomiting is partly produced by the vis
stimulans Vomitorii: But, 2. That it is mostly occasioned by the vis stimulans
of the Morbifick matter excern'd from the Glands of the Stomach. 3. I shall
prove that this Morbifick matter is not in the cavity of the Stomach (at least
in such plenty as it is excern'd by a forced Vomit) before the ingestion of the
said Vomit. 4. I shall give the whole destruction and connection of this
Operation; And, 5. Shall consider the advantages of the same in the cure of
Fevers.

Before I come to handle these, it is necessary, I first explain what I here
mean by a vis stimulans.

By a vis stimulans, I understand such a Quality in a Fluid, whereby the
particles thereof are disposed to make a real division or a violent inflexion
of the Nervous and Membranous Fibers of the Body, which occasions frequent and
forceable reciprocations, successions and derivations of the Liquidum Nervorum
into the Muscles and contractile Fibers of the Canals; whereby all the
involuntary Muscles are brought into violent contractions, and the emissaries
of the Glands are squeezed.

Those who desire a fuller account of the nature and mechanical Operations of
this vis stimulans, may see it, Page 165. and Seq. of Bellini's Book De Vrinis
and Pulls. and Prop. 52. of his last Book De Motu Cordis. I say then,

1. Vomiting is Partly produced by this vis stimulans Vomitorij; This is
evident from these considerations. 1. Because sometimes we immediately Vomit
upon the Ingestion of the Vomitory, before the Morbifick matter excern'd from
the Glands of the Stomach could have time to concur. 2. We throw up very often
the same we had taken in, with little or no mixture; which could not happen, if
the Morbifick matter had concurred to produce the fit. 3. Sound persons (in
whose Stomachs there is little or none of this Morbifick matter) often Vomit
upon a too plentiful ingestion of an (otherwise) inoffensive Liquor. The only
reason of which must be that the Stomach not being able to derive into the Mass
of the Blood the said Liquor, so fast as it is poured in, it must Sour on the
Stomach, and thereby acquire this vis stimulans, whereby it is thrown out: Or
perhaps it may still have a vis stimulans, tho not (when it is in a small
quantity) sufficient to bring the Stomach into that violent contraction which
is necessary in Vomiting; But this small vis stimulans being Multiplied by the
too great quantity of the Liquor, may acquire sufficient force to produce the
effect; as we see several things lose the quality to produce their visible
Effects, when in small, which they had when in great. But, 2.

I say, Vomiting is mostly accasion'd by this vis stimulans of the Morbifick
matter excern'd from the Glands of the Stomach; and that for these reasons, 1.
The action of the vis stimulans Vomitorij being terminated at, or near the
internal surface of the Stomach, after one or two plentiful fits of Vomiting,
(there being produced thereby such a succussion and compression of the sides of
the Stomach) these Particulae Stimulantes must necessarily be disentangled; and
so there could be no more fits of Vomiting, which is contrary to experience. 2.
We evidently see in Sea-Vomits, and in those produced by the Joltings of a
Coach in some people, there is no vis Stimulans Vomitorij to which we can
attribute this effect; and therefore it must necessarily be produced by the
vellications of the Morbifick matter excern'd by this particular motion. The
manner of which may be thus explained, every particular body has a determined
degree of tension and a determined length. And if a like reciprocation of
motion (by whatsomever cause) be produced in the ambient Medium, which would
necessarily be produced by another Body (when moved) of the same degree of
tension, and of length commensurable to the length of the first body, there
must be of necessity a motion produced in that first body, especially if the
motion of the Medium be violent, and the commensurable lengths be as the first
number's of the ordinary Arithmetical Progression, 1. to 2. or 1. to 3. or 2.
to 3, etc. This is evident in the unisone or concordant Strings of greater
Musical Instruments: And the Reason is, because thereby the Oscillations of
such Bodies become Commensurable. Now I suppose this particular Motion of
Jolting Coaches and Ships, to be such, as would be produced by another Body
having the just now mentioned Analogy to the Nerves of the Glands of the
Stomach, whereby they are brought into motion, and consequently derive great
Plenty of their Liquidum into the places, which makes such contractions as
squeez these Glands of the matter, which produces these fits of Vomiting:
Besides that the same cause may (upon other Fibers) produce the antecedent
Sickness which we feel in Sea-Vomits. 3. By a Vomit of warm water (for example)
there are often produced several fits of Vomiting; and yet we all know there is
no vis Stimulans in it; So that all it can do, is, that by its warmth (which is
a kind of a Fotus) it elicits the matter from the Glands of the Stomach, which
occasions this Vomiting. I could add a great deal more to confirm this
proposition, but I think this sufficient. I say,

3 ly. That the Morbifick matter (excern'd by Vomiting) is not existent in the
Cavity of the Stomach, (at least in such Plenty at it is excern'd by a forced
Vomit) before the administration thereof. 1, This is an evident Corollary from
the former Prop. The Vomit does not Act (at least after the first one or two
fits) by it is own vis ctimulans; There is (in Vomiting) produced a violent
contraction of the Fibers of the Stomach, the Muscles of the Addomen and
Diaphragm, which must be occasioned someway. There is nothing (in Vomiting)
which can occasion this, but either the vis ^timulans Vomitorii, or of the
excern'd Morbifick matter; and since (as has been already proved) it can not be
the former, it must of necessity be the latter: Wherefore if the Morbifick
matter were already existent in the cavity of the Stomach, the Vomit were of
little use after one or two Fits; which is contrary to experience. 2. If this
Morbifick matter were already in the cavity of the Stomach, it is not possible
but that one or two plentiful fits of Vomiting would eject all that is there;
so that afterward there should none be thrown out however violent the
consequent fits were, which is likewise contrary to experience. The force of
the Muscular Fibers of the Stomach, The Muscles of the Abdomen and Diaphragm
(which two last Monsieur Chirac, Professor of Medicine at Montpellier, by an
easy experiment, has shown to concur principally in Vomiting. vide, The Preface
of Tournfort's Histoire des Plants qui Naissent aux environs de Paris) is at
least equal to 260000 lib. weight; (the force, of the Muscles of the Abdomen
and Diaphragm being more than that of 248000 libs. and of the Stomach, not
inferior to that of 12000 pounds) which force if it be not sufficient to drive
out all that is existent in the cavity of the Stomach (however Viscid the
matter be) I leave every one to judge. 3. Supposing the Morbifick matter
already in the cavity of the Stomach; It is Impossible to give an account of
the different effects of different Vomits: For Example, why an Antimonial Vomit
does excern this Morbifick matter more plentifully than Whey or warm Water. For
if before the Ingestion of either, the Morbifick matter is already in the
Stomach, then the only thing left for them to do, is, to excite the Act of
Vomiting: But it is certain they may be both brought to be equal in that, i. e.
they may be both brough to excite an equal unmber of fits of Vomiting; and that
with equal violence (by taking their Quantitys in a reciprocal proportion to
their Vomitive Faculties) And yet their effects be very different, otherwise I
omit (for avoiding tendiousness) the other arguments I can aduce to confirm
this proposition.

4 ly. The whole deduction and Connection of this operation is thus: the
Particles of the Vomitory by their Incuncation into the Orific^s of the
Emisaries of the Glands, adjacent to the surface of the Stomach, do dilate the
same (which by some extrinsick cause) had been contracted and after the same
manner do dissolve (at least in some degree) the Cohesion of the stagnant
Morbifick matter, and render it more Fluid; and consequently, its resistance
less: Now the natural and constant action of the Glands being Secretion; and
the Impedimentum (by the dilatation of the Orifice and attenuation of the
Fluid) being totally taken away, or (at least) made less than the natural
Momentum of the Glands; The matter must necessarly flow into the Cavity of the
Stomach, till it be accumulated in such a Quantity (which not being to be done
in an instant, must require some time) as is sufficient (by the united
loathsomeness and the vis stimulans of it and the Vomitory) to vellicate and
force the Fibers of the Stomach, Abdomen and Diaphragm (by the communication of
the Nerves of the first with the two last) into a violent contraction, and
thereby throw all out by the Osophagus, which brings all to quiet again, Till
there be a new, a sufficient quantity exerned from these Glands to reproduce
the foresaid Contraction: And thus there happens a fit of Vomiting and Quiet
alternately, till either all the Morbifick matter be thrown out, or the force
of the Vomit so diluted, that it is no longer able to elicit the Morbifick
matter from the Glands. Besides these Primary effects of Vomiting, there are
two others, which ought not (tho less principal) to be omitted. The first is,
that in a strong Vomit, or in one which requires some considerable time before
it operate, there often passes some part thereof from the Stomach into the
Intestines, and occasions a gentle Purge, by dissolving the Faeces, and
vellicating the Fibers of the Intestines, as shall be more particularly shown
when we speak of Purging. However the effects of this, Purge very seldom, or
never go beyond the Primae Viae, For all gentle Purges (of which this is one)
are confined within these. The second is, that the strong contraction in so
many Muscles and Muscular Canals, which are at Work in Vomiting, and the
violent concussion which is produced over the whole Body, by a power (as has
been said) which is not inferior to that of two Hundred and Sixty Thousand
weight, may and often does, take away the Obstructions in many other Canals,
than those which are more immediately concerned about the Stomach and
Osophagus, as we evidently see by that vast Sweat which always breaks out after
plentiful fits of Vomiting. From these I deduce,

5 thly. The Advantages of Vomiting in the Cure of Fevers; which are, 1. The
taking away the Obstructions of the Glands of the Stomach and (sometimes of the
Intestines, which is the principal use of Vomiting; and how great a step this
is toward the Cure of Fevers, every one will see who considers, that in Fevers
occasioned by Intemperance, the Stomach is the Scene where this great Mischief
is both contrived, and put into Execution; the Obstruction of the Glands
thereof, being the first and principal Cause of these Fevers; And in Fevers
occasioned by Cold, the Stomach and Intestines being most Exposed, and least
Defended from the Cold Air, receives its first and strongest Impressions; which
two (as formerly was said) have the most considerable share in the cause of our
Continual Fevers: And therefore it is, that Vomiting (being timeously and
plentifully used) very often prevents such Fevers. 2. Another Advantage of
Vomiting is, That by the strong Contraction of the Muscles and Muscular Canals
and the violent Concussions of the whole Body thereby produced, the
Obstructions of many other Glands are removed, as has been just now shown.) So
that this with the former (removing so considerable a part of the Cause,
enables Nature to perform the rest very easily. 3. A Third Convenience (if not
Advantage) of Vomiting, is, That it is less dangerous than many of the
Medicaments that are taken inwardly; The effects of this is confined to the
Primae viae; (by which I always mean that winding Canal, which is continued
from the Mouth to the Sphincter any,) and is consequently less dangerous than
those which run the Circle of the Blood; For it is not to be doubted, that all
Alterative Medicines have more or less danger in them (from the effect of their
Stimulations upon the Nerves, their Fermentations with the Blood, their
Separating, or Promoting the Natural Cohesions of the Liquors of the Body, and
their many other unknown Productions.) That which goes the least way, must
therefore have the least danger: Now since it is certain, that Vomiting does
not go out of the Stomach and Intestines (where the Canals are strong and wide,
and the Fluids are viscid and gross) there must of necessity be less danger in
it, than in these which enter into narrower and weaker Canals filled with more
Fluid and finer Liquors. It is true indeed, there is some hazard from the
bursting of the Capillary Vessels of the internal Surfaces, by the violent
Concussions of the Body, occasioned by Vomiting; but this is easily prevented
by Blood-letting, which ought always to preceed the plentiful use of vomitories
in all Diseases. Besides, sometimes the violence of Vomit, is too great for the
strength of the Patient; but this is rather the fault of the Physician than the
Physic: For the Strength, and (consequently the violence of Vomits, as of all
other Medicines) ought to be adjusted by this Proportion, Viz. They ought to be
in a compounded Proportion of the strength of the Patient, and the danger of
the Continuance of the Disease. If this were observed, none could ever Err in
the Administration of Medicines.

III. Come we now to that which we called the Third proper Remedy of Fevers, to
wit, Purging; In explaining of which, I shall, 1. Show that Vomitive and
Purgative Medicines differ only in degrees of the same Quality. 2. I shall give
a short account of the several steps, and of the manner of this Operation. And,
3. Consider its use in the Cure of Fevers. I say then,

1. That Vomitive and Purgative Medicines, differ only in the degrees of the
same Quality, i. e. Purgative Medicines, by increasing their force vastly, and
confining it to a lesser Quantity, either of a Fluid or solid Body, become
Vomitive, and Vomitive Medicines (if diluted) become Purgative. This will be
evident from these Considerations. 1. We find by Experience, a strong Purge
never misses (if either it be very strong, or the Patient not very strong) to
Vomit, and the weaker part of a Vomit, which escapes into the Intestines, does
frequently Purge us. 2. The same Medicines (for example, Vinum Emeticum,) taken
by the Mouth, will provoke Vomiting, which given by way of Glister, will Purge:
The same obtains in all strong Emeticks. In short, all strong Medicines of
either kind constantly produce both these Effects. The reason of all which is
this; If the Medicament of either kind be so strong as immediately to vellicate
and stimulate the Fibers of the Stomach, to dilate the Orifice, and attenuate
the matter contained in the Glands thereof, it produces Vomiting; if it act but
gently, so as only to assist the Natural Motion of Digestion, it goes by the
Intestines, and dissolves the Cohesion of the Faeces, and finding there more
sensible Fibers, is able to bring them into violent Motions, which produce
Purging, as shall be just now show'n. 3. It is impossible in any other Theory,
to account how these two different Medicines should upon the same Parts produce
different Effects; For both these Medicines are taken by the Mouth, go down the
Osophagus, and enter into the Stomach either in the form of a Liquid, or are
there by it reduced into a Liquid; and consequently are brought in to contact
with, and Operate on the same Fibers, Glands and Membranes; and yet produce (by
their assistance) two different effects. It is simply impossible to explain the
manner of this, without saying the one acts more powerfully and forceably, and
makes more violent Contractions, and consequently is thrown up the most patent
way; the other more gently and softly, and has thereby time to seek out the
less obvious passages.

2 dly: The account of the several steps, and of the manner of this Operation,
is thus; Purgative Medicines, being received into the Mouth, and admitted into
the Stomach, their particles vellicate and stimulate the Fibers thereof, and
thereby increase the digestive faculties, i. e. bring the Muscular Fibers of
the stomach, the Muscles of the Abdomen and Diaphragm into more frequent
contractions than ordinary, till they are admited into the Intestines, the
Fibers and Glands of which being more sensible than those of the Stomach (whose
parts by the frequent rough Contacts; of one against another, and of the gross
Bodies which are often thrown into it, are as it were dead'ned) they easily
move and bring into frequent and forceable contractions, whereby these Glands
are squeezed of a Fluid which lubricates the Passages; and mixing with the
feculent matter of the Intestines (which is rendered Fluid by the same active
and Stimulating quality of the Purgative medicine) renders it yet more Fluid,
by which (and by the more than ordinary contractions of the Intestines) it
passes more plentifully and easily into the Rectum, and is thence ejected. This
is the use of the more gentle Purges which only cleanse the Intestines. But
those of more force (besides all these) do (as to the greater and more
spirituous part) enter into the Mass of the Blood by the Lacteals, and mixing
therewith produce many unnatural fermentations therein, separating or promoting
the natural Cohesions of the Liquors of the Body, and accasioning many other
unknown effects, as has been formerly said: And likewise there, vellicating the
spiral Fibers of the Arteries and Veins, bring these into more forceable
contractions, and thereby promote the Circulation of the Blood and make it run
with greater Velocity and force; and by this means in a short time wash away
any obstructions that either happen to be in the more direct Arteries, or the
more complicated ones which constitute the Glands, increase the insensible
perspiration, and purify the Blood of all the grosser and more noxious parts,
by the Ductus Cholodochus and Pancreaticus which void themselves into the
Intestines. All these effects of the more powerful Purgatives are Visible; for
sometime after one has taken such a strong Purge, we find the Pulse mightily
increased, the Perspiration augmented, the Spirits, or Liquidum Nervorum spent,
spent, the visible Excretions by Siege and Urine much greater, and the Body
weak'ned; especially after a few days of such a course. Whereby it is evident
these Medicines must operate after the manner ^^w explained. From hence it is
clear,

3 dly. That the advantages of Purging in the cure of Fevers are very great,
upon these two considerations: 1. If the Purge be more gentle so that it only
serve to cleanse the Intestines, it partly takes away the obstruction of the
Glands of the Stomach, and totally that of the Glands of the Intestines, which
is a considerable step toward the cure. But, 2. If the Purge be more violent,
so that it enter in any plenty into the Mass of the Blood, it conduces so much
toward the removal of the obstructions of most of the other Glands, that nature
is able to perform the rest very easily her self. But alas! this last case has
so much danger, and so many inconveniences in it, as render it as unsafe, as
otherwise (if these could be removed) it would be useful. Bellini in his Book
De Vrinis and Pulsibus, page 222. has demonstrated that in violent Purges there
is a greater danger by far than in Blood-letting. His words are, Quia vero
quicquid est suspicionis in missione Sanguinis ad solum fermentationem non
naturalem, quae possibilis per ipsam est in reliquo Sanguine, redigitur, and
hoc uno de nomine periculo non vacat; si igitur hujus mali suspicione careret
purgatio, illa potius adhibenda, quam venae sectio; cum purgatio ejus loco
caetroquin esse possit: sed res e converso se habet, suspicio enim ejus mali a
missione Sanguinis est suspicio rei possibilis non tamen necessario
prevenientis, aut necessario conjunctae, cum qualibet missione Sanguinis; in
purgatione autem necessarium semper est Sanguinem solvi a naturalibus
Cohesionibus, seu recedere and dimoveri a sua compositione; In Purgatione
igitur periculum erit certum, in venae sectione dubium: hoc est, erit Purgatio
venae sectione periculosior, etc. And therehe goes on to show how muchmore
dangerous Purging is than Blood-letting: From this and a great deal more he has
there adduc'd, it is evident, 1. That violent Purges have a great deal of real
danger in them absolutely, without respect to other remedies; and indeed these
unatural Fermentations and changes of the Cohesion of the Fluids instead of
promoting the cure, often increases the cause of Fevers, to wit the obstruction
of the Arteries which constitute the Glands. 2. That violent Purges are
respectively much more dangerous than Blood-letting, wherefore this last is a
more safe, and consequently a more useful expedient in the cure of Fevers than
the former. And I say, 3. That violent Purges are a much more dangerous remedy
in Fevers, than Vomitings are; For Vomits extend no further than the Primae
Viae, where the Canals are strong and wide, the Fluid viscid and Gross, But
violent Purges reach all the slender Vessels and Noble Liquors of the Body,
where the danger of any Considerable alteration is extremely great. Wherefore
upon this account, I say, that the danger of Violent Purges is to that of
Vomiting, as the length of the Canals of the whole Circuit of the Blood, is to
the length of the Canals of the Primae Viae. And how much longer the first is
than the latter, I leave the Reader to consider. Besides all these, there are
so many other known and evident dangers in violent Purges, that the only part
of Purging which is safe (in curing Fevers) is Glistering, (...) the Lotiones
Alvi, or rather (...) either of these, only that gentle Purge which is the
concomitant of every plentiful Vomiting.

IV. We are come now to the last proper Remedy of Fevers, which was the
Medicaments which increase the less sensible evacuations. But all that can be
pertinently said on this head; is so learnedly and accurately already handled
in a Treatise entitled, Archibaldi Pucarnij Dissertatio de Curatione febrium
quae per Evacuationes instituitur, that thither I shall refer the Reader, only
adding the reason why such Medicaments Administered in the beginning of Fevers,
do rather increase than cure them, which is this: In an Obstruction of the
Glands, the Blood in the Complicated Arteries which constitutes the same,
stagnates up to the next Branching thereof, nearest the Heart, and thereby a
considerable length thereof becomes obstructed and unpassable; the only way
this obstruction can be removed is by the force of the Blood, which in every
Pulse or contraction of the heart, washes off a particle of the same till the
whole be dig'd away; as shall be shown. Now the Arteries which constitute the
Glands, whereby the insensible evacuations are naturally secern'd, being in the
beginning of the Fever so much obstructed; It is simply impossible for such
Medicaments to carry these obstructions off as they are just now; they must
rather force through the superficial Arteries, and those few other Glands that
are (perhaps) left passable, the natural humidity only, i. e. the thinest Parts
of the Blood, and consequently make it more viscid, and thereby the obstruction
more firm, i. e. will increase the Fever; whereas, when a great deal of these
obstructions in the Arteries are washed away by the force of the Blood, i. e.
in or near the decline of these Fevers, such Medicaments will be able to force
the small remainder of these obstructions either through the Orifice of the
Gland, or into the continued Vein, till by frequent circulations it be either
lost, or thrown out of the Body.

From all that has hitherto been said about the cure of these Fevers, It is
evident.

COROLLARIA.

1.THAT the first thing incumbent upon a Physician, in the case of these
Fevers, is to let a considerable quantity of Blood, both in order to remove the
cause of these Fevers, and to prevent the inconveniences of the subsequent
Vomiting. Bellini in Prop. 5. and 6. De Febribus has demonstrated that Vena in
omni morbo est secanda, in quo minuenda quantitas, aut augenda velocitas, aut
refriger andum aut humectandum, aut aliquid adhoerens vasis dimovendum aut
abripiendum. Than which there could be nothing more pat to our Theory.

2. The Second step in the Cure of these Fevers, is Vomiting; for it at least
removes the Obstructions of the Stomach and Intestines, and goes a great length
to take away the Obstructions of the most of the other Glands likewise This
especially obtains in Fevers occasioned by Intemperance or Cold: As is evident
from what we have said about Vomiting; But as for Purging in Fevers, there is
very little more safe than what is the necessary Concomitant of all such
Vomitings.

3. The last, but most Universal, and surest step, is the increasing the less
Sensible Evacuations: But this must be used only in the decline of these
Fevers, as has been just now shown.

I have in this place only determined the Order, and the several Degrees of the
Efficacy of these Remedies (in the Cure of Fevers) with respect to one another:
Their Kinds and Quantities being to be adjusted by a former Analogy I have
given, when I was speaking about the Advantages of Vomiting.

But here it may be very fairly asked why (since I make the Obstructions of the
Artery and Nerve which constitute the Glands, the principal cause of Fevers) do
not I allow Mercurial Medicines (which all grant to be one of the most proper,
and perhaps Specific remedies of obstructions) to be one of the steps of the
cure of these Fevers.

Before I answer this question I shall, 1. Explain the nature of Mercury. 2. I
shall show the manner of the Operation of these Medicines; and, 3. The
advantages and usefulness of them.

I. As to the first I Suppose.

1. That pure Mercury, or Quicksilver, consists of parts (I mean those of the
first composition, by which I understand an aggregate of the Smallest and last
constituent Particles of any Body, and an aggregate of these aggregates I call
of the Second composition; and so on) exceedingly small equal, and perfectly
Sepherical.

This has been supposed by all who have written any thing tolerable about the
Nature of this Mineral; it is true indeed, some have supposed it so, because
they saw that dividing Mercury upon a plain (even by the assistance of a
Microscope) still the upper part retained its Sphericity, which they could not
so easily observe in other Fluids: But the true Reason of this is, The great
Gravity of the Mercury, in respect of other Fluids, and the uniform pressure of
the Medium. For all Fluids will retain their Sphericity till their Quantity be
so diminished (either by their being another Heterogeneous specifically lighter
Body included in them, or by their Gravity decreasing at a greater rate than
their Surfaces) that they are of equal Gravity with unequal Portion of the
Medium they are in, and then they will receive any Figure the Motion of the
Medium can imprint on them. However the divisions of Mercury must be very small
before it can be reduced to this State; but that it can at last be brought to
it, is evident from the mixing and pounding of Quicksilver among common water,
in which we know a part of the Quicksilver is lost, by the Diminution of its
weight, and the discoloring and effects of this Water.

But the true Reason why the former Supposition is to be made, is, because from
it some of the Phenomena of Mercury may be accounted for.

For, from thence it is evident, why Mercury (though the heaviest known Fluid)
rises with fewer degrees of Heat in an Alembick, than any other. 1. It Is parts
(of the first Composition) being exceedingly small, i. e. smaller than such
parts of any other Fluid, it must rise sooner than they; because the Gravity of
its Particles has a lesser Proportion to their Surfaces, than the Gravity of
the Particles of any other Fluid has to their Surfaces; for the Gravities of
Bodies decrease in a Triplicate Proportion, whereas their Surfaces decrease
only in a Duplicate one. Thus supposing (for Example) the Diameter of a
Particle of Mercury (of the first Composition) to be to the Diameter of a
Particle of Water (of the same Composition.) As 2 to 300; (and we may justly
suppose the Odds infinitely greater,) their Surfaces will be as 4 to 90000. And
their Solidities, i. e. their Gravities, as 8 to 27000000. This upon
Supposition their Specific Gravities were equal; but supposing (at the
largest) the Specific Gravity of Mercury to that of Water, as 15 to 1. The
real Gravities of such Particles will be to one another, as 120 to 27000000:
Whence it is evident, that not only the ratio of 8 to 4 or 2 to 1. is much less
than that of 27000000 to 90000 or 300 to 1. And therefore upon such Supposition
it will follow, That the Gravities of such Particles of Mercury, would be much
less than that of such Particles of Water: And that the Surfaces of these
Particles of Mercury, would be much larger, in respect of their Gravities, than
that of the like Particles of Water, in respect of their Gravities; and
consequently the Mercury would rise in the Alembick with much Fewer degrees of
Heat, than the Water upon this account. But, 2. The Particles of Mercury are
perfectly Spherical and Equal; (for all Homogeneous Bodies must consist of
Particles Similes and aequales in the Euclidean Sense, Vide Def. 1. 6. and 9.
11. Euclid.) and consequently can only touch in points, and thereby their
Sublimation will become more easy. A Sphere can be touched but by 12 other
equal Spheres, and that too, but in so many Points; and if we suppose the
Superficial Particles of the Mercury to be first raised in the Alembick, they
can be touched only by 9 other. Now the Force and Value of such a contact as
this of 9 Points, is less ( Caeteris paribus,) than that of other solid Bodies
generated by the Circumrotation of what ever Figure, Regular, or Irregular,
Right-lin'd, or Curvelin'd: For, The Contacts of Circles is the Measure of the
Contacts, of all other Figures whatsoever; and tho in some Curves their
Contacts in some Points, may be less than that of Circles, ( vide Scholium Lem.
11. Princip. Phil. Mathem. Newtoni.) yet in all their other Points, they will
be Proportionally greater, and consequently the value of the whole Contacts
greater than that of Circles; wherefore it is evident, that Spherical Bodies
will be more easily separated than any other, and consequently will rise in the
Alembick with fewer degrees of Heat than any other. I Suppose,

2 dly. That the only Effect of the Sublimations, and other Preparations of
Mercury, is the dividing it into these parts of the first CompositioN, which
are Spherical, Per suppos. 1. Or into parts of a more complicated Composition,
which (by reason of the vast Gravity of Mercury, in respect of other Fluids,
and the uniform pressure of the Medium) may be still Spherical; For if the
Mercury be pure, and no Heterogeneous lighter Body be mixed with it, it will
still retain its Sphericity till the ratio of the Surface of a Particle of
Mercury to its Gravity, be to the ratio of the Surface of a Particle of Air to
its Gravity, as is the Specific Gravity of Mercury to the Specific Gravity of
the Air, i. e. (putting the Specific Gravity of Mercury to that of Air, as m
to n; and the Diameter of a Particle of Mercury x, and that of a Particle of
Air a.) till m u1/ x1/ a Then x will be equal to na/ m that is, (supposing a
equal to Unity as the Standard, m to n as 10800 to 1 proxime, as all know) the
Diameter of a Particle of Mercury must be 10800 times less than that of a
Particle of Air, or the Particles of Mercury themselves, 1259712000000 times
less than these of Air, before they lose their Sphericity. Now besides these
divisions into Spherical Particles, the Saline Bodies which are mixed with the
Mercury in these Preparations keep these asunder and disjoined, like so many
congealed little Bullets separated by the Fixation of some Liquor. This is (as
I suppose) the whole effect of these Preparations; as is evident from what Mr.
Boil and all other Chemists have found; to wit, That from all the
Transmutations, and Preparations of Mercury they could elicite the same uniform
heavy Fluid; which could never happen if there were any other (besides the now
mentioned) effect produced by these Preparations: For by what means soever you
dissolve this congealed Separation, the greater Gravity of Mercury brings its
Particles into their former Union, and thereby reduces them into the same Fluid
Quicksilver. Besides these two Suppositions, it is to be observed,

1. That the chief Ingredients in Mercurial Preparations are (besides it self)
common and Armoniack Salts, and their Spirits, the Spirit and Oil of Niter,
Vitriol and its Spirit, and the like (which afterward we shall call by the
General Name of Saline Bodies,) All which (we know) are endued with a vast
power to vellicate and stimulate the more sensible parts of Animal Bodies, and
(consequently) to produce Vomitings and Purging (of themselves) according to
their Quantity, and the degrees of their Natural force.

2. That the only effect of repeated Sublimations in these Preparations, is,
the division of the Mercury into smaller Particles, and the freeing of these
from the Grosser and more Noxious parts of these Saline Bodies; for Mercury
sublimating more quickly and easily than these other Saline Bodies, must in
repeated Sublimations have a greater proportion to the Saline Mixture than in
the first Sublimations, and consequently the subsequent Sublimations must have
less of those Saline Bodies than the Antecedent, whereby the Preparation will
become sweeter and less vellicating. This is evident from the aquila alba and
panacea Mercurialis, which are all much heavier (specially) than any other
Preparations of Mercury,

These things premised, I come to explain,

II. The manner of the Operation of Mercurial Medicines; In performing which, I
distinguish two Cases. 1. Either the Medicine is taken inwardly. Or, 2. It is
applied outwardly; under which head I comprehend both Mercurial Inunctions and
Plasterings. As to the 1. After the Medicine is taken by the Mouth, it desends
into the Stomach, and there the Saline parts of the Composition vellicat the
Fibers thereof, which occasion those Gripes are felt upon the taking these
Medicines: And if the Salin Particles have a considerable share in the
Composition, they so powerfully stimulat the Fibers of the Stomach, as to bring
it into these Contractions which produce Vomiting, as has been formerly
explained: The Mercury it self, with some of the remainder of the Saline
Particles sliping into the Intestines, do likewise vellicat these, and occasion
a Gentle Purge; which Effect, though it be constant (in the first days after
taking these Medicines) yet it is never so violent as that of other Purgatives;
because most of it is force is spent in the stomach. Now that both the Vomiting
and Purging produced by these Medicines, are owing to the saline parts of the
composition, is evident from the nature of Mercury, and the effect produced in
it by the Chemical preparations thereof just now explained: For Mercury
consisting of spherical Particles, and by such preparations being only divided
into these, of themselves (as being spherical) these particles could never
occasion the stimulatitions, which (as has been formerly shown) are necessary
to produce these effects. The only thing they can contribute toward them is,
that by their excessive gravity and smallness they are capable to dissolve the
Cohesion of the more viscuous Fluids of the stomach and Intestines and
consequently make them flow more easily, when the Muscular Fibers of these
parts are otherwise brought into contractions. Besides, we see that the
forementioned effects, are mostly produced by those compositions in which most
of these Saline Bodies enter. As in the corrosive Sublimate, the White and
Yellow Precipitate: But in the others which pass many Sublimations, (as the
Sweet Sublimate, and the Panacea Mercurialis) we judge of their goodness as
they produce least of these effects. I ascribe the Sweating produced by a dose
of some of these compositions, partly to the violence of the Vomitting, and
partly to the Saline Particles which enter the composition; and that small
salivation, to the Imediate action of these Saline Bodies upon the Salivary
Glands, and not to the Mercury it self. All these will be evident to any who
have seen the sudden effects of these Medicines, which have not had sufficient
time, neither to enter nor circulate with the Blood, so as to be able to
produce the mentioned Sweating or salivation after the ordinary manner. Thus I
have endeavored to explain the effects of these Medicines while they are in
the Primae Viae. I shall now show the manner of their Operation in producing a
Flux de Bouche, that thereby the lesser effects of this kind may be understood.

The Mercury being freed (by the action of the stomach and the heat of the
Liquors contained in the same and in the Intestines) of most of the saline part
of the composition, enters the Blood by the Lacteals, and is with it carried
about through the Canals where either it, or any Liquor (of the Body) generated
by it, Flows, (the small remainder of these Saline Particles, which adheres to
the Mercury after the action of the Stomach and Intestines, assisting the
propagation of the motion, by the velicating the sides of the Canals) And
having the same Celerity, but a much greater weight, it has consequently a
greater force, and produces a stronger Ictus, and thereby (when once any
considerable quantity thereof has entered the Blood) it (by it is great force
and the smallness of its particles) disolves the unatural Cohesions of all the
Liquors, renders them more Fluid, and active, and likewise digs out all the
Obstructions of the impassable Canals like so many little Bullets shot against
a mud Wall, every little Bullet breaks down a part till the whole be levelled;
and this it is the more able to perform, both because it is exceeding weighty,
and makes therefore a greater and more forceable Ictus, and because it is
particles are exceeding small, and are therefore to be considered as so many
exceeding sharp Wedges or Cunei. Besides by the smallness of it is Particles it
is able to enter into these slender Canals in which the Blood cannot freely
pass, and thereby to scour all the Passages be they never so small. And that
there are Canals through which the Globules of the Blood cannot freely pass, we
are convinced from Microscopial Experiments. Thus all the Liquors of the Body
being attenuated, and consequently their celerity and force rendered greater,
and all the Canals scoured, and rendered passable, the whole Glands of the Body
are set a work, and throw out the more noxious and less Fluid parts of their
Liquors (by reason the particles of the Mercury either dissolve, or carry
before them all the gross particles which resist them) and thereby the
Perspiration, Urine, Salivation, are increased, the quantity of the Fluids
lessened, and the whole Body emaciated, till there be nothing left but pure and
useful Liquors, and clear and passable Canals. Those who can only be convinced
by occular Demonstration may see a kind thereof in Phil. Trans. for Jan. 1700.
where Leuvenhoeck from Microscopial Experiments on Tad-poles, confirms the main
of this Doctrine, as to the manner of the taking away Obstructions.

But there is another Effect of Mercurial Medicines, which is noways to be
forgotten; for besides these mentioned Effects, it distroys that corrosive
Faculty of the Liquors which bursts the superficial Vessels, and produces those
constant pains, Scabs, Ulcers, and the like, which we feel; For, supposing an
Obstruction in any Vessel (either by the corrosiveness or Viscidity of the
Liquor, or from some extrinsick cause) the Liquor Stagnates and Coagulates
there, and by the force of the fluent part of that Liquor, and by the
Corrosiveness of the stagnated part, the Vessels are Miserably distended, and
their parts dilacerated, which occasions constant pain in that part; or they
burst, and the Liquor putrefying, occasions a Botch, Scab, or Ulcer, more or
less Dangerous and painful, as the corrosiveness of the stangnated and
putrefying Fluid is greater or lesser. Now this corrosive Faculty must proceed
from the pointedness of the particles (perhaps these particles may consist of
four equilateral Triangled plains, for such have the greatest equal degree of
acuteness on all their points which seems necessary to make them equable in
their Actions, and Homogeneous in their Natures) of the stagnated Fluid. Now
the Mercury will not only remove the Obstruction, and make the Vessel passable
by its weight, but likewise by the same will break off, and plain the points
and Angles of these Particles, and so render them Harmless and innocent; for
Sublata causa, etc.

But here it may be objected, that the grand effect (as most People believe) of
Mercurial Medicines is Salivation, and that really the Salivary Glands secern
more of their Fluid proportionally than any other Glands of the Body, which is
contrary to the 5. Prop. about Secretion. To this I Answer,

1. That the principal effect of Mercury, is the attenuating the Fluids, the
clearing the Canals, and the destroying the Corrosiveness of the Obstructions,
and that salivation has no more title to be the principal effect of Mercury,
than insensible perspiration. For all the Glands (notwithstanding the
Objection) secret their respective Liquors in the proportion mentioned in prop.
5. about Secretion. 2. It is evident that salivation is not the main effect of
Mercury, from this, That many persons are cured of very dangerous Poxes, Ulcers
and Rheumrtisms without ever Salivating, at least at the ordinary rate of
Salivation. But 3. The reason why we seem to secern more by the salivary Glands
proportionally than by any or most others, are these, 1. The salivary Glands
are more in number than any of those which separate visible Fluids; and
consequently it is but reasonable they should secern more than any other. It is
true the Glands of insensible perspiration are more in number than those, and
it is not to be doubted but they secern more likewise; and it will be found so
when ever the thing is examined after Sanctorius's method; but that secretion
not being visible, makes the matter doubted. 2. The Canals which constitute the
Glands of salivation are evidently wider than these of others, as is clear from
their spungy and soft Contexture, and so it is very accountable from the
mentioned Prop. why they secern more plentifully. 3. The Fluid lecern'd in the
Salivary Glands is Ropy and Viscid, and one part draws forward another, which
does not happen in most other Glands, and upon this account it is no wonder
that those secern more than these. 4. The Salivary Glands in some People, have
not so good a Contexture, and so obvious a course as in others: And this is the
Reason why some Salivat little or none, and others too much. But 5. The true
account of the Matter is this, The Saliva being a tough ropy Substance, cannot
be thrust out so fast as the Mercury carries it forward, especially seeing it
seperates only the most Glutinous parts of this Saliva, whence all the Salivary
Glands begin to swell until there be such a quantity accumulated, as together
with the force of the Mercury, and of the succeeding Fluid is able to burst the
Orifices of the Glands: And it is observable, the Salivation continues only so
long as any of the Glands are found swelled. Whence it is evident that this
plentiful Salivation depends upon this, That the Fluid is as it were laid up in
store to be derived more plentifully afterward, whereas in the other Glands,
the Fluid being thiner, is secern'das fast as it is driven forward: And hence
it comes to pass, that we think the Saliva secern'd, is much greater in
Quantity than what is derived from the other Glands. If we take in all these
Considerations together, they will account for the plentiful Salivation by
Mercury.

2. As to the second Case: In Mercurial Inunctions the viscid Matter, in which
the Quicksilver is wrought and pounded, serves only to keep the small
Particles thereof separated and asunder, and to apply them to the Skin, till by
frequent rough Frictions the smallest Particles of the Mercury are forced
through the sides of the Cuticular Arteries into the Blood, and when once they
are got thither they are in the Estate just now Mentioned, and operate after
the manner already explained. And indeed this were the shortest and easiest
course of raising a Flux de Bouche, if Mercury could be adjusted to the
Strength and Constition of the Patient, (for the Quantity of Mercury, which
will kill one, will not produce the designed effect of Salivation in another)
by this Method, as exactly as by Administering it gradually in Doses, by the
Mouth. But it cannot be done so, and therefore the latter course is the more
safe.

Mercurial Plasters applied outwardly to heal Scabs; or inveterate Ulcers,
operate thus; The Corosive saline mixture, if there by any part thereof in the
Composition, eats away and corrodes the putrid Matter, which sears up the
Mouths of the Vessels; so that the Mercurial Particles get easily into them,
where they both clear the Vessel of the Obstructions, and destroy the
pointedness of the Particles of the Fluid, which two things did concur to make
the Ulcer sore. If there be no Saline Body in the Application, then the Mercury
must be forced in by Friction, into the Mass of the Blood, to produce the
designed effect.

Thus from a few easy and evident Postulates, I have given an intelligible
account of the Manner of the Operation, and of the Effects of Mercurial
Medicines, when the Mercury enters in any Quantity into the mass of the Blood,
and from thence it will be easily understood, that when the quantity is less,
the Effects will be proportionally lesser: Sore that it will be needless to
explain all the several degrees thereof by detail. But seeing it is evident
from Leuvenhoeck's Observations in the last mentioned Phil. Trans. That the
force of the Blood is able to wash away some Obstructions: let us take a gross
estimat of the Proportion of the Efficacy of the Blood assisted by Mercury, to
the Efficacy of the Blood of it self and unassisted to take away Obstructions.
First, Then we must consider, if instead of the ordinary Liquors there passed
nothing but Mercury in the Canals of the Body, the weight of Blood being to
that of Mercury, as 1032 to 14593, or as 1 to 13 at least, and their Velocities
being the same, Mercury would at least be 13 times more able to remove the
Obstruction than the Blood of self: But it is certain (if the Obstruction
renders the Canal impassible,) there can no Particle of the Mercury get away;
and (when there is any quantity thereof got into the Blood) there are still
some new Particles thereof coming up, so that after some time (they having a
greater Momentum than the Globules of the Blood, and thereby getting through it
up to the Obstruction) we may consider there will be little or nothing save
Mercurial Particles at, or near the Obstruction, driven against it, by the
whole force of the Blood; So, that as to the Obstruction it self, it is very
near the same, as if the whole Canals run Mercury. However, let us take the
Proportion only as 1 to 10, so that upon this account the Blood assisted by any
considerable quantity of Mercury, will be 10 times more able to remove the
Obstruction than the Blood unassisted.

2 dly. Let us consider, the Globules of the Blood are Elastick (for they often
lose their Figure in strait Canals, and recover it again, as Leuvenhoeck has
shown, which is the Definition of Elasticity) and those of Mercury are not, or
very little so: And consequently upon this account, the Efficacy of the
Globules of Blood will be hugely diminished, Let us suppose it looses of its
Efficacy (which is a liberal allowance) and then the Proportion will be to 10,
or 3 to 40.

3 dly. Let us observe, That the Globules of the Blood, and Mercury driven
against the Obstruction, and at every Pulse digging away a part of the same,
may be considered as Cunei, now caeteris paribus, the Force or Efficacy of
Cunei is reciprocally proportional to the Angles, their Edges make. But in
spheres the lesser or greater degree of Curvity, is to be considered as these
Angles, when these spheres are considered as Cunei: And the degrees of Curvity
in spheres (as in Circles) are reciprocally as their Radii. Supposing then the
Diameter or Radius of a Particle of Mercury is to that of a Globule of Blood,
as, 1 to 100 (and there can be Reasons given, some of which I have formerly
hinted, why the Odds may be supposed much greater) then the force of the
Mercury, and the Blood, to that of the Blood unassisted, to remove
Obstructions, will be as 4000 to 3. Lastly, let us consider, that by the force
of the Mercury, the Liquors of the Body are exceedingly attenuated and rendered
more moveable, and are thereby capacitated to receive a stronger Impression, so
that they both move more quickly and with greater force, as is evident from the
Pulse of those who are under a Flux de Bouche whose Pulse is little less
frequent and strong, than the Pulse of those in a Fever. Let us suppose the
Proportion, both of the frequency of their Pulse, and of its strength to that
of an ordinary one, as 3 to 2, (and this is certainly much less than the
truth.) Then it will be as 3 to 2 upon the account of its greater force, and
again as 3 to 2 upon the account of its greater frequency, that is as 9 to 4.
So that now upon this last, and all the former accounts, the proportion of the
Efficacy of the Blood assisted by any considerable quantity of Mercury, to that
of the Blood unassisted, to remove an Obstruction, will be as 36000 to 12 or as
3000 to 1. So that the first will be 3000 times more effectual for that end
than the latter. But if any should still think we have made too liberal
Allowances for the Mercury, let us rebate the Proportion one third part; yet
still the Blood assisted by any considerable quantity of Mercury will be able
to do as much toward the removal of an Obstruction in one day, as the Blood
unassisted in three years almost.

Besides, there are a great many cases in which the Blood unassisted, is so far
from being able to remove the Obstruction, that it will continually increase
the same: For if the Obstruction proceed from a Depravation of the Liquors of
the Body, as in Rheumatisms, or if some corroding matter, be forced into the
Liquors, so as to be able to vitiate the same, as in Poxes, Pests, and Poisons,
it is demonstrable, that (without some external assistance, either by Diet or
Medicines) the Malady, instead of mending by length of time, will increase. But
if the Obstruction proceed from some external injury, as in Bruises, Wounds,
Colds, and (perhaps all continual) Fevers, the Liquors (still persisting in
their Natural and Wholesome Estate,) may do much to drive away the same by
length of time; but still the sooner, and more safely if they be assisted by
convenient Medicines. I come to,

III. The Advantage and Usefulness of Mercurial Medicines.

And, 1. They are useful for destroying the Viscidity and Thickness, the
Corrosiveness and Pointedness, of the Particles of the whole Liquors of the
Body, rendering them Fluid and moveable, Innocent and Harmless, if before they
were otherwise.

2. They are evidently useful for removing all Obstructions, Ulcers, Scabs,
Botches, Swellings, constant Pains, (all which are but the effects of some kind
of Obstruction or other) of whatever Nature or Kind, by adjusting only their
Quantities rightly, but that is the Work of an able Physician.

Now for answer to the Question which gave occasion to this Discourse:
Mercurial Medicines were exceedingly useful and would answer the whole design
in Curing Fevers, were it not upon these two Accounts. 1. Before they could be
effectual for this purpose, they ought to be Administered in a large quantity,
which never misses (by the violence and force of the Motion of the Blood
thereby occasioned) to induce a new Fever in the Patient of ^^self, so that
instead of Curing the former Fever, it would double it, and make the danger
double, which by no means is to be done; the Patient having enough a do to
wrestle with one. But, 2. It requires so long time to bring the effects of
Mercurial Remedies to any height, that the Patient (in so long a space) would
be Cured by the force of Nature, or killed by the Violence of the Disease, so
that upon this account they are rendered useless. Besides there are a Thousand
other Inconveniences which render this Method in its full force, altogether
impracticable.

After all, I remember to have been told (some time ago) by that Eminent
Physician of our Country, (whom I have thrice already mentioned) That People
who have been severely flux'd, seldom fall into dangerous Fevers, and that in
Fevers of Children occasioned by Worms, Mercury, if discreetly used, is always,
and in some Fevers of riper years, is often, very successful. The Reason of
both which is very evident from our Doctrine.

For, in those who have been severely Flux'd, the Blood is so purified, and
rendered so Fluid, and all the Canals are so cleans'd and scoured, that if at
any time there should happen such Obstructions as occasion Fevers, Nature is
able in a short time to drive them away, seeing they must rather happen from
some external cause, than from within, where all is clear and passable.

As for Fevers occasioned by Worms among the Fluids in the Bodies of young
Persons, (which by the way is an Argument omitted for our Theory of continual
Fervers, as is likewise the Febris Variolarum, both which are occasioned by
Obstructions, as is evident from the botches which break out upon the latter,
and as shall be just now shown of the former) For here a little Worm being
forced into some of the capillary Arteries, where it can neither get back nor
forward, totally occludes the passage of the Blood, and thereby occasions a
Fever after the manner already explained. Now the Reason why the natural force
of the Blood is not able to remove such an Obstruction is, because a living
Creature makes it, which will not be mouldred away after the manner of
Coagulated Blood; But will require the greater weight and force the Mercury to
kill it first, and then both the Mercury and Blood concuring, wash it away.

FINIS.

