AN EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURE of ANATOMY, WHEREIN The Circulation of the Blood
is made visible, through Glass Veins and Arteries, with the Actions of the
Heart and Lungs; As also, The Course of the Blood from the Mother to the Child,
and from the Child to the Mother: By which Means any Person, though unskilled in
the Knowledge of ANATOMY, may at one View be acquainted with the Circulation of
the Blood, and in what Manner it is performed in our living Bodies.

Adorned with a Copper-Plate, Wherein The Structure of the Heart is designed,
and the Glass Vessels exactly represented in their Order, as they are in the
Figure to which they are to be referred.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1737.

Animadversion.
AS this Figure is chiefly calculated to demonstrate the Circulation of the
Blood, with the Actions of the Heart and Lungs, and the Nourishment of the
Child while in the Womb, it was absolutely necessary that it should represent a
Woman, supposed to be opened when alive; because these are all vital Functions,
which are not exercised in a Body when dead: Therefore it is to be hoped that
nobody will make objection to this Representation, which would carry with it an
Idea of the highest Barbarity and Cruelty, had it ever been put in Practice
upon any Humane Body.

Description of the Figure.
THIS Figure represents a Woman gone eight Months with Child, chained down upon
a Table, supposed to be opened alive, of which the two principal Cavities are
laid open, viz. the Breast and the lower Belly, which are divided from each
other by the Diaphragm or Midriff. In the Breast, the Heart which is placed to
move for carrying on the Circulation is seen between the two Lobes of the
Lungs, which likewise move as in Breathing; from the Heart are seen going out
the two principal Arteries of the Body made of Glass; the one leading to the
Lungs, and the other toward every Part of the Body, viz. toward the Head and
Arms, whilst the Trunk is continued on the Back Bones through the Breast, and
passing the Diaphragm into the lower Belly, divides itself to all its Parts,
and then goes to the Legs. The same Number of Veins made of Glass accompany the
Arteries, join in one Trunk, and open into the Heart again: Through the
Arteries a red Liquor, in imitation of Blood, is seen to move from the Heart to
every Part of the Body, and by the Veins returning from every Part of the Body
to the Heart again. In the lower Belly, in a Cavity called the Pelvis or Basin,
the Child is seen in the Womb, with the Afterbirth and Navel-string made of
Glass, consisting of two Arteries and one Vein arising from the Afterbirth by
many Branches, which terminate in one of a considerable Length, and enter the
Navel of the Child, through which the Blood is seen to pass, from the Mother
for its Nourishment. The two Arteries are likewise seen to arise out of the
Navel of the Child, twisted round the Vein in its Course toward the
Afterbirth, where it divides itself into a great Number of Branches, in the
same Manner as the Vein: Through these Arteries the Blood is likewise seen to
return from the Child to the Mother after Nourishment.

Of the Structure of the Heart and Lungs, and of the Circulation of the Blood.
IN order to have a right Understanding of the Circulation of the Blood, it is
first necessary to be acquainted with the Structure of the Heart and Lungs;
because they are the Organs immediately concerned in carrying on that important
Function.

Of the Heart.
The Heart is a self-moving Muscle of a pyramidal Figure, suspended (in the
Middle of the Breast between the two Lobes of the Lungs) by its principal
Vessels being connected to no other Part for the Convenience of its Motions. Of
the Heart we may consider the two Extremities; the one is uppermost and broad,
called the Base; the other is lowermost, and contracting itself narrow becomes
a little sharp, and is called its Point: This more so in Brutes. The Situation
of the Heart in Man is resting on the Diaphragm, slanting much toward the left
Side, so that the greatest Part of it is placed under the left Breast.

It consists chiefly of four principal Cavities, two of which are called
Auricles, or Ears, from their Figure, placed on the right and left Sides of the
Base of the Heart; the two other are the Ventricles, which are Cavities formed
immediately in the Substance of the Heart: The one is the right Ventricle and
the other the left: The right Ear opens into the right Ventricle; and the left
Ear into the left Ventricle. The Heart, like all other Muscles, is made up of a
great Number of Fibers or fleshy Threads, disposed in a particular Manner, on
the inside of the Ears, where they form a kind of irregular Network, and in
the Ventricles, besides this Network, leveral considerable Eminences called
Pillars. The right Ear opens into the right Ventricle, and the left into the
left Ventricle; at the Entrance of the right Ear into the right Ventricle there
are placed three Valves, which open from the right Ear into the right
Ventricle, but close the Return from that Ventricle into that Ear: From the
left Ear into the left Ventricle there are placed two more, in the same manner
as in the right Ventricle.

There are four principal Vessels which come into and go out of the Heart; two
Veins and two Arteries; the two Veins are the Vena Cava; or hollow Vein, which
is made from the Union of all the Veins of the Body, and the Pulmonary Vein,
made from the Union of all the Veins of the Luags. The Vena Cava opens into the
right Ear, and the Pulmonary Vein into the left. The two Arteries are, the
Pulmonary Artery, which divides itself into every Part of the Lungs, and the
Aorta magna, or great Artery, which divides itself into every Part of the Body;
the Pulmonary Artery arises out of the right Ventricle, at the Beginning of
which there are placed three Valves in the Figure of a Half Moon, which open
from the Ventricle into this Artery, but close from the Artery into the
Ventricle; the Aorta magna, or great Artery, arises out of the left Ventricle,
at the Entrance of which there are placed three other Valves of the Half Moon
Form, disposed in the same Manner as those in the Pulmonary Artery. Besides
these principal Vessels, there are two Arteries and a Vein appropriated to the
Use of the Heart; the Arteries are called Coronary; they arise from the great
Artery at its going out of the Heart, and are distributed throughout the whole
Substance of the Heart for its Nourishment; and the Veins bear the same Name
which return the Blood into the right Ear.

Of the Lungs.
The Lungs are two in Number, situate on each Side of the Heart, of an elastick
spungy Texture: They are connected to the Vessels of the Heart and Windpipe, of
which they are chiefly composed. The Windpipe is the Passage for Air into the
Lungs only; its upper Part is made up of fine small Cartilages, or Gristles,
four of which form its Entrance, which is at the Root of the Tongue, before the
Entrance of the Gullet, and is the Passage for the Aliments. The Fifth is a
cartilaginous Valve placed at the Entrance of the Windpipe, which is pressed
down at the Time the Aliments are passing into the Gullet. The Windpipe is
composed of many cartilaginous Rings, loosely connected to each other, in such
a Manner that they may draw one in another: It is placed in the Forepart of
the Neck, and, after its Entrance into the Breast, divides itself into two
Branches, whereof the one enters the right Lobe of the Lungs, and the other the
left: These Branches divide themselves throughout the whole Structure of the
Lungs, and every where terminate in small Vesicles or Bladders, which are all
tied together by a Number of small Productions, from the common Covering of the
Lungs. The next Vessels are the Pulmonary Arteries and Veins: The Pulmonary
Artery divides itself above the Heart into two Branches, the one to the right
and the other to the left Lobe of the Lungs, where they follow all the
Divisions of the Branches of the Windpipe, laying on the Sides of them, and
continuing their Course 'till they have attained to the small Vesicles, where
they spread themselves over them in a Number of small capillary Vessels. From
these small capillary Arteries on the Vesicles arise the capillary-pulmonary
Veins, which uniting themselves from small Branches into large, on the Sides of
the Branches of the Windpipe, form one Trunk in the left Ear. As these
considerable Vessels conduce nothing to the Nourishment of the Substance of the
Lungs (as will more particularly be treated of in describing the Circulation of
the Blood in the Child while in the Womb) there is a particular Artery for that
Use, called the Bronchal Artery, and a Vein to return the Blood.

Of the Circulation of the Blood, and its Use.
From what has been said of the Structure of the Heart and the Disposition of
its Vessels and Valves, placed at the coming in of the Ventricles from the
Ears, as well as of those placed at the going out of the Ventricles into the
Arteries; if the Action of the Heart be rightly considered, its Use may be
easily understood; for the Ears and Ventricles have both of them the Power of
contracting and dilating themselves. But neither of these two Actions can
happen at the same time both in the Ears and Ventricles, but the Dilatation of
the one must succeed the Contraction of the other, for reasons now to be
mentioned: For the Blood is always flowing from the Vena Cava into the right
Ear, and from the Pulmonary Vein into the left, the one from every Part of the
Body, and the other from the Lungs. So that the Ears, if rightly considered,
are two little Reservoirs always ready to supply the Ventricles with a
mensurated Quantity of Blood, lest its Motion should be suffocated by the
Weight of too much Blood at one time. As to the Ventricles, they are to receive
the Blood from the Ears, in given Quantities, in order to force it our of their
Cavities into the Arteries; by the Force of the right Ventricle through the
Pulmonary Artery into the Lungs, and by the left through the great Artery into
every Part of the Body. When the Ears contract, the Ventricles dilate, because
that the Ventricles at that time are receiving the Blood from them; and when
the Ventricles contract, the Ears dilate, because at that time the Blood
endeavoring to return into the Auricles from the Ventricles presses against
the Valves, and closes them; during which time the Auricles are filling and
kept dilated: The Blood in the Ventricles, which cannot return into the
Auricles, is forced over the Half Moon Valves into the Pulmonary Artery from
the right Ventricle, as well as over those from the left Ventricle into the
great Artery, by which Means the Arteries are dilated and filled with Blood. So
that the Dilatation of the Arteries succeeds the Contraction of the Ventricles;
for no Blood can possibly return from the Arteries into the Ventricles, because
the Half Moon Valves shut up the Mouths of those Arteries, whenever the Blood
endeavors to return; and this is the Reason of the Pulsation of the Arteries.
Hence it plainly appears, that the Use of the Heart is to carry on two
Circulations of the whole Mass of Blood at one and the same time: The one from
the right Ventricle through the Lungs to the left Ear, and the other from the
left Ventricle through every Part of the Body to the the right Ear. The Manner
in which these Circulations are carried on is the next thing to be considered;
And first, of that through the Lungs:

The Lungs perform two Actions, that of Inspiration, and that of Expiration;
the first is when the Air is taken into the Lungs, and the other is when it is
thrust out.

The first Action is performed by the Means of many Muscles which raise the
Ribs, and widen the Breast, during which time the Midriff, from a Unequal
Surface toward the Breast, becomes plane; and at the same time the outward
Air, being pressed, rushes in at the Nose and Mouth, and passes through all the
Branches of the Windpipe, which lead to the small Vesicles by which they are
blown up. The Rings which compose the Branches of the Windpipe, which before
were contracted one within another, are now extended the one from the other;
the Branches of the Pulmonary Artery and Vein laying on the Sides of the
Branches of the Windpipe, must of necessity be co-equally extended with them,
which before lay in Folds, gives now to the Blood a free Opportunity to pass
from the right Ventricle of the Heart, through all the Ramifications of the
Pulmonary Artery, and fill their Capillaries, which are distributed on the
Vesicles: By this time the Elevation of the Ribs ceases, and the antagonist
Muscles pull them down, assisted by the weight of the external Air, which
presses on their Surface, drives the Air violently out of the Vesicles, through
all the Branches of the Windpipe; and their Sides being brought together, the
Blood contained in the Capillary Arteries by this great Pressure is broken, and
its Globules grown so small, as to be able to pass in the Capillary Veins,
which are ^he Pulmonary Veins, from whence it is propelled by the conti^ual
Contraction of the Lungs into the left Auricle of the Heart.

Hence we find the great Necessity of Respiration; for by (...) the Blood in
its Passage through the Lungs undergoes a ^iolent Trituration, breaking the
Texture of its Globules to ^eparate its Parts, by which Means they become
dissimilar to ^ach other, and prepare a sufficient Quantity of different
Par^cles for the Nourishment of the different Parts of the Body, which is
carried on by the second Circulation from the left Ven^^cle of the Heart
through the Aorta magna, or great Artery.

The left Ventricle of the Heart has its Sides about four ^^mes as thick as the
right; and necessary it was it should be so; a greater Force being required to
drive the Blood through the great Artery into every Part of the Body, than
through the Lungs only, which is the Use of the right Ventricle.

The Aorta magna, or great Artery, is an elastick cartilaginous Tube arising
out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, and divides itself to every Part of the
Body, the Branches of which continue their Division 'till they become so small
as to be as fine as a Hair, and are called Capillaries: From these small
Capillary Arteries arise another Kind of small Vessels, which are called Veins,
which frequently unite into larger Branches from every Part of the Body, 'till
they have formed one common great Trunk, called the Vena Cava, or great hollow
Vein, which opens itself into the right Ear of the Heart. The Blood, which has
been sufficiently ground and subtillized by the Action of the Lungs, as was now
mentioned, is brought into the left Ear by the Pulmonary Veins. The Cavity of
each Ear is capable of containing one Ounce of Blood, so that whenever the left
Ear contracts, the great Artery must receive one Ounce of Blood, because the
left Ventricle can throw no more Blood into the great Artery, than what it
receives from its Ear. During the Time the great Artery is receiving this
Quantity of Blood from the contracting Ventricle, it is much dilated or
stretched: But as its Substance is induced with a great Spring, as soon as the
Resistance is taken off, which is, when the left Ventricle dilates to receive a
fresh Quantity of Blood from the left Ear, then the Artery contracts itself, by
which Means the Blood is crowded into its Cavity, and closely embraced and
pressed against its Sides; the Blood at the same Time equally resisting every
Way, presses against the Half Moon Valves, and prevents its Return into the
left Ventricle, and thus is obliged to pass on through all the Ramifications of
this Artery into every Part of the Body.

During the Time that the Artery is contracting to propel the the Blood into
every Part of the Body, the left Ventricle is dilating to receive another
Quantity of Blood from the left Ear, in order to throw it into the great Artery
again, by the Time that the Contraction of its Sides are over.

Thus by the alternate Dilatation and Contraction of the left Auricle and left
Ventricle, the Blood, which returns from the Lungs, where it has been
attenuated and rendered fit for the Nourishment of the different Parts of the
Body, is sent by the great Artery to be distributed to them, whilst the
excrementitious Parts are strained off by particular Glands, and carried out of
the Body by Sweat and other Evacuations: The remaining Part of the Blood, which
has not been sufficiently ground by the Action of the Lungs, is taken up by the
Veins, and brought back to the Cava, to be poured by the right Auricle into the
right Ventricle, in order to be forced through the Lungs again, and there to
undergo another Trituration, and afterward to be distributed to every Part of
the Body again, in the Manner it has already been described.

Of the Nourishment of the Child in the Womb.
During the Time that the Child is in the Womb, it is nourished with Blood
only, brought to it from the Placenta, or Afterbirth, through the Navel by the
umbilical Rope or Navel-string; but as there is always more Blood conveyed to
it than is necessary for its Nourishment, there is a constant Return of this
Blood through the Navel-string to the Afterbirth again.

Therefore to have a right Understanding in what Manner this reciprocal
Circulation is carried on, it is necessary to consider the Child, during the
Time it is in the Womb, to be precluded from all Communication with the outward
Air, and cannot breathe, all the Vesicles or little Bladders of its Lungs being
closely pressed together, and the Extremities of the Pulmonary Arteries and
Veins equally pressed with them, so that the Course of the Blood through the
Lungs is entirely stopped 'till Birth; and notwithstanding that the Circulation
of the Blood may be conveniently carried on (there are particular Passages left
open) without ever passing through the Lungs.

The first of these Passages is called Foramen Ovale, which is an oval Hole
opening from the right Ear of the Heart into the left, where there is a Valve
shutting from the left Ear into the right. The second is a Canal of
Communication, called Ductus arteriosus, which from the Trunk of the Pulmonary
Artery opens into the Trunk of the Aorta magna, or great Artery.

The Placenta, or Afterbirth, is a large Mass of Blood Vessels like a Cake,
composed of Arteries and Veins, by the Extremities of which it is fastened to
the inward Surface of the Womb, so that the Extremities of the Arteries of the
Womb are joined to those of the Veins of the Placenta, and the Extremities of
the Arteries of the Placenta to those of the Veins the Womb, by which Means the
maternal Blood, by the Arteries of the Womb, is transmitted into the Veins of
the Placenta, which Veins unite into one considerable one in the middle of the
Placenta, about an Ell long, which enters the Navel of the Child, passing
through the Fissure of the Liver, and opens in the Vena Cava, to bring the
Blood in the right Ear; one Part of this Blood passes through the Foramen
Ovale, or oval Hole, into the left Ear; the two Ears contracting themselves
force the Blood in the right and left Ventricle of the Heart, so that the Blood
contained in the left Ventricle is forced up the great Artery, and that in the
right up the Pulmonary: This Blood finding no Passage through the Lungs passes
the Canal of Communication, and mixes itself with the Blood of the left
Ventricle in the great Artery, by which it is sent to every Part of the Body of
the Child for its Nourishment: The remaining Quantity of Blood, which is not
employed in nourishing the Child, returns by two Arteries, which come out at
the Navel of the Child, and are convoluted about the Vein, which three Vessels
compose the Navel-string. The Arteries, having reached the Afterbirth, divide
into an infinite Number of Ramifications, whose smallest Branches unload
themselves of their Blood into the Veins of the Womb of the Mother. Thus the
Child is continually nourished during the Time that it is contained in the
Womb, and the Circulation carried on without ever passing through the Lungs.

But after the Child is born, the Air finding a Passage into its Lungs, blows
up all the Vesicles; by which Means the Pressure is taken off from the
Blood Vessels; at which Time, the Blood in the right Ventricle finding a free
Passage through the Pulmonary Artery into the Lungs, passes no more through the
Duct of Communication, but returns, by the Pulmonary Vein, into the Left, and
beating against the Valve of the Foramen Ovale for ever closes it up.

depiction of the heart and surrounding arteries

EXPLANATION of the FIGURE Shows the GLASSES with the Heart and Windpipe, As
they are ranged in the Figure.
A The Point of the Heart. B its Base. C The right Ear. D The left Ear. E The
right Ventricle. e e e Three Valves. F The left Ventricle. f f Two Valves. H
The Windpipe. h its Division. i i i i Some few of the Vesicles at the End of
the Branches of the Windpipe. G The Pulmonary Artery. g g g Three Valves. * its
Division to the Lungs. II The Pulmonary Veins, their Union into the left Ear. K
The Aorta, or great Artery. l l l l Its Division to the Head and Arms. L The
Trunk of the great Artery contained downwards. m m Branches to the Kidney. n
Division of the great Artery to the Legs. o o o o The Veins returning from
every part of the Body into P P the Vena Cava, or great Trunk, where all the
Veins unite in the right Ear.
Note, The Darts represent the Course of the Blood circulating through the
Heart and Lungs, as well as to and from every Part of the Body. Where the
Points of the Darts are directed from the Heart, they show the Course of the
Blood in the Arteries; and where they are directed to the Heart, they show the
Course of the Blood in the Veins.

FINIS.

