A BRIEF DEDUCTION OF THE ORIGINAL, PROGRESS, AND IMMENSE GREATNESS OF THE
British Woollen Manufacture: WITH An ENQUIRY whether it be not at present in a
very Declining Condition: The Reasons of its DECAY; and the Only Means of its
RECOVERY.

LONDON, Printed; And Sold by J. ROBERTS in Warwick Lane, and A. DODD at the
Peacock without Temple Bar. 1727. [Price One Shilling.]

THE PREFACE.
AS all Evils are to be discovered before we can expect their Remedy, this Work
proceeds in that Order.

We shall never attempt the restoring our Manufactures, if we do not first
enquire into the Causes of their Decay.

The following Work does not complain of the Evil with Reproach, and to expose
the Indolence of the Age, whatever Room there might have been for such a Satyr.

But seriously represents the Grievance, and earnestly moves our Superiors to
apply the proper Remedies.

It is not the War, it is not the Ingratitude of This Power, or the Inveteracy
of That, which can hurt the British Manufactures, at least not fatally.

Our Mischiefs are at Home, and the Remedy is at Home: We may cure the Evil
with the utmost Ease.

But if we will be Felo de se in Trade, if we will cut the Throat of our own
Manufactures, if we will pull them down with our own Hands, we should have our
Trade Buried at a Cross-way, with a Stake driven through it, and an Inscription,
Here lies Buried the English Trade, having destroyed it self.

This Tract regards no Faction or Parties; no Complaint against public or
private Persons or Management; but it is a Complaint of an unhappy Humor among
us all, that we will Discourage and Destroy our own Manufactures, and ruin our
selves.

May the National Wisdom restrain this Folly; may the Poor obtain such Help,
and Trade such Relief, as the Distress of our Commerce and People call for, and
the End of this Work, and the Author's Wish, will be fully Answered.

AN ACCOUNT of the Present Condition of the MANUFACTURES of GREAT BRITAIN.
The INTRODUCTION.
BEFORE I enter into the Substance of the Question now before me, and that I
may make as little Preamble as possible in a Thing of such Importance, it is
necessary to lay down in plain and direct Terms, so as may admit of no Cavils
or Disputes, what I mean, and how I would be understood by the Words, The
Manufactures of Great Britain.

By the Manufactures of Great Britain (and of which I suggest, that they are
now in a declining and decaying Condition) I mean the Woollen Manufactures,
such as Broad and Narrow Cloths, Serges, Kersies, Druggets, Bays, Says,
Perpets, Stuffs, Stockings, Hats, Flannels, and all those woollen Goods
generally used for Wearing-Apparel, Furniture of Houses, and suchlike
necessary Purposes; and as are made by the Labor of our People, for Use or
Sale at Home (that is to say, in Great Britain) or for Exportation Abroad, of
whatever Kind, and by whatever Names; for they bear so great a Variety of Names
(especially the Norwich and Spittle-Fields Goods) that it would be as endless
as it is needless to enter into the Particulars.

That this Manufacture is a thing of great Importance, of a vast Magnitude, and
a Value beyond all possible Calculation, I suppose I need not spend time to
prove; it is described in the best manner to be understood, by taking Notice,
that it not only uses and works up all the Wool which grows in England, but a
very great Quantity both from Spain and Ireland, Barbary, Turkey, and other
Places wherever it can be had, and of which I shall have occasion to take
notice again in its Place.

That this Manufacture was once in a flourishing Condition, vastly extended
abroad, and prodigiously consumed at home; was carried on to the Employment and
Enriching of innumerable Multitudes of People, and Families of People, 'till it
had made England (where its Center is fixed) the most opulent, populous,
wealthy, and powerful Nation in the World; all this I not acknowledge only, but
if it should be disputed, am ready to make appear at large upon all Occasions.

It is likewise evident, that this flourishing Manufacture has risen from small
Beginnings, and was at first rescued (as it were) out of Captivity in a strange
Land, where (like Israel in Egypt) it suffered Bondage, and was engrossed by
Foreigners who had no Title to it, having none of its Principles, no Materials
for carrying it on De Jure, in their own Right, no, nor De Facto, in their
Possession; but serch'd them from us, and then arbitrarily sold back the Goods
made of them to us at their own Price, enriching their People with the Profits
of the Manufacture, while ( Spaniard-like) we starved with the Mines of Gold in
our own keeping.

From this Captive-State, this miserable abandoned Condition, it was rescued,
by the Policy and Wisdom of our Government, and the impolitick and foolish
Management of the Spaniards, who by their Religious Tyranny, and their Civil
Fury, drove their own People over to us to seek Bread and Liberty, in return
for which they gave us Wealth and Trade, taught our Women to Spin, and our Men
to Weave; ever since this we have made the Manufacture our own, and are now
able to teach our Teachers, having infinitely improved the Kinds, as well as
increased the Quantity; have made not only innumerable new-invented Sorts, but
have also made those Sorts or Kinds of Goods much better than ever the
Flemmings were able to make them before, especially the Broad Cloths, which are
improved to such a Degree, and brought to such Perfection, as they were never
capable of before, or so much as to believe possible.

That by this very Article, England, though not an Inch of Land larger, either in
Length or Breadth, the Soil not an Ounce richer than it was capable of being
made before, the Climate not one Degree warmer, and without any one Advantage
of Nature, more than it had before; yet by a moderate, and I believe a just and
reasonable Calculation, between the Year 1490, in the beginning of King Hen.
VII. when we began to manufacture our own Wool, and the Year 1726, has
increased her People from under two Millions, to above seven Millions, raised
the Value of Lands so, that what was then worth 50l. per Annum, is now worth
1000l. per Annum, as may be seen by the Rate of Subsidies, and by other Rules
of Calculation, and which has raised the Value of Personal Wealth to such a
Degree, as admits no Comparison, no Calculation, and hardly any Imagination;
insomuch that Some are of opinion, that taking the Wealth of this Nation at the
Medium of Time, between the Conquest, and the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, that is
to say, about the Reign of Edward II. and excepting only the Wealth of Churches
and Monasterys, which indeed was great, there is now more Silver in England
than there was then Block Tin, more Gold than they had Copper, and more
Diamonds and Pearl than they had Bristol Stones.

This Increase of People, and of the Real and Personal Wealth of England, may
be said to be all owing to the Woollen Manufacture; and to bring it all to the
Point, viz. that this Woollen Manufacture has gone on increasing ever since,
even to this Time, or (as I may more properly say) to Our time, 'till its
Magnitude is such, that we may say it is too great, and that not too great for
the Country only, but too great for the whole World.

It is a strange Advance made in this Argument, and at the beginning of it too,
to say the Manufacture of England is too great for the World; but I cannot go
back from it; and upon a serious Reflection on its real Magnitude, as it now is;
and yet how much greater it is possible to make it, that is to say, how many
Countries, and, as I may say, Millions of People are yet unconcerned in it, and
unemployed by it, I do insist, that were the Wool of Great Britain and Ireland
kept entirely at home, the Quantity increased as it might be, and all that
Quantity manufactured at home, as it also might be, if those other Countries
were set to work, the People of Great Britain and Ireland are able to make more
Woollen Manufactures than all the known Inhabitants of the World would wear; To
such a Perfection of Working are the People arrived; to such an immense
Quantity is the Wool brought to amount, to such a prodigious Number are the
People multiplied; and the last Article indeed is the most essential of all the
rest, for not withstanding the Increase of the Wool, which is a Prodigy in it
self, yet to such a Degree are the People also increased, that all the Wool of
England, however (as I say) increased, and all the Wool of Ireland, from whence
no Wool was had in those Days, and all the Wool of Scotland, which was not used
at all in England in those times, is now manufactured in England, by less than
one quarter part of our People.

This may seem strange at first View, and especially when we see how many
Thousands, nay, how many Millions of People are employed in this one
Manufacture. But let me be allowed a short Digression, and I shall soon prove
it by giving you a View of the several Countries in England, where the Woollen
Manufactures are made, and where not.

N.B. Before I begin, I must observe, that when I say, such Counties make no
Woollen Manufactures, I do not mean that many of the People might not knit
their own Stockings, spin and weave Woollens for their own Use and Wearing, as
in some Places they do Linen, where yet we do not say the Linen is carried on
as a Manufacture; but it is to be understood that they make no Particular or
General Manufacture for Sale, and for Trade, to be carried out of the Bounds of
the Towns or Counties where they are so made.

1. The County of Cornwall is not known to have any Manufacture. Devonshire
indeed, the next County immediately on this Side, is full of Manufacture; but
we see nothing in Cornwall but Miners, and Diggers in the Earth for Lead,
Copper, and Block Tin; as for the poor Women, they are employed in washing the
Oar; and the Men who are not at work in the Mines are Refiners, Smelters, and
Melters of the Oar and Metals, or else are Husbandmen, Fishermen and Sailers;
but no Woollen Manufacture.

2. The four large Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surry, and Southampton, have very
little apparent Manufacture. In former times there were some Cloathings about
Guildford, Godlaming, Darking, and Farnham in Surrey, and likewise at
Tenterden, Cranbrook, Goudburst, and in the Wild of Kent, in both which
Counties they made a very good (though low-priz'd) Medley Cloth for the middling
Peoples wear, but it is all gone, extinct, except a little not worth naming.

3. The great City of London is now eminent for the Woollen Manufacture of
Stuffs, Chamlets, and several Goods, such as were formerly made at Norwich; but
as this is in a manner confined to Spittle-Fields, and a few adjacent Streets,
and to a very little in Southwark, it may be truly said, that not one twentieth
Part of the City and County of Middlesex are concerned at all in it.

4. The Inland Counties of Bucks, Hertsord, Cambridge, Bedford, and Huntingdon;
these have none of them any Woollen Manufactures, except that of late Years the
Spittle-Fields Manufacturers have employed some particular Places in those
Counties for spinning Worsted Yarn, but it is sent up to London to be
manufactured.

5. Even Lincolnshire it self, though it is the inexhaustible Fund of Wool for
all the East and South-East Part of England, and is the chief Support of their
Manufacture, yet has no Manufacture of its own, nor do we so much as see the
Women and Children employed, or any Spinning among them; though it is also an
exceeding large and populous County; but they are generally employed in Trade
or Husbandry at home, or upon the Seas abroad.

6. The County of Stafford, and of Chester and Darby, being wholly taken up in
making Cheese, breeding Horses and Cows, digging Lead, and making Crockery
Ware, have very little or no Woollen Manufacture, except about Tamworth.

7. Northumberland, Cumberland, Durham, and the East and North Riding of
Yorkshire, are the same, and have no Woollen Manufacture, except a small
Quantity of Yarn Stockings made at Richmond and Barnard Castle, and a ccarse
stripped Stuff for Hangings at Darlington.

8. All the Counties of Wales put together, produce no Manufacture for Sale, or
that come out of their own bounds, except Flannel, with a very few and very
coarse Yarn Stockings.

9. Nor do the two large Counties of Monmouth and Hereford, and two Thirds of
Shropshire, so much as pretend to any Woollen Manufacture, but are taken up
with planting Orchards, making Syder, etc.

So that notwithstanding the exceeding Greatness and Extent of the Woollen
Manufacture, and that (as I have said) it seems to be too great, even for the
whole World, yet it employs by far the least Part of England, and even the
least Part of the People in many of those Counties where it is made.

Nay, even in those Counties where great Branches of the Woollen Manufacture
are established, yet there are other Manufactures which employ greater numbers
of their People: For Example,

The four Capital Districts where the Woollen Manufacture of England is seated,
are thus divided:

1. The West Riding of Yorkshire, including the East Side of Lancashire, the
County of Westmorland and Richmondshire, and Part of Cumberland.

Yet in this very West Riding is the great Iron Manufacture of Sheffield; and
the County round it, which is called Hallamshire, is said to employ at least an
hundred thousand People.

2. The West Side of Wilts, and the whole Counties of Gloucester, Warwicksbire,
and Worcester, and part of Shropshire; and yet in the two Counties of Warwick
and Worcester are carried on the great Hard-ware Manufacture of Iron, Brass,
Steel, etc. at Birmingham, and the Nailors which it is known to employ are a
prodigious Number of People, many more than at Sheffield; as also, the
Manufacture of Glass at Sturbridge, besides several other smaller Manufactures
also of different kinds; add to which, the multitude of Dairies and
Cheese-makers in those particular Counties.

3. The great and populous Counties of Devon and Somerset, the most intent
perhaps upon the Woollen Manufacture of any in all Britain, yet how is the
first diverted by the fishing Trade upon both its Shores, its Cider Trade in
the South-Hams, and also in their Sea-affairs as well the Shipping as the
Merchandise; and the other in Grazing and Digging of Lead and Coal, which
employs many thousands of their People.

4. The Counties of Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk carry on the fourth, but not
the least Branch of the Woollen Manufacture, and yet they tell us there are
above thirty thousand Men employed out of those three Counties always at Sea.
Suffolk is two Thirds of it, both Land and People, employed in Dairies and
feeding Cattle and Fowls for London; and they tell us, that the two Counties of
Essex and Suffolk only, send every Year to London fifty thousand Head of fat
black Cattle, two hundred thousand fat Sheep and Lambs, fifty thousand Firkins
of Butter, and twenty thousand Barrels of Oysters, an hundred thousand fatted
Calves, with two Millions of Geese and Turkeys. How many of the People all That
may keep employed, let others judge for me: However it will be granted that
even in these three Counties where such prodigious Manufactures are produced,
as Norwich Stuffs, the Sudbury Says and the Colchester Bays, yet not one half
of the People are employed in any.

Add to this, the Multitudes of People in Lancashire employed in making the
Cotton Manufactures, about which alone they say there are two hundred thousand
People employed in the Town of Manchester, and within twelve Miles round it.

Add to this also, the Multitudes now employed in the same County in the Linen
Manufacture, which is so increased of late Years there as to employ near as
many as the Cotton, only that it extends over a greater compass of Land.

Add to them all, That even in those Manufacturing Counties, where the greatest
Part of the Woollen Work is carried on, and where the most People are employed
by it, not the Lawyers, not the Physicians, not the Gentry, not the Clergy, not
the Citizens, or Towns-people, that is to say, not the Shopkeepers, not all
the Handicrafts, such as Smiths, Carpenters, Masous, Bricklayers, Shoemakers,
and of the last, not their Wives or Children, so much as set a Hand, no not a
Finger, to any Part of this great Manufacture, except it be to wear it out and
consume it.

In a word, except the Weaving part, and the Managing part, the main Stress of
the Manufacture depends upon, and is performed by the Women and Children, and
that of those few Counties only.

The Conclusion from all this is directly to the Case proposed, thus:

If the Manufacture of England is so prodigious great, and yet employs but so
small a Part of the People, what might it not be brought to, and how would it
be (as I said) too great for the whole World, if all the Inhabitants, I mean
all the looser Inhabitants, such as are fit to work, and who would gladly work
if they could be employed, were set in upon it? What an infinite Quantity of
Goods would they make, and how would they use up, not only all the Wool that
England, Scotland and Ireland could produce, but even more Wool than they could
produce, though the said Quantity was to be increased to twice or three times as
much as it is, and that none was clandestinely carried away to other Parts?

But as I said this Part should be treated as a Digression, I will not run it
out too long. It comes of course next to consider the present State of this
great Manufacture, how it stands, and then bring it all to these great and
necessary Enquiries. 1. Whether it is under a declining and sinking Condition,
or no? 2. What Effect this Decay of the Manufacture may have, and what it
naturally tends to? 3. What are the Occasions of its Decay, and wherein it
consists? 4. What may yet be done to revive it? With some other Observations
which may fall in as we go.


And this is the Business in the following Sheets.

CHAP. I. Of the original State of the Woollen Manufacture of Great Britain,
with some just Deductions from what it has been in former Times to what it is
Now.
AS I have observed in the Introduction that the Woollen Manufacture was (like
the Children of Israel) rescued from a State of Captivity, and from a strange
Land, we must make that out a little plainer: The Case was thus.

In the Reign of Edward III. of glorious Fame, though England was thought to be
at that time in the most flourishing Condition that History gives us any
Account of: The Glory of her Arms, the Vigor of the Monarch, and of his eldest
Son, the Gaiety and Splendour of the Court were such as never were known before;
the Last was the Resort of all the Nobility, Youth and Gentry of Europe; the
second was the Admiration and Wonder of the World; the greatest Princes made
their Court to them, and Kings were Captives in their Possession: England was
the Terror of the World; The Battles of Cressy and Poictiers, and the
reinstating the King of Spain, deposed by his Rival, were Actions that brought
all the Powers of Europe to stand at Gaze, and as it were to dread the turning
of the Arms of England so much as toward their Dominions: History will confirm
all the Particulars; I have no room for long Quotations:

Yet all this while Trade shared no Advantages among the Conquests of the Day;
nor do we find the least Concern in any of the Councils of that Glorious
Prince, or of his Ministers of State, for the Propagation of Commerce, at home
or abroad.

Building public and sumptuous Edifices, great Churches and Monasterys; making
Feasts, Balls, Tournaments; adorning Windsor-Castle; instituting the famous
Order of Knighthood; making League, and Alliances; expensive Enterviews with
Foreign Princes, such as the Emperor and the Duke of Burgundy, and keeping a
magnificent English Court at Cologne, for almost a Year and a half at a time:
These things took up the Court, and turned the Eyes (I had almost said turned
the Heads) of the Nation, during that whole Reign. Things which tended to the
Glory of the Kingdom, and the Honor of the Majesty of the King, as
Nebuchadnezzar said of his great Babel that he had built; but, as we may add,
these glorious things gutted England of its Wealth, made the Monarch powerful
and his People poor.

In all his Parliaments we see not one Act for the Encouragement of Trade, for
the enlarging Commerce, for Employment of the Poor, for setting up
Manufactures; to speak the Truth, I question if the Word Manufacture or
Manufacturer were known in the Country; and, for ought I see, as the Tailors
were the Only Merchants, so the Shoemakers were the Greatest Manufacturers in
the Kingdom.

The bountiful Hand of Heaven had then, and from the Beginning, given England
the greatest Gift of Nature that the whole World could be said to enjoy, viz.
the Wool: The diligent and sensible Nations round us understood it, and how to
value it; and, which was more, understood how to improve it; and for that end,
thronged to the very outmost Bounds of the Continent of Europe (this way) to be
near it, and that they might bring it over as cheap as possible.

By this I mean the Netherlands, where the industrious People, by the Help of
the Wool from England, fell to work in such a Manner as that there they made
then, as we have since done in England, Clothes for all the known Parts of the
World.

This brought the many Thousands and Millions of People to inhabit those
drowned, overflowed Bogs and Marshes, which before that were scarce thought fit
for human Creatures to dwell in, and which were dwelt in only as Retreats and
Fastnesses to secure the fugitive Nations from the Incursions of the Gauls, and
afterward of the Romans.

This very Trade brought People, and built Cities and Castles, even where the
Sea allowed no footing, and the Land no Foundation; from hence, I say, the
numberless Throngs of People came to dwell in that Country, and by degrees, by
the Increase of their Wealth, and by their indefatigable Industry (all the
Effects of Trade and Manufacture) have brought it to be the richest Soil, the
fullest of People and of great Cities and Towns, of any Country in the World.

All this while England lay neglected to the last Degree; her Sons knocking
their Heads against Stone-walls, and ranging the Field of War in foreign
Countries, pursued their own Poverty, and sought Misery, for the Glory of their
Monarch.

But at home it was all a Miscellany of Sorrow: Villainage and Vassalage
comprised the Poor; Knighthood and Esquireship took up the middle Gentry; and
Glory dwelt only among the Barons and Princes.

All the Trade we read of, was carrying their Wool abroad, to give Employment
to the Poor of foreign Countries, viz. the Dutch and the Flemings; and this
Wool, we may say, was the grand Fund of the Wealth, both of King and People.

If the King made any Wars, and demanded Subsidies of his Parliament, as was
too frequently the Case in the time of Edw. III, the grand Article of Ways and
Means was to grant the King ten Shillings a Pack upon Wool, or twenty Shillings
a Pack upon Wool, like our two Shillings and four Shillings per Pound upon
Land; and once they came to such a Height, (God forbid we should see the like
of our Lands) that the Parliament gave the King one Half Part of all the Wool
it self for his Wars in France; by the same Token that (as King Charles II. did
too often) all the Money was spent, and no War with France begun neither; nor
did the War break out 'till three Years after; so that when it came, they were
sain to give the King new Subsidies again; that is to say, another Tax upon the
Exportation of Wool, and so over and over again several times.

In this State of Indolence, or rather horrid Ignorance and Blindness, was this
whole Nation, as it were, Philtred and Bewitched, notwithstanding all the
Glory, the Wisdom, the Policy and good Government which King Edward III was so
famed for.

Like People buried alive in Sloth and Idleness they sat still, ploughed and
sowed as much Corn as served just to feed them, sheer'd their Sheep every Year,
and, as it may be said, threw away their Wool; went to the Wars, were knocked
on the Head for the Honor of Old England, and the Glory of their great Kings;
and this was the Round of Life, even from the Nobleman to the meanest Vassal,
Peasant or Labourer in the Nation.

As to the poor Women and Children, they sat at home, fared hard, lived poor
and idle: the Women drudg'd at the Husbandry, and the Children sar still,
blowed their Fingers, picked Straws; and both might be said not to live, but to
slarve out a wretched time, then Die, and go, Where -- who knows!

As to Manufacture or Employment, we do not see room so much as to believe that
they knew any thing of it; any farther than it may be to make some very
ordinary things which Nature (...) Necessity put them upon for their own
Covering, and hardly that

In this miserable Condition lay the Ancestry of this diligent Nation, who
being but once let into the Method of working the Wool, and some Authority
supporting as well as encouraging them by stopping the Stream of its
Exportation, soon tasted the Sweets of it, soon fell heartily upon it,
presently became Masters of the Performance, and in time supplanted the
Encroachers; engrossed the Wool, for it was their own before; redeemed the
Captives, and at last brought not only the Manufactures, but the Manufacturers
too, over to England; for thousands of the People followed the Manufacture for
Bread, and that they might get Employment; and this began the multiplying of
the People too, as well as of their Wealth; for as Trade brings Wealth, so Work
brings the Workmen together.

It is just thus still in England: Wherever we see the Manufactures seated,
there we see Multitudes of People collected; the Labor gathers the Hands: and
this was the first Occasion of making those strict exclusive Laws for Parish
Settlements, that the particular Parishes where such Manufactures were set up
might not be oppressed with the Numbers of Poor flocking in from other Parishes.

Where the first Manufacturer's settled or set up, the unemployed People
presently thronged about them for Business and Wages; and we find it to this
day, that where the Manufactures are, the Country is always exceeding populous;
This it is evident the Manufactures did not find, but made it so; it is true the
Manufacture in most Places pitched its Situation in great Towns or Cities, such
as Norwich, Colchester, Canterbury, Exeter, and the like; but it is also certain
that those Cities, and especially the adjacent Countries, are grown infinitely
more populous by the settling of those Manufactures among them, than they were
before.

This is farther proved by a general View of those Parts of England where the
People are not thus employed; for where the Inhabitants of a Country consist
only, or chiefly, of Landlord and Tenant, Gentry and Shopkeepers, you see the
Country much less thronged; it is true that the Multitudes which live together
in those Places where the Manufactures are established as above, do influence
all the rest of the Nation by causing a greater Cultivation of the Lands, and
greater Improvement of Estates, for Provisions, which the other consume; the
Corn and the Cattle being brought from the remotest Parts for their
Subsistence, and by consequence the People are increased there also:

Yet we see the Country is inhabited in a more even manner, the People live
more at large and dispersed, as the Farms and the Lands which they cultivate
call them; they are spread as it were over the whole sace of the Land.

We see no such Villages there as Leeds or Hallifax, Sheffield or Birmingham,
Manchester or Froom, Taunton or Troubridge, in most of which, or on very little
Ground near them, twenty to forty thousand People are said severally to
inhabit; and in three or four of them, as in Hallifax, Manchester, Birmingham,
and Froom, many more.

But to go back to the Introduction of this Change: It was in the Reign of K.
Hen. VII, and not before, when the English began the bold Adventure of
Manufacturing their own Wool, (I mean began it in Quantity.) There had some
Attempt been made before, and we are told of some Adventurers in Trade who
having been over in Flanders and learned the Manner of it, but especially
having seen the Advantage of it, had brought over with them so much Knowledge
as to learn the People to spin, (so many of them at least as their Stocks could
compass to employ) and others to Comb and Card the Wool, and so on, through all
the other Parts of the Work; which went a little way, and was promising to go
farther in time.

But it is to be observed, that from the first Part of the Reign of Henry VI,
and through all that long Reign, and through the Reign of Edward IV, and Richard
III, the whole Nation was miserably embroiled in the Civil Confusions, such as
the Wars between the White Rose and the Red; the Houses of Lancaster and York;
and the several Insurrections and Revolutions of Affairs which naturally
attended those Quarrels.

Every one knows that War is no Friend to Trade: Arts and Improvements, much
less Manufacture, and the Employment of the Poor, never plant, or at least
never thrive, in the Flame and Heat of War, especially too the worst of the
kind, an Intestine, Civil, or to speak justly of it, an Unnatural War.

Times of Feud and Faction, Rebellion, Insurrection, killing and plundering,
are no times for Improvement; and this may be a just Reason why the Beginnings
of the Manufacture, which I have mentioned as above, took no considerable root
during the Confusions of War, both Civil and Foreign Wars, but especially Civil
Wars, which for sixty Years almost without Intermission vexed this Nation.

Perhaps a Manufacturer did, or suppose he had seated himself at any particular
Town or Place in the Country, had brought together some People, and had
instructed them in the Work, viz. some Women to spin, some Men to comb, to
weave, to dress the Cloth, and had built a Fulling Mill to thicken the Cloths,
and the like: Then come the two Armies into the Field, and they march over the
Country where the poor Manufacturer is settled: If it be a friendly Army, and
they are of the same Side, then the kindest thing that could be expected was to
call all the Poor Workmen away, especially the young able-bodied Fellows, with
their Bows and Arrows to increase the Army: If it were the Enemy, then they all
run away for fear of being forced. As for the Women and Children, they are no
body without the Men, for they cannot spin the Wool 'till the Men comb it, and
when they have spun the Yarn, it is of no use when the Men are gone that should
weave it; and perhaps the Loom which it should be wrought in, burnt by the
Plunderings and Ravagings of the Soldiers.

By this means (and I cannot doubt but this was often the Case) the Beginning
of the Manufacture was checked and put back, the poor Undertaker ruined and
undone; and so you heard no more of the Attempt for some Years.

This is as good an Account as I believe can be given why the Woollen
Manufacture began among us no sooner; why it had no Encouragement in England,
at least no considerable Encouragement, 'till the time of King Henry VII, and
about the Year 1480, to 1490.

The Reign of King Henry was the first Halcyon Season which England had selt,
not for some Years only, but for some Ages, as will appear at large in the
Histories of those Times: Either Wars abroad, or Wars at home, had vexed the
Nation, from the unfortunate Reign of Richard II. to that time; all the
Circumstances of those Reigns will confirm it, I need not quote the
Particulars, which are too many; the Nation was always in a Hurry and a Fright;
here the Oppressions of Tyrants, there the Rebellions of People; here the Kings
deposed and murdered, there the People ravaged and plundered; now one King
runs away, then another. Hen. VI. was upon the Throne, and in Prison,
alternately, five or six times; Edward IV. upon the Throne, and fled out of the
Country, twice at least; and so among the rest.

But Henry VII. took new Measures, and managed the Public Affairs with the
utmost Dexterity. He first humbled the too powerful Nobility, so to prevent
Caballing and Rebellion; brought them to be all dependent upon him, and
gradually impoverished them, while he hoarded up immense Sums of Money himself:
In a word, his Reign was a whole Scene of Intrigue and Design, among the great
Ones; the King ever talking of War, and blustering at his Neighbors as if he
would quarrel with every body; and got great Sums of Money from his Parliament
to begin a War (especially against France) but put the Money in his Pocket, and
never made any War at all, and (as some say) never intended it.

But in the mean time (as these Cabals and Politics at Court concerned no body
but themselves) his Reign, as to the People, was all pacifick and quiet, and
the Consequence was visible, for now Industry began to hold up its Head, Trade
began to spread, the Merchants began to set up, and Navigation to be
encouraged; the People of England began to look abroad and about them, and
Colonies and Factories began in this very Reign to be planted, foreign
Countries to be discovered, and new Worlds looked into; and Some tell us that
Christopber Columbus having now discovered America, came over hither, and made
the first Offer for a farther Discovery to King Henry, and particularly to take
possession of it for him, but that the King (by the mere Narrowness of his
Soul) declined the Expense of it.

Also it is affirmed, that several Voyages were made in this King's Reign to the
Western Shoars of Africa, and to the Gold Coast, and great Advantages made by
it to the Merchants, bringing pure Gold back for the most worthless Trifles:
But this is not to the present Purpose, only thus far, that this being a Reign
of prosound Peace, Arts and Commerce began to relish with the People, and they
began to turn their Hands to several kinds of Improvement.

Among the rest, this of the Woollen Manufacture came principally into play.
The King, who had lived abroad, as well in Flanders as in France and Brittany,
had seen with Regret, how not the Flemings only, but the French grew rich at
the Expense of England, and how even they could not refrain mocking the Sloth
and Weakness of the English, that should let their Wool be carried out of the
Kingdom, to be worked up into Cloths and Stuffs; and in a word, be manufactured
abroad, and then buy even the Cloths they wore of their own Wool so
manufactured abroad.

It must be consess'd it deserved Reproach, and when we come to look back upon
it at this distance, we cannot help wondering at the Madness of the People, but
there are so many other Examples of the unaccountable Stupidity of those Ages,
especially of the common People, that if they were all to be brought upon the
Stage, we should cease to wonder at any thing of this kind; as particularly,
how they were blindly given up to the absolute Tyranny of the Nobility, in
Civil Matters, and to the absolute Government of the ignorant Priests, on the
Side of Religion.

But not to dwell upon the Folly of those Ages, I proceed to take a View of the
Advances our Ancestors made in the recovering this glorious Trade; and even in
that, I shall not enlarge upon the little Beginnings, and unsuccessful
Attempts, which (as above) were made by private Purses, and on private
Experiments, before the Reign of King Henry VII. for if we may believe Fame,
there were several private Essays made, for the engaging in, and carrying on a
Manufacture of Woollen Cloth, before that Time, some of which began to promise
Success too; and the People began to relish the Thing, and taste the Profit of
it before.

Had it not been so, we can hardly think that King Henry could, all at once,
bring the People of England to a general Manufacturing, so as effectually to
stop the Exportation of the Wool, as he certainly did in the eighteenth Year of
his Reign, or thereabout.

But several People having attempted it before, some without Success, and some
with; and the Thing beginning gradually to increase and get ground in the Reign
of Edward IV. the King, who (as above) having seen the innumerable Numbers of
People working at it abroad, and being thereby fully sensible of the Advantage
it would be to his own Subjects, if they could be brought to engage in it at
home, first set heartily about it among his own Subjects, encouraging those
that were engaged in it, and promising Encouragement to others to go about it;
so that he brought several Men of Interest among his Nobility, and others, to
espouse it, and the Manufacture was set on foot in that manner in several Parts
of England, and that with apparent Success; as particularly, (if we may credit
private Accounts) the first Appearance of the Woollen Manufacture of Cloth was
at Wakefield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, being encouraged by an ancient
Knight and Favorite of King Henry, of the Name of Savil, and some other
Persons of Rank, who had Estates in that Country, and who encouraged their
Tenants and Vassals to the Work. This Savil, I suppose to be some of the
Ancestors of the late Marquis of Hallifax, one of whose Titles is taken from
the Town of Eland, in the same Part of the Country, and upon the Banks of the
Calder, not far from Wakefield, of whom the Posterity are Lords Eland to this
Day.

The next Place to which the Manufacture spread, was the Town of Okingham in
Berkshire; where it did not continue long, or at least was not contained in the
narrow Bounds of that small Place, but spread it self to the larger Towns of
Basingstoke and Andover in Hampshire and Wiltshire, and to Reading and
Newberry, in which four last Towns it continued even 'till within these few
Years, to an extraordinary Magnitude; but it is now removed farther West, into
Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, etc. Then the Countess of Richmond, Mother to King
Henry VII, encouraged some moneyed Men to set it up again in the Villages about
Woking, on the River Wey, where, or near which, she lived, with a great and
noble Hospitality, doing good to all the poor People round about her, and
particularly by thus settling them to work, and that from thence began the
Clothing about Guildford, Godlaming, Darking, etc. all Towns in Surrey; and in
other Places thereabouts, and which continues there (though decayed) to this Day.

It was some time after these private Persons undertook the manufacturing of
Wool, that King Henry, finding his Subjects begin to improve, and that the
Goods they made were able to supply the ordinary Demand, or near it; caused the
Exportation of Wool to be prohibited, and foreign-made Manufactures also to be
excluded, encouraging his People thereby to make larger Quantities of those
Goods at home.

Nor did there need any greater Encouragement to the Manufacture, than thus
shutting out the foreign Manufactures; for this increasing the Demand at home,
the Price increased of course, which sufficiently rewarded the Labors of the
Workmen, and increased their Wages.

I need not bring any Vouchers to prove, that this Increase of Wages improved
the Manufacture, or increased the Number of the Workmen; for now, not only the
English fell into the Trade with Courage, and with Multitudes, but (as above)
Multitudes followed the Manufacture out of Flanders, encouraged by the Gain,
and wanting Employment at home.

Nor were these of the laboring Poor only, but abundance of the Master
Manufacturers, and of those the most skilful in the Workmanship; by whom the
People here were soon instructed and perfected in the Knowledge, not of the Art
only in general, such as in the Sorting, Combing, Carding, and otherwise
managing the Wool, in Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, etc. but also in the several
kinds of Goods fitted for the Markets, and demanded as well abroad as at home.

Thus the English secured the Trade to themselves, and became first Masters of
the Woollen Manufacture; and the very Flemings themselves, who had for so many
Ages eat the Bread out of their Mouths, were now their Assistants and
Instructors, in completing them in the Knowledge of Dressing, Sheering,
Perfecting, and Finishing the working Part; thousands of the said Flemings, and
their Families, coming over hither for Work, and settling among them, and whose
Posterity became English, immediately after them, scarcely reserving their
foreign Names, or changing them, to conceal their Original.

For it is to be observed, that it was not so easy a Matter for Foreigners to
be naturalized among the English in those times, as it is now, which made those
that found means to settle here, and turn their Hands to the Manufacture, take
what care they could to conceal themselves, and so to change their Sir-names,
or at least shorten and abridge them into differing Sounds, that they might be
made to speak English as much as possible, that is to say, to sound like
English: for Example; Jean de Somteres would be called John Summers; Guillaume
de Tournay, William Turner; Esticnne D'Anvers, Stephen Danvers; Jaques de
Franquemont, James Franks; and so of the rest; by which all the Flemish, Dutch,
and Walloon Names were presently turned into English. And thus of those who had
two or three Christian Names (as is common among Foreigners) they turned the
second Christian Name into a Surname, and from thence it is said we have so
many Families of such Sirnames among us to this Day; for Example, Jean Jaques
de Buromeir, leaving out the Surname, was called John James; Guillaume Jacob
Van Platten, William Jacobs; Guillaume Henry de Villangen, William Henry; and
many more of this kind, as we find the French Refugees of the last Age are
doing at this very time; Jean de Morlaix is now John Morley; and but the other
Day, Jaques de Guilote called himself James Gill, and the like is done every
Day, so that the Families are no more known to be foreign. But this is a
Digression.

We find very little upon Record, relating to the Wool being carried into
Flanders after this; or of the Flemings making broad Cloth and Stuffs, nor
indeed are our Laws much concerned about those Affairs, except that King Henry
VII. toward the End of his Reign, had some Laws made to regulate the Lengths
and Breadths of the Cloths made here, in order to bring the Clothiers into a
Regularity of working, and that the several sorts of Goods should be all alike,
equal to one another, and as near as possible of an equal Goodness and Value;
so to establish the Price of every kind at Market, and prevent Frauds.

Hence came the fixing of Marks and Seals to the Cloths; at first, every Maker
striving to add a Reputation to his own Manufacture, and pretending it to be
superior in its Fineness or Goodness, to his Neighbors, set his Mark at the
End, wrought into the Cloth, in some different Color, or (as afer some time
was practiced) Leaden Seals, with the Maker's Name, and the Weight of the Cloth
stamped upon them; and hence after some time the several Towns and
Corporations, denominating the Manufacture from the Place, obtained Privileges
and Immunities, Powers and Authority to regulate the Length, and Breadth, and
Goodness of the several Manufactures made in those Towns respectively, stamping
the Leaden Seals with the Town Marks or Arms, as at Colchester, at Norwich, at
Leeds, and several other Places.

It is true that in this Interval between stopping the Wool from being
exported, and bringing the Manufacture at home to a Perfection, two
Inconveniences happened.

1. The King's Revenue was greatly impaired, and even the Parliament were put
to Difficulties for Ways and Means upon extraordinary Occasions to raise Money
for the King's Business; for the usual Fund for raising Money, when the
ordinary Subsidies, Tenths and Fifteenths were not sufficient, was by granting
the King twenty Shillings or forty Shillings, as the Public Occasion called
for it, upon each Pack of Wool; whereas now the Wool being detained at home,
the Clothiers paying no Duty upon that which they bought at home, nor any Tax
upon the Cloths when made, the Revenue to the Crown was stopped at once; and this
perhaps might be the reason, that notwithstanding the Prohibition in Henry
VII's time, which perhaps was temporary and so might be expired, we find the
Wool was exported again to Flanders in the Reign of King Henry VIII; and in the
Fourth of King Edward VI, we find mention made of a Wool Fleet of sixty Sail
bound to Antwerp, which I take to be partly also occasioned by this next
Article, viz.

2. That the Clothing being yet young in England, though greatly improved
(considering the time it had been set up in) the Manufacturers were not able to
work up the whole Quantity of Wool which grew in England, and so the Government
was obliged either to allow or wink at its being carried abroad, as it
certainly was all the Reign of Henry VIII, and of Edward VI also, though in the
said fourth Year of Ed. VI they consulted much upon erecting a Mart for the
English Cloth and Block Tin to be established at Southampton; so that none of
those Goods should be sold at any other Place, for the South-West Parts of
England, and at Hull for the North Parts; this last to accommodate the
Merchants of the East-Seas called the Hans, and also for the Ease and Advantage
of the Northern Clothiers in England; for that it was observed even then, that
the Clothing Trade flourished in those early Times in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, viz. at Wakefield, Halifax, Leeds, etc. more than in any other Part
of England.

However, as I have said, that the Clothiers were not yet able to work up all
the Growth of the Wool in England; so there seemed to be a Necessity to let
some Part of it be sent abroad; yet it was resolved in King Edward's Council,
it seems, to stop the Fleet which was just then going for Antwerp, and to have
the Wool kept at home, to encourage the Mart intended to be erected at
Southampton: But the Fleet was sailed out of Dover Harbor, and out of the
River of Thames, before the Order of Council was passed, and could reach them;
and so the Wool went away; and the King's Death following soon after, those
Resolves came to Nothing for that time.

In the next Reign, Philip II, King of Spain, marrying Queen Mary of England,
it was not to be expected that a Prohibition so much to the Prejudice of the
Trade of the Netherlands, which were King Philip's proper Dominion, should pass
in England; so that we have Reason to believe the Prohibition of sending Wool
over the Seas, was at least suspended for that Reign; and what happened in the
next, we shall have frequent Occasion to mention as we go on.

Thus you see the Infant State of the Woollen Manufacture; from what rational
Measures it received its first Encouragement in England, and how gradually it
came on; for we must also observe, that as it was a thing of vast Magnitude, as
well as of the utmost Importance to this Nation, so it was not easily, much
less suddenly, brought to Perfection; the Stream or Channel of so great a
Commerce was not soon changed, though our People came into it with Cheerfulness,
and made wonderful Progress for the time; yet This Rome was not built in a Day,
it was many Years, nay Ages, before it came to Perfection.

The first Beginnings of it I take to have been in the Reign of Edward IV, that
is to say, of its being attempted by private Hands: The first public
Countenance it received, was at nearest about the Year 1480, in the time of
Henry VII, and it was from thence to the Year 1560 (viz.) under Queen
Elizabeth, before it came to its Perfection; so that it was above an hundred
and twenty Years, as we may call it, in its State of Nonage, though all the while
increasing and growing, and in a promising View of a prosperous Magnitude, the
same which we have since seen it arrive to.

It had indeed a most glorious Patron (or Patroness) and Protector in Queen
Elizabeth; who not only promoted and encouraged it at home, but also extended
the Trade for the Consumption of it abroad; for in her Time, the several
Branches of the English Commerce were extended into almost all Parts of the
known World; the Turkey Trade, and the Muscovy Trade established; the Colonies
in America discovered and planted, by all which the Woollen Manufacture
obtained a Vent in foreign Markets, and those great Branches of its
Consumption, which have since been so large, and are still the most
considerable, were first established in her time, particularly (I say) that of
Turkey and Muscovy.

But nothing contributed so effectually to the Prosperity of the Woollen
Manufacture in this Nation, and which may be said (under the wise Conduct of
that glorious Queen) to complete the whole Fabric, giving the mortal Stroke
to, unhinging the whole Trade in, and shutting it for ever out from, the
Low Countries, as the long and bloody War between the King of Spain and his
Subjects in those Countries, on account of the Liberties and Religion of the
People.

By this, the People were distracted and separated, the Nobility murdered, the
Towns ruined, the Country plundered, the United Provinces (now called the
States General) entirely broken off from the King of Spain's Government;
thousands of the People fled over to England, where they were kindly received,
hospitably relieved, courteously entertained, and (which was above all the
rest) encouraged to set up their Manufactures in the Towns and Corporations,
wherever they pleased; and this increased and completed the manufacturing
Trade in England. And thus we have brought it within View (at least) of its
present State.

CHAP. II. Of the Flourishing Circumstances of the English Manufactures in the
Ages past, both Abroad and at Home; with a summary Account of its Gradations.
IT was not to be reckoned a small Part of the Increase of the Woollen
Manufacture in England (considering its Original was from Abroad) that it was
made capable of supplying the Demands of the Home Trade, and was considerable
enough to cloth its own People: Nor was it under above an hundred Years
Improvement from its beginning, that this could be attained to, as is Noted
above.

The Manufacturers abroad not only out-work'd us, but under-work'd us; they
made their Goods both better and cheaper; the English had great Advantages, but
no Experience, so that still some of the nicer and better Manufactures were
made in Flanders and Holland, nor was there any avoiding it at first.

But when the Flemings (persecuted and terrified by the Cruelty and Persecution
of the Duke D'Alva) fled over hither, and Queen Elizabeth gave them Protection
and Encouragement here, the English then became absolute Masters of the
Manufactures, and from thence we may Date the Perfection of their Skill; then
all foreign Importation might be said to cease, and the carrying abroad of the
Wool was made Criminal.

But let us see how its Consumption went on.

1. At Home; the whole Country was clothed, Poor and Rich; nothing so fine,
but it was to be had in Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, Worcestershire and
Barkshire: Jack of Newbury was a Clothier superior to any that are to be found
among us at this Time, by many Thousands, as Money went then; and Mr. Kenrick's
Will, of St. Christopher's (who was originally a Clothier, and then a Cloth
Merchant, dealing to Dort) testifies how considerable the Trade was by that
Time, ( viz. King James 1.) when he left above 40000l. in Gifts and Charities,
besides the Bulk of his Estate.

2. But let us also take a View of its Increase Abroad, from Queen Elizabeth's
Time, besides its being able fully to supply all the People at Home.

1. That Queen established a flourishing Company, called the Levant Merchants
(the same we now call the Turkey Company) by which she extended the Trade of
the English, for their fine Broad Cloths, into the several Courts of Persia,
Turkey, and Egypt; for either the Queen, or the Turkey Company (I am not sure
which) making some Presents to the Grand Seignior of fine English Cloth, of
such exquisite Workmanship for the Fineness of the Cloth, and of such beautiful
Colors, being dyed Scarlet and Crimson, the said Grand Seignior, and the Grand
Vizier, caused fine Robes or Gowns to be made of the said Cloths; and also fine
Vests, after their manner, which being surred with Sables and rich Furrs,
presented them much about the same time from the Great Duke (so the Russian
Emperor was then called) of Muscovy, made a most magnificent Appearance; the
Grand Seignior and his Courtiers were so pleased with them, that they soon
became the Mode or Wear of all the great Officers, and of the Grand Seignior
himself, and so again of the Viziers or Viceroys of their remotest Provinces,
and the same at the Court of Persia.

Thus in a few Years, the fine English Cloth became the Robes of Majesty, and
(as it were) the Badge of Greatness and Glory, at Constantinople, and at
Ispahan, at Alexandria in Egypt, and at Aleppo in Asia, and every where else
among the Mahometans, where they had Money sufficient to purchase them; and
thus it continues to this Day, which is still more strange than all the rest

2. The same Levant Company included the Trade to Alexandria in the Mouth of
the great River Nile, by which all the Country of Egypt was supplied; and not
only the great Court of the V^zier of Grand Cairo, (who, though a Subject or
Slave of the Grand Seignior, yet keeps a Court almost as great and as
magnificent as the Emperor his Master) but also the same C^oths were convoyed
to Suez, a Seaport of the Turks in the Red Sea, and thence by Water to Judde,
or Ieddo, the Sea Port to the City of Medina, the great Center of the Mohammedan
Superstition, where the Riches and Magnificence of their Priests is not to be
described; and where they are still clothed in the same manner, especially on
their Days of Ceremony.

3. The same Levant Company extended the Trade for English Cloth to the City of
Venice, at the bottom of the Adriatic Gulf, where they drove a very great and
advantageous Trade; for I suppose that the Trade of Smyrna and Scanderoon, and
the Caravans by Aleppo to Persia, were not at that time found out by the
English, but were carried on (if at all) by the Merchants of Venice; who at
that time engrossed indeed all the Commerce of the East, imported the Spices
and all the rich Goods of the Indies, by the Gulf of Persia, and by the
Caravans of Bassora and Bagdat to Aleppo, and sent back by the same Conveyance
such European Goods as those Countries demanded; among which, the fine Broad
Cloths of England, soon after that time, began to be the most acceptable, and
were indeed of the greatest Value of any thing of that kind in the World.

4. Likewise in this Queen's Reign, the Passage to Archangel, or the White
Sea, being discovered, the English Merchants found Means to carry on a Trade
from that Port, by Water-Carriage, to the great City of Muscow, a little way
excepted, where their Goods were carried by Land about sixty Miles only.

Here they also found a Market for their rich Cloths, in the great Duke's
Court; and upon this a new Society for Commerce was erected, and were called
the Muscovy Company; who brought back a very gainful Return in Sables, Ermins,
and other rich Furrs, the Produce of the wild and barren Deserts of Siberia and
the North.

N.B. These Muscovy Merchants found the Way, some time after this, to pass by
the great River Wolga, to Astracan, and thence into the Caspian Sea, an Inland
Navigation ( reckoning from Jerowslaw, where they first embarked their Goods)
of very near 2000 Miles on one River, viz. the Wolga; hence ( unwearted in
their Search after new Worlds of Trade) they passed the Caspian, landed in
Gerogia, passed over the Mountains of Armenia, and reached into the Heart of
the Kingdom of Persia, where they found an extraordinary Reception, sold their
fine Cloths at an extravagant Price, such as was even surprising to themselves;
and brought back Bales of raw Silk to a very great Advantage also; so that
notwithstanding the extraordinary Charges of so exceeding long a Travel, they
made a very profitable Voyage.

These two new Trades gave a very great Encouragement to the English Merchants,
and particularly to the Manufacture of English Cloth, which now obtained such a
Reputation over the whole Trading World, that nothing was equally valuable in
any, or perhaps in all the Courts of Europe and Asia.

5. In the latter End of this Queen's Reign, the same Manufactures were
demanded in an exceeding manner in the Northern Parts of the Empire, and the
Countries bordering on the Baltic; and this Trade naturally fell into the
Hands of the Hans, that is to say, the Society of Merchants who called
themselves the Hans, a Word signifying a Brotherhood, or an United Company; and
because there were so many (for there was once no less than Seventy two Cities
of them) they were called the Hans Towns; these carried on the Trade of the
North, as the Venetians did that of the South and East, mentioned above.

By these Towns, the English Manufacture was indeed wonderfully extended, that
is to say, into all the Countries in the Baltic, the Kingdoms of Denmark and
Norway, the Coasts of Mecklemberg, both the Pomerens, Prussia, Courland,
Livonia, Easthonia, etc. and up the great Rivers of those Countries, into the
very Heart of the Empire, and of all the Northern Countries; for Example,

1. By the City of Bremen, one of the chief of the Hans Towns, the English
Manufacture passed up the Weser, into all the Circle of Westphalia, into the
Countries of Lunenberg, Hessia, and some part of the Lower Saxony.

2. By the City of Hamburgh, another of the Hans Towns, they had the like
Passage into the Heart of the Dominions of the Empire, and even to the
Hereditary Countries of the House of Austria; for the Elb carries its
Navigation, by it self, and other Navigable Rivers, into and through the
Electorates of Saxony and Brandeburgh, up to the great City of Prague, the
Capital of Bohemia.

3. By the City of Lubeck, the Capital and first of the Hans Towns, to all the
Kingdom of Sweden; that City having at that time the Possession and Government
of all Schonen, and the whole Commerce of the Kingdom of Sweden; (whose Power
in Shipping was at that time very low) and the Hans were Masters of the Sea in
all that Part of the World.

4. By the City of Stetin, another Hans Town, situate on the great River Oder,
and by which the Stetiners carried on the like Trade into Silesia, Lusatia,
Austria, and into Poland.

5. By the City of Dantzick, another Hans, and by the Trade of that City upon
the great River Vistula, the English Manufactures were spread into the Heart of
Poland, and even to the Frontiers of Hungaria.

6. By all the Seaports of Koningsburg, Riga, Revel, and Narva, and the
several Rivers called the Duina, the Nicmen, the Pregel and the Narve; by all
which, the English Merchants found an exceeding Vent for the Consumption of the
English Cloths, especially the Northern Clothing of Leeds, Wakefield, and
Halifax, called in general Yorkshire Cloth; which being not so fine, or dyed in
such costly Colors as that which was sold into Persia, Muscovy and the Levant,
yet suiting best with those Northern Climates, the Merchants found the
Quantities which sold there exceeding great, and the Price sold for very
encouraging.

7. France and Spain also, though the last was generally embroiled with England
almost all that Reign, were yet (during the rising Prosperity of the English
Manufacture) glad to come into the Trade of it, and especially the Former took
off great Quantities every Year; for France had not yet set their Hands to work
to imitate (much less to rival) the English, in this particular Piece of
Improvement. As for the Spaniards, the Peace or Truce between Spain and the
States General, which was first settled for twelve Years only, by which the
Spaniards were obliged to acknowledge the Dutch, or United Provinces, to be a
Free State; as it brought on with it a Peace, or a good Correspondence (at
least) between England and Spain, so it wonderfully increased the British
Commerce, and especially the Consumption of the English Manufactures in all the
Provinces of Europe, where they had been obstructed (if not prohibited) before.

Particularly the Dutch, by the Navigation of the Rhine and the Maes (two great
Rivers, and one of them, without Comparison, the greatest River for Trade and
Inland Navigation in Europe) carried those Goods up into the middle of the
Southern Countries of the Empire; for now the English Woollen Cloth was become
the general Favorite of Europe, and the Manufactures of England were the chief
Article at the great Fairs of Ausburg, Nuremberg, Francksort, and Leipsick, the
greatest Marts of Europe at that time, if not in the World; and which continue
in a flourishing Condition to this Day, though sensibly declining in that
particular Article which was their first Rise and Foundation; I mean that of
the English Woollen Manufacture, as I shall show in its Place.

By this means the English Manufacture, which the Dutch at that time gladly
promoted, extended it self not only into the several Countries adjoining to
those Rivers, but into other Countries, by the additional Help of other
Navigable Rivers running into them, or running through other Provinces not far
from them; such as

1. The Moselle, falling into the Rhine at Coblents, and taking into it the
Saar, by which the Trade was supplied into Lorrain, the Country of Tryer, the
North-East Parts of France, the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun,
and into all that rich and fruitful Country between the Saar and the Rhine.

2. The Main, a River Navigable almost 200 Miles, into the Circle of Franconia,
and to the Countries of Wurtzburgh, Bamberg, Baden, and many other of the most
populous Parts of Germany, passing then by Francfort au Main, and falling into
the Rhine at Mentz.

3. The Neckar, a Navigable River also, running through the fruitful rich Country
of the Count Palatine of the Rhine, and passing by the Cities of Heidleberg,
Hailbron, and the Mountains of the Black Forest, and within a few Miles of the
City of Ulm upon the Danube, where that great River begins to be Navigable, and
by which the said Trade had a Communication with all the great Cities and
Rivers of Suabia and Bavaria, and even down to Passau, Lintz and Vienna.

4. The Aar, a large River of Swisserland, also Navigable, which rising out of
the same Mountains of the Grisons, from whence the Rhine it self proceeded,
passes through the City of Bern, near that of Zurick, and other considerable
Parts of the Swiss Cantons, and falling into the Rbine a little above Basle,
carried the English Woollen Manufacture into the Cantons of Swisserland; as it
does now serve, to our great Mortification, to bring the like Manufactures now
made in Swisserland, down into Germany, and to the great Fairs of Nuremberg and
Francksort, where they Undersell and Supplant us, as shall be seen in its Place.

In this flourishing Condition Queen Elizabeth left the Woollen Manufacture of
England; being at that time not the greatest Manufacture in Europe only (for so
it may be called still, though sinking and declining a-pace) but the most
increasing, thriving, and rising Trade (at that time) in the World.

As the Woollen Manufacture had thus been about an hundred and fifty Years in
its growing and increasing Condition, like a young Oak in the Woods; so now
being grown Major, or as we say of Age, and out of its Nonage, we may allow it
to have continued above another Century in its flourishing and prosperous
State; that is to say, it held its own, and continued in its full Glory,
extended to an infinite Length and Breadth, triumphing over the whole World of
Commerce, not rivaled, not imitated, I will not say, not envyed, but really not
rivaled by any People or in any Country in the World; no, not so much as
pretended to be rivaled any where: And this last hundred Years which I reckon
to be the State of its full Glory and Perfection, I take to be from the Middle
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, to the End of the Reign of King Charles II. that is
to say, near the End of it, viz. from the Year 1580, twenty Years before Queen
Elizabeth died, to the Year 1680, being the latter End of the Reign of King
Charles II.

During this time, the Manufactures were so far from receiving any Blow, any
mortal Wound or sensible Disaster, either from abroad or at home, that the
several Circumstances relating to the Vent and Consumption of them concurred to
enlarge them and render their Condition yet more flourishing and prosperous, if
that could be, than they were before. For Example,

First, During that Interval of Time, many flourishing and now famous Colonies
of English had been settled in America, and in other remote Parts of the World;
the Discoveries of the indefatigable Adventurers of that Age; such as Sir
Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, the famous Earl of Cumberland, Captain
Smith, and others, too many to name, by whom the Commerce of the English was
extended in a prodigious manner, and their Dominions also; as in the following
Countries in particular: 1. Virginia 1. Barbados 2. New Egland 2. Bermudas 3.
Newfoundland 3. Nevis 4. Hudson's-Bay 4. Antegoa 5. New York 5. Montserrat 6.
New Jersey 6. St. Christopher's 7. Pensilvania 7. Jamaica, etc. 8. Carolina.

In all these, the succeeding Generations have so improved, the Plantations
have been so spread, so well managed, and the Numbers of People are so
surprisingly increased, that whereas in the Beginning of King James's Reign it
is creditably affirmed there were not Five thousand People in all of them,
Negroes excepted, and not abundance of Them: It Is now as creditably insisted
upon, that there are not less than a Million of British Subjects, Slaves
included; which monstrous Increase is not only an Addition to the Greatness and
Glory of the British Dominion and to their Commerce, by the immense Return of
their Product to England, such as from the Continent in Tobacco, Rice, Pitch,
Tar, Turpentine, Train-Oil, Fish, Whale-fins, Furs, Drugs, etc. and to the
other Colonies on the Islands in Corn, Meal, Peace, Pork, Beer, Horses, etc. and
from the Islands to England, in Sugar, Rum, Melasses, Ginger, Cotton, Indico,
Piemento, Cocoa, and many other valuable things. I say, this Increase of People
is not only an Increase of Commerce, in the Returns abovenamed, but it adds to
the Consumption of the British Manufactures in an extraordinary manner; not
only all that Million of People being to be clothed from hence, but that they
have in all Places upon the said Continent taught the Natives of the Country to
go clothed also; and who are supplied with Manufactures from England; all
which is a mere Addition to the Trade, as well as to the Navigation of England,
since the time abovenamed; nothing of those Countries being then known, much
less any Trade to them.

It may be objected, and has been pretended, that the first Planters or
Inhabitants of those Colonies coming from England is no Addition; for that the
same Increase would have been from them at home, if they had not gone abroad.

But as this requires a long and full Answer, such a full Answer may be given
to it hereafter; and particularly this, that those Inhabitants generally going
over thither in mean Circumstances, and growing rich there by their Industry,
have quite altered the Case; and that the Increase of the same People, if it
had happened, had probably been an Increase both of unprofitable Hands and
Mouths; whereas here they have been just the contrary, and their Posterity
being rich and industrious, have thereby increased the public Wealth as well
as the Numbers of People: But this is not to the present Purpose.

It is certain, that since Queen Elizabeth's time, not our Colonies only, but
the whole Kingdom of England is increased in People in a wonderful manner; and
that notwithstanding the prodigious Numbers who we can account for, as
destroyed out of the ordinary course of Nature; such as by War abroad and at
home, Plague, Shipwreck, peopling of Ireland, and other Cases, by which some
Millions may have been destroyed, and no doubt have been.

All this Increase of People has been an Addition to the Consumption of the
Manufactures, and consequently an Increase of it; and to say, that the
Manufacture was increased by its being sufficient to clothe the Inhabitants in
Edward the Sixth's Reign, was to say little or nothing, compared to what the
Importance of the same Article would be now, seeing we cannot doubt but that
there are at least Four Millions of People in the Kingdom of England at this
time, more than there were at the End of the Year 1500.

The first Foundation of this Increase was, without doubt, said in the fixing
the Manufactures at home, which were before settled in Flanders, as I have
said; and the next Step was the Persecution of the Spaniards in Flanders,
mentioned also above.

The last of those Articles, as some are of Opinion, brought over at least one
hundred thousand Flemings into England, where Queen Elizabeth, far from being
ignorant of the Benefit that Numbers of People would be to her Dominions, where
she knew well there was Business enough to employ them gave them all imaginable
Encouragement, appointed them Churches, admitted them to set up in
Corporations, exempted them from Taxes, and the like; and we see their
Posterity here to this Day, distinguished by Name in many of our Manufacturing
Towns, as the Rebows at Colchester, the De Vinks at Norwich, the Papilons at
Canterbury, and the like.

I might give Examples of the casual Increase of the English Manufactures both
abroad and at home; within the Compass of an hundred and twenty Years now
passed, from the Death of Queen Elizabeth, as limited above, to this time; all
which may serve further to prove the then flourishing Condition of that Trade;
such as the several Factories of the English in other Parts of the World; and
the Increase of the Spanish and Portugueze Colonies in America, which have
still added to the Increase of the Manufactures of Great Britain, the
Consumption being so very great among those Nations.

Hitherto then we have seen the bright Side of the Subject, and have brought
the Manufacture to its Meridian Height: It is only to be observed as an
Addition to what has been said, that as the Consumption of the Manufacture
increased abroad, so the Quantity made increased at home. The Manufactures
increasing, the Manufacturers increased also; the Trade spread at home in
Proportion as it spread abroad; and that which was at first the Work of a few
Counties and Cities, became now the Employment of whole Provinces or Divisions
of the Country, being a kind of District consisting of several Counties or
Parts of Counties together.

Thus the Manufacture, first erected at Norwich, spread in a little after the
said time, over the whole Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk: As the Bay Trade of
Colchester, first confined to that Town and the adjacent Country, is now
extended through the whole County, one of the largest and most populous in
England. The Clothing Trade erected first at the Towns of Oakingham, Reading,
Newbery, and Andover, in the Countries of Wiltshire and Berkshire, is now
spread farther into Wiltshire and Somersetshire, extending along a vast Tract
of Ground from the Edge of Gloucestershire to the side of Dorsetshire, for near
an hundred Miles, through the richest and most fruitful Vale in all the West Part
of England called, the Vale of White-Horse, and including the populous Towns of
Malmsbury Tedbury Cirencester Stroud Marshfield Caln Chipenham Devizes Bradford
Trowbridge Froom Warminster Westbury,
And many more, with innumerable populous Villages.

The like in the Clothing of Worcestershire, extended into the Counties of
Salop, Hereford, Gloucester, and the Counties adjacent.

Thus, I say, the Manufacture flourishing abroad, spread in Proportion at home,
'till at length it arrived (...) the Magnitude which we see it in at this time,
when its Body is said to be too big for its Legs; and the Multitudes employed
in it are such, that at the same time that the Markets are decayed abroad, the
Extent of it not being limited at home, the Laws of Proportion have been
broken; and though the Sale has been lessened, the People have still gone on
making, 'till according to some, the Quantity has been superior to what the
whole World could, or at least in the ordinary Course of Trade would consume.
And this brings us to the present State of the Manufacture, as it stands aborad
just now with respect to the Sale, and as it stands at home with respect to the
Production, by which it will be easily seen, whether the Manufacture as a Trade
or as a Business is in a thriving or a declining Condition.

CHAP. III. Of the Present State of the British Manufacture, as well abroad as
at home; with a just Deduction from the Prospect of it to the Question in hand
(viz.) Whether it is in a Declining Condition or no.
WE have seen something of the past State of the Woollen Manufacture: Queen
Elizabeth brought it into a flourishing Condition, in which it continued with
several large Additions to its Prosperity, and a continual Increase of its
Magnitude, and of its Consumption, to the Time of the late Restoration; in
which time if it sunk in one Article, it rose in another; so that we might say,
it was always flourishing, and was rather greater than less at the end of the
next hundred Years, than at the beginning; that is to say, at the Year 1700,
than at the Year 1602, when Queen Elizabeth died.

Certain it is that the Consumption was infinitely increased, the Trade abroad
perfectly good; Experience as well as History confirms that even in the Height
of the Confusions of the Civil Wars in England, the Trade of the Woollen
Manufacture was flourishing and prodigious great. Even during the Time of the
Siege of Colchester, when that Town was, as it was called then, in open
Rebellion; the Necessity of Trade obliged the Besiegers to give the
Towns-People Leave to bring out their Bays to Lexden Heath, and to sell them to
the London Merchants, who came thither to buy; and the Sellers were allowed to
carry back their Money unmolested by the Soldiers who besieged them. The Reason
was plain; the Demand from abroad made it necessary the Merchants should be
supplied, and the Trade ought not to be obstructed.

Nay such was the Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture abroad, that all the
Increase of it at home was not sufficient; but the Irish, encouraged by the
Merchants, and having Plenty of Wool, feel into the Making Part, and in a few
Years Peace being restored in that Kingdom, and the English Inhabitants
multiplying, the Woollen Manufacture came (by the Industry of People) to be as
great there, in Proportion, as it was here.

France about this time increased in People, and flourishing in Peace under the
prosperous Reign of Lewis XIII, and the exquisite Administration of the great
Richlieu, began to extend their Trade; and the Demand they made of our
Manufacture in that Reign, was prodigious great.

But here we must make a full Point, and look a little into the Trade as in a
State of full Perfection, and standing for some time at a Stay.

That Great Britain grew immensly Rich in those Ages of Trade, is not to be
denied, or indeed disputed; we might give a long Account of the Increase of her
Wealth and Riches, her Greatness and Glory, and how it was all raised by, and
the Effect of, her increased Commerce; but it is too long for a Tract of this
Nature, it will be seen in its Consequences, and in nothing more than in the
prodigions Efforts made by the whole Nation, in the late double War, from the
Revolution to the Peace of Utrecht; in which, let but the immense Sums of Money
which were raised upon Trade only be taken Account of, and they will give us a
fair Sketch of the Improvement it self.

Nay, let the vast Sums raised Annually, to this Day, by the Customs upon
Trade, speak something of the Increase of it since those Days. I need not enter
into the Detail of those Productions, such as the Duties on Wines, Tobacco,
Brandies; East India, and Italian, and Turkey Importations; the Excises on
Beer, Ale, Malt, Spirits, Coffee, Tea, etc. which at this time raise such Sums,
as no Nation in the World can show the like of, and as this Nation never came
up to before.

I shall close the Abstract of it with this short Return of the late King Lewis
XIV, to the Account of the last Year's State of the War in England; when he saw
the Establishment of the South Sea Company, and the Provision made by the
Parliament for the old unprovided-for Debts, and for the Service of the growing
Year, both which amounted to near Eleven Millions Sterling, a Sum so frightful,
put into French Money, that the King upon sight of it, spread out his Hands,
and said, I see it is time to put an End to the War! I never believed that
England could have made such Efforts as these; let us make Peace upon the best
Terms we can.

But I come in the next Place to the declining Part of our Trade, and to
enquire where it began.

CHAP. IV. How and when the British Manufactures began to receive some
Impression from the Influence of other Nations: And how they began to suffer
any Lessening or Loss from those Impressions.
THE first Impression which the British Commerce felt upon the Greatness of her
Trade, and especially upon her Manufacture, was from Ireland.

It was in the latter end of the Reign of King Charles II, that England driving
such an encouraging Commerce in the Export of her Woollen Manufactures, the
Gain of it animated the Irish Merchants not only to Export the like from
Ireland, but to encourage the People of Ireland, as well the Natives as the
English Irish (so they call the Families risen up there from the English Race)
to push into it, and to set up the Working all manner of Woollen Goods made in
England, after the same Manner, and under the same Denominations as in England;
with this Addition, that they soon found themselves able not only to do it as
well as in England, the Wool and the Workmanship being as it were) the same;
but that they were able to Make, Finish, Export, and consequently Sell at
Market the same Goods, as good, and much cheaper, than the English.

The first Discovery of this in England seemed to be from France, and from
Spain, where our Merchants, to their great Mortification, first sound
themselves under-sold in the Markets; Goods of the same Fabric, of the like
Weight, Goodness, Value and Color, being afforded much cheaper than from
England.

This was an Affliction in Trade, and a very great Disappointment to the
Merchants; and, in its Turn, to the Factors, and to the Manufacturers in the
Country; for First, Our Goods at the several Markets in France lay unsold;
expected Orders were stopped and interrupted; the Merchants in France wrote to
Ireland for the Goods, the Markets were supplied, and our Trade in a word
decayed.

It was not long so here, but we began to find the same in Portugal, and at
Cadiz in Spain, and at other Markets, as at Leghorn, Messina, and the principal
Ports of Italy; and thus it was going on to be, in all other Parts of the World.

But this was not all; Misfortunes seldom come alone; one Evil generally
follows in the Neck of another. About this time Monsieur Colbert, that great
and successful Manager of the French Commerce, after having (with a most happy
and wonderful Advantage) put all the Southern Provinces of France upon the
planting Mulberry Trees, and raising of Silk; obliging every Town and Village
in the great Provinces of Languedock, Provence, Dauphine, and the adjacent
Countries, to plant a proportioned Number of Mulberry Trees for the nourishing
Silkworms, and by that means to establish a Fund for the Silk; he contrived
the like, as far as in him lay, for the Wool.

But finding it impossible to form a Production of Wool in France (though he got
over Sheep from England, from Ireland, and from Scotland) and that he could not
make the Wools come on or grow there, as they did at home, he then applied
himself to the settling Methods for getting Wool from England, and especially
from Ireland; by This he immediately set up large Manufactures in France, as at
Rouen, at Caen, in Poictou, Guienne, Nismes, and other Places, too many to
enumerate; with this, and the Spanish Wool, and such other Supplies as he got
from remoter Places, he soon advanced in his new Attempt, and made several
sorts of Woollen Manufactures, and this in such Quantities, and so well
performed, that we saw France, in a few Years, able to supply themselves with
Clothing of their own Making, though not of their own Wool, and even to
transport the Manufactures they wrought to other Places; where they were sold
in the same Markets with the English, to our great Mortification as well as
Loss.

Nor was this all; but so far the French proceeded, that in a few Years they
set up for Prohibitions, excluded our Merchandises all over France, and
pretended to shut us out from their Markets, so that we should not be allowed
to Import our Goods any more into France.

This was a terrible Blow to England; and had we not soon after made our selves
Amends upon France, by Prohibiting their whole Commerce with us, particularly
their Wines, Brandies, Linen, and wrought Silks, four Articles in which it was
said we took near two Millions Sterling from them per Annum, more than all the
Goods that they took from us amounted to; I say, had we not done this, it must
have ruined our whole Stock, by draining away such immense Sums in Cash as must
have been called off for the Balance.

Here began the Breach between England and France, in Point of Commerce; and as
it came with a War, it lasted so long, that it is not yet returned, nor is ever
likely to be: The Humor of the English ran off from the French Trade, neither
their Wines, or their Brandies, or their wrought Silks, have ever come into Use
again here, and perhaps would never do so again, though the Trade were to be
opened; at least, it would not as it did before: Our Taste is changed as to
their Wines; our Fashions and Modes are changed as to their Silks; and the
whole Vein of their Trade is turned (here in England) so as never to return
into the old Channel again, no, though the Trade should be laid open, which yet
it is not.

But still this was a Blow to our Manufactures, and lessened the Consumption of
them abroad, and consequently the Exportation of them at home; the Effect of
which was, that unless some new Vent of the said Manufactures was found out
abroad, there would of necessity be a Stop, and some Hands must be taken off at
home; the Quantity must abate as the Consumption abated, or else the Markets
abroad would be glutted with Goods, and the Makers at home not be able to put
them off; these must leave off making, or be undone; and if they left off
Making, the Poor (at least so far) would be undone: for all Abatement or
Declining of the Manufacture, is a degree of Ruin to the People.

To remedy this, Prudent Heads found out one immediate Help, though it was (in
its kind) what we may call a Desperate Cure, namely, a Cure by Amputation; it
was indeed cutting off a Member, a vast and important Member of our
Manufacture, viz. Ireland: The Case was thus:

It was found that Ireland began to encroach, in a very dangerous manner, on
our Manufacture, by running into every Branch of it, making every sort of Goods
there, which the English made at home, and that in so great a Quantity, that
they not only supplied their own Nation, and sent over great Quantities hither,
but that, as before, they filled foreign Markets with them, and even under-sold
us abroad.

Upon this, and considering the Abatement of the Consumption by Prohibitions
abroad, two Acts were passed in England, for the Encouragement of the English
Manufactures.

1 An Act to take off the Duty of Tonnage and Poundage, paid here upon the
Exportation of the Woollen Manufacture, which being about 5 per Cent upon the
Value, was considerable, and was done in order to bring down our Manufactures
at foreign Markets, so as not to be under-sold by the French or Dutch; which
Act continues in Force, and all our Manufactures are Exported free, to this Day.

2. An Act to Prohibit the Irish Woollen Manufactures being Exported to any
Parts or Places beyond the Seas. This was indeed a terrible Blow to the Irish
Merchants, and to the Manufacturers in that Kingdom; but there was no Remedy:
it was apparent, that if the Irish were suffered to go on, they would reduce
the Manufacture of England to nothing; as well by their Cheapness, as by their
irregular Working, being bound to no Laws or Rules, to no Lengths or Breadths,
or other such Limitations as the English are bound by.

It is not my Business, not have I Room here, to enter into the Reasons or
Arguments made use of on one Side or other, at that time; it is enough to my
present Purpose, that so it was, and that England found her self under a
Necessity of taking that Step with Ireland, however Hard or Severe it might
seem to be.

Nor can I enter into an Account of the Linen Trade, established on this
Occasion in Ireland, by the English, with the several Encouragements given to
it in the late King William's Reign, being as a kind of Equivalent to the Irish
for the heavy Article above, and which is since that grown up to an unexpected
Height there, and by particular Encouragements in England, is become much more
of an Equivalent than was even at first hoped for; but that is not our present
Enquiry; I return to the Case before me.

This Stop of the Exportation of the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, was a
sensible Relief to the English Trade, and for a while the Manufactures
flourished again; and though the French encroach'd (in a surprising manner) upon
us in some foreign Markets, yet there were some particular Articles which
increased our Consumption too very considerably, and these ought to be
mentioned, because I must do Justice as I go, and let it be fairly seen where
our Manufacture found some Helps, as well as where it felt its Decay; where it
was relieved, as well as where it was wounded and hurt.

Besides this violent Step for the Relief of the Manufacture, it had had three
Additions or Increases in the ordinary way of Commerce, which were exceeding
great, and which in their Turn greatly encouraged the People, and supported the
Thing as a Manufacture or Employment.

1. The Trade to Portugal, the Increase of which has been so surprising great,
and began to be so about the beginning of the first War, that it was apparent
in the Second War the Export of British Manufactures to Portugal, from England,
was greater than the whole Export to Portugal and Spain together was before.

2. The Trade to Muscovy, which by the Conquests of the late Czar in the
Baltic, his building the Port of Petersburgh, his altering the Habits and
Clothes of all his People, and several other Encouragements given by him to
Trade in General, and to the English Commerce in Particular, opened a new Door
to the Consumption of the British Manufacture, where there was none before.

3. The extraordinary Trade to Jamaica By what Ways and Means our Merchants
found it practicable to establish such a Commerce, it is not my Business to
describe; but this is certain, that during that War our Trade to Jamaica was
such, that the Number of Ships using that Trade was increased to more than four
times what they were in a few Years before the War; and that this Trade has
continued to this time, or 'till within a very little while (viz.) 'till the
Spanish Guard de Costa's, or cruising Ships of War, took upon them to keep a
better Lock-out than formerly, and interrupt it. Whether this Trade was
justifiable by the Terms of the Treaties subsisting between Great Britain and
Spain or not, is not to the purpose in this Place. I may perhaps grant it was
not: But it is the Fact, not the Legality of it, that I am now Enquiring about,
and in that Part I am sure of being right.

These three Articles of Commerce may be allowed to make a great Addition to
the Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture of England, and by these Helps, the
Loss of the French Trade was for some Years the less felt, if perhaps at all.

And that I may give a full Latitude to this Part of our Discourse, I may add,
for the take of the Argument only, that several other Branches of our
Exportation seemed to have been increased in the same Space (viz.) the last
thirty or forty Years, and that not in a trifling manner, but very
considerably; particularly to Legborn, the Trade of that Port being exceedingly
advanced during the various Turns among the neighboring Powers, and
particularly occasioned by the late Convulsions in Spain, Naples, Sicily, and
that were in Piemont and Milan, and other Parts of Lombardy; also by some
Improvements among the Italians, which we are not particularly Judges of: Be it
which way it will, it is evident the Exportations of British Manufactures to
Leghorn are more than double to what they formerly were.

I might instance like wise in the End case of our own Colonies, which is very
considerable in the last thirty or forty Years, as may be proved in many
particular Circumstances in their Trade, and especially by the Export of
British Manufactures thither, which is the Point I am upon, and which is
manifestly increased, as well to New England, and to Virginia, as to Carolina
in particular, and to other Places.

But I need not enlarge upon these things; for were the Increase of these
foreign Consumptions much greater than it is, and were the Places, where that
Increase has been, five times larger than they are, the declining State of the
Manufacture would still be made out, from other opposite Circumstances, too
evident to be denied, and too strong to be balanced by those Advances.

First, the unreasonable Increase of the Quantity made is to be considered, the
growing Condition of the Manufacture it self, in which we may venture to say
there are some Circumstances that not only will not be equaled by any Addition
of Commerce either abroad or at home; but, to speak boldly to it, would not be
equaled, if all the Nations to whom our Manufacture is exported, were to
increase the Consumption of it in proportion to that of Portugal or Legborn, as
above.

It is evident our Manufacture is increased to a Degree almost inexplicable,
insomuch that it is in itself too great for the Consumption of all Europe. Now
it seems a little of a Paradox that I should bring the Increase of the Quantity
as an Argument to prove the declining of the Manufacture that is increased: But
a little Reflection will set that Part to rights in your Thoughts, and the
Difficulty will immediately vanish.

In speaking of the Manufactures as Declined, we are not speaking of the
Quantity made, but of the Quantity sold; or it you will, we must change the
Terms, and distinguish betwixt the Woollen Manufacture as a Work or
Fabricature, and as a Trade. There may be as many G^ods made in England as
ever, but if there are not as many told as ever, the Trade will be allowed to
decline; nay, the more there is made, the more the Manufacture is declined if
they cannot be sold, because the Quantity becomes a Grievance to it self.

If it be apparent that the Quantity made, increases faster than the Quantity
sold off, or that there is more made than can be sold, the Manufacture is under
evident Discouragement. On the other hand, if there are more made and less
sold, that Discouragement increases to a Distraction; the Manufacture
languishes, and is in a kind of Dropsy, where the Repletion exceeding the
Evacuation, the Body swells in Bulk, but declines in Strength, and dies of the
worst kind of Consumption.

There is no question but that upon the apparent Increase of the Manufactures
in England, during those many Years mentioned in particular as above, the great
Advantage made by that Trade, and the vast Estates acquired even by the
Manufacturers themselves in their ordinary Business, encouraged others to fall
into it, and even encouraged those that were in it to enlarge their Business,
to launch out as their Stocks increased, farther and farther, into that Trade.

This Humor continues to this day, and is now become the great Grievance of
the Manufacture in general; and will, if not timely prevented, be ruinous to
the Trade in the End, as I shall make appear in its Place.

While the Manufacture was in its full Extent abroad, while it was the Mistress
of the World in Trade, had no Rivals, and no Attempts were made to mimick it,
or imitate it, but that it had an uninterrupted Sale abroad; the Increase of
the Quantity at home was far from being a Grievance, either to the Country or
to the Trade; and during the happy Years of its thus currently going off, vast
Additions to the Quantity were made at home, such, as if you will give Credit
to some People, would in a few Years have glutted the whole World with our
Goods, though there had been no Check given to the Vent of it abroad.

I could give a long History of the Increase of the Manufacture in England, I
mean, as a Work or Fabric; even whole Towns, nay, Parts of Counties, have,
within the Memory of some still alive, been employed in it, who were never
employed before.

I could likewise enter into the Detail of the Changes and Turns which the
Manufacture itself has suffered by changing the Kinds, as particularly the
changing the Clothing or Clothmaking into the making narrow and lighter Kinds
of Cloth, such as we call Druggets and Ketsies, instead of Broad-cloth, in the
Western Parts of England, such as the Counties of Wilts, Berks, and Devon; and
Sagathies and Duroys, a thin and light sort of Stuff, instead of thick
Cloth-Serges, at Taunton in Somersetshire, and other Parts adjoining; by which
Exchange of Kinds, it is the Opinion of many Men of Judgment, the English
Manufacture in general has suffered extremely, and a Door opened to the
Attempts of Foreigners, who encroached upon us by those Imitutions and
Delusions, but were not able to come up to us in the essential Part of the
Manufacture (viz.) the Clothing Part. The Case was thus:

The French were the first who, as I have said, set up to rival our
Manufactures, and having gotten Workmen as well as Materials from England, they
set up a Clothing Manufacture as well at Rouen and Caen and other Places in
Normandy, as at Nismes and the adjacent Cities in Languedock and Provence.

But the French (according to the known superficial Humor of that Nation)
contenting themselves with keeping up to the Standard of Broad Cloth in
Languedoc only; because they were obliged to follow the Pattern of the English
there, for the Turkey Trade; in other Places made it light, loose, and spongy,
thinner in Substance, and slighter in Workmanship; and this not being able to
carry the Breadth of the Broad Cloth, they altered to the usual Stuff Breadth
of half Ell, or half Yard, as their ordinary Stuffs were made.

These they called Cloths at first; but seeing they would not keep up the
Credit of that Name, as the English Cloth did; they gave them several Names
from the Towns or Counties where they were made, such as Drap de Normandy, Drap
de Berry, Drap de Lorrain, and so of the rest.

Had we let the French go on their own way, and kept up at home to the old
English Manufacture of Broad Cloth, the French to this Day had been distanc'd
in their new Attempt; but with a Weakness, never to be defended, while they
with Difficulty followed us, we faced about, and simply followed them.

They brought their Silk Stuffs, and Spanish Druggets, and light thin French
Serges, into Wear, and into Fashion; and they were in the right, because they
could make no better; We, to Ape them in their Mode, fall into the same sorts
of Stuffs, and so made that, which was their Necessity, be our Mischief.

By this Means, not only we wore their sorry slight Manufactures, and even
brought them privately from France it self, but (fond of our own Mischiefs) we
quit the Broad Cloth, the ancient Glory of England (as to Manufacture) and fall
into the making of light Stuffs for Men's Wear, to the Ruin of our own
Manufactures, as much as in us lay; for these new foolish Things neither
employed an equal Number of Hands, or consumed an equal Quantity of the Wool,
in both which they accommodated the French, who neither had at first a Number
of skilful Workmen to make them, or a Quantity of Wool to make them with; but
in both we weakened our own Country, for this at once caused the Wool to lie on
hand unwrought, and thousands of Poor to go unemploy'd.

The great Promoter of this Debauchery in Trade (for such it might be called)
was one D'Oyly, a Warehouse-Keeper in London, who, valuing himself upon that
for which he ought (according to the Laws of Persia) to have his Name be made
infamous, and his House be made a Dunghill, boasted of his Merit, and called his
new French Mimickry of a Manufacture, Doyly's Stuffs; and such was the Vanity
of the Day, that we saw the whole Town, nay, we might say the whole Nation, run
into them, and the ancient Manufacture of Broad Cloth lay by the Walls; the
substantial Woollen-Drapers had nothing to do, no Trade at their Shops; and the
new Stuff-Merchant D'Oyly had his great Warehouse near Exeter-Exchange in the
Strand, thronged with Buyers from Morning to Night, and the Man got an Estate
in one Summer's Trade.

It is true, God, and a hard Winter, should have the Thanks of the poor
Manufacturers, while they live; the Severity of the great Frost (falling in
immediately upon it) brought the good warm clothing Trade into Mode again, and
set the Poor at work in some tolerable Degree, so at least as to relieve them
for that time.

But this unhappy Humor revived so far, as brought our Manufacturers into the
way of making a middle Kind, between Cloth and Stuff, so as on one Side to suit
the Climate, and yet (as near as might be) on the other, to follow the French
Folly also, and this introduced the making Druggets, Sagathies, Chamlets,
Duroys, and the several kinds of Men's Stuffs, with which we have (as it were)
made War with our own Manufacture, and jostled the Broad Cloth as much as we
could out of the World; so that in short, if those light things which the
French made, because they could make no better, did not become the universal
Mode of our Country, and the better and more important Clothing, on which the
whole Nation depended, go quite out of use, it was none of our Fault.

The Truth is, though the first Madness wore off, and the D'Oyly Stuffs in a
little time did sicken and glut the Town, yet This is certain that the wearing
of Drugget and Stuffs, Chamlets and Duroys, and suchlike slight things, was a
terrible Blow to the ancient Clothing Manufacture; to this Day it has not
recovered it, and perhaps never will.

Thus far the Manufacture declined by our Own Folly: It is true indeed that
these slight thin Stuffs, though they did not consume so much Wool, or employ so
many Hands as the Clothing, yet, as they sent the People oftener to Market, the
Quantity made seemed to be some Amends to the Manufacture, and to the Poor; But
then, they opened a Door to the French to sell their slight, half-made Goods at
foreign Markets; for the Fashion also took Root, whereas (if the Manufacture of
Broad-cloth had been kept up) the French would never have been able to have
hurt us, at home or abroad.

But this is not all; I shall give you a farther Account of the Declining of
the Manufacture in its Sale abroad, and of the Reasons of it in particular,
more ruinous than this. But here I must take notice too, as I have said above,
how the Making increased, whether the Sale increased or no; and this we shall
give you some unanswerable Evidence of in a few Examples.

First, Upon this unhappy falling into the French Fashion of wearing Stuffs
instead of Broad-cloth, I mean for the Men's Wear, a strange and sudden
Metamorphosis in Trade followed here in London.

Spittlefields had been eminent for many Years for the Silk Manufacture,
encouraged and greatly increased by the coming over of the French Refugees in
1682 to 1684, and the Numbers of People increasing there, the Buildings
likewise increased; so that what with Ribband-Weavers and Broad-Weavers, it was
generally said there was an hundred thousand Weavers in Spittlefields and the
adjacent Streets.

But the Trade was not equal to the Numbers of the People, the Streets began to
be desolate, the Houses empty, and the People shifted about to other Places and
to other Employments, as Occasion supplied them; when all on a sudden, we were
surprised to find Wool-combers and Staplers setting up in Spittlefields, and
Shops began to open there for Worsted Yarn and for combed Wool, and abundance
(of the French Women especially) went spinning about the Streets. This was
employed at first among the Stocking-Weavers or Frame-work-Knitters, which
Manufacture, about that time, took a new Turn all over England, from Knitting
to Weaving or Framemaking to the great Loss of the Poor in the Countries where
those Goods were usually made, where many thousands were formerly employed in
Knitting, but now were quite struck out of the Work by the Gross of the
Stockings being wrought in the Frame.

This began the Woollen Trade in Spittlefields; but when the D'Oyly Stuffs had,
as I have said above, spread the Town, and the Humor continued for some time,
Spittlefields took another new Turn, and in one Year more we saw it as full of
Stuff and Worsted as before of Silk, the Silk-Weavers turned their Hands to the
narrow Woollen Manufactures, and the Quantity of those Manufactures now made
there of almost all Kinds, especially such as were formerly made at Norwich and
the Parts adjacent, is such, that in a word, Spittlefields is become the
principal Seat or Center of those Manufactures in England; and yet the City of
Norwich, as above, is supposed to be in as full Employ as ever, or at least as
usual; so that this whole Manufacture of Spittlefields is an Increase upon the
Manufacture in general, and must be answered for by a proportioned Sale
somewhere or other, abroad or at home, or else so far the Increase is too great
for the Consumption, and is not a Benefit but a Loss to the Manufacture, and
adds in the worst manner to its declining Circumstances.

I could give you a like Account of large Manufactures of Druggets and other
Goods erected in several Towns and Places in England within these few Years,
where no such or other Woollen Manufactures worth naming in this case were
wro^g^^ before, a^ particularly at the City of Bristol for Example. But this of
Sp^ttlefields is so flagrant an Instance where such a prodigious Work is now
carried o^ and where, within the Memo^y (...) the Writer hereof, no Woollen
Manufactures were made, that I need enquire no farther into it. I shall add but
one other Capital Article of Increase, and this is that of the Bay Trade in
Essex.

It is evident (...) Trade was contained within the particular Towns of
Colc^est^r and B^cking in Essex, where the making ^f Bays was first begun, and
was at least principally established, the Trade flourished, the Goods were
current abroad, commanded ready Money at home, and were seldom or never without
a Market, nor was there a Manufacture in Europe which better maintained the
Credit of its Make; Insomuch that a Merchant at Cadiz or Lisbon coming to an
English Merchant's Warehouse to (...) Bays, has no more to do but to open one
Corner of the Ba^e, and look upon the Seals of the Town of Colchester, and by
that they were sure to know of what Value the Goods were, and were certain to
find them answer both in Lengths and Goodness.

But the Neighboring Towns finding the Colchester and Bocking Bay-makers grow
rich, thrust themselves into that Trade, and now the Bays are made at
Coggeshal, at Witham, at Kelvedon, at Braintre, at Halsted, and in a word, at
almost all the most considerable Towns in Essex beyond Cbelmsford.

Nor is this all, but even the Bay-makers themselves, upon the least Start of
the Trade, and upon any sudden quick Demand from abroad, push in with such
Eagerness, and increase their Quantity to such a Degree, that they bring more
to the Market than all the World can take off.

This has, I may say, ruined the Trade; and the Consequence is, that as soon as
ever that small Run is over, and the Demand from abroad ceases, the Market is
immediately thronged with Goods, they are pawned and pledged to every monied
Man in the Place, 'till they can be put off; the Price sinks, the Labor of the
Poor stops, and the Bay-makers are often broke and undone.

Nor is the Credit or real Value of the Goods supported, for the Bay-makers
being now extended over the whole Country, and working out of the Jurisdiction
of the Bay-Hall at Colchester, they put what Goods they please upon the Market,
and what Marks or Seals they please upon the Goods; so that the Credit of the
Manufacture is sunk, and no Man trusts to the Seals of the Goods any more, but
takes Care to look into the Goods himself, and see with his own Eyes that he is
not cheated.

I cannot but esteem this last to be one eminent Degree of the Declining of
that Manufacture; for if once a Manufacture declines in its Credit, I shall
always conclude it is declined in its Sale, or will soon be so; but that by the
way. The present Article I am upon, and which I lay the whole Stress of the
Question now upon, is the Increase of the Quantity beyond the Demand; that more
are made than are or can be consumed, which I think is apparent in many other
Particulars.

I sum the whole Observation up in this one Head (viz.) that this very Increase
is a Grievance, which in the end may be ruinous to the whole Woollen
Manufacture of England, if some new Doors of Commerce are not opened abroad to
raise a Consumption equal to that Increase, or some Method be not taken to put
a Stop to the farther Increase of the Fabric at home, so as not to make the
Manufacture be too great for the Sale, whether it be at home or abroad.

CHAP. V. Of the real Causes of the Decay of our Manufacture; arising partly
from Prohibitions abroad, but chiefly from our refusing the Wear of it at Home;
and something offered for the Remedy.
BUT it is needful now to enquire into the State of our Manufacture abroad, as
to the Consumption of the several Species in those Countries where our Trade
used to be settled: If we find the Sale or Demand increasing abroad, the
increasing of the Quantity at home would certainly be so far from a Grievance,
that it would be the Glory and Prosperity of our Commerce and of our Country;
and if every County in England were as fully employed in manufacturing, as
Wiltshire, Devonshire, Norfolk and Essex, every City as Norwich and Exeter, and
every Market Town, as Froom, Taunton, Leeds, or Colchester, it would be the
Wealth of the whole, and the greatest Felicity that this World ever produced to
a Nation.

But the Case is not so, but far otherwise; instead of the Consumption
increasing abroad, instead of a larger Demand, we see all Parts of the World
envying us, most Parts endeavoring to imitate us, and as many as can
encouraging their own upstart Manufactures in the room of the British; and too
many totally prohibiting the Sale or the wearing our Manufactures, that their
own, however mean and ordinary, may take Place.

And not to dwell upon some late Prohibitions of the English Woollen Goods in
Spain and in the Island of Sicily, at Lintz, Passau, Vienna, and other Places
in the Emperor's Dominions, done rather by way of Insult to our Nation at this
Crisis of their Affairs, than that they are able to carry on any Equivalent
Manufactures of their own; I say, not to lay any Stress upon these, yet it must
be said, that other Places have of late Years attempted our Manufacture, and
some but with too much Success, and Prohibitions rather natural and
consequential, than political, increase upon us every Day.

It is the general Opinion (and I have joined with it in Part, in the beginning
of this Discourse) that there is no Wool to be found in any Part of the World,
or at least not in Europe, capable of working into such Manufactures, and of
making such several Sorts of Goods, as we at present furnish the World with;
and upon this very Principle we carry our Boasts of the British Manufacture so
high: Now in some particular Things we are right; I mean, right in our
Judgment, namely, that the World has not the Wool, that is, has not any Wool
capable of working into such Manufactures as we make; though as to Boasting, as
we do, I shall never come into that Part, because boasting of our Superiority
is but firing the rest of the World with an unwearyed Application to supply the
Defect.

But let us distinguish here with a little more Temper than we usually do;
There is a manifest Difference between having no Wool fit for any Manufacture
at all, and not having the best and the finest Wool, of the longest Staple, the
firmest Body, and the finest and softest Quality: There is a manifest
Difference between the Wool being good for nothing, and being not so good as
the English or Irish Wool. To descend to Particulars;

It is true, Europe, take it BY and LARGE (as we express it) from End to End,
does not produce a Wool capable of making our fine Broad Cloths of Warminster,
Trowbridge, Bradford, and Froom; or our fine Gloucester and Worcester Whites;
no nor perhaps such as our Wakefield and Leeds Cloth, though what we call coarse,
yet of Substance and Weight inimitable; nor of many several Manufactures of
other Kinds, such as Devonshire Kersies, Exeter and Taunton Serges, Devizes and
Bristol Druggets, Andover and Newberry Shaloons, and the like.

But to say therefore, that there are no other of our Manufactures that can be
made abroad, and that even where they have no English Wool, that I cannot and
must not grant, because Experience teaches us the contrary every Day, to our
great Disadvantage in Trade.

Saxony, a large and fertile Country in Germany, notwithstanding the Severity
of the Winters, which are sometimes such as gives a Check to the Production of
Wool, yet not only has a very good kind of Wool, but a very large Quantity of
it; and the Saxons, an industrious People, are already advanced so far in the
Manufacturing the Wool, that they make two particular Manufactures which are
very useful in those cold Countries, and which they formerly bought from
England, either brought thither to their Fair at Leipsick, by way (...)
H^^burgh, or bought at the great Mart at Frankfort, and carried over Land to
the Elb, at Magdeburgb; these were Colchester Bays and Welsh Flannels.

Every one knows, that as these Goods are soft and warm, and are suited very
particularly for preserving the Bodies of those who wear them in th^se Northern
Parts of the World from the Severity of the Cold, so they are not made of the
coarsest and harshest of the Wool; on the contrary, they are made thick and
downy, well milled, and the Nap raised, which would not be, if the Wool was not
fine and soft, and the Workmanship close and thick.

Yet these they now make in Saxony, not only in sufficient Quantities to supply
themselves, and their own Markets, but we see the Flannels and Bays of Saxony
sold every Year at Frankfort, at Nurembergh, and most of the other Fairs of
Note in the Upper Germany; and what is the Consequence of this? Not any
Prohibition of the English Bays and Flannels; no; we may send ours thither
also, and may sell them there too, if we can; but Nature forbids it, the Thing
is a Prohibition of it self; ours are not sold there, because their own are
sufficient, and we need not say, are cheaper, for it would be very hard, if
they can be made at all, that they should not be made cheaper than the English,
which pass through so many Hands, so many Countries, pay so many Embarkations,
Assurances, Commissions, and other Charges, and are carried so far, as well by
Land as Water-Carriage.

It is true, the Wool of Saxony is of a brown, or a kind of Russet Color,
occasioned by the Climate, or the particular Breed of the Sheep, or from
whatsoever other Incident in Nature we cannot account for; but as the Bays are
generally Dyed, and many of the Flannels also, it is not distinguished, for
that the Wool, however Russet, or of a Greyish Color at first, and as it grows
on the Sheep's Back, yet it is not at all the worse to take any Color, in the
Dying-fat, but (as some think) is rather the better.

I need go no farther for the Proof of this, than to appeal to those Merchants,
who trading to those Countries, usually had Commissions from thence to buy
great Quantities of those Goods here; and let Them tell us how many Bays or
Flannels they now have Orders for, for the Fair at Leipsick, or the Mart at
Frankfurt; or rather, whether any English Bays and Flannels are sent thither,
or no.

But this is not all: Let us look in the next Place into the King of Prussia's
Dominions, I mean that Part of his Country which was formerly called the
Electorate of Brandenburgh, the Country about Magdeburgh, the Country upon the
Havel and the Sprhee; there they have Wool, which, though coarse and harsh, yet
the Government of Prussia, careful to improve the Country to the utmost, and to
employ their own Poor for their own Work, causes all those coarser Manufactures
which their own Wool is capable of making, to be made among themselves; and
though these Manufactures are not equal to the British, yet as they are
sufficient to the Demands of their own Poor, and serve to cloth the Boors and
Pesants, that is to say, the Country People and Plow-men, and laboring Poor,
they think it reasonable to Prohibit all foreign Manufactures, which usually
were Imported for those Uses; such were our Yorkshire Kersies, double and
single Dosens, the coarse Goods made in Lancashire, such as Half-Thicks,
Pennistones, Duffiels, Blanketting, and other Woollen Manufactures made for the
Clothing and Covering of the Poor.

These were formerly Shipped off in great Quantities for Hamburgh, and for
Stetin and Straelsond, and other Ports on the South Coast of the Baltic; but
now the General Consumption of such Goods has been stopped for some Years, the
People making all those Things at home.

It is the like in Sweden, where, though their Wool is still coarser, and the
Manufactures they make the poorest and roughest that can be imagined, yet the
setting their own Poor to work to make their own Clothing, however mean,
serves to employ them, keeps their Money at home, and all still shortens us in
our Exportations of those Goods to that Country.

It is true our finer Cloths gain still an Admittance into those Countries,
because the Wool (even of Saxony) is not fine enough for such a Manufacture;
and this may show us, that we have certainly been in the Wrong of it, and have
weakened the Interest of our Manufactures abroad exceedingly, by leaving our
Clothing Trade to sink upon our Hands, and turn our Workmen to the lighter
Manufactures, which other Countries with their coarse Wool are so much easier
able to supply. But to go on;

So many of our Woollen Manufactures being thus excluded from Sweden, from
Brandenburgh, from Saxony, and from so many Parts of Germany, let us look next
toward the South; and here we find the Swiss of Zurick making Chamlets,
Shalloons, and several other Sorts of Manufactures, as well for Men's Wearing as
Women's, the same as are made in Spittlefields, Norwich, Andover, and several
other Places in England; the Swiss perform these Works now with much Accuracy,
and it is hard to know them from the like sorts of Goods made in England; the
Workmen also who set them up being fetched from Spittlefields, where they
learned the Art, and how to manage both the Wool, the Yarn, the Loom, the
Dressing, and in a word, the whole Finishing after the English manner, and
(without flattering our selves) as well performed.

Did the Zurickers only supply their own City, or their own Canton with these
Goods, the Loss to our Manufacture would be no more than the mere Negative upon
their Consumption; but I should not be just to the matter in hand, if I did not
tell you, that, to the irreparable Loss of the English Manufactures, these
Goods are brought from Zurick by the River Rhine to the City of Basle, and from
thence down the Rhine to Mentz, and then still by Water up the Main to the Mart
at Frankfort au Main, where they go too far in Supplanting the English Goods of
the same Denomination; and to such a Degree are they arrived, that I am told
there are very few English Goods of these Sorts now sold there; the Zurickers
supplying the Fair with them, as good as the English, and considerably cheaper.

Thus we see our Manufacture cut short on every Side, by the Envy or Industry
of the several Nations of Germany and Sweden, totally Prohibited in France, and
very much supplanted in several other Places.

The Emperor has for some time encouraged Manufactures in Bohemia, in Austria,
and in all the Hereditary Countries; and the Consequence of this, it is
expected, will be a General Prohibition of all the English Woollen
Manufactures. It has been attempted lately by way of Pique and Resentment
between the Imperial Court and Great Britain. But that Part may be esteemed a
Jest, compared with other Countries.

However it may be well worth considering, whether if this general Humor of
manufacturing should spread far in Europe, as we are just now told it begins to
do in Poland, and in Muscovy, and is threatened in Spain, what the Impression it
may make upon our Manufactures in England, may be in a few Years.

As these Invasions are Increasing, so our Manufacture must be Declining in
proportion, unless it could be said that some yet farther Branch of Foreign
Commerce can be found out for the Consumption of our Manufacture, which it is
time enough to speak of when we see it in Prospect, and which I should be glad
to say was probable.

I must acknowledge if the present War should proceed to Extremities, so as to
lay open the Trade from England to the Spanish West Indies directly, I should
venture to say it would give our Manufactures a new Turn, and they would feel a
Spring of Prosperity for some time, and that considerably too; especially if
some Bounds were set to the Manufacturers at home, else (if they launched out
in Quantity, according to Custom, as is mentioned above) they would glut the
Market, though they were to have a new America opened to them for the Trade once
in every five Years.

However, I see no room to argue upon this remote Prospect; they that are
Sanguine enough upon the War to run on making, and lay up a Stock of Goods in
expectation of a Market the next Fair at Porto-Belo, or when La Vera Cruz shall
be turned English, may go on their own way, I am for sharing no Bear Skins.

But I must come nearer home still, and must take the Freedom to insist, that
our Manufacture is in a State of Decay too from our Conduct at home, much more
than from all Prohibitions and Interruptions abroad. I am not disposed to make
this Work a Satyr upon my own Country, but certainly we are the first, if not
the only Nation in the World, who having the best and most profitable Product,
and the best and most agreeable Manufacture of our own, of any Nation in
Europe, if not in the World, are the most backward to our own Improvement.

A Manufacture valuable in it Self, infinitely profitable to the Poor,
unexceptionably pleasant to the Rich; not too hot for the Summer, not too cold
for the Winter; light enough for July; warm enough for December; beautiful as
the finest Silks, suiting with Laces, Embroidery, and all manner of Ornaments,
better than even Silk it self, and yet Ornamental and Rich in its own Luster.

A Manufacture receptive of the brightest and deepest Colors; Gay enough for
the Bridegroom, Solemn enough for the Widow; Rich enough for a Coronation,
Grave enough for the deepest Mourning.

A Manufacture that has not one Exception to be made against it, or one Reason
to be given for disliking it; except the weakest of all Reasons, the Love of
Change and Variety, or that wicked Reason which a Man gave why he did not love
his beautiful and agreeable Wife, viz. only because she was his own.

A Manufacture that all the World covets, envies us for, strives to imitate,
nay, are vain of but thinking they can imitate it.

A Manufacture which those other Nations (when they have faintly imitated it)
are obliged to Prohibit by the severest Laws, or else all their People would
run into them, and which they do strive to come at and purchase,
notwithstanding the strictest Prohibitions.

A Manufacture which is apparently declining for want of a Consumption equal to
its Bulk, and because of the too successful Attempts of other People to set it
up among themselves; and because of the Improvements that the Industry of
Strangers, and the Indolence of the British Manufacturers assists them in.

And yet with such a Manufacture as this, we cannot persuade our selves to wear
our own Produce, to propagate our own Industry, or employ our own People; but
we are no sooner Prohibited the Use of one foreign Bauble, but we fly to
another; first we turned our Backs upon our own wrought Silks, and run to India
and China for all the slightest and foolishest Trash in the World, such as
their Chints, slight Silks, painted Cottons, Herba, Silk and no Silks as if any
thing but our own was to be thought beautiful, and any thing but what was best
for us, was to be encouraged by us.

When this Extravagance was also checked by a Law, we run then into another
Extreme, and still turning our Fancy against our own Manufactures, on a sudden
we saw all our Women, Rich and Poor, clothed in Callico, printed and painted;
the Gayer and the more Tawdry, the better; and though ordinary, mean,
low-priz'd, and soon in Rags, the gayest Ladies appeared in them on the
greatest Occasions.

Thus the Ancient Manufactures of Great Britain were despised by our own
People, and the Bread taken out of the Mouths of the Poor; the Hands that would
have labored could get no Work; the Trade sunk; the Manufacturers slarved, and
the Wool lay by in heaps unwrought, and unfold, to the general impoverishing of
the People, and the Ruin of the Manufacture it self.

We are now by another Law of Prohibition restrained from the wearing of
painted Callicoes; and what follows? the Temper is not at all reclaimed, nor do
they so much as incline to return to the Use of their own Manufactures, which
is the main and best End of the Prohibition: But, as if we were resolved to run
down our whole Country, and ruin our Poor with our own Hands, we run to the
remotest Corners for some Shift or other to cheat our selves; and now we see
the general Clothing (of the meaner Peoplespecially) runs into the meanest,
tawdriest Colors, stamped upon the most ordinary Linen, fetched from
Scotland, Ireland, or indeed any where; as if any thing but our own was to be
our Choice, and as if we had forsworn our own Manufactures, and were ashamed to
be dressed in our own Cloths.

How shall we expect our own Manufactures should grow and increase, while this
is the Case? and if we will not encourage our own Growth, and the Labor of our
own People, how should we expect Foreigners should do it?

In short, as I said of the Woollen Manufactures of Saxony, that they are an
effectual Prohibition of the English, so I may say of our People's running into
the Wear of printed Linnens, Callicoes, etc. they are a tacit Prohibition of
the Manufactures; for what is a Rejecting the Manufacture by a kind of general
Consent, but a Prohibition in effect? and how should the Manufacture be
supported, when our own People turn their Backs upon it, and when even the
People that make it will hardly be persuaded to wear it?

I believe no Man will ask me, after this, how I will prove the Manufacture to
be in a declining State, or what is the Reason of it; no more can they ask what
Remedy is proper to apply to this Evil: It Is an unaccountable Thing in a
Manufacturing Nation like this, that Men should ask what will restore the
Trade, when they see so evidently what has been the Ruin of it.

The Answer is short, and (according to my Title) the Only Way to restore our
Manufactures, is to WEAR THEM. The Consumption at home is infinitely great: If
our whole populous Nation were obliged to cloth only in their own Manufacture,
we should neither complain of our selves, or value the Prohibition of others.

If you will not do this (and the next Direction is as short as that) you must
abate the Quantity; and, as you Consume less, Make less; what will Increasing
the Work do for us, while we Decrease the Consumption? It will in the End not
only ruin the trading People, but ruin the Trade it Self: But I have not room
to enlarge upon that Part here.

FINIS.

