THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.

VOL V.

By Mr. BROOK.

DUBLIN: Printed for the AUTHOR, By DILLON CHAMBERLAIN, in Dame Street, facing
Fownes's Street. MDCCLXX.

THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.
THUS my Lord, in the recent Acquisition of such a Son, forgot all his Losses,
and cast the whole Weight of his late Calamities behind him. His Eye could not
be tired with seeing him, neither his Ear with hearing the Sweetness of his
Voice; and he continued to hold, to gaze at him, to caress him, unmindful of
aught else, unmindful even of his Friend Meekly, who sat enraptured beside him.

Will you leave me again, my Child? cried out the Earl; do you intend to go
from me again, my Harry? you must not, you shall not leave me, not for an Hour,
no not for a Minute; a second Loss of my Son would quickly bring my gray Hairs
with Sorrow to the Grave. Never, never, my Lord, will I leave you, tenderly
cried Harry; never, for a Moment, will I forsake you again, my Father. I come
purposely to watch over, to comfort, to tend you, while I have Life, with all
possible Tenderness, Affection and Duty.

But where, hastily asked the Earl, where is the Murderer who stabbed my Peace?
where is that old Thief, that Robber, who rent my Child from me? Ah! my Lord,
cried Harry, he is very far from meriting such opprobrious Epithets; He is a
Summary of all that is excellent, all that is amiable in Nature. He respects
and loves you too, above the World, and all that is in it deserving of Love. O,
had you lately seen his Grief for your Losses, the Floods of Tears he shed, --
for -- for -- for! -- Here Harry could no more, but, on the Recollection of his
Mother and Brother, burst into Tears.

But tell me, my Dear, continued the Earl, tell me who and what he is, whom you
commend so highly?

Even the Son of your own Mother, my Lord; my much loved, my revered, my most
honored Uncle.

Impossible, my Child. That old despicable Man my Brother. No no, my Harry, he
must have deceived you. My Brother was All that was amiable upon Earth; the
Fairest among ten Thousand, the straitest Cedar in the Forest.

And such he is at this Day, my Lord. But, alas, alas, he has been broken by
the Batteries of many Afflictions; a Man wholly made up of Sorrows, and
acquainted with killing Griefs. You wanted me not, when he took me, my Father.
You had other and richer Treasures, Comforts that were infinitely more worthy
your Regard. But, little and despicable as I was, He had nothing but me. I
became his only Comfort, the only Treasure in which he delighted. Yet, as soon
as he heard that you wanted Consolation, he chose rather to be without it
himself; and so he restores me to you, if I may be any little Matter of Comfort
to you, my Father.

And where is this dear Uncle, this precious Brother, my Harry? Is he come with
you, shall I be so blessed to take him in with my Eye, to take him in with my
Arms, to petition, to obtain his Pardon, to press him to my Bosom, to my Heart,
to my Soul, where is he, where is this precious Brother, my Harry?

He is not come with me, my Lord, he feared, as he said, that you would not
forgive him the carrying off of your Ganymede, but he is desirous of attending
you, on the first Intimation.

Then you must write to him, for that Purpose, to Morrow, my Son, and dispatch
your Invitation by some of our swiftest Horses. The Influence of his Darling
will, unquestionably, be greater than that of an offending and unnatural
Brother. Is this Letter from him, Harry? -- it is, my Lord. -- Then, I will not
peruse it, till I get by myself. It probably contains Reproaches but too well
merited; or, possibly, Matters of Consolation, too tender for me to bear. --
But, Mr. Meekly, my dearest Meekly, ten thousand Pardons! -- Harry, take to
your Arms the Man, in the World, next to your Uncle, most deserving of your
Reverence, most deserving of your Heart!

Here, Mr. Meekly kissed and embraced our Hero, with all the Tenderness of a
Father and the Ardour of an old Friend.

Mr. Meekly, cried Harry, looking earnestly and fondly at him, do I not
remember something of that Face, Mr. Meekly? Are you not the Gentleman, for
whom I, long since, conceived such an Attachment, to whom my Heart cleaved, as
I may say, from my Infancy?

I am, my heavenly Creature, answered Meekly, I am the Man indeed whose Soul
was knit to yours, like the Soul of Jonathan to David, the first Moment I
beheld you; and who saw in you, then, all those noble, generous, and divinely
humane Propensities, that I see arrived to their Maturity at this happy Day!

While Mr. Meekly was thus rejoicing, Harry happened to turn his Head aside,
and spying the lively Portraits of my Lady and Lord Richard, he started, he
rose, and, gazing on them a Minute; he went softly to the Window, and, taking
out his Handkerchief, kept his Back to the Company, while he vented his
Emotions in a silent Passion of Tears. His Father and Mr. Meekly perceived what
he was about, but they did not disturb him. He brought fresh to their
Remembrance all the Passages of late Affliction, and they silently joined a
Flow of Grief to his. But their Tears were the Tears of sympathising Humanity:
or rather Tears of Delight, on observing the sweet Sensibilities of their
Darling.

In the mean Time Mr. Frank, who attended on Harry, had whisperingly given the
mourning Domestics an Intimation, concerning the Person of the Stranger who had
arrived. Some of them well remembered him; and All of them had heard of him,
and conceived a very kindly Impression of our Harry. They first expressed their
mutual Joy, by Kisses, Embraces, and silent Shakes of the Hand; but, in a
little Space, their Congratulations became more loud and tumultuous, and the
Voice of Exultation was heard through all the lower House.

Harry, hereupon, felt himself secretly hurt, and turning to his Father his yet
tearful Countenance, my Lord, says he, I beseech you to suppress this
unseasonable Sound of Joy among your Servants, in a House that ought so justly
to be the House of Mourning. -- My Love, mildly and kindly answered the Earl, I
cannot wholly refuse, to my poor and afflicted People, some Share of that
Comfort which I myself feel on the Return of my Harry. They are All my old and
true Servants, my Child, this is no other than an Expression of their Love to
you and to me, and I request you to receive them affectionately for my Sake.

Here the Earl rung a Bell, and desired tha tall his Domestics should come in.

They accordingly entered. Harry perfectly recollected Mr. John, the Steward,
Mr. Samuel, the Butler, and old Mrs. Mary, the Cook. He called them by their
Names, reminded them of old Times, and took them in his Arms with much
Affection. He then turned to the other Servants. He took Each of them by the
Hand in Turns, and spoke to them, with such a natural Ease and Lowliness, as
though he himself desired, in his Father's House, to become also, as One of his
hired Servants. Hereupon, gathering All about him, they catched and kissed his
Hand by Force; and then, kneeling around, they promiscuously petitioned for
Blessings on his Head; and rising, retired in a pleasing Passion of Sobs and
Tears; while the enraptured Earl beheld All; with a Mixture of such blissful
Sensations, as he had never felt before.

It now began to grow late, and, after a short Repast of some small Matters; my
Lord proposed their retiring to Bed, but, my Friend, said he to Harry, you must
content yourself with being my Prisoner for the present; you must lie in my
Chamber; I will not trust my Lamb from my Side, for Fear of its going once more
astray. Ah, my Lord, cried Harry, there is no Fear of that. My Heart is wholly
your Property, and you have, thereby, a sure Hold of all that I am or can have.

The next Morning, Harry impatiently rose, before the Servants were stirring;
and unlocking the great Door, and closing it softly after him, he went out
exulting on his premeditated Expedition. He reconnoitred and recollected the
quondam Scenes of his Childhood, and, flying like a Bird over the Hedges and
other Obstacles, he made the shortest Way to his still precious Mammy's.

When he approached the Place of his infant Endearments, he met his
Fosterfather going forth to his Field, with a solemn and melancholy Air, on his
usual Occupations. Harry instantly remembered the Features, once so delightful,
and springing to him, and catching at him, he kissed and clasped him
repeatedly, and cried aloud, my Daddy, my Daddy, my dear, dear Daddy Dobson!
how glad am I to see you once again! how is my Mammy, my dear Mammy? how is
little Tommy and little Rachel, and all our dear Family?

The old Man then, respectfully withdrawing a Space, I don't know you, my sweet
Master, said he; I never saw you before. Indeed but you did; many and many a
time and often, cried Harry, you carried me in your Arms, almost the livelong
Day, and pressed and hushed me to sleep at Night in your Bosom. Don't you
remember, your little Harry? don't you remember my two Dogs, don't you remember
my Cock?

O, exclaimed the good old Man, I now believe that you are my Child, the
dearest Child that ever was born! But, I never hoped to see him such a Thing as
you are; I never thought to see such a glorious Creature upon Earth!

Here, old Dobson returned Harry's Caresses with a twofold Force, and,
blubbering all aloud, had like to have smothered him with the Intenseness of
his Embraces.

Bring me, bring me, cried Harry, to the Sight of my dearest Mammy, I am all
impatient, to behold her!

Not so fast, said Gaffer Dobson, I love my old loving Cate, and, should she
find you out, of a sudden, she would certainly die of Joy. But, I will bring
you to her as a Stranger, and so you may bring Matters about. And, indeed, I
fear that my own Head is likely to be crazed by this Business; for I do not
find that I am the same Man that I was a while agone, I shall grow too proud, I
doubt, and look down upon all my better Neighbors.

Goodman Dobson then conducted Harry to their ancient Habitation. Nurse Dobson
was just up, and preparing to comb the Heads of her Children, when they entered.

Cate, says he, I have brought to you a young Stranger, who says he can give
you some Account of our little Harry, who says he is still alive,
notwithstanding all your Frights, and will shortly pay a Visit to some Parts of
this Country; and who knows then, but that we, among Others, may happen to set
our Eyes upon him, and that, I think, would be a great Blessing, my Cate?

O, no, no, no, exclaimed Nurse, without deigning to cast her Eyes on the
Stranger; he is dead, he is gone from me these many many Years; I once hoped to
have his Infant on my Knee and in my Bosom, but that Hope is quite gone; never,
never shall I behold my Darling again.

Harry had seated himself just opposite to Nurse; when, looking up, she
started, and stared eagerly in his Face. Don't impose upon me, William, says
she; tell me, tell me at once, mayhap this is my Child! Ah, against the World,
the Dimple in that Smile, is the Dimple of my Harry.

Here Harry sprung up and, at one Leap, caught his rising Nurse in his Arms,
crying, my Mammy, my Mammy, my dearest Mammy, do I live to be pressed once more
to your dear Bosom!

But the poor Woman breathed short, and could not get out a Word. Twenty times
she put him from her, and catched him to her again, gazing at him, by
Intervals, with a frantic Affection. At length, she cast herself back, on the
Bench that was behind her, and, clapping her Hands together, she gave a great
Shout, and burst into an hysterical Passion of Tears; while Harry seated
himself beside her, and gently drawing her Head to him, placed it fondly on his
Bosom, and mixed his Tears with here is.

This Gush came very seasonably for our loving Nurse's Relief. She soon
recovered her Breath and her Senses; and, seeing some Drops on her Harry's
Cheeks, she drew them in with her Lips, crying, precious Pearls be these! I
would not exchange One of them for the brightest Diamond in the Mines.

Mammy, says Harry, I stole away to come and see you, while my Father was
asleep, or else I should not have had Leave to stir from him a Foot. But You
and my Daddy must promise to come and dine with me, we will have a Table by
Ourselves. And do You, my dear Mammy, step to our House, and, if my Father
should miss me, tell him I am gone into the Town and will be back with him
before Breakfast.

Harry then stepped to the Village, and, remembering Gaffer Truck's House, he
went familiarly in, and enquired of the good Woman how all the Family was.
Pray, how is my honest old Bartholemew, says he, and how is your pretty
Daughter Molly, and above all what is become of my old Friend Tom? The poor
Woman, all in Amazement, cried, a pretty Tom he is forsooth, to be Friend to
such a sweet young Gentleman as You are. But Truth is that our Tom is at
prentice to a Barber at next Door. Well, says Harry, when Gaffer Truck comes
Home, tell him that his old Acquaintance, Harry Clinton, called to see him.

Tom had just finished an Operation on a Neighbor, as our Hero entered. How
are you Tom, says he, carelessly. Tom gaped, and stared, and gaped; but
answered not a Word. Will you give me a Cast of your Office, Tom? Ay, that I
will, Master, as soon you get a Beard. Why, Tom, you are grown a huge hulking
Fellow since I saw you last; will you step to yonder Green and wrestle one Fall
with me? No, no, Master, I should hurt you; methinks I could throw a Dozen of
such fairweather Gentlemen as You are, Master.

Harry instantly seized Tom, by the Breast with one Hand, and by the Shoulder
with the Other; when Tom, feeling the Hardness and Hurt of his Gripe,
immediately exerted his Powers, and grappled with his Adversary. But Harry,
giving him a slight Foot, laid him on the broad of his Back in the Middle of
his own Floor; but kept him, with both Hands, from being hurt against the
Ground.

I believe, said Tom, rising, You must zertainly be the Devil; and come, as
they say, to fling poor Sinners in the Shape of an Angel of Light. Ah, Tom,
Tom, cried Harry, this is not the first Struggle that you and I have had. Do
you remember the Bag of Nuts and poor blind Tommy? have you forgot your old
Friend, your little Harry Clinton?

Blessed Mercy! exclaimed Tom, can you be my young Lord, my Heart's dear young
Master? I am indeed, answered Harry, your old Acquaintance, my dear Tom, your
loving Friend, Harry Clinton. And so saying, he took Tom about the Neck and
kissed him very cordially.

Tom, says Harry, I want you to take a Walk with me; Tom instantly assented,
and out they went.

As they walked along, Harry began to grow sad. Tom, said he, do you know where
my dear Brother Dickey was buried? Yes, Sir, said Tom, a great Way off, in
yonder Church Yard below the Town's End. Do you know where the Sexton lives,
Tom? In a little white House, Sir, just joining the Yard.

As soon as they arrived, Tom called out the Sexton, and Harry, putting a
Guinea into his Hand, ordered him directly to unlock the Family Vault.

The Man looked astonished, but obeyed in Silence, and Harry, as he entered,
desired the Sexton and Tom to wait at a Distance, and promised to be with them,
by and by.

He put to the Door after him, just leaving Light enough to distinguish the
recent Deposits of the Dead.

O, said he, as he advanced, thou true House of Mourning, thou silent End of
all Men, how sad art thou to Sense! how sad to me above All, who bear in thy
dark Bosom such precious and beloved Relics.

Then, casting himself on the Coffins of my Lady and Lord Richard, as they lay
Side by Side; and clasping his Arms about them as far as he could reach; O, he
cried, my Mother, my Brother, my dearest Brother, my dearest Mother, you are
gone, you are gone from me, and You never knew the Love that your Son and
Brother had for You. Ah, how did I flatter myself, what Happiness did I not
propose, in attending, serving, and pleasing You; in doing thousands of tender,
kindly and endearing Offices about You! but you are snatched from me, my
Mother, you are snatched from me, my Brother! all my Prospects are defeated and
cut away for ever. You will no more return to me, but I shall go to You; and O,
that I were laid with You this Minute in this still and peaceful Mansion; where
Hopes and Fears cease, and All are humbled together!

Mean while, Mr. Meekly and gone abroad on his Morning's Walk. He met Nurse on
her Way to the Mansion House, and, accosting her in a kind of Triumph, my good
Nurse, says he, we have blessed Tidings for you, Your Harry, your Hero, is come
to the Country. I know it, Sir, I know it, answered Nurse, it is but a little
while ago that my Babe left my Bosom.

Mr. Meekly then proceeded in order to join his young Friend, enquiring of All
he met which Way Lord Henry went, till at last he was directed to the Church
Yard. There he found Tom and the Sexton who, on further Question, silently
pointed to the Door of the Family Vault, that hung on the jar.

Mr. Meekly felt himself affected, and withdrew to a greater Distance; but
still keeping his tearful Eye on the sad Mansion that now held the Living with
the Dead.

At length Harry came forth, drying his Cheeks with his Handkerchief. He
assumed a constrained Air of Cheerfulness, and joining Tom and the Sexton,
observed that a great Crowd was gathering in the Town.

Who are Those, Tom? says he; I suppose, answered Tom, your Honor's Tenants
and old Acquaintances, who are getting together to welcome You to the Country.
If that is the Case, Tom, we must go and salute them; and You shall introduce
me and tell me who is who.

Mr. Meekly, perceiving that Harry was on his Return, kept onward, aloof from
him, but with an Eye on his Motions.

By this Time, the Crowd had sorted themselves, the Principals of the Families
into one Group, the young Men into Another, and the fair Maidens into Another.
And, as Harry approached, They all set up a joint Shout of Triumph.

Please your Honor, says Tom, this is my Father; and this is Gaffer Gubbins,
and this Goodman Demster, and this Farmer Felster, and so on.

Harry, with the Lowliness of a Washer of Feet, would have kissed and embraced
them All in Turns; but, pressing about him, they seized a Hand on either Side,
and eagerly kissed them, as also the Skirts of his Clothes all round.

God bless your sweet Face, God bless your sweet Face! cried Goodman Demster,
who so sees it in a Morning, cannot fail, I think, of prospering the live-long
Day.

When he came, in Succession, to the Companions of his Infancy, as he kissed
and shook Hands with Each, in turn; Some reminded him of his having beat them
at Boxing, Others at Wrestling, and All of his having played with them at
Prison-Bars, Leapfrog, Shoot the Gate, and so forth.

Mean while, the Girls panted, gazed at him, and longed to get him to
themselves. Sir, says Tom, here is your old Acquaintance, my Sister Molly;
there is not a Lad, in the Town, whom she is not able to toss, except your
Honor. Molly looked full of Health as Haebe, and rosey as the May, and Harry
caught her about the Neck and kissed her very cordially. Do you remember me,
Molly? O, answered Molly, I shall never forget, since your Honor's Lordship
and I used to wrestle every Day behind our House. Ay, Molly, cried Harry, there
was no Harm in it then; but a Fall, at this Day, might be Dangerous to One of
us; above all things take Care of that, my good Molly. And, if you know ere a
pretty Lad, to whom you have a Liking, I will give You fifty Guineas, for old
Acquaintance sake, toward making up your Portion.

The Rest of the Girls now pressed for their Share of Harry, and it was with
Difficulty that he divided himself with any satisfactory Equality among them,
as they All kissed him so close, and seemed so loath to part.

At length, Harry's Watch reminded him that it was Time to attend his Father,
and, as he parted, they shouted after him, long Life and Health and Honors, to
our Townsman, our own Boy, our own dear sweet Child!

In the mean time, Mr. Meekly had returned Home, with his Heart full of Tidings
to the Earl. When Harry arrived, Breakfast was on Table, and he perceived that
his Father had been in Tears. But, no Notice was taken of the Affair at the
Charnel House, on either Part.

When Breakfast was over, Harry called in John. Mr. John, says he, can you tell
me how many Families there are in this Village of Yours? Twenty five Families
exactly, my Lord. Then Harry turned to his Father and said, if your Lordship
will be pleased to lend me five hundred Guineas for the present, I will pay you
very honestly the Hour that my Uncle comes to the Country. Why, Sirrah, cried
the Earl pleasantly, what Right has your Uncle to pay your Debts, especially to
such a great Amount as you speak of? O, my Lord, answered Harry, I have already
squandered away above fifty thousand Pounds of his Money, and this is but a
Trifle which, I am sure, I may very safely add to the Rest.

Here the Earl looked truly astonished. Fifty thousand Pounds! he exclaimed,
impossible, Harry. Why, you had neither such Ponds or Lakes, as mine, in
London, wherein you might make Ducks and Drakes of them. How, in the World,
could you contrive it, where did you dispose of them?

In Hospitals and in Prisons, my Father, answered Harry. In Streets and
Highways, among the Wretched and the Indigent. Supplying Eyes to the Blind, and
Limbs to the Lame; and Cheerfulness to the Sorrowful and broken of Heart; for
such was my Uncle's Orders.

Let me go, let me go from this Place, my Lord, cried Meekly! this Boy will
absolutely kill me, if I stay any longer. He overpowers, he suffocates me with
the Weight of his Sentiments.

Well, Harry, said the Earl, go to my Desk, here is the Key of the Drawer on
the left Hand, and I make you a Present of the Key and the Contents; perhaps
you may find there nearly as much as will answer your present Exigencies.

Harry went and, opening the Drawer, was astonished to see it quite full of
Gold. However he took no more than just the Sum proposed and, returning to his
Father, said, what shall I do, my Lord, with that vast Heap of Money? Why, you
extravagant Rogue, replied the Earl, there is not as much in it as will pay the
Debt you have contracted with one Man. O, cried Harry, I am quite easy upon
that Score; I will never affront my Uncle by the Offer of a Penny. And, don't
you think, said the Earl, that we have got Poor among us in the Country, as
well as you have in the City, Harry? I believe you may have got Some, my Lord,
but then I am much more difficult, than you may think, in the Objects on whom I
would choose to confer Charity. I look upon the Money, amassed by the Wealthy,
to have been already extracted from the Earnings of the Poor, the poor Farmer,
the poor Craftsman, the hard-handed Peasant, and the Day Labourer, whose seven
Children perhaps subsist on the Milk of a Couple of Cows. Wherefore, the
Objects, on whom we bestow these Gatherings, ought at least to be something
poorer, and more worthy of Compassion than Those from whom the Money was
exacted. So saying, he stepped out.

Amazing Boy! cried Mr. Meekly, how new, and yet how just was that Observation!
I am, cried the Earl, as it were in a Kind of delicious Dream, and can scarce
yet believe myself so blessed as to be the Father of such a Child!

In the mean time, Harry had called John aside. Mr. John, says he, here are
five hundred Guineas. Be pleased to step and distribute them by twenty Guineas
to Each of the Families in the Village. I would save you the Trouble, and give
them myself, but that, for the present, my Heart turns with Disgust from their
Thanks and their Honors. Tell them that this is a Token, in Memory of my dear
Brother, to keep them in mind of him. Tell them further that I will have no
Carousals, no Rejoycings, on Account of my Arrival; and that it would please me
infinitely better, if my Return would bring their late Losses to their
Remembrance, and set them All in Tears and Lamentations.

My Lord now proposed a Saunter into the Park, in order to procure an Appetite
for Dinner. Accordingly the Gate was ordered to be unlocked; and they entered
on a Gravel Walk, that was walled in on the left Hand, and paled in on the
Right, along the Verge of five Canals that fell, successively, in Cascades, the
One into the Other. Beyond the Canals, a vast Lawn fled the Eye, thinly
interspersed with Trees of different Hues and Natures. The Lawn again was
closed by an extensive Lake; and, on the further Side of the Lake, there rose
and sunk several Glens, that varied their Forms to the Prospect, as they
walked. Beyond the Glens there arose, again, to the Eye, a huge Forest of
time-immemorial Oaks. And, beyond All, there ascended a Range of romantic
Mountains, whose Fronts were whitened here and there with impending Rocks; but
whose Tops scaled the Heavens, and confounded their Forms and Colors with the
Clouds.

As they talked and walked along, they met with a six barred Gate that directly
thwarted their Passage; and my Lord reached his Hand, through the Rails, for
the Key, that the Keeper had left in the Lock on the inside, but he could not
get at it. We are All at a full Stop now, said he, unless Harry could make a
Shift to climb over the Gate; but no, don't, my Dear, your Foot might happen to
slip between the Rails and hurt you. I will obey your Lordship, answered Harry,
I will not venture a Foot upon One of them. So saying, he catched at the
topmost Bar with his left Hand, and, throwing himself slightly over, opened the
Gate for his Companions. The Earl and Mr. Meekly stood mute, in utter
Astonishment. At length the Earl cried, Child, you must surely be of more than
mortal Mould, or else you have a familiar Spirit that conveys you through the
Air. I have indeed a familiar Spirit, my Lord, answered Harry, a Spirit much
humbled by the Sense of its own Defects.

On their Return, John called his Master aside, and told him of his due
Distribution of Harry's Bounty to the Villagers. But my Lord, said he, when I
went down I found them All very busily employed, in preparing Bonfires and
Illuminations in Honor of my young Lord. This, however, I was obliged to
countermand, by his special Order; and it has greatly mortified all your poor
People. Well, well, said the Earl, it cannot be helped for the present; we must
not dare to offend our Harry at any Rate; and so those Matters of Rejoicing may
rest in Reserve till the Arrival of my Brother.

Soon afterward, our Hero's Fosterers came, decked out in their best Attire;
and Harry ordered a side Table to be covered for him and them, but my Lord
insisted on their dining all together.

Harry placed himself very lovingly between them, at Table, that he might help
them and prevail upon their Bashfulness to eat.

When the Repast was nearly over, Nurse enquired after the little Beggar-Boy,
whose Absence, she imagined, had caused the Elopement of her Darling. He is
come to great Fortune, answered Harry, he has found his Father and Mother, and
is Heir to a large Estate. Harry then told the Manner in which Ned had been
discovered, and they were All highly pleased and affected by the Relation.

But Mammy, says Harry, what is become of my Sister Nelly on whose Milk I was
suckled? and what is become of my little Brother Tommy, who was but two Years
younger than myself? -- They are both dead, my Precious; but God has been
pleased to give me Others in their Room. -- Well, Mammy, I find we must all
die, and, some time or other, that will be a great Grief to One of us,
whichever of us shall happen to outlive the Other. I am satisfied to die once,
said Nurse, but, never let me hear again of your dying, my Angel, I cannot
suffer the Thought, she cried, and burst forth into Tears; I could not bear, I
could not bear to die a thousand Deaths in the Death of my Harry!

But, Mammy, said Harry, in order to divert her Passion, you have not yet
enquired after the Man with the Beard. O, the old Rogue, exclaimed Nurse, I
cannot think of him with Patience. Ay, but, Mammy, you must know that, that same
old Rogue is my own darling Uncle, an own and only dear Brother to my own dear
Father here. If that is the Case, said Nurse, I don't wonder he should so
greatly yearn after you; and indeed I would rather wonder if all the World did
not yearn and long after you, my Love!

And now, Mammy, to show you how much you are obliged to this same darling
Uncle, he has ordered me to make you a Present of five hundred Pounds, in
Payment, as he says, of the Grief he has cost you. And take no Heed for your
Children, Mammy, I will take that Care upon myself; for this same dear Uncle
has made me a Gift of the Lands, and House, and Plate, and Furniture that he
has in this Town, and so you see I am well able to provide for you All.

Here, my Lord cast an Eye of tender Jealousy upon Harry. I perceive, my Son,
said he, that your Uncle is your only Trust, the only Dependence that you
choose to have upon Earth. Harry, with a Glance of his Eye, instantly caught
the Meaning of the Eye of his Father; and, throwing himself at his Feet, O,
pardon, my Lord, he cried, pray, pardon the Overflowings of a grateful and
simple Heart! My Uncle is my Property, but I am yours, my Father, to be
disposed of in Life, and in Death, at your Pleasure. I do trust, I do depend
upon you, my Father, and you have already overpowered me with the Weight of
your Affections.

My Lord's Eyes then glistened, and raising his Son, and taking him fondly to
his Bosom, I believe I have been wrong, my Love, said he; and hereafter I shall
always think so, rather than think any thing amiss in my Harry. But, tell me,
my Dear, and tell me sincerely; you speak of your Uncle, as One of the richest
and greatest Men upon Earth; as a Prince, as an Emperor, enabled to give away
Fortunes and Provinces at Pleasure.

And he is, my Lord, cried Harry, he is greater than any Prince or Emperor upon
Earth. To speak only of his temporal Wealth and Power, the most inconsiderable
Part of his Value. He can do, as I may say, what he pleases in England. The
Ministry are at his Beck, they profess themselves his Servants; and even his
Majesty acknowledges himself deeply his Debtor, and owes him, I dare say, Half
a Million of sterling English.

And yet this is the Man, exclaimed the Earl, (turning an Eye of Penitence on
Mr. Meekly) this is the Man, as I told you, my Friend, on whom I looked down
with such provoking Contempt; whom I treated with such unpardonable Insolence
and Ignominy.

My Lord then enquired concerning the personal Adventures of our Hero in
London, the Account of which would have been more entertaining, had not Harry
suppressed, throughout his Narration, whatever he apprehended might tend to his
own Honor.

As soon as the Fosterers had taken their leave, my Lord proposed a Walk to his
Guests, in the Gardens; and, after a few Turns, they sat down in a rural
Arbor, that was interwoven, all about, with Jessamine and Honeysuckle.

Mr. Meekly, said the Earl, I have often longed to hear the Particulars of your
Life, and how you came to live by Faith and not by Sight, and to hold your
Conversation in Heaven, as you do at this Day.

I can soon obey your Lordship, answered Meekly, for my Story is very short and
very simple, and no way adorned with uncommon Incidents.

My Mother died a few Hours after I was born. My Father did not survive her two
Years; and I fell to the Care of my only Kinsman, an Uncle by my Father's Side.

My Uncle was an old Bachelor, and though he was of a cold Temper and had no
Tenderness for any One, he yet spared no Cost in my Education. He sent me to
Eaton School, and from thence to Cambridge, where I remained till I took my
Degrees. I then went to London, bought a Sword and Sword-Knot, and commenced
fine Gentleman.

Though my Head had been duly stored, by my Tutors, in the Rudiments of our
Religion, my Heart had not yet felt any of its Precepts; and I conceived that,
to go regularly to Church, receive the Sacrament, confess myself a miserable
Sinner, and avoid gross Vices, was the Sum of Christianity. I therefore
entered, without Scruple, into all the fashionable Pleasures and Vanities of
the Age; and I held that, to pardon an Affront, would have been One of the
deadly Sins, in a Gentleman-Christian.

One Day, at James's Coffeehouse, Colonel Stannard and another Gentleman
engaged, at Backgammon, for five hundred Guineas; and, as the Stake was so
considerable, and both Parties celebrated for their Skill in the Game, we all
crowded about them, to see the Issue.

I happened to be next behind the Colonel's Chair, and Others pressed behind
me, eagerly bending and looking over my Shoulders. At length he began to fret,
as the Game was drawing to a Close and going against him. Pray, Gentlemen, he
would cry, don't bear upon me so; for Heaven's Sake keep off, you will make me
lose the Game. Hereupon, I did my utmost to bear back from him, but the Company
pressed me forward, in Spite of all I could do. Till the Colonel, giving an
unhappily decisive Cast, turned about in a Fury, and spit directly in my Face.

Indignation gave me sudden and unusal Strength, and, casting All off who had
borne upon me, I instantly drew my Sword and ran the Colonel through the Body.
The Company cried out that all was fair, and opening a Window for me, they
urged me to escape. Accordingly I got off, rode Post to Dover, and there
embarked for France.

The Colonel, God be praised, did not die of his Wound. He lay under the Hands
of the Doctors for about seven Months, then recovered and went to join his
Regiment in Flanders.

Of this my Uncle sent me Advice, telling me at the same Time that I might
return with safety. Yes, thought I, with safety to my Life, but with Death to
my Honor! I have taken Revenge indeed, but not Satisfaction; the Colonel must
be compelled to make me personal Reparation for the Affront which he dared to
put upon me. His Recovery has again dashed the Spit into my Face; and I will
pursue him through the World, till it is wiped from the Observation and
Remembrance of all Men.

With this deadly Determination, I went Post, from Paris to Flanders, and
traced the Colonel from Place to Place, till I found him in a Village, on the
Road to Amsterdam.

I believe, Sir, said I bluntly, you may not remember me, for our Acquaintance
was sudden and of very short Duration; I am the Man in whose Face you spit
publicly, at James's Coffeehouse. Then, Sir, said he, I am scarce yet
recovered of the Cause which you gave me to bear you always in Mind; but pray,
what may your Commands be with me, for the present? I am come to demand a
Remedy, at your Hands, for the Wound which you gave my Honor, and which
otherwise must remain for ever incurable. Ah, he cried, no Man ever exacted so
severe a Satisfaction as you have already taken; what then may be the Nature of
the further Reparation, that you are pleased to require? Either to ask my
Pardon, or fight me within this Hour.

That is very hard upon me, indeed, replied the Colonel; the Honor of my
Commission will not allow me to beg Pardon of any Man, at least in order to
avoid a Combat; so Sir, if you insist upon it, I must obey your Summons, though
very reluctantly, I confess. Then Sir, said I, meet me in Half an Hour, with
your Pistols and Sword, behind yonder little Hill.

The Colonel was punctual to the Appointment. We both grasped a Pistol, at a
Distance of twenty Paces, and advancing, Step by Step, cried fire! fire! fire!
Each seeming determined to make sure of his Adversary; till, coming within
Arm's length, I fired directly in his Face, but the Ball passed through his
Hat, and only grazed the Skin of his left Temple.

The Colonel then took his Pistol into his left Hand, and reaching out his
Right to me, with a Smile of great Complacence, I think Sir, said he, I may now
ask your Pardon with Honor And to convince you that I did not come to engage
You in Malice, be pleased to examine my Arms, you will not find so much as a
Grain of Powder in the One or the Other.

Ah, Colonel, I then exclaimed, I acknowledge you my Conqueror both in Honor
and Humanity. Had I been so unhappy as to kill you, and find your Arms
unloaded, I should certainly have done you Justice, by shooting myself through
the Head. But, why did I pursue you from Kingdom to Kingdom; why was I
unappeased by all the Blood that I shed? was it from any Malignity of Heart
toward you? by no Means; but, while I lamented the Misery I had already
occasioned You, I was impelled to finish your Destruction, by a barbarian
World, or rather, by the bloody Prescribers of Custom, whose Censure I dreaded,
worse than Death, or even Futurity. Courage, Colonel, incites Soldiers to fight
for their Country; but it is Cowardice alone that drives Duellists together.

For three affectionate Days, I remained with my late Enemy, but now warm
Friend. He then was obliged to return to Quarters; and we parted, with a Regret
much exceeding the Hostility with which we had met.

On the Departure of the Colonel I went to Amsterdam, from whence I drew upon
my Uncle to the amount of L700. For I resolved, before my Return, to take a
Tour through the Seven Provinces, though I had gone for a very different
Purpose.

During nine Months I resided, or journeyed from Place to Place, among that
People. Holland is, unquestionably, the wealthiest, the busiest, and most
populous State upon Earth. Not a Hand is unemployed, not a Foot of Ground
unoccupied; and, for a long time, I ascribed their extraordinary Prosperity to
an Industry and Ingenuity peculiar to them alone. But, on further Observation,
I discovered the true Source as well of their Industry as their Opulence, and
am persuaded that any Nation, bordering on the Ocean, might derive the like
Prosperity from the same Spring.

Not, my Lord, that I think Opulence a real Benefit to a People, for Man's Life
consists not in the Abundance of his Possessions. But I look upon Industry,
the natural Parent of Opulence, to be as well a Blessing as a Duty to Man, from
the Time that he was appointed to earn his Bread in the Sweat of his Brow. Many
mental Virtues, also, as well as temporal Benefits follow in the Train of
Industry; it makes Men healthful, brave, honest, social, and pacific. He, who
labors hard to acquire a Property, will struggle hard to preserve it, and
Exercise will make him active, robust and able for the Purpose. As the Man of
Industry has, in himself, a living Fund of Competence for his own Occasions,
he will be the less tempted to plunder or prey upon Others; and the poignant
Sense and Apprehension of being deprived of a Property, so justly acquired,
will give him the nicer and stronger Sense of such an Injury to Others.
Industry further incites to Commerce and good Neighborhood, in order to
dispose of mutual Redundancies for the Supply of mutual Wants. And, lastly, it
delights in Peace, that its Time and its Labors may not be interrupted, nor
the Fruits thereof endangered, by Rapine and Invasion; and all this may be said
of Nations, as well as of Men.

Your Observations, said the Earl, are perfectly just; the Works of Industry
are, unquestionably, the Works of Peace, and tend to open the Avenues wherein
the Virtues may walk. But, how to incite Men or Nations to Industry, that is
the Question. The finer Arts, we see, may be encouraged and promoted by
National Bounties, as now in France; but there is no inciting the Bulk of the
People to Industry, in like Manner; that would be, as though the Public should
grant a Bounty to itself. Nations certainly differ from Nations as Man differs
from Man; Some are, by Nature, industrious and ingenious, such as China and
Holland, it is their Propensity, their Talent; while Others, like Ireland, are
naturally lazy and listless, and therefore remain in well merited Indigence.

You have greatly mistaken this Point indeed, my Lord. China and Holland are
industrious and ingenious, because, whether it were through good Hap or good
Policy, they hit upon the only Method whereby Industry and Ingenuity could be
duly promoted. Whereas Great Britain and Ireland are totally ignorant of the
said Method to this Day, though Both of them highly capable of having it put in
Execution.

You surprise me, Mr. Meekly, said the Earl, a Method to make Men ingenious, a
Method to make them industrious! how can that be?

Experience has proved it to be even so, my Lord; for where a Method may be
found for encouraging and promoting Ingenuity and Industry, that Method will,
infallibly, make People become both ingenious and industrious. No Man will
work, my Lord, without some Hire, or Wages, or Return for his Labor; neither
will Any, who are in Want, refuse to work, when assured of a due Reward for so
doing.

When the good Householder walked out to the Marketplace, and found Laborers
loitering there, when it was now toward Evening, he asked them, why stand ye
here all the Day idle? And when they answered, because no Man has hired or
given us Employment, he took this for a sufficient Apology, he had Compassion
upon them, and he supplied them with the divinest of all Kinds of Charity, the
Means of earning their own Bread.

Now, throughout China and Holland, no Person is in Want, because All are
hired, All employed, the Young and the Old, the Lame and the Blind; and All
find a ready Sale, without Anxiety or Loss of Time, without Travel or Delay,
for the Products of their Industry. Throughout Great Britain, on the contrary,
Nineteen in Twenty are in real Want; and in Ireland, as I am told, Forty nine,
in Fifty, are nearly in a State of Beggary, merely for want of being employed,
for want of Encouragement to Labor.

Permit me, then, to explain to your Lordship, how some Men, and some Nations,
come to be encouraged to Industry, and Others to be discouraged, or, in a
Manner, prohibited from it.

Different Men are endowed with different Talents and Powers, insufficient in
many Respects, though superfluous in Others, to their own Occasions. Different
Countries are also endowed with different Productions, superfluous in many
Respects to the Natives, though necessary or desirable for the Well-being of
Foreigners.

Now, these alternate Qualities, of Deficience and Abundance, at once invite
and impel all Men, and all Countries, to claim and to impart that reciprocal
Assistance which is denominated Commerce. Each gives what he can spare, Each
receives what he wants; the Exchange is to the mutual Advantage of all Parties.
And, could a Method be found out for encouraging Manufacturers to persevere in
their Industry, and improve in their Arts, by a ready Conveyance and Sale of
all their Redundancies, neither Want nor Superfluity could find Place upon
Earth.

All this is quite clear and self-evident, Mr. Meekly, but how to procure this
ready Sale is the Question.

Your Lordship must allow that the Way to procure it would be to bring
Barterers and Commuters, Buyers and Sellers! All who mutually want and mutually
abound, together. For this is the End and Purpose of every Market upon Earth.

Now, in Great Britain and Ireland, and in all Continents or inland Countries,
the several Deserts, Mountains, Marshes, and other Obstacles, with the
Difficulty, Danger, and Toil of Travel, and the great Expense of Land Carriage,
have utterly precluded all Commerce and Communication to any considerable
Extent. Insomuch that it would be easier and cheaper to convey a Commodity, of
any Burden, to either of the Indies, than from many Parts of Great Britain or
Ireland to Others, by Land.

While God appears to separate the several Nations of the Earth from Each
other, by the Intervention of Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, he has actually and
intimately united them thereby.

WATER serves to the Art and Navigation of Man, as Air serves to the Wings of
the feathered Species. It is the easy and speedy Medium, the ready Conduit and
Conveyance, whereby all Redundancies are carried, and all Wants supplied. It
makes Man, as it were, a Denizen of every Country on the Globe. It shortens
every Distance, and ties the remotest Regions together. It carries and
communicates the Knowledge, the Virtues, Manufactures, and Arts of each Climate
to All. It gives new Springs and Motives to Industry, Action, and Invention. It
gives a general Importance to the meanest Manufacturer. It gives to each Man an
Interest in whatever is done upon Earth, the Productions of every Region, and
the Tribute of every Nation.

Now, China and Holland are the only Countries upon Earth, who have
considerably availed themselves of this capital Benefit of Water-Carriage, or
Water-Commerce; and therefore they are, incomparably, the most populous and
most prosperous of all Countries in the World.

China, as your Lorship knows, extends from under the Tropic of Cancer to about
thirteen hundred Miles North, and thereby contains within itself all the
Variety of Climate, and Degrees of Heat and Cold, that are requisite for the
sundry Productions upon Earth. Inspired by some Forecast, or Sagacity, not
imparted to the rest of Mankind, they cut and quartered this vast Continent, by
as many navigable Canals as answer to the Ducts and Veins in the human Body,
for the Dispensation of Life and Nourishment. These Canals serve as Links or
Chords to the grand Community of the Chinese, they bind Region to Region, House
to House, and Man to Man, and hold the Whole as one System or Family together.
This great Kingdom is, thereby, become as one City, and the Canals as so many
Streets, through which Plenty is diffused by Commerce to every Part. If any Art
or useful Invention commences or receives Improvement in any Place, it is
immediately conveyed to every Place for Imitation and Promotion. No Portion of
this wide Continent lies waste or uncultivated, because the Canals are as so
many Markets brought to every Man's Door, and, by the perpetual Demand of
whatever is saleable, incite the Natives to exert themselves in providing all
the Redundancies they possibly can, that they may derive Wealth to themselves
by supplying the respective Wants of Others. Thus, throughout the expanded
Dominion of China, nothing is wasted, nothing lost, nothing superfluous,
nothing wanting. All are employed, active, industrious, ingenious, and
thriving. Their Canals are intimately to them, what Seas are diffusively to the
rest of the Globe. They are thereby become, as a World within themselves,
sufficient to their own Happiness and Occasions. They never change their
Manners or Policy. They never enterprise War against Others. And China is
affirmed at this Day, to contain one hundred and twenty Million of prospering
Inhabitants.

The Dutch also, about a hundred and forty Years ago, followed the Example of
the Chinese. Their Country is now become as one great and extended Metropolis
to the Universe; and through their Canals as through paved and spacious
Highways, the World resorts with all its Wealth. So encouraged and so incited,
neither the Lame, nor the Blind, nor the Maimed, sit unemployed. Every Child is
taught its Trade from the Moment it can apply its little Hands to a regular
Motion, and they bring to the Parents vast Sums, in lieu of an infinite Variety
of Toys and Trifles that are dispersed among the Idle of the other Children of
Men. For, Barterers, and Commuters, Buyers and Sellers, Manufacturers and
Merchants, like Pyramus and Thisbe, want nothing but the removal of envious
Obstacles, to meet and to multiply a similary Progeny.

From what has been premised, my Lord, it is most evident, That Industry is the
Parent of the Wealth of this World. That no Man's Industry is sufficient to his
own Occasions. That the mutual Assistance denominated Commerce is, therefore,
necessary to the Well-being of all People. That the reciprocal Advantage of
this Commerce consists in supplying mutual Wants with mutual Redundancies. That
this Commerce, however, cannot be carried on without a Medium for the
Conveyance of such Supplies. That such a Medium, by Land, even where it is
practicable, is tedious, toilsome, expensive, extremely discouraging, and
cannot be pushed to any considerable Extent or Effect. That God, however, has
opened for the Purpose, an easy, speedy and universal Medium of Seas, Lakes,
and Rivers, Part of which he has left unnavigable, that Man might finish, by
Art, what Nature had prepared, and contribute in some Degree to his own
Advantages. That accordingly China and Holland (and France of late) have
pursued the Path so divinely appointed, and that Power, Wealth and Prosperity
have flowed in upon them, in Proportion as they have opened the Medium of
Water-carriage for their Reception. And, that Causes which have produced their
concomitant Effects, without Variation, from the earliest Ages to the present
Period, must be presumed to produce the like Effects, through all Countries and
Ages to the End of Time.

I protest, Mr. Meekly, exclaimed the Earl, you have pushed this Matter into
mathematical Demonstration. What a happy, what a glorious Prospect now opens to
my View! How easily, how speedily, how profitably might this Method be put in
Execution, throughout the Earth! There is no Deficiency of Rivers, or
collateral Streams for the Purpose. The Sinking into the Earth would give Vent
to new Springs, and extract Plenty of Water in all Places for an inland
Navigation; and Half the Number of Hands, that perish through War and Want,
might be peacefully and plentifully employed in accomplishing this Weal of
Mankind. Famine and Depredation would then cease. Nation would no longer rise
up against Nation, nor Man against Man. The Earth, by Culture, would soon
become capable of sustaining tenfold the Number of its present Inhabitants. We
should no more be tempted to push Each Other from Existence. We should find
ourselves mutually interested in preserving and multiplying the Lives of All
from whose Labors we were to derive such Advantages. All would be Plenty, All
Peace and Benevolence throughout the Globe. The Number of Inhabitants, instead
of being a Burden, would then become the Riches of every Climate. All Hands
would be set to Work, when thus assured of a Purchaser for every Effect of
Labor. The Buzz of Wheels, Reels, and Looms; the Sound of Hammers, Files, and
Forges; with the Shouts of Vintage, and the Songs of Harvest, would be heared
in all Lands! I am quite astonished that a Work, so full of Benefit and
Blessing to the Universe of Man, is not already commenced, advanced, and
completed.

How comes this to pass, Mr. Meekly? Have You yet mentioned this Matter to Any
of our Great Ones?

I have, my Lord, to Several. They confessed themselves convinced of the
Utility of the Scheme; and, could Each of them be assured of engrossing to
himself the most considerable Part of the Profits that would thereby accrue to
the Public, the Work would instantly be begun, and would shortly be perfected.
For, such is the Nature of unregenerate Man, that he grudges to Others any
Portion of those Goods which he so eagerly craves and grapples after for
himself. He would hedge in the Air, and make a Property of the Light. In
Proportion as he sees his Neighbors in comparative Want, he exults in the
Accumulation of imaginary Wealth. But, should he deem them, in a Measure, more
prosperous than himself, he sighs at his inmost Soul, and grows wretched and
repining.

I protest, cried the Earl, were I young, I would to Morrow Morning, at my own
Cost, set about this great Work of national, or rather of universal
Beneficence. But, my Harry here has Youth enough, with an Abundance of
Benevolence also for the Purpose; and I recommend it to him as the greatest of
Charities, a Charity to Great Britain, a Charity to Mankind. What would you
think, my Lord, said Harry, of my expending your whole Drawer of Gold upon this
Business? great as it is, it would be but a small Matter toward the Value of
purchasing Peace upon Earth, and the Sons of Peace, upon Earth, will be
likeliest to be the Sons of Love in Heaven. So that we cannot lay out our Money
to better Advantage, in any Purchase for the Benefit of the Brothers of our own
Frailty.

Alas, my Love, rejoined Mr. Meekly, though you were Master of Half the Wealth
of the People of England, and were willing to employ the Whole for their
Emolument in this Way, the People themselves would oppose you in every Step you
should take. Some would be too proud to accept a Benefit from You. Others would
tell you that no Man should dare to violate their Property with either Spade or
Pick-Axe; and Others would indict you even for treading on their Grounds.
Nothing less than the Act of the whole Legislature, to whom the People have
committed their confluent Powers, can avail for an Undertaking of such National
Import.

Then, my dear Mr. Meekly, be pleased to let me have, in Writing, what you have
already set forth on this Head; and, if I live to come to the lower House of
Parliament, I will bend all my Powers to this capital Charity. And, if no other
Oratory will avail for the Purpose, I will bribe the Members with a hundred
thousand Pounds, and corrupt them, if possible, into one Act of Patriotism It
is observable that, within ten Years, subsequent to the Period of the above
Prouie, the INLAND NAVIGATION of England commenced. Since which Time, the River
Isis has been made navigable from Oxford to Cricklade in Wiltshire, and to
Abington in Berkshire. The River Avon in Warwickshire from Stratford to the
Severn. The Avon from Bath to Bristol. The Medway from Maidstone in Kent to
Tunbridge. The Lug in Herefordshire to the Wey. The Lea from Ware to the
Thames. The River Kennet in Berkshire to the Thames at Reading, containing 20
Locks in 17 Miles. The River Are in Yorkshire, containing 16 Locks, whose Tolls
are now valued at about L.10000 yearly. Beside the Stroud, the Nen, and the
Wey, with many Others, now in Island.
. But, Mr. Meekly, I interrupt You. Pray proceed in your Narrative.

On my Return to Amsterdam, from my Tour through the Seven Provinces, I grew
affected, one Evening, in a Manner I had never before experienced. I did not
feel myself any way sick or in pain, and yet I wished to exchange my Sensations
for any other Species of Malady. I was wholly pervaded by a gloomy Despondence.
I looked abroad for Comfort, but it was no where to be found, every Object gave
Disgust to my discontented Imagination. I secretly enquired of my Soul, if
Riches, Honors, Dignities, if the Empire of the World would restore her to
Joy? But She turned from them and said, All these Things are Strangers, and
Aliens to my Peace. Alas, said I, tell me then where your Peace may be found? I
know not, she replied, but I feel that I am wretched.

For three Days I continued under this Oppression of Spirit. And on the third
Night an increasing Horror, of deep and heavy Darkness, fell upon me. All Hope
died within me, and Misery seemed to open a Gulf of ever deepening Destruction
in my Soul. I lay all the Night, bathed in Drops of unutterable Anguish. I
wished and struggled to arise and change my Situation, but I felt that my Mind
was its own Place and its own Hell, from whence there was no Removal, no
possible Escape.

I now concluded that, some how, I must have sinned beyond the Measure of all
Sinners, since my Damnation was deeper than that of any Other. I therefore
turned toward God and wished to repent; but, as I did not feel Conviction for
the Sins of which I accused myself, no Place for Repentance was found in my
Soul.

Tremendous Author! I cried, I find that thou can sink and slay at Pleasure,
but can thou not also raise up and make alive? If all Things have their
Existence in thee, O God! is it not near and easy unto thee to impart to us
some Sensation of thine own Existence also? some Sensation of thine own Peace,
the Sense that it is thou alone who can be our Sustainer? Save me, Jesus,
save me from the Hell of mine own Nature! Save me, thou Son of David, O save me
from Myself!

While I thus prayed in an Agony, my whole Frame was suddenly overpowered and
sunk, as I suppose, into a State of Insensibility, till the following Day was
far advanced. At length I perceived that I still existed.

I dreamed that I found myself in a deep and noisome Dungeon, without a single
Ray that might even suffice to show me the Horrors of my Situation. I attempted
to rise and grope about, but I perceived that I was tied and fastened down to
Earth by a Number and Variety of Bands and Fetters.

At length a sudden Light appeared, and diffused itself throughout the Darkness
of my Mansion. When, looking up, I observed that the Keeper of my Prison had
entered, the Doors being yet locked. His Head, as I thought, was bound about
with a Tiara, from whence the Glory arose that shone around me. In the Coronet,
instead of Gems, were inserted a Number of Thorns, whose Points streamed with
incessant and insufferable Brightness. And on the golden Circlet was engraved,
in all Languages, JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS.

Immediately my Shackles loosened and fell away of themselves, and I wished to
cast my whole Existence under the Feet of my Lord, but was so overcome with
Ecstasy that I could not rise. When, looking upon me with a Smile of ineffable
Graciousness, he approached and took me by the Hand, and, at the Contact, I
sprung up a great Height in my Bed, and awoke to Sensations of indescribable
Blessedness.

You are come then, my Lord, my Salvation, you are come, my Master! I cried;
and I will cling inseparably to you, never, O, never more will I suffer you to
depart. Ah, I have felt, severely felt what it is to be without you. For, in
your Absence, though but for a Moment, lies the Essence of Hell and Misery;
but, in your Presence, my Beloved, in your Presence is Peace unspeakable, and
Joy for ever more!

From that Day, my Nature became, as it were, wholly inverted. All the Honors
and worldly Respects, for which I formerly risqued my Life, were now my
Aversion, and I turned from carnal Indulgence and Sensuality with Loathing.

Nothing could now affront, nothing could now offend me. As I totally despised
myself, so I wished, after the Process of my divine Master, to be despised and
rejected of Men. This made all others, the very meanest of human Creatures,
respectable unto me. Even in Reprobates, methought, I discerned some unerased
Traces of the Image and Superscription of my God, and I bowed down before it.

If Any attempted to injure, or defraud me of my Property, I yielded it without
Variance, and thereby I found myself cordially enriched.

I grew weary of my own Will and of my own Liberty, and I earnestly prayed my
Lord that he would rid me of them, and be, instead thereof, a controuling
Principle within me, ever influencing and directing me according to his own
Pleasure. Turn me, Jesus Master! O turn me, I cried, from all the evil
Propensities of my own evil Nature, though thou should turn me, as thou did
Sennacherib, with thy ruling Rein on my Neck, thy Bridle in my Mouth, and thy
Hook in my Nose! Take my Heart and Affections captive, and into thine own
divine Guidance! compel me into all the Ways and all the Works of thy
Commandments; till thy Yoke shall become easy and thy Burden light and
delightsome; till I shall move, as down a Descent, wherever thy Goodness would
guide me; till I shall feelingly find and know that all thy Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all thy Paths the Paths of Peace!

This, my Lord, may look somewhat like Boasting, but it boasts of Naught,
excepting Christ crucified, or rather arisen in me, whereby all worldly Matters
are crucified unto me.

Within about a Fortnight after my Conversion, I received a Letter from a
Friend in London, informing me that my old Uncle had secretly married a young
Creature, who was lately delivered of a Son. That he now openly acknowledged
her for his Wife; and that this, as he feared, did not bode me any Good.

At another Time, these Tidings would have greatly alarmed me; but I was now
equally resigned and indifferent to all Events.

In a few Days after, as I was stepping out of my Lodgings, I was arrested in
the Name, and at the Suit of my Uncle, for L.700, the precise Sum for which I
had drawn upon him about nine Months before. All the Consequences of this
Caption immediately occurred to me. I perceived that my Uncle intended to
deprive me of my Patrimony, in Favor of his new Family; and, as I had no Means
for opposing his Machinations, save what lay in his own Hands, I concluded that
a Jail was to be my Portion for Life. Wherefore, I lifted up my Heart and said,
within myself, to Prisons and to Death give me cheerfully to follow thee, O
thou who, in Death, art the Life and Resurrection!

My Spirit had no sooner uttered this short Ejaculation, than I felt such a
Weight of Peace descending upon me, that my Heart leaped within me at the
Prospect of Suffering, and I would not have exchanged my Prison for a Throne.

While I quietly walked with the Officers toward the Place of my Durance, they
came to a great Tavern, where they entered and proposed to regale themselves at
my Expense.

Mean time, a Dutch Merchant of great Eminence, happened to be, with his Lady,
in the principal Room, and, hearing a Bustle in the House, he enquired the
Cause, and sent for the chief Bailiff.

Soon after, I was conducted into their Presence. They Both rose as I entered;
and the Gentleman, approaching, took me familiarly by the Hand and said in
Dutch, Mr. Meekly, I hear You are in Distress, and that is sufficient to
recommend you to my Services; but your Appearance exacts Something more from my
Inclinations. Pray let me know wherein, and how far it may be requisite for you
to command me.

I muttered Somewhat, as I suppose, inarticulately toward an Answer. For I
protest, my Lord, I was so struck, so awed, so confounded, by his Presence,
that I was lost, for the Time, to the Consideration of my own Affairs. Mean
while he placed me at Table just opposite to the heavenly Vision of his Bride,
and then went and resumed his Seat beside her; while I, gazing in Silence and
utmost Wonder, recollected those Lines of Milton where, speaking of Adam and
Eve, he calls them "the loveliest Pair
"That ever since in Love's Embraces met;
" Adam, the goodliest Man of Men since born
"His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters, Eve."


The Gentleman perceived my Astonishment, and graciously smiling, again asked
me what Sum was requisite to extricate me from my present Difficulty. Ah, Sir,
said I, it is a Sum that far exceeds all human Bounty, and, indeed, I would not
accept the Obligation from any Man, unless I were assured of being shortly in a
Capacity to reimburse him, of which I see no Likelihood, I think no Possibility.

Here I told him, in few Words, how my Father had left me an Infant at the
Disposal of my Uncle, who had now put me under Arrest for L.700, which, some
time since, he had freely remitted to me, as in my own Right.

I see, said the Gentleman, your Uncle is a Villain, and means, by casting You
into Prison, in a strange and distant Place, to deprive you of the Power of
bringing him to Account. But he must be detected, it is a Justice which you owe
to the Public, as well as yourself. And, as the Amount of the pretended Debt is
not sufficient for that Purpose, here is an Order on the Bank in Town for
double the Sum. For this you must give me your Note of Hand. Be pleased to
reimburse me when it is your Convenience. If that should never happen, be under
no Concern; for I hold myself already repaid with Usury, in the Opportunity of
serving an injured and a worthy Man.

O Sir, I cried, I cannot, indeed I cannot, I will not accept it on any
Account. I am patient, nay I am pleased with the Lot that is appointed me.
Shall I, in an Instant, break the Yoke and cast the Burden which my gracious
Master, but this Instant, has laid upon me? No, Sir, I submit myself to it with
Thankfulness; I take his Cross to my Bosom and press it to my Heart.

O Meekly, said he, you are a very misdeeming Christian, if you think yourself
entitled either to assume or retain your proper Crosses at will. There is too
much of Self-Righteousness, in such a Zeal, Meekly. Humility would rather bid
the Will of our Master to be done; and he offers you Enfranchisement by my
Hand. Do, my dear Sir, cried the Angel beside him, do, let me petition, let me
persuade you to accept this little Instance of our good Will to so good a
Creature. Though my Lord here has not been able to prevail, a Lady has superior
Claims, and I must not be refused.

Quite sunk, quite overwhelmed, I dropped involuntarily on my Knees before
them. Blessed Pair, I exclaimed, blessed and beauteous beyond Expression; if
Angels are like You, what Happiness must be in Heaven! I could no more, my
Words were choked by my rising Emotions.

My Benefactor then rose, and coming tenderly toward me, he took me warmly in
his Arms. My Meekly, says he, do not oppress me, I pray you, by this Excess of
Acknowledgment; I am but a worthless Instrument in the Hands of your Beloved;
for from him, and him alone, is every good Gift, and even the Will of the
Giver. O, Mr. Meekly, added the Lady, her Eyes glittering through Water, we
thank you, we cordially thank you, Mr. Meekly; you have occasioned us much
Pleasure this Day, I assure you; and the Means of our Happiness should be
delightful in our Eyes.

My Patron then rung a Bell, and ordered his principal Gentleman into his
Presence; when, putting the Order into his Hand, here, says he, take this, with
the Bailiff, directly to the Bank; there pay him his Demand of L.700 and Fees;
and bring me a hundred Pounds in Cash, and the Remainder in Bills on London.
Then, calling for Pen and Ink, he drew the following short Note, I owe You
fourteen hundred Pounds. To which I signed Charles Meekly.

On the Return of the Messenger, I was put in Possession of the Cash and Bills,
and a Dinner of little Elegancies was served up.

After a short Repast, the Decanters and Glasses being placed, and the
Attendants dismissed, my two Patrons gave a loose to social Joy, and invited me
to be a Partaker in their Festivity. Never was I, nor ever shall I again, be
witness to such Flights of Fancy, such a spontaneous Fluency of Heart-springing
Glee! with what Pleasure did Erudition cast off its formal Garb! how
delightingly did Wisdom assume the Semblance and, at Times, the very Phrase of
Childhood! they laughed, they rallied me, themselves, and the World. Their
Merriment was as the Breaking forth and Exuberance of overflowing Innocence and
Virtue. Conceive to yourself, my Lord, a large Room surrounded with Benches,
whereon are seated the principal Philosophers, Literati, Lawyers, Statesmen,
chief Captains, and chief Conquerors in all Ages; then think you behold two
sportively observant Children in the Midst, looking and laughing at the
Insignificance of the several Sages; taking off and holding up the Solemnity
and Self-importance of each Profession in Charicature; and setting the whole
World, with all its Wisdom, its Toils, and boasted Acquirements, its
Solicitudes, Applications, and Achievements at naught.

The Gentleman, indeed, pretended, and only pretended, to defend the Sophists,
the Valiant, and the Renowned of his Sex; but he evidently exulted in his own
Defeat; while the Lady, with a Drollery amazingly valuble, ran through the
Schools of Philosophy, the Systems of human Policy, and Histories of Heroism,
unpluming the Crested, bringing the Lofty low, and depreciating and reducing
all Magnitude to Miniature. And all this She did with an Archness of such
pleasant Meaning; with such Looks, Eyes, and Attitudes of bewitching
Transition, as would have infused Fascination into old Age and Ugliness; what
then must it have done when accompanied by a Beauty that scarce ever was
equalled, that could not be exceeded? Did the Sarah of the Patriarch Abraham
resemble her, I wonder not that Nations should have been enamoured of her at
the Age of Fourscore.

At length, the enraptured Husband; no longer able to contain, bent toward her
with Looks of Soul-darting Delight, and, restraining his Arms that would have
crushed her to his Bosom, O, my Louisa, he cried, You are too much, too pearly,
too precious a Treasure for me! But, giving him a sweetly petulant Pat on the
Cheek, away, you Rogue, she said, I Will none of your Mockeries!

What can Expression add further to this divinely preeminent of human
Creatures? whatever was her present Glance, Aspect, or Posture, you would have
wished to fix her in it, that you might gaze and admire for ever. But, when she
varied the Enchantment of her Action and Attitude, you forgot the former
Attractions; and She became as it were a Newness of ever rising Delight!

Alas, how transient, how momentary was the Bliss I then enjoyed! A Chariot and
six pied Horses drove up to the Door, attended by a Retinue of ten or twelve
Men, All armed, gallantly mounted, and in rich Apparel.

My dear Meekly, mournfully said my Benefactor, I am sorry that we are destined
to different Departments. Hodge to night at a Villa belonging to one of my
Correspondents, and Tomorrow we set out to visit some of the German Courts.
Fare, fare you well, Meekly, for a short Season at least!

I would have east myself at his Feet. It was an Emotion, a Propensity which I
could not resist; but he prevented me, by kissing and casting his Arms
affectionately about me. The Lady then turned to me, and, with a Smile of
Heart-captivating Graciousness, God be with You, God be with You, my good Mr.
Meekly, she cried, perhaps we may meet ere long in your own England. I answered
not, but bending on one Knee, I caught her Hand, pressed it fervently to my
Lips, and permitted her to depart.

Alas, they did depart. I saw them for the last Time. They mounted their
Carriage, and being seated, they bent forward, and, bowing to me with a fixed
Regard, off they drove, and tore away with them, as I thought, the best Part of
my Soul.

I followed them with straining Eyes: when out of sight, methought I held them
still in view; and I blessed and kissed, in Imagination, the very Ground over
which they went. At length I awoke from my Delirium, and with slow and heavy
Steps turned back into the House.

I had not yet, through Shame, so much as enquired the Name of my Benefactor. I
therefore called to my Host, in order to inform myself of all that I could
learn concerning him; as also to make out a Bill, for it had not been called
for, and I pleased myself with the Thought of discharging a Reckoning that my
Friends had forgotten. When I questioned my Host on this Head, he put his Hands
to his Sides and broke into a violent Fit of Laughter; no, no, Master, said he,
there is nothing for any One to pay in this House, I assure You; Mynheer never
troubles himself about those Matters, his Major Domo pays all, ay, and for
every Guest too that happens to be in the same Inn with his Master.

Why pray, said I, is he a Lord? A Lord, quotha? not so little as that comes to
neither; no Sir, he is a Prince, the very Prince of our Merchants, and our
Merchants are Princes above all Lords. And pray how do they style or call him?
He has many Names and Titles, when our Traders speak of him, they call him
Mynheer Van Glunthong, but Others style him my Lord of Merchants, and Others my
Lord the Brother-Man, and my Lord the Friend of the Poor.

The Remainder of my Story is very short, and still more insignificant. I soon
set out for England, in order to file a Bill against my Uncle, and compel him
to discover what Patrimony my Father had left me. But God was pleased, in the
mean Space, to cut off all Debate; his Wife and Child had died of an epidemic
Distemper, and he did not survive them above a Fortnight. He left me a
penitential Letter, with a small Will enclosed, whereby I became entitled to
three hundred a Year in right of my Father, and an additional four Hundred in
right of my Uncle, with a Sum of near three thousand Pounds in ready Money.

If I know my own Heart, the only Cause of rejoicing, that I felt on that
Occasion, was that it put it in my Power to discharge my Pecuniary Obligations
to my late generous Preserver. I immediately wrote and transmitted Bills to
Holland for the Purpose, but the Bills were returned, and I could hear no
Tidings concerning the Residence of my Patron. I then put out his L.1400 on the
best Securities that I could procure. It is now close upon five and thirty
Years since I saw him; and, in that Time, the Principal, with Interest upon
Interest, yearly turned into Capital, has amounted to nearly five thousand
Pounds, one Penny of which I never touch, but hold the Whole as sacred.

Mean Time, it has cost me Hundreds upon Hundreds in Correspondencies,
Advertisements, and even in special Messengers to several Parts of Europe, to
discover where this Greatest, this most eminent of Men could have concealed
himself; but alas, my Search proved as fruitless as that of the Miser in
hunting after the Pearl of mighty Price!

During those five and thirty Years, the Image of the Persons of those my two
gracious Patrons never left my Memory, were ever at my Heart. Ah, I would say
to myself, they are dead, they are dead; or rapt, perhaps, like Ebjah alive
into Heaven; Flesh and Blood, resmed as theirs, might easily pass from its
little Impurities, through the Fire of the Love of God, to the Place of its
Bliss. And again it was my daily and ardent Petition, that, if their Mortal was
not yet swallowed up of Immortality, I might once set my Eyes upon them before
I died.

Here Mr. Meekly ended. -- I thank you, my dear Friend, said the Earl, for your
History; it has entertained me most pleasingly, and I have also been highly
edified by some Passages in it. But, with Respect to the Glimpse that you had
of your two wonderful Friends, I think it must have been a Vision, or merely a
Matter of Imagination; for, I never saw in Nature, nor read in Fiction of any
thing comparable to the Excellencies that you have described in that exalted
Pair. If it was a Vision, my Lord, it must have been one of blessed Angels
indeed; but I hope you will allow that the Benefits, which they conferred, were
no way visionary. O, Mr. Meekly, said Harry with a Sigh, the Picture, that you
have drawn of that dear Lady, has almost given me a Distaste to all the rest of
her Sex. Ah, might I meet hereafter some Daughter, some Descendent, some
distant Likeness of her, how happy should I think myself! May Heaven succeed
your ominous Wish, my dearest Child, cried Meekly! It is just, perhaps
prophetic that it should be so. For, never did I see so perfect a Resemblance
between any two Creatures, as between the Consort of that bewitching Woman and
yourself; it struck me, the other Night, the Moment you entered the Room; and I
thought that I beheld my very Benefactor newly arisen, like a young Phoenix,
from the Ashes of old Age.

Near a Fortnight more elapsed, without any News or Notice from Mr. Clinton, or
from the Messenger who was sent dispatch for him. Harry daily advanced in the
Favor and Familiarity of his Father. And Mr. Meekly continued with them in a
most pleasing Society.

On a fine Morning, as they were walking together toward the Village, this is
the first Time, my Harry, said the Earl with a Sigh, that I have ventured to
turn my Face this Way, since the Death of my Wife and the Interment of your
dear Brother. O my Lord, cried Harry, I would gladly exchange my Lot in Life
with the meanest of yonder Cottagers, who earns his daily Bred by the Labor of
his Hands, provided I might thereby restore them Both to your Bosom. Not so,
not so, my Son, fervently replied the Earl, I would not lose my Harry, though I
were thereby to resuscitate All that are dead in England! I have no Cause, no
Manner of Right to complain; I am still happy, wonderfully happy, too happy in
the Possession of such a Child!

Just then, a great Shouting and Uproar was heard in the Village. The huge
Mastiff, belonging to Peregrine Pelt the Tanner, had run mad, and came foaming
up the Road, pursued by thirty of the Townsmen, armed with Staves, Spits, and
Pitchforks. The Dog rushed on at such a Rate, that there was no Possibility for
our Company to escape him; and Harry, observing that he made directly toward
his Father, threw himself full in his Way. Instantly the envenomed Monster
sprung up and cast himself open Mouth upon our Hero; but Harry, with a
wonderful Presence of Mind, having wrapped his left Arm in the Skirt of his
Coat dashed it into the frothing Jaws of the terrible Animal, when, giving a
Trip, at the same Time, to his hinder Legs, he threw him flat on the Ground,
and, springing up into the the Air, he descended upon him with all the Force of
his Heels, and dashed his Bowels to Pieces; whereupon the Creature uttered a
faint Howl, sprawled awhile, and expired.

The Earl and Mr. Meekly stood, yet a while, pale, astonished, and unassured;
and my Lord, looking about in a Pannic, cried, where is the Dog, what is become
of the mad Dog? In the mean time the Villagers came on in full Pursuit, crying
out, the mad Dog, the mad Dog, take Care of the mad Dog! But, when they All
arrived, and beheld their huge Enemy looking formidable even in Death, never
was Amazement equal to theirs. They stared at the Earl, Meekly, and Harry, in
Turns; and seeing no Weapon in any of their Hands; God, cried Goodman Demster,
God has been wonderfully gracious in your Deliverence, my Lord; for nothing
less than a Thunderbolt could so suddenly have stricken this Monster dead. I
protest, said the Earl, I was so much alarmed that I know not how it happened;
I remember nothing further than that my dear Child here thrust himself between
his Father and Danger. But I beheld, said Meekly, when, with one Stroke of his
Arm, he dashed the Creature to the Ground, and then instantly crushed him to
death with his Feet. Not I, Mr. Meekly, modestly replied Harry, God gave me
Strength, for the Season, in Defense of my Father. But are you not bit, are you
not hurt, my Child, cried the Earl, coming up tremblingly to his Son? Not
touched, indeed, my Lord. Glory for that in the Highest, exultingly cried the
Earl!

I knew, exclaimed Tom Truck, with a Shout and Look of Triumph, I knew it could
be no Other but my brave and noble young Master who did the Feat. On my Life,
cried Farmer Felster, he is able, with his naked Arm, like another young David,
to save his Lambs from the Jaws of the Lion and the Paws of the Bear.

Though these Praises served only to put our Hero to Confusion, they went
trickling, like Balm of Gilead, to the Heart of his Father. Pelt, said the
Earl, let it be your Task to flea and tan me the Hide of your own Dog. I will
have his Skin stuffed with Incense, and his Nails of solid Gold; and he shall
hang up in my Hall, from Generation to Generation, to commemorate the Piety and
Prowess of my Son! Mean while, my good Friends, I invite you All, with your
Families, Kinsfolk, and Neighbors, to come and feast with me this Day. Sorrow
has endured her Night; but Joy comes, with my Child, and arises on us as a
new Morning!

In the Afternoon, all the Towns-Folk and Neighbors, with their Wives and
Children, convened to the great House, having their Cattle and themselves heavy
laden with Faggots, for a magnificent Illumination. The whole Court was spread
with Tables, and the Tables with Victuals and Liquors; beside two Hogsheads of
October that stood apart.

The Earl, in the Joy for his own Escape, and the recent Prowess of his young
Hero, went forth with a cheerful Countenance and graciously welcomed all his
Guests; whereat, they wished Health and long Life to his Lordship and their
young Lord, and, giving a joint Huzza, sat down to their Banquet. From whence,
after a Night far spent in Carousal, their great Fire being out, and their
great Hogsheads exhausted, they peacefully helped Each-Other to their
respective Homes; regretting, however, that they had not been honored with the
Presence of their young Master among them. For Harry had besought his Father to
dispense with him, yet awhile, from partaking in any Party or Scene of
Festivity, especially when appointed in his own Honor; and Mr. Meekly highly
approved and applauded his Motion.

On the Eve of the following Day, Mr. Meekly rode abroad on a charitable Visit
to a dying Man in the Neighborhood; and my Lord was fondly toying and patting
the Cheek of his Darling, as they stood at the Hall Door; when Harry spied a
mourning Coach turning up the lower End of the great Avenue, and instantly
cried out, there is my Uncle, my Lord, my Uncle, my dearest Uncle! and off he
shot like Lightning. The Coach drove but slowly, Harry was up with it in a
Twinkling, and vaulting in at the Window, was, in the Instant, in the Bosom of
his best Friend and Patron.

In the mean time, the Earl had retired into the House in great Agitation. He
feared and was jealous of the Manner in which his Brother would meet him; and
this gave him equal Doubt and Hesitation respecting the Manner in which he
ought to receive his Brother. Mr. Clinton, on the other Hand, was not wholly
without some similary Emotions; so that, when Harry introduced his Uncle into
the Parlour, no two noble Personages could salute Each other with a more
distant Respect.

The Earl, however, on casting a Glance upon the Face of his Brother, felt a
Tide of returning Affection, and lifting up his Hands and Eyes, exclaimed, it
is he, it is he! my Harry, my Harry Clinton! my dear, my long lost, my long
sought Brother! then hastened forward, in a Gush of Passion, and caught him in
his eager Arms. When Mr. Clinton, alternately folding the Earl to his Bosom,
cried, I am content, O my God! give me now to depart in Peace, since at last, I
find, and feel that I have indeed a Brother!

Our Hero, observing the Violence of their Emotion, interposed with a gentle
Care, and supporting them to Seats, placed them tenderly by each other.

For a while they Both sat silent, with a Handkerchief at their Eyes; till the
Earl turned, and plaintively said, you don't forgive me, Harry Clinton; you
never will, you never can forgive me, my Brother! Whereupon, Mr. Clinton caught
up the Earl's Hand to his Lips, and, pressing it with a fervent Respect, cried,
my Brother and my Lord, my Brother and my Lord!

O then, said the Earl, you do forgive me, I find; but, never can I, never will
I forgive myself. My Faults toward you, my noblest Brother, for these many long
Years have been ever before me; my Neglects, my Pride and Insolence, my
contemptuous Treatment of One, so highly my Superior; of my Harry, the only
Boast and Glory of our House!

Mean while, our Hero stood aloof with his Head averted, weeping and sobbing
with evident Agitation. Till Mr. Clinton cried, no more, my Brother, no more, I
beseech you! It is already too much; I cannot bear my present Excess of
grateful Affection for you; it struggles to rush forth, but Utterance is not
given. Beside, we shall break the Heart of our dear Child there; his Nature is
too tender to support such a Scene as this.

Harry then smilingly turned his Face, toward his Parents, all shining through
Tears, as the Sun in a Shower. And advancing, and kneeling before them, as they
sat; he took the Hands of Each, alternately, and pressed them in Silence to his
Lips.

In about an Hour after, while their Affections were still at the highest, but
their Spirits somewhat composed, Mr. Meekly returned. The Earl immediately
rose, and advancing, took him by the Hand with a cordial Familiarity. Mr.
Meekly, says he, I shall now have the Pleasure of introducing you to that
inestimable Brother of whom you have heard me speak so often; Brother, this is
Mr. Meekly, my best and worthiest Friend!

Mr. Clinton rose and advanced; and Meekly approached with an abased Reverence,
not venturing to look up, but saluted him, as he would have saluted an Angel of
Light!

Meekly, Meekly, cried Mr. Clinton, I have surely heard that Name before! Pray,
Mr. Meekly, were you ever abroad? have you traveled, Sir? were you ever in
Holland, Mr. Meekly?

Here, Meekly started, as awaked by the Sound of a Voice, whose recollected
Tuneings went thrilling to his Heart; and lifting up his Eyes, and beholding
the Traces of Features, once so lovely, and ever deeply endeared to his Memory;
he started, and staggering back some Steps, he sunk down on a Chair behind him,
almost in a fainting Fit.

The Earl, greatly alarmed, went up, and taking him by the Hand, what is the
Matter, my Friend, says he? are you taken suddenly ill, are you not well, my
Meekly?

O, my Lord -- he pantingly cried -- there he is -- as sure as I live -- my
Patron -- my Benefactor -- the wondrous Man that I told you of -- there he
stands, in his own precious Person before us!

Mr. Clinton then approached, and, taking a Seat beside him, leaned toward him
with a melting Complacence. Mr. Meekly, said he, I expected ere this to have
embraced you in Heaven; but I rejoice to meet you even on Earth; for I have
ever retained a very affectionate Impression of you; and I more especially
rejoice to meet you in the present Society.

But then -- but then you come alone -- you come alone, my Lord and Master! --
Alas, you wipe your Eye! -- O then, it must be so! -- And here he broke into a
passionate Gush of Tears.

My Lord and our Hero, hereupon, recollecting the engaging Circumstances of a
Character, on whose Description they had been so lately enamoured, could not
refuse their Tribute to the Memory of that admirable Lady, to whose Person they
now found themselves endearingly attached by Affinity.

At length Mr. Clinton, distressed to the last Degree for the Distress in which
he saw the forlorn Meekly, sweetly turned from his own Affliction to the
Consoling of that Friend whom he found so deeply afflicted for him.

Mr. Meekly, says he, let us not weep for the Living, but rather for the Dead!
for those who are yet in the Vale of Mortality. Shall we mourn the Condition of
Angels, shall we lament that a Weight of Glory is fallen on those whom we
loved? No, let us rather rejoice in the Prospect of being speedily Partakers!

When Supper was over, Harry laid hold of the first Interval of Converse, to
enquire after his Friends in Town, more especially Mr. Clement, his Arabella,
and their little Dicky. They are come, said Mr. Clinton, to sudden and great
Affluence. Old Clement is thoroughly reconciled to his Son, and is doatingly
fond of Arabella and her Child. I am glad of it with all my Heart, cried Harry,
clapping his Hands; but pray, how did this Matter come about, Sir? By an Event,
my Dear, in which the Arm of Providence was signally visible. But, before I say
how it came to pass, you ought to give our Company a short History of this
worthy Family, they will then become interested in their Success.

Harry, willingly and gracefully, performed the Task enjoined him; and then his
Uncle proceeded.

The second Day after you lest me, a Man of a genteel Appearance, but pale and
bleeding, was carried, stretched on a Door, by some of our charitable Townsmen,
and brought to my House. I was then abroad with Clement on a Visit to your old
Friend Vindex; but the Stranger was instantly admitted; and, while some of the
Servants rode off for a Surgeon, others tenderly undressed and put him into a
warmed Bed.

Soon, after I had returned and was informed of what had passed, the Surgeon
arrived, and, putting five Guineas in his Hand, I desired him to attend his
Patient and bring me Word of his Estate. In Half an Hour he came forth and,
shaking his Head, said, our Patient, Sir, will not do. He is wounded in the
Groin with a Pistol Bullet. The Ball has got within the Abdomen, my Instruments
will not reach it, and, if it has entered the Viscera, he will die of
Convulsions in less than three Hours. I have accordingly told the Gentleman
what I thought of him, and advised him immediately to settle his worldly
Affairs. He tells me his Name is Saint-Belial, and he requested me, as soon as
I reached London, to send Mr. Clement to him, who lives over against the blue
Posts on the Strand.

The Name of Clement made me curious to know who the Party was, and, entering
his Chamber, I took a Chair and sat down softly by the Side of his Bed. But,
the Moment that I cast my Eye on his Visage, I shrunk inward at the Shock; for
all the Malignity and Horrors of Hell were jointly legible on his Countenance.

Humanity, however, compelled me to address him. I am sorry to hear, Sir, said
I, that you are not for this World, but I trust that your Hope looks forward to
a better Home. I have no Hope, said he, save such as my Faith has been, that,
since I must die, I shall die wholly.

I protest, I was so stunned and disconcerted by the Words and Looks of the
Man, that I found no Answer, and he proceeded.

As I have no further Concern with this World, I have sent for an old Gentleman
with whom I had some Connections, and resolve to do an Act of Justice before I
die, the only One that ever I did during my Lifetime. For, your Charity, and
that of your People, has half frightened me into a Notion, that there may be
something of that, which is called Goodness, upon Earth; and then how fearful,
how tremendous must my Situation be! Wherefore, as old Clement may not arrive
in Season, I will, with your Permission, inform you of such Things as concern
him. For, as I have nothing to hope, through all Eternity, neither have I any
thing to fear on this Side of it.

My Father's Name was Belcher Saint-Belial. He was an under Retainer to the
Law, and raked up a little Fortune by sidelong Practices; so that he grew
ambitious of preferring me, his only Child, to the Bar, and, in that View, sent
me to School, and from School to Oxford College. But, I ought to have began my
History earlier.

If there are Devils, I surely had One before I saw the Light, and was filled
with the evil Spirit from my Mother's Womb; insomuch that my Nurse died of a
Cancer in her Breast occasioned by the envenomed Bites I gave her Nipple, with
my toothless Gums, while she suckled me.

While an Infant, I took a heartfelt Pleasure in dismembering Flies and
impaleing Worms alive upon Pins; and, when at School, I was the Promoter of all
Parties for worrying and torturing Cats and Dogs to death. But my principal
Amusement lay in catching and fleaing Frogs, in seeing them spring about in the
Rage of their Pains, and so leaving them to perish in unutterable Anguish.

As I grew in Stature, I grew also in the Strength of my Malignity. Evil became
my Good. My Enjoyments lay in the Loss, Damage, and Detriment of Others. I
conceived a Kind of envious Hate against Those who had done me a Benefit. I
requited open Friendship with hidden Malevolence; and I cannot remember that
ever I felt a Sense of any thing that goes by the Name of Gratitude, Humanity
or Virtue.

I usually carried about me a walking Stick or Cane, in the hollow Part of
which an Iron Spike was contained, which I could cause to spring forth with a
Shake of my Arm, and again return to its Case, at Pleasure. With this, as I
strolled the Fields, which I often did for the Purpose, I stabbed the Cattle of
the Neighbors in the Belly or Fundament, and chuckled to see them leap, and
kick, and plunge about in their Agonies. In short, I drew to myself a Kind of
Comfort from a Comparison with the Miseries that I inflicted on other
Creatures; and, had the Elements been at my Control, nothing but Pest and
Hurricane, Distemper and lingering Death should have arisen and prevailed
throughout the State of Nature.

At the College I got acquainted with one Clement, a gentle tempered but weak
Lad, of whom I made a Property. And I prevailed upon him to turn away several
of his Servants, under Color of their having stolen the Cash, Books, and
other Effects, of which I had secretly plundered him.

At length I had private Intelligence that my Father had been pilloried for
Forgery and other double handed Dealings; that he had died of the Bruises which
he received on the Execution of his Sentence; and that his Effects had been
seized by a Variety of Claimants. Wereupon, without taking any Notice of my
Father or Family, I made my shortest way to London, with All that I could
borrow or lay a light Hand upon among my Acquaintance.

The first Thing I did, at the City, was to wait upon old Clement, the Father
of my Friend, with a forged Draught upon him for a hundred Pounds; on the Sight
of which, he so fretted, and exclaimed, and walked about in such Perturbation,
that I greatly feared I had overshot my Mark. At length, however, he laid me
down the Money, but catching up a Book, swore that it was the last Penny his
Son should receive from him for six Months to come.

He then began to question me touching the Character of the young Gentleman,
and, under Color of praising him for Articles to which I perceived the old Man
had an Aversion, I exasperated him to such a Degree, that he again swore he
would hold no further Correspondence with him, until he should be fully assured
of his Reformation.

Having thus effectually cut off all Commerce between my Friend and his Father,
I cast aside my Fears of being suddenly brought to Account for my late
Acquisition. I was even so daring as to take Lodgings the very next Door, where
I got in League with a young Woman of a most seducing Face and Person, but
whose Profligacy of Manners was, artfully, covered by the most artless
Appearance of shamefaced Innocence that ever graced the feigned Character of
any Actress, on any Stage.

She did not attempt, however, to impose upon me, for kindred Minds, like Ours,
instantly saw into Each Other; and we soon concerted a Plan for her marrying
Goodman Clement, and dividing the Spoils of the old Miser between us.

This we easily brought about, and never was Man so happy, in being so imposed
upon, while I shared with him in the Possession of his Purse and his Bride.

In the mean time, as I had promised to procure him Intelligence concerning his
Son, I produced several forged Letters from pretended Correspondents in
Cambridge, containing such Accounts of the Galantries and other Extravagancies
of young Clement, as wholly alienated his Father's Affections from him, and he
sent him a final Note, whereby he discarded him from his Fortune for ever.

About two Years thus passed, in the full Enjoyment of All that could glut
Flesh and Blood; though, in order to ingratiate myself with the old Man, I
appeared to him the most frugal and abstemious of Mankind. But, one Night,
while Mrs. Clement and I sat together, indulging ourselves in the Hope that the
good Man had been knocked on the Head, or had fallen dead of an Apoplexy; He
was brought to us in a Chair, pale and wounded, and told us that he should have
been certainly murdered, had he not, by the most wonderful Providence, met with
his Son, who bravely knocked down the Robber and happily delivered him; and
that he had given him what Cash he had about him, with a Note for L. 500, on
the Bank.

All in a Pannic, and thunderstruck as I was by this News, I yet pretended to
congratulate him on the Return of his Son to Duty, but advised him to Bed
directly for the Recovery of his Health and Spirits.

The Remainder of the Night, I walked about, agonizing, and racking my Brain
for some Expedient to divert the instant Ruin that impended, when a sudden
Thought started, or was rather infused into me, and, at Dawn of Day, I went to
an Agent, who had done several Jobbs for me, of no very laudable Tendency.

When I had given him his Lesson, and put twenty Guineas into his Hand, he
hastily went and desired to see Mr. Clement, on Business of great Consequence,
when, falling on his Knees, he confessed, with appearing Penitence, that he was
the Person who had wounded him the foregoing Night; that he did not intend to
hurt him so much, but that young Mr. Clement had hired him for the Purpose, and
lay in wait hard by, in order that he might appear to come in to his Rescue.

This Tale was so feasible, that the old Man swallowed it, as a greedy Fish
swallows the Bait that, at the same time, conveys the Barb into his Bowels. He
thereupon had me called to him in a Hurry, told me what he had discovered, and
gave me an Order to stop Payment of the L.500, with a hasty Note to be left at
the Bank for his Son.

On the Way, I recollected an Advertisement in the public Papers that offered a
large Reward for the Caption of one Arabella Clement, who had been guilty of
the Murder of the late Lord Stivers; and it instantly occurred to me that She
was probably the Wife of my quondam Friend and Patron. Wherefore, as soon as I
had dispatched my Business at the Bank, I ran and collected a Number of
Constables, and waited with them aloof, till I saw the Object, whom I dreaded
and detested above Plague and Poison, enter and return discontented from the
Counting House. We then dogged him at a Distance till we saw him safe lodged
and, following softly up Stairs, we demanded a Woman who stood before us for
our Prisoner.

Young Clement then, all enraged, exerted himself with wonderful Action and
Intrepidity. With one Stroke of a Poker, he tore off my right Ear and cleft my
Shoulder to the Bone; then drove us All down Stairs, though several Shot were
fired at him.

What happened to him afterward I knew only from Report, for I lay ill of my
Wounds for several Months together, and on my Recovery, could learn no Tidings
concerning him.

In the mean Space, my continual Fears of his Appearance made my Life extremely
miserable. My Paramour and I had often Thoughts and Consultations touching the
Expediency of making away with the old Gentleman; but it occurred to us that
young Clement might still be alive and, on the Death of his Father, might bring
us to a severe Account for his Substance.

At length, about six Weeks ago, as I returned from transacting an Affair at
St. Albans, I met, and instantly recognized my old Enemy, walking with a young
Gentleman, about a Mile above this Town. Immediately I stopped, and, pulling my
Hat over my Eyes, pray Gentlemen, said I, am I on the right Road to London? for
I have traveled far, and fear I may have gone astray. You are on the direct
Road, said the Lad, but if you choose to stop short, you are heartily welcome
to a Lodging with us for the Night. Why, Gentlemen, said I, do you live in
yonder Town? We do, said Clement. In that Answer I had all the Intelligence I
desired, and away I spurred.

From that Time, scarce a Day passed wherein I did not take an Airing on the
same Road, still expecting and panting to meet my Adversary. I rode armed with
one Case of Pistols before me, and Another in my Pockets; and I determined,
though I should meet Clement in the Midst of a hundred Men, to shoot him
directly through the Head, and trust to the Speed of my Horse for my Escape.
But, this Day, as I returned near the farther End of the Town, a white Goat,
pursued by a Dog, rushed suddenly through a Hedge, whereupon my Horse plunged,
and one of the Pistols that was ready cocked in my Wastcoat Pocket went off,
and reduced me to the Condition in which you behold me.

His last Words were scarce intelligible. He was seized with Convulsions and
lay speechless near two Hours. At length old Clement arrived; his Servants
helped him out of his Coach; I met him in the Hall, and led him into the
Parlour.

There, being both seated, I succinctly gave him the Heads of Saint Belial's
History. When, looking earnestly at me, you appear, Sir, said he, to be much of
the Gentleman, but, if you were an Angel, I would credit nothing against the
Honesty of that good Young Man; and least of all to the Prejudice of the dear
young Innocent that I have married.

I confess I was somewhat piqued at this sudden Rebuff; but, suppressing the
Tendency that I had to Resentment, I wish, said I, you had come Time enough to
be present at the unhappy Man's Confession, but it may yet please God to open
your Eyes to your own Wrongs before he expires.

So saying, I conducted him to the Room where the Wretch lay, to all
Appearance, insensible. I then recollected an approved Elixir that I had in my
Closet, and sending for it, I infused a Tea-spoon full, Drop by Drop, into his
Mouth.

In a Quarter of an Hour he came perfectly to his Senses, and, turning his
languid Eyes toward the old Man, You are come then, said he, to hear my dying
Words. -- I forged the Note for which you gave me a hundred Pounds -- I forged
all the Letters that you received to your Son's Prejudice -- I was the Father
of the Child which the Strumpet, with whom you live, brought into the World --
She is not your Wife -- She is Wife to Caleb Cable the Boatswain, who lives by
the Monument. -- He has got Hundreds of your Money for keeping Counsel -- It
was, in truth, your Son who rescued you from the Hands of the Robber -- I
forged the Tale, and bribed the Man who deceived you in that Matter -- Often,
as you lay in Bed, Moll Cable has urged me to dispatch you before Morning --
Had I murdered your Son, as I long since intended, you should not have survived
him four and twenty Hours. --

Here, turning his eager and ghastly Visage upon me, O Sir, said he, is there,
is there, for certain, a Judgment to come? Alas! I answered, Death, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell, are the four capital Things of which the Universe affords the
highest and deepest Assurance. O, then, he cried, I am going, down! down! down!

This he spoke with all the visible Horrors and Desperation, conceivable in
Judas, when just about fixing the Rope to his Neck; and, lapsing into his last
Agonies, he soon after expired.

All pale and astonished, the old Gentleman sat silent and panting; and, seeing
he was about to faint, I ordered some Drops and Water, with a Bottle of Wine,
while I supported him from falling.

When he was somewhat restored, and had recovered his Speech, he laid hold on
my Hand and said, I beg your Pardon, Sir, I would do it, if I were able, upon
my Knees. But, who could have thought this? -- I wish that I had indeed been
murdered -- I would that I had died, before I was thus undeceived in the only
Objects of my Love. -- Alas, Sir, I have now no Relation, no Kindred, no Friend
except yourself upon Earth. All Others are equally Plunderers and Murderers in
my Eyes. -- These Words were interrupted by a Flood of Tears.

Having consoled him in the kindest Manner I could, Word was brought that
Dinner was served, and I led him, partly by Constraint, to the Table; but
whispered private Orders that Arabella and her Dickey should not appear, for
Clement staid to dine with his Friend Vindex.

After Dinner and three Glasses, which was all I could force upon him, I
remonstrated the Expediency of his immediate Return, to secure his Effects;
lest all should be spirited away upon any Intimation of the present Accident.
Ah, Sir, said he, I shall scarce, I fear, be able to bear the Sight of a Place
in which I so long thought myself so very happy; but if you will be so gracious
as to accompany me I will venture. I will, said I, on Condition, that you
engage to return and sleep here this Night.

Early in the Afternoon we arrived at his House, in my Coach, attended by his
two Servants and Four of mine, well armed. As we entered the Parlour, his
supposed Wife rose in an Alarm that she evidently endeavored to suppress. What
is the Matter, Lovee? said she, advancing; for what did Saint Belial send to
you? it became him much better to have attended on You, methinks. I fear my
Lovee is sadly tired. But, pray, what did he want with you? To tell me,
answered old Clement, that he was a dying Man, that I was a Dupe and a Cuckold,
and that you were a Strumpet.

O fie, Lovee, said she, those are very naughty Names; but you cannot be in
earnest.

Step, said he, and enquire of Caleb Cable the Boatswain; tell him, at the same
time, that I cannot afford to maintain his Wife any longer, and that he has
seen the very last of his hush Money. Ah, Polly, Polly, he continued,
meltingly, all this I could almost away with; but Murder is a frightful Thing;
who could think that my Polly would murder her old Man?

O then, she cried, I see that the Villain has betrayed me. I see that I Am
undone. My Youth and Beauty cast away, my Arts and Time spent in vain! Why, you
doting, driveling Wretch, your Fortune was little enough to compensate the
Pains I took in disguising my Aversion to you. But, you shall not live to
triumph in my Disappointment.

So saying, she sprung forward and, grasping his Neck in both her Hands, he
instantly grew black in the Face, his Eyes rolled, his Jaws expanded, and he
must have expired on the Spot. But I stepped hastily to her and, seizing both
her Wrists, I gave them a sudden Wrench, whereupon she loosed her Hold,
shouting out that her Arms were broke, and throwing herself, groaning, into a
Chair, she called for instant Perdition on me, the crazy Dotard, herself, and
all the World.

In the mean time, the old Gentleman had sunk panting to the Floor. But,
raising him gently, I placed him on a large Sofa, where he began to respire
with Freedom.

I then sent for a Sergeant at Mace and his Attendants, and giving our Heroine,
with a Mittimus into his Hands, I desired him to provide her with a decent Room
and suitable Accommodations, and not to admit any Company, except her Servant,
till further Orders. Ay, away with her, away with her, at any Rate! exclaimed
the old Man, she has the Looks of a very Gorgon, and every Hair of her Head is
turned into a frightful Serpent.

As soon as she was gone, I called her principal Maid and, putting a few Pieces
into her Hand, I desired her to follow her Mistress and to serve her with Care
and Tenderness; and further to intimate to her that, when she gave any Proofs
of Repentance and Reformation, she should yet be humanely and generously
provided for.

Having thus far settled Matters, I gave Commission to James and Andrew, with a
male Domestic in whom the old Man confided, to remain and take care of the
House and Effects; and, taking the Keys of the Cabinets with us, we set off on
our return to Hamstead.

On the Way, Mr. Clement grew deeply dejected, and sighing said, O Sir, how
strong, how very strongly is the Desire of Society impressed on the human
Heart; when, even in the Absence of Robbers and Murderers, I feel a Want and
Disconsolation that I cannot express. I have now no Relation, no Friend but
Yourself, no Kindred or Connection with any Other upon Earth. To You, indeed, I
owe my Life, and all else that I am worth; and, if you will not chase me from
You, if you will allow me to remain with You, You shall be all the World to me,
the Heir and sole Possessor of all that I possess.

But, have You not a Son? I cannot think I have, said he; it is now above eight
Years since I set Eyes on my dear Hammel, the precious Pearl whom, in my
Dotage, I madly cast away. But, were he still living, after what is past, I
could never more have the Courage to look him in the Face. A cruel and a false
Pelican have I proved to my Little One; instead of fostering him with my
Vitals, I have withheld and torn from him even the common Means of Life.

Do you know None of your Name, said I, who may claim your Substance under
Color of being of your Blood? Not Any, Sir; my Father was a Foreigner, and I
never heard of any Other of the Name in this Nation.

There is One of your Name, said I, who lives in our Town. But then, he is in
flowing Circumstances, quite above the Desire of increasing his Fortune by base
or low Means. He is my most intimate Friend, a very accomplished Gentleman, and
has one of the finest Women to Wife, and two of the loveliest Children that I
have seen. If you please, I will invite and introduce them to You, to Night, or
to Morrow.

On our Arrival, I left old Clement a while in the Parlour, while I stepped to
give private Directions respecting the Conduct of your Tutor, Harry, and the
Interview which I proposed between him and his Father.

Sir, said I as I returned, I have taken the Liberty to invite your Namesakes
to sup with You. They are a very amiable Family, and I hope that their Company
and Acquaintance will prove a Matter of Consolation, perhaps a Blessing to You.
Ah, he cried, my Claims are of a very different Nature; I have no Right to
Blessings or Consolations of any Kind.

Some time before Supper, a Rapping was heard, and Arabella entered, leading in
a little Daughter of about four Years old, and followed by her Son, Dickey, All
elegantly dressed.

Madam, said I, this is a Namesake of Yours, my worthy Friend Mr. Clement, pray
let me have the Pleasure of introducing You to each Other.

When they were both seated, the old Gentleman took out his Perspective, and,
peering at her for some Time, ah, he cried, what lovely Faces there are in the
World, but All have not proved lovely throughout, like You, Madam.

He then called Dickey to him, and taking him by both Hands, and bringing him
forward between his Knees; what is your Name, my Dear, says he? Richard
Clement, Sir, so please You. I would it were Bartholomew, replied the old
Gentleman; but Names signify nothing, You are a sweet little Fellow, and
perhaps may be something the better for my Death. I would not wish your Death,
Sir, said Dickey, for All that I could get by You. O, how very heavenly,
exclaimed the old Man, how heavenly is the Simplicity and Disinterestedness of
Infants!

He next requested Arabella to spare her little Daughter to him, for a Minute;
and she accordingly took and led her to him: When, fondly caressing her, and
seating her on his Knee, Could you find in your Heart, says he, to love such an
ugly old Thing as I am? Yes, me could, says she, and me has got some Comforts
for you in my Pocket. Whereupon she produced a little Paper and, unfolding it,
presented him with some candied Seeds and Almonds. O, my God, cried the old
Man, what a Heaven I should yet enjoy upon Earth, could I but purchase the
Society of these dear Infants! -- I heard him, with a moistening Eye, and
rejoiced in the ripening Fruits of my little Project.

Pray, Madam, says I, what is become of our good Friend your Husband, are we
not to have the Happiness of his Company to Night? Sir, says she, he was
engaged on indispensable Business at the Time, but will certainly attend you
before Supper.

She had scarce spoke when a second Rapping was heard, and in came our Hammel,
not in gay but costly Apparel, as I had appointed.

On introducing the Son, to his venerable Father, they respectfully saluted
Each other as utter Strangers. For, our present Hammel was more different from
the meagre and threadbare Hammel that his Father had last seen, then Pharaoh's
fat Kine could be from his lean Ones.

During Supper, and after, I purposely threw out occasional Topics, and gave
several Opens, wherein I knew that Hammel could shine; and he accordingly made
Use of them with great Spirit and Advantage.

His Father gazed at him with a respectful Admiration, and at length exclaimed,
You are an Ornament, an Honor, Sir, to your Name, to your Lineage, and the
Country wherein you were born. But pray of what Family? Alas, Sir, you add
Stings to the Recollection of my Faults this Day: I once had a Son, a Son who,
in an humble Degree, might now have resembled yourself; but my Unkindness must,
long since, have broken his gentle Heart. My Child saved me from Murderers, and
I in Return was the Murderer of my Child. O, Hammel, my Hammel, my Son, my Son
Hammel, would to God I had died before I wronged thee! Would God I had died for
thee, O Hammel, my Son, my Son!

His last Words were broken and nearly suppressed by a Gush of Tears; when the
tender hearted Hammel turned an Eye upon me, and cried, O, Sir, we have gone
too far! -- Then, hastily advancing, he threw himself at the Knees of his
Father. I am here, Sir, he cried, your Hammel, your own Hammel, in all Duty and
Affection, submissive and prostrate before you.

You my Hammel, are you my Hammel, asked the old Man? Ah, had you but his
famished Face and his tattered Garment, I would take you to my Arms, to my
Heart, into my Vitals.

O, my Father, cried Hammy, look not so strange and wild upon me! I am indeed
your Child, once the Darling of your Heart, whom you fostered so tenderly, and
nurtured at School and College; the true Son of your true Wife, look upon me,
my Father! You often told me that I was her Picture; do you not see the very
Features of my dear Mother in my Face?

Yes, yes, I think I do. -- But then I have been mightily imposed upon of late.
I would you were leaner and worse clad, my Child! however, if you come in the
Name of my Son, I also will kneel down and crave his Pardon and your Pardon?

Here the old Gentleman sunk down upon his Knees, and poor Hammel, starting up
at the same instant, cried aloud, Alas! Sir, he is beside himself, and I too
shall go distracted!

I then was grieved at Heart for the Stratagem I had made Use of, to connect
this worthy Family the more endearingly together. And coming soothingly to him,
and raising him in my Arms, I replaced him in his Seat, and said, believe me,
trust to me, my dear Mr. Clement; this is your true Child, your only Child,
your true Hammel! He has lived with me many Years, I can prove him to be yours
by a thousand Witnesses, by those who can witness what he has suffered, on
account of being your Son.

Well, well, well, said he, whisperingly, it does not signify much, for I have
another One coming, my Polly is now in the ninth Week of her Reckoning. -- Ay,
but, that Saint Belial, who knows but the Child may be an Imp of his Begetting?
-- A cursed Couple they are, I Am sure; she a Succubus, and he the Devil himself
incarnate -- I hope they didn't hear me -- shut the Door! -- O, there they are!
-- Save me, save me! -- they come upon me! -- My Throat, they gripe my Throat!
-- My Breath, my Breath! -- O -- h --

Here he swooned. But, on taking a little Blood, he came to himself. So I
ordered all to be kept quiet about him; and, getting him to Bed, he swallowed a
soporific Draught, slept soundly till Morning, and awoke in his perfect Senses.

I then went to bid him Good Morrow, and took a Chair by his Bedside. -- That
was a mighty agreeable Family, said he, who supped with you last Night, Sir.
The very worthiest, I replied, that I know upon Earth. -- You called them
Clement, I think. -- That is their Name, Sir. -- Pray, did they go Home? -- No,
they are here still; at Times, we make but one Family and one Household.

While I spoke, I was surprised to see Clement enter, dressed in the same
shabby Clothes in which we first found him, Harry; and the old Gentleman,
turning his Head to the Door, started up in his Bed and cried, if I am a living
Man, that is surely my Hammel, my very Son Hammel.

On hearing this, poor Clement leaped hastily forward and, falling by the Bed,
seized One of his Father's Hands, repeatedly kissed it, and wept upon it. You
are restored to me then, he cried, my Father, my Father! God be praised, God be
praised! You are restored to me entire, I trust, with all that paternal and
melting Fondness which was once the Blessing and the Treasure that I prized
above the World. No, Hammy, said the old Man, I will not deceive you, I cannot
love you as I once loved you, because you never can forgive me. If you could
forgive me, Hammy, I would love you with a double Love, a Love passing the Love
of Fathers.

O, my Father, exclaimed Hammel, this one happy Moment of Reconciliation amply
cancels all Offenses, and outweighs all Sufferings. Permit me then, my dearest
Father, to introduce Those to you who have an equal Right to your Blessing.

So saying, off he went, and brought in Arabella, with her attending Children,
and all the Four kneeled down by the Side of the old Man.

O, my God, he cried out, you are too bountiful, too gracious, you oppress, you
crush me to nothing with this exceeding Weight of your Benefits! I was a
withered and a blasted Branch, and you have caused me, like Aaron's Rod to Bud
and Blossom anew, and to bear these blessed Fruits, I trust, to your Glory!

When Breakfast was laid, and the old Gentleman dressed, I sent up for him, and
when we were seated, Clement entered with his Family, All elegantly dressed, as
on the preceding Night. Hammy, said I, how came you by that Disguise which you
put on this Morning? You looked so unlike yourself you almost frightened me. --
Don't you remember that Dress, Sir? -- How should I remember what I never saw
before? -- O, you did see them before, Sir; those were the Weeds I wore, when
you saved me and Mine from famishing; and I have ever since preserved, and
shall ever preserve them, as the precious Memorial of my Obligations to you.
What, exclaimed the old Gentleman, my Life, and your Life! has he saved your
Life also, my Son? Yes, Sir, cried the grateful Creature, All who are alive
here live only by -- Here, while I put one Hand to the Mouth of my Friend, his
venerable Father seized hold on the Other, and, bending one Knee, he pressed it
to his Lips, in a Silence that passed all possible Utterance.

But pray, Mr. Clement, said I, to turn aside the Subject, what do you propose
to do with Mrs. Cable? You know that, in Case of Penitence, I promised to have
her taken Care of. To be sure, Sir, said he, I will make good all your
Engagements, and I will further do whatever she desires, on Condition of her
residing in a different Country, or rather in a different Kingdom; for I would
not, for the World, that she should come within the Reach of me, by fifty
Leagues at least; unless you were always to be with me for a Safeguard.

I laughed, and, immediately, Mrs. Cable's Maid entered all in a Heat, with a
frightened and imploring Countenance. So my good Girl, said I, how is your
Mistress, to Day? Ah Sir! she cried, I have but a very sad Account to give you
of my Commission. My Mistress is dead, and I doubt that I, myself, have been
ignorantly her Murderer.

Soon, after she was shown to her Apartment, Hetty, says she, I find myself
growing very sick, pray step and bring me the little Bottle of Cordial, that
you will find standing in such a Corner of my Closet. I did as I was ordered
and, returning in all Haste, I presented her with the Bottle. When, looking
mournfully at it, and giving a heavy Sigh, Ay, she cried, this is the right
Cordial, this will do the Business; then calling for a Wine Glass, she filled
and drank it off.

In a little while after, she complained of being drowsy, whereupon I undressed
and helped her to Bed, and lighting a Candle, I sat down to watch beside her.
For a Time, she appeared to sleep quite sound and easy, but again, began to
moan and toss the Clothes. In a while after, however, she seemed quite
composed. But, toward the Dead of Night, not hearing her breathe, I held up the
Candle, and saw that her fine Face was livid and ghastly, and her Skin all
discolored.

I then thought that I, myself, should have dropped dead on the Spot. I gave a
great Shriek, and, I believe, continued shrieking till the Keeper and a Servant
Maid came in. So Sir, if your Honor is pleased to think that the Blame of this
Matter belongs to me, I am come to deliver myself up to Justice.

No, my Girl, said I, you are not at all suspected. I don't perceive any
Interest that you could possibly have in this melancholy Event. No, Sir, said
old Clement, I can answer for her Innocence; she is but a late Comer; she was
particularly tender of me, and, I dare say, knew nothing of the ill Designs of
her Mistress. And so, Hetty, I will recommend you to a better Mistress, Hetty,
an Angel of a Mistress, even to my own dearest Daughter, who sits blushing
before you there.

That Night, after the Inquest of the Coroners, Mrs. Cable was secretly buried
in the Fields, and my Servants interred her Confederate on the high Road; for I
did not choose to have the sacred Ceremony of our Church profaned over a
Reprobate who rejected the Hope of a blessed Resurrection.

The Day before I set forward, our kind-hearted Clement earnestly petitioned to
accompany me, and urged his Impatience to embrace You, my Harry; but this I
peremptorily refused, as I was sensible that his own Affairs demanded his
Presence. So I came away, alone, yet attended by the Tears and good Wishes of
the happiest Family that is, I think, within his Majesty's Dominions.

My dearest Brother, said the Earl, the latter Part of your Story is
exceedingly pleasing, and yet scarce makes Amends for the Horrors that
preceded. My Flesh, as well as my Spirit, still shudders at the Character of
that accursed Belial. I did not think that such a Malevolence and Malignity of
Disposition could be generated in the Bottom of Hell itself.

And yet, my Lord, I am persuaded, said Mr. Clinton, that could it please God,
at this Instant, to withdraw from me the Influence of his holy and happy
Spirit, I should become altogether as evil as Belia himself.

I cannot think so, my Brother, replied the Earl, You would still continue a
Rational and free Creature. There is certainly a Distinction in the Nature of
Things; there is the Beautiful and Deformed, the Amiable and Detestable; your
Judgment would approve the One and reject the Other; and your Freedom of Agency
would act conformable to your Election.

Ah, my Lord, cried Mr. Clinton, what Things, what Beauty, what Amiableness,
what Freedom is this that you speak of? Have you found out another Universe, or
another Deity beside Him in whom our Life subsists? Are there any Things in
Nature, save the Things of our God? Or what Beauty or Amiableness can they
possibly exhibit, save what they derive from him; save some Quality or
Impregnation, some Manifestation or Impression of his own Beauty or Amiableness?

To make this Matter clear, let us go somewhat deeper, quite back, if you
please, my Lord, to the very Birth of Things.

Throughout Nature, we find that God can impart to his Creatures a Being, an
Identity, a Fire of Life, an Intelligence or Sagacity, a Consciousness, a Force
or Action, a Will, and a Freedom, distinct from himself, and distinct from each
Other; and this is the utmost Extent of Creaturely Nature, whether respecting
the Powers that are in Hell or in Heaven, whether respecting the highest
Seraphim that are in Bliss or in Perdition.

Now, all these Powers or high Prerogatives, although distinct from God, are
infinitely far from being independent of him, for he will not, he cannot depart
from his Supremacy, nor that Universality of Essence, by and in whom alone all
Essences subsist. He can, indeed, impart the forementioned Powers to any
limited Degree that he pleases; but then, in their highest Degree of Fire,
Life, or Sagacity, Force, Action, or Freedom, you will perceive, on the
slightest Reflection, that there is nothing of the Beautiful or Amiable, that
You spoke of; but that they are equally applicable, and may be equally
exercised to evil, or good Purposes, according to the Nature or Disposition of
the Agent.

Your Pardon, for one Minute, my noble Brother! I have already specified the
many great and wonderful Powers that God can impart to his Creatures,
distinctly, though not independently, from Himself. But there is one Power, one
Quality which God cannot make Creaturely; which, with all his Omnipotence, he
cannot possibly impart, in any Kind of Distinction or Separability from
himself; and this Quality is called GOODNESS.

And now, my dear Lord, in order to convince You of this most capital and most
important of all Truths, a Truth upon which, Time, Eternity, and the Universe
all turn, as on their Axis; it may be necessary to enquire what GOODNESS is.

It will be answered, that GOODNESS is various and infinite in its Kinds and
Degrees. It is so indeed, for it is, at once, ONE and MANY. It springs forth
from our God, as the living Fountain in Paradise, that thence divided it into
Rivers and numberless Streams, to water and replenish the whole Earth. All
those Streams, however, were but so many Parts or Portions of the one variously
blessing Fountain, and that Fountain is LOVE, it is the LOVE of Others, my Lord.

There is no Species of allowed or conceivable Virtue, that is not reducible
under the Standard of this, their great Leader, and all generating Parent,
called LOVE. GOOD WILL is the eternal Blesser of All to whom it is beneficent,
and also generates its own Blessing in the very Act of its Love.

Here lies the great and impassable Gulf, between God and his Productions,
between the Creature and the Creator. The Will of God is an Eternal FIRE OF
LOVE toward his Creatures, and goes forth in Blessings upon them as wide and
universal as his own Existence. But the Will of the Creature is confined and
limited like its Essence. While it is distinct, or uninformed of the Will of
God, it cannot possibly act beyond or out of itself; it cannot possibly feel
for any Thing except itself; it cannot wish any Welfare except its own Welfare,
and this it endeavors to compass by the Exertion of all its Powers. Indeed, we
may as well suppose that a crude Rock, at the Extremity of either Pole, while
compassed by perpetual Darkness and compacted by perpetual Frost, should yet
kindle itself, and beam forth in Light and Warmth upon All around; as that any
creaturely Will should, of its own Powers, go forth in Affection or Kindness
upon Others.

From this distinct, selfish, and craving Will of the Creature springs every
possible Evil, whether natural or moral. From the Preference of its own
Identity to that of Others, arises Pride. From the Eagerness of its grasping
at all Advantages to itself, arises the Envy of any imaginary Advantage to
Another. Pride, Covetousness, and Envy beget Hatred, Wrath and Contention, with
every Species and Degree of Malevolence and Malignity; and the Disappointment
of these Passions produces Rancour and Misery; and, Altogether, they constitute
the whole Nature and Kingdom of Hell itself in the Soul.

But, when God is pleased to inform the Will of the Creature with any Measure
of his own benign and benevolent Will, he steals it sweetly forth in Affection
to Others. He speaks Peace to the Storm of rending Passions; and a new and
delightful Dawning arises on the Spirit. And thus, on the grand and final
Consummation, when every Will shall be subdued to the WILL OF GOOD TO ALL, our
Jesus will take in Hand the resigned Chordage of our Hearts, he will tune them,
as so many Instruments, to the Song of his own Sentiments, and will touch them
with the Finger of his own divine Feelings. Then shall the Wisdom, the Might,
and the Goodness of our God become the Wisdom, Might, and Goodness of all his
intelligent Creatures. The Happiness of Each shall multiply and overflow, in
the Wishes and Participation of the Happiness of All. The Universe shall begin
to sound with the Song of Congratulation, and all Voices shall break forth in
an eternal Hallelujah, of Praise transcending Praise, and Glory transcending
Glory! to God and the Lamb!

Hasten, hasten that blessed Period, great God, we beseech thee! exclaimed the
Earl. But, tell me, my heavenly Brother, for it is surely in Heaven that you
hold your Conversation, and from whence you derive all your Knowledge and
Lights; tell me then, is there no Distinction, no Preference, in Matter of
Goodness, between Creature and Creature, between Man and Man? For this seems to
be the Consequence of what You have set forth very nearly, I acknowledge, to
mathematical Demonstration.

Your Question, my dear Lord, is very deep, said Mr. Clinton, and still leads
to greater Depths than I would choose to disclose before our Harry, yet awhile.
I will however attempt, in few and simple Words, to give you some Satisfaction
on this most interesting Article.

There are two great and capital Errors, under which the World of Man has
labored, and still continues to labor ever since the Creation. The First is,
that of ascribing and imputing, to Ourselves, every Emotion and Inclination,
toward Virtue or Goodness, that we seel within us: The Second is, that, as free
Agents, we are enabled to elect and reject, merely by the Act of an own Will
independent of any Impulse or Bias whatever.

I have already shown your Lordship that every creaturely Will, independent of
the Will of its God, can be no other than an eager Craving after its own
Happiness, and cannot possibly be affected in Behalf of another Creature, who
is wholly distinct from it and wholly an Alien to it. Wherefore, every
creaturely Will, in such a separate and adverse State, is altogether as an
Ishmael, whose Hand is against every One, and every One's Hand against him.

On the other Hand, I have shown You that God (the sole Fountain of all Being
and Blessedness) can, in his Nature and Disposition, be nothing but LOVE; and
that, even in loving Himself, he must love his own Productions, the Realizing
of his own Ideas, and the Works of his own Power. What, indeed, should hinder
our God from being wholly a God of Love? Was there any thing before him, was
there any thing coaeval with him to control or oppose him? Had he any thing to
envy, had he any thing to excite his Anger, except his own Conceptions, and
These he was at Liberty to bring, or not to bring into Existence or
Perceptibility, even at his own Pleasure. What then should affect him with the
slightest Tincture of Malignity? Could he add to his own Happiness by rousing
the hateful Passions within his own blessed Bosom? We may more rationally
suppose that the Sun, in his distant Zenith of burning Superiority, should have
his Light impaired by the Squirt of a Schoolboy, than that the Deity should be
affected, with any Touch of Malevolence, by any Creature, or by all the
Creatures that his Omnipotence can produce.

Purblind Reason, here, will say; even the Goodness of God himself, in the
human Heart, will say, if our God is all LOVE, if he is a Will to all Rectitude
and Happiness in his Creatures, why did he suffer any Evil to begin in Nature
or Creature? Could Evil have arisen contrary to the Will of Omnipotence, if
Omnipotence had willed that it should not arise?

Ah, my Friends, no Evil ever did nor ever can approach the Will of God;
neither can he will or affect any Species of Evil in Nature or Creature, but he
can allow a temporary Evil in the Creature, as a Travail toward its Birth into
the more eminent Degree of that Goodness and Happiness which God affects. God
cannot affect or take Delight in the Sufferings of the most abandoned Reprobate
that ever blasphemed his Name; but, he can will that the Sinner should be
reclaimed, to Happiness, even by Suffering, when there are no other Means, in
Nature, whereby he may be reclaimed.

Could Creatures, without the Experience of any Lapse or Evil, have been made
duly sensible of the Darkness and Dependence of their creaturely Nature, and
of the Distance and Distinction between themselves and their God; could they
have known the Nature and Extent of his Attributes, with the Infinity of his
Love; could they have known the dreadful Consequences of falling off from him,
without seeing any Example, or experiencing any Consequence of such a Fall;
could they have, otherwise, felt and found that every Act of creaturely Will,
and every Attempt at creaturely Power, was a Forsaking of that eternal Wisdom
and Strength in which they stood; could all intelligent Creatures have been
continued in that Lowliness, that Resignation, that Gratitude of burning
Affection which the slain. Will of the mortified Sinner feels, when called up
into the Grace and Enjoyment of his God; could those endearing Relations have
subsisted in Creation, which have since newly arisen, between God and his
lapsed Creatures, wholly subsequent thereto; those Relations, I say, of
Redemption, of Regeneration, of a Power of Conversion that extracts Good out of
Evil, of a Love that no Apostasy can quench, that no Offenses can conquer; if
these eternal Benefits could have been introduced, without their Ground or
Foundation in the Admission of Evil, no Lapse or Falling off would ever have
been.

To make this Matter still clearer, if possible -- In the dark and the
boundless Mirror, called Nature, God beheld and contemplated, from all
Eternity, the Loveliness of his own Light and the Beauty of his own Ideas, even
those Ideas to which he had determined to impart Perceptibility, or a
Consciousness and Feeling of an Owness of Existence, in Him. He also
contemplated, therein, the whole Infinity of Possibilities, all Causes with
their Consequences in the remotest Relation, all Events that ever should or
ever could come to pass.

He saw that, without an intelligent Desire, no Creature could be excellent, or
formed in his Likeness. But he saw also that, unless such Intelligence should
be ruled by his Wisdom, and such a Desire wholly conformable to his Will, the
Creature could not be wise, the Creature could not be happy.

In the Possibility of the Creature's Desire of Independence, God saw the
Possibility of moral and natural Evil: But he saw that such partial and
temporary Evil might be converted to the Production of an Infinity of Good; and
he saw that, without the Admission of such Evil, the Good that bore Relation
thereto could not arise.

He knew that, till the Lapse or Falling off of some of his Creatures, his own
infinite Attributes could not duly be manifested, could not be duly adored in
the Glory of their Contrast. That no Creature, till then, could be duly
sensible of its own Fallibility, could be duly sensible that Sufficiency and
Perfection were solely in God, and that all Things depended on him as well for
every Quality of Blessedness as of Being.

He foresaw all the Misery that should attend upon Error; but he saw also how
amiable, how beneficial was the Sense of such Error; how it might serve to sap
the Self-Confidence of the Creature, and engage him to cast his Trust where his
Strength alone lay. And he the more willingly permitted the Sufferings of all
his fallen Offspring, as the future blissful Period was already present to him,
when the Miseries of the short Parenthesis (called Time) should be for ever
shut up between the two Eternities; and when all his beloved and rectified
Creatures should enter upon the Fullness of the Enjoyment of their God.

From the Blackness of Guilt, and the Cloud of Pains, Calamities, Diseases, and
Deaths, God saw Remorse, Contrition, Humility, Patience, and Resignation,
beaming forth into new Wonders of Light and eternal Life. He saw new Relations,
new Connections, new Endearments arise, between Creatorly Good and Creaturely
Evil, between Transgression and Redemption, Repentance and Pardon; and he joyed
(without Beginning) in calling his loved Offspring from Error to Rectitude,
from Lowliness to Exaltation, from Death into Life, from Time to Eternity, and
from transitory Afflictions into ever enduring and ever increasing Blessedness.

God foresaw, in future Worlds of new and wonderful Construction, the Frailty
and Lapse of his favorite Family of Man. He saw him sunk into the Inclemency
of outward Elements, and into the inward Darkness and Wrath of his distinct and
limited Nature; externally besieged and tempted by lying Offers of Enjoyment,
and internally rent by disappointed Desires and malignant Passions. But, he had
provided a Redemption of such stupendous Potency, as would not suffer the
perverse Creature to tear itself out of the Arms of his Affection. He had
provided a Seed of the SON OF HIS LOVE, that should take Root in Man's World of
inward and outward Evil; that should grow as a fragrant Flower, through
Corruption and Abomination, into the Freedom, the Light and the Purity of
Heaven; that should reprove his Unrighteousness, that should convict him of
Wickedness, that should convince him of Weakness, and soften him into Sorrow
for his own Transgressions; that should melt him into a Sense of the Calamity
of others; that should diffuse as a dawning Light through his dark and angry
Nature, subduing his Pride, assuaging his Passions; calling him forth from Self
into the Expansion of Benevolence, into all the Charities and Amities, the
Feelings and Offices of the human Heart thus made divine; and lastly, maturing
in him a different Nature and a new Creature; that God may be in all Men the
ONE WILL TO THE ONE GOODNESS; thereby uniting all Men, as one Man, in their
God. For deep, indeed, are all his Counsels; and all the Mazes of his
Providence will finally unwind themselves in the Rectitude and Fullness of the
Wisdom of his Love.

That a Creature, inexperienced or newly brought into Being, should stand in
the State in which he felt his Delight: Or even, that he should fall therefrom,
by attempting at something, through an own Will, and the Presumption of an own
Power; does not appear to have any Thing very wonderful in it. But that a
Creature, already fallen into the Misery and Depravity of a second and base
Nature, should rise again superior to its original Goodness and Glory; this is
the Work, produced in Time, that will be Matter of chief Amazement throughout
the second Eternity.

That Man, I say, fallen into a Body of bestial Flesh and Members, fallen into
the Properties of a dark and wrathful Nature; fallen into circling Elements of
Hostility, Distemperature and Dissolution to his Frame; that Man, I repeat it,
thus degraded and weakened, thus oppressed and assaulted from within and from
without, should yet advance and proceed through his Course of appointed
Warfare, denying his own Appetites, pulling down his own Pride, combating
Sufferings with Patience, subduing Injuries with Love, delighting to labor
under the hinder Part of that Cross which Simon the Cyrenian was compelled to
bear; conquering, rising, triumphing over Desires, Disappointments,
Tribulations, Languor, Sickness, failing Existence and Death; and All this,
without any Constraint or Violation of that Principle of Liberty which his
ETERNALLY FREE PROGENITOR imparted unto him; this indeed is a Wonder to
Cherubim and Seraphim, and, from Eternity to Eternity, the GREATEST WORK of God.

Here, Brother, said the Earl, you expressly acknowledge that Man is a free
Agent.

I acknowledge, answered Mr. Clinton, that Man has a Principle or Seed of
Liberty within him, a Power of turning, or at least of leaving his Will to the
Impulse of Good, on the one Hand, or of Evil on the Other, he could not
otherwise be accountable; and this brings me directly to your Lordship's
Question respecting the Distinction, in Matter of Merit, between Man and Man.

KNOW THYSELF, was the wisest of all the Saws in the ancient Schools; for the
most useful of all Studies, to Man, is that of Man.

MAN has been represented, by the Boastings of pagan Philosophy, as equal in
many Respects, and in some Articles superior to what they conceived of Godhead.

They define him a rational and lordly Intelligence, sole Dictator to his own
Actions, Controuler of his own Passions, and of Powers, Virtues, and Faculties,
wholly free and independent. But, what says Nature on this Head?

Man goes out of this World, even as he comes into it, quite passive and
without his own Consent. From the Womb to the Time of his maturing in Reason,
and even till some Degree of Power is awakened in him toward governing his
Appetites and resisting his Inclinations, he is as merely a sensual and servile
Machine as any inferior Animal or Brute in the Creation. His Pulses beat, his
Blood cruclates, and all the Offices of Respiration, Secretion, and
Perspiration are performed, alike awake as asleep, without any more Attention
or Care, on his Part, than if he had no Interest or Concern therein.

In the mean Time, he is begirt by outward Objects, and outward Elements, that
hold an intimate Correspondence and perpetual Communication with his Flesh,
with all his Organs, and his animal Life; exciting in him a Variety of
Appetites and Desires that he can no more resist, than a Twig can swim against
a Torrent; insomuch that, were this the Whole of the Man, with Respect to his
Appetites, he would of Necessity be a Brute, and with Respect to his Passions,
he would of Necessity be a Devil.

Thus far, my Lord, you see that Man is wholly acted upon, and does nothing but
as he is incited or impelled thereto; and were there no other Agent within him
to act upon him on the opposite Part, had he no present Friend to combat with
and control the evil Propensities of his Nature, he would be as totally a
Slave to his carnal and diabolical Lusts, as the Galley-Rower is to the Bench
whereon he is chained.

But, blessed be our all-creating, all-redeeming, and all-loving Friend, who is
ever present in us and to us, and does not leave our Impotence destitute of his
Help; who, in the Center of our old and reprobated Adam, has implanted a
divine Seed of a new Nature and a new Creature; even the renewed Image of
himself in our Souls. It is this infant Resemblance of himself in our Essence,
which God always cherishes, which he always elects, which he pursues; which he
calls upon by the Word of the Son of his Love, which he informs with the Breath
of his holy Spirit, whispering into it the still Voice of his own beatifying
Affections.

Now, though these two Seeds or Principles are so intimately united in us, that
very few observe any Distinction between them, yet no two Things can be more
opposite than they are to Each Other, both in their Natures and Propensities.
And, accordingly, the great Apostle, Paul, has specified and marked out their
separate Offices and Departments with the most exact Precision. Reach me yonder
Bible, Harry, -- Here it is. --

That which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law,
that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in
me. For I know that in me (that is, in my Flesh) dwells no good Thing; for to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not. For
the Good that I would, I do not; but the Evil which I would not, that I do.
Now, if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that
dwells in me. I find then a Law, that when I would do Good, Evil is present
with me. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward Man. But I see
another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me
into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. O, wretched Man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death!

Here, my Friends, You see, the Apostle distinguishes, most precisely, between
the opposite Natures and Tendencies of the two several Seeds of the first and
the second Adam, between the Outward and Inward, the Vitiated and Regenerate,
the Old and the New Man. The Old warring against the New, and endeavoring to
bring him into Captivity to Sin and Death; insomuch that our own evil Cain
would willingly slay outright the good Abel that is in us.

Now, between these adverse Offsprings of the earthly and heavenly Adams, our
Will, or Principle of Freedom, or Power of Election, is placed.

On the one Part, we are besieged and assailed by a World of tempting and
seducing Objects, that hold intimate Intercourse with our Flesh and carnal
Sensibilities, and impel their Influences on our Spirit, through every Organ.
While the Rulers in Darkness, enter through the said sensual Avenues, excite
their diabolical Passions within us, and begin to open a Kingdom of their own
in our Soul.

On the contrary Part, our heavenly Father is graciously pleased to act upon
us, through the kindred Seed of that divine Nature which he had implanted in
our Essence. He attracts us strongly though not forcibly; and he sheds into us
a Species of mental Feelings and Affections, to which Flesh and Blood is wholly
an Alien.

Here then, when the Will turns away, from divine Influence, and delivers
itself up to the Impulses and Operations of the evil Agents, the whole Man
becomes a Prisoner in the Regions of Darkness and Shadows of Death, and Nothing
but intense Sufferings can awake him to a Sense of the Error, Insufficiency,
and Folly of his Pursuits, and of the Loss and Horror of the State in which he
lies.

But, when the Will turns and yields itself to the gracious Drawings and
Influence of God's blessing Spirit; God opens himself unto it, and attracts it
still more powerfully, till he gradually delivers it from the Slavery of Sense,
of Sin, and of Self, into the perfect Freedom of a willing Service to Goodness.

Above all, when the Will is assaulted by violent, pressing, and permanent
Temptations; if yet, with the Assistance of supporting Grace, it strives and
struggles to maintain the Fight, and to tear itself away from the Custody of
Evil, though anguishing in the Strife, and pierced, even to the dividing of the
Bone from the Marrow; then is the Scripture fulfilled that says, the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force; then is our Jesus
in the highest Height of his Throne and Dominion; then does he deem all his
Sufferings overpaid; and he will, himself, be the Champion in the Will of such
a Champion, and he will fight the good Fight, and run the good Course, and hold
fast the good Faith both in him and for him, and he will impute the Whole of
his Conquests to the willing Instrument of his Operations, and will crown him
with the Crown of his own Glory, and will stretch out his Existence to the
Reception and Expansion of his whole Heaven within him.

Here then, my honored Brother, You have your Question fully answered touching
the Difference, in Point of Merit, between Man and Man; since no Creature can
have any Merit save so far as he opens his Will to the Impressions of the
Goodness of God upon his Spirit.

What, you will say, is this the utmost Merit that the Best of Men can boast,
that of barely yielding his Will to the Drawings and Influence of the Spirit of
Goodness? -- It is, indeed, my Lord, the very Whole of the Merit that any
Creature can have, as his own Merit; the very utmost that he can do toward
cooperating with his God, and conducing, in any Degree, to his own Salvation
and Happiness.

O, that all Men, that all Men had this Merit, my Friends! that All would open
the Gates of their everlasting Souls, and humbly and earnestly petition the
King of Glory to come in! This would lead to ever during and ever increasing
Merit; for our God would then impute his own Merits unto us, not by an outward
but inward Imputation, even the feeling Sense and Participation of his Nature,
his Powers, and Qualities within us. We should become good in his Goodness,
wise in his Wisdom, and strong in his Omnipotence. By resigning and
surrendering, to him, our dark, empty, hungry, and uncomfortable Creature; we
should gain, in lieu thereof, the Plenitude of the rich and illuminating
Creator. The Fullness of all Delight would become our Portion and Inheritance;
and the Proprietor of the Universe would be our Property and Possession.

Here Mr. Clinton paused, and his Auditors continued in a kind of respectful
Musing, as attentive to what he might further offer. At length the Earl
exclaimed, Never, never more, my Brother, will I debate or question with You,
further than asking your Advice or Opinion, to which I shall instantly and
implicilty submit, as I would to that of the highest Seraph in Heaven. Our dear
Meekly, here, and I had some former Converse on a few of these deep Subjects,
and I received much Satisfaction and Instruction from him; but he was not quite
so explicit and convincing as You have been.

Ah, my Lord, cried Meekly, were I as intimate with the Fountain of all
Knowledge, as your precious Brother is, You would not then have posed me in the
Conversation we last held on those Heads.

On the following Day, at Breakfast, Mr. Meekly took out his Pocketbook, and
produced Bank and Stock-Bills to the amount of something upward of three
thousand Pounds. He then presented them to Mr. Clinton, and said, Here, Sir, is
a little Matter toward Repayment of the Loan I had from You in Holland. I
bless, I bless my God, that he has enabled me, thus far, to approve myself an
honest Man; but, above all, I bless him for giving me once more a Sight of the
gracious Countenance of my Patron. But for You, I had miserably perished in a
Dungeon; to You, Sir, I owe my Liberty, to You I owe my Life, to You I owe the
Recovery of the Inheritance of my Fathers. With Respect to such Obligations I
am indeed a beggared Insolvent. But, my Heart is pleased with the Thought, that
the Connection between us, of Creditor on your Part and of Debtor on mine,
should remain on Record to all Eternity.

Here, the worthy Meekly became oppressed under Sensations of grateful
Recollection, and, putting his Handkerchief to his Eyes, he sobbed out his
Passion.

In the mean time, Mr. Clinton held the Bills in his Hand, and carelessly
casting his Eye over them perceived the Amount. As soon as he saw that his
Friend's Emotion had partly subsided, You have, Mr. Meekly, says he, You have
been quite a Gospel Steward, and have returned me my Own with most unlooked for
Usury, and I heartily pray God, in Recompense of your Integrity, to give You
the Principality of many Cities in the coming Kingdom of his Son. But what
shall I do with this Money, my dear Meekly? My Wealth already overflows, it is
my only Trouble, my only Encumbrance. It claims my Attention, indeed, as it is
a Trust for which I know I am strictly accountable. But I heartily wish that
Providence would reclaim the Whole to himself, and leave me as One of his
Mendicants, who daily wait on the Hand that supplieth All, who seek his
Kingdom, with necessary Things. For my Harry has enough, and more than enough,
now, in the Abundance of his noble Father. You must therefore keep these Bills
to yourself, my worthy Friend; retain, or give, or dispose of them, even as it
shall please You; whether as your Property or as my Property, it matters not
Sixpence; but, take them back, you must take them back indeed, my Meekly. And
so saying, he shoved them over from him, on the Table.

Ah, my most honored Sir, exclaimed the repining Meekly, sure You would not
serve me so! My Soul is but just eased of a Load that lay heavy on it for many,
many Years. Be not then so severe as to replace the Burden upon me. It would
break my very Heart, should you persist in refusing this little Instance of
Acknowledgment from One of your warmest Lovers.

Here, Harry found himself affected and distressed for the Parties, and, in
order to relieve them, took the Decision of the Matter upon himself.

Gentlemen, says he, I will, with your good Pleasure, put a very quick End to
this Dispute, and I offer myself to You, as your joint Trustee, to be your
Almoner and Disposer of these Bills.

As I was lately on my Rambles, through some Villages near London, the Jingle
of a Number of infant Voices struck my Ear, and turning, and looking in at the
Ground-Floor of a long Cottage, I perceived about thirty little Girls neatly
dressed in a Uniform, and All very busily and variously employed, in hackling,
carding, knitting, or spinning, or in sewing at their Sampler, or in learning
their Letters and so forth.

The adjoining House contained about an equal Number of Boys, most of whom were
occupied in learning the Rudiments of the several Handy-Crafts; while the rest
were busied in cultivating a back Field, intended as a Garden for these two
young Families.

I was so pleased with what I saw, that I gave the Masters and Mistresses some
small Matter; and I resolved, within myself, if ever I should be able, to
gather together a little Family of my own for the like Purposes.

Now, Gentlemen, here comes Mr. Meekly's Money quite in Season for saving just
so much of my own. But hang it, since I am grown suddenly rich, I think I will
be generous for once in my Life, and add as much more out of my proper Stock. I
shall also make so free as to draw on my Uncle there for the like Sum; and
these, totted together, will make a pretty Beginning of my little Project. As
to my poor Father here, he has nothing to spare, for he has already lavished
all his Wealth on his naughty Boy.

My Lord and the Company laughed heartily at Harry's little Pleasantry -- But
hearkee, honest Friend, added the Earl, you must not think to expose me, by
leaving me out of your Scheme; cannot you lend me as much, Harry, as will answer
my Quota? Yes, my Lord, said Harry, upon proper Securities, I think I may
venture. You are a Rogue, and a Darling, and my Treasure, and my Honor, and my
Ornament, cried the Earl, turning and bending fondly toward him. While Harry's
Eyes began to swim with Pleasure, and, casting himself into his Father's Bosom,
he there hid the Tears of his swelling Delight; while Mr. Clinton, and Mr.
Meekly sat, silently wrapped in the Enjoyment of the tender Scene.

When Harry was reseated, Gentlemen, says he, I must bid you adieu. I am
engaged on a Party in the Village this Morning. For this Day, I must quit the
Honor of being your Lordship's Son, and shall content myself with the Station
of One of your Vassals or Dependants; and so saying he rose, and away he shot.

Immediately the Earl rung the Bell, and Mr. John entered. John, said he, do
you know any thing of Harry's Expedition into our Town to Day? Why, my Lord,
said John, our loving Townsmen have agreed to do all the Honor they can to the
Arrival and Welcome of your honorable Brother. The Day is to be spent in
Sports; and Tomorrow is to be lighted up with the Bonfires and 'Luminations of
this very Night. There is a Football also to be, and I fancy that my Master
Harry designs to be no better than a Hail Fellow among them.

Tell me then, my good John, could you contrive so as to place us where we
might see some of these Diversions without being seen? Why, please your
Honors, the Football is to be in our Park; and I can raise a Stage of Boards
where, by the Help of a Step Ladder, your Honors may get up, and peep over,
and so see all that passes. Get it done then, get it done, good John,
immediately.

When John had gone out to execute his Commission, I believe Sir, said Meekly
to Mr. Clinton, that there is not such a Boy, as your Nephew, no, not in the
whole Universe; every Look and Accent, every Motion, Fiber and Member, so
wonderfully answering, to the Meekness and Modesty, the Honor, the Galantry
and Intrepedity of his Spirit. He shrinks from Praise, he is ashamed before it;
and yet his Words sink, as Balm on the Heart, and his Actions compel People to
affront him with rejected Honors wherever he goes. While I look on his lovely
and lowly Countenance, and inwardly embrace him as I would a Part or Portion of
my God; I secretly say to myself, you are a Proof, my Harry, that the lower the
Roots of Humility strike into the Depths beneath, the more the exalted Branches
ascend the Heights of Heaven! I attend, I study him, as well for my Instruction
as Delight, and look upon and revere him, as the most perfect Copy that ever
yet was taken of the omnipotent Babe in the Manger.

The other Day, he preserved his noble Father and me from being rent in Pieces
by a mad and foaming Monster of a Mastiff. But, his Calmness of Courage with
his Quickness of Action, his Prowess and Power, on that Occasion, exceeded all
that I ever met with in Fable. Pray, my Lord, have you not yet told you Brother
of that wonderful Incident? No indeed, said the Earl, my Harry continued with
us, till within this Minute, and I was cautious of offending him by mentioning
the Matter before him. For, he can scarce bear to be thanked for the Charity
that he gives, and much less to be praised for any Virtue or Accomplishment. O,
my Brother, my Brother, what do I not owe you? a Debt immense indeed, never,
never, to be paid, for this precious, this inestimable Treasure of a Boy!

Ah, my Lord, cried Mr. Clinton, I am already overpaid; your Pearl has overpaid
me for all my polishing. Nay, I am become his Debtor, I am indebted to him for
my Life, if that were a Thing of Value. It is now about three Weeks since he
delivered me from the greatest Peril I ever was in, and in the wonderful Manner
I am going to tell you.

The Day before he set out for this Place, I desired him to take a Walk with me
in the Fields, where I inteded gradually to discover to him the heavy Tidings
of the Death of his Mother and Brother.

Just as I began to open the Matter to him, I heard a sudden and terrifying
Roar, and turning my Eye to the Place from whence it came, I perceived a
monstrous Bull, tearing the Ground with his Foot, and denouncing his Wrath in
the Voice of Thunder, when, quitting a few Kine among whom he stood, he made
directly at us. Instantly I cried out to Harry, and charged him to fly for his
Life, but instead of obeying me, he advanced with a hasty Pace to meet the
enraged Animal.

Never was I in such a Pannic as I then was for our precious Boy. I shook from
Head to Foot, and was just going to drop, when the furious Beast stooped his
Head to dash our Child to Pieces; but Harry, quick as Thought, laid hold on a
Horn with one of his Hands, and rising into the Air, threw himself astride upon
the Creature's Neck.

The Bull plunged, and tossed, and tore about at a frantic Rate, endeavoring
to disencumber himself of his Rider, while Harry took out his Penknife and
urged him to greater Madness by pricking him with the Point. At length the
Monster, all panting, and white with Foam, stood still as a Post. When Harry,
stooping, made Way through his Hide, opened the jugular Vein, and cut his
Windpipe in two, and, after some imperfect Roars, the Creature sunk breathless
beneath him.

Think of my Transports then, my Brother, when I saw my Hero safe and smilingly
triumphant. I said and did Things, I believe, that were quite beside my Reason;
but I shall not be so readily alarmed for him, hereafter, as I see that his
Action, Intrepidity, and Presence of Mind, make him more than a Match for any
living Creature.

In some Time after, John returned and gave his Lord Notice that their Station
was prepared, whereupon our Company issued forth and ascended their Seat of
Eminence, where, through the Cover of some Trees, they could see and observe
without being observed.

After they had been seated and had talked awhile, of Truth, the LORD, OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS, of Heart felt Peace, and the fearful looking out for Judgment
from the God of Love, a promiscuous Crowd of many Hundreds of Old and Young,
Male, and Female, entered and flooded the Park.

As All thronged about Harry with an affectionate Familiarity; he appointed
that Football should begin the Sports; and, two Champions being chosen, Each of
them chose his Man, and that Man Another, alternately, till about forty
strenuous and active Youths were ranged on either Side.

The Field was then divided, and the Ball being tossed aloft in the Midst, they
All mingled and jostled together, like Hailstones; till, after much running,
wrestling and sweating, two Games were successively lost on the Side of the
Party where Harry had ranged himself.

Ah, cried the Earl, my poor Harry, I find, is not accustomed to rude Sports of
this Kind; whereupon Mr. Clinton laughed and cried, he is a Rogue, he is a
Rogue, as you will quickly see, my Lord.

Master Harry, Master Harry, exclaimed his Associates, had you staid among us,
instead of going to that dull and heavy heeled London, we would have taught you
to play Football better than you do.

I never play right, answered Harry, but when the Girls are on my Side. And
here I lay a Wager of twenty Guineas, in Hands of my Daddy Dobson, that, give
me but my Choice, Twenty of these pretty Lasses, and I will beat your two
Parties of Fourscore from one Barrier to the other. What say you, Polly Truck,
will you be on my Side? I will side with your Honor against the World, cried
Polly, and away went her Clothes to her Jacket and under Petticoat.

On this facetious Proposal of our Hero's, a loud Roar and Laugh was set up,
that lasted a long Time. Well, well, Gentlemen, said Harry, I will give you
leave to double your Laugh as soon as you are Winners. In the mean Time, my
good Polly, be pleased to choose me out the rest of our fair Fellows at
Football.

When this was done, Harry took them All, both Males and Females, to the
extremity of the Barrier just opposite to his Father, extending to about a Mile
in Length; and, while the Girls stood panting through Fear and Emulation behind
him, he took the Ball in Hand, and, throwing it into the Air, gave it a Kick,
as it descended, aloof from his Adversaries who were ranged directly against
him, and then following it, like a Bullet, he gave it another Kick before it
touched the Ground, and pursued and pursued it, with astonishing Rapidity, till
he gave it the last Kick, high over the Trees that reached high over the Wall
and over the Heads of his Parents.

In the mean Time, Polly Truck, had followed her beloved Patron with all
imaginable Zeal and Speed, and had overrun all the Lads by near a Furlong. At
last she came up to Harry panting and quite spent, and wished to wish him much
Joy but was not able.

While these Things were in Agitation, our Company beheld All from behind their
Cover, and, as Harry approached, their Hearts beat a quick and equal Measure
with his Feet, even with such Emotions as Virgil ascribes to the Bosom of
Latona, while she beholds and contemplates her fair Daughter Dian so eminently
transcending the Choruses of her Nymphs in Grace, Beauty, and Excellence.

As soon as Polly Truck was come to her Speech, Laws, your Honor! says she,
where in the World do you contrive to hide your Wings? I have nine Holland
Smocks that I won by running at nine Wakes, and never was beaten before, in my
Life. Harry laughed, and gave his quondam Playfellow a friendly Shake of the
Hand.

The Company now began to come in apace, though yet awhile incapable of
Utterance; but, gathering about Harry, they silently eyed him from Head to
Foot, and beheld him with a Kind of venerating Astonishment. At last, young
Felster (the Wit of the Town) cries, I have always heared, till now, that All
were Fellows at Football, but here is One, I am sure, who has no Fellow. I will
bet upon his Head, or rather on his Heels, against the ninety-nine Shires, and
desire no better than Cripples to side him.

At length Old and Young, Men and Maidens, got once more together; and the
Question was started concerning the next Sports upon which they should enter,
when they beheld a mighty Giant approaching with Strides that would have suited
the Arch of a River. He was called, by way of Eminence, the great Roger of
Rosstown, and was accompanied by his Kinsman, Pelt the Tanner.

As soon as Roger came up, he very affectionately saluted those of his
Acquaintance, asking, what Sport have ye got forward, my brave Boys? The best
Sport, answered Jack Felster, would be to see your Highness, Mr. Roger, get a
Fall before Night. That Man, cried Pelt, does not step on English Ground who
will ever be able to crack of that Feat. Why, as to that Matter, said Roger,
though I rose early this Morning, I have a strong Fancy that I am up for the
whole Day. Tom Truck, cries Felster, if you will get on one Side of him, I will
get on 'tother, and try what Hand we can make of this famous Champion.

Accordingly the Attack began; but Roger smiled superior, and handled and
played them together as a Show-Man plays his Puppits. Another Wrestler was then
added, and then Another, but the Four could no more move him than if he were a
Tower; while he lifted them up, in Turns, and laid them successively on the
Ground, with the best natured Caution.

Harry then came smilingly up and said, Mr. Roger if you will be so kind to teach
me the Art of Wrestling, I will make you a Present of twenty Guineas for your
Pains, my Daddy Dobson there has the Money in his Pocket. Roger here surveyed
our Hero with the most inquisitive Attention. I rejoice to see your Honor,
says he, with all my Heart; and indeed, it was for that only Purpose that I
came here to Day, having already heard the Story of my Cousin's great Mastiff.
But, Sir, as you were proposing, and as I honestly think, you may do
wonderfully well for a Wrestler of Quality; for you are exceeding finely made
as any Thing can possibly be for the Volume of you; and, as the Jockeys say,
are the prettiest Fellow of your Inches I ever set my Eyes on. But, you want
something of my Bulk, Master, to give you the full Powers. However, I thank
your Honor for your generous Proffer, I am ready to enter on my Office
whenever you please; and I hope to make the very most of the little Matter that
is in you.

They then grappled, not as Combatants, but as Tutor and Pupil, and the Rogue
Harry submitted himself, as a pliant Twig in his Hands, while Roger continued
to initiate him in this Trip and that Trip, and in the various Methods of
assailing and evading. When Harry, perceiving his Instructor a little
overpoised, suddenly gave him an inside Foot, and a Push at the same Instant
toward the Part to which he inclined. -- Strait, like a Promontory sapped with
all its Pines, nine Paces huge the Giant sidelong veered, the tenth, on bended
Knee, his mighty Arm upstaid. -- Amazement filled the rustic Powers, to see
with such Slight moved their Mightiest, and a universal Shout rent the wide
Welkin.

Roger rose and returned something abashed at his Foil; but said, with apparent
good Humor, I am sorry that I have not twenty Guineas in my Pocket to pay your
Honor, for showing me that same Trip. However, I hope you will give me one
Turn more for the Victory. I now engage you, as a Learner, not as a Teacher. As
you will, says Harry.

Here, Roger laid hold on Harry, with a truly hostile Gripe, while Harry seized
his brawny Muscles, as with little Cramps of Steel. Then was seen, on either
Side, the long calculated Proportions of Weight against Action, and of Action
against Weight. Roger several Times assayed to lift our Hero between his Hands,
and to lay him, as he had served the other Peasants, on the Ground, but could
not compel him to quit his Gripes. He then swayed him hither and thither, and
thrust him from him and pulled him to him, and hooked and tripped him on every
Side, but felt himself often staggered by the quick Efforts of Harry, while the
Scales of Contest seemed alternately inclining to either Part. At length,
Roger, beginning to find himself overbreathed, plucked his Adversary to him,
and, bending heavily forward, overshadowed and overbore our Hero to the Earth.

Great Roger then rose triumphant, and Harry also arose in the best Humor
imaginable. Mr. Roger, says he, I hold it truly an Honor that you think me
worthy of Contention, although you have conquered. But this has been a Kind of
Fling for which I don't owe you a Farthing, till you can make me of a Bulk
approaching to yourself. But come, Mr. Roger, I will not take you at an
Advantage, recover your Breath, and then, as you said to me, I hope you will
give me another Chance for the Victory.

Soon after the Combatants again engaged, and mutually exerted their very
utmost; Roger for saving his Honor, and Harry for preventing an open Disgrace
before the Face of so great an Assembly. They struggled, they put every Power
of Strength and Art to the Proof; till Roger, finding himself beginning to
fail, had recourse to his former Stratagem, and, plucking Harry suddenly to
him, would again have overlaid him; but our Hero, now aware, slipped nimbly
from under him, and setting his right Foot before the right Foot of his
Adversary, he gave a Shove, with his left Hand to the Other's right Shoulder,
and prostrate fell the great Roger of Rosstown, extended over half a Rood of
Ground.

Then, indeed, the Clamours became immoderately high; young Felster, above all
Others, grew insolently triumphant, and the Girls could scarce be detained on
the Ground, while they clapped Hands, and shouted, and sprung up aloft, in the
Congratulation of Harry's unexpected Victory.

Our Hero then very affectionately stepped forward, and gave Roger a Hand to
help him up, but he rose very slowly, as he was something hurt by his Fall. Mr.
Roger, says Harry, I am now doubly your Debtor, and will accordingly pay you
double Wages, as you have taught me, not only to throw Others, but to throw
yourself also. Adad, cried Roger, I find and feel too, that you are already but
too well taught to my Hand.

As soon as Harry had paid Roger his forty Guineas, Part of which he borrowed
from Goodman Demster, Roger seized his Hand, and kissing it ardently, he cried,
O my Conqueror, my Hero, my noble Child! throughout Life may all Enemies fall
before you, nor Death itself be able to fling my Boy!

Just then the great Bell rung loudly for Dinner, and Harry, turning and
measuring the Height of the Park Wall with a Glance of his Eye, took a short
Race, and running up it some Steps, caught hold of the Copeing, and threw
himself over, while all the Assembly poured after him a Shout of Amazement.

Harry happened to alight within a few Paces of the Stage where his Father and
Uncle sat; but not attending to that, he was hastening homeward, when Mr.
Clinton cried out, Ho, ho, honest Friend, whither away so fast? Harry stopped
and started, and turning about, looked something abashed to find that his so
highly revered Friends had been the Spectators of his little Feats and Follies;
however he advanced toward them in order to help them down, while the Earl
whispered to his Brother and said, Now we shall see how proud our Harry will be
of having overcome the famous Roger of Rosstown.

While they sat over a temperate Meal, why Harry, said the Earl somewhat slily,
the great Roger of Rosstown was but a Babe in your Hands. Ah, my Lord, cried
Harry, smiling and blushing, you are not yet rightly apprized how that Matter
stands. It cost me no less than forty Guineas to prevail upon Mr. Roger to let
me cast him; but, when your Lordship was a Boy, perhaps you would have thought
it but a small Matter for the Purchase of Honor, especially in the Eyes of the
pretty Wenches. Indeed, my Harry, said the Earl, I was a very, very naughty Boy
at your Years; and, had I been such a Fellow as you are at this Day, I should
have kept as large a Seraglio as the Sophy himself, and that also of willing
and kind hearted Girls.

Just then John entered with Tidings that an Ambassy of a Score of Wenches
waited at the Hall-Door, and were pushing before them the prettiest Maiden he
ever beheld, to be their Spoke's-woman.

Immediately my Lord ordered that they should All be introduced, and quickly
after a Clatter was heard without, crying, Indeed, indeed now, Miss Aggy, You
must and shall speak for us.

The Door was then thrown open, and a young Creature entered, coloring,
panting, and palpitating, and followed by the Group of Wenches who put her
forward before them.

The Earl, in Pain for her sweet Confusion, did his best to encourage her, and
ordered Harry to help them round with a Glass of Wine. By the Time that this
was done, Miss Aggy became a little better assured, but had not yet dared to
look One of them in the Face, but kept her Eyes bent on the Ground, as though
she had been ashamed of their Brightness.

If -- if -- my Lord, said she, (tremblingly and whisperingly) if your honored
-- your very honorable Brother is here -- we come to invite him and his
Company to our Town-Ball. -- And we will attend you with Pleasure, my little
Angel, cried the Earl. But, pray who are you, and where do you live? -- So
please You, my Father's Name is Abel Jessamin, and he is lately come Tenant to
Part of your Lordship's Estate. -- Then I will make him a Present of at least a
Year's Rent for his fair Daughter's Sake. Here, John, give five Guineas apiece
to these pretty Lasses to buy each of them a Riband. And, do you hear, bring me
twenty Guineas for this their chief Ambassadress. -- Not for the World, my
Lord, indeed I will not accept a Farthing. My Father, though poor, is very
jealous of his Honor, and should I take any thing from any Man living, he
would never suffer me to darken the Light that shines in at his Door.

Aggy then made an elegant Courtesey to the Ground, and retreated, attended by
her own Graces, and by the revereing and affectionate Regards of the Company.

Who can this Creature be, cried out the Earl, so lovely, so uncommon, such a
sweet Distinction about her! Ah, exclaimed Mr. Clinton, what a Pity it would be
that such Innocence should be seduced, and such Purity corrupted! And yet, that
is most likely to be the Case, said Mr. Meekly, since Beauty is the Bawd that
procures its own undoing, and Loveliness the very Magnet that attracts Men to
its Destruction. Harry half suppressed a Sigh, but said nothing.

The Horses were now immediately ordered to be put to, and our Company drove
into the Town, accompanied by the Acclamations of Hundreds upon Hundreds who
lined the Way.

As soon as they came to the Market Place, the Coach set them down near a
spacious Flooring that was raised, in open Air, about a Foot from the Ground,
and surrounded with Benches behind Benches, and Benches above Benches, to a
great Elevation.

When they were shown to the Seats prepared for them, they were served with a
Variety of Wines and Cakes; for our open hearted Townsmen had spared no Cost
for the Entertainment of their noble Guests and their Neighbors. The Band of
Music (the choicest that could be got) then struck up, and the Jubilee was
opened in full Triumph.

My Lord then wished, in secret, that Harry and Miss Jessamin would lead the
Ball; but, observing that his Son looked something dejected, he imputed it to
Fatigue, and suppressed his Desire. In the mean Time, the Lads and Lasses
entered upon the Stage, and several footed it away featly and with all due
Applause.

As Harry had not yet opened his Lips to the too, too amiable Aggy, nor even
presented his Hand to lead her out, she declined every other Hand that was
offered to her. At length, as the Day began to lose of its Luster. Mr. Clinton
whispered to Harry, and requested the Favor that he would dance an Entry.

The Desire of Father or Uncle was instantly, to Harry, the same as the Command
of the Grand Signior to his Slave. He rose, stood forth, and appointed the Air,
and began to move with a slow and graceful Measure. But, as the Notes of the
Tune quickened, he quickened his Motions. Either now appeared to be wholly his
native Element. No Eye could perceive that his Foot condescended to claim
Acquaintance with Earth. He trod Air. He spun around. He soared aloft like a
Pyramid of Fire; while his Limbs preserved the Measure, and his Heels traversed
each other, as he shot forward or sideways, with a Quickness that dazzled the
Sight. Till poor Aggy, in the Exuberance of her Admiration, very innocently and
very inadvertently exclaimed, Sure, sure, that Girl is not born who can deserve
to have him. All to herself.

Happily for Aggy, the Company was so intent on the Motions of our Hero, that
Few attended to her, save Harry himself, who heard what she said to the very
Bottom of his Heart.

But Aggy, utterly confounded, at the Recollection of what she had uttered,
thought that the Company and the whole World were privy to her Shame. Her Face,
Neck, and Bosom were instantly suffused with Crimson; and she did not presume
to raise her Eye to any Face, or any Object, till she gently pulled her elderly
Aunt by the Sleeve, and, stealing away, deprived the Assembly of its principal
Object and Ornament.

That Night, after Supper, while Harry joined with the Company in a Kind of
constrained Cheerfulness, they began to compliment him on the Achievements and
Honors of the Day, when Harry replied, in evident Discontent, No more, no
more, my Friends! Indeed, I never so thoroughly despised and detested myself as
I do at this Instant. And so saying, he rose hastily and withdrew to his
Chamber.

Mr. Meekly soon followed, for he was to lie in the same Room. And he sat down,
in Silence, while Harry was slowly undressing. My dear young Friend, says he at
length, I grieve to see you indisposed. Indeed, Sir, said Harry, I am not quite
as I wish, and fear I shall disturb you. Ah, my dear Boy, cried Meekly, I know
your Disorder perfectly well. I marked the Rise and the Progress, I saw the
Whole as plain as Paul's. Had Aggy Jessamin been indifferent to you, You would
have danced and conversed as familiarly with her as with any other Wench. But,
you dreaded your own Feelings, and you dreaded, still more, that those Feelings
should be betrayed to the Observation of Others. I know Aggy Jessamin and her
Father, She is indeed very lovely and very deserving; but yet She is no Mate
for you, my Harry.

Ah, Sir, cried Harry, since you have already seen so far into my Soul, I think
I had better open my whole Bosom to you, You will look down upon me, to be
sure, you will hold me in the utmost Contempt, but, no Matter for that, so You
promise not to love me the less.

Here, I am deemed a mighty clever Fellow, forsooth, at leaping high Walls, and
flinging huge Giants; while alas I am flung, myself, by the least of my own
Infirmities, and can no more wrestle against one of my Passions than if Each of
them were a Grecian Hercules.

I own to you, Mr. Meekly, that I love Aggy Jessamin, my Heart also tells me
that I shall always love her. What then must be the Consequence of my unhappy
Affection? Neither my Father nor Uncle will ever approve of our Union, and I
would rather pine to Death, than offend the One or the Other.

Should I happen to meet the sweet Girl apart, I fear, nay I feel, that I could
not be able to resist the Temptation, and, should she happen to yield, what a
Ruin must ensue! If she loved me, it would break the poor Thing's Heart to be
forsaken, and the Breaking of here is would break my Heart also. And yet, I could
never think of continuing in a criminal Commerce.

Ah, my dear Mr. Meekly, pity the Weakness of your Friend, and pity the
Ignorance that he is in of his own Spirit. My Heart exulted this very Day in
its own Humility, while it felt itself insensible to the Acclamations of the
Vulgar, and while I reflected that a few Years would soon cripple the Performer
of such trifling Exploits, or possibly render me, in old Age, the ridiculous
Boaster of the Feats of my Childhood. But, when the sweet Breath of Aggy gave
its pleasing Applause to my little Matters, Vanity and Self-esteem sunk, with
her Approbation, deep into my Bosom, and I have not yet been able to dispossess
them.

O, such is my Passion for her, that, could I get a Dispensation but for a
single Trespass, I would willingly do, for it, whole Years of hermitical
Penance in the Wilderness. But, what would that avail, my Friend, or how might
a whole Eternity atone for the Seduction of Innocence and Corruption of Virtue?

O, help me then, Mr. Meekly, help me to struggle against myself; better is it
to suffer All that the cruel Conflict may cost me, than to suffer the Stings of
that never ending Remorse which would tear my Soul for having injured the
Object of my Affection.

Meekly was in Tears, and could not answer for some time. -- Yes -- says he at
length, I will assist you in this Combat, a Combat more glorious than ever was
fought by all the Caesar's and Alexanders that ever drew Sword. And I will pray
to the Captain of our Salvation, in your Behalf; that he may sight the good
Fight both in you and for you, and finally crown you with the Wreath of eternal
Glory! But then you must be ruled, you must conform to the Prescriptions of
your severe but wholesome Physician; in short, my dear Child, you must not see
her any more. -- What, never, Mr. Meekly, never see her any more? That is hard,
indeed: -- It is a necessary Hardship; could you answer to yourself the
Consequences of such an Indulgence? -- I could not, I could not, I confess it,
my Friend. -- I will prevail upon her Father to send her far from you; and I
will look out for some agreeable and kind hearted Man who may make her a worthy
Husband, and be sensible of her Merits. --

O, you bear too hard upon me, too hard, indeed, cried Harry. What, give her to
Another? And yet that is an ungenerous Regret; for, why should I grudge that
Happiness to Another which I cannot enjoy? Well then, be it so, since it must
be so, Mr. Meekly. Take her, bear her, tear her away from my Sight, from my
Vitals! But then she must not go empty. Take for her two thousand, three
thousand, five thousand Pounds; she is welcome, she is welcome to All that I am
worth.

Here, Harry sat down and wept, and was accompanied by his Friend. But, the
Conflict was now over; and though his Heart was deeply grieved, it was much
more at Ease.

The next Morning, at Breakfast, Harry appeared to be quite composed. When the
Earl, taking a Bundle of Papers from his Pocket, turned, with a fond and
conciliating Air, to Mr. Clinton, and said: My dearest Brother, when You shall
be at Leisure to cast your Eye over this Parcel, You will find that I have not
been altogether, at least not all along, the unnatural Kinsman you had Cause to
apprehend. These are Copies of the Letters which I sent in search of You,
through several Parts of Europe, and in which I petitioned you to pardon my
past Offenses, and to return and possess yourself of your Rights in the Half of
my Fortune and the Whole of my Heart.

Precious Pledges, cried Mr. Clinton, are all Things to me that bring me any
Instance of the Affection of so dear a Brother; and so saying he put the Papers
into his Bosom.

But tell me, my ever amiable Harry Clinton, continued the Earl, where in the
World could you hide yourself from my Enquiries these twenty Years past? I have
got some scattered Sketches of your History from Mr. Meekly and my Son here,
and have been burning to learn the Whole, but dreaded to ask you that Favor,
lest the Recollection of some Passages should give You Distress. I refuse no
Pain to do you a Pleasure, my Brother.

Here, the honorable Mr. Clinton began his Story, as formerly recited, and
that Night sent his Auditors weeping to Bed.

On the following Morning, when he came to that Part of his Narrative where
Lady Maitland broke away, he proceeded as follows.

Having traveled through several Parts of France and Italy, I took Germany in
my Tour. I staid some time at Spa where I drank the Waters, and within the Year
arrived, in perfect Health, at Rotterdam.

On a Visit to Mr. De Wit, at his Villa near the City, he told me, over our
Bottle, that he had, at that Time, in his House and in his Guardianship, one of
the most extraordinary Women in the Universe. Though she is now, says he,
advancing toward the Decline of Life, she is by far the most finished Female I
ever beheld, while all she says, and all she does, give a Grace to her Person
that is quite indiscribable. She has a Youth too, her Son, with her, who is
nearly as great a Rarity as herself; and, were it not that his Complexion is
sallow, and that he is something short of a Leg, and Blind of one Eye, he would
positively be the most lovely of all the human Species.

You put me in mind, said I laughing, of the Barratarian Wench, who was
commended, to Governor Sancho, as the most accomplished Beauty within a League,
with this Exception only, that one Eye was blind, and that the Other ran with
Brimstone and Vermilion. But pray who are these Wonders?

That, said he, I either cannot or must not declare. They are evidently People
of the first Fashion, and must have some uncommon Reasons for their present
Conduct, as they live quite retired and admit of no Company.

I protest, said I, you have raised my Curiosity in Earnest; is there no
managing so as to procure me a short tete a tete with 'em? I wish there was,
says he, for I long to know how far your Sentiments agree with mine in this
Matter. Yesterday the Lady told me that she intended to go and reside some Time
in England, and that I would oblige her by getting a Person, duly qualified,
to initiate her and her Son in the Language of the Country. And now, if such a
fine Gentleman could condescend to undress himself, you might come Tomorrow,
as a Person who wanted Hire, and I might introduce you to an Interview by the
way of treating, provided you are upon Honor not to reveal any thing
concerning them or their Place of Abode

The next Morning I waited on Mr. De Wit, under the Appearance of a reduced
Gentleman, a Character that excites a Mixture of Contempt and Compassion.

The Lady received and spoke to me with that dignified Complacence, which awes
while it engages, and, while it attracts, forbids an irreverent Familiarity.
She was, indeed, every thing that my Friend had boasted of her; for though her
Person was all Majesty, her Manner was all Grace. Will you answer for the
Discretion of this young Man, Mr. De Wit? I will, Madam, says he. I bowed to
them both.

On turning, I perceived that her Son eyed me with much Attention, and I, on my
Part, surveyed him with the utmost Astonishment. He labored indeed,
apparently, under all the Disadvantages that my Friend described; but
Enchantment lurked in his Accents and in the dimpling of his Lips; and, when he
smiled, Heaven itself was infused through the fine Roundings of his
Olive-coloured Countenance.

In short, I felt such a sudden Attachment to these extraordinary Personages,
that I resolved to keep on the Deception, at least for a few Days, and
accordingly engaged with them at a stated Salary

I entered on my Province. My young Pupil, especially, began to improve apace.
And, as I was particularly cautious of observing the distant Respect that
suited my Station, I grew into great Favor both with Mother and Son.

How long, Mr. De Wit, would say, do you propose to carry on this Farce? Till I
can prevail upon them, I answered, to accompany me to England. For I feel my
Affections so tied to them that I cannot think of parting.

On a Day as I sat with my Pupil in his Apartment, he happened to let his Book
fall, and, as I stooped to take it up, the Picture of my Matilda, that was
richly enamelled, and set with Brilliants, to a great Value, suddenly loosed
from its Ribband, and dropped through the Bosom of my Shirt upon the Floor.

I stood concerned and greatly abashed by this Accident, but my Pupil, still
more alarmed, started up and, catching at it, gazed upon it intensely. Ha, my
Friend, said he, I doubt you are an Impostor. The Proprietor of this Jewel
would never set himself out to hire without some sinister Design. Who, Sir, and
what are you?

I own, said I, my sweet Fellow, that I am not what I seem, I am of noble
Delcent, and of Riches sufficient to purchase a Principality. -- And what then
could induce you to impose upon us as you have done? -- Curiosity at first, and
then the strong Inclination which I took both to you and your Mother at our
first Interview; neither did I propose to reveal myself till we should reach my
native Country, where all Sorts of Honors and Affluence attend you. -- Tell me
then, said he, whose Picture is this, a very lovely One indeed; is this the
Face, Sir, of your Mistress or your Wife? (looking very inquisitively at me.)
Ah, said I, she was once Mistress of thousands of Hearts, Nobles waited before
her Drawing Room, and Dukes near her Toilet. She was once also my Wife: But the
dear Saint is now eternally blessed in a more suitable Bridegroom.

Will you indulge me, Sir, said he, with the Story of your Loves? It may atone
in great Measure for your late Deception which, however well meant, was very
alarming.

Here I related to him the short pathetic History that I told you of my
Matilda, with which he was so affected and in such violent Agitation, that I
was quite affrighted for him and stopped several Times, but he insisted on my
proceeding.

Ah, said he, when I concluded, should I ever be consorted in the Manner that
you and your Matty were, how blessed I shall think myself! I have, says I, a
little Cousin in England, perhaps the loveliest Child in the World, and if you
will marry her, when you Both come to proper Years, I will settle ten Million
of French Money upon you. Mean Time I beseech you to say nothing to your Mamma
of what has passed. I will not, said he, unless I see a discretionary Necessity
for it.

That Night, I went to the City to settle the Affairs of my Household. On my
Return next Morning, I met Mr. De Wit at the Gate of his Court. Ah, my Friend,
said he, our amiable Guests are departed. Gone, I cried, gone! which Way, where
to, I pray you? That also is a Secret, said he, which I am not permited to tell
you. Late in the Evening there arrived a Retinue of about twenty Servants,
strongly armed and mounted, with a flying Chaise and six Horses, and a Packet
of Letters. The Lady did not go to Bed, but ordered all Things to be in
Readiness for their Departure against the Rising of the Moon, When they were
near setting out, and going to bid me adieu, Have you no Commands, Madam, said
I, for the good young Man your Tutor? Not a Penny, says she, I cannot afford
Wages equivalent to Servants of his Quality. How, Madam, said I, is my Friend
then detected? But, it was a very innocent and friendly Fraud I assure you; I
should not have imposed him upon your Ladyship, did I not know you to be safer
in his honorable Hands than in those of any Other.

I then gave them an Account of your Family, your vast Fortune, nor was I quite
silent as to your Merits, my dear Harry; and I added, that I was sensible you
would be deeply afflicted at the Departure of Persons to whom you were so
strongly attached. There is no Help for it, replied my Lady, we have Reasons of
utmost Import for not disclosing ourselves to him. Tell him, however, that we
esteem him highly -- affect him tenderly -- shall think of him -- shall pray
for him -- and -- and -- lastly -- that you saw us drop a grateful Tear to his
Remembrance.

As I could extort no further Intelligence from my Friend, Mr. De Wit, I parted
in a half Kind of Chagrin, and prepared to pursue my Fugitives, though I knew
not what Road to take, nor where to turn me for the Purpose. At all Adventures,
however, I set out on the Way to France, as they appeared to be of that
Country, as well by the Elegance of their Manners, as by their Fluency in the
Language.

I was attended by eleven of as brave and faithful Fellows as ever thrust
themselves between their Master and Danger.

On the fifth or sixth Day, as we got on the Borders of French Flanders, in an
open and desolate Way, with a Forest far on the left, a Man rode toward us on
the Spur, and approaching cried out, Help, Gentlemen, for Heaven's Sake, help
to rescue my dear Ladies, who are plundered and carried away by the Banditti.
They have already killed twenty of my Companions, and I alone am left to cry
out for Relief -- I bid him lead, and we followed!

In a few Minutes we came where we saw a great Number of the Dead and dying,
covering the Sand and thin Herbage. But our Leader cried out, Stop not here, my
noble Friends! Yonder they are, yonder they are, they have but just taken away
all our Horses, Luggage, and Coach, and are now at the Plunder. I am weak through
Loss of Blood, but will help you the best I may.

Here he spurred again toward the Enemy, but his Horse would not answer his
Courage. I then looked about to observe if any Advantage could be taken; for I
perceived that the Ruffians were still very numerous, about Thirty who had
survived the late Combat; but, seeing that the Country was quite open, and that
we had nothing but Resolution and our God to help us, I commended myself to him
in so good a Cause, and, putting my Horse to Speed, I rode full at the Foe,
confident of being well and gallantly seconded.

When the Banditti perceived us, they instantly quitted the Plunder, and
gathering into a Group, they prepared their Carabines, and discharged them full
at us as we drew near.

As I happened to be foremost I received the greatest Damage. One of their
Balls gave me this Mark in my Neck; Another passed through the Flesh of my left
Shoulder; and Another through my Hat, and left this Scar in my Head.

But, when we came in upon them, as the Romans say, comminus ense, Hand to
Hand, had they doubled their Numbers, they would have been as nothing to us. My
faithful Irishman levelled Half a Score of them with his own Hand, and in less
than three Minutes we had no Opponent in the Field. I then rode up to the Coach
and perceived two Ladies in it, pale as Death, and sunk senseless to the Bottom.

Immediately I ordered James, my Surgeon's Mate, to take a little Blood from
them, and, on their Recovery, to follow me, with all my People, and all the
Horses, Baggage, etc. to the nearest Inn. Then, feeling my Wounds begin to
smart, I took my Surgeon with me and gallopped away.

In about a League, we came to a large House of Entertainment, and, finding
myself sick and qualmish, through the great Effusion of Blood, I had my Wounds
directly dressed and, taking a Draught of Wine Whey, got into a warm Bed.

After a Night of uneasy Slumbers the Curtain of my Bed was gently drawn aside,
and awaking, I heard a Voice say, in soft Music, Ah, my dear Mamma, it is he,
it is he himself!

On lifting my feeble Eyes, I perceived a Vision at my Side, of a female
Appearance, but more wonderful and more lovely than any thing I had ever
conceived of the Inhabitants in Bliss. Her Eyes swam in Glory, and her whole
Form seemed a Condensing or Substantiation of Harmony and Light.

While I gazed in silent Astonishment, I heard another Voice say, Don't you
know us, my Son, my dear Mr. Clinton, don't you remember your Pupils, don't you
remember your blind, lame and tawny Lewis? he is now turned into that passable
Girl there, whose Honor and whose Life you Yesterday preserved at the great
Peril of your own.

Here, seizing her Hand, I pressed it to my Lips and cried, Am I then so
blessed, my honored Madam, as to have done some Service to the two dearest
Objects of my Heart's fixed Affections? Soft, says she, none of these
Transports, your Surgeon tells us that Repose is necessary for you. Mean time
we will go and prepare the best Regimen that the Place can afford for your
Nourishment. And, after that, I will send a Dispatch to my Lord, and let him
know how far, how very deeply He, and we, and all his House are indebted to you.

For that Day, and the following Week, as my Fever grew something high, I saw
no more of the Daughter, and the Mother staid no longer than to administer
something to me, or barely to enquire how I was. At length I got a Cool and
began to recover, when the former Vision descended upon my ravished Senses, the
vision of that Louisa, the Sight of whom never failed to bring Cheer to the
Eyes and Delight to the Hearts of all Beholders.

They sat down by my Side, and my Lady, taking my Hand and looking tenderly at
me, what would you think, said she smiling, of my Louy for a Wife? Ah, Madam, I
exclaimed, She would be too much of Bliss, too precious, too glorious, too
overpowering for the Heart and Senses of any Mortal. Don't tell me, cries my
Lady, in my Eyes, my Harry, you are full as amiable for a Husband as she can be
for a Wife. Beside, you have earned her, my Son, she is your own dear Purchase,
by a Service of infinite Value, and at the Price of your precious Blood. She
has told me the Story of your first Love, and the Recollection of it never
fails to bring Tears from my Eyes. But I must, hereafter, hear the Whole from
your own Mouth, with all your other Adventures, the smallest Incident will be
very interesting to me, I assure you. O, my dear, my sweet Fellow, you are to a
Hair the very Man I wish for my Louisa, the brave, the tender, gentle and
generous Heart; just the Thing I would have wished for myself, when I was at
the Age of my Louy.

But, my dearest, my honored Madam, loved and honored next to Heaven, you
have not yet told me how your Louisa is inclined. Whereupon, the bewitching
Creature, archly smiling, and blushing, and reaching forth a polished Hand of
living Alabaster, Here, she cried, I present you with this Trifle, in Token
that I don't hate you -- very much.

My Clinton, said my Lady, I have sent off my favorite Servant Gerard, with my
Dispatches to my Lord. He is the only One that remains of all my Retinue. Your
Surgeon has dressed his Wound, and pronounces it so slight as not to incommode
him in his Journey. I chose him more particularly for the Carrier of my
Purposes, as he was the Witness of your Valor, as he can testify to my Lord
with what Intrepidity you rushed foremost, into the Thick of the Assassins, and
with what unexampled Bravery you defeated, in a short Time, a Body of four or
five times your Number. These Things, I trust, will have their due Weight; for,
though my Lord is of a lofty and inflexible Nature, he is yet alive to the
Feelings of Honor and Justice, so that our Affairs have a hopeful and
auspicious Aspect. But, you are a little flushed, my Child; we will not
encroach further upon you till Tomorrow.

During the three following Weeks, though confined to my Bed, I was permitted
to sit up, and my Wounds, though not skinned, were healing apace. What
Happiness did I enjoy during that ecstatic Interval! the maternal and filial
Angels scarce ever left my Side. One Morning, when I just awoke from a
terrifying Dream, they both entered with Peace and Comfort and Healing in their
Countenances.

What is the Matter, my Harry, said my Lady, your Face does not seem composed
to that Fortitude and Complacence which is seated in your Heart. Ah, Madam, I
cried, I have been all Night tormented with the most alarming and horrible
Visions I ever had in my Life. Three times I dreamed, successively, that my
Louisa and I were walking Hand in Hand, through the Fields of Elysium, or on
the Banks of Meander, or in the Gardens of Alcinous, gazing and drinking in
large Draughts of Love from Each Other: when at one Time a huge and tremendous
Dragon, and again a sudden Earthquake, and again an impetuous Hurricane came,
and caught, and severed us far asunder.

But my Visions, my honest Friend, said the heavenly smiling Louisa, have been
of a very different Nature. I dreamed that, while we were standing on the Brink
of a frightful Precipice together, your Matilda descended, all celestial, and a
thousand Times more lovely than she appears in the lovely Portrait that you
carry about you. At first I feared that she came to reclaim you to herself;
but, instead of that, she smiled upon me and began to caress me, and taking my
right Hand she put it into Yours. Then, ascending in her Brightness, she
hovered awhile on high, and casting down upon me a Look of fixed Love, she gave
me a Beck with her Hand, as it were to follow, and was immediately lost in
Glory.

O, my dear Children, cried the Marchioness (for such she was) might I but once
see ye united, how I should lift my Head! or rather how satisfied I should be
to lay it down in Peace, having nothing further to care for on this Side of
Eternity.

That Night I slept sounder than usual, and did not awake till the Day was
something advanced. On opening the Curtain, I saw James seated in a moody
Posture by the Side of my Bed. How are the Ladies, James? said I. Gone, Sir.
Gone, gone! I cried out. Yes, Sir, gone indeed, but with very heavy Hearts, and
Both of them drowned in Tears. Here has been a large Body of the Gens d'Armes
sent for them, so that there was no resisting. Poor Gerard went on his Knees to
his Lady, to beg Permission to throw himself at your honored Feet, as he said,
and to bid you adieu, but She would not allow him. Mean time, she charged me
with this Watch and Ring, and this Letter for your Honor.

I catched at the Letter and, tearing it open, read over and over, a thousand
Times, what will for ever be engraven in my Memory and on my Heart.

WE leave you, we leave you, most Beloved of Men, and we are miserable in so
doing, but alas we are not our own Mistresses. My Lord, for this Time, has
proved unjust and ungrateful; and refuses your Louisa, as well to my Prayers;
as to your infinite Merits. He has affianced her, as it seems, to a Prince of
the Blood, and his Ambition has blinded him to all other Considerations. Be not
yet in Despair, we shall exert our very utmost to get this injurious Sentence
reversed; and if your Louisa inherits my Blood or Spirit, not all the Engines
in France will ever compel her to give her Hand to Another. In the mean Time,
follow us not, come not near us, we beseech You. Should you be discovered, you
will inevitably be assassinated, and we also should perish in your Loss, my
Son. We are distracted by our Fears for you, and it is this Fear that has
prevented us from disclosing ourselves fully to You. Keep up your
Correspondence, however, with our Friend De Wit, and through him you shall learn
the first favorable Turn that happens in our Affairs. I leave You my Ring in
Token of your being the wedded of our Heart, and Louisa leaves you her Watch,
to remind you of Time past, and to look upon, when at Leisure, and think of

your ELOISA DE -- your LOUISA DE --



Yes, I cried, ye precious Relics, ye delicious Memorandums, to my Lips, to my
Heart! Be ye the Companions of my Solirude, the Consolers of my Affliction!
sooner shall this Arm be torn off, and Time itself pass away, than One or the
Other shall be divided from my Custody.

Ah, how useless are Admonitions to the Impatience of a Lover! Fervent Love can
know no Fears. I was no sooner able to sit my Horse than I set off directly for
Paris, with this Precaution only, that my People would call me by my Mother's
maiden Name of Goodall.

As we knew not the Names or Titles of those after whom we were in search, our
Eyes became our only Inquisitors, and we daily ranged the Town, poreing into
every Carriage of Distinction for a Sight of the Mother or Daughter; and even
prying among the Lacqueys and Liveries for the Face of our Friend Gerard.

On a Day, as my valiant Tirlah and I rode a broad, reconnoitring the Suburbs,
we heard a Noise and a Shout of Distress that issued from a distant
Farm-House; and, as we hastened up, the Tumult grew louder, and the Cry of
Help! and Murder! was several Times repeated.

We instantly knocked at the Door, but were refused Admittance; when Tirlah,
alighting, ran against it and, breaking through Bars and all with his Foot,
threw the Door off its Hinges.

On entering, we saw a Man stretched on the Broad of his Back in the Floor, with
four Others about him, who were going to use him very barbarously. Stay your
Hands, I cried, I will shoot the first Man through the Head who shall dare to
proceed in this Business.

Why Sir, said a young Fellow, rising, this Man wanted to be gracious with my
pretty young Wife, I caught him in the very Attempt, and so I think it but fair
and honest to spoil him at such Sport for Time to come. Ay but, said I, you
might murder him, and I cannot suffer that. Come, my Friend, no Harm appears to
be done as yet, and if he pays a handsome Penance for the Wickedness of his
Intention, I would advise you to pass Matters over for the present. Say, how
much do you demand? Five hundred Louis d'Ors, said the Fellow; if he pays that,
he shall be quit for this Turn.

Five hundred Louis d'Ors! I exclaimed; why, all the Clothes on his Back are
not worth the hundredth Part of the Sum. True, Master, said the Peasant,
winking, but his Pockets may happen to be richer than his Clothes. Well, said
I, if he secures you in Half the Sum, I think you may be satisfied. Why,
Master, since you have said it, I will not go back. Whereupon the astonished
Prisoner was permitted to rise.

What do you say, you sad Man you, are you willing to pay this Fellow the Sum I
agreed for, in Compensation of the Injury you attempted to do him? I am, Sir,
said he, with many Thanks for your Mediation. Then, hastily putting his Hand to
his Pocket, he took out a Note on the Customs which, with some small Matter of
Cash, made up the Money, and we departed the House together.

As I was just going to mount, he came up and accosted me with Elegance and
Dignity. Sir, said he, You have made me your Debtor, beyond Expression, beyond
the Power of Princes to pay. Be pleased however to accept the little I have
about me, here are five thousand Louis, in this little Note-Book. Not a Penny,
Sir, indeed, I am by no Means in want. You must not refuse, said he, some Token
of my Acknowledgment, here is a Stone valued at double the Sum I offered you.
Then, taking from a Pocket the Diamond Button of his Hat, he presented it to
me. You must excuse me, Sir, said I, I can accept of no Consideration for doing
an Action of Humanity, and I rejoice to have preserved a Person of your
Distinction and Generosity. I then turned my Horse, and, though he called after
me, I rode away, being neither desirous of knowing or being known.

My Researches hitherto being altogether fruitless, I imagined I might, with
better Likelihood, meet my Beloved, in the public Walks, public Theaters, or
Rooms of distinguished Resort.

One Night, as I sat alone in a side Box at the Opera, intently gazing and
hungering around for some Similitude of my Louisa; there entered One of the
loveliest young Fellows I ever beheld. He carelessly threw himself beside me,
looked around; withdrew his Eyes; and then looked at me with such a long and
piercing Inquisition as alarmed me, and gave me Cause to think I was discovered.

Though the French seldom hesitate, he seemed at once backward and desirous of
accosting me. At length he entered upon Converse touching the Drama and the
Music, and spoke with Judgment and Elegance superior to the Matter; while I
answered him with due Complacence, but in a Manner that partook of that
Regardlesness for Trifles which then sat at my Heart.

Between the Acts, he turned and cast his Eye suddenly on me. Sir, says he, do
you believe that there is such a Thing as Sympathy? Occasionally, Sir, I think
it may have its Effect, though I cannot credit all the Wonders that are reported
of it. I am sorry for that, said he, as I ardently wish that your Feelings were
the same as mine at this Instant. I never saw you before, Sir, I have no
Knowledge of you, and yet I declare that, were I to choose an Advocate in Love,
a Second in Combat, or a Friend in Extremity, You, You are the very Man upon
whom I would pitch.

I answered not, but seized his Hand and pressed it to my Bosom. I conceive,
Sir, continued he, notwithstanding your Fluency in the Language, that you are
not a Native. My Name is D'Aubigny, I live at such a Place, and, if you will do
me the Pleasure of a single Visit, all the Honors, Respects, and Services,
that our House can confer, shall be yours without Reserve. Sir, said I, I am of
England, my Name is Goodall, and as soon as a certain Affair allows me to admit
of any Acquaintance in Paris, You shall be the first Elected of my Arms and my
Heart.

In a few Nights after, as Tirlah and I were turning a Corner of the Rue de St.
Jaques, we saw three Men, with their Backs to the Wall, attacked by nearly
three times their Number. We did not hesitate a Moment what Part to take. At
the first Pass, I ran one of the Assassins through the Body; Tirlah levelled
Two more with his oaken Staff, and the rest took to Flight.

Gentlemen, said One of the Three, I thank you for this brave and seasonable
Assistance. -- Roche, run for a Surgeon, I am wounded, I doubt, dangerously. --
Pierre, lend me your Arm -- Come, Gentlemen, we have but a little Way to my
House.

Though the Night was too dark for examining Features, I thought that the Voice
was not quite unknown to me. Within a few Minutes we arrived at a Palace that
retired, inward, from the Houses that were ranged on either Hand On pulling the
Hanger of a Bell, the great Door opened upon a sumptuous Hall, which led to a
Parlour, enlightened by a silver Sconce that hung from the Vaulting.

As we entered, the Master turned short upon me, and looking full in my Face,
and starting and lifting his Hands in Surprise, Great Ruler of Events! he
cried, the very Man I wished my Brother and Companion through Life, and this is
the very Man You have sent to my Rescue!

Just then the Surgeon arrived, and I heard him hastily asking where the
Marquis was. On entering, he said, I Am sorry for your Misfortune, my Lord, but
Matters may be better than we apprehend. And immediately he took out his Case
of Instruments. One of the Ruffians, said the Marquis, before I was aware, came
behind and ran me through the Back.

The Surgeon then tipped open his Lordship's Wastecoat, and changed Color on
seeing his Shirt drenched in Blood. But, getting him quickly undressed, and
having probed his Wound, he struck his Hands together and cried, Courage, my
Friends! it is only a Flesh-business, the Weapon has passed clear of the Ribs
and Vitals.

As soon as the Marquis's Wound was dressed, and that we had got him to Bed, I
fancy, Sir, said I to the Surgeon, I may have some small Occasion for a Cast of
your Office, I feel a little Smart in my Sword Arm.

On stripping, he found that a chance Thrust had entered about Half an Inch
into the Muscle above my Elbow, and had ripped up some of the Skin. But, he
quickly applied the proper Dressing, and I was preparing to take my Leave, when
the Marquis cried out, You must not think of parting, my dear Friend; You are
the Master of the Master here, and Lord of this House and of All that is in it.

The Surgeon then ordered his Lordship to compose himself as soon as possible;
and, having wished him a good Night, I sent Tirlah to my Lodgings to let my
People know that I was well and in friendly Hands. I was then conducted by the
Domestics to a superb Apartment, where a Bed was prepared, and where a small
Supper of Elegancies lay fuming on the Sideboard.

Having swallowed a few Bits, with a Glass or two of Wine, I rose and sauntered
through the Room, musing on my Louisa, heavily sighing, and nearly despairing
of being ever able to find her.

Some time after, I sat down, to undress and get to Bed, when a Number of the
Officers of Justice silently entered my Chamber, seized my Sword that I had put
off, and coming whisperingly to me, commanded me to accompany them, without
making any Noise.

I saw that it was Madness to resist, and, as I went with them, I observed that
two of the Family Liveries had joined themselves to the Officers. It then
instantly occurred that I was in the House of my Rival; that the Marquis was
the very Person to whom my Louisa had been destined; that I was somehow
discovered; and that they were conducting me to the Bastile, of which I had
heard as many affrighting Stories as are usually told of the Inquisition.

Ah, Traitor, said I to myself, is it thus you serve the Man who but now saved
your Life at the Expense of his own Blood? Let no One hereafter trust to the
bleating of the Lamb or the courting of the Turtle; the roaring of the Lion,
and the Pounces of the Vulture, may thus deceitfully lurk under the One and the
Other.

After passing some Streets, they took me to a large House, where dwelt One of
their chief Magistrates, being also a Member of their Parliament. Having
knocked respectfully at the Gate and waited some Time, at length we were
admitted, and they took me to a kind of Lobby, where we staid, while One of the
Posse went to advise the Justiciary of my Attendance. At length he returned
and, accosting me in a Tone of surly and discouraging Authority, Friend, says
he, my Lord is engaged and not at Leisure to Night; Tomorrow, perhaps, he may
hear what you have to plead in your own Defense. So saying, he and his Fellows
thrust me into a waste Room, and locked and chained the Door upon me, and,
laughing, bid me to warm or cool my Heels at Pleasure.

Fool, Fool that I was, said I, to quit the Side of my brave and faithful
Companions, how quickly should we have discomfited this Magistrate and all his
Host! but I must be a Knight Adventurer forsooth, and draw my Sword in the
Defense of every Scoundrel who goes the Street.

I then went and felt the Windows, to try if I could force a Passage for making
my Escape; but, finding that all were grated with strong and impassable Bars of
Iron; O, I cried, that this Marquis, this ungrateful D'Aubigny were now in his
fuilest Strength and opposed to me, Point to Point, that I might reclaim from
him, in an Instant, the Life I have given!

I then traversed the Room with an inconsistent Pace, now rashly resolving on
furious Events; and again more sedately deliberating on what I had to do. Till,
having ruminated thus for the Remainder of the Night, I at last became more at
Ease, and resigned myself to the Dispensations of All-disposing Providence,
though, I confess, with a gloomy and reluctant Kind of Content.

When the Day appeared and was something advanced, I heard my Door unlocking
and the Chain taking away, and I concluded that they came to summon me to my
Trial. But, instead of the Officers of Justice, I saw near twenty Men in the
Marquis's Livery, who silently bowed down before me, and respectfully showed
me, with their Hand, the Way out of my Prison. I followed them also in Silence,
and getting into the Street, I wished to know if I was really free, and turned
from them down the Way that led to my Lodgings; whereupon they cast themselves
before me, and, in a supplicating Posture, besought me to go with them.

Finding then that I was still their Prisoner, I gave a longing Look out for my
valiant Fellows; but, as they did not appear, I suffered myself to be
reconducted to the Marquis's Palace, and followed my obsequious Commanders into
the proud Apartment, to which they had led me the preceding Night, and where,
bowing to the Ground, they all left me and retired.

As I had been much fatigued in Body and Mind, I threw myself on the Bed,
leaving Events to their Issues, and fell into a Kind of starting and
intermitting Slumber, when I heard a Voice, at my Side, shout out, in once
loved Accents, O, my dearest Mamma, it is He, indeed, it is he, it is he himself!

On this I awoke, and rouzed myself, and lifting my languid Eyes, and fixing
them on the Object that stood before me; and are you then, I cried, are you
also, Louisa, in the Confederacy against me? -- Say nothing, you are not the
Louisa I once knew. -- I will arise, I will go forth, not all your Gates and
Bars and Bolts shall hold me, I will tear my Body and my Soul too, if possible,
from you for ever! -- Go to your Betrothed, to your Beloved! and leave me to
perish, it is a Matter of no Import -- I am yet pleased that I saved your
Chosen; as it may one Day serve to reproach you with the Merits of the Man whom
he has so unworthily treated!

I could no more. A long Silence on all Sides ensued, save the Language that
was uttered by Heavings and Sobbings. When the Marchioness, coming and casting
herself on her Knees by my Bed; you have Reason, Sir, she exclaimed, you have
Reason to reproach and to detest every Branch of our ungrateful Family for
ever! you saved myself, you saved my Daughter, and yet the Father and the
Husband proved averse to your Deservings, and turned your Benefits into Poison.
You have now saved our Son, the only One who can convey our Name to Posterity,
and yet, from the Beginning, you have received nothing in Return, save Wounds,
Pains and Sickness, Losses, Damages and Disappointments, and, at this very Day,
the most ignominious Usage, where you merited endless Thanks and everlasting
Renown. Blame my Louisa then, and me, but blame not my Son, Sir, for these
unworthy Events; he is quite innocent of them, he is shocked and distracted by
them; he respects and loves you more than ever Jonathan loved the Son of Jesse.
But he will not, he dare not see you, till we have, in some Measure, made his
Peace.

How, Madam! I cried, -- but, no more of that Posture, it pains me past bearing
-- Is it a Fact, can it be possible that the Marquis D'aubigny should be your
Son? Is he not of the Blood royal, the very Rival whom your Letter rendered so
formidable to me? and, was it not by his Order that I was disgracefully
confined in a Dungeon all Night?

No, no, said my Lady, he would have suffered the Rack first. He is in Despair,
quite inconsolable on that Account. Let us go, my dearest Harry, let us go and
carry Comfort to him of whom you are the Beloved.

Ah no, my Mamma, cried out Louisa, let us put no Constraint on Mr. Clinton, I
pray you! there has been enough of Confinement, we leave him now to his
Liberty; let him go, even where, and to whom he likes best. Once, indeed, we
could have tied this all-conquering Champion with the Spinning of a Silkworm;
but now he tells us that neitheir Gates, Bars, not Bolts shall hold him to us.

Here, I threw myself precipitately at her Feet, Pardon, pardon, my Louisa, I
cried, O pardon the misdeeming Transports of your Lover, and pardon the Faults
that Love alone could commit. My Enemies are foreign to me, they and their
Injuries affect me not; but you are Regent within, my Louisa, you sit throned
in my Heart, and the Presumption of an Offense from you makes strange Uproar in
my Soul. Well, says she, reaching her Hand and smiling through Tears, since it
is so, poor Soul, here is the golden Scepter for you, I think I must take you
to Mercy.

I caught her Hand, and impressed my very Spirit on the Wax, and my Lady,
casting her Arms about us, and kissing us both, in Turns, requested that we
should go and carry some Consolation to her dear repining Lewis.

As we entered his Chamber, the Marchioness cried out, here he comes, my Son,
we have brought your Beloved to you, yet not your Mr. Goodall, as you thought,
but One who is, at once, both your Good Angel and our good Angel, even our own
Harry Clinton, the Betrothed of our Souls.

I took my Seat on the Side of the Marquis's Bed, and looking fondly upon him,
would have enquired of his Health, but my Speech for the Time was overpowered
by my Affections. Then, taking my Hand in his, the Power of this Hand, says he,
I have found to be great, but, has your Heart the Power to pardon the Insults
and Outrage you have received in the House of him who is so deeply your Debtor?
My Lord, said I, I have already drank largely of Lethe on that Head; nothing
but my Diffidence of your Regard can offend me.

You know not, said my Lady, you know not yet, my dear Harry, how this
provoking Business came about. I will explain it in a few Words.

On our Return to Paris, and on our Remonstrances to my late Lord of the
inestimable Services you had rendered to his Family, he enquired your Character
among the English; and, notwithstanding the Report of the Nobility of your
Birth and your yet nobler Qualities, hearing also that you had acquired Part of
your Fortune in Trade, he conceived an utter Contempt for you, and took an
utter Aversion to you.

Some Time after, as he took Notice that Louisa and I wanted our Watch and our
Ring, I dreaded his Displeasure, and gave him Room to think that the Robbers
had taken them from us in Flanders; and this Report became current among our
Domestics.

In the mean Time my Lord became importunate with our Louisa, respecting her
Marriage with the Prince of C -- who was then with the Army, and her Prayers
and Tears, hitherto, had been the only Artillery which she had used in her
Defense. But, when the Couriers brought Word that the Prince was on his Return,
my Lord sent for Louisa, and gave her instant and absolute Orders to prepare
for her Nuptials. But she, full as positively and peremptorily, replied that
her Soul was already wedded, that she would never prostitute her Body where her
Heart was an Alien, and that all the Tortures of the Inquisition should not
change her Resolution. Her Father, thereupon, rose to such ungovernable Fury,
that, with one Blow of his Hand he struck her senseless to his Feet. But, when
he saw my Lamb, my Darling, all pale and as dead before him, the Tide of Nature
returned, and the Conflict of his Passions became so violent, that an Impostume
broke in his Stomach, and, falling, he was suffocated, and expired on the Spot.

Soon after, the Prince arrived. He had never seen my Daughter, but his
Ambition to possess a Beauty of whom the grand Monarch, himself, was said to
have been enamoured, had caused him to demand her in Marriage. For that Purpose
he also did us the Honor of a Visit. Louisa refused to appear; and I told his
Highness, with the best Grace I could, that she happened to be pre-engaged. In
a few Days after, he met my Son in the Thuilleries and accosted him to the same
Intent, but my Son had been previously prejudiced in your Favor, my Harry, and
answered the Prince with so cold or so haughty an Air, that further Words
ensued, they both drew, and his Highness was slightly wounded, but, as Company
interposed, the Affair was hushed up and, shortly after, the Prince was killed
in a nightly Broil upon the Pont neuf. We then wrote to our Friend De Wit to
advertise you of these Matters, and to hasten you hither; but you arrived, my
Child, you arrived before there could be any Expectation of an Answer.

Two Days ago, as I observed that my Lamb's Spirits were something dejected, I
prevailed upon her to take an Airing to our Country Villa. On our Return this
Morning, we were struck half dead with the News that our Lewis was wounded and
dangerously ill in his Bed. We flew into his Room, and were still more alarmed
to find him in a Fury that is not to be imagined, while Jacome, his old
Steward, was on his Knees, all pale and quaking at a Distance before him.
Villain, he cried, what have you done with my Friend, what have you done with
my Champion, the Preserver of my Life? -- Please your Lordship, said he,
trembling, I took him for a Highwayman, I saw my Lady's Ring and my young
Mistress's Watch in his Custody, I will swear to the Property before the
Parliament of Paris, and so I lodged him in Prison -- till -- till --

Go, Wretch, cried my Son, recall your Information, take all your Fellows with
you, and instantly bring me back my Friend, or your Ears shall be the Forfeit,
but conduct him to his own Chamber, I cannot yet bear to see him, I cannot bear
the Reproach that his Eye must cast upon me.

All afflicted, and yet more astonished, my Louisa and I sat down by the Side
of my Son, casting Looks of Surprise and enquiring Doubt on Each Other. At
length I said, what is this that I hear of our Ring, and our Watch? Alas, he is
no Highwayman who took them from us, they were our own free Gift, a Mite in
Return for a Million of Services. But do you know any thing of the Possessor? I
know, answered Lewis, that he is the loveliest of Mankind, the Preserver of my
Life, and that his Name is Goodall. Ah! screamed out Louisa, there we are lost
again; this Goodall must certainly have murdered our precious Clinton, and
possessed himself of our Gifts, he would never have parted with them while he
had Life. O my Sister, said my Son, when you see my Friend Goodall you will
think nothing of your Harry Clinton; why, why were you so hasty, so precipitate
in your Choice? a Robber, a Murderer? no. Had I a thousand Lives, I would pawn
them all for the Probity that Heaven has made apparent in the Face of my
Preserver.

It is with Shame and great Reluctance, my dearest Brother, that, at Times, I
recite Passages tending so much to my own Praise; and yet, did I omit them, I
should do great Injustice to the kind and amiable Partiality of Those who were
so fondly my Lovers and my Beloved.

But, Madam, said I to the Marchioness, did you not hint something of his
Majesty's being enamoured of my Louisa? Ah, such a Rival would be a terrible
Business indeed, especially in a Country of unlimited Power.

There is no Fear of that now, said my Lady. The King has changed his Fancy,
from young Mistresses and old Counselors, to young Counselors and old
Mistresses. But, what I mentioned was once very serious and alarming.

My Louisa was scarce turned of fourteen, when the Duchess de Choisseul
requested her Company to Marlay where the Court then was. The King fixed his
Eye on her and enquired who she was, but took no further Notice at that Time.
Missing her, however, at the next, and again at the following Drawing Room, he
asked the Marquis what became of his fair Daughter, said he had a Place in his
Eye for her, and desired, in an Accent of Authority, that he would send her to
Court.

The Marquis instantly took the Alarm. He was ever jealous of his Honor, and
singularly nice in Matters of female Reputation. He gave his Majesty a Sort of
equivocal Consent, and, hurrying Home, ordered me directly to prepare for
carrying my Daughter out of the French Dominions. The Night was employed in
hastening and packing. We disguised our Louisa in the Manner as you saw her
metamorphosed at Rotterdam, and set off for Holland before Day. The rest you
know, my Clinton, as You were the principal Mover in all our Concerns. -- But,
tell me, my Lewis, can you conjecture on what Account those Assassins set upon
you? -- I declare, Madam, said the Marquis, I cannot; perhaps they mistook me
for Another; or, now I recollect, it might be owing to some familiar Chat which
I had, the other Night, with a pretty Opera Girl, who is said to be in the
keeping of a very great Man. But, Madam, you forgot to tell my Brother how my
Father was banished, on Account of Louisa, to his paternal Seat in Languedoc,
on the Borders of the Mediterranean. Very true, said the Marchioness, and was
not recalled till Madame Maintenon was taken into supreme Favor.

But, I wonder what is become of our faithful Gerard, I thought that he would
have been the first to come and to throw himself at the Feet of his Hero.
Indeed, my Harry, he would have tired Any, who loved you less, with his Praises
and perpetual talking of you and your Exploits. -- O, here he comes. -- Step
in, Gerard. Is there any One in this Company that you remember, beside the
Family?

Gerard then advanced with a half-frantic Aspect, and kneeling, and grappling
at my Hand, seemed desirous of devouring it. God be praised, he cried, God be
praised, my noble my glorious Master, that I see you once again, and above all
that I have the Blessing of seeing you in a Place, where a Throne of beaten
Gold should be raised to your Honor. O, had I been here, all Sorts of Respects
and Worships, instead of Indignities, should have been paid to your Deservings
But, I have provided for the Hangdog Jacome, I have tied him Neck and Heels,
and tumbled him into the dark Vault.

Ay, said I, but, my good Friend Gerard, I have not yet got my Share of
Satisfaction upon him, pray show me where he is. I then followed Gerard to the
Place where the deplorable Wretch was cast; and, cutting all his Cords, I led
him back to the Company, and warmly joined his Petition for Pardon and
Restoration.

As soon as Jacome and Gerard were withdrawn. Ah, my Brother, cried the
Marquis, what new Name shall we find for a Man of your new Character? Moreover,
what shall we do with you, what shall we do for you? You have quite overpowered
us, we sink, we drown under the Sense of our Obligations. We have nothing worth
your Acceptance, save this simple Wench, and what is She in Comparison of what
we owe you? Ah, I cried, She is That without whom all Things are nothing; She
is the living Treasure, the Rachel of Rachels; seventy times seven Years were
too short a Service for her! I would not exchange this little pearly Joint of
this very little Finger for all the Gems that glow in the Mines of India, and
so saying, I pressed the precious Finger with my Lips; while Louisa turned upon
me an Eye of such ineffable Satisfaction and melting Acknowledgment, as sunk
upon my Soul and wrapped it in Elysium.

Ay but, my Harry, said the Marquis, you ought not to prize your Louy as much
as me; She did not fall in love with you at first Sight as I did. How do you
know that, honest Friend, cried Louisa. Is there a Necessity that our Tongues
as well as our Blushes should be Telltales? Are Maidens to trumpet forth their
Thoughts, like You broad fronted Men, whose Ornament is your Boldfacedness.

Thus happy, above All styled happy upon Earth, we joyed and lived in Each
Other, continuing a mutual Commerce of delightful Sensibilities and Love for
Love.

Alas, our blissful Junto was soon to be broken in upon. In a few Days, One of
the royal Pages came and intimated to the Marchioness that his Majesty required
her immediate Presence at Court. And we remained in a Kind of fearful and
fluctuating Suspense, till her Return.

As She entered, the Consternation in her Countenance instantly struck an Alarm
to all our Hearts. O, my Children, my dear, my dear Children, we must part, she
cried, and that too, speedily. Our Hour of Bliss is past, our Sunshine is over,
and the Clouds gather thick upon us, heavy laden with Wretchedness. Alas, my
Heart misgave me ever since that inauspicious Encounter the other Morning. As
we came from our Villa a great Funeral met us (a bad Omen as I have heard) Our
Carriage stopped to let them pass, and the Carriage of the Duke of Ne -- rs
drove up beside us. As we remained within a few Paces of each other, he gazed
at Louisa with such an unmanner'd Intenseness, as caused her to color and turn
aside. However, he accosted us not, nor enquired concerning us; it seems our
Arms and Livery were too sure an Indication of our Name and Quality. In short,
on my approaching the Presence, the King affected to smile very graciously upon
me, and said, I have provided, Madam, a noble and princely Husband for your
Daughter; it is the Duke of Ne -- rs. Ah, I cried, bending my Knee in a
supplicating Posture, my Daughter is already engaged by Bands of the most
endearing and indissoluble Obligations, to a Man who has preserved the Lives
and Honors of all our Family, to a Man who, I trust, by his eminent Courage
and Qualities, will become the brightest Jewel in your Majesty's Crown. Madam,
said he severely, you must withdraw your Election, I find I have ordered
Matters superior to your Merits, but my Will is the Law here, and shall be
obeyed. I rose, dejectedly curtsied, and withdrew without Reply.

Ah, I exclaimed, on what Summit does this Rival hold his Abode? I will
instantly go and scale it, and at once put an End to his Life and his
Pretensions! My Lady then, throwing her Arms about my Neck, and pressing her
Lips to my Cheek, what Romance, says she, is this, my Harry? would you at once
fight the Duke, and the King, and the whole Army of France? No, my Child,
Prudence reduces us to more salutary, however deplorable Measures. We must
part, my Harry, we must part this very Night, and my Louisa must depart with
you. My Chaplain shall, this Minute, unite you by Ties that Death alone can
sunder. Alas, my precious Babes, I little expected that your Nuptials should be
celebrated by Tears and Wailings! But, better these than no Nuptials. When You
are once joined I shall care little for myself. And, if we meet no more here,
we may yet meet hereafter, as happily as the Barbarians who tear us asunder.

The Chaplain was then summoned and, having performed his Office, no
Congratulations nor Salutations ensued, save a Kiss and a Sigh of mine on the
Hand of my Angel. The Marquis then called me, and drawing me down to him, he
pressed me ardently to his Bosom, cried O my Harry, O my Harry! burst into
Tears and dismissed me.

Mean while, all was in Bustle and Hurry throughout the Palace. No Festival was
prepared, no Bridal Bed laid. Horses, Arms, and Carriages were all the Cry, and
the Marchioness, with an anguishing Heart, but amazing Resolution, issued her
Orders with a Presence of Mind that seemed serene in the Midst of Tempest.

I then sent for my brave Fellows, with Orders to double their Arms, and to
double their Ammunition. They came accordingly. It was now within three Hours
of Day. All was dispatched, all in Readiness, the Carriages were at the Gate.
Silence sat on every Tongue and a Tear on every Cheek. I threw myself at my
Mother's Feet, I clasped, I clung to them; she wept aloud over me, but neither
of us uttered a Word. When, rending myself away, I took my sobbing Louisa under
my Arm, seated her gently in her Chariot, placed myself to support her, and
away we drove.

When we got clear of the Town, and were speeding on the Way, my Louisa started
and cried out, O, how fast, how very fast they take me from you, my Mamma!
Whither, whither do they carry me, perhaps never to return, never to meet
again! I answered not, but kissed her Head and drew her gently to me, and she
seemed more at Ease. But, after a while, I felt her Agitation at my Bosom, and
she exclaimed, From my Birth to this Hour of We, my blessed Mamma, never was I
from those dear Arms of yours; shall I ever, shall I ever again behold those
Eyes that used to look with such Fondness upon me?

Here, I could no longer contain, but taking her Hands between mine, and
weeping upon them, I said, will you then, my Angel, are you resolved upon
breaking the Heart of your Harry? O no, says she, no, not for Worlds upon
Worlds would I break that dear and feeling Heart, the Heart of my Heart, the
Heart of which I became enamoured. She then leaned her Head fondly over and, in
awhile, fell fast asleep; while my Arms gently encircled and my Soul hovered
over her, as the Wings of a Turtle over her new-begotten.

When She awoke and found herself so endearingly situated; she gave me a Look
that overvalued the Ransom of a Monarch; she kissed my Hands, in turns, she
kissed the Skirts of my Garments. O, she cried, I will endeavor, I will do my
best to be more composed. I know I ought not to repine. I am too rich, too
happy. I ought to wish for nothing more, I ought to wish for no One more; since
my Harry is so near me, since I have him to myself. -- But -- but -- And here
her lovely Lips began again to work; and the Drops that trembled in her living
Brilliants could hardly be restrained from breaking Prison. -- Soon after, the
Grief of her Heart overweighed her Spirits, and she fell again asleep into my
Arms, that opened of themselves to receive her.

On setting up for the Night, I rejoiced to find that my Louisa was something
more alive; and that her Repose on the Way had greatly deducted from the
Fatigue that I apprehended.

When we had eaten a Bit of Supper, She looked to me and from me, with downcast
Lids; and, with changing Looks and a faultring Accent began to say; Will you,
will you permit me, my Love, to be Regent for a little Time, and in a very
trifling Matter? Allow me only to be Governess for a few Days, and I promise
that you shall be my supreme Lord and sweet Master all the rest of my Life.

I swear, said I in a Transport, by that precious Head, that you are already
Queen-Regent of all my Thoughts and Actions; and that, during my Existence, you
shall dispose of all that I have and all that I am, at Pleasure.

O then, said she, my Harry, we must lie apart for some Nights. I would not
have our chaste and blessed Bridal stained by Tears and Dirges. Nay, no
Hesitation, you have sworn that I am Ruler, and I will be obeyed.

I then cast myself at her Knees and, hiding my Face in her Lap, Cruel, cruel
Louisa, I cried, I find You are not yet mine. What shall I do to earn You? But,
I will be patient, if possible; I would not, for the World, put the Color of
Constraint on the Love of my Beloved. And so I kissed her Gown, in Token of due
Homage.

Arising, I called her Maids, and desired that they would order their
Mistress's Chamber to be prepared, as also a Bed for themselves in the same
Apartment. I then secretly ordered that a Pallet should be spread for myself
before her outer Door, and, laying myself down, with my Arms at my Side, I
guarded, like the Dragon of old, the precious Fruit of my Hesperia.

At length we reached Calais, and immediately sent to the Beach to engage a
Ship for wafting us over to the Land of Freedom and Rights, but the Wind was
contrary.

Mean while the Day advanced toward Evening, and my Louisa and I sat together
in the Arbor of a little Pleasure-Garden that lay behind the House, when James
came hastening to us and cried, Hide yourself, Madam, for Heaven's Sake hide
yourself! here is the Duke de Ne -- rs with a large Party of the King's light
Horse.

Poor Louisa started up and attempted to fly, but She trembled and grew faint,
and sunk down again on her Seat.

James said I, stay and take care of your Mistress. Then, turning with hasty
Steps to the House, I recommended my Spirit in a short Ejaculation, and
entered, determined that the Duke should accompany me in Death. His Highness
was in the Parlour. I advanced fiercely toward him. So, Sir, says he, you have
cost us a warm Chase -- Heavens, what do I see! -- and, so crying out, he threw
himself back into an Arm Chair, all panting, and his Aspect working with
Distraction and Disappointment. -- Cursed Chance! he again exclaimed, are you
the Man, Clinton? -- Ah, I must not hurt You, I ought not to injure You, but,
what is then to be done? -- Where have you put my Louisa? -- But, no Matter,
let her not appear, let me not see her, I could not answer the Consequence. --
I would be just if I could, Clinton -- O Love, O Honor, how you do distract
me! -- You refused my Treasures and Jewels, Clinton, but then you have rent
from me a Gem more estimable than my Dukedom -- Help Saints, help Angels, help
me to wrestle with myself! -- Honor, Virtue, Gratitude, O, compel me to be
just! -- Tear, tear me away, while there is Strength to depart! -- Adieu,
Clinton, you are recompensed; should we happen to meet again, I may assail you
without Reproach. And so saying, he rose suddenly and rushed out of the House.

I then hastened to seek my Love, but had scarce entered the Garden, when I saw
James on his Knees before her, endeavoring to oppose her Way to the House. But
she cried, away, Villain, let me pass, they are murdering my Lord, they are
murdering my Husband, I will go and perish with him: Then breaking away from
him, she shot along like a Lapwing, till, seeing me advancing, she sprung upon
my Bosom, crying, O my Harry, O my Harry, are you safe, are you safe? and
fainted away in my Arms.

The rest of my Story, my Lord, is no way material or entertaining. The Serene
of heartfelt Happiness has little of Adventure in it, and is only interesting
to the Possessors.

Having settled my Affairs in London, and carrying my Eden along with me, I
passed into Holland to settle and be quit of Matters there also. For the World
that I wished was in my Holding, and all Things else appeared either nugatory
or encumbering.

It was there that I met our Meekly, and taking a pleasant Tour through the
Skirts of Germany, we entered France, and leaving Paris on the right Hand, we
reached the Marquis's Country Seat, situate near twenty Leagues beyond the
Metropolis.

What a Meeting, what an Interview! My Louisa sunk in Tears, for Half an Hour,
on the Bosom of her Mother. And the Marquis would put me from him and pull me
to him again, all panting with Transport and insatiate of his Caresses! It was
too much of Joy, it was Pleasure to paining. The Domestics would no longer be
estrained from their Share of the Felicity; they rushed in and, as though we
had been ^ew descended Divinities, they dropped on their Knees, they fell
prostrate and clung about us, kissed our Feet, our Hands, our Garments, and
broke forth into Cries, as though it had been the House of Mourning and
Lamentation.

On retiring, they got my Louisa's Gerard to themselves; he now became a Man of
mighty Importance among them. They crowded about him and, in a joint Voice, but
a Distraction of Questions, enquired after our Travels, our Adventures, our
good and evil Occurrences, and all that concerned us.

The Marchioness then coming, and casting her honored Arms around me, and
weeping upon me, cried aloud, O Harry, my Son, my Son, I delivered my Daughter
to you, even as Edna committed her Sarab, of special Trust, to Tobias, and I
see that you have entreated her very kindly, my Son, my Son!

As my Louisa now began to be apparently pregnant, I earnestly pressed my
precious Mother and Brother to accompany us to England, the Place where Law was
Regent, where there was no Apprehension of Inquisitions or Bastiles; and where
the Peasant was guarded, as with a Bulwark of Adamant, against every
Encroachment of arbitrary Power. They assented with Joy, and the Marquis, going
to his Escritoir, brought forth Bills to the amount of ten Million of Livres,
the Produce of some Concerns which he had disposed of for the Purpose. Here, my
Brother, says he, if I am not able to be grateful, if I am not able to be
generous, I will at least be just; here is the Patrimony to which my lovely
Sister is entitled. But, I said to the Marquis, my Louisa can admit of no
Accession of Value. Keep your Goods to yourself. Remember how Esau said to
Jacob, I have enough, enough, my Brother, these Things can add nothing to the
Abundance of my Blessings. But then, he cried, you must accept them, as a Token
of our Loves, and so he constrained and impelled them upon me.

Soon after, we passed to London, where we continued some Months, and where my
Louisa was delivered of my little Eloisa, who was said to be the beautiful
Likeness of her Father.

We then retired to my Seat near Stratford, on the fatal Avon, the chief of the
landed Possessions that Mr. Golding had bequeathed me; where we remained
something upward of five Years, happy, I think, above All that ever were happy
upon Earth. For my Louisa was perpetual Festivity to our Sight and to our
Hearts; her Eyes beamed with living and sentimental Glory, her Attitudes were
Grace, her Movements were Music, and her Smiles were Fascination. Still varying
yet exhibiting the same Delight, like the Northern Aurora she shone in all
Directions. And she sported as though she had gone to Heaven, from Time to
Time, and borrowed all her Plays from the Kingdom of little Children.

But, she needed not to go to Heaven, since Heaven was ever in her and round
about her, and that she could no more move from it than she could move from
herself. She had been, from her earliest Years, the beloved Disciple of the
celebrated Madam Guyon; and the World, with all its Concerns, its Riches and
Respects, had fallen off from her, as the Cloak fell away from the burning
Chariot of Elijah. She looked at nothing but her Lord in all Things, she loved
nothing but him in any Thing. She was the sweetest Playfellow that ever lived
for the Babe of the Manger of Bethlehem; and he was, in her Heart, a Pleasure
passing Sense, as well as a Peace that passed Understanding. Even in conjugal
Endearment, her Manner refined and chastened the Sense of Possession and her
Pudicity awed me in the Midst of Transport.

Our Friends now prevailed upon us to accompany them, in our Turn, to France;
together with our prattling Eloisa, who was become the darling and inseparable
Companion of her Grandmother and her Uncle. We again took London in our Way. I
there renewed, for a while, my old Acquaintance with my Fellows in Trade, and
they persuaded me to join them in a Petition to his Majesty for the Restoration
of some of the lapsed Rights of their Corporation, as your Lordship may
remember.

From Calais we turned and, by long but pleasant Journeys, at length arrived at
the Marquis's paternal Seat in Languedoc, that opened a delightful Prospect on
the Mediterranean. And here we continued upward of five Years more, even as
Adam continued in Paradise, compassed in by Bliss, from the rest of the World.

During this happy Period I often pressed my dear Marquis to marry, but he
would take me to his Arms and say, O my Harry, show me but the most distant
Resemblance of our Louisa, and I will marry and be blessed without Delay.

In the mean while, my Angel made me he joyful Father of a little Son, who was,
also, said to be the happier Resemblance of his happy Father. Then, though I
had long disregarded the World and all its Concerns, as I saw a Family
increasing upon me, and also considered the Poor as my appointed and special
Creditors; I resolved once more to return and settle my long suspended Accounts.

As for the Marchioness, she protested that she could not think of parting with
her little Eloisa, and that she should not be able to survive her Absence ten
Days. So my Louisa and I, and my little Richard, who was named after you, my
Lord, set out by Sea and, after a favorable Voyage, arrived in England;
comforted however with the Promise that our Friends would join us as soon as
possible in Britain.

Within the ten subsequent Months, we received the joyful Tidings that our
Brother was married to the Third Daughter of the Duke of Alenson, that they
were all in the highest Triumph, and would speedily be with us in a joint
Jubilate on the Banks of the Avon.

Soon after, as my Louisa and I rode along the River, pleasing ourselves with
the Prospect of a speedy Union with Persons so dear to us, and talking and
laughing away at the Cares of the Covetous and the Ambition of the High-minded;
a Fowler inadvertently fired a Shot behind us; and my Horse, bounding aloft,
plunged with me into the Current, from whence however I was taken, and
unwillingly reserved to Years of inexpressible Misery, of a Misery that
admitted not of a Drop of Consolation.

Mean while my Love had fallen, with a Shriek, from her Horse and lay senseless
on the Sod. Some of my People flew back, and bringing a Carriage conveyed us
gently home, where my Louisa was undressed and put into a Bed, from whence she
never rose. Her Fright had given such a Shock to her Blood and Spirits as threw
her into a violent Fever.

On the second Day, while I sat with the Physicians by her Side, James put in
his Head and beckoned me forth. Ah, my dearest Master, says he, I pray God to
give you the Strength and Patience of Job; you have great Need of them, for
your Calamities, like his, come All in a Heap upon you. Here is a Messenger
dispatched from France with very heavy Tidings, that my sweet young Lady, your
darling Eloisa, was cast away, in a Sloop, upon a Party of Pleasure, and that
the good old Marchioness did not outlive her five Days. Then lifting my Eyes to
Heaven, Strip, strip me, my God, I cried, to the Skin, to the Bone, leave,
leave but my Louisa, and I will bless thy Dispensations!

On the next Day, my little Dickey was taken ill of a severe Cold that he
caught, through want of due Attention during the Sickness of his Mother. As he
was of a florid Complexion, his Disorder fell suddenly in an Inflammation, on
his Lungs, and in less than twenty-four Hours, he went to join his little
Brother and Sisters in their Eternity. Did I not feel these Losses? Yes, yes,
my Friends; they wrung, they rent my Vitals. Yet I still lifted my Heart in an
eager Prayer, and repeatedly cried, Take, take All, even the last Mite, leave,
leave me but my Louisa, and I will bless thee, O my Creator!

Alas, what could this avail! Can an Insect arrest the Motion whereby the round
Universe continues its Course? On the fifth Day I perceived that the Eyes of my
Louisa, the Lamps of my Life, began to lose their Luster. The Breath that was
the Balm of all my Cares and Concerns grew difficult and short. The Roses of my
Summer died away on her Cheek. All agonizing, I felt and participated her
Changes, and she expired, while I dropped and lay senseless beside her.

I knew not what our People did with her or me afterward. For three Weeks I lay
in a Kind of dosing but uneasy Stupor; neither do I recollect, during that
Period, when, or whether I received any Kind of Sustenance.

At length I awoke to the Poignancy and Bitterness of my Situation. I did not
awake to Life, but rather to the blackest Gloom of the Regions of Death. And
yet it was from this Depth and enfolding of Death alone, that my Soul could
find, or would accept an Alleviation of its Anguish.

O Earth, I cried, where is thy Center, how deeply am I sunk beneath it! How
are the Worms exalted over me! How much higher are the noxious Reptiles that
crawl upon Earth! I will not accuse thee, thou great Disposer, I have had my
Day, the sweetest that ever was allotted to Man; but O, thy past Blessings
serve only to enhance my present Miseries, and to render me the most accursed
of all thy Creatures.

I then rose, and threw myself along the Floor; and my faithful and valiant
Companions immediately gathered to me. But, finding that I would not be
removed, they cast themselves around me.

All Light was shut out, save the Glimmering of a Taper, and for seven Nights
and seven Days we dwelt in Silence, except the solemn Interruptions of
smothered Sobs and Wailings.

At length my Spirit reproved me. What Property, said I to myself, have these
People in my Sufferings, or why should I burden those who love me with my
Afflictions? I then constrained myself and went and took out a Drawer. Here, my
Friends, I said, here is something that may help hereafter to dry up your
Tears. Divide these Thousands among ye; neither these Counters nor your
Services are now of further Use. Fare ye well, fare ye well, my worthy and
beloved Brothers! God will give you a more gracious Master, but -- but -- such
another Mistress ye never -- never will find! I then took Each of them to my
Arms, and kissed them, in turns, and the House was instantly filled with
heart-tearing Lamentations.

I now expected and wished to be left wholly alone, but James and two Domestics
remained against my Will. I then endeavored to seem easy, I even struggled to
appear cheerful, that I might communicate the less of Grief to the voluntary
Sharers in my Misery. O World, World, I said to myself, thou once pleasant
World, we have now bid a long an eternal Adieu to Each Other! From thee I am
cut asunder, thou art annihilated to me, and we mutually reject every Kind of
future Commerce.

Ah, how much deeper was my Death than that of those in the Tomb, where the
Wicked cease from troubling, and where the Weary are at Rest. While I was dead
to every Relish of Light and of Life, I was wholly alive to all the Gloom and
Horrors of the Grave. The Rays of the Sun became an Offense to my Soul, the
Verdure of the Fields, the whole Bloom of Nature were blasted and blasting to
my Sight; and I wished to sink yet deeper, and to own a lower Bottom to myself
of Darkness and Distress.

I no longer regarded what the World thought of me, or what it did to me, and I
left my Hairs and my Nails, even as those of Nebuchadnezar, to grow like
Eagle's Feathers and Birds Claws.

My Friend James, in the mean Time, took a Place for me in this Town, in order
to remove me from Scenes that could only serve to perpetuate or aggravate my
Misery, by reminding me of the Blessedness that I had once enjoyed.

He was now become my Controuler. I was patient and passive to any Thing, to
every Thing, and so he conducted me hither, I neither knew nor cared how.

In all this Time, though I panted after a State of Insensibility, even as a
Traveller, in the burning Desert, thirsts after a cool and slaking Stream. I
never attempted to lay a violating Hand on the Work of my Creator. I did not
even wish an Alleviation of my Misery, since my God had appointed that I should
be so very miserable.

At length, my Spirit rose from its Blackness to a Kind of calm Twilight. I
called for a Bible and, since this World was incapable of a Drop of
Consolation, I wished to know if the next had Any in Store.

As I read, the Whole of the Letter, and of the Facts contained therein,
appeared as so many Seals and Veils that removed from before my Eyes, and
discovered Depths under Depths, and Heavens above Heavens to my amazed
Apprehension. I had no Vision, no Revelation of these Matters; but the
Conviction was impressed as strongly on my Soul, as though an Angel or God
himself had revealed them to me.

How this came to pass I know not; Homer gives to his Heroes a Sight into
Futurity at the Time that their Spirits are breaking away from the Shackles of
Flesh and Blood. And it is not unlikely that the Eye of the Soul when wholly
turned from all carnal and earthly Objects, can penetrate with the greater
Scope and Clarity into Concerns that are merely celestial and divine.

I have now told ye the Whole of my dreary History, my Friends, till I met with
our Harry, and the rest our Harry can tell.

But Harry was in no Manner of Vein, at present, for entertaining or receiving
Entertainment from any One. His Eyes were swelled with weeping, his Spirits
totally depressed, and getting up, as with the Burden of fourscore Years on his
Shoulders, he retired slowly and silently to his Apartment.

Here, Mr. Meekly took the Opportunity of our Hero's Absence, to apprise the
Company of what had passed respecting the fair Aggy Jessamin. And why, my dear
Meekly, said the Earl, why would you baulk my Boy? I would rather than fifty
thousand broad Pieces get any Offspring of my Harry into my Arms, however
little it might be, legitimate or illegitimate. He is a glorious Fellow, he
cannot be debased by marrying a Kitchen Wench, although his Alliance would
ennoble a Princess. What Is your Opinion, Brother? Indeed, said Mr. Clinton, if
the Girl is virtuous, as her Countenance promises, I have no Objection.

Mr. Meekly instantly went, with these indulgent Tidings to Harry, but he shook
his Head, and said, No no, my Friend, I will not abuse their Goodness. Beside,
since I heard the Story of my Uncle's Louisa, my Passion is not quite so
violent. I have formed a perfect Idea of the Bride I would wish; and, if I get
not some One answering to the Image in my Heart, I will go unmarried to my
Tomb. Yet, as I still ardently love the sweet Girl, I would not for the World
risque the Temptation of a Meeting with her; and I am willing to pay roundly
for her Removal. Be pleased then, my dear Friend, to settle this Matter with
her Father, the stipulated Sum shall be ready, on Demand, to any Amount that
you please, if they may serve to promote her Happiness.

On the next Day, Mr. Meekly introduced to Harry a tall and comely young Man in
a peasant Dress, but of an Air and Deportment much superior to his Appearance.
My Lord, said Meekly as he entered, you must quit all further Thoughts of the
lovely Miss Jessamin. I have here brought a prior Claimant to whom, I am
confident, the Probity, the Generosity of your Heart will give Place.

Harry rose to receive him, when the Stranger, looking earnestly and amazedly
at him, cried out, Ah no, we must All give Place here, I find. Does she know
him, has Aggy seen him? I will then go and bury myself where my Heart may break
in Despair of ever reclaiming her Affections.

No fear, Sir, said Harry, reaching his Hand, give me but to know that you have
entitled yourself to her Regards, and my own Heart shall break in a thousand
Pieces, rather than oppose or disturb the Peace of two gentle Lovers.

I will give you our Story, my Lord, in a very few Words. Mr. Jessamin and my
Father Jessop served an Apprenticeship to the same Merchant, and, when that was
expired, they joined in Trade to the Levant. But, as my Father was of the more
adventurous Temper, they soon after broke Partnership. My Father traded to
Turkey and the Isles of the Archipelago; and Mr. Jessamin confined himself to
the Italian Coast.

In one of his Voyages to Genoa, he there married and begot the charming Aggy,
and, returning to London after a Number of Years, he fitted out a Ship of
considerable Force in order to convoy his Wife and Daughter, with all his
Treasures to England.

On their Way home they were taken by a French Privateer. Their Ship and rich
Cargo were sent to Toulon. And Mrs. and Miss Jessamin, with some other
Prisoners, were taken on board the Enemy's Vessel, that proceeded on her Cruise
for further Captures.

I happened, at the Time, to be on my Return homeward, in a Ship called,
WELCOME ENEMIES; she had the Appearance of a Merchant, but was actually better
fitted for War than Trade.

The same Privateer came up with us, and bearing on us, with Confidence,
commanded us to strike; but we answered them with an unexpected Broadside and,
coming to close Quarters, we nearly cleared their Deck by the Discharge of our
small Arms. Soon after, we grappled and boarded; when, hastening down to the
Cabin, I there for the first Time beheld my Aggy, in a fainting Fit, with her
lovely Head reclined on the Lap of her Mother.

As I kneeled to give Assistance toward her Recovery, she first opened the
Morning of her Eyes upon me, then turning them to her Mother, cried, Ah, Madam,
what new Misfortune has been added to our Misery? I hope we have not fallen
into the Hands of the Infidels. No, Miss, I said, you are free, you are free,
and you are freed by Hands that offer themselves of their own Accord to your
Shackles.

When we came to Port, I divided the Freight of our Prize among the brave
Fellows who had seconded me so gallantly. And, having sold the Vessel for three
and twenty hundred Pounds, I compelled Mrs. Jessamin to accept of it, as some
small Compensation for the Losses that her Family had sustained.

As soon as I had paid my Duty to my Father, and that the Warmth of his first
Caresses was over. Sir, said I, I have melancholy News to tell you. I fear your
old Friend and Partner, Mr. Jessamin, is undone, as to Trade; great Part of his
Fortune has been seized by the French, and that may prove a heavy Loss to
myself also. He has but one Daughter, and might I prevail upon her to accept of
my Hand, I should thereby become entitled to all her Father's Possessions. But,
Sir, I cried, casting myself passionately at his Feet, if the Happiness of your
Son is of any Weight with you, You will still assent to our Union, and thereby
make me the most blessed of all human Beings!

Everard, said my Father, sedately, you know I love you, and I am willing to
divide that Love between your Fancy and your Fortune. If Jessamin lays down
twenty thousand Pounds, in Hand, toward portioning your four Sisters, I will
consent to your Union. And that is what I would not do, with any other Wench,
under double that Sum.

As I knew my Father's Disposition to be as obstinate as it was affectionate, I
rose and retreated without Reply. I instantly went to Mr. Jessamin's, I found
my Charmer alone. I threw myself at her Knees. I solicited, I urged her to an
immediate Marriage. When, blushing like the Morning, when it arises as ashamed
of the Brightness that it brings, Sir, said she, we owe you all Things, I never
can refuse you any Thing that Virtue will allow me to grant. Ah, how cold is
that, I cried; I will not accept You as a Debt, my Aggy, if your Heart is not a
free will Offering, then let mine burst in sunder, they can have no Commerce
together. Indeed, says she, giving her Hand, I never had an Inclination for any
Other, and I have in the World but the one Objection to you. What is that, what
is that? -- It is, she cried, with filling Eyes, that I fear to hurt You by a
Match so very much disproportioned to your Merits.

Her Parents entered and found me still at her Feet. I rose in much Confusion
and, taking a Seat, I heartily told them what had passed between my Father and
me; and urged the same Petition to them that I had to their Daughter; when Mr.
Jessamin, recollecting himself, gave me an Answer deserving of everlasting
Memorial.

Mr. Jessop, says he, had I a Province to bestow along with my Child, you
should have it as freely as I would give, of my Water-Cistern, to a thirsty
Traveller. But here it happens that the inestimable Obligations, which you have
heaped upon my Family, are quite averse to the Promotion of your present
Desires.

In the first Place, as a Man of Probity, if I wish, one Day, to merit the
Happiness of your Alliance, I cannot consent to be a Party in any clandestine
Matter. Again, shall a Heart, full, and bursting with Gratitude, be a Partaker
in bringing either Damage or Disgrace, on the only One whom I account my
Benefactor and Patron? Lastly, shall a Father, who estimates the Honor of his
Child, as a Pearl above the World's Purchase; shall he subject her tender,
perhaps her melting Gratitude, to the Temptation of yielding further than she
ought? or even to the Temptation of binding her virtuous Affections beyond the
Power of a Retreat? This would be too severe a Tribute even for All that you
have done for us. Do not exact it, my Son. My Heart wrings under the Necessity
of rejecting your Suit. You cannot be pained as I am by this Refusal. But it is
inevitable. You and my Daughter must meet no more till these Clouds are
overpassed and that a new Light, of happier Influence, begins to dawn upon us.

I answered not. I wept where I sat for Half an Hour, I was not unaccompanied,
and I then withdrew.

But, my Lord, I begin to grow tedious in Spite of my Intentions. I returned to
my Father and requested him, in order, as I said, to get rid of my present
Passion, that he would dispatch me abroad upon another Voyage.

I had given him a very lucrative Account of my last, and that made him the
less inquisitive respecting the Prize we had taken.

He assented with Joy, as he feared that my Love might yet contend, and prevail
in the Combat against Duty. And he took upon himself the Care of equipping out
my Ship in a more gallant Plight than ever.

The Day before I went on board, I stepped to Mr. Jessamin's. My Aggy did not
appear, and I found her Parents employed in preparing for a disconsolate
Retreat to the Country. I told them I came to take my Leave, and asked if they
would send any Venture by me. The very worthy Man then went to his Desk and,
taking out the Bills of the Sale of the Privateer, here, my Everard, says he, I
have nothing to adventure with you save your own free Gift. The Remainder of
the Wreck of my Fortune is little enough to supply us with very frugal
Accommodations, in our desired Exclusion from the World and its Ways. And here
is a little Note of the Place of our Retreat, if ever, my Child, if ever -- if
ever we shall happen to meet on this Side of Eternity! O, I cried, kissing the
Bills, if I do not bring you a good Account of these Ventures, never, indeed,
shall we meet, till parting shall be no more!

We then set about taking Leave, and having several Times rushed alternately
into the Arms of Each other, we again sat down and wept, till no Tears were
left; when, rending myself away from them, and nearly blind to the Way that I
went, I departed.

Within a Year and a Half I returned, and, in a Storm, put in at Plymouth. But
notwithstanding the Intrepidity, and great Affection of my Companions; though I
had made Death and Success as Matters equally indifferent, and on one of which
I was determined; yet, our high Hopes and Enterprizings had failed us on
several Occasions, and I am come back with little more than ten thousand Pounds
for Mr. Jessamin, over the Produce of the Voyage which my Father may exact from
me.

Wherefore, with post Horses, and a beating Heart, I have crossed the Country
in Disguise, impatient, yet fearful, to know, how the Heart of the nobly
inexorable Jessamin, may be affected toward me, and this Morning, as I skulked
about the House, this Gentleman met me and, having questioned me, brought me
directly to your Lordship.

Here Harry covered his Eyes with his Hand, and musing for a Time, at length
said, I fear, my Friends, it may be difficult to bring this Matter about with
Propriety. I would not willingly affront Mr. Jessop here, by a Gift of the Sum
that is deficient to his Happiness. Neither, indeed, would it be duly delicate
in Mr. Jessop to offer, to his Father-in-law, a Penny beyond what his Venture,
so well supported by Mr. Jessop's Bravery, had acquired. You therefore, my dear
Mr. Meekly, shall be the Conduit of the Expedient that I propose on the
Occasion. I question if the War was proclaimed when Jessamin's Ship was made
Prize; but, be that Matter as it may, I trust I have Interest sufficient to
procure a Restoration the first Treaty of Peace. Do you therefore, my Friend,
get me an Order from Jessamin for L.10000, on the first of his Effects in
France, (with legal Interest however) and then take this Key and deliver to our
Friends the very utmost of the Sum required by the Father of the darling Fellow
who is now before me.

Meekly then sprung up, advanced in Years as he was, and catching and clinging
about Harry, O my Hero, my Scipio, he cried, you are the Champion whom Heaven
delights to empower to subdue itself by Violence! Go on, till the Wreath of
Triumph shall be bound to your Head in all its prepared Glories!

Mean while, young Jessop, lay prostrate, in the Oppression and Agony of
Gratitude, at the Feet of his younger Patron. But Harry gently and
affectionatly disengaging himself from them, withdrew to his Closet, saying to
his own Heart; now Aggy adieu, adieu Aggy, for ever!

For three succeeding Sundays, our Hero heard the Bands of Marriage published
between Everard Jessop and Agnes Jessamin, all which he bore with the Firmness
of a Stoic, or rather with the Resignation of a Christian who keeps a Look
forward to a more pearly Hope.

Perhaps, some may be curious to know how Aggy stood affected in regard to our
young Lord. Let it suffice to be told that she made the worthiest of Wives to
the very worthy Everard, notwithstanding that he had the Imprudence to tell her
of Harry's Regard for her, as also of the Obligations by which he had bound
them. Aggy, therefore, could not justly refuse Harry a Share in her Friendship,
and there is something extremely tender in the Friendship of a generous Female.

Be that as it may, in about three Weeks after her Marriage, as she walked,
with two fair Visitants, in a pleasant Field behind the Town, she saw our Hero
coming toward her, attended by two Servants, and galantly mounted on a proud
young Steed, whom he had undertaken to dress, and was now gracefully riding to
the Manage.

She felt a sudden Alarm she knew not why, and, as Harry approached, she turned
away that he might not recognize her. But, as soon as he had passed, she gave
one Look after him, and feeling herself discomposed by a little hysterical Fit,
she sat down on the Grass between her Companions, and wept till she was
restored to her Strength and Spirits.

In a few Days after, she set out for London, where she became the daily Idol
of her Father-in-law, and saw our Harry no more.

On an Evening, after Coffee, as the Earl stood fondly fooling with his Harry,
as one Child with Another, he turned to Mr. Clinton and said, How came it to
pass, my Brother, that Jesus suffered near four thousand Years to elapse,
before he became incarnate for the Salvation of the World, although it was by
him alone that the World could be saved?

We may as well demand of God, said Mr. Clinton, why he suffered near four Days
of Creation to lapse, before he compacted yon glorious Body of far beaming
Light. For, this Matter was barely a Type, and the Sun himself but a Shadow of
the CHRIST that was to come. But, did the World want Light, before Light became
incorporated in its illustrious Circumscription? No, my Lord. JESUS, who was
from Eternity the Illumination of the dark Immensity of Nature; Jesus who,
alone, is the living Light of Spirit, Soul, and Sentiment; the perpetual
Fountain of the Streams of Beauty and Truth; he said, LET THERE BE LIGHT! and
instantly, through the Darkness of a ruined World, the Internity of his ever
living Light kindled up an Externity of corporeal Irradiation, that has its
Effluence from him, and cannot beam but by him.

Now, as a Day is as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as a Day, in the
Sight of God; you see that the fourth Day of Creation, wherein the Light of
this outward World was compacted into the glorious Body of the Sun, precisely
answers to the four thousandth Year, wherein Jesus, the Light of Eternity was
to become embodied and incarnate in Christ the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

But, as the World wanted not Light, before the Sun opened his first Morning in
the East, neither did it want the Means of Salvation before the blessed
Doctrine of MESSIAH was promulged upon Earth!

All Sorts of Sectarians, All Persons of selfish and little Minds would make a
Monopoly of the SAVIOR, they would shut him up into a Conventicle, and say to
their God, thus far shall thou go, and no further. But he is not so to be
confined. The Spirit of our Jesus blows wide and where he lists. And he is
at once both the Purifier and Redeemer, as well of all Nations, as also of all
Nature.

Accordingly, we see that the Turks, who are wholly unblessed by true Religion
or Liberty; who live the Slaves of Slaves; without a Form of civil Government;
temporally subjected to the Will of a Tyrant; and spiritually to the Worship of
a sensual Impostor; yet want not the Feelings of our JESUS in their Heart.

Even the wild Indians, who never listened to the Toll of a Bell, nor ever were
called into any Court of civil Judicature; These want not their Attachments,
their Friendships, their Family-feelings, nor the sweet Compunctions and
Emotions of the human Heart, by Jesus, forming to DIVINE.

The Truth is that People live, incomparably more, by Impulse and Inclination
than by Reason and Precept. Reason and Precept are not always within our Beck;
to have their due Influence, they require frequent Inculcation and frequent
Recollection; but Impulse and Inclination are more than at Hand, they are
within us, and, from the Citadel, rule the Outworks of Man at Pleasure.

When the Apostle, speaking of CHRIST, affirms that there is no other NAME
under Heaven whereby a Man may be saved. And again, when he affirms that Those,
who have not received the Law, are a Law unto themselves. He intends one and
the same Thing. He intends that CHRIST, from the Fall of Man, is a PRINCIPLE OF
REDEMPTION in the Bosoms of All Living. That he is not an outward but an inward
Redeemer, working out our Salvation by the Change of our depraved Nature. That
in and from Him, alone, arise all the Sentiments and Sensibilities, that warm
the Heart with Love, that expand it with Honor, that wring it with
Compunction, or that heave it with the Story of distant Distress. And that He
alone can be qualified to be Judge at the last Day, Who, from the first Day to
the last, was internally a Co-Operator and Witness of all that ever passed
within the Bosoms of all Men.

Hence it is that, although the Christian Countries have received the two
Tables of the Laws of Christ, his external as well as internal Revelation,
(Each witnessing to the Other that the God of our Gospel is the God of our
Nature) the Nations however, who are Strangers to his Name, yet acknowledge his
Influence, they do not indeed hear, but they feel the Precepts of that LIGHT
which lights every Man who comes into the World.

My dearest Brother, said the Earl, my Conceptions are quite clear with respect
to the Omnipresence of Christ's Divinity. But, as his Body is circumscribed by
external Features and Lineaments, I can form no Notion of its being in several
Places at once. How then will it be, I pray you, at and after the last Day?
Will he be present to, and approachable only by a select Number of his Saints;
or will he go certain Journeys and Circuits through the Heavens, blessing All,
in Rotation, with his beatific Presence?

Is not the Body of yonder Sun circumscribed, my Lord? Most certainly -- It is
now, said Mr. Clinton, at a Distance of many Millions of Leagues from You, and
yet You see it as evidently and feel its Influence as powerfully as if it were
within your Reach. Nay, it is more than within your Reach, it is within your
Existence. It supplies Comfort and Life to your animal Body and Life; and you
could not survive an Hour without its Influence and Operations.

Now, this is no other than the apt Type and prefiguring Promise of what Christ
will be to his New-begotten in the Resurrection, when Corruption shall be
swallowed up of Glory and Mortal of Immortality. The same blessed Body which,
for the Redemption of commiserated Sinners, went through the shameful and
bloody Process of Scourges, Thorns, Spittings, and Buffettings; which hung six
agonizing Hours on the Cross; which descended into the Grave, and thence opened
the Way through Death into Life, and through Time into Eternity; Even this Body
shall then shine forth in ineffable Beauty and Beatitude, in effentially
communicative Grace and Glory; through the Height and through the Depth,
through the Length and through the Breadth, beaming wide beyond the Universe,
from Infinity to Infinity.

Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, will then become co-embodied in this divine
Body; they will be the Repletion of it, they will operate all Things by it. To
bring the Creator nearer to his Creatures, the invisible Godhead will then
become visible, the Infinite circumscribed, the Unapproachable accessable, and
the Incomprehensible comprehended, within the Humanity of our CHRIST.

Then will his Cross be exalted, for an Ensign to the circling, bending, and
worshipping Universe. His Wreath of Thorns will kindle all Nature with the
Dartings and Castings forth of its Corruscations. And his Reed of Mockery will
become the Scepter of unlimited Domination.

From his five Wounds shall be poured forth incessant Floods of Glory and wide
diffusing Blessedness upon all his Redeemed. Adoring Worlds, in self-Abjection,
shall strive to sink beneath the Abjection that became their Salvation. These
ever apparent Ensigns of so dearly purchased Benefits shall inevitably attract
the Wills of all Creatures, they shall cause all Hearts and Affections to rush
and cleave to him, as Steel Dust rushes to Adamant, and as Spokes stick in the
Nave whereon they are centred. There shall be no Lapse thence-forward, forward,
no Falling away, for ever. But God in his Christ, and Christ in his Redeemed,
shall be a Will and a Wisdom, and an Action and a Mightiness, and a Goodness
and a Graciousness, and a Glory rising on Glory, and a Blessing rising on
Blessedness, through an ever beginning to a never ending ETERNITY.

O Brother, Brother, Brother! exclaimed the Earl, I am enraptured, I am
entranced! -- I see it all, I feel it all. I am already, with all my
Corruptions, with all my Transgressions, desirous of being crushed to Nothing
under the Foot of my Redeemer. But he comforts instead of crushing me. O that I
were this Night, this very Moment to be dissolved and to be with my Christ!

That Night, the Earl was quite happy and pleasant, and affectionate even
beyond his Custom. He said and did every Thing that could be endearing to his
Harry and to his Friends. He caressed them at parting for Bed. He smilingly
shook Hands with all the Domestics that approached him; and, in the Morning,
was found dead, without any Notice or Warning to the Servants who attended and
lay in the Room.

A sudden and grievous Alarm was instantly given through the Family, and
quickly reached the Town, and spread through the adjacent Country.

Harry fell upon his Father's Face, and wept upon him, and kissed him, and wept
aloud, and kissed him again, crying, my Father, O my Father!

And they laid his Remains in a plated Coffin, under Escutcheons and a sable
Canopy of Velvet. And the House and the Court was circled with Mourners from
all Parts. And they mourned for him fifty and nine Days. And, on the sixtieth
Day, he was deposited in his Family Tomb; but Mr. Clinton would not permit
Harry to attend the Funeral of his Father.

Our Hero was now the Master of Millions, approaching to the Prime of Youth,
glowing with Health, Action and Vigor, of Beauty incomparable, beloved of All
who knew him, and the Attraction and Admiration of every Eye where he passed.
Yet all these Advantages, with all his higher Accomplishments, became as
Matters of no Value, they sunk and sickened to his Sense, while he felt a Void
in his Bosom, eager after he knew not what, sighing he knew not why; keen and
craving in his Desires, yet pining and languid in the Want of Possession.

What is the Matter, my Love? said Mr. Clinton, my dear Brother died in a good
old Age. Such Things should be expected, we know that they must be, and we
ought not to grieve as Persons who are without Hope.

True, Sir, said Harry, and yet it is a very melancholy Thing for a poor Man to
reflect how very rich he was a very little while ago. I lately had a dear
Brother, a dear Mother, and the dearest of Fathers, but where are they All now?
I look round the World and see nothing but yourself therein. And -- should you
too -- should you too -- Here Harry could no more. His Uncle also broke into
Tears, at the Thoughts of parting with his Darling Harry, though it were to
join his Louisa.

My Harry, says he at last, we have yet two precious Treasures left upon Earth,
if we did but know where to find them; it is your Cousin the Countess of
Maitland, and the Brother of my Louisa the Marquis D'Aubigny. Let us go in
Search of them, my Son. Next to my Louisa they are the loveliest of all Living.
They abound in all human and divine Affections, and will caress us with kindred
and corresponding Hearts.

Soon after, they set out for France and, by a roundabout Tour of short but
pleasant Journeys, arrived at Paris, where Mr. Clinton ordered his large
Retinue to his ancient Inn, and, taking only two Footmen, he and Harry went in
their Post-Chaise to the Marquis's Palace.

On the ringing of the Bell and the opening of the Gate, a single Domestic came
forth. Mr. Clinton perceived that all was dark in the Hall, and this instantly
gave an Alarm to his ever ready Feelings.

He alighted, however, and, stepping with his Harry, up the Flight of Marble,
Where is your Master, says he, where is my Brother the Marquis? Heaven bless
us, cried the Fellow, are you my Master's Brother? I have heard a Deal of and
about your Lordship, though I never was so happy as to see your Face before.
Ho! he continued, and rung another Bell, come All of You! attend the Brother of
your Lord, attend the present Master and Lord of your Household!

Immediately the Palace was in Commotion, the Parlour and Hall were lighted up,
and All seemed to have acquired a Set of Wings to their Motions.

Mr. Clinton looked with Eagerness at Each of the Domestics, endeavoring to
recollect the Features of some old Acquaintance, but all the Faces were strange
to him. Pray tell me, my Friends, says he, where is your Master, where and how
are he and his Lady, are they still in good Health, has he had any Children by
her?

Please your Honor, said an elderly Man, my Master's first Lady died of
Childbirth, and her Infant perished with her. But, he is since married to One
of the loveliest Women in the World. He is gone, a Year since, on an Embassy
into Africa; his Lady would not be left behind, we lately heard from them, they
are Both in Health; and we expect that less than a Month will bring them safe
to us; indeed, the Sum of our Prayers is for their happy and speedy Return.

What, said Mr. Clinton, are there none of my old Friends, not one of our
ancient Domestics to the fore? -- Please your Lordship, Jacome, the white
headed Steward, is still left, but, though in good Health, he is very little
more than half alive. -- Pray go and tell him that an old Friend of his is
here, and would be very glad to see him, but don't do Things suddenly, and be
very tender and careful in bringing him to me.

Old Jacome was wheeled in, wrinkled, pale, and paralytic, and all enfeebled as
he sat reclining in an easy Chair, he seemed to recover Life and new Spirits,
as they brought him forward. Bring me to him, bring me to him; my Eyes are
wondrous dim; bring me closer, that I may know if it is my very Master indeed.
Bring me but once to know that it is his sweet pardoning Face and then let me
die with all my Sins upon me, I care not.

Mr. Clinton then took him very lovingly by the Hand, my good Friend Jacome,
says he, we are both growing old I find, I rejoice however to see you once more
upon Earth. O, cried the old Man, a well known and a sweet tuned Voice is that
Voice; it is you then, it is you yourself, my Master! Alas, for all your Losses
since last we parted! I have got a salt Rheum in my Eyes of late, and I never
thought of you but it began to come down.

Here Jacome, sobbing aloud, provoked the joint Tears of his attending fellow
Servants; though they had never been Partakers in the foregone Calamities,
farther than by the Ear, whence they were now recollected and carried home to
their Hearts.

My Lord, says Jacome at last, I am not the only One that remains of your old
Servants. Your Gerard too, who (Blessings on his Hands) once tied me Neck and
Heels, Gerard too is forthcoming and near at Hand. Your Honor's wonderful
Bounty made a Gentlemen of him at once, and he is now in a high Way with a Wife
and three Children. A hundred and a hundred Times have we washed your
Remembrance with our Tears. And indeed I think your Honor ought not to send
for him, lest he should suddenly die or run distracted at your Sight.

In the mean time, One of the Lacqueys had officiously gone and informed Gerard
of the Arrival of his Patron. He came panting, and rushed forward, as it were
to cast himself at the Feet of his Lord. But stopping suddenly, and drawing
back some Steps, he nailed his Eyes, as it were, on the Face of Mr. Clinton,
and spreading his Hands, cried:

You live then, my Lord, you still live, my dearest Master! you survive all
your Deaths and Sufferings, and the Weight of ten Mountains has not been able
to crush you! -- O, the Times, the Times, my Master, never more to return! --
will there be such Times in Heaven, think you? -- Will there be such Angels
there as we once lived with upon Earth?

Here he clapped his Hands together, and set up such a Shout of bitter
Lamentation, as was enough to split the Heart of every Hearer, and, in a
Manner, to split the Graves of the Persons whom he deplored.

As soon as Mr. Clinton and his two old Friends had parted, for the Night: Tell
me, my dear Sir, said Harry, are there different Kinds of Grief, or is it,
merely, that Grief affects us in different Manners?

When I wept for my dear Father, my Mother and Brother, my Affliction was
anguishing and altogether bitter, without any Species of alleviating Sensation
to compensate my Misery. But, it was far otherwise with me to Night; when I
grieved in the Grief of your old and faithful Domestics, I felt my Heart
breaking, but I was pleased that it should break; I felt that it was my
Happiness so to grieve; and I could wish a Return of the same sweet Sensations.

The Reason is this, my Love: When you lamented your Parents, you lamented
Yourself in your private and personal Losses. Your Affliction was just, it was
natural, it was laudable. But still it was confined, it participated but little
of the Emotion that is excited by the Affliction of Others, and the Anguish was
the keener by being nearly limited to your own Bosom and your own Concerns.

But, in the Griefs of my old and loving Servants, this Night; you became
wholly expanded; you went beyond, you went out of yourself. You felt, without
Reflection, how delightful it is to go forth, with your God, in his social,
generous, noble, and divine Sensibilities. And you delightfully felt, my Harry,
that such a House of Mourning is more joyous to your Soul, than all the
Festivals that Flesh and Sense can open before you.

And now, my Child, I will finally, and once for all, lay open the very
horrible and detestable Nature of SELF in your Soul.

SELF appears to us, as the Whole of our Existence, as the Sum total of All, in
which we are interested or concerned. It is as a NARCISSUS, self-delighted,
self-enamoured. It desires, it craves, and claims, as its Right, the Loves,
Attachments, and Respects of all Mankind. But, does it acquire them, my Harry?
O, never, never. SELF never was beloved, never will be beloved, never was
honorable or respectable in the Eye of any Creature. And the Characters of the
Patriot, the Hero, the Friend, and the Lover, are only so far amiable, so far
revereable, as they are supposed to have gone forth from the Confines of SELF.

As Mr. Clinton proposed to wait the Return of the Marquis, he employed the
mean Season in Endeavors to amuse his Darling, and to dispel the Cloud of
Melancholy that continued to hang over him.

For this Purpose, he went with him to Versailles, and to the many other
elegant Environs of Paris. He also showed him the Thuilleries and other public
Walks, where our Hero became oppressed by his involuntary Attraction of all
Eyes upon him.

One Night, happening to go to the Play, without the Company of his Guardian,
as he came forth, with the Crowd, a Carriage was opened for him which he took
to be his own, and in he stepped, and away he was taken.

In the mean Time, Mr. Clinton waited Supper for him, and began to grow uneasy
when the Clock struck Twelve. At last his Carriage and Servants returned with
Tidings that they staid for him, above an Hour, at the Theater, after the Play
was over, and had ever since been in Search of him, to no Purpose.

Though Mr. Clinton was, by Nature, of an intrepid Spirit, and was still more
assured by his Reliance on Providence, he yet found himself agitated in a very
alarming Manner. He therefore retired to his Closet, and there, on his Knees,
fervently commended his Harry to the Protection of his God.

At length the Clock struck Three. Soon after, the Bell was heard from the
Hall, and Harry, entering, with a Page in a rich Livery, flew like Lightening
up Stairs, and cast himself into the Bosom of his Patron.

My Father, my Father! he cried, I have been in sad Pannics for you. I knew the
Love that you bore to your good for nothing Harry. But, indeed I could not help
it. I could not get to you till this Instant. I have been a Prisoner, Sir, and
here is my dear Deliverer.

As soon as they were something composed, and All seated; Harry proceeded to
satisfy the Impatience of his Uncle.

As I came out of the Theater, ruminating on a Passage in one of Racine's
Tragedies, I found a Chariot in the Spot where I had left my own, and stepping
heedlesly into it, I was soon set down, and hastening through the great Hall,
flew up Stairs to salute you. But, think how I was surprised, when I suddenly
found myself in the most sumptuous Chamber, perhaps, in the Universe. It was
wainscotted with Mirrors of the most perfect Polish, whose Plates were artfully
buttoned and buckled together by Diamonds and other Gems of a most dazzling
Luster.

All astonished, I recoiled, and was going to withdraw, when I was met by a
Lady who followed and accosted me. Have you Commands, Sir, says she, for any
One in this House? -- A thousand Pardons, Madam, I perceive my Error! I really
thought I was set down at my own Lodgings. -- No great Offense, Sir, but now
that I look at you again, I think you ought to pay the Forfeit of your
Intrusion, by giving me one Hour of your Company, at least. -- You must excuse
me, Madam, my Guardian would be under the most terrifying Alarms for me. -- A
Fig for Guardians, she cried, You are now my Prisoner, and nothing less than my
Friend Lewis, with his Army at his Back, shall be able to take you out of my
Hands.

So saying, she rung a Bell, and, immediately a folding Door of pannelled
looking-Glass flew open, and showed us to another Apartment, where a Supper,
composed of all the Elegancies of the Season, was served up, as by Magic, and
lay fuming on the Table.

She then took me by the Hand and, having graciously seated me, placed herself
opposite. A Number of Servants then vanished, on the Instant, leaving a dumb
Waiter of Silver behind them.

Sir, said she, we are not to have any further Company. You alone were
expected, you alone are desired, All Others are forbidden. In short, I have
seen you often at the public Walks and Theaters. You did more than strike my
Fancy, you laid hold on my Heart. I enquired every Thing about you. I know your
Rank, Title and Fortune. I made use of this Night's Stratagem to decoy you to
me, and, though there are few Women, in Europe, of equal Opulence or Dignity, I
think I cannot much demean myself by an Alliance with a sweet Fellow whom I so
ardently love. But come, our Supper cools.

I gazed at her with Admiration. She was indeed the most finished Beauty I ever
beheld. And I was inwardly flattered, and in a Manner attached to her by her
Partiality in my Favor.

After Supper, and some futile and insignificant Chat, she drew her Chair
nearer to me. What say you, my Lord, says she, fondly, am I to live, or to
perish?

Ah Madam, I cried, Love is, as a little Bird, if you cage it, it will beat
itself to Pieces against its Prison. Not that I regard your late Threats of
Confinement; my own Arm is at all Times sufficient to deliver me from your
Thraldom; but, in Truth, I am partly become a willing Prisoner to You; and Time
may, possibly, reconcile me to your different Customs.

What Customs, I pray you? Why, Madam, the Ladies, in my Country, use no Paint,
except the Rouge of Nature's Blush and the Paleness of Chastity. Love also, in
England, is a Kind of Warfare between the Sexes, just such as once happened
between the Parthians and old Rome; our Ladies conquer, by flying, and our Men
are vanquished while they pursue.

Persons, Sir, of a certain Rank, said she, are dispensed with from conforming
to little Matters of Decorum. However, if you will endeavor to adopt the
Manners of my Country, I will do my best, on my Part, to conform to those of
Yours.

So saying, she looked languishingly at me, and drew her Chair quite close;
when, by an involuntary Motion, I put mine further back. Don't be alarmed, my
Lord, says she, Women of my Condition know always where to stop. Right, Madam,
said I, but possibly you might not be quite so successful in teaching me where
to be stopped.

Cold constitutioned Boy! she cried (indignantly rising and coloring) your Bed
lies yonder, you may go to it, if you like, and ruminate till Morning on the
Danger of slighting and insulting a Princess. So saying, she swept haughtily
out of the Room, and locked me in.

During an Hour after she had withdrawn, while I walked about, considering what
I had to apprehend from the Threats of this extraordinary Woman, I heard a
great Bustling in and about the Falace; but, within another Hour All was quiet
and still again.

I then conceived Thoughts of attempting my Escape. But again, I held it
beneath me to be caught in the Manner; and so I resolved to wait till Morning,
and then to force my Passage through her Guards in open Day.

In the mean Time, I imagined that a Panel in the Wainscot stirred. And, soon
after, it was removed, and my young Friend, here, entered my Chamber on Tiptoe.
He beckoned me to Silence and, taking me by the Hand, he led me through the Way
by which he came.

We then descended a narrow Pair of back Stairs, and, groping along a dark
Entry, he cautiously unbolted a Door that opened into a Garden; and hurrying
with me, across, he unlocked another Door that opened to the Street, and out we
got, rejoicing!

Soon after, we met a Party of the Guards, who were patroling the Streets, and,
putting a few Pieces into their Hand, I requested their safe Convoy, and they
conducted us Home.

My Lords, said Perre, (for that was the Page's Name) it would be extremely
dangerous for Ye to remain another Day, or even till Morning in Paris. The
Princess is the most intimate Friend of Madame Maintenon, and through her can
do what she pleases with the King. During my Residence with her, she grew tired
of two handsome Lovers, in Succession; but they told no Tales; and no One can
yet tell what became of them.

Mr. Clinton was quite of Perre's Opinion. He instantly sent for his People.
All was Hurry, Pack and Dispatch, and, toward Dawning, they set out on a Road
that led to the Cantons. But, changing their Course again, for several
successive Mornings, they arrived at Calais by a long Tour of near five Weeks
travel.

Mr. Clinton set up at his old Inn, and after Dinner, the Host entered to pay
his Compliments. Have you any News, Landlord? Nothing at present, my Lord, all
is quiet again. But here has been a fearful Bustle about three Weeks ago. The
King's Army came down, in Pursuit of young Englishman who ran away with a Lady
of Quality from Paris. For my Share, continued he, looking earnestly at Harry,
I fear that You, pretty English Lads, will hardly leave us a lovely Wench in
the Nation. Harry looked quite secure, being wholly innocent of any present
Design on the Sex; but poor little Perre turned as pale as the Table Cloth.

I remember, continued our talkative Host, that just such another Affair
happened, when I was a Boy and Servant in this House. Here came a young
Englishman, just such another sweet Fellow as this before me; and he brought
with him an Angel of a Creature, the like of whom my Eyes never did, nor ever
shall open upon till they close in Death. After him came one of our great
Dukes, with a Party of the King's Army, and terrible Things were expected. But,
they made it up in a Manner I know not how. And my Lord Anglois carried off his
Prize in Triumph! Mr. Clinton stooped his Head, and dropped a silent Tear, but
held no further Converse with our Landlord on the Subject.

That Evening, a Gale sprung up and, going on Board, they were safe anchored,
before Morning, in the Bay of Dover.

They then mutually embraced; and Harry, catching his beloved Deliverer to his
Bosom, we are now upon English Ground, says he; welcome to my Arms, my dear
Perre, no longer my Page or Servant, but my Friend and my Brother! You cannot
conceive what Pain your Officiousness has hitherto cost me, but, there must be
no more of this; You shall hereafter be served and attended as I am, nay, I
myself will gladly serve You to the utmost of my Power and the Extent of my
Fortune.

Ah, my Lord, cried the lovely Perre, gently falling at the Feet of his Master,
if you deprive me of the Pleasure of serving You, you deprive me of all the
Pleasure that the World can afford me. If you knew the Delight I find in being
always about you, in watching your Thoughts and Motions, in looking into your
fine Eyes and there reading your Desires, before they rise to Expression, You
could not find in your Heart to deprive me of such a Blessing. Well then, said
Harry, raising him fondly in his Arms, our future Contest shall be, which of us
shall serve the Other with most Affection and Sedulity.

After Dinner, the Evening being calm and shiny, Harry took his Perre with him
along the Shore that stretches under the stupendous Cliffs of Dover. They had
not walked far when, getting out of the Sight of People within the Winding of a
Creek, a Man advanced toward them, and, taking out a Pistol, called to Harry,
and ordered him to throw down his Purse. Our Hero did not regard his Purse,
but, thinking it an Indignity to be robbed by one Man, he put his Hand to his
Sword. Hereupon, the Villain cocked and levelled his Pistol, and the faithful
Perre, observing that he was going to fire, instantly jumped in between her
Master and Danger and received the Ball into her own lovely Bosom.

Harry saw his Darling drop, and, flying all enraged at the Robber, he ran him
thrice through the Body and pinned him to the Ground. Then, flying as swiftly
back, he threw himself by the Side of his dying Perre, and gently raising her
languishing Head, placed it fondly on his Bosom.

You are wounded, my Friend, dangerously wounded I fear, says Harry. Yes, my
Lord, I am wounded just as I could wish; and I would not exchange my preent
blessed Death for the longest and happiest Life that the World could bestow. --
But, it is Time to undeceive, and eveal a Secret to you, which nothing but
death should ever have extorted from me -- I am not what I seem, my most
beloved Master! -- I am a foolish and fond Girl who, at the first Glance,
conceived a Passion for you. -- My Name is Maria de Lausanne; -- I am Niece to
that bad Woman whom you justly rejected. -- But, what did I propose by this
Disguise? First your Deliverance, my Lord, and that I effected. -- But, did I
further aspire to the Honor of your Hand? Far from it, far from it -- I felt
my own Unworthiness, I did not think you could be mated by any Thing less than
an Angel -- But then to see you, to hear you, to serve, to touch, to be near
you, to fix my Eyes on you unheeded, and, if possible, to win your Attention by
the little Offices of my Fondness, this was my Happiness, the Whole of the
Heaven that I proposed upon Earth -- I have had it, I have enjoyed it; -- and I
ought to die content -- But, alas, to part from you, there is the Pang of
Pangs. -- O, if this Day merits any Thing, by the Offer of my own Life for the
Preservation of my Beloved. -- Then cause my chaste Clay to be kindly deposited
in the Tomb of your Ancestors -- that -- when Time shall come -- my Dust may be
neigh boured -- to your precious Dust -- and there sleep in Peace -- beside you
-- till we spring -- together -- from Corruption -- into Glory and Immortality!

During these short Sentences and difficult Respirations, Harry could answer
nothing -- He was suffocated by his Grief. -- But, putting his speechless Lips
to the fading Lips of his Maria, he drew her latest Breath into his own
affectionate Bosom, and Angels instantly caught her Spirit into the Regions of
Purity, of Love, and of Faith unfailing!

Harry, then, plucking up Strength from Oppression, and Courage from Despair,
pressed his Lips to the pale, and unfeeling Lips of his true Lover, and cried,
Yes, my Maria, our Dust shall be joined, and I feel that our Spirits too shall
shortly be wedded! -- Then, raising her in his Arms, and pressing her to his
Bosom, he bore her to the Town, while he poured upon her, all the Way, the two
Fountains of his Affection.

When he got to the Inn, and came to is Uncle; Here, Sir, said he, I present
you with a very precious little Burden, a Burden that lies much heavier on my
Heart than (...) did in my Arms. He then related to Mr. Clinton the Whole of
what had passed; then, heavily sighing, and shedding a Tear, Mr. Clinton cried,
Ah, my Harry, I would to Heaven that your Maria had lived, She exceeds your
Aggy Jessamin all to nothing.

Harry ordered a Carriage, on Purpose, for himself and his Beloved. She was
deposited in a Coffin hurried up for the Occasion; and, notwithstanding all the
Remonstrances and Entreaties of his Parent, Harry proved a Rebel, for the first
Time, and would not be divided from his Maria, till they reached London.

There, our Hero ordered a Coffin of unallayed and beaten Silver to be prepared
for her Reception. And, though near five Days had passed since the Departure of
her Spirit, her chaste Flesh remained as pure and untainted, as that of a Lamb
newly slain.

While they were putting her into her solemn Repository. Ah, Sir, said Harry, I
pretend not to compare with you, your Losses, I own, have been greater than
mine. You are a Man, like your divine Master, wholly made up of Sorrows and
acquainted with killing Griefs. But still you must allow that, for my little
Time I have had a competent Share. It matter not. I am reconciled to them. I
begin to be pleased with them. And indeed Joy is become my utter Aversion,
while I think on this loved Creature, who willingly bled and died for my Sake.

As Harry thought it his Duty, so he thought it would be his Delight to weep
and lament his Maria for ever. But Passions seldom are permanent, and Time,
though it may not wholly efface, daily wears away an insensible Portion of the
deepest Impressions.

Harry caused the Coffin of his Deliverer to be exalted on a Cabinet in his
Bedchamber, that it might be always in his Sight. But the Familiarity of
affecting Objects daily lessens their Force; and Harry, Week after Week, began
to contemplate the Repository of the loved Remains of his Maria, with abating
Affliction.

In the mean Time, Mr. Clinton received a Letter, by the French Mail, in answer
to One which he had left for his Brother-inlaw, at Paris. And, this Letter
informed him, under the Marquis's Hand, that he had returned from his Ambassy
to the Court of Morocco, and that he and his Lady would be shortly in England.
And, at the Bottom he found written, in a different Character, Will it be any
Satisfaction to see them accompanied by your once loved -- FANNY GOODALL.

We have found them, my Harry, he cried, we have found them, our long and far
sought Friends; the two Treasures which our God had graciously laid in Store,
for the Comfort of us poor People who lost All beside. But, don't let us do
them the Disgrace, my Son, of meeting and receiving them with Tears and Dirges.
Let me then prevail upon you to permit your faithful Perre to be conducted by
some of our People, with an honorable Train of Undertakers to Enfield, and
there to be treasured up in your Family Vault, where I shall speedily join her,
and whereto even my Harry must finally adjourn. -- Harry wiped his Eye and
said, be it as you please, my Father!

Within the following Fortnight, as our Hero stood with a single Attendant in
Cheapside overagainst the Devil Tavern, where the Club, called Legion Club, was
kept; he was accosted by a glittering Appearance, who took him by the Hand and
said, How are you, Master Fenton? -- Well, Sir, I thank you; Lord Bottom I
presume! -- The same, Sir -- And pray how are the worthy Lord and Lady
Mansfield, as also your lovely Sister, the Lady Louisa? -- Passable, Sir; but
what makes you in black? I hope Mr. Fenton is still in the Land of the Living.
-- He is, my Lord. But Black is a cheap Kind of Wear, it is a Matter of
Frugality to kill a Cousin once in a Twelvemonth. -- Well, be that as it may,
I insist on your stepping over the Way to take one Glass with me -- Your
Lordship must excuse me, I am going to the Wharf, to enquire concerning some
Friends whom I expect from France. O, I protest, Master Fenton, you shall not
disappoint me, I insist on renewing our old Acquaintance.

Harry could hardly have found it in his Heart to refuse the Request of an
avowed Enemy, much less could he think of rejecting an Invitation that was made
under a warm Appearance of Friendship.

When Lord Bottom had seated his old Enemy (as he still supposed him to be) in
the Midst of fourteen or fifteen Bloods and Bucks, Harry would gladly have
retreated; but rejected the Thought, lest they should think that he was
intimidated.

Gentlemen, cried Lord Bottom, give me Leave to introduce a Phenomenon to you,
my Friend yonder is a CHRISTIAN! A Christian, cried One; a Christian, cried
Another? Ay, said Lord Bottom, a Christian of the right Cast, he literally
conforms to the Example of his Master. If you smite him on the one Cheek, he
will turn the Other to you, and you cannot delight him more than by Kickings,
Spittings, and Spurnings.

Pray Sir, said One of the Company, are you actually a Christian? I hope so,
Sir, said Harry. And may I spit in your Face, Sir, said Another, without Fear
of Chastisement? You may, Sir, said Harry.

I told ye so, Gentlemen, I told ye so, exclaimed Lord Bottom. I have myself
put the Christianity of my Friend there to the Proof. I have made him the But
and the Jest of all Companies. I have dubbed him with the Title of FOOL. I have
pasted it on his Back in Capitals, in the Midst of the Levee, and in the
Presence of his Majesty. And yet, he never showed the least Instance of his
being offended. For Example now, and so saying, he spit directly in Harry's
Face.

Another then, and then Another, and so on, in a numerous Succession spit full
at our Hero. While he, without the smallest apparent Emotion, barely took out
his Handkerchief and wiped the Moisture from his Face.

At rength a lusty-looking young Man arore Damn the Rascal, said he, I will not
demean myself by spitting at him, I will piss upon the Rascal; which he
accordingly prepared to do. But Harry, perceiving his Approach, turned mildly
and said, I do not recollect, Sir, that this was any of the Indignities to
which my Lord and Master submitted. Then, without rising from his Seat, he gave
him a Knuckle in the Temple which laid him asleep on the Floor.

'Sbl -- d, cried One of the Company, I fear, Jemmy Bottom, you have brought us
into the wrong Box. You have certainly mistaken your Man.

He has indeed, said Harry, calmly. He calls me Fenton, but my Name is not
Fenton, my Name is Henry Earl of Moreland; and you shall, every Man, lie these
twelve Months in Newgate for this Day's Breach of Privilege against a Peer of
the Realm. Here is my Star, Gentlemen; I can put my Riband on at Pleasure.

The whole Legion were instantly struck with mute Terror and Astonishment. They
lifted up their Hands, or sunk to their Knees in petitioning Postures. But
Harry said, with a firm and alarming Accent, I desire your Reformation,
Gentlemen, and I will endeavor to complete it. I have hitherto, only shown you
the first Part of Christianity in the Example of meek and lowly Sufferance. The
second Part remains. It is to teach You, abject Wretches, to suffer in your
Turn. However, I am not of a very vindictive Nature, and if All of you will be
upon Honor to give me your Hands, I will pardon what is past and dismiss you
in Succession.

Lord Bottom and his Friend Rakely were the first who advanced, lowly bowing,
to claim the proposed Terms of Peace, when Harry, seizing Bottom's Hand with a
strong and agile Gripe, crushed the Bones and the Grisles as it were into one
Mass, and Bottom, giving a huge Scream, dropped roaring on the Floor. Rakely then
would have recoiled, but Harry, catching at him, sent him to join his Brother
in Iniquity and Affliction on the Boards.

Well, Gentlemen, said Harry, what keeps you in your Seats? Why do ye not come
and give me the Honor of your Hands as was agreed? If you do not do it
directly, I will take Each of you, very quietly, by the Nose, and kick you
through the Crowd of Attendants down Stairs.

My Lord, cried One of the Company, I will not give you my Hand, neither shall
any Man living take me by the Nose. So saying he sprung up, and catching at his
Sword, which lay with Others on a Table, he hastily drew it and stood on his
Defense.

O fie, Sir, said Harry, without moving from his Seat, you don't put yourself
in a Posture. Any Man, who was not a very good natured Man, might take you at
an Advantage, and run you under the Open that you give to your right Flank. But
Sir, said Harry, rising, I will only caution you by a little Puncture in the
Sword Arm; I don't mean you much Hurt. And, so saying, he passed his Sword
through the Flesh of his Adversary's right Arm, and, taking him to the Door, he
wished him a good Evening, and turned him down Stairs to seek for a Surgeon.

He then returned to the Company, and, taking Each of the intimidated Wretches
(in Succession) by the Nose; he led them out, and footed them down Stairs,
through the Midst of their own Servants, the Waiters, etc. crying, a Kicking to
all the infamous and scoundrel Sons of Belial who dare to spit at Christianity!

Then, calling two of the Drawers, Here is something for yourselves, my Lads,
says he; and here I leave you yonder Swords and these two very fine Gentlemen
in pawn for your Reckoning. So saying, he walked quite composedly away, through
the Midst of two long Ranges of bowing Admirers, who lined the Stairs and the
Entry, and thus Harry dissolved the Legion Club.

The next Morning early before Mr. Clinton was up, while Harry sat sipping a
Dish of Tea, dressed in a dark gray Frock, his Hair slightly bound up after the
Footman Fashion, and his long Staff of quarter cleft Oak, without Knot or Flaw,
standing polished beside him, Mr. Frank introduced a young Man, whom he
recommended to his Lordship's Service.

Harry measured him, with a Glance, from Top to Toe, and was instantly struck
by the visible Action, Power, and Energy of his Proportions.

Sit down, Frank, says Harry, while your Friend and I treat. What is your Name,
my Lad? John Sutton, so please you. And what Wages do you desire? From one
Pound to one hundred yearly. -- A great Difference indeed, John. -- Why, please
your Honor, if I may not happen to like you I shall march without asking a
single Penny. But if I should have the Misfortune to love you, as your
Countenance threatens, I shall certainly deserve the whole of my Demand, by All
that I shall do, and dare to do in your Service.

Can you wrestle, Jack? -- Whenever your Honor shall get a Man, through the
Shires of England, who is able to fling me, I will serve you the Remainder of
my Life for nothing. Can you cudgel, Jack? -- I was born a Fencer, so please
your Lordship, my Father was a famous Prizefighter, and my Mother could beat my
Father himself at the Quarter Staff. -- Did you ever read the History of Robin
Hood, Jack? -- I did, Sir. -- Then you may remember that honest Robin never
took an Abettor into Pay, save such a One as was able to cope with himself.
Frank here shall sit and see fair Play.

Harry then rose, and taking two Sticks, gave one of them to his Opponent,
then, putting a Brass Helmet upon Jack's Head, there is something, said he, to
save you from Hurt, and now, come at the Thickness of my Skull as fast as you
can!

To it they strait fell, with equal Confidence of Ability. But Harry,
perceiving that Jack intended to spare him, cried, Come, Jack, the best, the
very best that you can do, or not a Penny, a single Penny of Wages, I assure
you.

Jack then exerted his utmost, and put nearly the fullest Powers of our Hero to
Proof, till Harry, dazzling his Eyes by a sudden Flourish, gave him a smart
Stroke on his brazen Headpiece, and drove him stunned and staggering several
Paces backward, till he rested against the Wall that stood behind him.

Ha, said Jack, recovering, and casting his Cap aside, that indeed was a Blow
which neither my Father nor Mother ever taught me to fence.

Well, my Friend, said our Hero, as soon as you are rested, we must have a
little Turn or so at Wrestling. No, no, cried Jack, I would not advise your
Lordship to that, there lies all my Excellence, the very best of my Manhood.
Well, Jack, said Harry, a Fling on this Floor cannot hurt us a Whit more than a
Fall on the Downs.

They closed, they grappled, they griped under and over, at Hip and at
Shoulder, alternately lifting and lifted, till they were nearly overbreathed.
Then, parting for a Moment, they rushed forward and seized each other by the
Breast, when Harry, giving his Adversary a sudden Twist on one Side and then an
agile Jerk and Foot on the other, cast him sidelong on the Carpet.

Poor Jack rose, astonished and in utter Abasement, ashamed even to lift his
Eyes toward the Eyes of his Friend Frank; when Harry took him by the Hand and
forceably seated him at the Tea-table. Come, Jack, says he, don't be
discouraged. You have put me harder to it than did the great Roger of
Ross-town, though I think I am much abler than I was at that Day. Here Frank,
order us something more substantial for Breakfast, while your Friend and I
endeavor to accommodate our Differences.

When Breakfast was over, Harry looked fixedly at his late Opponent and said, I
will give you, Jack, a little Matter above the Extent of your Demand; I will
give you one Hundred a Year for your Cudgelling, another Hundred for your
Wrestling; and as you say you can love, I will lay another Hundred in store for
you, till that Promise is put to Proof; and here is twenty Guineas as Earnest
of our Agreement. Jack then threw himself prostrate before the Feet of his new
Master. Keep your Bounties, keep your Bounties for my Executors, he cried, for
I feel that, when your Service demands my Life, I shall not survive another
Minute.

Harry then rose and, putting another Quarter-staff into the Hand of his new
Servant, here is a Horse for you, Jack, says he, in case you should tire; for
we have a long Walk from Pal-Mall here, to the Custom-house Wharf and back
again.

As they drew near the Quay, Harry observed a great Crowd, all in Motion, and
shouting as in the Midst of an Affray. Immediately he hastened up, and, making
way through the Mob, perceived that they were kicking, and wounding, and
dragging above twenty unhappy Foreigners along the Pavement. While a Lady, who
stood with her Women on the Stairs, cried aloud, five hundred, a thousand, five
thousand Pounds to Any who will save my poor People!

Come, Jack, says our Hero, let us try to deliver these abused Strangers from
the Cruelty of our savage Countrymen.

On the Word, Harry found himself well seconded by Jack, and, in less than a
Minute, above thirty of the Assailants lay sprawling on the Area; while the
wounded and bruised Foreigners arose as well as they could, or crawled and got
in a Group to the Feet of their Mistress.

The Mob, thereupon, rallied, and, gathering to the Number of some Hundreds,
advanced in a formidable Body against our two Champions. But, they had better
have kept aloof. For Harry, running upon them, overturned the First he met with
one End of his Staff, and laid a Second at his Feet with the Revolution of the
other End, insomuch that at every Motion, as it were, he dispatched two Men.

Neither was Jack unactive. The Crowd began to recoil, when, rushing into the
Midst, they overthrew such as opposed them, and, whirling their Staffs about
their Heads, they quickly opened and cleared large Room for themselves. No One
dared to abide within the Wind of their Weapons; and the Mob, flying several
Ways, left our Hero quiet Master of the Field of Battle.

Mean time, the Lady stood fixed in utter Astonishment at the Feats which she
had seen, when Harry, gracefully approaching, I think myself happy, Madam, says
he, in having done some small Service to a Lady of your fair and noble
Appearance; of what Country may I presume? Of England, Sir, says she, and I am
ready to discharge my Promise of five thousand Pounds for the gallant Rescue
which you brought to me and my People.

No, Madam, said our Hero, I will not debase the little Merit of my Humanity by
the Acceptance of a Bribe. But I shall not be easy till I see You and your
Attendants out of the Reach of these London-Barbarians. They may return with
different Weapons, and a larger Reinforcement. He then called to some Porters
and, throwing them a Parcel of Silver, ordered them to bring all the Coaches
they could muster. And go You, Jack, says he, to the Shipping, enquire after
the Friends that I told you of, and then follow me to the White Cross Tavern in
Cheapside.

The Coaches came, and Harry assisted his Porters in carrying, helping, and
gently stowing the Maimed and the Wounded into half a Dozen of them. He then
handed in the Lady, and next, coming to a Blackamoor Boy, who had a Coronet of
Diamonds inserted in his Cap, he offered to lift him in. But the Youth, bending
one Knee to the Dust, and seizing on Harry's Hand, eagerly and repeatedly
kissed it, crying out in French, heavenly, heavenly Creature! and then,
breaking into Tears, sprung into the Coach, and sat down by the Lady.

Our Hero then bestowed the four female Attendants, with such Luggage as was
brought on Shore, into the four remaining Coaches. Then, grasping his
Quarterstaff, and ordering the Porters to attend, he guarded and escorted All
safe to the White Cross.

The first Thing he then did was to order private Apartments for the Lady and
her Attendants. He next dispatched the Waiters for all the Surgeons in the
Neighborhood. He then locked the Room where he saw the Luggage safe lodged;
ordered a sumptuous Dinner to be prepared as soon as possible; and, lastly,
discharged the Coaches and Porters, who poured their parting Blessings upon his
Head; and all this he did with wonderful Dispatch, for Harry was now in the
wide Element of his Beneficence, as a Whale in the Ocean.

Four Surgeons then came, and our Hero, putting five Guineas apiece into their
Hands, desired them to examine and dress their Patients; and staid till he
heard the delighting Tidings that None of them were incurable. He then sent up
to the Lady to desire Permission to attend her. She rose and met him as he
entered; Child of Heaven, said she, from which of the Orders of Angels have you
descended? I have heared as well as seen what you have wonderfully done for us.
Madam, said Harry, endeavoring to turn the Discourse, I would not advise you
to remove your People for some Time: I have ordered Beds and Apartments for
them in this House; where those, who are tolerably well, may assist the Doctors
to attend their sick Fellows till All shall be restored. In the mean time I
have sent to my Father's for his Coach and Chariot to convey You, and this
young Gentleman, and your Women, to our House, where you can want for no
Servants, since my Father, and I, and All will be truly and tenderly your
Servants. We are your Property, Sir, said the Lady, dispose of us as you please.

But, pray Madam, said our Hero, what could provoke the Rabble to insult You
and Yours, in the Manner that they did this Day? I protest, Sir, said she, I
cannot conceive, except it be that, as some One says in LEAR, our Countenances
liked them not.

In a little Time after, Dinner was served up, and Harry, happening to turn his
Head, perceived the black Youth by stealth kissing the Hat, and pressing the
Gloves to his Bosom that he had laid on a Table.

Whatever the Darkness or Deformity of any Aspect or Person may happen to be,
if the sentimental Beauty of Soul shall burst through the Cloud upon us, the
Dark becomes Light, the Deformed quite comely, and we begin to affect what was
lately our Aversion. Thus it was that Harry found himself suddenly and
inevitably attached by the two recent Proofs that this outlandish Youth had
given of his Affection.

Being all seated, Harry looked earnestly at the young Moor, and turning to the
Lady said: I now perceive, Madam, how ridiculous all Sorts of Prejudices are,
and find that Time and Observation may change our Opinions to the Reverse of
what they were. I once had an Aversion to all Sorts of Blacks, but I avow that
there is something so amiable in the Face of this Youth, and his Eyes cast such
a Luster over the Darkness of his Countenance as is enough, as Shakespeare has
it, to make us in love with Night, and pay no more Worship to the gaudy Sun.

The Moor, hereat, smiled celestial Sweetness, and Joy beamed from his Eyes and
throughout his dimpling Aspect.

But who can you be, my sweet Fellow, said the Lady, who are the Picture, the
Image, almost the Thing itself that I was so sadly in love with five and thirty
Years ago? Why, Madam, said our Hero, you could not have been born at that
early Day. Ah you Flatterer, says she, I am turned of Forty. But, pray Madam,
who was he that was so happy as to attract your infant Affections? -- His Name
was Harry Clinton -- Why, Madam, Harry Clinton is my Name. -- Harry Clinton,
Harry Clinton! screamed out the Lady, and started up from her Chair; -- Yes,
Madam, I am Son to the Earl of Moreland, and I almost dare to hope that you
were once the enchanting Fanny Goodall. -- Yes, my lovely Kinsman, I am indeed
your Fanny Goodall.

Harry then sprung forward, and seizing her Hand, kept it dwelling on his Lips.
But, disengaging it, she opened her Arms and clasped him to her Bosom, and wept
over him as a Mother would over a long-lost Son. While the young Moor ran and
danced about the Room, like a mad Thing, clapping Hands, and springing, like an
Antelope, almost to the Cieling.

When they were something composed, the Moor caught the Lady about the Neck and
kissing her, cried, Joy, Joy, my dearest Madam, the greatest of all Joys! Then
turning to our Hero, he took each of his Hands, in Turns, and pressed them to
his Lips, while Harry, kissing his Forehead, cried, my Brother, my Brother!

When they were again set to Dinner, Jack entered. My Lord, says he, I have
been all along the Quays and the Shipping, but can learn no Tidings of the
Marquis D'Aubigny, nor of any French Family save that of the Duchess Bouillon,
who, this Morning, came up the River with a numerous Train.

Well, says Harry, our Happiness has been already quite sufficient to the Day.
To morrow may crown our Wishes with full Success.

No, my Love, said the Lady, you cannot see the Marquis for some Time. The
Truth is that you find, in me, your Fanny Goodall, the Marchioness D'Aubigny,
and the Duchess de Bouillon. But these Matters shall be explaimed more clearly,
when I am blessed with the Sight of your precious Uncle.

News was now brought that the Carriages were at the Door, when, taking a hasty
Bit or two, they visited and left Orders for the Care of the Sick and Wounded,
and then set out in a Hurry for Pal Mall.

When they arrived, the Duchess hastened in, enquiring for Mr. Clinton, and,
when she came where he was, she cried out, as she advanced, and as he rose to
receive her, your Fanny, your Fanny Goodall, my Cousin! and throwing herself
into his Arms, dwelt there for a Minute. Then recoiling awhile, she looked
fondly at him and cried, your Sister also, my Brother, your Sister D'Aubigny!
the Wife of the Brother of your heavenly Louisa! then clasping him to her Arms,
she broke into Tears; and again, quitting him, sat down to quiet her Emotions.

Mr. Clinton, having seated himself affectionately beside her, said: These are
wondrous Things that you tell me, my precious Sister; by what Miracle have
these Blessings been brought about?

I am too much agitated at present, says she, let me have a little Coffee, and
the Matter shall be unravelled.

As they were settling to the Tea-table, give me Leave, Sir, said the Duchess,
to introduce my little black Companion to your Notice. He is a sweet Fellow I
assure you, notwithstanding his Complexion. He is Child to our royal Friend the
Emperor of Morocco, who has entrusted him to our Guardianship for his Travel
and Education. However he might have come by his sable Outside, his Father, the
great Abenamin, is the least of the tawny of any Man I saw in Africa, and his
Mother is one of the fairest and finest Women that ever opened a Pair of living
Diamonds to the Light; but, she took Fright, while she was pregnant, at the
sudden Sight of a Blackamoor. But, my Brother, I shall more particularly
recommend him to your Regard, by telling you that he is an exceedingly pious
Christian, though as playful as Lambs and as chuckling as Infancy.

She then turned and, taking the little Abenamin by the Hand, led him up and
placed him before her Brother. When the Youth, suddenly dropping on his Knees,
looked up to Mr. Clinton, with Eyes that spoke Love and reverential Awe, and
besought his Blessing.

The old Gentleman found himself surprizingly affected and, lifting up his
Hands, cried, God be gracious to you, my Child, and make your Soul as bright as
your Countenance is sable! and may the Sun of Righteousness shine with Power
upon you, and soon disperse or illumine every Shade that is about You. The
Prince embraced his Legs, kissed his Knees, and arose.

Soon as the Coffee was removed, You may remember, my dearest Cousin, said the
Duchess, in what a Hurry I last parted from you. Mr. Fairface, with whom the
Bulk of my Fortune was deposited, went off with above a hundred thousand Pounds
of my Substance, beside four times that Value entrusted to him by Others.

I traced him to Paris, and there he had the Impudence to give me an Interview,
but at the same Time had the Impudence to bid me Defiance.

Immediately I commenced Suit, and sent dispatch to London for my Papers and
Witnesses.

On the Opening of my Cause in Court, I was summoned by the Title of Countess
of Maitland, otherwise Frances Goodall. On hearing the Name, a Gentleman who
was near me started, and turning and coming up, Pray, Madam, says he, are you
any way related to the honorable Harry Clinton, who once went by that Name in
this City? I am Sir, said I, almost the nearest Relation that he has upon
Earth. -- He is, Madam, my dearest Friend and Brother. Pray speak to your
Advocates to postpone your Suit for a few Days, till I am informed of the
Nature and Merits of your Cause.

This was accordingly done. He desired to know where I lodged, and in less than
an Hour his Chariot was at my Door.

Except yourself, my Cousin, the Marquis had the most lovely and winning Aspect
and Person that ever I beheld. I soon convinced him of the Equity of my Demand
and of the Villainy of my Trustee, and made him perfect Master of the whole
Affair. But he still continued to visit, and to stay with me a considerable
Part of every Day, under Color of being better informed touching this and
the other Particular, the remaining Time was spent in soliciting for me.

At length a Hearing came on; and, after a short Trial honest Fairface was cast
in Principal and double Costs. He was instantly taken into Custody, and put
under Confinement, till he discharged the whole Amount of the Judgment in my
Favor.

No sooner was one Suit over, wherein I was Plaintiff, but Another was
commenced wherein I happened to prove but a very weak Defendant. The Marquis
now became Solicitor for himself, but with such a sweet Timidity as seemed to
doubt, and greatly dread the Success of his Cause.

I could not refuse my Time to him who had devoted the Whole of his Time and
Assiduity to me. We spent whole Days together. But O, what Floods of Tears did
that Time (at Times) cost both him and me, while he pathetically and feelingly
related your History, from the Place where you broke off, to the Death of your
Louisa and your precious Infants.

I believe, my Cousin, that, as Grief is a greater Softener, so it is a greater
Cementer of Hearts than any other Passion. I gave the Marquis, in my Turn, my
little Story, and dwelt on every tender Minuteness of my infant Passion for
you. Ah, said he, what a pity that a Heart, so susceptible of all divine and
humane Feelings, should sit as a lonely Turtle, upon the Housetop, without a
suitable Mate.

I took him for that Mate, my Cousin, and in a Husband I found the truest and
tenderest of Lovers. I became pregnant, for the first Time of my Life, and was
delivered of a sweet and promising little Fellow, whom we left at Nurse in our
Country Seat, while I attended my Lord on his Embassy to Morocco:

But, here I must stop, my Brother, I am under the positive Interdiction of an
imperial Thing called a Husband, not to divulge a Word further till he sees you
Face to Face. But I trust that he has blessed Tidings for you, my Brother, he
says that he, otherwise, would not have dared to present himself before you,
after his Loss of your Eloisa.

Mr. Clinton smiled (careless) as at the Impossibility of any consoling Event
upon Earth. Again, smiling archly, I protest, my Sister, said he, you appear to
me to grow younger for your Years. I see no Manner of Alteration, save that you
are something plumper, and not quite so slender as when we parted. O, says she,
laughing, there may be a Reason in Nature for that.

I rejoice at Heart to hear it, said Mr. Clinton; but pray, when may we expect
my Brother? -- In about two Months; at present he is engaged with the King, who
is extremely fond of him, and lately created him a Duke, on account of the
Services which he rendered the State in Africa. We received your dear Letter,
my dearest Brother, at Paris, but wondered who the sweet Fellow could be who
was said to accompany you.

In the mean Time, our Hero and the young Prince were in close Combination.
Abenamin stepped about, and about Harry, and toyed with him, and twisted the
Curls of his careless Locks around his Fingers. Then turning and looking fondly
up in his Face, Ah, how fair, says he, does this black Visage of mine show in
those fine Eyes of yours! It is in Truth, said Harry, so fair in my Eyes, that
I would not exchange it for fifteen of the fairest female Faces in Britain. The
Prince then caught his Hand and pressed it to his Bosom. But what shall I call
you, says he, you are a great Lord in this Country, and, in my own Country I am
greater than a Lord. But I hate the Formality of Titles between Friends, and I
will call you my Harry, provided you promise to call me your Abenamin. A
Bargain, says Harry, let us seal it with a Kiss! No, no, says the Prince, we
never kiss Lips in Africa, but I will kiss your Head, and your Hands, and your
Feet too with Pleasure. But tell me, Harry, what makes you so mighty clever a
Fellow, will you teach me to be a clever Fellow also? Ay, that I will, says
Harry, and to beat myself too, provided you promise not to hit me over hard.
Abenamin fell a laughing, and aimed a little Fist as though he meant to
overturn him.

As soon as Harry's Grief, for his late Maria, would allow him to associate, he
had been to seek his old Friend and Tutor Mr. Clement, but he found only a
single Domestic at home, who told him that the old Gentleman had been some Time
dead, and that the Family were lately gone to take Possession of a new Seat
that they had purchased in the Country.

However, as Harry found himself quite happy in the present Society, he sought
no further Acquaintance or Amusement in London. In less than three Weeks, the
Retinue of the Prince and the Duchess were well restored, and they All set out
for Enfield, there to await the wished Arrival of the Duke.

They slept the first Night at Oxford, and toward the Noon of the third Day
they set up at the Angel Inn in Coventry.

It happened to be a Season of Festivity in the Town. Over against the front
Windows, a Stage had been erected for a Mountebank and his Merry Andrew; and,
as soon as they had dismounted, it became a Stage for Combatants. Two
Quarterstaffs and a Pair of Basket-hilted Cudgels lay thereon; while an
adjoining Pole was hung with a Variety of Prizes destined to the Conquerors.

Immediatley two Champions mounted, with two Seconds appointed to see fair
Play. But One of the Combatants was quickly dismissed with a broken Head.
Another then succeeded, and then Another, to the Amount of half a Score, but
the first Hero still kept the Field of Battle. While Harry sat, with his
Company, looking out of the Dining Room Windows at the Diversion.

At length Jack came behind his Lord, and giving him a Touch on the Shoulder,
whisperingly begged his Permission to claim the Stage.

Harry assented. Jack was up in a Twinkling, and quickly dispatched the Victor,
as he had served his Predecessors. A Number of Candidates then succeeded, but
with no better Fortune; and the Prize was taking down to be delivered to our
Friend Jack; when an elderly looking Man desired to be lifted on the Stage.

Come, says he to Jack, you seem to be a clever Fellow, let us quit this Boy's
Play, and take up the Quarterstaff; when Jack, remembering a Piece of an old
Ballad, repeated, accurss'd be he, Earl Piercy said, by whom it is denied.

They grasped their formidable Weapons, and Each threw himself into an expert
Posture of Defense. Then began the Work to grow warm, and these Champions had
twice traversed the whole Round of the Stage, before a Wound or Bruise was
received on either Part.

At the third Bout, the old Stager made a Feint at his Adversary's left Leg,
and, in attempting to defend it, the Sconce of our Friend Jack was covered with
Blood, and he sprung off the Stage and instantly vanished.

Harry then stepped backward and ordered his Servant to be called, and,
laughing, cried, Ah my poor Jack! I knew what would be your Fate the Moment I
saw the Face of your Opponent. You unfortunatley met with the famous Oakum, the
old Prizer of Islington; many and many a Lesson have I got from him. But, you
may happen to get some Satisfaction ere long. Run, and give yonder Fool a
Crown, for the Loan of his patched Coat for a few Minutes.

Jack flew on his Embassy, while Harry burned a Stick at a back Room Fire, with
which he made to himself very formidable Eyebrows and Whiskers. Then, hurrying
on the Fool's Coat, he stepped forth and desired to be lifted on the Stage.

Oakum little expected a second Adversary, but, when he saw the Merry-Andrew,
as he supposed, he had like to be suffocated by a sudden Fit of Laughter, while
the Crowd tore the Elements to Fritters with their Clamor.

Harry then put himself in an awkward and peasant-like Posture, while Oakum,
advancing carelessly, made a slight but, as he thought, demolishing Stroke at
him. But Harry, setting it aside with the one End of his Staff, gave Oakum,
with the other End, as it were a chance Chuck under the Chin, and tossed him on
the broad of his Back along the Stage.

The Shouts of the Populace were then redoubled. At length Oakum, arising,
fixed his Eyes upon Harry with an inquisitive Astonishment, as desirous of
knowing how this Business came about. While Harry, with a Grin of stupid
Amazement, seemed equally to wonder at what he had done.

Again they set themselves in hostile Opposition. Oakum then aimed a disabling
Stroke at Harry's right Shin; but Harry, quick as Thought, slipping his Leg
backward, gave the Weapon Room to pass, and, at the same Time, bestowing a
sudden Tip on the Crown of his old Master, he cut him along the Skull, and gave
him once more to measure his Length upon the Boards.

The Crowd stood awhile silent, as scarce crediting what had passed before
their Eyes, till Oakum, rising and staggering, and again fastening his Sight
upon our Hero, cried aloud, either You must be the DEVIL or young HARRY FENTON.

Harry then stepped up, and put his Mouth to the Ear of his Adversary. Oakum,
says he, here are five Guineas to help toward the Cure of your broken Head. But
remember that it is not honorable for the Masters of our Science to set
themselves in Competition against the Ignorant. Oakum bowed and withdrew;
crying, Heaven be praised that it is no Other than my own Scholar who foils me.

The Clamours of the Populace now became outrageous. The Prize of a silvered
Coronet interwoven with Laurel, was plucked down in a hurry and placed on the
Head of our Hero. All the Towns-people then put their Hands in their Pockets,
and, mustering their Shillings and Sixpences, threw them in Showers on the
Stage; while the Duchess, Mr. Clinton, and the generous Abenamin also emptied
their Pockets, to reward the Prowess of the Man who had vindicated the Quarrel
of their favorite Jack.

All this Profusion of Money was faithfully gathered up, by the two Seconds,
and delivered in a Hat full of Silver to Harry, who, bestowing a Handful on
Each, delivered the Remainder to his Man Jack who stood by the Stage.

The Crowd then ascended, and, laying violent Hands on our Hero, bore him
triumphantly away. They then placed him in an Arm-Chair erected on long Poles,
and, hoising his Carriage on their Shoulders, they carried him in the Midst of
Peals of Shouts up the Street, while an appointed Herald went before them and
cried, O the FOOL, the FOOL, the brave, the noble FOOL, who beats the Skill of
the Wise, and the Acts of the Mighty to Pieces! At length, Harry, growing tired
of this Parade, put his Hand on the Head of one of his Carriers, vaulted
lightly over, instantly vanished from their Sight, and flew up Stairs to his
Company.

His Friends now began to recognize their Harry, in the Coat of the Fool, and
broke into repeated Fits of Laughter. Abenamin then turned to his beloved
Friend and cried, what is become of my handsome Harry? why, he is turned to
almost as ugly a Fellow as myself. Then, kissing his Forehead and stroaking his
Cheeks, he said, O, It was the cleverest and darlingest FOOL that ever I knew
in the livelong Days that I have passed upon Earth.

When the Populace perceived their favorite Fool seated in the Midst of
Quality, they All gathered to the Inn, and commenced their Shouts anew. But
Harry, calling for his Hat of Silver, as also for all the Change that could be
mustered in the House, amounting to the Value of about thirty Guineas, he threw
his Cash in Handfulls on every Side, till he was nearly exhausted, and that the
Crowd cried out, Enough, enough, your Honor, too much, too much indeed* O,
that All would equally learn to set Bounds to their Avarice!

When Dinner was over, and that Harry was restored to his former Self, our
Company, again, set out on their Journey, amidst the Blessings and Acclamations
of the whole City, who had ranged themselves on, each Side, to behold and pay
them Obeisance as they passed.

The next Day, as they stopped at a Village to repair the fractured Harness of
an over mettled Horse; Harry, mean while, took a walk with his Abenamin along
the Road. In their Way they came to a long and waste Cottage, where they heared
the confused clattering of junior Voices. Harry stepped to the Door, and,
looking in, perceived about forty or fifty Boys ranged on Benches of Turf,
while a Man of a pale Aspect sat on a decayed Chair, instructing them in their
Lessons.

Your Servant, Sir, says Harry, pray what Language do you teach? -- I can teach
Latin and Greek too, so please your Honor, but the People of this Country
choose to confine themselves to the Language of old England. -- If I am not too
free, Sir, pray what is your Name? -- Longfield, so please your Honor. --
Longfield, Longfield? I have surely heared that Name before. Pray, were you
ever acquainted with a Man called Hammel Clement? -- Hammel Clement, Sir? he
was my dearest Friend, the Friend whom I injured, the Friend of my Heart! --
Then, cries Harry, you are the Friend of my Heart too, my Longfield, and so
saying, he embraced and pressed him to his Bosom.

The poor Man shrunk back, in half Wonder and half Terror at what this might
mean, but the benevolent Harry soon quieted his Apprehensions. Your Friend
Clement, says-he, is come to great Fortune, and, I dare answer for him, would
be nearly distracted with Joy at your Sight, and would gladly divide his
Substance with you; but, if you please, you shall be no Encumbrance upon his
growing Family. You shall instantly come with me, and, as Pharaoh said to
Jacob, regard not your Stuff, for the Good of all my Lands lies before You, my
Longfield. And I rejoice more in acquiring such a Heart as Yours, than if I had
acquired the Possession of a Province.

Harry then called a few of the Neighbors in, and giving them some Guineas, to
be changed and divided among the Children, in order to enable them to see a new
Master, He and Abenamin took the threadbare Longfield, on each Side, under the
Arm, and carried him away.

When they came to the Turn that led to the Mansion House, Harry perceived with
much Pleasure, that the two School-Houses, which he had put in Hand before the
Death of his Father, were now completed. They stood opposite to each other,
with the Road between them. Their Fronts were of hewn Stone; and a small Cupola
rose over Each, with Bells to summon the Children to Meals and to Lesson.

Here, Longfield, says our Hero, is to be your Province. You are to superintend
these Schools, at a Salary of three hundred a Year. And I will soon send you,
with proper Means, throughout the Country, to muster me a Hundred chosen
Children of each Sex, for I yearn to be a Father, Longfield, and to gather my
Family of Little Ones under my Eye and my Wing.

As soon as they alighted, Mr. Clinton and his Harry once more welcomed the
Duchess and her Abenamin to their Home and their Hearts, and the late House of
Mourning became a House of Joy.

Above All, Abenamin inspired Mirth and Good humor throughout the Family; and
Melancholy fled before him wherever he turned. He was daily inventive of new
Matters of Entertainment. He danced African Dances, for them, with wonderful
Action and Grace; and he sung African Songs that imitated and exceeded the wild
and inarticulate Warblings of the Nightingale. So that he became the Darling
and little Idol of the whole Household.

Harry had sent for the Town Tailor, and got Longfield fitted with three or
four Suits from his Father's Wardrobe. He then sent him on his Commission, in
Company with Mr. Trustly the Agent, whom he ordered to show him the Country, to
introduce him to the several Families of the Peasantry, and to furnish him with
whatever Sums he should call for.

In the mean Time, our Hero and Abenamin became inseparable. He made the Prince
a Present of his little dressed Jennet, and at Times rode out with him, and
taught him the Manage. At other Times they would run and wrestle, and play a
hundred Gambols through the Walks and the Gardens.

Did you ever see the Chase of the Antelope, Harry? -- Not I truly. -- You
shall not be long so, says the Prince. Go, gather me all the House, Man, Woman,
and Child before the Door here. You shall be the Huntsman, and I will be the
Antelope, and if any of your People can catch me, in a Mile's Running, they
shall have my Cap for a Kerchief.

Immediately the whole Posse was summoned, to the amount of about sixty
Persons, Male and Female; and Mr. Clinton and the Duchess, hearing what they
were about, came laughing to the Door to see the Diversion.

Harry then gave his royal Antelope about fifty Yards Law, then cried, away!
and instantly all Heels and all Voices were loosed after him.

The Prince then turned, and bounded over an Aha, that was sunk on the right
Side of the Avenue, then, clearing several other Obstacles, whereby he threw
out the greatest Number of his Pursuers, he at length reached the Fields, and
shot away like an Arrow.

Our Friend Jack headed about nine foreign and domestic Footmen, who still held
the Chase, though at a Distance; while Abenamin led them a Round of above a
Mile. Then, turning short homeward, he came flying up the Avenue, with only
Jack and two Followers puffing far behind. At length, reaching near the Door,
the Prince threw himself precipitately into the Arms of his Friend, as it were
for Protection, crying, Save me, my Harry, save, save your little Antelope!

Mr. Clinton and the Duchess, then, successively embraced the Victor, and
wished him Joy. I protest, Harry, cried Mr. Clinton, I will bet a thousand
Pieces with you, on the Head of my Abenamin against your famous Polly Truck.

That Night, as our Hero sat with the Prince in his Apartment, Have You ever
been in Love, my Harry, says he? I confess, said Harry, that I have had my
Twitches and Tendencies that Way.

He then gave him a Narrative of the Struggles of his Heart, respecting the
fair Aggy Jessamin. And again he related to him the Tragedy of his faithful
Maria, which cost the Prince the drenching of a Handkerchief in Tears.

Ah, exclaimed the Prince, never, never will I forgive your Maria her Death!
Why was it not my Lot, by some severer Doom, to prove to you the Superiority of
my Friendship and Affection? What, cried Harry, would you not leave me a single
Companion upon Earth? when my Abenamin quits the World, I shall also bid it
adieu!

When Tears were wiped away, the Prince took his Friend by the Hand and said: I
have a Sister, my Brother, a Sister twinned with me in the Womb, and as fair as
I am black. All Africa is pleased to hail her as the Beauty of the Universe,
but the Truth is, that I think but poorly of her. The Duke brought her with him
to France, and, should he bring her to England, beware of your Heart, my Harry!
for, though I am prejudiced against her, she is the Idol of all Others, who bow
down to her, as before a little Divinity. This has made her so excessively
vain, that she holds herself of a different Species from the rest of Mankind,
and thinks the Homage of the World nothing less than her Right. And now, my
Harry, though I earnestly wish to be allied to you, by a Tie, nearer if
possible than that of Friendship, yet I would not wish my own Happiness, at the
Expense of your Peace; and so I give you timely Warning against this dangerous
and haughty Girl.

Our Company had now been upward of six Weeks at the Mansion House. Harry,
hitherto, had never seen any Part of the Country, or any Part of his own
Estate, above a Mile from the House. Wherefore, leaving his Friend Abenamin in
Bed, in the Presumption of his being tired with his last Day's Fatigue, He
issued early forth, accompanied only by Jack and his Agent's Runner, who knew
and was known every where.

With their Staffs in their Hands, they crossed and quartered the Country, at
Pleasure, without Let or Obstacle.

At length, they came within Prospect of a House sumptuously fronted, and of a
happy Situation. Harry stopped here, with Pleasure, comparing, as he
approached, the Acquirements of Art with the Advantages of Nature; when a
Servant issued forth, and humbly besought him to walk in. Harry heard the Voice
of Music. What is your Master's Name, says he? Fielding, so please your Honor,
and we are this Day celebrating the Nuptials of his Son, the young Squire.

The Master of the Family met our Hero at the outward Door. Harry recoiled at
recognizing the Face of the Mr. Fielding, whom he had seen at Hamstead, but,
taking no Notice, walked with him into the House.

Breakfast, soon after, was ushered in, and Mrs. Fielding, and Mr. and Mrs.
Catharines, and Ned came with his blooming and blushing Bride to the Table.

Harry chuckled and rejoiced at Heart, but still took no Note; when, after some
cursory Conversation, Ned looked at him with an eager Disturbance and cried,
Bless me, my Heart tells me that there is something in that Face which is not
quite unknown to me. If I could think, after my many and late Enquiries, that
my Patron was alive, bating the Difference of Years, I should verily believe
that you were -- your Harry Fenton, cried our Hero, springing up, your Harry
Fenton, my dear Ned!

Harry then opened his Arms to receive his Friend, while Ned leaped and catched
at him, as the grapling Iron of a Corsair would catch at a Ship from which
great Prize was expected,

All the Family then, so highly as they had been obliged by our Hero and his
Father, struggled who should be foremost in their Acknowledgments and Caresses.
The holy Catharines, fondly taking him to his Arms cried, Christ be gracious to
you, my Child! and may the God, who has formed you as an Angel upon Earth, make
you also of the highest Order of Angels in Heaven!

After Dinner, Harry rose and took his Leave, but they all got in a Group and
opposed his Passage, telling him he must be their Prisoner for that Night. I
consent, only on this Condition, said Harry, that you promise to dine with me,
All, Tomorrow. Why pray Sir, where do you live, says Mr. Fielding? At Enfield,
with the young Earl of Moreland, says Harry, but he has a great Friendship for
me, and the House is as it were my own.

Much Company arrived in the Evening, and the Ball was opened and held till
late. But our Hero declined dancing, that his Friend Ned might stand forth
peerless in the Eyes of his Bride.

Harry rose, by the Dawning, and footed it in an Hour to Enfield. He flew up
Stairs to salute the Family, but found no One, save Mr. Clinton, from whom he
received, at once, a warm Blessing and Embrace.

Where is the Duchess, Sir, and my Friend Abenamin? Gone, Harry, says his
Uncle, about Breakfast Time Yesterday; a Courier arrived with the joyful
Tidings that my Brother was on the Road, and so my Sister and our Abenamin
hastened to meet him. By this Time I suppose they are All on their Return. And
now take Care of yourself, my Harry. The Duke brings with him the Sister of our
Abenamin, the fair Princess Abenaide; the Duchess tells me that a lovelier
Creature never beheld the Light; so that you must guard your Heart with double
Bars, against the Power of this Beauty. -- She is vain and disdainful, Sir,
excessively vain, I am told, so that her Pride will prove an Antidote against
the Poison of her Charms. However I will haste to meet and welcome your most
noble Brother.

Harry was mounted on a haughty Charger, that cost fifteen hundred Guineas when
a Colt in Mauritania. He was white as new fallen Snow, save a black Mane and
Tail, one Foot jet Black to the Joint of the Fetlock, and three large
blood-like Spots on the far Shoulder. He was so perfectly instructed and
subdued to the Manage, that he seemed to have no Will save the Will of his
Rider, while Harry's least Motion, like Electricity, informed every Joint and
Member. O, that the Wills of all Men were equally subdued to the Scepter of the
Prince of Righteousness, reigning and ruling within them!

The Princess came foremost in an open Chariot drawn by six spotted Arabians.
The Chariot was plated all around in burnished Gold emblazoned with Gems of
Luster. But, if the Eye could scarce bear the Blaze of the Vehicle, much less
could it support the Brightness of the Beauty who sat enthroned within it.

Harry bowed twice, as he approached, but she scare deigned a perceptible Nod
of Acknowledgment to his Salute. -- Our Hero felt himself piqued. Proud Beauty!
thought he, I thank you for your timely Prevention of a Passion that, perhaps,
might have proved unhappy to me. He then passed forward with affected
Carelessness to salute the Duke.

When he came up, the Coach stopped, and Harry, flying from his Saddle,
approached the Window, while his Steed stood trembling but motionless behind
him.

My Lord, said Harry, seizing the Duke's Hand and respectfully kissing it, if
you were sensible of the Joy that my Heart receives from your Presence, I think
it would make you nearly as happy as myself. My sweet Fellow, said the Duke, I
have often heard of you at Paris, as also by the Letters of my Love here; my
Longing at last is gratified, though my Wonder is increased.

But Madam, says Harry, what have you done with my little Playfellow, what is
become of my Abenamin? O, cried the Duchess, laughing, he is forthcoming I
warrant you; but what has so bewitched you to him? I think you could not be
fonder, if he were a Mistress. True, Madam, answered Harry, sighing, I never
look to have a Mistress that I shall love half as well; but pray put me out of
Pain, and let me know where he is. Be pacified, said the smiling Duke, he is
not far off; and here is my Hand and Promise that you shall see him before
Night.

Our Hero then turned, and touching his left Hand to the Shoulder of his Horse,
he rose perpendicular, like a Pyramid of Fire, and again descended on his Seat,
as a Flake of Snow on a Rose-Bud. He then touched his white Wand to the Neck of
his Steed, who instantly mounted the Air, like a winged Pegasus, while the
Duchess shouted out, thinking her Harry a gone Man, but he returned as
composed, as though he were seated on a Bed of Cotton.

The Coach now began to move, and Harry put his Wand to the Flank of his Horse,
who, turning his Head to the Carriage, as of his own Accord, moved sidelong
toward Enfield, with a proud but gentle Prancing; while the Duke cried out,
Look, look! O the Boy, O the Boy, the lovely glorious Boy!

As our Hero attended the Carriage of the Duke, the Princess and her Train had
got to the House and alighted, while Harry opened the Coach Door, and handed
out the noble Pair, who alternately kissed and took him to their Arms. Mr.
Clinton then came forth and received them All with Transport. But Harry, under
some Pretense, walked away, ruminating, in order to avoid the disdainful
Regards of the young Lady.

In the mean Time, our Company, rejoicing, and caressing Each other all the
Way, had got slowly, though very lovingly, to the great Mansion Parlour. The
Duke then, respectfully taking the young Lady by the Hand, Permit me, Brother,
says he, to recommend to you my lovely Ward, the fair Princess of Morocco. The
Lady then gently bent one Knee toward the Ground, while she received the
cordial Blessing and Salute of the old Gentleman.

They then took their Seats. When, Mr. Clinton, while he looked more earnestly
on the Princess, grew suddenly affected, and called out for a Glass of fair
Water and Hartshorn. When he drank it, be found himself in a Measure restored,
and, lifting his Hands, he cried, I protest One would think that Nature had
copied this young and lovely Creature from an Image that has lain impressed
upon my Heart, near these forty Years.

You are in the right, my Brother, exclaimed the Duke, it is even as you
surmize. Allow me then, once more, to introduce to you the Counterpart of our
once adorable Louisa, to introduce to you my Niece and your own Offspring, my
Brother, even the Daughter of your still living and ever precious Eloisa. The
Princess then sprung forward, and, dropping precipitately at the Feet of her
Grandfather, she put her Face between his Knees, and, seizing both Hands, she
bathed them with her Tears, crying, My Father, O my Father, my dear, my dearest
Father, how inexpressibly blessed I think myself, to be the Offspring of such a
Father! Mr. Clinton then raising her, and seating her fondly on his Knee, and
grasping her to his Bosom, I will not ask, he cried, how these Miracles came
about, it is enough that I feel the Attraction which pulls you into my Heart.
And so saying, their Tears flowed, till they mingled on the Flooring.

Go, my Angel, said Mr. Clinton, and take yonder Seat, that I may view and
delight my Soul with your Sight, at Leisure. My Eyes begin, at these Years, to
see best at a Distance.

At length, the soft Voice of our Harry was heard in the Hall, and the Duke,
whispering his Brother, requested him, for a little Time, to take no Notice of
what had passed.

Our Hero then entered, bowing respectfully and gracefully, but carelessly
toward the Side where the Princess sat. He then took his Seat beside the Duke,
and bending fondly to him, and seizing a Hand, with both his Hands, he pressed
it to his Lips and cried, Welcome, welcome, my dearest Lord, to the House and
the Hearts of your truest Lovers!

Then, giving a Glance to the Side where the Princess sat, he caught a Glimpse
of her Attractions and, sighing, said to himself, O, the Pity, the Pity! But,
no Matter; her Pride shall never suffer a single Charm to take Place; and, so
thinking, he turned his Eyes aside.

Mean time, Abenaide arose, with as little Noise as a Hare from her Seat; and
stealing round, like a Cat circumventing a Mouse, She came behind Harry's
Chair, and reaching, and covering an Eye, with each of her Hands, she turned
his Head to her, and made a Sound with her Lips, as though she had kissed him.
Harry opened his Eyes in utter Astonishment, while in a Twinkling standing
before him, she chuckled a Laugh and cried, Ha, ha, he, -- my Harry, what, have
you forgot me, don't you remember your old Playfellow, your little Friend
Abenamin?

Harry's Eyes were now opened, in the Midst of the Hurry and Agitation of his
Soul. At a Glimpse he took in the whole Oppression of her Beauties; and,
casting himself, quick as a Glance of Lightning, at her Feet, he seized the Hem
of her Robeing and glued it to his Mouth.

At length, lifting up his Eyes, he cried, Ah, what are all these Wonders to
me, or my Happiness, unless my Abenamin will also become my Abenaide? That,
replied the Princess, is not at my Option, there sits my Lord and Father at
whose Disposal I am.

Harry then rose, and, throwing himself at the Feet of his revered Patron,
embraced his Legs in Silence, while Mr. Clinton cried out, Yes, my Harry, I
understand you; nothing shall ever be wanting to the Happiness of my Darling,
that the Power of his tender Parent and loving Uncle can effect. I can have
nothing in Heaven or Earth, that is not the Property of my Harry. Harry kissed
his Feet and sprung up.

Mr. Clinton then continued, I aver, I am still in a Labyrinth. Did you not
say, my Abenaide, that you were also our Abenamin? I did, my Lord, says she,
but I did not dare to avow myself. Ah what a painful Struggle did that
Restriction cost me! while I panted to catch and to cling to your honored
Feet; while I used to look, and gaze upon you, unperceived; while my Heart
swelled with Affection, and my Eyes with restrained Tears, and while I kissed,
in secret, the Book that you read, and the Ground that you trod on.

Abenaide then sat down, and Harry, lightly throwing himself on the Ground
beside her, looked beseechingly around and cried, My Lord, my dearest Lady, our
still precious Fanny Goodall, can you vouch, can ye warrant that I am safe in
this Matter? Then, looking up to the Princess, and drinking her in; No, he
cried, you cannot engage it, I feel that I shall perish in the very Ecstasy of
the Expectation of being united to her.

Just then, Mr. Meekly came in. He had been long and far away, upon many a
blessed Tour of doing good through the Earth. But, as soon as he heared of the
Arrival of his beloved Patron and young Lord, he rode post to embrace them.

Harry sprung from Love to Friendship, and catching him in his Arms, cried, O,
my Meekly, my dearest Meekly, how seasonably you come, to temper, by your
Advice, the insufferable Transports of my Soul; behold the Regent of my Heart,
behold the Queen of all my Wishes!

Meekly then fixed his Eyes upon the Princess, and soon after exclaimed;
Gracious Father! what do I see? Can the Louisa be resuscitated and new raised
from the Dead? O then, it must be so, she must be her Descendent. No One, save
my peerless Patroness, could produce the Likeness of my Patroness. But how this
blessing Miracle was brought about is the Question.

That is my Question too, my dear Meekly, said Mr. Clinton, if my most noble
Brother would be so good as to solve it. I will gratify you, Gentlemen, said
the Duke, in as few Words as possible. Mean while, the Princess withdrew.

On my Embassy to the Court of Morocco, I had several private Interviews with
the Emperor, before my Credentials were opened in Public. I had the good
Fortune to be liked by him, so that he suffered no Day to pass without seeing
me. His Name was Abenamin, he was accounted a great Captain, he exceeded All in
his Dominions for Grace of Person and Beauty of Aspect; and that which rendered
him still more singular was, that he had given Liberty to all the Ladies of his
Seraglio, and, for many Years, had kept constant to the reigning Sultana, said
to be the most exquisite Beauty upon Earth.

As we grew more intimate, in the Exuberance of his Affection for his Empress,
he could not refrain from speaking of her to me, and he promised that, before I
departed, I should see and converse with her; a Grace, he said, never granted
to any other Man.

At length, the Day being appointed for my public Entry, I rode through the
City, attended by a sumptuous Train, and alighting before the Palace, advanced
to the Hall of Audience.

The Emperor was seated, with his Sultana at his right Hand, upon a Throne of
Ivory. As soon as I had approached the Presence, and began to open my
Commission, the Empress gave a great Shriek, and fell over in a Swoon upon the
Bosom of her Husband.

The royal Abenamin instantly turned pale as Death, tore off her Veil with
trembling Hands to give her Air, and called me to his Assistance, as it is
accounted Profanation for any Moor to touch the Person of the Empress. But, O
Heaven, O my Friend! think what was my Astonishment when, in the pale Face of
the Queen, I beheld the loved Features of our darling Eloisa!

The Court broke up in Confusion, and her Women came hurrying with Drops and
Essences. As soon as she recovered, she opened her Eyes upon me, and reaching
out her Arms, and catching me to her, she cried. O my Uncle, my dearest Uncle,
am I so blessed then as to behold you before I expire.

The Monarch, in the mean Time, looked upon me with a jealous Eye, and twice
put his Hand to the Haft of his Dagger, but checked his rising Indignation,
till he should have the Mystery of his Queen's Behavior explained. The Women
then raised her up and bore her to her Apartment; while the Emperor, turning to
me, with no very friendly Aspect, ordered me to follow him.

When I had attended a considerable Time in the Antichamber, He came forth with
a serene and joyous Countenance, and embracing me, cried, O my Friend, my dear
Kinsman, how transported I am to find and acknowledge You for such; the Parent
of my Angel becomes a Part of myself.

He then led me by the Hand into the Bedchamber of my Eloisa, where we renewed
our Caresses without Restraint. But the Monarch, fearing that these Emotions
would be too much for her, told me that he had something for my private Ear
till Dinner; and took me into an adjoining Closet.

There, seating, and taking me affectionately by the Hand, I will now tell you,
my Uncle, says he, how I came by this inestimable Treasure of your Niece.

I had fitted out a royal Ship of my own, not as a Corsair, but rather for
Trade in the Mediterranean. On their Return from the Coast of Egypt, as they
past, after a violent Hurricane, within Sight of old Carthage, my People
perceived, at a Distance, a Sloop stranded on a Shoal of Sand about a League
from the Shore. Immediately they sent out a Boat and took the distressed
Company in, consisting of my Charmer, two female Companions, and three Servants
in Livery, beside the Boatmen.

The Intendants of my Ship behaved themselves with all possible Respect toward
the young Lady and her Attendants, and endeavored to quiet her Terrors, by
assuring her that she was free, and that their Prince was a Person of too much
Honor and Humanity to derive any Advantage from the Disasters of the
Unfortunate.

The Moment that they brought her before me, pale, trembling and in Tears;
while she dropped on her Knees, and lifted to me her fine Eyes in a petitioning
Manner; the Gates of my Soul opened to the sweetly affecting Image, and ever
after closed, of their own accord, upon it.

Ah, I cried, heavenly Creature, calm, calm your causeless Fears! I swear by
our Prophet and the God of our Prophet, that I would rather suffer the Gaunch,
than put the smallest Constraint on your Person or Inclinations. You are free,
Madam, you shall ever be free, save so far as I may bind you by my tender
Offices and Affections.

I raised her, and she grew something better assured; when, bending a Knee in
my Turn, I kissed her Robe and cried, Look not upon me as your Tyrant, look not
on me as your Lover; but look upon me as your Friend, the tenderest and truest
of Friends, who shall ever be ready to sacrifice his own Happiness to Yours.

From that Time I studied every Amusement, every Diversion, that might serve to
dissipate the timid Shrinkings of her remaining Apprehensions. While I
conducted myself toward her, with a distant though fond Respect, not even
presuming to touch her ivory Hand.

In the mean Time, my Soul sicken'd, and grew cold to all other Women. If you
were ever in Love, my dear D'Aubigny, you know that it is a chaste as well as a
tender Passion. I languished indeed for her, I longed and languish'd to Death;
but then it was rather for her Heart than her Person that I languished.

One Day, as she heaved a heavy but half suppressed Sigh, Ah my Angel, I cried,
I can have no Joy but Yours, and yet You have Griefs to which you keep your
Friend, your Abenamin a Stranger. True, my Lord, says she, Tears breaking from
her, all your Bounties have not been able to silence the Calls of Kindred or
Claims of Nature within me. Ah, my Parents, my dear Parents; I feel more for
You, than I feel even for myself, in being torn from you.

The Weight of her Affliction fell, like a Mountain, on my Soul and crushed me
to her Feet. You would leave me then, Eloisa, you wish to leave me, but your
Generosity delays to tell me so, for fear of breaking my Heart. -- Well, be it
so -- go from me -- you know I cannot survive you -- but, my Death is of no
Consequence, my Eloisa shall be happy. -- I will go this Instant, I will
dispatch my swiftest Galley to Languedoc -- I will write Word to your Parents
that you are safe, that you are beloved, and yet pure and untouched, since
respected as a Deity. -- I will invite them to come and take Possession of my
Treasures, my Dominions, my Heart: But -- should they reject my Suit, I again
swear, by Alla, to send You to them, laden with Wealth, though I myself should
drop dead at the Instant of your Departure.

The noble Soul of my Eloisa became instantly affected. She caught a Hand
between both of hers, and bathing it with Tears, cried, O, now indeed you have
bound me by Chains infinitely stronger than all the Shackles that fasten the
Slaves to the Galleys of Africa.

I kept firm to my Engagement, and, in a few Weeks, my winged Messengers
returned. But, O the Tidings, the very doleful Tidings for my Beloved! They
brought Word that they found no Creature; save two ancient Domestics in the
great Hotel, as two Ravens in the Midst of a lonely Forest.

From these they learned, that my Eloisa's Mother and little Brother were dead,
that her Grandmother was dead, her Aunt the Marchioness also dead, and that the
Marquis had retired they knew not whither.

She wept incessantly, and I wept with her. -- At length she softly said; You
have conquered, my Lord, you have conquered; I am subdued by your Weight of
Affection! O, that You could but conform to one Article more, that we might be
united as one Heart, and one Soul, and one Sentiment for ever!

It was now, for the first Time, that I dared to seize her Hand, I crushed it
to my Lips, and thrust it into my Soul. What would you enjoin, I cried, I would
do any Thing, dare any Thing to be united to my Eloisa! in Life and in Death,
Body to Body and Dust to Dust, never never to be sundered, till her Spirit
should make the Heaven of my Spirit hereafter.

Ah, she suddenly exclaimed, that, that is the very Thing I so eagerly desire.
Let the God of my Heart be the God of your Heart, let the God of my Spirit be
the God of your Spirit, so shall we be united in him, and jointly partake of
his Blessedness through Eternity!

Ah, I cried, can I forego the divine Precepts of our Prophet? Your Prophet,
says she, preaches only to the Eye and the Ear, and this is all that he does or
can pretend to: But Christ, my Prophet, preaches, in the Heart, to the
Affections. From him is every good Motion divine or human, He is the unknown
God of your Spirit, my Master, my Abenamin, and you feel his precious Power
while you disavow his Name.

I was puzzled, I was silenced. I bent a Knee in Reverence, kissed her Hand,
and withdrew.

I sent for the Chief of the Christian Missionaries, throughout the City and
Country. I consulted Each of them in private, but received no Satisfaction from
them. They All appeared equally zealous for my Reformation, but attempted it by
different and even by opposite Arguments.

Some would have persuaded me to be Christian, by showing the Absurdity of
every Religion that was not Christian. Others affirmed that my eternal
Salvation depended on my Conformity to certain external Rules and Penances.
While the greatest Number inveighed against the Christians of every other
Denomination; and would have thrust me wholly from Christ, if I did not consent
to receive him within their stinted Pale.

I knew not what to do: I was put to a Stand, and quite confused by this
Multiplicity of conflicting Opinions. At length, a Countryman of my own came to
me from the Desert. He had been a great Sinner, but was converted by the Sense
of his Sins, and he was revered and resorted to by All the Friendless and
Afflicted.

I opened my Soul to him, with all its Doubts and Difficulties. -- My Friend in
CHRIST, said he, with a gentle and still Voice, they have been leading you all
astray, quite away from the Haven that stretches forth its Arms for the
Reception of long toiled Mariners, whom Storms have, at length, compelled to
seek a final Port.

The God of your Creation can alone be your Redemption, the God of your Nature
can alone be the Salvation of the Nature that he imparted. But, who shall
convince you of this? Not all the Angels in Heaven, nor all the Doctors upon
Earth, till the Christ of your Heart shall be pleased to convince you that you
are, as indeed you are (however mighty a Monarch) a poor, frail, erring, vile,
and despicable Creature; subjected to innumerable Lapses and Infirmities,
Sickness, Passions, and Crosses, Griefs, Agonies and Death. When this is
effectually done, the Whole of the Business is done. You will call for and
catch at a Savior, in the Sensibility of your Want of him. When you come thus
laden with your Sins to him, he will in no wise cast you out. But he will take
you, as Noah took the wearied Dove into the Ark. He will take you within the
Veil of his own Temple of Rest, and all Sects, Forms, and Ceremonies will be as
the outward Courts, with which you shall have no Manner of Commerce or Concern.

My Heart felt the Weight and the Fullness of Conviction. I took him to my Arms
and requested instant Baptism. My Eloisa was called, we locked ourselves in.
And I was washed by Water and Faith into Christ, while my kneeling Angel wept a
Stream of Delight beside me.

It is said that Possession cloys. But I experienced, my dear D'Aubigny, that
Love never cloys. Every Day, with my Eloisa, seemed to triumph, in heartfelt
Happiness, over my first bridal Day. But O, what was the Joy, the Exultation of
my fond Heart, when she gave me to be the Father of a little Daughter of
Paradise!

One Day, while we were toying and fooling with the smiling Infant, and
throwing her, as she crowed, from the One to the Other. Ah, my Husband, cries
Eloisa, how poor I was lately, no Parents, no Kindred, nothing but my Abenamin
upon the whole Earth; and now God has been pleased to make my Affliction to
laugh, and to give this Babe for a further Band, a precious Link of Love
between us.

He was just in this Part of his Narration, when the Music sounded to the
Banquet. We instantly rose and joined our Eloisa.

When the Collation was removed. Madam, said I to the Empress, have you ever
heard of a Relation, of yours, christened by the Name of Fanny Goodall, and
lately Countess of Maitland? I have, said she, often heard my fond Father speak
of her with filling Eyes. She is in this City, Madam. She is no longer Countess
of Maitland. She is now doubly your Relation, your Aunt as well as your Cousin,
and goes by the Title of the Marchioness D'Aubigny. With the good Leave of my
Lord here, I will bring her to you directly.

I went to the Palace appointed for my Residence: I there gave my Fanny a few
Heads of the Story of our Eloisa, and took her hastily to the Presence.

The Ladies looked at Each other, in long and silent Admiration. Then, opening
their Arms, and rushing together, they continued some Minutes locked in mutual
Embraces.

Madam, said the Emperor, smiling, I think I ought to be allowed the same
Liberties with my Aunt, that your Husband took with his Niece. Whereon, he
welcomed and caressed her with an affectionate Fervor.

O, exclaimed the royal Fair, how very poor, and how very rich our God can
suddenly make us! But then, Lord of my Life, to think of parting, of parting
with these dear Friends again, perhaps never to see them more, that is what
sinks and wrings my Heart, in the very Midst of Exultation!

That, my Love, said the Emperor, is the very important Article on which I wish
to consult with you and our Friends here, our dear Kindred in Christ. But I
must first show them their young Relation, my little Enchantress, my priceless
Pearl, my Eye delighting Abenaide.

He then stepped forth, and, after a while, led in a gracefully moving Creature,
but veiled from the Head to the Waist. Throw up your Veil, my Love, says he;
here are none but your Friends, your very dear Relations, your lovely Aunt and
your Uncle, the Marquis and Marchioness D'Aubigny.

She did as she was ordered, and instantly broke upon my Sight, like a new
Glory arisen upon Midday.

My Fanny seized upon her, as desirous of devouring her. And I, in turn, took
her to me, with tearfull Eyes, as almost persuaded that I embraced the newly
revived Person of my dearest Sister Louisa; so perfect was the Resemblance in
every Grace and Feature.

When we had nearly oppressed the celestial looking Maid with our insatiate
Caresses; She seized our Hands and, kissing them, cried, What a blessed Day is
this, that enriches Abenaide with two Parents more; another precious Father,
and another lovely Mother, happy, happy Abenaide.

Her royal Father then gave a Beck, and she instantly vanished; while her
Absence seemed to cast a Shade throughout the Room.

The Monarch then, deeply musing and heavily sighing, began -- I am now, my
dearest Friends, Friends beloved above the World and all that it contains, I am
now to open to you my inmost Heart, and to reveal a Purpose whereon I have been
ruminating these many Months, but could not hit on an Expedient for bringing it
to pass. How opportune has our Jesus sent you to us on this Occasion!

I have but the two Children living; my Abenaide, and a Son, by a former Woman
of my Seraglio. His Name is Abencorrage; he is a Youth renowned in the Field,
but of a proud and impetuous Demeanor. He had long conceived an illicit
Passion for his young and lovely Sister. At length the Fire broke forth, and he
lately attempted her Honor.

I would instantly have put him to death, had I any other Heir to succeed to my
Dominions. I therefore contented myself with banishing him my Court and my
Presence, though I am sensible that this has not availed for the extinguishing
his horrid Flame.

Now, my Friends, should I die, or should this violent Boy break into
Rebellion, for he is the Favorite of the licentious Soldiery, I tremble to
think what would become of my bright eyed Dove, within the Talons of such a
Vulture.

This, together with my eager Desire of quitting a Kingdom of Infidels, and of
joining with the blessed Society and Communion of Saints, has, after some
Struggles, determined me to abdicate my Throne, as soon as I can amass and
transmit a Fund sufficient for supporting my Eloisa and myself, with becoming
Dignity, in her native Country.

Ah, my Lord, I cried, clasping him passionately in my Arms, regard not your
Treasures, delay not a Moment for that! your Eloisa's Relations, both by Father
and Mother, are possessed of princely Fortunes, and they will all be freely at
the Disposal of your Majesty.

Ah, my D'Aubigny, said he, I am not yet so duly mortified a Christian as
needlessly to elect a State of Dependence, or willingly to descend at once from
the King to the Beggar. I have however been preparing: I have already converted
a large Part of my Effects into Bills and Jewels, of high Value but light
Portage, to the amount, as I think, of about Sixty Million of French Money;
this I will transmit by you, and as soon as I shall have compassed an equal
Sum, I will stay no longer in Africa, I will fly to your Bosoms, my precious
Friends.

In the mean Time, this violent and lustful Boy gives no Rest to my
Apprehensions. It is therefore necessary that I commit my Abenaide to your
Trust. It is necessary, I say, that I tear away my choicest Limb, the dearest
Part of my Vitals! Support me, Christ, in the Trial, but it must be gone
through.

This, however, must be done with all possible Privacy. I am persuaded that my
young Villain has his Spies in and about my Palace. I shall therefore request
my dear Aunt, to disguise my little Girl in Boy's Apparel, and to blacken every
Part of her visible Complexion, that she may pass unnoticed, as your Page,
through the Midst of my Attendants. As also that it may prove, during the
Travels of my Darling, a Preservative against the Lust of the Eye, and any
further Attempt tending to Violation.

At length the Time approached and pressed for my Departure, but how to part
was the Question. All Attendants were ordered to avoid the Presence, far away.
Our metamorphosed Abenaide stood weeping beside us, while her Father and Mother
crushed us, successively, to their Bosoms. All was Passion, a Gush of Tears,
but not a Word was uttered on any Part.

O, my D'Aubigny, cried the Emperor at length, Friend, Brother of my Heart, can
you conceive what I feel at this Instant? I regard not the World, nor the
Things of the World. Omit such necessary Accommodations as are common to us
with Brutes; and All, belonging to the immortal and divine Humanity of Man, is
Magnetism, is Fellowship, the Feeling, as of Steel to Adamant, and of Adamant
to Steel. There is the Friendship, the Endearment, the Love, passing Love, and
surpassing all other Enjoyment. If we meet again, my D'Aubigny, I shall
anticipate my Heaven!

Again, he embraced his little Angel, and again he embraced his Queen, and
besought her to be comforted. We then took Leave, as for the last; and again
they called us back, and embraced and took Leave again; till, seeing no End, I
suddenly broke away, hurrying with us our Abenaide, for fear of Observation. I
forgot, however, to tell You that, the Day before our Departure, the royal
Abenamin had enjoined me to set apart twenty Million of Livres, for the Portion
of his Child, in case she should be married to any great Prince or Potentate,
requesting me, at the same Time, not to put any Constraint on the Inclinations
of his Lamb.

I have little further to say, my Brother. We arrived safe at Paris, where we
received your Letter; and, impatient to make you happy, I dispatched my Fanny
with her Train and your Abenaide before me; enjoining them, however, not to
reveal our Secret till my Arrival. For, as I had charged myself with the Loss
of your Eloisa, I deemed myself best entitled to make you Reparation in Person.
But, I ought not to omit that, before I left Paris, I received a further
Remittance of twenty Million from your Son-in-law, so that we may speedily look
to have the royal Pair in England.

Soon after, a Post Chaise whirled into the Court, and Harry, flying out,
caught Clement and Arabella into his strict Embrace. He then hurried them in,
where Mr. Clinton received and caressed, and introduced them to the Duke and
Duchess, as Persons of great Merit, and his highly valued Friends. He then
presented to them his Abenaide, who accordingly saluted Clement, and embraced
Arabella with an affectionate Familiarity.

O Sir, cried our Hero, kissing his Uncle's Hand, am I to be the last Person in
the World, whom you will honor with a Salute from your bewitching Daughter? I
ask your Pardon, my Lord, said Mr. Clinton (solemnly) Allow me then, at length,
to repair my Omission by presenting to your Earlship her little Highness
Abenaide.

The Duke and Duchess and Meekly laughed. But Harry was not a whit the slower
in laying hold of his Advantage. He kissed her Forehead, her Eyes, her Cheeks,
and lastly dwelt upon her Lips, as though he would have infused his Soul
between them. Harry, Harry, cried Mr. Clinton, I will never introduce you to my
Girl again, unless you promise not to kiss so hard and bring so much Blood into
her Face.

Just then a Footman entered; My Lord, says he to Harry, here are three
Carriages and several Horsemen waiting without the Gate, they enquire for one
Master Fenton who, they say, lives with the Earl of Moreland, but I assured
them there was no such Person in the House. O Sir, said Harry, these are our
old Friends the Fieldings, and out he flew.

As he approached the Carriages, the Company gave a Shout of Joy. Why, Sir,
said Mr. Fielding, a Servant denied you to us, and said that no One of the Name
of Fenton lived here. O, says Harry, don't heed the Puppy, he is but a new
Comer.

He then opened the Doors of the Carriages, and handed and kissed them, in
Turns, as they came out, Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, the reverend Mr. Catharines and
his sainted Phaebe, and Ned and his blooming Bride.

Mr. Clinton received them at the Door, with the Joy of his Heart apparent in
his Countenance. He then introduced them to his most noble Brother and Sister,
to his Friend Meekly, and lastly he presented his Abenaide to them, on whom
they all gazed in mute and reverential Astonishment.

Harry then observing that his Uncle had not equally presented his Daughter to
Ned. Sir, says he, I apprehend that this is not quite fair; I have already
kissed the fair Bride of my Friend, with all my Heart, and it is but honest
that he should be favored with a Salute from Mine, in turn.

Harry then took Ned by the Hand and presented him to his Beloved. While Ned
bent the Knee, and touching her Hand tremblingly, looked awfully to her Face,
and said: Yes, Bride of Eden, lovely Extract of every Beauty! You alone can
reward, You alone can deserve him, You alone are fitted to be the Mate of my
incomparable Lord and Master, my Patron and Preserver! So saying, he lightly
touched his Lips to the polished Hand. But the Praises of her Harry had gone,
with a pleasant Trickling, to the Heart of Abenaide, and, gently raising Ned,
she affectionately saluted him, with a glistening Eye.

Pray Sir, said Mr. Fielding, whisperingly, to Mr. Clinton, is the Earl of
Moreland in Company? -- That is he, Sir, pointing to Harry. -- O then, cried
Fielding, he is titled below his Merits, it was for an Emperor that Nature
intended him.

Dinner was then served. -- During the Repast the Duke said, Let us not, my
Brother, keep our Harry in Pain: Why should we delay the Happiness of Children
so very dear to us? With Regard to your Child's Marriage to some mighty Prince,
as your Son-in-law hinted, I think her more ennobled and more illustrious, by
her Marriage with our Hero here, who purchased her, at his Peril, than if she
were mated to the greatest Potentate on Earth.

You must excuse me, my noble Brother, said Mr. Clinton, I will have no
clandestine Doings in this Business. My Girl shall be married in the Face and
witnessing of Thousands; left hereafter, this young Rogue should have the
Effrontery to deny her. What Day of the Week is this, Thursday, I think, let
Monday Sennight be the Day!

Harry rose and pressed and kissed the Hand of the Duke with Rapture, and then
kissed the Hand of his Patron in silent Submission.

They kept the Fieldings with them for three Days. But Harry would not part
with his Clement, nor Abenaide with Arabella till the Marriage should be over.
Harry, in the Presence of these two Friends, attempted to take some little
accustomed Liberties, under her Name of Abenamin. But, the Proprietor of his
Heart sweetly repulsed him and cried, No, no, honest Friend, I will box with
you whenever, and as often as you please, but, no more wrestling, my Harry!

In the mean Time, all Preparations were pushed into Forwardness by Mr.
Clinton. The many Shops of the many Towns, within many Miles around, were
emptied of their Boards and Sheeting, their Knives and Forks, etc. Thousands of
Tables and Forms were framed, Thousands of Tents were erected. Proclamation was
made in every Village, and all People, within thirty Miles, invited to the
Wedding.

When the Day approached, one hundred Oxen were slain, five hundred Sheep,
three hundred Swine, with fifty fat Deer, etc. etc. The Spits fried, and the
Cauldrons smoaked over the Fires of many a Field.

At length the auspicious Morning rose; and Harry and his Bride were already up
and dressed in their respective Apartments. Harry wore a Jacket and Drawers of
white Satin. His Locks flowed through a Knot of oriental Pearl. And a Mantle of
purple Velvet, embroidered with Needle wrought Flowers of Gold, hung over his
left Shoulder, and came under the right Arm in floating Skirts, joined at the
Ends by a Buckle of Carbuncles.

The Princess was habited, after the Persian Fashion, in a Vest of Silver
Brocading, scollop'd over a Petticoat of the same Fabric, that flowed in a
Train behind. A Scarf of cerulean Tint flew between her right Shoulder and her
left Hip, being buttoned at each End by a Rose of Rubies. Her shining Tresses
of jetty Black, bound together at her Neck beneath a huge Amethyst, fell down
in luxuriant Ringlets, and shaded and revealed, by Turns, the fine Bend of her
tapering Waist. A Coronet of Diamonds, through which there waved a white Branch
of the Feathers of the Estrich, was inserted on the left Decline of her lovely
Head. And a Stomacher of inestimable Brilliants rose beneath her dazzling
Bosom, and, by a fluctuating Blaze of unremitted Glory, checked and turned the
Eye away from too presumptuous a Gaze.

Our Hero, coming forth, beheld her, as a Pillar of Fire, just issuing from her
Antichamber. He stepped back, as she advanced, and fixed his Eyes upon her in
mute Astonishment; then springing forward he fell prostrate and kissed the Hem
of her Robeing. Again rising on one Knee, he lifted his Hands toward Heaven,
and his Eyes to her glowing Countenance. Oppressive Power of Beauty! he cried,
O, may every Day rise, like this, on my Soul-enrapturing Abenaide, encircling
her with Friendship, Love, and Joy, and the Knee of admiring Thousands!

Arabella attended her royal Friend, and Clement his noble Pupil, just as
Longfield entered to give an Account of his Expedition. But, he had scarce
begun his Detail, when, catching the Image that had long since made an
Impression on his Heart, he started and turned pale, and breaking off he cried,
Bless me, my Lord, Mrs. Clement, I think! Yes, my Longfield, said Harry, and
here too is your old and fast Friend Hammel Clement. Clement would not have
known Longfield in his present genteel Plight; but, hearing his Name, and
recollecting him at a Glance, he flew and seized upon him with a strenuous
Embrace. Arabella then advanced to welcome her old Friend; but poor Longfield
respectfully bowed and shrunk back.

You shall not escape me so, my dear Mr. Longfield, says she; I cannot forget
what I owe you, even my Life and Reputation; and I bless the Father of Mercies,
who has put it in our Power to pay Part of our Debt, and so saying she embraced
him with Freedom and Cordiality. Yes, my dear Longfield, cried Hammel, yours
is the Half of our Fortunes, and more than the Half of our Hearts. Your Heart,
Sir, said Longfield, will ever be most valuable; but as to any Thing
additional, the Bounty of my young Master has rendered all further Fortune
quite superfluous to me.

Longfield then beckoned his Lord forth, that he might relate to his Eye,
rather than to his Ear, the Success of his Commission. They hastened to a long
Barn, where he showed Harry two Ranges of beautiful Children, One of a hundred
chosen Girls, Another of a hundred chosen Boys, All dressed in a clean and
elegant Uniform. Harry walked between the Ranks, his Heart exulting in the
Sense of its own divine Humanity. Then, embracing his Agent, Yes, my Longfield,
he cried, These shall be indeed my Children; and I will prove a true and
affectionate Father to them. But let us hasten to bestow upon them a tender
Mother too, I trust.

He flew back, as a Glimpse of Lightening, and seizing and half devouring the
Hand of his Bride, Will you pardon me, my Beloved, says he, some Matters that
happened before our Union? I have collected all the Children I ever had before
Marriage. I scorn any Thing that is clandestine. They wait for your Inspection;
and I hope that you will not prove a hard Stepmother to them. You are a Rogue,
says she, archly smiling, and giving him a Pat on the Cheek; but come along,
and so saying, away they tripped.

The Princess walked, with a silent and musing Attention, up and down the
Ranges. Her Heart grew strongly affected, and, taking out her Handkerchief, she
wiped away the dropping Tear. And has my Lord, says she to Longfield, has he
indeed taken upon him to be a Father to all this pretty Host of Little Ones? He
has, so please your Highness, says Longfield, and has accordingly clothed and
provided for them. O, she cried, under the FATHER, which is in Heaven, he is
the dearest and sweetest Father that ever was upon Earth! So exclaiming, she
sprung at Harry, and notwithstanding her late Coyness, scarce vouchsafing a
Hand to his Lips, she now grappled about his Neck, half smothering him with the
Repetition of her Kisses and Caresses; and then thrusting her Face into his
Bosom, she vented her Passion in Tears.

On their Return, they perceived Mr. Clinton, the Duke and Duchess, all
standing in the great folding Door, and flying up the marble Steps, they Both
bent the Knee, and received the joint Blessings and successive Caresses of
their three exulting Parents.

Just then Harry spied Goodman Dobson and his Dame coming diffidently but
puffingly up the Avenue. Instantly he caught his Angel by the Hand and hastened
to meet them. He took them successively in his Arms, and kissed them with warm
Affection, while with yearning Hearts and Bowels, they wished him Joy upon Joy.
They then kneeled down on each Side of the Princess, kissing her Hands and
Garments, and blessing her for bestowing such a Heaven of Beauty upon their
Harry. But, as soon as Harry told her that they were his Fosterers, his very
dear Daddy and Mammy; she raised and kissed them, in turns, with her Arms about
their Necks; and besought them to be her Daddy and Mammy also; for, alas, says
she, my Daddy and Mammy are far away. Harry then gave them into the Hands of
his Man Jack, with Orders to take them to the Larder.

The Multitude, before this, began to thicken apace. And the Youth had got
together in the great Lawn, casting the Coit and the Sledge, and leaping over a
Cord that was raised between two Posts.

My lovely Harry, cried the Duke, I have heard Things, almost incredible, of
your Prowess and Action, but never saw any Sample save the mounting of your
Bucephealus. Will you be so good to give me some Instance of your Excellence
among yonder young Competitors, whom I suppose to be the most eminent that the
Shire can exhibit? Do, my Harry, said Mr. Clinton, clasping and kissing him,
indulge my dearest Brother on this our Day of Jubilee.

Harry bowed, and ordered Jack to bring him his Quarterstaff, and dispatched
Another for a Cord and two long Poles. He then walked down the Avenue, attended
by the Males and Females of the whole Family.

As they approached the Lawn, a Youth, of uncommon Vigor, had cleared the
former Cord, though raised to something upward of five Feet in Height, but All,
who attempted to follow, either recoiled or pitched over.

Harry then caused his two Poles to be erected to an Elevation of ten Feet,
with a Cord reaching from Top to Top. The Multitude came down, in Thousands, to
see what they were about. When Harry, having cleared the contested Cord with a
standing Hop, went backward from his lofty Poles, about the Distance of thirty
Paces; then, rushing forward, he advanced one End of his Staff to the Ground,
and springing, and raising, and rising upon the opposite End, he pitched
himself over the elevated String, while the Multitude beheld him, as a new
risen Phoenix, suspended and glittering in the Air, and then alighting, as
winged, on the other Side.

The Elements were rent by a universal Shout, which followed and undulated
after our Company, till they sheltered themselves within the House.

The Fieldings then arrived, with the reverable Mr. Catharines, who was
appointed to join the angelic Pair.

After Breakfast, the Carriages were ordered out. First, Mr. Clinton and his
Meekly moved away, in Mr. Clinton's Coach and Six to the Church. The Family of
the Fieldings then followed, in a Coach and Six, and two Chariots. Next went
Clement and his Arabella, in their Post Chaise and Four. The Duke and Duchess
then succeeded, in a sumptuous Coach proudly drawn by Six German Greys,
attended by a long Retinue of French Liveries, and the Dutchess's Women in a
Coach and Four. Last advanced the Princess's four faithful Moors, mounted on
fiery Coursers, and All glistering in Barbaric Gems and Adornments. And last of
all came our Hero and his Abenaide, enthroned in her open Chariot, as two
Pearls of the Orient in a Case of burnished Gold; her six spotted Arabians,
restraining their Impatience, beat Measures with their Feet, scarce seeming to
advance the Pace of a Tortoise. Never will any Sight so glorious be exhibited,
till the heavenly Jerusalem shall descend upon Earth.

Harry's Jack closed the Rear, mounted on his Lord's rhone Charger, who stepped
foaming behind the Chariot; and the long Cavalcade nearly reached from the
great Hotel to the Entrance of the Town.

The Crowd, however, extended wide and far beyond the Cavalcade. They bowed
respectfully and paid Obeisance to Mr. Clinton, the Duke, etc. as they passed;
but as soon as they got a Glimpse of the Chariot of their young Phaeton, their
Acclamations became unremitted and almost insufferable to the Ear, like the
Shouts of a Persian Army at the rising of the Sun.

Slowly as our Harry moved, the Multitude strove to retard him, by throwing
themselves in his Way, that they might satiate their Eyes and Souls with the
Fullness of Beauty. Bended Knees and lifted Hands, Prayers, Blessings, and
Exclamations were heard, and seen on all Sides; and, all the Way as they went,
Thousands, upon Tens of Thousands, shouted forth the Hymeneal of the celestial
Pair!

THE END.

