THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland. In FOUR
VOLUMES.

By Mr. BROOK.

DUBLIN: Printed for the AUTHOR. By DILLON CHAMBERLAIN, in Dame Street, facing
Fownes's Street. MDCCLXV.

TO THE RIGHT RESPECTABLE MY Ancient and well-beloved PATRON THE PUBLIC.
WHY don't you dedicate to Mr. PIT?

Because, Sir, I would rather set forth my own Talents than the Virtues and
Praises of the best Man upon Earth. I love to say Things that no One else ever
thought of, extraordinary, quite out of the common way. I scorn to echo the
Voice of every Fellow that goes the Road. Whether the Vessel of the
Commonwealth shall sink or swim; what is it to me? I am but a Passenger.

But, then, there is a Manner in doing Things you know.

No, Sir, it is no Business of mine. Mr. Pit is the Patron of my Patron; let my
Patron then dedicate to him, and welcome, dedicate Statutes, Temples, Monuments
as lasting as the Benefits conferred! It is nothing to me; neither will I say a
Syllable more about the matter.

May it please your Respectableness,

THOUGH the Dedication is the shortest Part of a Book, and held by all Readers
to be the vilest and most contemptible; yet the Writer and his Patron, the
Dedicator and the Dedicatee, have a different way of thinking; the Latter, on
account of the Incense that it breathes, and the Former, on account of the
Profit that it brings, look upon it as the most important Part of the
Performance.

Alas! how little Consideration is left, for the Race of Writers, among the
Race of Readers, especially on this Chapter of Dedications.

Your Respectableness, perhaps, has not duly perpended the Travail, the Toil,
the mavelous Drudgery, the Muck that Dedicators are obliged to pass through,
and the Fences of Truth over which they must break, in order to cull, select,
and sublimate an Offering fit to lay upon the Altar of Adulation.

Through what a World of Weeds do they range to gather their little Nosegays;
from what a Profusion of Offenses do they extract their Perfumes; and, how many
Nights do they watch, to concentre and realize a single Mouthful of Moonshine
for the Gratification of their Partrons.

The Trades also, incumbent upon them, are manifold, such as of Painting,
Patching, and Plastering; of Embroidering, Shaping, and Shaving; and of Tyring,
Trimming, and Tayloring; in order to smooth and garnish the Man whom it
delights them to honor, and to furnish him with a full Suit of Praises.

But your Respectableness, I humbly hope, would not wish me to be at all this
Trouble; for indeed Trouble is a Thing that I do not affect. There is, also, a
kind of Delicacy requisite in tickling the Ribs of Vanity. I am at best but a
downright sort of a Fellow. And, should I, aukardly presume to dash your
Merits, full, into the Chops of your Modesty, I might deserve but ill at the
Hands of your Respectableness.

My Grandmother, Peace be with her! I remember one thing among the many good
Advices, which she gave and I forgot. Never disgrace yourself, quoth she, in
order to do Honor to any One breathing. Think not, therefore, my most
respectable Patron, that I will either debase myself by cajoling you to your
Face, or do Violence, to Truth, by any kind of Panegyric when your Back shall
be turned.

That I have received many Favors from your Greatness, and have a competent
Sense of Gratitude for the same, is most certain. It is also true that all my
Studies and Labors have been applied for your Service, and that I wish no
other Death than that of laying down my Life for your Sake. Yet, with all my
Love for your Person, and Endeavors for your Prosperity, I cannot find about
me the smallest Scantling of Veneration for your Virtues.

You have, however, the Satisfaction to be quite easy upon this Score, and no
way to be mortified at any Sentiments to your Disadvantage. Your Fund of good
Humor on such Occasions is inexhaustible; and you have often joined with me in
reproving and ridiculing your own Vices and Follies, which at all times you
take more pleasure to rally, than I apprehend you will at any time take Pains
to amend.

I remember that in my Youth I was a great Builder of Castles, and, having your
Interest always at Heart, and seldom out of my Head, I employed my Time in
forming a thousand romantic and airy Schemes for your Advantage.

I once proposed to build your Happiness on Religion, on Christian Piety, and a
deep Sense of Duty; but, having in vain sought a Foundation whereon I might lay
the first Stone, the Superstructure vanished like the Clouds of last September.

I then attempted to plan the Establishment, of your Liberty and Renown, upon
the ancient and approved Principles of the SPARTAN POVERTY. As this had been
barely a heathen Virtue; as it had raised and supported that great and glorious
People, through many succeeding Centuries, in an uninterrupted Enjoyment of
Freedom, Power, and Prosperity; and, as nothing appeared to be wanting to the
Accomplishment of this Scheme, save a few simple Articles, such as Moderation,
Content, Self-Denial, and so forth, I made no doubt of your embracing the Terms
with Joy.

On paying my first Visit, your Respectableness was just come from a
Corporation-Cant, where I was told you had set your OWN MOTHER up to Sale; but
your Dignity was so drunk at the Cost of the Bidders, that I chose to defer
Matters to a more sober Opportunity.

On my next Address, I understood that the Equipage of your Respectableness was
in waiting; for it is not with you now as in the Days of Queen Bess. You were
hastening to see the Italian Puppet-shew. As I advanced to pay my Respects, I
was dazzled by the Ornaments with which you had glorified your Person, All, the
Product of foreign Looms and of foreign Labors; your Linen of the Netherlands,
your Point of Spain, your Ruffles of Dresden, with a full Suit in the Cut of
France, and trimmed like That of the three Brothers in a Tale of a Tub. In
short you were so satisfied, so wrapped, so full of your Finery, you could, then,
attend to nothing, save the Contemplation of Your fair Self.

I still had Patience. I watched my Time. I attended You, late on a Sunday
Evening, when I thought you at Leisure from the Fervor of your Devotions. But,
how was I struck of a heap, when your Footman informed me that some Noblemen
and Ladies, of the most fashionable Distinction, had engaged you for the
Afternoon, at the GAMING TABLE.

Soon after, I was apprised that, what with spending your Time and Money, in
running to Raree-Shows; in playing four Corners and a Fool; in Drinking,
Dressing, Drabbing; and in Gormandizing, and Gambling; the Finances of your
Respectableness were considerably sunk. It also, came to my Ear that you were
hugely fond of COCK-MATCHES, though you kept them as far as possible from your
own Dunghill; That it was your Custom to Bett on one Side, and then to Bett on
the other Side, and to lose your Money on all Sides; and that, by these and the
former Means, your Respectableness was dipped, so up to the Ears, in Debt, it was
thought your yearly Income would, in time, barely answer the Interest of what
you owed.

It was now confidently affirmed, may it please your Respectableness, that You
yourself were apprehensive of being reduced to sudden Indigence. And I eagerly
seized this Occasion of waiting upon You, in order, as I trusted, to reconcile
You to your Fate, and, possibly, to delight You with the Prospect of your
approaching Poverty. For I sighed when I reflected on your intemperate and
unbounded Thirst after Riches, That Death to national Nature, which had proved
the mortal Poison of Greece and of Rome, and of all People who tasted it, from
the Beginning of the World to this present good Day.

Being shown to your Apartment, I perceived your Greatness seated in a moody
kind of Attitude. But, having formerly had the Honor of being known to You, I
took a Chair without Ceremony; and, chatting with You awhile about the Weather,
the News of the Day, and such like ponderous Matters, as sage Ministers and
sage Politicians are wont to do. I began to introduce and open the Business.

Pray, Mister, said your Dignity (somewhat short) have You any particular
Business with me, at this Time? I am come may it please You, said I, to propose
a speedy and effectual Method for the Supply of all your Wants. At these
agreeable Tidings, all the Ears, your Respectableness had, were pricked up and
opened to Audience. -- Go on, my Good Friend, dispatch, in Heaven's Name!

May it please You, added I, it was the Custom of all the Seers and Sages, of
ancient Days, to introduce Truth and Wisdom under the Covering of Fable; and
this Covering was as a Nut-Shell, if your Teeth were able to crack it, you had
the Kernel for your Pains. Permit me then, at least to imitate their Manner;
for, though the Matter should happen to drop by the Way, the first Traveller
who takes it up may be bettered thereby.

Once upon a time, for so says my Story, a Householder, with his Family, was
cast on a certain Island, where, through a Process of Years, they propagated
till they became a little Nation. The Soil was exceeding fertile, but there was
neither River nor Spring in all the Land. Nature, however, had provided for
this Defect, by a Kind of Fruit; that perfectly allayed the Thirst; It was
bitter to the Taste, but left an agreeable Flavor in the Mouth, and gave
Health, Spirits, and Vigor to the whole Constitution; and it was called by a
Name which, in our Language signifies as nearly as I can render it THE FRUIT OF
ABSTINENCE.

There was, also, other Fruits, of a Species wholly the Reverse of the former;
for the Flavor of these was extremely delicious; but then they enflamed the
Thirst, enervated the Frame, and were called by a Name that signified the FRUIT
OF INDULGENCE.

As, almost, all People made this latter Fruit a Part of their daily Food; the
national Thirst, in time, became so great, that the Liturgy, of their Church,
was altogether composed of Prayers for Rain. O Jupiter, some Water, a little
Water, dear Mister Jupiter, Water, water, water, we pray for nothing but Water!
sink us, plunge us, drown us, overwhelm us with Water!

On the Decline of every Sun, several Families spread out the Fleeces of their
Flocks, as also their Sheets, and Blankets, for the Receiving and Retaining of
the nightly Dew. Others furnished themselves with small Alembicks for
distilling the Urine of their Household. Some took a Twelvemonth's Voyage to
bring back as much Liquid as they might subsist on for a few Weeks. And the
Geniuses of the Nation employed themselves in various Projects, such as the
chimical Extraction of Moisture from Biscuit and old Fiddles; as also the
hanging Nets of a peculiar Texture, on Poles of due Elevation, for catching the
Clouds.

Your Respectableness has my Tale. -- Can make nothing of it, say You? --
Suppose the Thirst, of this People, an Emblem of their Avarice, and Wealth to
be represented by Water, in the Fable. --

In short, may it please your Dignity, I have brought You (here it is) a
Refinement on the Institutions of the great Lycurgus. Could I, like the
Legislator of Lacedaemon, prevail upon you barely to abridge your Desires, You
would find yourself wholely a Stranger to Want. You would thereby acquire the
Wealth of Greatness, Goodness, Gloriousness; that Peace, that Solidity of
sublunary Enjoyment, which can only be found in a voluntary POVERTY.

Scarce had I pronounced the last fatal Word, when your Respectableness started
up in a Passion. You asked me if I had not seen the Levee of Duns at your Gate,
and the Catchpoles that lurked for You at every Corner. You consigned me, with
a very good Will, to the Devil; and desired that, the next time I presumed to
turn State-Quack, I should not prescribe Drink to a drowning Man.

As I retired, under the greatest Dejection of Spirits. -- Ho! you cried,
honest Friend! Mr. what do they call you? come back! You, who scatter your
Money as fast as your Words; as profuse of your Purse as you are of your
Opinions; You who always run a Mile before your Rents, and live upon the
Harvest of the next Year's Sickle; are not You also a poor Devil, One of the
Diogenical Gentlemen, as very an Emperor of the Tub as myself?

Preach up Poverty, with a Pox! first get wherewithal to pay your own Debts.
The ready Runners! my Boy, the passable Pictures! the royal Pages! the
Sparklers! the Portable! the Potable! Ay marry, this would do, this would
fortify your Argument, this would mould me to your Form, and persuade me to
your Faith. It is this, my little Lad, that would shut too the Door on all
manner of Temptations, and kick the Corruptions, you have so often complained
of, into the Kennel. Come, cast me the Nativity of this bright Son of Phoebus,
draw me a Scheme for raising this Egyptian from the Deep; and You shall be my
Darling, my Bardling, my hourly Oracle, my Apollo of Delphos, and what not.

Was your Respectableness, said I, ever told your Fortune? perhaps it might
bear some Resemblance to my own. I was a Boy, when the cunning Man, peering
earnestly into my Palm, uttered a Sentence, which I shall remember the longest
Day I have to live. You will always, said he, be getting a Power of Money, and,
take my Word, you will never be worth a Groat.

Indeed, could I have prevailed upon your Respectableness to be contented with
Poverty, I was in Hopes you would have enriched your Monitor for his Pains.
But, in truth, I Am a very Ass at this Business of getting Money either for You
or myself; and as for the keeping it, when I have got it, I have, long since,
given up all thoughts of the Matter. I will, however, do my best to add to the
Glories, to the Virtues, as I may say, of your Respectableness, in a Manner
more acceptable than my present Plan has proved.

I am your Dignity's most devoted, and wish you a mighty good Evening.

HAVING thereafter consigned my late Scheme to Bakers and Barbers, and to all
the vilest Applications of waste Paper. I sat down to study and provide a
Remedy for that feverish Kind of Consumption, under which your Respectableness
apparently labored during our late Confabulation.

I was sensible, at the same time, that your Distemper was common to many other
Countries, and that it was no where held to be dangerous, forasmuch as it only
consisted of two Articles, the Sensuality of the Body, and the Corruption of
the Mind.

I also knew that, in former Ages, a great Number of Publicks had been affected
with the very Malady that now possessed your Respectableness, and yet had lived
merrily under it to their dying Day.

I wished, however, to keep that Day at some Distance from your Greatness; and,
with long and intense Labor, and at the Cost of many a Candle, during my
nightly Lucubrations; I compounded a Medicine of approved and infallible
Efficacy, consisting, for the Nonce, of a quantum sufficit of the TEMPERANCE
and PATRIOTISM of the primitive Romans.

I knew that the Cure would follow, but how to prevail upon your
Respectableness, to swallow the Prescription, was a small matter of Difficulty
that yet remained. For, it is a Misfortune peculiar to Those who are bit by
Love, Avarice, Ambition, Pride, and such Passions, that they detest the
Thoughts of a Restorative, and are so enamoured of their Distemper they would
rather see the Devil than Doctor Apollo himself at their Door.

I, again, had the Honor of being admitted to an Audience. I called up and
exhausted all the Powers of Oratory on that capital Occasion. I demonstrated,
to your Respectableness, that the whole Weight and Elevation of the Roman State
rested, simply, on the two Pillars of TEMPERANCE and PATRIOTISM, on which it
rose, increased, and stood supported through many Ages; till, those Pillars
being gradually sapped, the mighty Structure, with its said Foundation,
decayed, grew ruinous, and fell confounded together. That Temperance is
necessary to the Strength of a Man, as Patriotism is necessary to the Strength
of a People. That each Roman, thus nerved and powerful apart, was yet
strengthened, a hundred thousand fold, by an invisible Chord which run from Man
to Man and united All, as One, in the LOVE OF COUNTRY. That hence sprung the
Helicon of their abundant Inspiration to Toil, Industry, Frugality, Valor,
Conquest, and Glory. They were swallowed, like so many Drops, in this Ocean of
Patriotism. They were lost to every Care and Sensation of SELF; and were only
found where they labored, fought, bled, or expired for their COUNTRY!

While, warmed and somewhat raised by the Elevation of my Subject, I thus
reasoned on National-Power, on human-Excellence, on Virtue, on Temperance, on
Patriotism, and Glory! I shall never forget the kind Concern which your
Respectableness expressed for me, in the evident Alarm and Compassion of your
Countenance, as for a Person whose Fit you feared was approaching.

Being, both of us, more composed, your Greatness was pleased to demand whether
this Romance was wholly of my own Invention, or, if I had lately been fishing
the Well, where Truth was formerly drowned, for an Ens Rationis of some
speculating Philosopher? Where, you cried in the name of Wonder, have you been
able to gather together such an old fashioned Bundlement of Scientific
Balderdash? You shall bring me to the Practice, exactly, at the Period that the
Hogs shall be brought to feed along with the Herrings; or at the time of the
Appearance of the Comet with the three Tails; or on the Week of the four
Fridays, so long looked for by Astrologians. -- Here! exclaimed your
Respectableness, who waits? All you, my Printers, Editors, and other Porters
who attend at the Gate of the Public! should this Fellow come, any more, with
these his Preachments of Piety, and Poverty, and Patriotism, and Stuff, I
command Ye to shut my Doors directly in his Face.

May it please your Respectableness, I am but a very little Man, and of a very
lowly Temper, and yet I could not but be piqued at the Severity of this
Treatment. I was, as a trodden Worm, and turned upon your Greatness with a
Resentment, that, possibly, did not become me.

May your Dignity, I replied, continue to be blessed with Writers duly
levelled to the Taste of the Reader, with the Politics of Court Hirelings, the
Poetry of Laureats, the Divinity of a H -- y; with Bawdry from the Fleet, with
Fragments from the Kennel of Grubstreet, with Strumpet Biography with W -- upon
Grace, with Treatises on --, and episcopal Essays on Spirit.

I trust that My Patron, in Recompense for a long Life spent in his Service,
will pardon me the dropping of one Observation, -- Nay don't look disgusted, --
it is no matter of great Offense, it is nothing more than this, that the Nose
of your Respectableness has ever been a ready Handle for the leading of a
FOOL, and a FOOL shall accordingly attend You on my next Visit.

PREFACE.
I Hate Prefaces. I never read them, and why should I write them? They stand
like Pales about a Park, I always overleap 'em, if I (...) there is any thing,
within, worth (...). But, what can I do? I am likely to lead a fine Life with
this Performance, when People begin to quarrel with me, upon reading the first
Word, of the first Page, of my Works.

This Friend, and that Friend, and the other Friend asks me, and here sits
Another, who is mighty curious to know, why I entitle my Hero the FOOL OF
QUALITY.

Pray, was it not more decent to impute Folly to one Man, than to Mankind, if I
found myself under the Necessity of doing the One or the Other?

Perhaps I call him a Fool, in Complaisance to a World that will, certainly,
honor him with the same Title, when they find his Wisdom of a Size not suited
to their Own -- Why, pray, what is Wisdom? -- Tell me, first, what is Folly. I
will, then, tell you what is Wisdom, if I find any Smattering of it in your
Definition.

I wonder, was there ever an Age of Wisdom, or a Land of Wisdom? -- Look about
You. The World will answer for Itself. -- Does not every Age and Nation grow
wiser and wiser? And have not all Fathers, from the Flood downward, been
accounted, no better than Fools, by their Posterity? -- I wish I had not been
born for some Centuries to come. What a Prodigy of Wisdom should I then be, in
comparison of what I am, at this Day.

Indeed, I should be glad to be wise, if I thought I could get any thing by It
-- Right, that is all the Use that the World makes of It; it is the very End,
Purpose, Goal, and Business of all the Wisdom upon Earth -- If a Man has length
enough of Sense to outreach all about him, by a Yard and a Half; He is, by a
Yard and Half, wiser than all his Neighbors.

But, was not Solomon then a Fool to neglect Riches, which he might have had
with a Wish: and to ask for Wisdom, whose only Use is the obtaining of Riches?
Was not this wishing to mend a roundabout Road, when a Quarter of an Hour would
have carried him, by a short Cut, to the End of his Journey? -- I fancy, my
dear Friend, it would be no great Matter of additional Burden to take the Folly
of Solomon upon your own Shoulders.

For, in case he had taken the Riches, how the pox should he keep them, while
any neighboring Power was wiser than himself?

Paris was not five Years younger than Solomon, when he, also, might have
chosen either Riches or Wisdom, and yet preferred a pretty Wench to the One and
to the Other. I am not so young as Paris, by five times five Years, and would,
therefore, prefer the One or the Other to the Wench -- You then allow that
Paris was a Blockhead in the present Case -- Sir, I allow any Man to be so, in
every Case, where he happens to differ in Opinion from myself -- Why pray, sage
Sir, have You got all the Wisdom of the World to yourself, or what Quantity
thereof, think you, may there be upon Earth? -- Less, by five Scruples, than
any Man in judiciary Robes and a full bottomed Wig, conceives to have fallen to
his own Share. -- But Folly you take to be multiplied and various -- Of two
Sorts, quoth an eminent Author, That which belongs to the Writer, and That
which belongs to the Reader of these Works.

Sir, this is wild Discourse, and very wide from the Purpose. Let me tell you
the World was never so wise as now. It is filled with Men of deep Erudition,
and Science -- True, my Monitor; but are they a jot the wiser for all their
Knowledge?

At the rate that you talk, in the Times of ancient Ignorance, there might have
been a competent Modicum of wise Folk in the World -- possible -- And, by the
same Rule, in these our enlightened Days of Connoissieurship and Erudition,
nearly, all our Literati may turn out Fools -- more than probable -- These are
Riddles -- that might be solved -- Explain 'em, I beseech you -- Not at
present. I will tell you a Story and pray listen. It is worth the hearing.

Fifty and five Pilgrims met, one Evening, at a great Inn, that led to more
Roads than there are Points in the Compass. They supped merrily together, in a
large Hall; and found, upon enquiry, that they were, all, bound to the Castle
of final Repose, appointed for the Reception of the Sons of Science. When the
Cloth was removed; Gentlemen, quoth the Pilgrim who first entered, I rejoice to
be joined, by so much good Company, on these my honorable Travels; and, I am
still better pleased to have it in my Power to conduct every Man of ye, the
shortest and surest way, to your Journey's End. Here, Gentlemen, here is my Map
of infallible Directions, the most accurate Extract, that ever was taken, of
all Inquiries, Observations, and Informations for the Nonce. Pardon me,
Brother, said the Pilgrim who sat next, your Map must be erroneous by, at
least, five Degrees; by five, did I say? by seven, as I hope to get to my
Journey's end. Look here at my Map, and believe your own Eyes. I Will be damned,
cried a third Pilgrim, (peering over the Maps of his Neighbors, and taking out
his own Parchment) I Will be damned if the Geographers, who designed the One or
the Other, were any better than Adventurers; They never reached the Place of
Destination I Will be sworn. Gentlemen, said a Fourth, with wonderful good
Temper, I do not swear; but I have, critically, remarked all the Charts
produced. There Is a blind Beggar, in our Town, who is led by his Dog, and, if
he does not arrive, at the Place we are bound to, with better Speed, and
greater Certainty, than any of you Three; I give myself, do ye see, and all my
Goods to the Devil, save a small Perpetuity, in Remainder, to my Son. That may
be, exclaimed a Fifth, but, look ye here, my Friends, here are the Quotations,
here are the Authorities. Authorities! quoth a Sixth, a Fiddlestick for a
Hobby! are they unquestionable, unassailable, like these in my Hand? Thus,
every Man's Chart, throughout the Fifty and Five, was, like the Hand of the Son
of Hagar, against the Chart of every Man. Each insisted on being accompanied,
in his own Way, as a Matter of mere Charity to all the Rest. They set out, the
next Morning, on as many different Roads as there were Persons at Table; and,
yet, no One of them ever arrived at the Place proposed, if any Dependence may
be had on those customary Posts, whom the World, from Age to Age, has paid for
Intelligence.

I don't clearly apprehend the Application of your Story, -- If that is not
your Fault, it must be my Own. It is at least a Dozen of the Twelve Labors to
beat any thing into the Head of some People. -- I will give you the Chance of
another Tale.

A certain Prince sent an Invitation, to two distant Personages, to come to his
Court. He, further, sent such Directions as could not be mistaken by any One,
living, who was willing to find the Way. And he, further, sent a written
Promise, signed, and sealed by the Seal royal, of the most happy
Accommodations, upon their Arrival.

The One, of the Parties invited, was a purblind Man who, barely, saw
sufficient to discern his Road. He, accordingly, was fearful of Error. He
cautiously, held on his Way; and, thereby, reached his Journey's End, the Place
of happy Destination to which he was appointed.

The other was a Man who had all his Eyes about him; but, he was a Genius, had
vast Invention, and thought it a Disparagement to tread in any Path that had
been beaten by others. He was for contriving short Cuts, and opening new
Discoveries. He made Excursions on all Hands. He grew impatient of the
Accommodations, appointed and reserved for him, at the Court of the Prince. He
expected them on his Journey, and sought for them at every Turn. He found them
not. He, therefore, traveled and strayed this way, and that way, in Search of
them. This led him, still, further and further from his Road. Till, maimed by
Accident, and stiff with Age, he grew, equally, ashamed and unable to return.

-- As plain as my Nose -- You can the readier follow -- But, talk to me, no
more, about the World and its Wisdom. I detest Wisdom, I avoid it, I would not
be bit by it. It is the Tarantula that spins a Web, whereby Innocence is
entangled. It is a Politician who opens a Gulf for the Swallowing up of a
People. It is a Lawyer who diggs a Grave for the Burial of Equity. It is the
Science, of Hocus Pocus, that bids Happiness come and pass, by the Virtue of
Cups and Balls. It is a Syllabub of fasting-Spittle for the Fattening of the
Virtuosi. It is a Robe with a pompous Train. A Wig spread to the Rump. A Beard
lengthened to the Girdle. It is a Ditch of Puddle, with a hoary Mantle, that
will not be moved to Merriment by any Wind that blows. It is an Ass in a
Sumpter-Cloth. An Owl, solemnly perched, amidst solemn Ruins, on a solemn Night.

Descend to me, sweet Folly! if thou have not, as I suspect, been my constant
Companion. Be, thou, my Sister, my Playfellow, thou Kitten of the solemn Cats
of State and Learning. But, no. Thou never were the Offspring of such stupid
Progenitors. Thou art ever joyous, ever young, although coeval, in Paradise
with our first Parents, ere, (a Pox upon their Ambition) they wished for the
Knowledge of Good and Evil. Pride pretends to spurn thee; Science affects to
look down upon thee; but they sigh for thee when no one sees, they have frowned
thee away, and when they seek they shall not find thee. Come, Folly! for even
thy Petulance and little Wickednesses become delightful, when thou incitest the
yeanling Kids and cooing Turtles to Combat. Thou art not captious, thou art not
testy, they laugh at thee, and thou laughest with them for Company. The Hours
dance before thee, the Graces smile in thy Train. Thou art a Companion for
Conquerors, a Play-fellow for crowned Heads. But, alas! thou art not respected,
as heretofore; when the Monarch of all Asia sent his Ambassadors to wait upon
thee, they came, with a mighty Train, even from Persepolis unto Laconia, to see
thee riding upon Switches, with Agesilaus and his little Son.

By -- my pleasant Friend, thou almost persuadest me to be a Fool, during the
Remainder of my Pilgrimage through the Wisdom of this World. But, is there no
such thing as true Wisdom in Nature? -- Sir, I have written a whole Chapter
upon the Subject; but it lies a great way on, toward the End of my Book, and
you have much Folly to wade through, before you come at it. -- Give me a Peep,
I beseech you. -- No Sir, you shall not anticipate. Do you Want to be in Port,
without making any Voyage? -- If I must win my way to Wisdom, Inch by Inch, let
me set out directly. -- Here then, begin. And pray, let me have your Remarks,
unpremeditated, as you proceed. I will answer you, as Whim or Judgment shall
happen to dictate.

THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.
CHAP. I.
RICHARD the Grandfather of our Hero, was ennobled by James the First. He
married a lovely Girl of the ancient Family of the Goodalls in the County of
Surry, and, at Seven Years Distance had two Sons, Richard and Henry; but dying
early, in the Reign of Charles the First, he bequeathed L12000 to his youngest,
and near L20000 annual Income to his eldest Son; not in any personal Preference
to his Brother, but as one who was to support the Name and Honors of the
Family. He appointed his Brother in Law Executor and Guardian, who, educating
the Children agreeable to their different Fortunes and Prospects in Life, in
about Seven Years after the Death of their Father, sent Richard with a Tutor to
take the Tour of Europe, and bound Henry Apprentice to a considerable London
Merchant.

During the Travels of the One and the Apprenticeship of the Other, the
Troubles happened, and Cromwell assumed the Regency; before the Fortune of the
Morelands could be forfeited or endangered, by siding with the Crown or the
Commonwealth.

Richard returned to England a short time before the Restoration; and being too
gay and too dissolute for the Plodding and Hypocricy of Cromwell and his
Fanatics, he withdrew to the Mansion House of his Forefathers.

On his Landing he had inquired for his Brother Henry; but hearing that he was
lately married, and wholely absorbed in Matters of Merchandise, as he had the
utmost Contempt for all Cits and Traders, he took no further Notice of him.

In the Country, he amused himself with his Bottle, Hounds, Hawks, Race Horses,
etc. and in debauching the Persons of the neighboring Wenches, and corrupting
the Morals of the Neighboring Squires. But, on the Restoration of his Majesty,
of pleasurable Memory, he hastened to Court, where he rolled away and shone as
in his native Sphere. He was always of the Party of the King, Rochester, etc.
where Virtue was laughed out of Countenance, and where all Manner of
Dissoluteness became amiable and recommendable by the Bursts of Merriment and
Zest of Wit. But toward the latter End of this droll Reign, Earl Richard, being
advanced in Age, and being still older in Constitution than Years, began to
think of providing an Heir to his Estate; and, as he had taken vast Pains to
impair it, he married a Citizen's Daughter who wanted a Title, and with her got
a Portion of one hundred thousand Pounds, which was equally wanting on his Part.

With his Lady he, again, retreated to the Country, where, in less than a Year,
she made him the exulting Father of a fine Boy; whom he called Richard.

Richard, speedily, became the sole Center of all his Mother's Solicitudes and
Affections. And though, within the Space of the two succeeding Years, she was
delivered of a second Boy, yet, as his infant Aspect was less promising and
more unformed than his Brother's, she sent him forth to be nursed by the robust
Wife of a neighboring Farmer, where, for the Space of upward of four Years, he
was honored with no Token from Father or Mother, save some casual Messages, to
know from time to time if the Child was in Health.

This Boy was called Henry, after his Uncle by the Father's Side. The Earl had
lately sent, to London, to make Enquiry after his Brother, but could learn no
Manner of Tidings concerning him.

Mean while, the Education of the two Children was extremely contrasted.
Richard, who was already entitled my little Lord, was not permitted to breathe
the Rudeness of the Wind. On his lightest Indisposition the whole House was in
Alarms; his Passions had full Scope in all their infant Irregularities; his
Genius was put into a Hot Bed, by the Warmth of Applauses given to every Flight
of his opening Fancy; and the whole Family conspired, from the Highest to the
Lowest, to the Ruin of promising Talents and a benevolent Heart.

Young Harry, on the other Hand, had every Member as well as Feature exposed to
all Weathers, would run about, Mother-naked for near an Hour, in a frosty
Morning; was neither physicked into Delicacy, nor flattered into Pride; scarce
felt the Convenience, and, much less understood the Vanity of Clothing; and was
daily occupied, in playing and wrestling with the Pigs and two mungril Spaniels
on the Dunghill; or in kissing, scratching, or boxing with the Children of the
Village.

When Harry had passed his fifth Year, his Father, on a festival Day, humbly
proposed to send for him to his Nurses, in order to observe how the Boy might
turn out, and my Lady, in a Fit of good Humor, assented. Nurse, accordingly,
decked him out in his holiday Petticoats, and walked with our Hero to the great
House, as they called it.

A brilliant Concourse of the neighboring Gentry were met in a vast Parlour,
that appeared to be executed after the Model of Westminster Hall.

There was Sir Christopher Cloudy, who knew much but said nothing; with his
very conversable Lady, who scarce knew by halves, but spoke by wholesale. In
the same Range was Sir Standish Stately, who in all Companies held the first
Place, in his own Esteem. Next to him sat Lady Childish; it was at least thirty
Years since those Follies might have become her which appeared so very
ridiculous at the Age of fifty-five. By her Side were the two Stiltons, a blind
Man would swear that the One was a Clown, and the Other a Gentleman, by the
Tones of their Voices. Next to these were two Pair of very ill mated Turtles;
Mr. Gentle, who sacrificed his fine Sense and affluent Fortune to the Vanity
and bad Temper of a silly and turbulent Wife; and Squire Sulky, a brutal Fool,
who tyranized over the most sensible and most amiable of her Sex.

On the opposite Side was Lord Prim, who evidently labored hard to be easy in
Conversation; and next to him was Lord Flippant who spoke Nonsense with great
facility. By his Side sat the fair but dejected Miss Willow, she had lately
discovered what a Misfortune it was to be born to Wit, Beauty, and Affluence,
the three capital Qualifications that lead the Sex to Calamity. Next to her was
Colonel Jolly, with a Heart ever tuned to Merriment and Lungs to Laughter; had
he known how to time his Fits, the Laugh might have grown catching. Below him
was seated Mrs. Mirror a Widow Lady, industriously accomplished in the Faults
of People of Fashion. And below her sat the beloved and respected Mr. Meekly,
who always sought to hide behind the Merits of the Company. Next to him was
Major Settle, no one spoke with more Importance on things of no Signification.
And beside him sat Miss Lovely, who looked Sentiment, and, while she was
silent, inspired others with Sense and Virtue.

These were the principal Characters. The Rest could not be said to be of any
Character at all. The Cloth had been lately removed, and a Host of Glasses and
Decanters glowed on the Table, when in comes young Harry escorted by his Nurse.

All the Eyes of the Company were, instantly, drawn upon him, but he advanced,
with a vacant and unobserving Phisiognimy, and thought no higher of the
Assembly than as of so many Peasants at a Country Wake.

Dicky, my Dear, says my Lady, go and welcome your Brother, whereat Dick went
up, took Harry by the Hand, and kissed him with much Affection. Harry thereupon
having eyed his Brother, I don't know You, said he, bluntly, but, at the same
time held up his little Mouth to kiss him again.

Dick, says my Lady, put your laced Hat upon Harry, till we see how it becomes
him, which he immediately did; but Harry, feeling an unusual Encumbrance on his
Head, took off the Hat, and having for some time looked contemptuously at it,
he cast it from him with a sudden and agile Jerk, as he used to cast flat
Stones, in order to make Ducks and Drakes in the Mill Pond. The Hat took the
Glasles and Decanters in full Carrier, smash go the Glasses, abroad pours the
Wine on circling Laces, Dresden Aprons, silvered Silks, and rich Brocades;
female Screams fill the Parlour, the Rout is equal to the Uproar, and it was
long ere most of them could be composed to their Places.

In the mean while, Harry took no kind of Interest in their Outcries or
Distresses, but spying a large Spanish Pointer that, just then came from under
the Table, he sprung at him like Lightning, seized him by the Collar, and
vaulted on his Back with inconceivable Agility. The Dog, wholly disconcerted by
so unacustomed a Burden, capered and plunged about in a violent Manner, but
Harry was a better Horseman than to be so easily dismounted; whereon the Dog
grew outrageous, and rushing into a Group of little Misses and Masters, the
Children of the Visitants, he overthrew them like Ninepins; thence proceeding,
with equal Rapidity, between the Legs of Mrs. Dowdy, a very fat and elderly
Lady, she instantly fell backward with a violent Shriek, and, in her Fall,
unfortunately overthrew Frank the Foxhunter, who overthrew Andrew the Angler,
who overthrew Bob the Beau, who closed the Catastrophe.

Our Hero, mean Time, was happily dismounted by the intercepting Petticoats,
and fairly laid, without Damage, in the fallen Lady's Lap. From thence he arose
at his Leisure, and strolled about the Room, with as unconcerned an Aspect as
if nothing had happened amiss, and as though he had neither Act nor Part in this
frightful Discomfiture.

When Matters were once more, in some Measure set to Rights, my Heavens!
exclaimed my Lady, I shall faint, the Boy is positively an Idiot, he has no
Apprehension Conception of Persons or Things. Come hither, Sirrah, she cried
with an angry Tone; but, instead of complying, Harry cast on her a Look of
Resentment and sidled over toward his Nurse. Dicky, my Dear, said my Lady, go
and pretend to beat his Foster Mother, that we may try if the Child has any
kind of Ideas. Here, her Ladyship, by ill Fortune, was as much unadvised, as
her Favorite was unhappy in the Execution of her Orders, for while Dick struck
at the Nurse with a counterfeited Passion, Harry, instantly, reddened, and gave
his Brother such a sudden. Pash in the Face, that his Nose and Mouth gushed out
with Blood. Dick set up the Roar, my Lady screamed out, and rising and running
at Harry with all imaginable Fury, she caught him up, as a Falcon would truss a
Robin; turned over his Petticoats, and chastised him with all the Violence of
which her Delicacy was capable. Our Hero, however, neither uttered Cry or Tear,
but, being set down, he turned round on the Company an Eye of Indignation, then
cried, come away, Mammy, and issued from the Assembly.

Harry had scarce made his Exit when his Mother exclaimed after him, Ay, ay,
take him away Nurse, take him away, the little Devil, and never let me see his
Face more.

I shall not detain my Readers with a tedious Detail of the many and differing
Opinions that the remaining Company expressed with regard to our Hero; let it
suffice to observe that they generally agreed that, though the Boy did not appear
to be endowed by Nature, with a single Faculty of the Animal rationale, he
might, nevertheless, be rendered capable in Time, of many Places of very
honorable and lucrative Employment.

Mr. Meekly, alone, though so gentle and complying at other Times, now presumed
to dissent from the Sense of the Company. I rather hold, said he, that this
Infant is the Promise of the greatest Philosopher and Hero that our Age is
likely to produce. By refusing his Respect to those superficial Distinctions,
which Fashion has inadequately substituted as Expressions of human Greatness,
he approves himself the Philosopher; and, by the Quickness of his Feelings for
injured Innocence, and his Boldness in defending those to whom his Heart is
attached, he approves himself at once the Hero and the Man.

Harry had now remained six Months more with his Nurse, engaged in his
customary Exercises and Occupations. He was already, by his Courage, his
Strength, and Action, become tremendous to all the little Boys of the Village,
they had all Things to fear from his sudden Resentment, but, nothing from his
Memory or Recollection of a Wrong, and this also was imputed to his native
Stupidity. The two mungril Dogs were his inseparable Play-fellows, they were
all tied together in the strictest Bonds of Friendship, and caressed each other
with the most warm and unfeigned Affection.

On a Summer's Day as he strolled forth with these his faithful Attendants, and
rambled into a Park whose Gate he saw open, he perceived in a little Copse that
bordered on a Fishpond, a Stranger seated on a Bench of Turf. Harry drew near
with his usual Intrepidity, till he observed that the Man had a reverend Beard
that spread over his Breast, that he held something in his Hand on which he
gazed with a fixed Attention, and that the Tears rolled down his Cheeks,
without ceasing, and in Silence, except the half suppressed Sobs that often
broke from his Bosom. Harry stood, awhile, immovable, his little Heart was
affected, he approached the old Man with a gentle Reverence, and looking up in
his Face, and seating himself by his Side, the Muscles of his Infant Aspect
began to relax, and he wept and sob'd as fast as his Companion.

Friend. -- Pray, who is this ancient Stranger? I have a great Curiosity to
know. Is he necessary to your Story, is he to have any future Connection with
the Child? How came he by the long Beard? Beards were not the Fashion in those
Days. There must be some extraordinary Reason for it, if there is any Reason at
all. Is his Story long, do you begin upon it directly? It is a great fault in
Authors to hold their Readers in Suspense; our Curiosity grows languid; twenty
to one it is vanished, before you begin to give it any Kind of Satisfaction.
Who in the World is he, what Business has he here?

Author. -- Sir, you see he is a Stranger; I have mentioned him as such. If he
chooses to continue so, for some Time longer, I know of no right that I have to
discover him. Perhaps I am the only Person breathing whom he has entrusted with
the Secret of his Affairs; I am upon Honor not to betray him; you must pardon
me -- pray proceeed.

CHAP. II.
THE old Gentleman turned and gazed at the Child, as on some sudden Apparition.
His Tears stopped. He returned the Picture, which he held, into his Bosom. And,
lifting up his Eyes, Great Power, he cried, is this the One, of all the World,
who has any Feelings for me? Is it this Babe, this Suckling, whom thou have
sent, to be a Partaker in my Griess, and the Sharer of my Afflictions? Welcome,
then, my little Friend, said he, tenderly turning and caressing the Child, I
will live the longer for thy Sake, and endeavor to repay the Tears thou have
shed in my Behalf.

The Language of true Love is understood by all Creatures, and was that of
which Harry had, almost, the only Perception. He returned his Friend's Caresses
with unaffected Ardour, and no Two could be more highly gratified in the
Endearments of each Other.

What is your Name, my Dear? said the old Gentleman. Harry Clinton, Sir. Harry
Clinton! repeated the Old Man, and started. And pray who is your Father? the
Child, then looking tenderly at him, replied; I Will have you for a Father, if
you please, Sir. The Stranger, then caught him up in his Arms, and passionately
exclaimed, You shall, you shall, my Darling, for the tenderest of Fathers,
never to be torn asunder, till Death shall part us.

Then asking him where he lived, and Harry pointing to the Town before them,
they both got up and went toward it. Our Hero was now again all Glee, all
Action; he sprung from and to his Friend, and played and gambol'd about him,
like a young Spaniel in a Morning, just loosed from his Chain, and admitted to
accompany his Master to the Field. As his two Dogs frisked about him, he would
now mount upon One, then bound upon the other, and each pranced and paraded under
him as delighted with the Burden. The old Gentleman beheld all with a Pleasure
that had long been a Stranger to his Breast, and shared in the Joys of his
young Associate.

Being arrived near the Farm House, Nurse, who stood at the Door, saw them
approaching, and cried out, Gaffer, Gaffer, here comes our Harry with the dumb
Gentleman. When they were come up. Good People, says the Stranger, is this your
Child! no, no, Sir, answered the Nurse, we are but his Fosterers. And, pray,
who is his Father? He is second Son, Sir, to the Earl of Moreland. The Earl of
Moreland! you amaze me greatly, is this all the Notice and Care they take of
such a Treasure? Sir, replied the Nurse, they never sent for him but once; they
don't mind him, they take him for a Fool. For a Fool? cried he, and shook his
Head in Token of Dissent. I am sure he has the wisest of all human Hearts. I
wish it may beso, Sir, said the Nurse, but he behaved very sadly, some Time
ago, at the great House. She then made a Recital of all our young Hero's
Adventures in the Mansion-Parlour; whereat the old Gentleman inwardly chuckled,
and, for the first Time, of some Years, permitted his Features to relax into a
Smile of Cheerfulness.

Nurse, said he, every Thing that I hear and see of this Child serves the more
to endear and bind me to him. Pray, be so good as to accompany us to my House,
we will try to equip him better both as to Person and Understanding.

As this Stranger's Seat made Part of the Village, they were soon there. He
first whispered his old Domestic, who, then, looked upon the Child with
Surprise and Pleasure. The Footman was next sent to bring the Tailor, and some
light Stuffs from the Town Shop. Matters being thus dispatched, with respect to
our Hero's first Coat and Britches, Nurse was kept to Dinner; and after this
Gentleman had entertained his young Guest with a Variety of little Tricks,
childish Plays, and other-Fooleries; toward Evening, he dismissed him and his
Nurse, with a Request that she would send him every Day, and a Promise that he
should be returned every Night if she desired it.

Harry, being thus furnished with the external Tokens of a Man Child, having
been born into the World, became an inseparable Friend and Play-fellow to his
Patron. At Times of Relaxation, the old Gentleman, with the most winning and
insinuating Address, endeavored to open his Mind and cultivate his Morals, by
a thousand little Fables, such as of bold Sparrows, and naughty Kids, that were
carried away by the Hawk, or devoured by the Wolf, and of good Robbins, and
innocent Lambs, that the very Hawks and Wolves, themselves, were fond of. For
he never proposed any Encouragement or Reward to the Heart of our Hero, save
that of the Love and Approbation of Others. At the Times of such Instruction,
Harry, who knew no other Dependence, and beheld his Patron as his Father and as
his God, would hang upon his Knee, look up to his Face, delighted, and greedily
imbibe the Sweetness of those Lessons whose Impressions neither Age, nor any
Occurrence, could ever after erase; so prevalent are the Dictates of Lips that
are beloved.

At other Times, the Stranger would enter, with our Hero, into all his little
Frolicks and childish Vagaries, would run and wrestle with him, ride the Rods,
roll down the Slope, and never felt such sweet Sensations and inward Delight,
as when he was engaged in such Recreations.

There was a Cock at Harry's Nurses, the Lord of the Dunghill, between whom and
our Hero a very particular Intimacy and Friendship had been contracted. Harry's
Hand was his daily Caterer; and Dick, for the Cock was so called, would hop
into the Child's Lap and pick his Clothes, and rub his Feathers against him,
and court Harry to tickle and stroke and play with him.

Upon a Shrove-Tuesday, while Harry was on his Road, from his Patron's,
intending a short Visit to his Nurse and Foster Father, a Lad came to their
Door and offered Gaffer a double Price for Dick; the Bargain was quickly made,
the Lad bore off his Prize in Triumph, and Gaffer withdrew to the manuring of a
back Field. Just at that Crisis Harry came up, and enquired of the Maid for his
Daddy and Mammy, but was answered that neither of them was within. He then
asked after his favorite Cock, but was told that his Daddy had, that Minute,
sold him to yonder Man who was almost out of Sight.

Away sprung our Hero, like an Arrow from a Bow, and held the Man in View till
he saw him enter a great Crowd, at the upper end of the Street. Up he comes, at
last, quite out of Breath, and making way through the Assembly, perceived his
Cock, at some Distance, tied to a short Stake, and a Lad preparing to throw at
him with a Stick. Forward he rushed, again, and stopped resolutely before his
Bird, to ward the Blow with his own Person, at the Instant that the Stick had
taken its Flight, and that all the People cried out, hold! hold! One End of the
Stick took Harry in the left Shoulder, and bruised him sorely; but, not
regarding that, he instantly stooped, delivered his captive Favorite, whipped
him under his Arm, caught up the Stick, flourished it, as in Defiance of all
Opponents, made Homeward through the Crowd, and was followed by the Acclamations
of the whole Assemby.

The old Gentleman was standing before his Court Door when his Favorite
arrived, all in a Sweat; what is the Matter, my Dear, says he, what made you put
yourself into such a Heat? what Cock is that you have under your Arm? In answer
to these several Questions Harry ingenuously confessed the whole Affair. And,
when his Patron with some Warmth, cried, why, my Love, did you venture your
Life for a silly Cock? why did I? repeated the Child, why Sir, because he loved
me. The Stranger, then, stepping back and gazing upon him with Eyes of tender
Admiration; may Heaven for ever bless thee, my little Angel, he exclaimed, and
continue to utter from thy Lips the Sentiments that it Inspires. Then, catching
him up in his Arms, he bathed him with his Tears, and almost, stifled him with
his Caresses.

In a few Days, our Hero was again restored, by frequent Fomentations, to the
Use of his Arm; and his Dada, as he called him, and he returned to their old
Recreations.

As Harry's Ideas began to open and expand, he grew ambitious of greater Power
and Knowledge. He wished for the Strength of that Bull, and for the Swiftness
of yonder Horse. And, on the Close of a solemn and serene Summer's Evening,
while he and his Patron walked in the Garden, he wished for Wings that he might
fly up and see what the Sky, and the Stars, and the rising Moon were made of.

In order to reform this Inordinacy of his Desires, his Patron addressed him in
the following Manner.

I will tell you a Story, my Harry. On the other Side of yonder Hill there runs
a mighty clear River, and in that River, on a Time, there lived three silver
Trouts, the prettiest little Fishes that any one ever saw. Now God took a great
liking and love to these pretty silver Trouts, and he let them want for nothing
that such little Fishes could have occasion for. But two of them grew sad and
discontented; and the One wished for this Thing, and the Other wished for that
Thing, and neither of them could take Pleasure in any Thing that they had,
because they were always longing for something that they had not.

Now, Harry, you must know that all this was very naughty in those two little
Trouts; for God had been exceedingly kind to them; he had given them every
Thing that was fittest for them; and he never grudged them any Thing that was
for their Good; but instead of thanking him for all his Care and his Kindness,
they blamed him, in their own Minds, for refusing them any Thing that their
silly Fancies were set upon. In short there was no End of their wishing, and
longing, and quarrelling, in their Hearts, for this Thing and the other.

At last, God was so provoked, that he resolved to punish their Naughtiness by
granting their Desires, and to make the Folly of those two little stubborn
Trouts an Example to all the foolish Fish in the whole World.

For this Purpose, he called out to the three little silver Trouts, and told
them they should have whatever they wished for.

Now, the Eldest of these Trouts was a very proud little Fish, and wanted,
forsooth, to be set up above all other little Fishes. May it please your
Greatness, says he, I must be free to tell you that I do not, at all, like the
Way in which you have placed me. Here you have put me into a poor, narrow, and
troublesome River, where I am straitened on the right Side, and straitened on
the left Side and can neither get down into the Ground, nor up into the Air,
nor go where, nor do any one Thing I have a mind to. I am not so blind, for
all, but that I can see, well enough, how mighty kind and bountiful you can be
to Others. There are your favorite little Birds, who fly this Way and that
Way, and mount up to the very Heavens; and do whatever they please, and have
every Thing at Command, because you have given them Wings. Give me such Wings,
also, as you have given to them, and then I will have something for which I
ought to thank you.

No sooner ask than have. He felt the Wings he wished for growing from either
Side, and, in a Minute, he spread them abroad, and rose out of the Water. At
first he felt a wonderful Pleasure in finding himself able to fly. He mounted
high into the Air, above the very Clouds, and he looked down with Scorn on all
the Fishes in the World.

He now resolved to travel, and to take his Diversion far and wide. He flew
over Rivers, and Meadows, and Woods, and Mountains; till, growing faint with
Hunger and Thirst, his Wings began to fail him, and he thought it best to come
down to get some Refreshment.

The little Fool did not consider that he was now in a strange Country, and
many a Mile from the sweet River, where he was born and bred, and had received
all his Nourishment. So, when he came down, he happened to alight among dry
Sands and Rocks, where there was not a Bit to eat, nor a Drop of Water to
drink; and so there he lay faint and tired, and unable to rise, gasping, and
fluttering, and beating himself against the Stones, till at length he died in
great Pain and Misery.

Now, the second silver Trout, though he was not so high minded as the first
little proud Trout, yet he did not want for Conceit enough, and he was moreover
a narrow hearted and very selfish little Trout, and, provided he himself was
snug and safe, he did not care what became of all the Fishes in the World. So
he says to God:

May it please your Honor. I don't wish, not I, for Wings to fly out of the
Water, and to ramble into strange Places, where I don't know what may become of
me. I lived contented and happy enough, till the other Day, when, as I got
under a cool Bank from the Heat of the Sun, I saw a great Rope coming down into
the Water, and it fastened itself, I don't know how, about the Gills of a
little Fish that was basking beside me, and he was lifted out of the Water,
struggling and working in great Pain, till he was carried, I know not where,
quite out of my Sight. So, I thought in my own Mind, that this Evil, some Time
or other, may happen to myself, and my Heart trembled within me, and I have
been very sad and discontented ever since. Now, all I desire of you, is, that
you would tell me the Meaning of this, and of all the other Dangers to which
you have subjected us poor little mortal Fishes; for then I shall have Sense
enough to take care of my own Safety, and I am very well able to provide for my
own Living, I warrant you.

No sooner said than done. God immediately opened his Understanding; and he
knew the Nature and Meaning of Snares, Nets, Hooks, and Lines, and of all the
Dangers to which such little Trouts could be liable.

At first he greatly rejoiced in this his Knowledge; and he said to himself,
now surely I shall be the happiest of all Fishes; for, as I understand and am
forewarned of every Mischief that can come near me, I Am sure I love myself too
well not to keep out of Harm's way.

From this Time forward, he took Care not to go into any deep Holes, for fear
that a Pike, or some other huge Fish might be there, who would make nothing of
swallowing him up at one Gulf. He also kept away from the shallow Places,
especially in hot Weather, left the Sun should dry them up and not leave him
Water enough to swim in. When he saw the Shadow of a Cloud coming and moving
upon the River, a ha! said he to himself, here are the Fishermen with their
Nets, and immediately he got on one Side and skulked under the Banks, where he
kept trembling in his Skin, till the Cloud was past. Again when he saw a Fly
skimming on the Water, or a Worm coming down the Stream, he did not dare to
bite, however hungry he might be; no no, said he to them, my honest Friends, I
am not such a Fool as that comes to neither; go your ways and tempt those who
know no better, who are not aware that you may serve as Baits to some
treacherous Hook, that lies hid for the Destruction of those ignorant and silly
Trouts that are not on their Guard.

Thus, this over careful Trout kept himself in continual Frights and Alarms,
and could neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep in Peace, lest some Mischief should
be at Hand, or that he might be taken napping. He daily grew poorer, and
poorer, and sadder, and sadder, for he pined away with Hunger, and sighed
himself to Skin and Bone; till, wasted almost to nothing with Care and
Melancholy, he at last died, for fear of dying, the most miserable of all
Deaths.

Now, when God came to the youngest silver Trout, and asked him what he wished
for. Alas (said this darling little Trout) you know, may it please your
Worship, that I am but a very foolish and good for nothing little Fish; and I
don't know, not I, what is good for me or what is bad for me; and I wonder how
I came to be worth bringing into the World, or what you could see in me to take
any thought about me. But, if I must wish for something, it is that you would
do with me whatsoever you think best; and that I should be pleased to live, or
die, even just as you would have me.

Now, as soon as this precious Trout made this Prayer in his good and his
humble little Heart, God took such a Liking and a Love to him, as the like was
never known. And God found it in his own Heart, that he could not but take
great Care of this sweet little Trout, who had trusted himself so wholely to
his Love and good Pleasure, and God went wheresoever he went, and was always
with him and about him, and was to him as a Father and Friend and Companion;
and he put Contentment into his Mind and Joy into his Heart; and so this little
Trout slept always in Peace, and wakened in Gladness; and whether he was full
or hungry, or whatever happened to him, he was still pleased and thankful; and
he was the happiest of all Fishes that ever swam in any Water.

Harry at the Close of this Fable, looked down and grew thoughtful, and his
Patron left him to himself to ruminate on what he had heard Now, Harry had
often heard talk of God, and had some general though confused Notions of his
Power.

The next Day, he requested his Patron to repeat the Story of the Three little
silver Trouts. When he had ended, Dada, says Harry, I believe I begin to guess
a little at what you mean. You wouldn't have me wish for any Thing, but leave
every Thing to God; and, if I thought that God loved me, half as well as you
love, me, I would leave every Thing to himself, like the good little Trout. He
does, my Harry, he loves you a thousand Times better than I love you, nay a
thousand Times better than you love yourself. God is all Love; it is he who
made every Thing, and he loves every Thing that he has made. Ay, but Dada, I
cannot, for the Heart of me help pitying the two poor little naughty Trouts. If
God loves every Thing, why did he make any Thing to dye? You begin to think too
deeply, Harry; we will speak more of these Matters another Time. For the
present, let it suffice to know that, as he can kill, he can also make alive,
again, at his own Pleasure.

Harry had now remained about twelve Months with his Patron, when it was
intimated to the Earl and his Lady that the dumb Man had taken a Fancy to their
Child, and, that he was almost constantly, resident at his House. Alarmed at
this News, and apprehending that this Man might be some Impostor or Kidnapper,
they, once more, sent Orders to the Nurse to bring the Boy home.

Nurse run in a Hurry to the Stranger's, and, having informed him of the
Necessity she was under to take away the Child, many mutual Tears were shed at
Parting; but Harry was the sooner pacified when Nurse told him that it was but
for a short Visit, as before.

When they came to the Castle, there was no Company in the Parlour, but the
Earl and his Lady, with Lord Richard and some other Masters of Quality, about
his Age and Size. Harry, however looked about with a Brow of Disgust; and, when
my Lady desired him to come and kiss her, maybe you will whip me, he answered
sullenly; No, she replied, if you don't strike your Brother Dicky any more. I
will not beat him, says Harry, if he will not beat Mammy. Come then and kiss me, my
Dear, said my Lady, whereon Harry advanced with a slow Caution, and held up his
little Mouth to receive her Salute. He was then kissed by his Father, his
Brother, and the little Masters, and all Things promised future Reconcilement
and Amity.

A Number of glittering Toys were then presented to Harry on all Sides; he
received them, indeed, in good Part, but laid them all aside again as Things of
whose Use he yet was not wise enough to be apprehensive.

Friend. Is it not too early for your Hero to show a Contempt of Toys?


Author. My Lady, as you will see, imputed it to his Folly, not to his
Philosophy.


Fr. But Children have a natural Fondness for fine Things.


Aut. How so, is there a natural Value in them?


Fr. No. But --


Aut. Education, indeed, has made the Fondness next to natural. The Coral and
Bells, teach Infants, on the Breast, to be delighted with Sound and Glitter.
Has the Child of an Inhabitant of Monomotapa a natural Fondness for Garbage?


Fr. I think not.


Aut. But, when he is instructed to prize them, and sees that it is the Fashion
to be adorned with such Things, he prefers them to the Glister of Gold and
Pearl. Tell me, was it the Folly, or Philosophy, of the Cock in the Fable, that
spurned the Diamond and wished for the Barley Corn?


Fr. The Moral says it was his Folly, that did not know how to make a right
Estimate of Things.


Aut. A wiser Moral would say it was his Philosophy, that did know how to make
a right Estimate of Things; for, of what Use could the Diamond be to the Cock?
In the Age of Acorns, antecedent to Ceres and the royal Ploughman Triptolemus,
a single Barley Corn had been of more Value, to Mankind, than all the Diamonds
that glowed in the Mines of India.


Fr. You see, however, that Age, Reflection, and Philosophy can hardly wean
People from their early Fondness for Show.


Aut. I see, on the contrary, that the older they grow, and the wiser they
think themselves, the more they become attached to Trifles. What would you
think of a sage Minister of State, who should make it the utmost Height of his
Wishes and Ambition to be mounted on a Hobbyhorse?


Fr. You cannot be serious, for the Soul of you.


Aut. It has been seriously, and truly, and literally the Fact. For, Haman
being asked, by the greatest Monarch upon Earth, what should be done most
desirable for the Man whom the King delighted to Honor? He answered (in the
Persuasion that he himself was the Person) Let the royal Apparel be brought and
let him be arrayed therewith, and let him be put upon the Horse that the King
uses to ride, and let him be brought through the Street, and have it
proclaimed before him, thus shall it be done to the Man whom the King
delights to Honor. What shall we say here? could the sage and ambitious
Haman think of nothing better than what would have suited the request of a
Child of five Years old? Or was it that the Emperor of Asia, or this World
itself, had nothing more valuable to bestow than a fine Coat and a Hobbyhorse?


Fr. How many Volumes do you expect this Work will contain?


Aut. Sir, a Book may be compared to the Life of your Neighbor. If it be good,
it cannot last too long; if bad, you cannot get rid of it too early.


Fr. But, how long, I say, do you propose to make your Story?


Aut. My good Friend, the Reader may make it as short as he pleases.


CHAP. III.
MY Lady piqued thereat, told the Earl that she resolved, once more to prove
the Wits of the Youngster in Britches; and whispering to Dicky, he immediately
went out and took with him his Companions. Soon after, Dick returns without his
Shoes, but with a pitiful Face, and cries, Brother Harry honey, I want a Pair
of Shoes sadly, will you give me Yours? Yes, I will, said Harry, and instantly
strips and presents them to him. Then entered another Boy and demanded his
Stockings, in the like petitioning manner; another begged his Hat, another his
Coat, another his Waistcoat, all of which he bestowed without Hesitation. But,
when the last Boy came in and petitioned for his Shirt; no, I will not, said
Harry, a little moody, I want a Shirt myself. My Lady then exclaimed, upon my
Conscience, there is but the Thickness of a bit of Linen between this Child and
a down right Fool. But my Lord rose up, took Harry in his Arms, and having
tenderly embraced him, God bless thee, my Boy, he cried, and make thee an
Honor to old England.

Dinner, soon after, was ordered up, and Harry permitted his Nurse to retire
peaceably to the Kitchen, during the Interval, as he and all the Masters were
then on Terms of Amity.

My Lady placed Harry, next herself, at Table, but no Peer ever paid such a
Price at Pontac's, as our distressed Hero did that Day for his Ordinary. For he
must sit up just so, and hold his Knife and Fork just so, and cut his Meat, and
open his Mouth, and swallow his Victuals just so and so and so. And then,
between every two Words, there was to be so many my Lords and my Ladies, and I
thank you Sir, and I thank you Madam, and Master this and Master that, that
poor Harry, no longer able to contain himself, cried, I wish I was with my
Mammy in the Kitchen.

After Dinner the Children were set to Questions and Commands. But here, our
Hero was beaten hollow, as he was afterward, at Draw Glove and Shuffle the
Slipper. They next came to Hot Cockles, and Harry, being first down, had his
left Hand well warmed for near a Quarter of an Hour, till, more by good Luck
than any good Policy, he fixed upon a delicate little Gentleman, the Son and
Heir of Lord and Lady Toilet, who lay down, accordingly; when Harry,
endeavoring to sum all the Favors he had received in one Payment, gave Master
such a Whirrick, that his Cries instantly sounded the ne plus ultra to such
kind of Diversions. But Harry being chidden for his Rudeness and obliged to ask
Pardon, all was soon whole again.

Now, throughout these several Amusements, though this Group of little Quality,
behaved themselves with great good Manners toward our Hero, yet, as my Lady's
Judgment of his Intellects became current through the Country, and that all took
him to be little removed from a Natural; these small Gentry, also, held him in
the lowest Contempt, and gave themselves secret Credit for the Decency of their
Conduct in his Behalf.

Two or three of them, however, having maliciously contrived to set him in a
ridiculous Light, prevailed upon his Brother to join in the Plot. They,
accordingly, proposed a Play, wherein, Harry was enjoined to stand in the
Center, for so many Minutes, without Motion or Resentment let his Companions do
what they would about him.

Our Hero, consequently, fixed himself to a Posture and Countenance altogether
determined. The Attack instantly began. Some grinned, some pointed, some jeered
and flouted at him, some twitched him by the Hair, some pinched him by the
Breech, one tweaked him by the Nose, and another spirted Water full in his
Face; but Harry bore all with the Firmness and Resignation of a Stoic
Philosopher; till my Lady, quite impatient, cried out, did you ever see the
like; such a Stock of a Child, such a Statue? why, he has no kind of Feeling,
either of Body or Mind.

While she was pronouncing these Words, young Skinker, eldest Son to a wealthy
'Squire, a chubbed unlucky Boy, about the Age of Lord Richard, put one Hand
within the other and desired Harry to strike thereon, which he did accordingly;
but, feeling unusual Smart, and fired at the Treachery that he, justly,
conceived was in the Case, Harry gave him such a sudden Fist in the Temple as
drove him staggering backward, several Steps. Skinker, wholly enraged, and
conscious of superior Strength, immediately returned, and with all his Might,
gave Harry a Stroke on the Head, which Compliment he returned by a Punch in the
Eye as rapid as Lightning. All the Boys stood aloof, and amazed at the Combat.
My Lady, vehemently cried out to part them. But my Lord rose and, peremptorily,
commanded fair Play. Mean while, young Skinker, wholly desperate to be foiled
by one so much his Inferior in Strength and Understanding, flew on Harry like a
Fury and fastened the Nails of both his Hands in his Face, from which Gripe our
Hero as quickly disengaged himself, by darting his Head into the Nose and Mouth
of his Adversary, who was instantly covered with Blood, though his Passion
would not permit him to attend to the Pain; for, exerting his last Effort, he
closed in on our little Champion, and determined, at once, to finish the
Combat, by lifting and dashing him against the Ground; but Harry finding
himself going, nimbly put one Foot behind and hit Skinker in the Ham, and, at
the same time pushing forward, with all his Force, prone fell the unfortunate
Skinker precipitated by the double Weight of himself and his Antagonist, and
his Head rebounded against the Floor, while up sprung Harry, and with a rising
Dunt in the Stomach, put a Period to the Fray.

All dismayed, and, wholly discomforted, Skinker flowly arose, and began to
puke and cry most piteously. His Companions then gathered about him, and,
compassionating his Plight, turned an Eye of Indignation upon the Victor; all
promiscuously exclaimed, O fie, Master Harry, I Am quite ashamed, Master Harry,
you gave the first Blow; it was you that gave the first Blow, Master Harry; to
all which Reproaches Harry, surlily, replied, if I gave first Blow he gave
first Hurt.

Come, come, said my Lord, there must be something more in this Affair than we
are, yet, acquainted with. Come hither Master Skinker, tell me the Truth, my
Dear, what was it you did to Harry that provoked him to strike you? Indeed,
Sir, said Skinker, I did not intend to Hurt him so much. When I gave him one
Hand to strike, I held a Pin, within side in the other, but the Pin run up
further than I thought for. Go, go, said my Lord, you deserve what you have
got. You are an ill-hearted Boy, and shall not come here to play any more.

My Lady then called Harry, desired to look at his Hand, and found the Palm
covered with Blood. This she washed away, and, having found the Wound, she put
a small bit of Black sticking Silk to the Orifice, and Harry instantly held
himself as sound a Man as ever.

It was then that, instead of exulting or crowing over his Adversary, he began
to relax into Melancholy and Dejection, and sideling over toward Skinker, and,
looking wistfully in his Face, if, said Harry, with a trembling Lip, if you
will Kiss and Friends with me, I Will never beat you any more. To this Overture
Skinker was, with a sullen Reluctance, persuaded by his Companions. And, from
that Moment, the Victor began to gain Ground in the Heart and good Graces both
of Father and Mother.

Night now approached, the Candles were lighted up, and the Children took a
short and slight Repast. Master Dicky then, privately whispering to his Mamma,
desired her not to be frighted at what she might see, and immediately withdrew.
In a short Time he returned, and gathering all his little Companions into a
Group, in the Center of the Parlour, held them a while in Chat. When, O
tremendous! a back Door flew open, and, in glided a most terrifying and
horrible Apparition; the Body and Limbs, from the Neck downwards, were all
wrapped in a winding Sheet; and the Head, though Fear could not attend to its Form,
appeared wholly illuminated with Flames that glared through the Eyes, Mouth and
Nostrils.

At Sight hereof, Master Dicky, appearing the first to be frighted, screamed
out, and ran behind his Mamma's Chair, as it were for Protection; the Pannick
grew instantly contagious, and all this Host of little Gentry, who were,
thereafter, to form our Senates, and to lead our Armies, ran, shrieking and
shivering, to hide themselves in Holes and to tremble in Corners.

Our Hero, alone, stood undaunted, though concerned; and, like an Astronomer who,
with equal Dread and Attention, contemplates some sudden Phenomenon in the
Heavens, which he apprehends to be sent as an Ensign or Forerunner to the fall
of mighty States, or dispeopling of Nations, so Harry with bent and
apprehensive Brows, beheld and considered the approaching Spectre.

He had never heard nor formed any Idea of Ghosts of Hobgoblins, he therefore
stood to deliberate what he had to fear from it. It still advanced upon him,
nor had he yet budged. When his Brother cried out, from behind my Lady's Chair,
beat it, Harry, beat it. On the instant, Harry flew back to the Corner, next
the Hall, and catching up his Staff, the Trophy of Shrove Tuesday, he returned
upon the Spectre, and, aiming a noble Blow at the illuminated Sconce, he, at
once, smash'd the outward Lantern; drove the Candle, Flame and all, into the
Mouth of him who held it; and opened his upper Lip from the Nose to the Teeth.
Out spouted the Blood as from a Spiggot. The Ghost clapped all the Hands that
he had to his Mouth, and slunk away to show to his Friends in the Kitchen, how
he had been baffled and mauled by an Infant of seven Summers.

Heaven preserve us, cried my Lady, we shall have nothing but Broils and
Bloodshed in the House while this Child is among us. Indeed, my Dear, replied
the Earl, if there was any Thing more than mere Accident in this Business, it
was the Fault of your Favorite Dicky, who desired the Boy to strike.

By this Time, the little Gentry came, all from their lurking Holes, though yet
pale and unassured. And, whatever Contempt they might have for the Intellects
of Harry, they had, now, a very sincere Veneration for his Prowess.

Bed Time now approaching, and all being again settled. Harry, says my Lord,
you have been a very good Boy, to Day, and have joined with your Companions in
all their little Plays. Now, if you have any Plays to show them I am sure they
will have the good Manners to do as you desire. What say you Harry, have you
any Play to show them? Yes, Sir, said Harry, I have a many of them; there is
first, Leap Frog, and Thrush a Thrush. To it, then, Harry, says my Lord, and
pray, all you little Gentlemen, do you observe his Directions.

No sooner said than done. Harry took his Companions, One by One, and, causing
them to stoop, with their Heads toward the Ground in a long Line, and at
certain Distances each before the other, he returned to the Tail, and taking the
Advantage of a short Run to quicken his Motion, he laid his Hands on the Rump
of the Hindmost, and vaulting lightly over him, he, with amazing Rapidity, flew
along the whole Line, clearing a Man, at every Motion, till he alighted before
the Foremost, and down he popt in the Posture of those behind.

My Lady, in utter Astonishment, lifting up her Hands and Eyes, exclaimed, O
the fine Creature, O the graceful Creature! if there was but a Mind to match
that Body, there would not be such another Boy in the Universe.

Lord Richard, being now hindmost, was the next who adventured, and, with
Action enough, cleared his two first Men; but then having lost the Advantage of
his Run, and, his Foreman being of more than ordinary Size; he first stuck upon
his Rump, and, pitching thence, broke his Forehead against the Floor. He got up
however with a pleasant Countenance, and, running along side the Line, set
himself in his former Posture before his Brother. The Hindmost then, and then
the next, and the next, and so onward, took their Turns, in Succession, without
any better Success. The one bruised his Shoulder, another sprained his Finger,
another bumpt his Head, another broke his Nose, etc. etc. So that, in less than
five Minutes, my Lady had got an Hospital of her own, though not altogether
consisting of Incurables.

Now, Spirits, and Vinegar, brown Paper, black Plaster, etc. were called for
in a Hurry, and, the several Stupes and Dressings being skilfully applied, the
Children were ordered to their respective Beds, and Nurse was prevailed upon to
continue with Harry, till he should be reconciled to his new Friends and
Associates.

Now Harry was become a Favorite, especially among the Servants who, in a
manner; adored him, since the Adventure of the Box and the Hobgoblin.

Friend. Hobgoblin. -- In good Time -- Nothing amazes me, so much, as the
terrifying Apprehensions that the World, from the Beginning, has universally
entertained of Ghosts and Specter.


Author. Do you fear them?


Fr. No -- I cannot say -- not much -- something of this formerly. I should not
like, even now, to lie alone, in a remote Chamber of a ruinous Castle said to
be haunted, and have my Curtains, at Midnight, opened suddenly upon me by a
Death's Head and Bloody-bones. All Nonsense, I know it; the early Prejudices of
a dastardly Fancy -- I fear, while I am convinced there is nothing to be
feared. -- Do you think there is any such Thing in Nature as a Spirit?


Aut. I know not that there is any such Thing, in Nature, as Matter.


Fr. Not know there is any such Thing as Matter? -- You love to puzzle -- to
throw lets into the Road of common Sense. -- What else do you know? from what
else can you form any kind of Idea?


Aut. The Room is warm enough, more Heat is needless. -- I know that Thoughts
and Conceptions are raised in my Mind; but, how they are raised, or that they
are adequate Images of Things supposed to be represented, I know not. What if
this Something, or this Nothing, called Matter, should be a Shadow, a Vacuum,
in respect of Spirit, wholely resistless to it and pervadeable by it? Or, what
if it be no other than a various Manifestation of the several good and evil
Qualities of Spirit? If one infinite Spirit, as is said, fills the Universe,
all other Existence must be but as the Space wherein he essentially abides and
exists; indeed, they could not be produced, or continued for a Moment, but by
his existing omnipotently, indivisibly, entirely, in and throughout every Part.


Fr. This is new, very new -- but I will not batter my Brains against your
Castle. -- According to your Thesis, when a Man is apprehensive of a Spirit or
Spectre, it is not of Shadows but of Substances that he is afraid.


Aut. Certainly; his principal Apprehension arises from his believing it more
sufficient, more powerful, and more formidable than himself.


Fr. Excuse me, there are more tremendous Reasons. On the Supposition of an
Engagement, those Sort of invisible Gentry have many Advantages over us. They
give a Man no manner of fair Play. They have you here, and have you there, and
your best Watch and Ward is no better than fencing against an invisible Flail.
-- But, seriously, do you think we have any innate Fears of these Matters?


Aut. All our Fears arise from the Sense of our own Weakness, and of the Power
and Inclination that Others may have to hurt us.


Fr. If our Horror of Apparitions is not innate, how comes it to pass, that
Soldiers, that general Officers, who dare all other Danger, that Heroes who,
like Brutus, have given Death to themselves, or who have been led to Execution
without a changing Cheek, have yet dreaded to lie alone, or to be left in the
dark?


Aut. We all see that a Spirit has vast Power. Nothing else in Truth can have
any Power at all. We perceive, by ourselves and others, with what Ease it can
act upon what we call Matter; how it moves, how it lifts it. Perhaps, were our
Spirits detached from this distempered Prison, to which the Degeneracy of our
fallen Nature has confined them, they might more easily whirl a Mountain
through the Atmosphere, than they can now cast a Pebble into the Air. The
Consideration of this Power, when joined to Malevolence, as is generally the
Case, becomes very tremendous. The Stories told by Nurses and Gossips about a
Winter's Fire, when the young Auditors crouch closer and closer together, and
dare not look about for fear of what may be behind them, leave Impressions that
no subsequent Reason or Religion can efface. The Ideas of an Apparition, on
these Occasions, are connected with all the Horrors, of which infant
Imaginations can be susceptible; Fangs, Horns, a threatening Mien, saucer Eyes,
a flaming Breath, and a deadly Aspect. When Children are told of Fairies, who
carry off People to dwell with them under Ground, and of evil Spirits who
snatch away Soul and Body, together, to be their Associates in Regions of
Darkness, and Woe, the Fear of such Evils greatly surpasses those of Death, as
it weds Misery to Existence beyond the Grave. -- On the contrary Side. Had
Spirits been originally represented to Infants as Beings of an amiable
Appearance, and as Guardians benevolent and beneficent to Man; had they further
deigned to visit us under such Representations, and, had we experienced the
Advantage of their Instructions and good Offices, we should have met them with
Transport, and have parted with Regret.


Fr. I observe that, as our female Antiquarians drop off, our Faith in Specter
perceptibly decays. We have not the fiftieth Story either propagated or
believed, that was credited as Gospel when I was a Boy. What think you, is it
for, or against Religion, that such Fables should get footing among Mankind?


Aut. I never could think it for the Interest of Religion that the Providence
of God should be elbowed, as it were, quite out of the World by a System of
Daemonism. On the other Hand, I take the Devil to be a Personage of much more
Prudence than to frighten his Favorites from him by assuming such horrid and
disgustful Appearances. He rather chooses to lurk behind Temptation, in the
Allurement of Beauty, the Deceitfulness of Smiles, the Glozing of Compliments,
in Revel and Banqueting, in Titles and Honors, in the Glitter of Ornament,
and in the Pomp of State. When God sends his Spirits on Messages to Man, there
is a Meaning of Importance in the Errand. Such was that of his Angel to Manoah
for the Delivery of a People; and to Zacharias and the blessed Virgin for the
Redemption of Humankind. But, when the Devil is said to send his Emissaries
throughout the Earth, on what Errands does this Arch-Politician employ them?
Even such as could suit no other than a Dunce or a Driveller. I never yet heard
of one of these Missions that could be construed to any Intention of Cunning or
common Sense. I therefore hold the Legends of his ghostly Visitation to be
altogether apocryphal.


Fr. Every Man of common Sense must be of the same Opinion. And yet, have you
known any Person wholely free from such Prejudices, who made no Distinction, on
this fantastical Article, between Darkness and Midday, between a lonely
Charnel House and a full Assembly?


Aut. I have; but they were Men of exceeding strong Nerves; as also of
exceedingly clear or exceedingly callous Consciences, which, coming from
opposite Points, equally met for the same Purpose on this Occasion.

Two Travelers, the One a Man of Piety, the Other a Profligate, met at a
Country Inn just as Night came upom them. It was Halontide-Eve, the Season, in
those Days, wherein the Devils were said to keep high Carnival, and when all
the Inhabitants of the visionary Regions were supposed to revel and range
throughout the Earth at Pleasure.

For want of better Company our Travelers made up an Acquaintance, and further
cemented it by a Jugg of good Liquor. The Night was dark. The Girls of the
House had new washed their Smocks, to be hung to the Fire, and turned by the
ghostly Resemblances of their Sweethearts; and the Conversation, in the
Kitchen, ran on many an authentic Narrative of Specter, and, particularly, on
the Man in Gibbets who hung by the Road, and who was reported, between Twelve
and One at Midnight, to descend from the Gallows, and take just three turns
about the old Barn.

Do you believe any of this droll Stuff, said the Profligate. I know not what
to think, answered his pious Companion, I find all the World in the same Story,
and yet, as the saying is, I never saw any Thing more frightful than myself. As
for my Share, said the Profligate, I think I shouldn't fear the great Devil
himself; and indeed I should be glad to have a little Chat with the old
Gentleman. Stout as you are, rejoined his Companion, I will lay you a Bett of
five Crowns that you dare not warm a Porringer of Broth, and go, and offer it,
without there, to the Man in Gibbets, I will depend on your Honor for
Performance of Articles. It Is done, cried the other; the Betts were produced,
and respectively deposited in the Hands of my Landlady.

Our pious Traveller, who now began to be alarmed for his Wager, stole slily
out, while his Companion was busied in heating the Broth. He made up to the
Place where the deceased Malefactor was taking the fresh Air. The Gallows was
low, and, by the Advantage of a Bank behind and his own Agility, he leaped up
and fastened his Arms about the Shoulders of the Corpse, so that they both
appeared but as one Body.

He had just fixed himself to his Mind, when, up comes his Companion with the
Porringer and a Stool. He directly mounted the Stool, and, reaching up a
spoonful of Broth to the Mouth of the Dead, with a firm and bold Voice he
cried, Sup Man! why don't you Sup?

Scarce had these Words been uttered, when, fearful to hear! with a Tone deep
as Hell and dismal as the Grave, the Man in Gibbets replied -- It i -- is too
ho -- ot. And damn you, why don't you blow it then? rejoined the other.


Fr. My Nerves will not admit of this for Fact. The Tale indeed is good, though
such an Instance of Intrepidity in any Mortal may be disputable. But, shall we
never return to our Story again?


Aut. It matters not how far we travel from it, since the Magic of a Wish can
bring us back in a twinkling.


CHAP. IV.
RUFFLED Linen, laced Hat, Silk Stockings, etc. had now been ordered, for
Harry, with a new Suit of Clothes, trimmed like those of your Beau-Insects,
vulgarly called Butterflies. They were tried on, in the Presence of his
Parents, and highly approved by all, except Harry himself, who seemed, by his
Fidgettings, to be somewhat disgusted at this new Kind of Encumbrance. Harry,
says my Lord, puts me in mind of the Son of Jesse in the Armor of Saul, he has
not yet proved them. Well Harry, how do you like yourself? I don't know, not I,
says Harry. But, Papa, can you tell me what these Things are for? In truth
Harry, you pose me. Will Not People love me better, Sir? not a whit indeed Harry,
replied my Lord. L -- d help that little Fool's Head of thine, interposed my
Lady, if People will not love thee, they will respect thee the more. Fool's Head!
repeated my Lord, upon my Soul, the Child has more Sense than Half our Nobility.

Harry had been, now, near a Month with his Parents, and, as his Nurse had not
yet parted, he was tolerably amenable to Quality Government. However, he pined
in the Absence of his Dada, as he called him, and daily importuned my Lord and
Lady to be permitted to go and see him. For, as Harry's Heart told him that his
bearded Dada loved him better than all the World, so Harry loved him better
than three Worlds; for, he was ever desirous of going three Times as far, in
Affection and good Offices, as any one went for him.

At length, he obtained Consent, and was conducted, by his Nurse, in all his
Finery, on a Visit to this dear Dada.

Their meeting was accompanied by Tears of Joy on both Sides; when the old
Gentleman, struck with Concern at the Garb in which he saw his Darling, cried
out, and who, my Dear, put this Fool's Coat upon my Child? Fool's Coat, Sir,
says Harry; yes, my Love, it is worse than all that; they were very naughty
Doctors who have endeavored to poison my Boy. There is not a Bit, of all this
Lace and Ruffling, that is not full of rank Poisons. I will tell you a Story my
Harry.

There was, once upon a Time, a very good and a very clever Boy called
Hercules. As he grew up, beside his Prayers and his Book, he was taught to run,
and leap; to ride, wrestle, and cudgel; and though he was able to beat all the
Boys in the Parish, he never used to hurt or quarrel with any of them. He did
not matter Cold, nor Hunger, nor what he eat, nor what he drank; nor how, nor
where he lay; and he went always dressed in the Skin of a wild Beast, that
could bear all Winds and Weathers, and that he could put on or off at Pleasure,
for he knew that his Dress was no Part of himself, and could neither add to
him, nor take away any Thing from him.

When this brave Boy came to Man's Estate, he went about the World, doing Good
in all Places; helping the Weak, and feeding the Hungry, and clothing the
Naked, and comforting those that cried, and beating all those that did Hurt or
Wrong to others; and all good People loved him with their whole Hearts, and all
naughty People feared him terribly.

But, O sad and dismal! a Lady, whom he had saved from great Hurt and Shame,
made him a Present of a new Coat, which was called a Shirt, in those Days, as
they wore it next the Skin. And now, my Harry, take Notice. The Lady had
covered this Coat, all over, with Laces, and with Rufflings, and with Beads of
Glass, and such other Fooleries; so that poor Hercules, looked just as fine, as
you do now. And he turned him to this Side, and he turned him to that Side, and
he began to think more and better of himself, because he had got this Fool's
Coat upon him. And the Poison of it entered into his Body and into his Mind,
and brought Weakness and Distempers upon the one and the other. And he grew so
fond of it that he could not bear to have it put off. For he thought that, to
part with it, would be to part with his Flesh from his Bones. Neither would he
venture out in the Rain, any more; nor box nor wrestle with any Body, for fear
of spoiling his fine Coat. So that in Time, he lost the Love and the Praises of
every Body; and all People scorned him, and pointed at him for a Fool and a
Coxcomb, as he went by.

For some Time, after the old Gentleman had finished his Story, the Child
continued to gaze up at him, with fixed Eyes and open Mouth, as fearful of
losing any Syllable that he might utter. 'Till, recollecting himself, he cried
out, O, this is a very sad Case, indeed; I wish my Coat was burnt, so I do,
but, don't fear for me Dada. Why, how then Harry? replied his Patron. Why, I
may find a Trick for all this, Dada, I warrant, you never see me in this ugly
Coat again.

After this and some other Instructions and mutual Endearments, Nurse pressed
to be gone; and these two fond Friends were compelled to sunder, with a
Promise, on Harry's Part, of a speedy Return.

For some Time after his Arrival at the Mansion House, Harry appeared
thoughtful, and greatly dejected, which they ascribed to his parting with his
old Friend; but Harry had Schemes in his Head that they were little able to
fathom or guess at. Having peeped about, for some Time, he found a Knife, in a
Window, which he instantly seized upon, and then, stole up with all possible
Privacy, to his Apartment.

There he stripped himself, in a Hurry, and, falling as quickly to work, began to
cut and rip and rend away the Lacings of his Suit, without sparing Cloth or
Seam. While he was, thus, in the Heat and very Middle of his Business, he heard
himself, repeatedly called on the Stairs, and hurrying on his Clothes, to obey
the Summons, he ran down to the Parlour with Half the Trimmings hanging in
Geometry, Fritters, and Tatters about him.

The droll, and very extraordinary Figure that he cut, struck all the Company
into utter Amazement. Having gazed on him, for some Time, in a kind of silent
Stupor. Why Harry, cries my Lady, what is all this for? who abused you, my
Child, who put you in this Pickle? come hither and tell me, who spoiled your
Clothes? I did, Madam. You did, Sirrah, cried my Lady, giving him a Shake, and
how dare you spoil them? why, because they wanted to spoil me, said Harry. And
who told you they would spoil you, Sirrah? I will not tell, said Harry. I Will lay a
Wager, cried my Lady, it was that old Rogue with the Beard; but I Will have him
whipped for a Fool and a Knave out of the Parish. Pray, my Dear, be patient a
little, said his Lordship. Come here, Harry, and tell me the Truth, stoutly;
and no Harm shall happen to you or your Dada with the Beard. Come, speak, what
Fault did he find with your Clothes? Why, Sir, he said, as how they would
poison me. Poison you, my Dear; pray how was that? Why, Sir, he told me as how
there was a little Master, called Herclus, and as how he was a mighty good Boy,
and was cold and hungry, and almost naked, and did not matter, so as how he
could do Good to every Body; and as how every Body loved him with all their
Heart. And then, he told me, as how he got a mighty fine Coat, and looked here,
and looked there, and minded nothing but his Coat; and as how his Coat poisoned
him, and would not let him do any more Good, and as how all the Boys then hated
him, and pissed upon him, Sir -- and as how -- I believe, that is all, Sir --

Here, my Lord and Lady took such a Chink of Laughing, that it was some Time
before they could recover; while Harry looked abashed and disconcerted. But my
Lord, recollecting himself, took the Child on his Knee, and, warmly pressing
him to his Bosom, I must tell you, my Harry, said he, as how you are a mighty
good Boy, and as how your Dada with a Beard is a mighty good Dada, and has told
you all that is right and true. And, that I will go, myself, one of these Days,
and thank him in Person. Thank you, Sir, says Harry.

Well, Harry, said my Lord, I promise that no one shall poison you any more,
with my Consent. Whereupon another new Suit was immediately appointed, of a
Kind that should fear no Weather, nor, in case of Dirt or Damage, draw upon
Harry the Resentment or Admonitions of his Mama.

Just as Dinner was served up, Mr. Meekly entered and took his Seat. He came in
order to conciliate a late Difference between the Earl and Sir Standish
Stately; and in this he found no manner of Difficulty, as my Lord was, by
Nature, of a kindly Disposition, and required no more than a first Advance to
be reconciled to any Man.

During the Entertainment, Harry kept his Eyes fixed on Mr. Meekly; and, as
soon as the Cloth was off, he rose, went over to him, looked fondly in his
Face, and took hold of his Hand with the Familiarity of an old Acquaintance.

Mr. Meekly, said my Lord, my Son Harry pays you a very particular and very
deserved Compliment; he puts me in mind of that Sort of Instinct, by which a
strange Dog is always sure to discover, and to apply to the most benevolent
Person at Table. Indeed, my Lord, said Mr. Meekly, (caressing the Child) I know
not, whether by Instinct, or by what other name to call my own Feelings; but
certain it is that, the first Moment I saw him, in his little peasant
Petticoats, I found my Heart strongly affected toward him.

In a short Time my Lady retired, with the Children, and left the Earl and Mr.
Meekly over a temperate Bottle. Mr. Meekly, said my Lord, (taking him cordially
by the Hand) I rejoice at the Advantage of our late Acquaintance, or rather I
repine that it was not earlier. I am greatly interested, Sir, in asking you a
few Questions, if I thought I might do it without Offense. Are you any way
straitened in your Circumstances? -- No, my Lord, -- But, would you not wish
them more affluent, would you not wish that your Power of doing Good were more
extensive, more answerable to the Benevolence of your own Inclinations? -- I
cannot say that I would, my Lord. I have upward of seven Hundred a Year clear
Income; and that is fourteen Times more than I have Occasion to expend. -- It
would be indelicate, replied the Earl, very indelicate to own that I am sorry
for your Prosperity; and yet I feel that I should have been happy in your
Distress, in the Power it would have given me to serve, to oblige you. I want a
Friend, I want just such a Friend as Mr. Meekly, and I know of no Price at
which I would not gladly purchase him. -- My Lord, I am yours, freely,
affectionately yours, without Fee or Condition. Sir, rejoined my Lord, as I
find that I cannot make out a Title to your particular Attachment, I am content
to be taken into the general Circle of your Benevolence.

The World, Mr. Meekly, think me the happiest of Men; blessed in my Family, in
my Friends; with Health, Honors, Affluence; with the Power of gratifying every
Wish that human Fancy can form! but alas! my Sensations are very far from
affirming their Judgment of these Matters; and I will deserve your Advice, your
Consolation, if you can afford it, by unbosoming myself to you without reserve.

When I reflect on my past Life, I look on many Parts of it with Repentance,
and on the Whole with Regret. Not that I wish the return of Pleasures that I
now despise, or of Years spent in a Manner that Virtue and common Sense must
equally disapprove? but I am arrived at my Evening of Life, like a Sportsman
who, having been in pursuit of Game all the Day, returns homeward, sorrowful,
satigued, and disappointed. With every Advantage that could gratify either my
Vanity or my Appetites, I cannot affirm that I ever tasted of true Enjoyment;
and I now well perceive that I was kept from being miserable, merely by
Amusement and Dissipation.

As I had the Misfortune to be born to Title and a vast Estate, all People
respected, in me, the Possession of those Objects which they themselves were in
pursuit of. I was consequently beset with Sycophants and Deceivers of all
Sorts, and thereby, trained from my Infancy, to unavoidable Prejudices, Errors,
and false Estimates of every Thing. I was not naturally ill-disposed, but I was
perpetually seduced from all my better Tendencies.

Both my Parents died, before I arrived at those Years wherein our Laws allow
of any Title to Discretion. I had but the one Brother, O that dear Brother, how
many Sighs he has cost me! I was older than him by about seven Years, and this
disparity of our Age, together with the elevating Notion of my Birthright, gave
me the authoritative Airs of a Father, without a Father's Tenderness toward
him. This mutually prevented that Cordiality, that Sympathy, as I may say, by
which Brothers should be cemented during their Minority. And, when our
Guardian, as I then judged, had so far betrayed his Trust, as to bind my
Brother apprentice to a Trader, and thereby to deprive him of all Title to
Gentility. I looked upon him as a Branch cut off from the Family-Tree, and, as
my Thoughts about him were accompanied by Coldness or Disgust, I forbore to
make any Enquiry concerning him.

I am apt to think, however, that he was not equally unnatural on his Part;
but, hearing of the dissolute Life I led on my return from Travel, he might
justly deem me unworthy of his Acquaintance or Notice.

During the Time of my Intimacy with his late Majesty and the Ministers of his
Pleasures and Policy, a Servant brought me Word that a Gentleman, attended by a
Number of the principal Citizens, waited for me in my Ante-chamber; whereupon I
gave Orders for their immediate Introduction.

On their Entrance, I was awfully struck with the Presence of their Principal,
with the Elegance of his Figure, the Nobleness of his Aspect, and Ease of his
Address, and I felt myself drawn to him by a sudden Kind of instinctive
Attachment.

My Lord, says he, we come to wait upon you in the Name of the very respectable
Body of the Citizens of London; some Infringements have been lately made on
their City-Charter, and their first Application is to your Lordship, as they
wish, above all others, to be obliged to you for their Redress.

They have been very discreet, said I, in their choice of an Advocate. Their
Demands must be exorbitant, if they fail of Success while you are their
Solicitor.

This Paper, proceeded he, contains a clear Detail of their Rights and the
Encroachments that have been made thereon. They are sensible of your Lordship's
Interest with his Majesty and the Ministry, and they humbly petition for your
Favor and happy Influence in their Behalf.

Without Papers, I replied, or any Inducement save that of your own Request,
let me but know what I am to do, and I shall think myself truly honored and
obliged by your Commands.

My Lord, he rejoined, I do not wish to betray you into any mistaken or
unmerited Complaisance. I am but a Trader, a Citizen of the lower Order.

I now felt myself blush with Shame and Disappointment; I resented my being
deceived by the Dignity of his Appearance; and I was more particularly piqued
by the sarcastical kind of Smile with which he closed his Declaration. All
confused, I looked down, and pretended to cast my Eye over the Paper, in order
to gain Time for Recollection. Having, at Intervals, muttered a few Words, such
as Charters, Grants, Privileges, Immunities, and so forth. I am not, said I, an
Enemy to the lower Ranks of Men; poor People must live, and their Service, as
well as Subordination is necessary to Society; but I confess I was always fond
of those sumptuary Laws that confined the Degrees of Men to their respective
Departments, and prevented Mechanics from confounding themselves with Gentlemen.

My Lord, says he, with the most easy and provoking Unconcern, when you shall
be pleased to look down from the Superiority of your Station, and to consider
Things and Persons according to their Merits, you will not despise Some, merely
for being of use to Others. The Wealth, Prosperity, and Importance of all this
World is founded and erected on three living Pillars, the TILLER of the Ground,
the MANUFACTURER and the MERCHANT. Of these, the Tiller is supposed to be the
least respectable, as he requires the least of Genius, Invention, or Address;
and yet the Plowman Triptolemus was worshipped as a God; and the Plowman
Cincinnatus is still held in as high Esteem as any Peer of any Realm, save that
of Great Britain.

I have known, said I, a Mob of such Gods and Dictators somewhat dangerous at
Times. I must be free to tell you, Mister, that Matters are much changed since
Princesses kept Sheep, and the Sons of Kings were Cow-herds. The Ranks and
Orders of Men are now appointed and known, and one Department must not presume
to break in upon the other. My Baker, Barber, Brewer, Butcher, Hatter, Hosier,
and Tailor, are, unquestionably, of Use, though I have not the Honor of being
acquainted with one of them. And, hitherto, I have deemed it sufficient to send
my Servants to entertain and pay them their Bills, without admitting them to a
Tete a Tete, as at present.

He now rejoined, with a little Warmth. My Lord, we pardon your Indelicacy, in
consideration of your Error. The venerable Body, now present, might be admitted
to a Tete a Tete with the first Estate of this Kingdom, without any
Condescension on the Part of Majesty. And, would you allow yourself to be duly
informed, I should soon make you sensible that we have actually done you the
Honor which we intended by this Visit.

Permit me to repeat that the Wealth, Prosperity, and Importance of every Thing
upon Earth arises from the TILLER, the MANUFACTURER and the MERCHANT; and that,
as nothing is truly estimable, save in Proportion to its utility, these are,
consequently, very far from being contemptible Characters. The Tiller supplies
the Manufacturer, the Manufacturer supplies the Merchant, and the Merchant
supplies the World with all its Wealth. It is thus that Industry is promoted,
Arts invented and improved, Commerce extended, Superfluities mutually vended,
Wants mutually supplied, that each Man becomes a useful Member of Society, that
Societies become further of Advantage to each other, and that States are
enabled to pay and dignify their upper Servants with Titles, rich Revenues,
Principalities and Crowns.

The Merchant, above all, is extensive, considerable, and respectable by his
Occupation. It is he who furnishes every Comfort, Convenience, and Elegance of
Life; who carries off every Redundance, who fills up every Want; who ties
Country to Country, and Clime to Clime, and brings the remotest Regions to
Neighborhood and Converse; who makes Man to be literally the Lord of the
Creation, and gives him an Interest in whatever is done upon Earth; who
furnishes to each the Product of all Lands, and the Labors of all Nations; and
thus knits into one Family and weaves into one Web the Affinity and Brotherhood
of all Mankind.

I have no Quarrel, I cried, to the high and mighty my Lords the Merchants, if
each could be humbly content with the Profits of his Profession, without
forming themselves into Companies, exclusive of their Brethren, our itinerant
Merchants and Pedlars. I confess myself an Enemy to the Monopolies of your
charter'd Companies and City Corporations; and I can perceive no evil
Consequence, to the Public or the State, if all such Associations were this
Instant dissolved.

Permit me, he mildly replied, once for all, to set your Lordship right in this
Matter. I am sensible that the Gentlemen of large landed Properties are apt to
look upon themselves as the Pillars of the State, and to consider their
Interests and the Interests of the Nation, as very little beholden or dependent
on Trade; though the Fact is, that those very Gentlemen would lose nine Parts
in ten of their yearly Returns, and the Nation nine Tenths of her yearly
Revenues, if Industry and the Arts, (promoted as I said by Commerce) did not
raise the Products of Lands to tenfold their natural Value. The Manufacturer,
on the other Hand, depends on the landed Interest for nothing save the material
of his Craft; and the Merchant is wholely independent of all Lands, or rather
he is the general Patron thereof. I must further observe, to your Lordship,
that this beneficent Profession is by no means confined to Individuals, as you
would have it. Large Societies of Men, nay mighty Nations may and have been
Merchants. When Societies incorporate, for such a worthy Purpose, they are
formed as a Foetus within the Womb of the Mother, a Constitution within the
general State or Constitution; their particular Laws and Regulations ought,
always, to be conformable to those of the National System; and, in that Case,
such Corporations greatly conduce to the Peace and good Order of Cities and
large Towns, and to the general Power and Prosperity of the Nation.

A Nation that is a Merchant has no need of an Extent of Lands, as it can
derive to itself Subsistence from all Parts of the Globe. Tire was situated in
a small Island on the Coast of Phaenicia, and yet that single City contained
the most flourishing, opulent, and powerful Nation in the Universe; a Nation
that long withstood the united Forces of the three first Monarchies, brought
against her by Nebuchadnezar and Alexander the Great.

The seven united Provinces do not contain Lands sufficient for the Subsistence
of one Third of their Inhabitants; but they are a Nation of Merchants; the
World furnishes them with an Abundance of all good Things; by Commerce they
have arrived at Empire; they have assumed to themselves the Principality of the
Ocean; and, by being Lords of the Ocean, are in a Measure become the
Proprietors of all Lands.

Should England ever open her Eyes to her own Interests, she will follow the
same prosperous and ennobling Profession; she will conform to the Consequences
of her Situation. She will see that, without a Naval Pre-eminence, she cannot
be safe; and, without Trade, that her Naval Power cannot be supported. Her
Glory will also flow from this sure Source of her Interests, and a Sail-yard
will become the highest Scepter of her Dignity. She will then find that a
single Triumph of her Flag will be more available, for her Prosperity, than the
Conquest of the four Continents; that her Pre-eminence, by Sea, will carry and
diffuse her Influence over all Lands; and, that universal Influence is
universal Dominion.

Avarice, my Lord, may pile; Robbery may plunder; new Mines may be opened;
hidden Treasures may be discovered; Gamesters may win Cash; Conquerors may win
Kingdoms; but all such Means of acquiring Riches are transient and
determinable. While Industry and Commerce are the natural, the living, the
never failing Fountains, from whence the Wealth of this World can alone be
taught to flow.

And can you, cried I, have the Effrontery, to insinuate a Preference, of
yourself and your fellow Cits, to our British Nobles and Princes, who derive
their Powers and Dignities from the steadfast Extent of their landed
Possessions? Was it by Barter and Bargain that our Edwards and Henrys achieved
their Conquests on the Continent? or was it by Pedlars and Mechanics, think
you, that the Fields of Cressi, of Poictiers, and Agincourt are rendered
immortal? Go, I continued, seek elsewhere for Redress of your insignificant
Grievances; we give little to sturdy Beggars, but nothing to saucy Rivals.

Wholely kindled by this Invective, he cast on me a fierce and menacing Regard;
and, with a severe Accent, and a side Glance that shot Fire; when Courtiers
(says he) acquire Common-Sense, and that Lords shall have learned to behave
themselves like Gentlemen, I may do such a one the Honor to acknowledge him
for a Brother.

Your Brother! exclaimed Mr. Meekly, your Brother, my Lord? -- Yes, Mr. Meekly,
my Brother, my amiable, my very amiable and honorable Brother, indeed. But,
turning contemptuously from me, he instantly departed with his attending
Citizens.

I ought to have followed, I ought to have staid him. I should have fallen upon
his Neck. With my Tears and Carresses I should have wrung a Pardon from him,
and not have suffered him to leave me till by my Submissons I had obtained full
Forgiveness. This, indeed, was my first Emotion. But the Recollection of my
long and unnatural Neglect, my utter Disregard of his Person and Concerns, now
aggravated by my late Insults, persuaded me that a Reconciliation, on his Part,
was impossible.

I remained disconcerted, and greatly disturbed I felt with what Pride and
Transport I should now have acknowledged, have courted, have clasped this
Brother to my Bosom; but my Fancy represented him as Ice in my Arms, as
shrinking and turning from me with Disgust and Disdain. At Times, I formed a
hundred Schemes toward recovering his Affections; but again, rejecting these as
ineffectual, I endeavored to console myself for his Loss, by considering his
late Demeanor as exceeding faulty, and expressive of a Disposition
insufferably proud and overbearing. My Heart, indeed, acknowledged how very
lovely he was in his Person; but the Superiority of his Talents, and the
Refinement of his Manners, gave him a Distinction that was not altogether so
grateful.

All Day I kept my Apartment, in Displeasure, at my Brother, myself, and the
World. The next Morning I was informed that, the Moment he left me, he went to
the Minister, who engaged, at his Instance, to have every Grievance that he
complained of redressed to their extent. That the Minister had, afterward,
introduced him to his Majesty in full Levee, that the King held him in long and
familiar Conversation, and that all the Court was profuse of their Admiration
and Praises of Mr. Clinton.

This, also, was fresh Matter of Triumph to him, and Mortification to me. It
was now evident that my Brother's Application to me was intended, merely, to do
me peculiar Honor; and, in Return, said I to myself, I have endeavored to
cover him with Confusion and Disgrace. Yet, when I understood that he had
disdained to mention me as his Brother, or of his Blood; I also scorned to
derive Luster from any Claim of Affinity with him; and I further felt that I
could not forgive him the Reproaches which he constrained me to give myself in
his behalf.

From that Time, I took great Pains to dissipate or suppress those uneasy
Sensations which the Remembrance of him gave me. But, after I had married and
retired from the Glare and Bustle of the World; and, more particularly, on the
Birth of my first Child, when my Heart had entered into a new Sphere of
domestic Feelings, this dear Brother returned with double Weight upon my Mind.
Yet his Idea was no longer accompanied by Envy or Resentment, but by an
affectionate and sweet, though paining, Remorse.

I wrote him a Letter full of penitential Submissions, and of tender and
atoning Prayers for Pardon and Reconcilement. But, alas, my Messenger returned
with Tidings that, some Years past, he had withdrawn from Trade, had retired to
France or Holland, had dropped all Correspondence, and that no one in England
knew whether he was dead or alive.

Ah, my Brother, my dear Brother! (I would often repeat to myself) has any
Reverse of Fortune happened to you, my Brother? Perhaps some domestic Calamity;
some heavy Distress, no doubt! and no Brother at Hand to console or share your
Afflictions. Return to me, divide my Heart, divide my Fortune with me and mine!
Alas, Wretch that I am, you know not yet that you have a Brother, one deserving
of that Name. You know not that this Bosom of Flint is now humanized, and
melted down in the Fervor of Affection toward you. You hate me, you despise
me, my amiable Brother! How, how shall I make you sensible that my Heart is
full of your Image, of Esteem, of tenderest Love for my lovely Harry Clinton?

I, again, sent other Messengers in search of Intelligence, I procured Letters
to the Bankers and Merchants of principal Note abroad; but all my Solicitudes
and Enquiries were equally fruitless.

The Grief, that this occasioned, first taught me to reflect, and cast a Shade
over the Luster of every Object about me. The World no more appeared as that
World which, formerly, had held out Happiness to either Hand. I no longer
beheld it through the Perspectives of Curiosity or youthful Desire; I had worn
out all its Gayeties; I had exhausted all its Delights, for me it had nothing
more to promise, or bestow; and yet I saw no better Prospect, no other Resource.

Should I turn to Religion, a little Observation taught me that the Devotees,
themselves, were warm in pursuit of Objects, of which I was tired; that they
were still subject to the Passions and Desires of the World; and were no way to
be distinguished from other Men, save by an unsociable Reserve, or gloomy Cast
of Countenance.

May I venture to confess to you, Mr. Meekly, that, at Times of my Despondence,
I dared to call the Justice and Wisdom of Omnipotence into question. Take this
World, (said I to myself) consider it as it seems to stand, independent of any
other, and no one living can assign a single End, or Purpose, for which it
could be made. Men are even as their Fellow-Insects; they rise to Life, exert
their Lineaments, and flutter abroad during the Summer of their little Season;
then droop, die away, and are succeeded, and succeeded in an insignificant
Rotation. Even the firmest human Establishments, the best labored Systems of
Policy, can scarce boast a nobler Fate, or a longer Duration; the mightiest
States and Nations perish, like Individuals; in one Leaf we read their History,
we admire their Achievements, we are interested in their Successes, but,
proceed to the next, and no more than a Name is left; the Ninevehs and Babylons
of Asia are fallen, the Sparta and Athens of Greece are no more; and the
Monuments that promised to endure to Eternity, are erased like the Mount of
Sand which, Yesterday, the Children cast up on the Shore.

When I behold this stupendous Expanse, so sumptuously furnished with a
Profusion of Planets, and Luminaries, revolving in appointed Courses, and
diversifying the Seasons; I see a Work that is altogether worthy of a God.
Again, when I descend to Earth, and look abroad upon the infinite Productions
of Nature, upon Provisions so amply answering to the Wants of every living
Being, and on Objects and Organs so finely fitted to each other, I trace a
complicated Maze of Wisdom, Bounty, and Benevolence. But, when I see all these
Beauties and Benefits counteracted by some adverse and destructive Principle;
when the Heavens gather their Clouds and roll their Thunders above, and the
Earth begins to quake and open beneath us; when the Air, that seemed so late to
be the Breath and Balm of Life, grows pregnant with a Variety of Pests, Plagues
and Poisons; when Life itself is found to be no other than the Storehouse or
Habitation of Death, and that all vegetable and animal Systems include within
their Frame, the Principles of inevitable Distemper and Dissolution: When
additional to all these natural Mischiefs, I consider the Extent and Empire of
moral Evil upon Earth; when I behold the wretched perishable short lived
Animal, called Man, for the Value of some Matter of Property as transient as
himself, industrious and studious of the Destruction of his Species; when, not
content with the Evils that Nature has entailed upon him, Man exerts all his
Talents for multiplying and speeding the Means of Perdition to Man; when I see
half the World employed in pushing the other Half from the Verge of Existence,
and then dropping after in an endless Succession of Malevolence and Misery; I
cannot possibly reconcile such Contrasts and Contradictions to the Agency, or
even Permission, of the one over ruling Principle of Goodness called GOD.

Could not Omniscience foresee such Consequences, at Creation? Unquestionably,
said Mr. Meekly.

Might he not have ordered Matters so, as to have prevented the Possibility of
any Degree of natural or moral Evil in his Universe? -- I think he might, my
Lord. -- Why did he not, then, prevent them? to what End could he permit such
multiplied Malevolence and Misery among his Creatures? -- For Ends, certainly
my Lord, infinitely worthy both of his Wisdom and his Goodness. -- I am
desirous it should be so; but cannot conceive, cannot reach the Way or Means of
compassing such an Intention.

Can you not suppose, said Mr. Meekly, that Evil may be admitted for
accomplishing the greater and more abundant Good? May not partial and temporary
Malevolence and Misery be finally productive of universal, durable, and
unchangeable Beatitude? May not the Universe, even now, be in the Pangs of
Travail, of Labor for such a Birth, such a blessed Consummation?

It were, rejoined the Earl, as our Shakespeare says, it were indeed a
Consummation devoutly to be wished. But, might not Omnipotence have brought
about a Consummation equally good, without any Intervention of preceding Evil?
-- Had that been possible, my Lord, it would unquestionably have been effected.
But if certain Relations arise between God and his Creatures, and between Man
and Man which could not arise save on the previous Supposition of Evil, without
which, indeed, neither the Attributes of God himself, nor the Insufficiency,
Dependence, or Obligation of the Creature could have been duly discoverable
throughout Eternity, then temporary Evil becomes indispensably necessary to the
Consequence and Consummation of the greatest Good.

Your Notion, exclaimed the Earl, is great, amazing, truly glorious, and every
Way worthy of a God who, in such a Case, would be infinitely worthy of all
Worship! Is this the Reason, Mr. Meekly, that what we all so earnestly seek for
is no where to be found, that no Portion or Taste of Happiness is to be had
upon Earth?

I do not say so, my Lord; I think that a Man, even on Earth, may be
occasionally, nay durably, and exceedingly happy.

What, happy? durably, exceedingly happy? repeated the Earl. I was told that
the Experience of Ages, that Philosophy and even Divinity had agreed with
Solomon in this, that all upon Earth was Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. If any
may enjoy Happiness, on this Side of the great Consummation that you speak of,
I am persuaded, Mr. Meekly, that you yourself are the Man. Your Lips indeed say
nothing of the Matter, but neither your Eyes nor your Aspect can restrain the
Expression of some extraordinary Peace that abides within. O, say then, my
dear, my estimable Friend, whence, how, by what Means may a Man arrive at
Happiness? -- By getting out of himself, my Lord.

Out of himself, Mr. Meekly! you astonish me greatly. A Contradiction in Terms,
unnatural, impossible! -- God, himself, my Lord, cannot make a Man Happy in any
other Way, either here, or hereafter.

It is, said the Earl, an established Maxim among all thinking Men, whether
Divines or Philosophers, that SELF-LOVE is the Motive to all human Actions.
Virtue forbid! exclaimed Mr. Meekly; all Actions are justly held, good or evil,
base or honorable, detestable or amiable, merely according to their Motives.
But, if the Motive is the same to all, there is an End, at once, to the
Possibility of Virtue; the Cruel and the Kind, the Faithful and the Perfidious,
the Prostitute and the Patriot are confounded together.

Do not all Men, returned the Earl, act agreeable to their own Propensities and
Inclinations? do they not Act so or so, merely because it pleases them so to
act? and is not this Pleasure the same Motive in all? -- By no Means, my Lord,
it never was nor can be the Motive in any. We must go a Question deeper, to
discover the secret Principle or Spring of Action. One Man is pleased to do
Good, another is pleased to do Evil; now, whence is it that each is pleased
with Purposes in their Nature so opposite and irreconcilable? Because, my Lord,
that the Propensities or Motives to Action, in each, are as opposite and
irreconcilable as the Actions themselves; the one is prompted and therefore
pleased with his Purpose of doing Evil to others, through some base Prospect of
Interest redounding to himself; the other is prompted and spurred, and
therefore pleased with his Purpose of endangering his Person or suffering in
his Fortune, through the benevolent Prospect of the Good that shall thereby
redound to Others.

Pleasure is, itself, an Effect, and cannot be the Cause, or Pinciple, or
Motive to any Thing; it is an agreeable Sensation that arises, in any Animal,
on its meeting or contemplating an Object that is suited to its Nature. As far
as the Nature of such an Animal is evil, evil Objects can alone affect it with
Pleasure; as far as the Nature of such an Animal is good, the Objects must be
good whereby its Pleasures are excited.

When Damon was sentenced, by Dionysius of Syracuse, to die on such a Day; he
prayed Permission, in the Interim, to retire to his own Country, to set the
Affairs of his disconsolate Family in order. This the Tyrant intended most
peremptorily to refuse, by granting it, as he conceived, on the impossible
Conditions of his procuring some one to remain, as Hostage for his Return,
under equal Forfeiture of Life. Pythias heard the Conditions, and did not wait
for an Application on the Part of Damon, he instantly offered himself to
Durance in the Place of his Friend, and Damon was accordingly set at Liberty.

The King and all his Courtiers were astonished at this Action, as they could
not account for it on any allowed Principles. Self-Interest, in their Judgment,
was the sole Mover of human Affairs; and they looked on Virtue, Friendship,
Benevolence, Love of Country, and the like, as Terms invented by the Wise to
impose upon the Weak. They, therefore, imputed this Act of Pythias to the
Extravagance of his Folly, to the Defect of Head, merely, and no way to any
Virtue or good Quality of Heart.

When the Day of the destined Execution drew near, the Tyrant had the Curiosity
to visit Pythias in his Dungeon. Having reproached him for the romantic
Stupidity of his Conduct, and rallied him, some Time, on his Madness in
presuming that Damon, by his Return, would prove as great a Fool as himself; my
Lord, said Pythias, with a firm Voice and noble Aspect, I would it were
possible that I might suffer a thousand Deaths, rather than my Friend should
fail in any Article of his Honor. He cannot fail therein, my Lord. I am as
confident of his Virtue as I am of my own Existence. But, I pray, I beseech the
Gods to preserve the Life and Integrity of my Damon together. Oppose him, ye
Winds! prevent the Eagerness and Impatience of his honorable Endeavors! and
suffer him not to arrive till, by my Death, I have redeemed a Life, a thousand
Times of more Consequence, more Estimation, than my own, more estimable to his
lovely Wife, to his precious little Innocents, to his Friends, to his Country.
O, leave me not to die the worst of Deaths in my Damon!

Dionysius was confounded and awed by the Dignity of these Sentiments, and by
the Manner, (still more sentimental) in which they were uttered; he felt his
Heart struck by a slight Sense of invading Truth, but it served rather to
perplex than to undeceive him. He hesitated, he would have spoken, but he
looked down, and retired in Silence.

The fatal Day arrived. Pythias was brought forth, and walked, amidst the
Guard, with a serious but satisfied Air, to the Place of Execution.

Dionysius was already there. He was exalted on a moving Throne that was drawn
by six white Horses, and sat pensive and attentive to the Demeanor of the
Prisoner.

Pythias came. He vaulted lighty on the Scaffold; and, beholding for some Time
the Apparatus of his Death, he turned with a pleased Countenance and addressed
the Assembly.

My Prayers are heard, he cried, the Gods are propitious! You know, my
Friends, that the Winds have been contrary till Yesterday. Damon could not
come, he could not conquer Impossibilities; he will be here Tomorrow, and the
Blood which is shed to Day shall have ransomed the Life of my Friend. O, could
I erase, from your Bosoms, every Doubt, every mean Suspicion of the Honor of
the Man, for whom I am about to suffer; I should go to my Death, even as I
would to my Bridal. Be it sufficient, in the mean Time, that my Friend will be
found noble, that his Truth is unimpeachable, that he will speedily approve it,
that he is now on his Way, hurrying on, accusing himself, the adverse Elements,
and the Gods. But I haste to prevent his Speed; Executioner, to your Office!

As he pronounced the last Words, a Buzz began to arise among the remotest of
the People. A distant Voice was heard. The Crowd caught the Words; and, stop,
stop the Execution! was repeated by the whole Assembly.

A Man came at full Speed. The Throng gave way to his Approach. He was mounted
on a Steed of Foam. In an Instant he was off his Horse, on the Scaffold, and
held Pythias straightly embraced.

You are safe, he cried, you are safe, my Friend, my Beloved, the Gods be
praised, you are safe! I now have nothing but Death to suffer, and I am
delivered from the Anguish of those Reproaches which I gave myself, for having
endangered a Life so much dearer than my own.

Pale, cold, and half Speechless in the Arms of his Damon, Pythias replied in
broken Accents, -- Fatal Haste! -- cruel Impatience! -- what envious Powers
have wrought Impossibilities in your Favor? -- But, I will not be wholely
disappointed -- Since I cannot die to save, I will not survive you.

Dionysius heard, beheld, and considered all with Astonishment. His Heart was
touched. His Eyes were opened; and he could no longer refuse his assent to
Truths so incontestably approved by their Facts.

He descended from his Throne. He ascended the Scaffold. Live, live ye
incomparable Pair! he exclaimed. Ye have borne unquestionable Testimony to the
Existence of Virtue, and that Virtue equally evinces the Certainty of the
Existence of a God to reward it. Live happy, live renowned! and, O, form me by
your Precepts, as ye have invited me by your Example, to be worthy of the
Participation of so sacred a Friendship.

YOU bring your Arguments quite home, Mr. Meekly, said the Earl; the
Understanding cannot reject what the Heart so sensibly feels. My Soul deeply
acknowledges the Existence of Virtue, with its essential and inherent
Difference from Vice, and this Difference, I acknowledge, must as necessarily
be founded in the Difference of the Principles from whence they proceed; but,
what those Principles are I know not; and I am equally a Stranger to what you
intend by a Man's getting out of himself in order to Happiness. What am I to
understand by the Term SELF, Mr. Meekly.

Every Particle of Matter, my Lord, has a SELF or distinct Identity, inasmuch
as it cannot be any other Particle of Matter. Now, while it continues in this
its State of SELFISHNESS or absolute Distinction, it is utterly useless and
insignificant, and is to the Universe as though it were not. It has however a
Principle of Attraction (analogous or answerable to Desire in Mind) whereby it
endeavors to derive to itself the Powers and Advantages of all other Portions
of Matter. But when the DIVINE INTELLIGENCE has harmonized certain Quantities
of such distinct Particles into certain animal or vegetable Systems, this
Principle of Attraction in each is overcome, for each becomes attracted and
drawn as it were from SELF, each yields up its Powers to the Benefit of the
Whole, and then, and then only, becomes capable and productive of Shape,
Coloring, Beauty, Flowers, Fragrance, and Fruits.

Be pleased now to observe, my Lord, that this Operation in Matter is no other
than a Manifestation of the like Process in Mind; and that no Soul was ever
capable of any Degree of Virtue or Happiness save so far as it is drawn away,
in its Affections, from SELF; save so far as it is engaged in wishing,
contriving, endeavoring, promoting, and rejoicing in the Welfare and Happiness
of others.

It is therefore that the Kingdom of Heaven is most aptly, and most
beautifully, compared to a Tree bearing Fruit and diffusing Odours, whose Root
is the PRINCIPLE of infinite Benevolence, and whose Braches are the blessed
Members, receiving consummate Beatitude from the Act of Communication.

I think, indeed, said the Earl, that I can form some Sort of a Notion of such
a Society in Heaven. But it would pose you, Mr. Meekly, to exemplify your
Position from any Body of Men that ever were upon Earth.

Pray pardon me, my Lord, the States of Sparta and Rome, derived their Luster
and Power, their whole Preeminence and Praise, from this Principle of
Communication, which, in them, was called Love of Country. But this beatifying
Principle was still more eminently instanced in the Society of the Church of
Jerusalem, who had all Things in common; who imparted their Possessions to all
Men, as every Man had need; and, thence, did eat their common Bread with
Gladness and Singleness of Heart, praising God, and having Favor with all
People.

You say, my Lord, that you can form a Notion of some such Excellence in
Heaven; but I can form no Notion of any Excellence more admirable, in Heaven
itself, than when a Man, in his present State of frail and depraved Nature,
overbears his personal Fears of Pain and Mortality, and yields up his Body to
assured Perdition, for public Good, or for the sake of those whom it delights
him to preserve.

I shall pass over the Instances of the Roman Regulus and the Decii, as also
that of Leonidas and his three Hundred Spartans who devoted their Lives for the
Liberties of Greece; was that Candidate less a Hero who, being rejected from
being one of these Self-devoted, exclaimed, the Gods be praised that there are
three Hundred, in Sparta, better Men than myself! But, I come nearer our own
Times and our own Nation, to exemplify this Disregard of SELF, the vital Source
and Principle of every Virtue, in six Mechanics or Craftsmen of the City of
Calais.

Edward the Third, after the Battle of Cressy, laid Siege to Calais. He had
fortified his Camp in so impregnable a Manner, that all the Efforts of France
proved ineffectual to raise the Siege, or throw Succors into the City. The
Citizens however, under the Conduct of Count Vienne their gallant Governor,
made an admirable Defense. Day after Day the English effected many a Breach
which they repeatedly expected to storm by Morning; but, when Morning appeared,
they wondered to behold new Ramparts raised, nightly erected out of the Ruins
which the Day had made.

France had now put the Sickle into her second Harvest since Edward with his
victorious Army sat down before the Town. The Eyes of all Europe were intent on
the Issue. The English made their Approaches and Attacks without Remission; but
the Citizens were as obstinate in repelling all their Efforts.

At length, Famine did more for Edward than Arms. After the Citizens had
devoured the lean Carcasses of their starved Cattle, they tore up old
Foundations and Rubbish in search of Vermin. They fed on boiled Leather and the
Weeds of exhausted Gardens, and a Morsel of damaged Corn was accounted Matter
of Luxury.

In this Extremity they resolved to attempt the Enemy's Camp. They boldly
sallied forth; the English joined Battle; and, after a long and desperate
Engagement, Count Vienne was taken Prisoner; and the Citizens, who survived the
Slaughter, retired within their Gates.

On the Captivity of the Governor, the Command devolved upon Eustace Saint
Pierre, the Mayor of the Town, a Man of mean Birth but of exalted Virtue.

Eustace now found himself under the necessity of capitulating and offered to
deliver, to Edward, the City, with all the Possessions and Wealth of the
Inhabitants, provided he permitted them to depart with Life and Liberty.

As Edward had long since expected to ascend the Throne of France, he was
exasperated, to the last Degree, against these People, whose sole Valor had
defeated his warmest Hopes; he therefore determined to take an exemplary
Revenge, though he wished to avoid the Imputation of Cruely. He answered, by
Sir Walter Mauny, that they all deserved capital Punishment as obstinate
Traitors to him, their true, and natural Sovereign. That, however, in his
wonted Clemency, he consented to pardon the Bulk of the Plebeians, provided
they would deliver up to him six of their principal Citizens, with Halters
about their Necks, as Victims of due Atonement for that Spirit of Rebellion
with which they had enflamed the vulgar Herd.

All the Remains of this desolate City were convened in the great Square, and,
like Men arraigned at a Tribunal from whence there was no Appeal, expected with
beating Hearts the Sentence of their Conqueror.

When Sir Walter had declared his Mesage, Consternation and pale Dismay was
impressed on every Face. Each looked upon Death as his own inevitable Lot; for,
how should they desire to be saved at the Price proposed? whom had they to
deliver save Parents, Brothers, Kindred, or valiant Neighbors who had so often
exposed their Lives in their Defense? To a long and dead Silence deep Sighs and
Groans succeeded; till Eustace St. Pierre, getting up to a little Eminence,
thus addressed the Assembly.

My Friends, we are brought to great Straits this Day. We must either submit to
the Terms of our cruel and ensnaring Conqueror; or yield up our tender Infants,
our Wives, and chaste Daughters to the bloody and brutal Lusts of the violating
Soldiery.

We well know what the Tyrant intends, by his specious Offers of Mercy. It will
not satiate his Vengeance to make us merely miserable, he would also make us
criminal, he would make us contemptible; he will grant us Life on no Condition
save that of our being unworthy of it.

Look about you, my Friends, and fix your Eyes on the Persons, whom you wish to
deliver up as the Victims of your own Safety. Which of these would ye appoint
to the Rack, the Axe, or the Halter? Is there any here who has not watched for
you, who has not fought for you, who has not bled for you? Who, through the
length of this inveterate Siege, has not suffered Fatigues and Miseries, a
thousand Times worse than Death, that you and yours might survive to Days of
Peace and Prosperity? Is it your Preservers, then, whom you would destine to
Destruction? you will not, you cannot do it. Justice, Honor, Humanity make
such a Treason impossible.

Where then is our Resource? is there any Expedient left, whereby we may avoid
Guilt and Infamy on the one Hand, or the Desolation and Horrors of a sacked
City on the other? there is, my Friends, there is one Expedient left; a
gracious, an excellent, a Godlike Expedient! Is there any here to whom Virtue
is dearer than Life? Let him offer himself an Oblation for the Safety of his
People! He shall not fail of a blessed Approbation from that Power, who offered
up his only Son for the Salvation of Mankind.

He spoke -- but a universal Silence ensued. Each Man looked around for the
Example of that Virtue and Magnanimity, in others, which all wished to approve
in themselves, though they wanted the Resolution.

At length Saint Pierre resumed -- It had been base in me, my fellow Citizens
to propose any Matter of Damage, to others, which I myself had not been willing
to undergo in my own Person. But I held it ungenerous to deprive any Man of
that Preference and Estimation which might attend a first Offer, on so signal
an Occasion. For I doubt not but there are many here as ready, nay more zealous
of this Martyrdom than I can be, however Modesty and the Fear of imputed
Ostentation may withold them from being foremost in exhibiting their Merits.

Indeed, the Station, to which the Captivity of Lord Vienne has unhappily
raised me, imparts a Right to be the first in giving my Life for your Sakes. I
give it freely, I give it cheerfully; who comes next?

Your Son! exclaimed a Youth, not yet come to Maturity. -- Ah my Child! cried
Saint Pierre, I am, then, twice sacrificed. -- But, no -- I have rather
begotten thee a second Time. -- Thy Years are few but full, my Son; the Victim
of Virtue has reached the utmost Purpose and Goal of Mortality. Who next, my
Friends? -- This is the Hour of Heroes. -- Your Kinsman, cried John D'Aire!
your Kinsman, cried James Wissant! your Kinsman, cried Peter Wissant! -- Ah,
exclaimed Sir Walter Mauny, bursting into Tears, why was I not a Citizen of
Calais?

The sixth Victim was still wanting, but was quickly supplied, by Lot, from
Numbers who were now emulous of so ennobling an Example.

The Keys of the City were then delivered to Sir Walter. He took the six
Prisoners into his Custody. He ordered the Gates to be opened, and gave Charge
to his Attendants to conduct the remaining Citizens, with their Families,
through the Camp of the English.

Before they departed, however, they desired Permission to take their last
Adieu of their Deliverers -- What a Parting, what a Scene! They crowded with
their Wives and Children about Saint Pierre and his fellow Prisoners. They
embraced, they clung around, they fell prostrate before them. They groaned,
they wept aloud; and the joint Clamor of their Mourning passed the Gates of
the City and was heard throughout the Camp.

The English, by this Time, were apprised of what passed within Calais. They
heard the Voice of Lamentation, and their Souls were touched with Compassion.
Each of the Soldiers prepared a Portion of their own Victuals to welcome and
entertain the half famished Inhabitants; and they loaded them with as much as
their present Weakness was able to bear, in order to supply them with
Sustenance by the Way.

At length, Saint Pierre and his fellow Victims appeared under the conduct of
Sir Walter and a Guard. All the Tents of the English were instantly emptied.
The Soldiers poured from all Parts, and arranged themselves on each Side, to
behold, to contemplate, to admire this little Band of Patriots as they passed.
They bowed down to them on all Sides. They murmured their applause of that
Virtue which they could not but revere, even in Enemies. And they regarded
those Ropes, which they had voluntarily assumed about their Necks, as Ensigns
of greater Dignity than that of the British Garter.

As soon as they had reached the Presence, Mauny! says the Monarch, are these
the principal Inhabitants of Calais? They are, says Mauny, they are not only
the principal Men of Calais, they are the principal Men of France, my Lord, if
Virtue has any Share in the Act of ennobling. Were they delivered peaceably,
says Edward; was there no Resistance, no Commotion among the People? Not in the
least, my Lord; the People would all have perished, rather than have delivered
the least of these to your Majesty. They are Self-delivered, Self-devoted, and
come to offer up their inestimable Heads as an ample Equivalent for the Ransom
of Thousands.

Edward was secretly piqued at this Reply of Sir Walter, but, he knew the
Privilege of a British Subject, and suppressed his Resentment. Experience, says
he has ever shown that Lenity only serves to invite People to new Crimes.
Severity, at Times, is indispensably necessary to deter Subjects into
Submission by Punishment and Example. Go, he cried to an Officer, lead these
Men to Execution. Your Rebellion, continued he, addressing himself to Saint
Pierre, your Rebellion against me, the natural Heir of your Crown, is highly
aggravated by your present Presumption and Affront of my Power. -- We have
nothing to ask of your Majesty, said Eustace, save what you cannot refuse us.
-- What is that? -- Your Esteem, my Lord, said Eustace, and went out with his
Companions.

At this Instant, a Sound of Triumph was heard throughout the Camp. The Queen
had just arrived, with a powerful Reinforcement of those gallant Soldiers, at
the Head of whom she had conquered Scotland, and taken their King Captive.

Sir Walter Mauny flew to receive her Majesty, and briefly informed her of the
Particulars respecting the six Victims.

As soon as She had been welcomed by Edward and his Court, She desired a
private Audience. My Lord, said She, the Question I am to enter upon is not
touching the Lives of a few Mechanics; it respects a Matter, more estimable
than the Lives of all the Natives of France, it respects the Honor of the
English Nation, it respects the Glory of my Edward, my Husband, my King.

You think you have sentenced Six of your Enemies to Death. No, my Lord, they
have sentenced themselves, and their Execution would be the Execution of their
own Orders, not the Orders of Edward.

They have behaved themselves worthily, they have behaved themselves greatly, I
cannot but respect, while I envy, while I hate them, for leaving us no Share in
the Honor of this Action, save that of granting a poor and indispensable
Pardon.

I admit they have deserved every Thing that is evil at your Hands. They have
proved the most inveterate and efficacious of your Enemies. They, alone, have
withstood the rapid Course of your Conquests, and have witheld from You the
Crown to which You were born. Is it therefore that You would reward them? that
you would gratify their Desires, that you would indulge their Ambition, and
enwreath them with everlasting Glory and Applause?

But, if such a Death would exalt Mechanics over the Fame of the most
illustrious Heroes, how would the Name of my Edward, with all his Triumphs and
Honors be tarnished thereby! Would it not be said that Magnanimity and Virtue
are grown odious in the Eyes of the Monarch of Britain? And that the Objects,
whom he destines to the Punishment of Felons, are the very Men who deserve the
Praise and Esteem of Mankind The Stage, on which they should suffer, would be
to them a Stage of Honor, but a Stage of Shame to Edward, a Reproach to his
Conquests, a dark and indelible Disgrace to his Name.

No, my Lord. Let us rather disappoint the saucy Ambition of these Burghers,
who wish to invest themselves with Glory at our Expense. We cannot, indeed,
wholely deprive them of the merit of a Sacrifice so nobly intended; but we may
cut them short of their Desires; in the Place of that Death, by which their
Glory would be consummate, let us bury them under Gifts, let us put them to
Shame with Praises; we shall thereby defeat them of that popular Opinion which
never fails to attend those who suffer in the Cause of Virtue.

I am convinced; you have prevailed; be it so, cried Edward, prevent the
Execution; have them instantly before us!

They came, when the Queen, with an Aspect and Accents diffusing Sweetness,
thus bespoke them.

Natives of France, and Inhabitants of Calais, Ye have put us to vast Expense
of Blood and Treasure in the Recovery of our just and natural Inheritance; but,
you acted up to the best of an erroneous Judgment, and we admire and honor in
you that Valor and Virtue, by which we are so long kept out of our rightful
Possessions.

You noble Burghers, you excellent Citizens! though you were tenfold the
Enemies of our Person and our Throne, we can feel nothing, on our Part, save
Respect and Affection for You. You have been sufficiently tested. We loose your
Chains, we snatch You from the Scaffold; and we thank You for that Lesson of
Humiliation which you teach us, when you show us that Excellence is not of
Blood, of Title, or Station; that Virtue gives a Dignity superior to that of
Kings; and that Those, whom the Almighty informs with Sentiments like yours,
are justly and eminently raised above all human Distinctions.

You are now free to depart to your Kinsfolk, your Countrymen, to all Those
whose Lives and Liberties You have so nobly redeemed, provided you refuse not
to carry with You the due Tokens of our Esteem.

Yet, we would rather bind You, to ourselves, by every endearing Obligation;
and for this Purpose, we offer to You your Choice of the Gifts and Honors that
Edward has to bestow. Rivals for Fame, but always Friends to Virtue, we wish
that England were entitled to call You her Sons.

Ah my Country, exclaimed Saint Pierre, it is now that I tremble for You.
Edward could only win your Cities, but Philippa conquers Hearts.

Brave Saint Pierre, said the Queen, wherefore look you so dejected? -- Ah
Madam! replied Saint Pierre, when I meet with such another Opportunity of
dying, I shall not regret that I survived this Day.

Here a long Pause ensued. At length the Earl recollected himself. Mr. Meekly,
sais he, You have now proved to me your Position more effectually, more
convincingly, than all the Powers of Ratiocination could possibly do. While you
related the Story of those divine Citizens, I was imperceptibly stolen away and
won entirely from Self. I entered into all their Interests, their Passions, and
Affections; and was wrapped, as it were, into a new World of delightful
Sensibilites. Is this what you call Virtue, what you call Happiness?

A good deal of it, my Lord. There are in Nature but two Kinds of Self; in
other Words, there are but two Sorts of Wills in the Universe; the Will of
infinite Wisdom, of infinite Benevolence, going forth in Beauty and Beatitude
on all Creatures; And the Will of the Creature, desiring, attracting, envying,
coveting, and rending all Things, from All, to its own Interest and Advantage.
In the first Will subsists all possible Good, from the Second arises all
possible Evil; and did not the first Will, in some Measure, inform and
meliorate the Second, the Will of every Creature would be an Ishmael, his Hand
would be against every One, and every One's Hand against him, and there would
be nothing but Strife and Distraction, Hatred, Horror, and Misery throughout
the Creation.

Hence it follows that, as there is but one Will, from Eternity, infinitely
wise to discern what is best throughout the Universe, infinitely good to desire
the Accomplishment of what is best, and infinitely powerful to put what is best
in Execution; every Will that is not informed by this ONE WILL, must of
necessity act in Ignorance, in Blindness, and Error. I will further affirm that
every Act of every Will, that is not informed by the ONE WILL of GOODNESS must,
of equal necessity, be the Act of Malevolence.

I do not see the necessity of that, replied the Earl. I well perceive that God
can give to intelligent Beings an Existence or Identity distinct from himself,
for I see that he has done it. What should therefore prevent him from giving
Qualities as distinct from himself as the Essence? why might he not impart, to
any limited Degree, Capacity, Discernment, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness? Might
not such a Being instantly perceive, to a vast Extent, the Relations of Things,
with their several Fitnesses and Disagreements? would he not consequently be
enamoured of what was right and beautiful? would he not act agreeable to such a
just Approbation? and would not such Actions be fitly accounted the Act of
Virtue?

At this Instant a Messenger arrived on the Spur. He brought word to Mr. Meekly
that his Friend, Mr. Husbands, was taken suddenly ill and earnestly requested
to see him directly; whereupon Mr. Meekly, who preferred any Matter of Charity
to all other Considerations, immediately got up, made a silent Bow and vanished.

TO RETURN to our Hero. As soon as he was new rigged, he pressed for another
Visit to his Patron; who received him, with accustomed Tenderness, but greatly
wondered at his Peasant Dress. Nurse, then, recited to him the whole Adventure
of the fritter'd Robeings. Whereat, the old Gentleman, in a manner devoured him
with the Eagerness of his Caresses.

When Nurse and Harry were departed, he called to him his old Domestic. James,
says he, with a Tear yet standing in his Eye, I can no longer live without the
Company of this dear Child, hasten, therefore, the Orders that I have already
given you, and let all Things be in Readiness for the first Opportunity. The
Domestic, who had caught the filent Habit of his Master, with a Bow, assented,
and retired.

Autumn was now advanced, and Lord Dickey, with his Brother, a Number of little
Associates, and an attending Footman, got leave to go to the Copse, a Nutting.
As the Children were perfectly acquainted with the Way, the Servant desired to
stay behind, a while, in order to provide Hooks for pulling down the Branches.
This was granted; and forth they all issued in high Chat and Spirits.

The Copse lay, at some Distance, on one Side of the Park behind the
Mansion House; but, when they had nearly approached the Place of their
Destination, Harry missed a Garter, and, promising speedily to rejoin his
Companions, went back to seek it.

In the mean Time, his Associates, on entering the Wood, met with another
little Posse of the Village Fry, who were on their Return, one of whom carried
a Bag of Nuts that seemed bulkier than the Bearer. So, Gentlemen, says Lord
Dickey, where are you going? Why, Home, where should we go? says a little Boor,
sullenly. And, pray, what have you been doing, says the Lord. Guess, says the
Boor. Is it Nuts that you have got in that Bag? demanded the Lord. Ask,
Tomorrow; answered the Boor. Sirrah, sais Dickey, a little provoked, how dare
you to come and pull Nuts here, without our Leave? Why, as for that, Master
Dickey, replied the other, I know you well enough, and I wouldn't ask your
Leave, an' you were twenty Lords, not I. Sirrah, says Dickey, I have a great
Mind to take your Nuts from you, and to give you as good a Beating, into the
Bargain, as ever you got in your Life. As for that, Master Dickey, coolly
answered the Villager, you must do Both or Neither. Here I lay down my Nuts
between us; and now come any Two of your Watergruel Regiment, one down the other
come on, and if I don't give ye your Belly fulls, why, then, take my Nuts, and
welcome, to make up the Want.

This gallant Invitation was accepted, on the Spot. Lord Richard chose his
Companion in Arms; and Both appeared quite flush and confident of Victory. For,
though neither of them had been versed in the Gymnastic Exercises, they didn't
want Courage and they knew that the Challenger was their Inferior in Strength
and in Years.

But, unhappily for these two Champions of Quality, Tommy Truck, their
Adversary, had, like Harry, been a Bruiser, from two Years old and upward; and
was held, in Veneration, as their Leader, and their Chief, by many who were his
Superiors in Age and Stature.

Lord Richard began the Assault, but, was down in a Twinkling. To him his
Friend succeeded, but, with no better Fortune. A Swing or Trip of Tommy's sent
them, instantly, as Alcides sent Antaeus, to gather Strength from their
Mother-Earth. And, though these Summer Heroes, like the young Roman Nobility at
the Battle of Pharsalia, were solely intent on defending their pretty Faces
from Annoyance, yet Tommy, at the third Turn, had bloodied them, Both.

Harry, who was now on his Return, perceived the Engagement, and, running up,
and, rushing between the Combatants, interposed, with a Voice of Authority, and
parted the Fray.

Having enquired, and duly informed himself of the Merits of the Case, he,
first turned him to Lord Richard, and said, O, Brother Dickey, Brother Dickey,
you ought not to hinder poor Boys from pulling a few dirty Nuts, what signifies
'em? Then, turning to the Challenger; his old Acquaintance; Tommy, says he, did
you know that Dickey was my Brother? Yes, says Tommy, rudely, and what though of
I did. O, nothing at all, says Harry, but I want to speak with you, Tommy.
Whereupon he took the Conqueror under the Arm, and walked away, with him, very
lovingly, in all Appearance, looking about to take Care that none of the Boys
followed him.

Mean Time, the little Gentry threw out their Invectives, in Profusion, against
our departed Hero. I think, says one, that Master Harry had as much to blame in
Tommy as Lord Dickey. Ay, says another, one would think he might as well have
taken his Brother's Part, as that Blackguard's. Indeed, it was very naughty of
him, says a Third. For my Part, says a Fourth, I never will have any Thing more
to say to him.

While, thus, they vilified their late Friend, he and his fellow Champion
walked, Arm in Arm, in a sullen and uninterrupted Silence. Till, coming to a
small Opening, in a secreted Part of the Wood, Harry quitted his Companion,
desired him to strip, and, instantly, cast aside his own Hat, Coat, and
Waistcoat. Why should I strip, says Tommy? To Box, says Harry. Why should you
box with me, Harry? sure I didn't strike you, says Tom. Yes, Sir, replied our
Hero, you struck me when you struck Dickey, and knew that he was my Brother.
Nay, Harry, cried Tom, if it is Fight you are for, I Will give you enough of it, I
warrant you.

Tom was about eight Months older than Harry, his equal in the Practice of
Arms, and much the stronger. But, Harry was full as tall; and his Motions,
quicker than Thought, prevented the Ward of the most experienced Adversary.

Together they rushed, like two little Tigers. At once, they struck and
parried, and, watching every open, they darted their little Fists, like
Engines, at each other. But Tom, marking the Quickness, and feeling the Smart
of Harry's Strokes, suddenly leapt within his Arm, bore him down to the Earth,
and triumphantly gave him the first rising Blow.

Harry rose, indignant, but warned, by the Strength of his Adversary, to better
Caution. He now fought, more aloof, and as Tom pressed upon him, he at once
guarded, struck, and wheeled, like an experienced Cock, without quitting the
Pit of Honor.

Tom, finding himself wholely foiled by this Parthian Method of Combat, again
rushed upon his Enemy, who was, now, aware of the Shock. They closed, they
grappled, they caught each other by the Shoulders, joined Head to Head, and
Breast to Breast, and stood, like two Pillars, merely supported by their
Bearing against one another. Again they shifted the left Arm, caught each other
about the Neck, and cuffed and punch'd at Face and Stomach, without Mercy or
Remission; till Tom, impatient of this Length of Battle, gave Harry a side
Swing, and, Harry giving Tom a Trip at the same Time, they fell Side by Side,
together upon the Earth.

They rose, and retreated, to draw Breath, as by mutal Consent. They glared on
one another with an Eye of vindictive Apprehension. For neither of them could
now boast of more Optics than Poliphemus; and, from their Forehead to their
Shoes, they were in one Gore of Blood.

Again they flew upon each other, again they struck, foined, and defended, and
alternately, pressed on and retreated in Turns, till Harry, spying an Open,
darted his Fist, like a Shot, into the remaining Eye of his Enemy. Tom, finding
himself in utter Darkness, instantly, sprung upon his Foe, and endeavored to
grapple; but Harry, with equal Agility, avoided the Shock, and, traversing here
and there beat his Adversary at Pleasure. Till Tom cried out, I yield I yield,
Harry, for I cannot see to fight, any more.

Then, Harry took Tom by the Hand and led him to his Clothes, and, having
assisted him to dress, he, next, did the same friendly Office to himself. Then,
Arm in Arm, they returned much more loving, in reality, than they set out,
having been beaten into a true Respect and Affection for each other.

Sometime before this, the Footman had joined his young Lord, with the several
Implements requisite for Nutting. They had, already, pulled down great
Quantities; the young Quality had stuffed their Pockets; and the little
Plebeians, who had assisted, were now permitted to be busy in gathering up the
Refuse. When all, turning at the Cry of there is Harry, there is Tom, they
perceived our two Champions, advancing, leisurely, but Hand in Hand, as Friends
and Brothers.

They had left their Clothes unbuttoned, for the Benefit of the cooling Air;
and, as they approached, their Companions were frozen into Astonishment, at the
Sight of their two Friends all covered with Crimson.

They were neither able to advance to meet them, nor to speak, when they
arrived. 'Till Lord Dickey, first, inquired into this bloody Catastrophe, and,
Harry remaining wholely silent on the Subject; blind Tommy cried out, why,
Master Dickey, the Truth is, that Harry, beat me, because I beat You. Then
Dickey, feeling a sudden Gush of Gratitude and Affection rising up in his
Bosom, looked wistfully on his Brother, and said, with a plaintive Voice, O
Brother Harry, Brother Harry, you are sadly hurt; and, turning about, he began
to weep most bitterly. But Harry said, Shaw! Brother Dickey, don't cry Man, I
don't matter it of the Head of a brass Pin. Then turning to the Footman, with
Tom still in his Hand, he cried, here John, take that Bag of Nuts and poor
blind Tommy to my Mammy's, and tell Daddy that I desire him to see them both
safe home.

Friend. Sir, your Hero is indeed a Hero, he must be every body's Hero.


Author. Sir, you do him vast Honor; and I should be proud of your further
Instructions toward his supporting the Dignity of the Character you give him.
Pray, what are the ingredient Qualities of which a Hero is compounded? what
Idea have you formed of such a Personage? tell me, I beseech you, what is a
Hero, my good Friend?


Fr. Pshaw! -- what a Question -- every Fool knows that. -- A Hero is -- as
though one should say -- a Man of high Achievement -- who performs famous
Exploits -- who does Things that are heroical -- and in all his Actions and
Demeanor, is a Hero indeed -- why do you laugh -- I will give you the
Instances approved throughout the World; recorded and duly celebrated by
Poets, Painters, Sculptors, Statuaries, and Historians. -- There was the
Assyrian Ninus, the Sesostris of Egypt, the Cyrus of Persia, the Alexander of
Greece, the Caesar of Rome, and, partly in our own Days, there was the Conde of
France, the Charles of Sweden, and Persia's Kouli Kan. -- What the plague does
the Fellow laugh at?


Aut. I am laughing to think what a Blockhead Themistocles was. Being asked
whom he considered as the greatest of Heroes; not him who conquers but who
saves, replied Themistocles; not the Man who ruins but the Man who erects; who,
of a Village can make a City, or turn a despicable People into a great Nation.


Fr. According to your Notion of Heroism, that Boor and Barbarian, Peter
Alexiowitz of Russia, was the greatest Hero that ever lived.


Aut. True, my Friend; for, of a numerous People, he disembruted every one,
except himself. But then, in all Equity, he ought to divide his Glory with Kate
the Washerwoman, who humanized the Man that humanized a Nation.


Fr. Whom do you take to have been the greatest Hero of Antiquity?


Aut. Lycurgus, without Comparison, the greatest of Heroes and the greatest of
Legislators. In those very early Days, the People of Lacedaemon were extremely
rude and ignorant; they acknowledged no Laws, save the Dictates of their own
Will or the Will of their Rulers. Lycurgus might have assumed the Scepter; but
his Ambition aspired to a much more elevated and durable Dominion, over the
Souls, Manners, and Conduct of this People and their Posterity. He framed a
Body of the most extraordinary Institutions that ever enteredinto the Heart or
Head of Man. Next to those of our DIVINE LEGISLATOR, they were intended to form
a new Creature. He prevailed upon the Rich to make an equal Distribution of
their Lands with the Poor. He prohibited the Use of all such Money as was
current among other Nations, and, thereby prohibited the Importation of the
Means and Materials of Pomp and Luxury. He enjoined them to feed, in common, on
simple and frugal Fare. He forbid all Gorgeousness of Furniture and Apparel. In
short, he endeavored to suppress every sensual and selfish Desire, by
Injunctions of daily Exercise, Toil, and Hardship, a patient Endurance of Pain,
and a noble Contempt of Death. At length, feigning some Occasion of being
abroad for a Season, he exacted an Oath from the Lacedaemonians that they
should strictly observe his Laws, without the smallest Infringement, till his
Return. Thus, for the love of his Country, he went into perpetual Banishment
from it. And he took Measures, at his Death, that his Body should never be
found, lest it should be carried back to Sparta, and give his Countrymen a
Color for dissolving their Oath.


Fr. Laying Peter aside, who, think you, was the greatest Hero among the
Moderns?


Aut. To confess the Truth; among all that I have heard or read of; the Hero
whom I most affect was a Madman, and the Lawgiver whom I most affect was a Fool.


Fr. 'Troth, I believe you never would have been the Writer you are at this
Day, if you had not adopted somewhat of both the said Qualities. But, come,
unriddle I beseech you; where may this favorite Hero and Legislator be found?


Aut. In a Fragment of the Spanish History, bequeathed to the World by one
Signior Cervantes.


Fr. O! -- have you led me to my old Acquaintance? pray, has not your Pegasus
some Smatch of the Qualities of the famous Rosinante?


Aut. Quite as chaste, I assure you. But, I perceive that you think I am
drolling; you don't suppose that you can ever be seriously of the same Opinion.
Yet, if you demand of your own Memory, for what have the great Heroes
throughout History been renowned? it must answer, for Mischief merely, for
spreading Desolation and Calamity among Men. How greatly, how gloriously, how
divinely superior was our Hero of the Mancha! who went about righting of
Wrongs, and redressing of Injuries, lifting up the fallen, and pulling down
those whom Iniquity had exalted. In this his mavelous Undertaking, what
Buffettings, what Bruisings, what Tramplings of Ribs, what pounding of
Packstaves did his Bones not endure? (Mine ached at the recital.) But, Toil was
his Bed of Down, and the House of Pain was, to him, a Bower of Delight, while
he considered himself as engaged in giving Ease, Advantage, and Happiness to
others. If Events did not answer to the Enterprises of his Heart, it is not to
be imputed to the Man but to his Malady; for, had his Power and Success been as
extensive as his Benevolence, all Things awry, upon Earth, at the Risque of his
Limbs and Life, would instantly have been set as straight as a Cedar.

But, let me turn, with Reverence, to kiss the Hem of the Robes of the most
respectable of all Governors and Legislators, Sancho Pansa. What Judgments!
what Institutions! how are Minos, and Solon, and the inspired of the Goddess
Aegeria here eclipsed! Sancho, thou wast a Peasant, thou wast illiterate, thou
wast a Dunce for a Man, but an Angel for a Governor; inasmuch as, contrary to
the Custom of all other Governors, thou did not desire any Thing, thou did
not wish for any Thing, thine Eye was not bent to any Thing, save the Good of
thy People! therefore thou could not stray, thou had no other way to
travel. Could Aesop's Log have been moved to Action upon the same Principle,
the Regency of Storks had not prevailed among Men. How am I provoked, Pansa,
when I see thee insulted! how am I grieved when I find thee deposed! Saving the
Realms of a certain Majesty, I say, and sigh to myself, O, that the whole Earth
were as thine Island of Barataria; and thou, Sancho, the Legislator and the
Ruler thereof.


Fr. I feel Conviction. I confess it. But tell me, I pray you; why has the
World, through all Ages and Nations, universally ascribed Heroism and Glory to
Conquest?


Aut. Through the Respect, as I take it, that they have for Power. Man is by
Nature weak; he is born in and to a State of Dependence; he therefore naturally
seeks and looks about for Help; and, where he observes the greatest Power, it
is there that he applies and prays for Protection. Now, though this Power
should be exerted to his Damage, instead of Defense, it makes no Alteration in
his Reverence for it; he bows while he trembles, and while he detests he
worships. In the present Case, it is with Man, as it is with God; He is not so
awful and striking, he is not so much attended to, in the Sunshine and gentle
Dews of his Providence and Benignity, as in his Lightnings and Thunders, his
Clouds and his Tempests.

Hero, heroes, and (...), in the three Languages, signify a Demigod, or one who
is superior to mere Man. But, how can this Superiority or Distinction be shown?
The serene Acts of Beneficence, the small and still Voice of Goodness are
neither accompanied by Noise nor Ostentation. It is Uproar and Tumult, rather
the Tumbling of sacked Cities, the Shrieks of ravished Matrons, and the Groans
of dying Nations that fill the Trump of Fame. Men of Power and Ambition find
Distinction and Glory, very readily, attainable in this Way; as it is
incomparably more easy to destroy than to create, to give Death than to give
Life, to pull down than to build up, to bring Devastation and Misery rather
than Plenty and Peace and Prosperity upon Earth.


Fr. Were not Mankind, in this Instance, as blind to their own Interests, as
they were iniquitous in giving Glory where Shame alone was due?


Aut. In so doing, they proved at once the Dupes and the Victims of their own
Folly. Praise a Child for his Genius in Pranks of Mischief and Malevolence, and
you quicken him in the direct Road to the Gallows. It is just so that this wise
World has bred up its heroic Reprobates, by ascribing Honor and Acclamation to
Deeds that called loudy for Infamy and the Gibbet; for the World was an Ass
from its very Commencement, and it will continue a Dunderhead to the End.

From the Beginning of Things (a long Time ago) the joint Invention of Mankind
has discovered but two Methods of procuring Sustenance on Earth, the First by
the Labor of their own Hands, the second by employing the Hands of others.

All therefore are excluded, or at least ought to be excluded from such a
World, who refuse to labor, or, what is still worse, who disturb and prevent
the Labor of Others.

Among those who will not labor, we may number all who have the Happiness of
being born to no Manner of End; such as the Monks of every Country, the
Dervises of Persia, the Bramins of India, the Mandarins of China, and the
Gentlemen of these free and polished Nations.

These have nothing to do but to sleep it, to wake it; to eat it, to drink it;
to dance it, to doze it; to riot it, to roar it; and to rejoice in the happy
Earnest which this World has given them of the Jollities of the next.

Among those who disturb the Labor of others, I reckon all your rascally
Alexanders and Caesar's, whether ancient or modern, who, in their Fits of Frenzy
and Folly, scamper about, breaking the Lanterns and beating the Watch of this
World, to the great Amazement of Women and Terror of little Children; and, who
seem to think that Heaven gave Noses and Heads, for no End in Nature but to be
blooded and cracked. In short, I have no Patience when I hear talk of these
Fellows. I am not Half so fretted when I hear my own Works read -- Go on, I
request you, it may happen to put me in Temper.


CHAP. V.
THE young Gentlemen were, now, upon their Return; and, as they approached the
House, they crowded about Harry to keep him from being seen, till he took an
Opportunity of slipping away and stealing up to his Chamber. He now grew stiff
and sore, and his Nurse, having got an Intimation of what had happened, hurried
up to him, and wept over him with abundant Tears of cordial Affection. She
strait, undressed, and put him to Bed; and, having ordered some White Wind
Whey, of which she made him drink plentifully, she, also, undressed, and went
to bed to him, and Harry, casting his little Arm about her Neck, and, putting
his Head in her Bosom, was fast in a Twinkling.

By this, John had returned from the Execution of his Commission. He had been
fully apprized by Tommy, on the Road, of all the Circumstances relating to this
bloody Business; and, going to his Lord and Lady, he gave them the whole
Detail, occasionally dwelling, and expatiating on Harry's Courage, his Prowess,
his Honor, and his Generosity. They could, now, no longer forbear indulging
themselves with the Sight of a Child, in whom they held themselves honored,
above all Titles. They stole, gently, up Stairs; and, having got a Peep at
Harry, and observed that he was fast asleep, they stole, as softly, back again,
each inwardly exulting in their glorious Boy.

Our Hero was scarce recovered, from his Wounds and Bruises, when, on a Day, he
met a little Beggar Boy at the Hall-Door, half naked, and whinging, and
shivering with Cold. His Heart was, instantly, touched with wonted Compassion;
and, taking him by the Hand, what is your Name, my poor little Boy, says Harry?
Neddy, Sir, says the Child. And, where is your Daddy and Mammy? O, Sir, answered
Ned, I have no Daddy nor Mammy in the World wide. Don't cry, don't cry, says
Harry, I have several Daddies and Mammies, and I Will give you One or Two of 'em.
But, where did you leave your Clothes, Neddy? I haven't any, Sir, replied the
Child in a piteous Accent. Well well, it don't matter, Neddy, for I have more
Clothes, too, says Harry. So, taking him again by the Hand, he led him up to
his Apartment, without being perceived of any; and, helping him to strip, he
ran to his Closet for the Shirt which he had last thrown off, and put it on the
new Comer with equal Haste and Delight. He, next, ran for the entire Suit that
his bearded Dada had given him, and, having helped, and shown him how to put on
the Breeches, he drew on the Stockings and Shoes with his own Hands. To these
succeeded the Coat and Waistcoat, and Ned was, now, full as well rigged as his
Benefactor.

Never had our Hero enjoyed himself, so highly, as while he was thus employed.
When he had finished his Operations, he chuckled and smiled, turned Ned, round
and round, walked here and there about him, and was as proud of him, as if he
had been wholely of his own making.

He now, again, became thoughtful, forecasting in his Mind the Particulars that
might further be requisite for the Accommodation of his Guest; for he was grown
too fond of him to think of parting suddenly. He then recollected an adjoining
Lumber-Room, and, taking Ned with him, they found a little old Mattress, which,
with united Strength they dragged forth, and lodged in a convenient Corner of
the Closet. To this they added a Pair of old Blanketts, and Harry, having
spread them for Ned's Repose, in the best Manner he was able, asked his
Dependent if he was yet hungry; Yes, very, very hungry indeed, Sir, cried Ned.
No sooner said, than Harry flew down to the Kitchen, and, looking about, and
spying a large Porringer of Milk and a Luncheon of Bread, that one of the
Servants had provided for a young Favorite of their own, he seized upon them
like a Hawk, and hastening, again to his Chamber, delivered them to Neddy who,
already, had half devoured them with his Eyes. Ned, instantly, fell to with the
Rapture of a Cormorant, or any Rapture that can be supposed less than that of
his Friend Harry, who stood over him with the Feelings of a Parent Turtle; that
feeds his Young with the Meat derived from his own Bowels.

For a few Days, Harry kept his Dependent shut up in his Chamber, or Closet,
without the Privity of any of the Family, except Nurse, to whom he had revealed
the Affair under the Seal of the strictest Secresy.

But, on a cross Day, Susy the Housemaid, having entered with a new Broom into
our Hero's Apartment, perceived, in a Corner, the tattered Deposite of Ned's
original Robeings, and, lifting them, at a cautious Distance, with a Finger and
Thumb, she perceived, also, as many other Philosophers have done, that there is
no part of this Globe which is not peopled with Nations of Animals, if Man had
but Attention, and Optics duly accommodated to the Vision. She dropped the
living Garment, as though she had taken up a burning Horse Shoe; and was,
instantly, peopled, by her prolific Imagination, with Tribes of the same
Species from Head to Foot.

In this Fit of Disgust, Susy happened, unfortunately, to step into the Closet,
and spyed Ned in a dark Corner, where he had squatted and drawn himself up to
the Size of a Hedgehog. She, immediately flew at him, like one of the
Eumenides, and dragged him forth to the Light, as Hercules is said to have
haled Cacus from his Den. She questioned him, with a Voice of implacable
Authority, and Ned, with humble and ingenuous Tears, confessed the whole
Adventure. But Susy, no way melted, exclaimed, what, Sirrah, have you, and your
Master Harry, a mind to breed an Affection in the House? I will remit of no
such Doings, for I have an utter Conversion to Beggar-Brats and Vermil. She
then commanded him to bundle up his old Rags, and, driving him down Stairs
before her, she dismissed him from the Hall-Door with a Pair of smart Boxes on
each Side of his Head, and ordered him never more to Defend her Sight.

Poor Ned, went weeping and wailing, from the Door, when who should he see, at
about fifty Paces, distant, but his beloved Patron Harry, who had been cutting
a Switch from the next Hedge. To him he ran, with Precipitation. Harry, touched
with a Compassion not free from Resentment, to see his Favorite in Tears,
demanded the Cause of his apparent Distress, which Ned truly related. Our
Hero, thereupon, became thoughtful and moody; and, judging that Susy had not
acted thus without Authority, he conceived a general Disgust at a Family who
had treated him so injuriously in the Person of his Neddy; but, comforting his
Dependent the best he could, come Neddy, says he, don't cry, my Man; I will
bring you, that I will, to my own dear Dada, and he will welcome and love you,
for my Sake. Then, making his Way through a small Breach in the neighboring
Hedge, he ordered Ned to follow him, and flew across the Field, like a Bird of
Passage, in a direct Line to his Patron's.

The old Gentleman saw him approaching and gave Sign to his ancient Domestic,
who withdrew, with Precipitation. He received and caressed our Hero with more
than usual Transport, and who, my Dear says he, is this pretty little Boy that
you have got with you? Harry, then, like the Grecian Demosthenes, taking Time
to warm himself with the Recollection of his own Ideas, and, setting his Person
forth with an Action and Ardour that determined to prevail, made the following
Oration.

Why, Dada, I must tell you as how this poor little Boy, for he is a very poor
little Boy, and his Name is Neddy, Sir, and he has no Friend in the wide World
but you and I, Sir; and, so Sir, as I was telling you, he comes to the Door,
crying sadly for Cold and Hunger, and he would have pitied every Body, for he
had no Clothes, nor Daddy nor Mammy at all, Sir, and I had a many of them, and
that was not fair, you know, Sir; and I was in the Humor to give him all the
Dadas and Mamas I had in the World, except you, Sir; and Mammy Nurse. And so, I
takes him up Stairs, and I puts the Clothes upon him, that you gave me, when I
was a poor little Boy, Sir; for no Body had to say to 'em, but you and I, Sir;
and I knew that you would pity poor little Neddy, more than I pitied him
myself, Sir. And so, Dada, they takes my poor little Neddy to Day, and boxed
him, and beat him sadly, and turned him out of Doors; and so I meets him crying
and roaring, and so, you know, Sir, as how I had nothing to do, but to bring
him to you, Sir, or to stay, and cry with him for Company, Sir.

Here, Orator Harry ceased to speak, except by his Tears, which he could no
longer restrain, and which proceeded to plead most emphatically for him. But,
his Patron took him in his Arms, and kissed the Drops from both Eyes, and said,
don't cry, my Darling, for I am yours, my Harry, and all that I have is yours,
and, if you had brought a whole Regiment of poor little Neddies, with you, they
should be all welcome to me, for your Sake, my Harry.

Then Harry sprung up, and caught his Patron about the Neck, so that it was
some Time before the old Gentleman could get loose. But, Harry, says he, I am
going just now to leave this Country; will you and your Man Neddy come along
with me? Over the World wide, Dada, says Harry; but where are you going, Sir? I
am going a Begging, Harry. O, that will be brave Sport, says Harry, I Will tell
you what you shall do, Dada. What Is that, my Love? Why, Sir, says Harry, you
must get a great Bag, like the old Man and little Child that was at Door,
'tother Day. And Neddy and I will beg for you, Sir; and we will put all that we
get into your great Bag, as that good little Child did for his Daddy, without
touching a Bit; though he was a hungry enough, himself, poor Fellow, I warant.
But don't let us go to beg to Papa's Door, Sir; for, if you do, they will box
and beat us, and drive us away, as they did to poor little Neddy, to Day, Sir.

The old Gentleman, thereat, had his Countenance divided betwixt the rising
Tear and the bursting Laugh. But, taking Harry by the Hand, he said. No no, my
heavenly Creature, I am not going to beg of any Man living, but to beg of God
to pour down his full Weight of Blessings upon my Harry, and, to endeavor to
confirm them to him, both here and hereafter, by my Care and Instructions.

Having thus spoken, he put a large Cake into the Hand of each of the Children,
and, causing them to drink a full Glass of small White Wind, he took them into
a back Yard, where a light Coach with six Horses and three Servants, ready
mounted, attended. And, having placed his young Companions, and seated himself
between them, away the Coach drove, at a sweeping Gallop.

About the Time that our Hero and his Patron set out, Nurse went up Stairs,
with a most bountiful Cut, of Homebaked Bread and Butter; for the Amusement of
the young Caitiff whom she had left in the Closet; but not finding him there,
she hastily dropped her Provinder on the first Window she met, and, hurrying
down to the Kitchen, earnestly enquired for the little Beggar-Boy whom Master
Harry had taken into his Service; at this Question all the Servants stood in
silent Amazement, except Susy, who, bridling up, and assuming the whole
Importance of her Station. Why, Nurse, says she, you mustn't oppose that I am
come here, to sweep and to clean after lousy little Flagrants, it was enough to
breed an Antagion, that it was, in the House; so what magnifies many Words, I
took the little dirty Bastard and cuff'd him out of Doors. You did Hussy, says
Nurse, you dare to affront and vex my Child, my little Man, the Honor and
Pride of all the Family? And, so saying, she ups with her brawny Arm, and gave
Susy such a Douse on the Side of the Head, as left her fast asleep for an Hour
and upward. Then running up Stairs, again, she went, searching and clamouring,
for her Harry, about the House, in order to comfort and condole with him for
his Loss.

Dinner was now served up, and the Company seated, and all the Servants ran
severally, here and there, repeatedly summoning Master Harry to attend. But,
Harry was out of Hearing, by many a Mile. When the Cloth was removed, Nurse
entered with an Aspect, half in Tears and half distracted, and exclaimed that
her Child was not to be found. And what, Nurse, says the Earl, do you think is
become of him? I hope, my Lord, says she, that he is either strayed to his
Daddy, or to the dumb Gentleman's. Then, Messengers were, instantly, dispatched
to both Houses, who speedily returned, with Tidings, that Master Harry had not
been seen at his Foster-father's, and that no one was at Home at the House of
the Dumb Gentleman.

The Business, now, became serious, and alarming; the whole House was in
Commotion, and all the Domestics, and our Hero's loving Nurse, with Lord Dickey
in her Hand, ran searching through the Gardens, the Fields, and the Groves,
that resounded, on all Sides, with the Name of the Absentee.

On their Return from a Disquisition, as fruitless as solicitous, Nurse
declared her Apprehensions, that Harry was gone off, with a little favorite
Boy whom he had taken into Service, and whom the House Maid, that Morning, had
beaten out of Doors. Susy, being nearly recovered, and now called and
questioned, hereon, was compelled to confess the Fact, though in Terms less
haughty and less elegant, than usual; when my Lord, looking sternly at her, and
who, you Strumpet, he cried, gave you Authority to turn any one out of my House
whom my noble and generous Boy was pleased to bring in? get you instantly away,
and never let me be so unhappy as to see that Face again.

By this Time, the whole Village and Neighborhood, as well as this noble
Family, were in Trouble and Alarms for the Loss of their little Favorite; when
a Countryman entered in sweaty Haste and desired, without Preface, to be
admitted to the Earl. My Lord, says he, I think I can give you some News of
your dear Child. As I was returning Home on the London Road, I saw a Coach and
Six driving toward me at a great rate, and, though it passed me in Haste, I
marked that the Gentleman with the Beard, was in it, and that he had two
Children with him, one on each Hand, though I had not Time to observe their
Faces.

Here is something for your News, said the Earl, it may be as you say. -- Here,
John! take a Posse of the Servants along with you. Go in Haste to that Man's
House. If no one answers, break open the Door; and bring me Word of what you
can learn concerning him.

John, who was the House Steward, hurried instantly on his Commission; and,
finding all in Silence, after loud and repeated Knockings, he and his Myrmidons
burst open the Door, and rushing in ran up and down through all the Apartments.
They found the House richly furnished, a Library of choice Books above Stairs,
a Buffet full of massy Plate, and every Thing in Order as if prepared for the
Reception of a Family of Distinction. At this they all stood astonished, till
John, casting his Eye toward a Table in the Street Parlour, perceived a Paper
which he hastily snatched up, and found to be a Letter, duly folded and sealed
and addressed to his Lord. Exulting at this Discovery, he left some of the
Servants to watch the Goods, and hurried back with all possible Speed to his
Master.

My Lord, says John entering, and striving to recover Breath, the dumb
Gentleman, as they call him, must be a main rich Man, for the very Furniture of
his House cannot be worth less than some Thousands of Pounds. John then
presented the Letter, which the Earl hastily broke open, and found to be, as
follows:

My Lord,
I Am at length presented with an Opportunity of carrying off your little
Harry, the greatest Treasure that ever Parents were blessed with.

The Distress that I feel, in foreseeing the Affliction that his Absence will
cause to your whole Family, has not been able to prevail for the Suspension of
this Enterprise, as the Child's Interest and Happiness outweighs, with me, all
other Considerations.

Permit me, however, to assure your Lordship that our Darling is in very safe
and very affectionate Hands, and that it shall be the whole Concern, and
Employment of my Life, to render and to return him to you, in due Time, the
most accomplished and most perfect of all human Beings.

In the mean while, your utmost Search and Enquiry after us will be fruitless.
I leave to your Lordship my House and Furniture, as a Pledge and Assurance of
the Integrity of my Intentions,

And am, etc.


The Mystery of our Hero's Flight was now, in a great Measure unravelled; but
no one could form any rational Conjecture, touching the Motive of the old
Gentleman's Procedure in the Case; and all were staggered at his leaving such a
Mass of Wealth behind him.

As the falling on of a dark Night rendered all Pursuit, for that Time,
impracticable; my Lord ordered the Servants to Bed, that they might rise before
Day; and then to take every Horse he had, Coach-Cattle and all, and to muster
and mount the young Men of the Village, and to pursue after the Fugitives, by
different Roads, according to the best Likelihood or Intelligence they might
receive.

In this hopeful Prospect, the House was again in some Measure composed; all,
except poor Nurse who would not be comforted, neither could be prevailed upon
to enter in at the Doors; but all Night, on the cold Stairs, or rambling
through the raw Air, continued clapping and wringing her Hands, and bewailing
the irreparable Loss of her Harry.

On the following Day, my Lord ordered a minute Inventory to be taken of all
the Furniture in the forsaken Mansion House; and further appointed Harry's
Foster-father, with his Family, to enter into Possession, and to take Care of
the Effects, till such Time as the Proprietor should renew his Claim.

After three tedious Days, and as many expecting Nights, the Posse that went in
quest of our Runaways returned; all, drooping and dejected, most of them slowly
leading their overspent Horses, and universally bespattered or covered with
Mire, without any Equivalent of comfortable Tidings to balance the Weight of
their Langour and Fatigue.

The Happiness or Wretchedness of human Life, as it should seem, does not so
much depend on the Loss or Acquisition of real Advantage, as on the fluctuating
Opinions and Imaginations of Men. The Absence of this Infant who, but a few
Months before, had no Manner of Interest in the Views, Affections, or
Solicitudes of this noble Family, appeared now as the Loss of all their Honors
and Fortunes. A general Face of Mourning seemed to darken every Apartment; and
my Lord and Lady no more paid Visits, nor received public Company. They were
however inventive in many Contrivances for amusing and consoling their darling
Dickey, but even this was to little Purpose, for he was often found silently
languishing in Corners; or crying, O, where is my Brother Harry, my own sweet
Brother Harry, shall I never see my own Brother Harry any more?

My Lord had already dispatched a Multitude of circular Letters to all his
Acquaintances, with other Notices, throughout the Kingdom, containing Offers of
ample Rewards for the Recovery of his Child. But, finding all ineffectual, he
caused Advertisements, to the same Purpose, to be repeatedly inserted in all
the public Papers; as the same, no doubt, are still extant, and may be found in
the musty Chronicles of those Days.

Within a few Weeks after the publishing of these Advertisements my Lord
received a Letter, respecting his Son Harry, that afforded great Consolation to
him and his Lady; insomuch, that, with the Help of the lenient Hand of Time, in
less than the Space of twelve Months, this noble Family were restored to their
former Cheerfulness and Tranquillity.

But, to return to the Situation in which we left our Hero: The Coach drove on,
at a round Rate, and the Children continued in high Glee, and thought this kind
of Conveyance the finest Sport imaginable.

When they had entered, a Space, on the first Common, the Coachman looked
about, to take Care that no one was in Sight; and, turning to the right Hand,
he held gently on, till he came to another great Road, on which he drove at his
former Rate. This he did, again, at the next Common, and, coming to another
Road that led, also, to London, and Night now approaching, he put up at the
first great Inn he came to.

Harry's Patron had the Precaution to keep his great Coat muffled about his
Face, so that no one could observe his Beard, till they were shown to a Room,
and Fire and Candles were lighted up. Then, his ancient Friend and Domestic,
having provided Scissars and Implements for Shaving, locked the Door and set to
Work in the Presence of the Children.

Harry was all Attention, during the whole Process; and when the Operation was
quite completed, he drew near to his Patron, with a cautious kind of Jealousy,
and, looking up to his Face, with the Tears in his little Eyes, speak to me,
Sir, says he, pray speak to me. It is, answered the old Gentleman, the only
Comfort of my Life to be with you and to speak to you, my Harry. The Child,
hearing the well known Voice of Friendship, immediately cleared again, and,
reaching up his little Arms to embrace his Patron; O, indeed, says he, I
believe you are my own Dada still.

Though Harry was, now, reconciled to the Identity of his Friend, yet he felt a
secret Regret for the Absence of his Beard. For he loved all and every Part, of
him, so entirely, that the Loss of a Hair appeared a Loss and a Want to the
Heart of Harry.

After an early Supper, and two or three small Glasses of Wine per Man; this
Gentleman, whom his Servants had now announced by the Name of Mr. Fenton,
became all Things in all with his young Companions. He delighted them with
several entertaining Tricks. He put the Point of a large Needle to the Edge of
a drinking Glass, and then, placing the Center of a Pewter Plate on the Top of
the Needle, he began to turn it about, with an increasing Motion, till it
whirled round, at a Rapidity that was altogether joyous and amazing to the
little Spectators. He, next, turned two Plates with their Faces to each-other,
and, placing them on the Brim of a large Beer-Glass, he put an Egg upon the
Plates, and, giving the Plates a slight Stroke, with the Side of his Hand, the
Plates, instantly flew from between the Glass and the Egg, and the Egg fell
plumb into the Glass, without the smallest Fracture.

After some other of the like Fooleries, the Table was removed; and, as the
Room was very large, Mr. Fenton proposed Hide and go seek to his Associates.
This Invitation was accepted with Transport, and, after they were cloyed with
Hide and seek, they all played Tagg till they were well warmed.

Mr. Fenton then ordered a Pallet into the Chamber, for James, his faithful
Domestic, and little Ned. Then, helping to undress Harry, he put him, first, to
Bed; and, hastening after, he took his Darling to his Bosom, and tenderly
pressed him to a Heart that loved him more than all the World, and more than
that World ten times told.

In about three Days more, they arrived safe, at Hamsted, and stopping at the
Court of a large House, that was delightfully situated, they were welcomed by a
Gentlewomanly looking Matron, whom James had fixed for Housekeeper, about a
Fortnight before.

The next Day, Mr. Fenton and his blithe Companions were attended at Table by
James and the two Footmen.

As soon as the latter Grace was said, and the Cloth taken away; Harry, says
Mr. Fenton, it is now our turn to wait on James and his Fellow Servants. For
God made us all to be Servants to each other, and one Man is not born a Bit
better than another, and he is the best and greatest of all who serves and
attends the most, and requires least to be served and attended upon. And, my
Precious, he, that is a King to Day, if so it shall please God, may become a
Beggar Tomorrow, and it is good that People should be prepared against all
that may happen.

Having so said, he took his Associates down to the Hall, just as the Servants
had sat down to Dinner. He gave his Domestics the Wink, and, beginning to set
the Example, asked Mrs. Hannah, and Mr. James, and Mr. Frank, and Mr. Andrew,
what they would please to have? The Servants, readily falling in with their
Master's Scheme, ordered Harry to bring such a Thing, and Ned to fetch such a
Thing, and Harry to do this, and Harry to do that. While Harry, with a graceful
Action, and more beautiful than Ganymede the Cup Bearer of the Gods, flew
cheerfully about, from Side to Side, preventing the Wishes of all at Table; so
that they poured upon him a thousand Blessings from the Bottom of their Hearts,
and, would now scarce have parted with him for the mighty Rewards, which his
Father, some Time after, proposed for his Recovery.

Within a Fortnight after this, Mr. James, the House Steward, had furnished a
large Lumber-Room with thousands of Coats, out-Coats, Shirts, Waistcoats,
Breeches, Stockings, and Shoes, of different Sorts and Sizes, but all of warm
and clean, though homely Materials.

When this was done, Mr. Fenton led his Favorite up to the Stores, and said;
my Harry, you see all these Things, and I make a Present of all these Things to
my Harry. And, now tell me, my Love, what will you do with them? Why, Dada,
says Harry, you know that I cannot wear them myself. No, my Dear, says Mr.
Fenton, for, you have Clothes enough beside, and some of them would not fit
you, and others would smother you. What then will you do with them, will you
burn them, or throw them away? O, that would be very naughty and wicked indeed,
says Harry. No, Dada, as I don't want 'em, myself, I will give 'em, to those
that do. That will be very honestly done of you, says Mr. Fenton, for, in Truth
they have a better Right to them, my Harry, than you have, and that, which you
cannot use, cannot belong to you. So that, in giving you these Things, my
Darling, it should seem, as if I made you no Gift at all. O, a very sweet Gift,
says Harry. How is that, says Mr. Fenton; why, the Gift of doing Good to poor
People, Sir. Mr. Fenton, then, stepping back, and, gazing on our Hero, cried;
whoever attempts to instruct thee, my Angel, must, himself, be instructed of
Heaven, who speaks by that sweet Mouth.

But, Harry, it would not be discreet of you to give these Things to the common
Beggars who come every Day to our Door; give them Victuals and Halfpence or
Pence a-piece, and welcome. But, if you give such Beggars twenty Suits of
Clothes, they will cast them all off, and put on their Rags, again, to move
People to pity them. But, when you spy any poor Travelers going the Road, and,
that your Eye-sees that they are naked, or your Heart tells you that they are
hungry; then, do not wait till they beg of you, but go and beg of them to
favor you with their Acceptance; then take them in, to the Fire, and warm
them, and feed them; and, when you have so done, take them up to your
Store-Room, and cloth them with whatever you think they want. And, believe me,
my Harry, whenever you are cold, or hungry, or wounded, or in want, or in
Sickness, yourself; the very Remembrance of your having clothed, and fed, and
cured, and comforted, the naked and the hungry, the wounded, and the afflicted,
will be Warmth, and Food, and Medicine, and Balm to your own Mind.

While Mr. Fenton spoke, the Muscles of Harry's expressive Countenance, like an
equally tuned Instrument, uttered Unisons to every Word he heard.

From this Day forward, Harry and Ned, by Turns, were frequently out on the
Watch; and, often single, or in Pairs, or by whole Families, Harry would take
in a poor Father and Mother, with their helpless Infants, driven perhaps from
House and Home, by Fire, or other Misfortune, or oppressive Landlord, or
ruthless Creditor; and, having warmed, and fed, and clothed, and treated the
Old-Ones as his Parents, and the Little-Ones as his Brothers and Sisters, he
would give them additional Money, for Charges on the Road, and send them away
the happiest of all People except himself.

By this Time, Mr. Fenton had inquired into the Circumstances and Characters of
all the Poor in the Town and throughout the Precincts, and, having refuted or
confirmed the Intelligence he had received, by a personal Inspection and Visit
from House to House, and, having made Entries of all such, as he deemed real
Objects and worthy of his Benificence, he invited the Heads of the several
Families to take a Dinner with him, every Sunday, at his Hall.

On the following Sunday, there came about thirty of these Visitants, which
Number soon increased to fifty weekly Guests.

On entering, they found the Cloth ready spread, and Mr. James, having counted
Heads, laid a Crown, in Silver, upon every Plate; which first Course was a most
relishing Sauce to all that followed. A plentiful Dinner was then introduced,
and, the Guests being seated, Mr. Fenton, Harry, Ned, and the four Domestics
attended, and disposed themselves, in a Manner the most ready to supply the
Wants of the Company. The Guests, all abashed and confounded at what they saw,
sat, some Time, with open Mouth, and unswallowed Victuals, much less did they
presume to apply to the Waiters for any Article they wanted; till, being
encouraged and spirited up, by the Cheerfulness, Ease, and Readiness of their
Attendants, they became, by Degrees, quite happy and jovial; and, after a
saturating Meal, and an enlivening Cup, they departed, with elevated Spirits,
with humanized Manners, and with Hearts warmed, in Affection, toward every
Member of this extraordinary House.

By the means of this weekly Bounty, these reviving Families were soon enabled
to clear their little Debts, to the Chandlers, which had compelled them to take
up every Thing at the dearest Hand. They, were, also, further enabled to
purchase Wheels and other Implements, with the Materials of Flax and Wool, for
employing the late idle Hands of their Household. They, now, appeared decently
clad, and with happy Countenances. Their Wealth increased with their Industry.
And the Product of the Employment of so many late useless Members became a real
Accession of Wealth to the Public. So true it is, that the Prosperity of this
World, and, of every Nation and Society, therein, depends, soley, on the
Industry or Manufactures of the Individuals. And, so much more nobly did this
private Patron act, than all ancient Legislators, or modern Patriots, and
Landlords; whose Selfishness, if they had but common Cunning, or common Sense,
might instruct them to increase their proper Rents, and enrich their native
Country, by supplying the Hands of all the Poor, within their Influence, with
the Implements and Materials of the Prosperity of each.

In the mean Time, Mrs. Hannah, daily, instructed the Children in the Reading
of English. Neither was Mr. Fenton inattentive to any Means that might preserve
and promote the Health, Action, and corporal Excellencies of his little
Champion.

He held a large Lawn, behind his Garden: and, hither he summoned, three Times
in every Week, all the Boys of the Vicinage, that were within two Years,
advanced above the Age of our Hero. To these he appointed Premiums for
Football, Hurling, Wrestling, Leaping, Running, Cudgelling, and Buffing. But
the Champions were enjoined to invest their Fists with little Mufflers,
insomuch, that, how great soever their Vigor might be, the Bruises that they
gave stopped short of Mortality.

Now, though these Premiums were, almost, universally adjudged to the Party of
which Harry then happened to be a Member, or, individually, to himself for his
single Prowess and Preeminence. Yet, he never would consent to bear the Prize
from the Field; but, either gave it to some Favorite among those, with whom he
had been associated; or to the particular Champion whom he had worsted in
Contest. For he felt the Shame and Defeat of his mortified Adversary, and
consolingly hinted at the Injustice of the Judges, and reformed their Error, by
the Restoration of the Reward.

One Day, while Harry was watching to intercept poor Travelers, as eagerly as
a Fowler watches for the rising of his Game; he heard a plaintive Voice, behind
the Hedge, as he thought, in the opposite Field. He flew across the Road, and,
passing through a small Turnstile soon found the unhappy Objects he sought for.
He stood, for some Time, like a Statue, and his Compassion became too strong
for Tears or Utterance: but, suddenly turning, and flying back again, he
rushed, with Precipitation, into the Room where Mr. Fenton was writing a
Letter. What is the Matter, said Mr. Fenton, starting, what has frighted you,
my Harry, what makes you look so pale? To this Harry replied not, but catching
hold of his Hand, and pulling, with all his Force, O come, says he, O come,
Dada, and see.

Mr. Fenton then got up, and suffered himself to be led where the Child pleased
to conduct him, without another Word being asked or answered on either Side.

When they were come into the Field, Mr. Fenton observed a Man sitting on the
Ground. His Clothes seemed, from Head to Foot, as the tattered Remainder of
better Days. Through a squalid Wig, and Beard, his pale Face appeared just
tinctured with a faint and sickly Red. And, his hollow Eyes were fixed upon the
Face of a Woman, whose Head he held on his Knees; and, who looked to be dead,
or dying, though without any apparent Agony; while a male Infant, about four
Years of Age, was half stretched on the Ground, and half across the Woman's
Lap, with its little Nose pinched by Famine, and its Eyes staring about,
wildly, though without Attention to any Thing. Distress seemed to have expended
its utmost Bitterness on these Objects, and the last Sigh and Tear to have
been, already, exhausted.

Unhappy Man, cried Mr. Fenton, pray, who or what are you? to which the
Stranger, faintly, replied; without lifting his Eyes. Whoever you may be,
disturb not the last Hour of those who wish to be at Peace.

Run, Harry, says Mr. Fenton, desire all the Servants to come to me,
immediately; and bid Mrs. Hannah bring some Hartshorn and a Bottle of Cordial.

Away flew Harry, like feathered Mercury, on his Godlike Errand. Forth issued
Mr. James, Frank, and Andrew. And last came Mrs. Hannah, with the House-Maid
and Cordials.

Hannah stooped, in Haste, and applied Hartshorn to the Nose of the Woman, who
appeared wholly insensible. After some Time, her Bosom heaved with a
long-rising and subsiding Sigh, and her Eyes feebly opened, and immediately
closed, again. Then Hannah and the House-Maid, raising her gently between them,
got a little of the Cordial into her Mouth, and bending her, backward, they
observed that she swallowed it. Then James, Frank, Andrew, and the House-Maid,
joining their Forces, lifted her up, and bore her, as easy as possible, toward
the House. While Harry caught up her Infant, as a Pissmire does its favorite
Embryo, in a Time of Distress, in order to lodge it in a Place of Protection
and Safety.

In the mean Time Mr. Fenton and Mrs. Hannah put their Hartshorn, with great
Tenderness, to the Nostrils of the Stranger, and requested him to take a Sup of
the Cordial. But, he, turning up his dim, though expressive Eyes, feebly cried,
are you a Man or an Angel? and directly fainted away.

They rubbed his Temples, with the Spirits, and did their utmost to recover
him, but a sudden Gust of grateful Passion had proved too strong for his
Constitution. On the Return of the Servants he was, also, carried in. A
Physician was, instantly, sent for; Beds were provided and warmed, in haste;
the new Guests were all, gently, undrest and laid therein; and, being compelled
to swallow a little Sack Whey, they recovered to a kind of languid Sensibility.

The Physician gave it, as his Opinion, that this unhappy Family were reduced
to their present State, by Excess of Grief and Famine. That Nourishment should
be administered, in very small Proportions. And, that they should be kept as
quiet, as possible, for a Fortnight at least.

WHILE all imaginable Care is taking for the Recovery of these poor People. We
beg leave to return to the Affairs of their Protectors.

Friend. A Plague upon your return! This is just like a Man in whose Company I
once traveled; we were advanced on our Journey, in a fair and happy Road, when
he took it into his Head to ride back again, in search of an old Glove. Here
you have raised my Curiosity to the highest, and equally distressed me in
favor of this unhappy Family, when, in the Instant, you fly off from the
Satisfaction expected. But here also, I presume, you are upon Honor; you are
entrusted with Secrets, and would not for the World betray them to your Readers.


Author. Sir, you never were more mistaken. I know nothing at all of these
People's Affairs. As soon as they are able they will speak for themselves. I
know of no Advantage that they can get by their Silence, whatever they may
derive from your Compassion and Generosity by telling their Case. But the
Doctor, for the present, will not permit them. -- Proceed, my Friend, I pray
you. Your Patience will have but a very short Trial.


CHAP. VI.
ABOUT a Month before this, Mr. Fenton had engaged one Mr. Vindex, the
Schoolmaster of the Town, to come, for an Hour every Evening, and initiate the
two Boys in their Latin Grammar. But, he had a special Caution given him, with
respect to the generous Disposition of our Hero, which was said to be induced
to do any Thing, by Kindness; but to be hardened and rouzed into Opposition by
Severity.

In about ten Days after the late Adventure, Mr. Fenton was called to London,
where he was detained, about three Weeks, in settling his Books with his
Dutch-Correspondents; and in calling in a very large Arrear of Interest, that
was due to him upon his Deposits in the Funds.

During his Absence, Mr. Vindex began to assume a more expanded Authority, and
gave a freer Scope to the surly Terrors of his Station.

Ned was, by Nature, a very lively, but very petulant Boy; and when Vindex,
reproved him with the imperial Brow and Voice of the great Mogul, Ned, cast
upon him an Eye of such significant Contempt, as no Submissions or Sufferings,
on the Part of the Offender, could ever after compensate.

The next Day, Mr. Vindex returned, doubly armed, with a monstrous birch Rod,
in one Hand, and a Ferule in the other. The first he hung up, in Terrorem, as a
Meteor is said to hang in the Heavens, threatening future Castigation to the
Children of Men. The second he held, as determined upon present Action; nor was
he unmindful of any Hook, whereon to hang a Fault; so that, traveling from
Right to Left, and from Left to Right, he so warmed the Hands of the
unfortunate Edward, as ruined the funny Economy of his Countenance, and
reduced him to a disagreeable Partnership with the Afflicted.

On the Departure of Vindex, though Ned's Drollery was dismayed, his Resentment
was, by no Means, eradicated. For the Principle of Ned was wholly agreeable to
the Motto of a very noble Escutcheon, and, Nemo me impune lacessit, was a
Maxim, of whose Impropriety not Saint Anthony, himself, could persuade him.

All Night he lay ruminating, and brooding on Mischief in his Imagination, and,
having formed the Outlines of his Plan toward Morning, he began to chuckle, and
comfort himself, and exult in the Execution. He, then, revealed his Project to
his Bedfellow, Mr. James, who was greatly tickled therewith, and promised to
join in the Plot.

Full against the Portal, that opened upon the School-Room, there stood an
ancient and elevated Chair, whose Form was sufficiently expressive of its
Importance. Mr. Vindex had selected this majestic Piece of Furniture as, alone,
suitable to the Dignity of his exalted Station. For he judiciously considered
that, if Thrones and Benches were taken from among Men, there would be an End
of all Dominion and Justice upon Earth.

Through the Center of the Seat, of this Chair of Authority, Ned got Mr. James
to drill a small Hole, not discernible, except on a very minute Scrutiny. He
then provided a cylindrial Stick of about six Inches in length, to one End of
which he fastened a Piece of Lead, and, in the other End he fixed the Head of a
large Needle. This Needle had been a Glover's, of approved Mettle, keen, and
polished, and three-square, toward the Point, for a quick and ready Penetration
of tough Leather. He, next, fastened two small Chords, transversly, to the
leaden Extremity of the Stick, and, James assisting, they turned the Chair with
the Bottom upward, and tacked the four Ends of the Chords, in such a manner, as
answered to the four Cardinal Points of the Compass; while the Stick remained
suspended in an upright Direction, with the Point of the Needle just, so far,
through the Drill, as put it upon a Level with the Surface of the Seat. Lastly,
they fastened a long, and well waxed, Thread about the Middle of the Stick,
and, drawing this Thread over the upper Rung, they dropped the End of it, just
under Ned's Stool; and replaced the Seat of Learning in its former Position.

Greatly did Ned parade it, when, on Trial, he found that his Machine answered
to a Miracle; for, the Stick being restrained from any Motion, save that in a
Direction to the Zenith; on the slightest Twitch of the Thread, the Needle,
instantly, mounted four Sixths of two Inches above the Surface of the Seat, and
was, as quickly, recalled by the Revulsion of the Lead.

At the appointed Hour of Magisterial Approach, in comes Mr. Vindex. Master
Harry and Ned are called. Each seizes his Book; and takes his Seat as usual in
a Line nearly, diagonal to the right and left Corner of the Chair of Authority.
Mr. Vindex assumes the Chair. But, scarce was he down, when Ned gives the
premeditated Intimation to his Piercer, and up bounces Vindex, and gives two or
three Capers, as though he had been suddenly stung by a Tarantula. He stares
wildly about; puts his Hand behind him, with a Touch of tender Condolance;
returns to the Chair; peers all over it with Eyes of the most prying
Inspection; but, not trusting to the Testimony of his occular Sense, in a Case
that, so very feelingly, refuted its Evidence, he moved his Fingers over and
over every Part of the Surface; but found all smooth and fair, in Spite of the
late sensible Demonstration to the contrary.

Down again, with slow Caution, subsided Mr. Vindex, reconnoitring the
Premises, to the right Hand, and to the left.

As his Temper was not, now, in the most duleet Disposition; he, first, looked
sternly at Ned, and, then turning toward Harry, with an Eye that sought
Occasion for present Quarrel, he questioned him, morosely, on some Articles of
his Lesson. When Ned, not enduring such an Indignity to the Patron of his Life
and Fortunes, gave a second Twitch, with better Will, and much more lively than
at first; and up, again, sprung Vindex, with redoubled Vigor and Action, and
bounded, plunged, and pranced about the Room, as bewitched. He glared, and
searched all about, with a frantic Penetration, and pored into every Corner for
the visible or invisible Perpetrators of these Mischiefs. He, now, began to
imagine that some Devil wanted a Pincushion, and proposed no other, for the
Purpose, than his capacious Material.

In this Thought, he retreated to the next Chamber, stripped off his Clothes,
his Shoes, and Breeches, and, to know whether a Lodgment had been duly made;
he groped for the Heads of the supposed Weapons. He next searched his Breeches,
and every Skirt and posterior Fold of Coat and Waistcoat. But, finding the
Coasts clear of any Ensigns of Hostility, he writhed and twisted his Head and
Eyes to this Side and to that to discern, if possible, the Devastations that
had been made in the Field of Honor; when, hearing a little Titter in the
neighboring School Room, he began to smell a Fox, and, dressing himself again,
with a malignant Determination of better Note for the Future, he returned with
a Countenance of dissembled Placability, and, resuming his Chair, began to
examine the Boys, with a Voice apparently tuned by good-Temper and Affection.

During this short Serene, poor Ned happened to make a little Trip in his
Rudiments; when Vindex turned, and cried, to our Hero, Master Harry, my Dear,
be so kind to get up and reach me you Ferrule.

These Words had not fully passed the Lips of the luckless Pedagogue, when Ned
plucked the String with his utmost Force, and Vindex thought himself, at least,
impaled on the Spot. Up he shot, once more, like a sudden Pyramid of Flame. The
Ground could no longer retain him, he soared aloft, roared, raved, cursed, and
swore, like a thousand Infernals. While Ned, with an Aspect of the most
condoling Hypocricy, and Words, broke by a Tone of Mourning, tenderly inquired
of his Ailments.

Vindex turned upon him an Eye of jealous Malignity, and taking a sudden
Thought, he flew to the Scene of his repeated Infliction, and, turning up the
Bottom of the Seat of Pain, this complicated Effort of extraordinary Genius lay
revealed, and exposed to vulgar Contemplation.

He first examined, minutely, into the Parts and Construction of this wonderful
Machinery, whose Efficacy he still, so feelingly, recollected. He then, drew
the String; and admired, with what a piercing Agility the Needle could be
actuated by so distant a Hand. And, lastly, and deliberately, he tore away,
Piece by Piece, the whole Composition, as his rascally Brethren, the Turks,
have also done, in their Antipathy to all the Monuments of Arts, Genius, and
Learning throughout the Earth.

In the mean while, our Friend Edward sat trembling and frying in his Skin. All
his Drollery had forsaken him; nor had he a single Cast of Contrivance, for
evading the Mountain of Mischiefs that he saw impending. How indeed could he
palliate? what had he to hope or plead in mitigation of the Penalty? where, in
the Party, so highly offended, he saw his Judge and his Executioner.

Mr. Vindex had now the Ball wholly at his own Foot, and, that Ned was ever to
have his Turn again, was a Matter no way promised by present Appearances.

Vindex, at length, looked smilingly about him, with much Fun in his Face, but
more Vengeance at his Heart. Mr. Edward, said he, perhaps you are not yet
apprized of the Justice of the Jewish Laws, that claim an Eye for an Eye, and a
Breech for a Breech; but I, my Child, will fully instruct you in the Fitness
and Propriety of them.

Then, reaching at the Rod, he seized his shrinking Prey, as a Kite trusses a
Robin; he laid him, like a little Sack across his own Stool, off go the
Breeches, and, with the left Hand he holds him down, while the Right is laid at
him with the Application of a Woodman who resolves to clear Part of the Forest
before Noon.

Harry, who was no way privy to the Machination of the Needle, now approached,
and interposed in behalf of his unhappy Servant. He petitioned, he kneeled, he
wept; but his Prayers and Tears were cast to the Winds and the Rocks, till
Vindex had reduced the Posteriors of poor Ned, to a Plight little different
from those of Saint Bartholemew.

Mr. Vindex justly deemed that he had, now, given a Lesson, of such ample
Instruction, as might dispense with his Presence for some Days at least.

In the mean Time, the Scalping of Ned's Bottom held him confined to his Bed,
where he had full Time, and Leisure, to contrive, with one End, a just and
worthy Retribution for the Sufferings of the other.

Harry went, often, to sit, and condole with Ned in this the Season of his
Calimity; and, as he had, now, conceived a strong Aversion to the Pedagogue, on
Account of his Barbarity; he offered to assist his Friend in any Measures
deemed adequate to the Stripes and Injuries he had received.

The House of Mr. Vindex was a large and old-fashioned Building, with a steep
Flight of Stone-Stairs, and a spacious Landing-place before the Door. Ned was
again on his Legs, the Night was excessive dark, and the Family of the
Preceptor had just finished an early Supper.

About this Time, a gentle Rapping was heard, and a Servant, opening the Door,
looked this Way, and that Way, and called out repeatedly, to know who was
there; but, no Voice replying, he retired and shut all to again. Scarce was he
re-enter'd when he hears Rap, rap, rap, rap. The Fellow's Anger was now
kindled, and, opening the Door suddenly, he bounced out at once, in order to
seize the Runaway. But, seeing no Creature, he began to feel a coming
Chilness, and his Hairs to stir, as though each had got the Life of an Eel. Back
he slunk, closed the Door with the greatest Tenderness, and crept down to
reveal a Scantling of his Fears to his Fellows in the Kitchen.

Now, though Men and Maids laughed, heartily, at the Apprehensions of Hodge;
they yet resented this Insult on their House, as they called it, and, getting
all up together in a Group, they slily, crowded behind the Door, with the Latch
in one of their Hands, ready to issue, in an Instant, and detect the
Delinquents.

They were not suffered to freeze. Knock, knock, knock, knock, knock. Open
fly's the Door, and out rush the Servants. Nothing appeared. They all stood,
silent, and astonished beyond Measure. Some, however, with outward Bravade but
inwards Tremblings, went searching, along the Walls, and behind the Posts for
some Lurcher. Again, they gathered to the Landing-place, and stood,
whisperingly debating what this might be. When, to the inexpressible Terror and
Discomfiture of all present, the spontaneous Knocker assumed sudden Life and
Motion; and gave such a Peal and Alarm to their Eyes and Ears, as put every
Sense and Resolution to the Rout, and in they rushed, again, one on the Back of
the other, and clapped to the Door, as in the Face of a Host of pursuing Demons.

Mr. Vindex and his Lady, for some Time past, had been sitting opposite, and
nodding over a Fire in the back Parlour, where they returned each other's
Salute, with the greatest good Manners and Punctuality imaginable. He now
started, on hearing the Rustling in the Hall, and angrily called to know what
was the Matter.

Vindex, from the Prejudice of Education during his Infancy, had conceived the
utmost Spite to all Specter and Hobgoblins, insomuch, that he wished to
deprive them of their very Existence; and labored to persuade himself, as well
as others, of their Nonentity, but Faith proved too strong, within him, for all
his verbal Parade of avowed Infidelity.

While the Servants, with pale Faces and short Breath, made their Relation, the
magisterial Philosopher did so sneer, and, contemptuously, toss this Way and
the other, and throw himself back, in such affected Fits of Laughter, as nothing
could be like it. Till, bouncing, at the Sound of another Peal, he mustered the
whole Family, Boaders and all, to about seventeen in Number, together with
Madam Vindex who would not be left sole; and now they appeared such an Army as
was sufficient to face any single Devil, at least, and, forth they issued, and
filled the Landing place, leaving the Door on the Jar.

Here, Mr. Vindex turned, and, with his Face toward the Knocker thus addressed
the Assembly.

My honest, but simple Friends, quoth he, can any Thing persuade ye, that a
Spirit, or Ghost, as ye call it, a Breath or Being of Air, a something, or
nothing, that is neither tangible, nor visible, can lay hold of that which is?
Or are ye such Idiots as to imagine, that you Knocker, (for he did not yet
venture to touch it) a Substance, of solid and molten Brass, without Members or
Organs, or any internal System or Apparatus for the Purpose, can, yet, be
endued with Will, Design, or any Kind of Intelligence, when the least
locomotive Faculty, in the meanest Reptile, must, of Necessity, be provided
with an infinitely varied Mechanism, of Nerves, Tubes, Reservoirs, Levers, and
Pulleys for the Nonce. I should discredit my own Senses on any Appearance
contrary to such palpable Demonstration. In all Lights -- Soft -- break we off
-- Look where it comes again -- For, in this Instant of Affirmation, so
peremptory and conclusive; the Knocker, as in Contempt and bitter Despite to
Philosophy, so loudly refuted every Syllable of the Premises, as left neither
Time nor Inclination, to Vindex, for a Reply. But, rushing desperately forward,
he burst in at the Portal, with such as had Presence of Mind to take Advantage
of the opening, and, turning again, and shutting the Door violently in the Face
of Half of his Family, he ran and threw himself into his Chair, in an Agony of
Spirits.

The Servants and Boarders, whom Vindex had shut out, not abiding to stay in
Presence of the Object of their Terrors, tumbled, in a Heap, down the Stairs,
and gathering themselves up, again, ran, diversely, to communicate, to all their
Neighbors and Acquaintance, the Tidings of the enchanted Knocker. Their
contagious Looks and Words gave the Pannic, throughout; but, Curiosity
prevailing above Apprehension, the Town began to gather, though, first, in thin
Parties, and at a cautious Distance; till the Crowd, increasing, took Heart and
Resolution from Number, and venturing up a Step or two of the Stairs, and being
still pressed and urged forward by new Comers from behind, they, at length,
filled the whole Flight and the Landing-place, and one of them growing bold
enough to lift his Hand toward the Knocker, the Knocker generously, convinced
him that no Assistance was wanting. Rap, rap, rap, rap. Rap, rap, rap, rap.
Rap, rap, rap, rap. Back recoil the foremost Ranks, casting off and tumbling
over the Ranks behind. No one stayed to give Help or Hand to Friend or Brother,
but, rising, or scrambling off on all Fours; each made the best of his Way to
the first Assylum; and, in less than ten Seconds, there was not a Mouse
stirring throughout the Street.

If I had the Ill Nature of most Authors, who seldom communicate any Thing
worthy the Knowledge of the Public, I might, also, leave the foregoing Aenigma
to be solved, or rather made more implicit, in such ways as Philosophy might
happen to account for. But, in Compassion to the Pains of a laboring
Imagination, I choose to deliver my Reader, with all possible Ease and Dispatch.

The Fact is, that these astonishing and tremendous Phenomenon, that
discomfited little City, alarmed the Country round, and resuscitated the
Stories and Legends of the old Women of all the Parishes from Barnet to London,
was the whole and sole Contrivance of our Hero's petulant Foundling, during a
nightly Lucubration.

Ned had, accordingly, imparted his Plan of Operations to Harry, and Harry had
engaged Mrs. Hannah in the Plot.

Now, Mrs. Hannah had a House, in a narrow Part of the Street, just opposite to
that of Mr. Vindex, where her Niece and an old Servant resided. This House was
narrow, but of the Height of four Stories; and, on the said memorable Night,
Ned dropped the End of a Bottom of small Twine from the Garret Window, which
Hannah took, across the Way, and fastened, with a double Knot, to the Knocker
of Vindex's Door. And, now, it is twenty to one, that if Vindex's Family and
the rest of the Neighborhood had been, even thus far, let into the Secret,
they would not have been, altogether, so much alarmed at the Consequences.

I have read of Generals who could gain, but not maintain Conquests; and of
Women who could keep all Secrets but their own. Thus it happened to Ned. His
Vanity was, at least, on a Level with his Ingenuity; he was so elated with the
Success of his recent Stratagem, that he boasted of it to some, and half
whispered it to others; till it came to the Ears of the much exasperated
Vindex. Vindex, in the first Heat, and very Boil of his Passions, snatches up a
huge Rod, just cut from that Tree whose bare Name strikes Terror through all
our Seminaries of Learning, and, taking with him one of his Boarders, he
marches directly down to the House of Mr. Fenton, and, thus formidably armed,
he enters the fatal School-room.

Ned, by great good Fortune for himself, was then absent. But, our Hero
happening to be there, Vindex, instantly, shut the Door and called him to Task.

Master Harry, says he, did you know any Thing of the strange Knocking at my
Door, last Tuesday Night? To this Question, Harry, who was too valiant to be
tempted to tell a Lie through Fear, without Hesitation, answered in the
Affirmative. You did, Sirrah, cried the Pedagogue, and have you the Impudence,
also, to confess it to my Face? Here, Jacky, down with his Breeches, and horse
him for me directly.

Jack was a lusty lubberly Boy, about ten Years of Age, and stooping to
unbutton Harry, according to Order, our Hero gave him such a sudden Fist, in
the Mouth, as dashed in two of his Teeth, that then happened to be moulting,
and set him a crying and bleeding after a piteous Manner. Vindex then rose into
tenfold Fury, and took our Hero in Hands, himself, and, notwithstanding that he
cuffed and kicked and sought it most manfully, Vindex, at length, unbuttoned
his Breeches, and set him, in due Form, on the Back of his Boarder.

The Pedagogue, at first, gave him the three accustomed Strokes, as hard as he
could draw. So much, my Friend, says he, is for your own Share of the Burden;
and, now, tell me who were your Confederates and Abettors in this fine Plot?
That I will never tell you, deliberately and resolutely answered our Hero.
What, shall I be bullied and out-braved, replied the frantic Savage, by such a
one as you? You little stubborn Villain, I will flea you alive, I will
carbonade you on the Spot. So saying, he laid at him, as though he had been a
Sheaf of Wheat; while Harry, indignantly, endured the Torture, and, holding,
in, his Breath, that he might not give Vindex, the Satisfaction of a Groan, he
determined to perish rather than betray.

In the mean Time, Ned had peeped in at the Keyhole, and, spying the Situation
and Plight of his loved Patron, he ran to Mrs. Hannah and imparted the horrid
Tidings. Hannah rose, with all the Wrath of Tisiphone in her Countenance, and,
flying to the School-room, she rushed violently against the Door, burst it open
in a twinkling, and, springing forward, fastened every Nail she had in the Face
and Eyes of Vindex, and tore away and cuffed at a fearful Rate. Jack at this
Period, had let his Rider to the Ground, when Harry, catching at a Sword, that
hung against the Wainscot, whipped it down, and drawing it from the Sheath, as
quick as Lightning, he sprung at Vindex, in order to run him through the Body;
but, happily, not having had the Patience to put up his Breeches, they
trammelled him in his Advance, and he fell prostrate, with the Sword, in his
Hand, which reached the Leg of the Pedagogue and gave him a slight Wound, just
as he was endeavoring to make his Way through the Door. Jack had, already,
made his Escape, and the mauled Preceptor scampered after, with his Ears much
better warmed, and his Temper better cooled, than when he entered.

Harry bore his Misfortune, with a Sort of sullen, though shamefaced,
Philosophy. But, every other Member, of this honorable Family, almost adored
him for the bloody Proof that he had given of his Virtue; and vowed unpitying
Vengeance on the ungenerous Vindex.

During the above Transactions, the Strangers, whom Mr. Fenton had received
into his House, had been tended with great Humanity and were, now, on the
Recovery.

Mr. James, on conversing with the Head of this little Family. Observed that he
was an exceeding sensible Person, and had provided him with a decent, though
cast, Suit of his Masters; and had also, with the Assistance of Mrs. Hannah,
put his Wife and little Boy into clean and seemly Apparel.

As James's Invention was on the Rack to get adequate Satisfaction on the base
spirited Vindex, he went to consult his new Friend, who dropped a Tear of
Generosity and Admiration, on hearing the Story of Harry's Heroism and Nobility
of Soul.

By his Advice, Mr. James dispatched a Messenger to a Druggist, at London, and
to several other Shops for a sundry Apparatus, and, having all Things in
Readiness, and, Harry being now able to bear a Part in the Play; James sent a
strange Porter to Vindex, with Compliments from his Master, as though he were
just come home, and requested to speak with him.

Vindex, accordingly, comes, and knocks. The Door opens, he enters, and it
instantly shuts upon him. He starts back with Horror as at the Sight of Medusa.
He perceives the Hall all in Black, without a single Ray, save what proceeded
from a sickly Lamp, that made the Gloom visible. He is suddenly seized upon by
two robust Devils covered over with painted Flames. They drag him to the
School-Room, but, O Terror of Terrors! he knows the Place of his pristine
Authority no more. He beholds a Hell more fearful that his Fancy had yet
framed. The Cieling seemed to be vaulted with Serpents, Harpyes, and Hydras,
that dropped livid Fire. On one Side ran Phlegeton, in Waves of burning Sulphur.
And here, the Tisiphone, Magaera, and Alecto, of the Heathens, appeared to
contend for Frightfulness with Milton's Death and Sin. Four Fends, and two
little Imps, at once laid their Fangs upon him, and would have dragged him to
the Ground. But the Pedagogue was a sturdy athletic Fellow, and cuffed, and
scratched, and roared it out most manfully. The Devil, however, proving too
strong for the Sinner, he was cast prostrate to the Earth; and, being left, in
Retrospection, as bare as Father Time, some sat upon his Shoulders to keep him
down, while others, on each Side, alternately keeping Time, like the Threshers
of Barley, gave our Flogger such a Scoring; as imprinted on his Memory to the
last State of Magistracy, a fellow-Feeling for the Sufferings of petty
Delinquents.

Being all out breathed in turns, they remitted from their Toil; and, now,
appeared to be a Set of the merriest Devils that ever were associated. They
fastened the Clothes of the disconsolate Vindex, about his Neck, with his own
Garters; and, having manacled his Hands before him, they turned him loose to
the Street. While he, with a wonderful Presence of Mind in the midst of his
Terrors, raised his Hands, the best he could, to cover his Face and hurried
homeward; judiciously recollecting, that Forty nine, in Fifty, would recognize
the one End, who would not recognize the other, especially in the present
Pickle.

Within a few Days, after this Adventure, Mr. Fenton returned. At the first
Sight of one another, he and his Harry, grew together for near Half an Hour.
He, then, addressed every Member of his Family, One by One; and, with a
familiar Goodness, inquired after their several Healths and Concerns. He also
asked after his late Guests, and desired to see them; but, on Mr. James's
Intimation, that he had somewhat of Consequence to impart to him, they retired
to the next Room.

Here, James made him a minute Recital of the preceding Adventures; and set
forth, in due Contrast, the Baseness and Barbarity of Vindex on the one Part;
and the unassailable Worthiness of his Harry on the other. While the Praise, of
this chosen of the old Gentleman's Soul, sunk, like the Balm of Gilead, upon
his wounded Mind, and almost eradicated every Memorial of former Grief, and
planted a new Spring of Hope and Joy in their Room.

The Table being spread for Dinner, Mr. Fenton sent to desire that the Stranger
and his little Family should join Company. They came, according to Order, but
entered, evidently overcome with a Weight of Shame and Gratitude too grievous
to be borne.

Mr. Fenton saw their Oppression, and felt the whole Burden upon his own
Shoulders. He, accordingly, was interested and solicitous in the Removal which
he effected with all that Address of which his Humanity had made him a great
Master.

Through the Enfoldings of the Stranger's Modesty, Mr. Fenton discerned many
Things preceding the vulgar Rank of Men. Mr. Clement, said he, I am astonished,
beyond Measure, that a Person of Letters, as you are, and, who has so much of
the Gentleman in his Person and Manner, should, yet, be reduced to such
Extremity; in a Christian Country, and among a People distinguished for their
Humanity. There must be something very singular and extraordinary in your Case.
And, this Night, if you are at Leisure, and that the Recital is not
disagreeable to you; you would oblige me by your Story.

Sir, answered Mr. Clement, since my Life is yours, you have, surely, a Right
to an Account of your Property. Whenever you think proper, I will cheerfully
obey you.

Mr. Fenton now rose, and stepped into Town; and, calling upon a Neighbor whom
he took to the Tavern, he sent for Mr. Vindex who came upon the Summons.

Mr. Vindex, says he, pray take your Seat. I am sorry, Mr. Vindex, for the
Treatment you have got in my House, and still sorrier that you got it, so very
deservedly.

I have long thought, Mr. Vindex, that the Method of Schoolmasters, in the
Instruction of our Children, is altogether the Reverse of what it ought to be.
They, generally, lay hold on the human Constitution, as a Pilot lays hold of
the Rudder of a Ship, by the Tail, by the single Motive, I say, of Fear alone.

Now, as Fear has no Concern with any Thing but Self, it is the most confined,
most malignant, and the basest, though the strongest, of all Passions.

The Party, who is possessed with it, will listen to nothing but the Dictates
of his own Terror, nor scruple any Thing that may cover him from the Evil
apprehended. He will prevaricate, and lie; if that Lie is questioned he will
vouch it by Perjury; and, if he happens to do an Injury, he will be tempted to
commit Murder to prevent the Effects of Resentment.

Fear never was a Friend to the Love of God, or Man, to Duty, or Conscience
Truth, Probity, or Honor. It, therefore, can never make a good Subject, a good
Citizen, or a good Soldier; and, least of all, a good Christian. Except the
Devils, who believe and tremble, are to be accounted good Christians.

How very different is the Lesson which our Master CHRIST teaches, who
commands us, not to fear what Man can do unto us; to smile in Sickness and
Calamity; to rise superior to Pain and Death; and to regard nothing, but as it
leads to the Goal of that Immortality which his Gospel has brought to Light.

There is, Mr. Vindex, but one Occasion, wherein Fear may be useful, in Schools
or Commonwealths. That is, when it is placed as a Guard against Evil, and
appears, with its Ensignia of Rods, Ropes, and Axes, to deter all, who behold,
from approaching thereto.

But this, Mr. Vindex, is far from being the sole Occasion on which
Schoolmasters apply the Motive of Fear and Castigation. They associate the
Ideas of Pain to those Lessons and Virtues which the Pleasure of Encouragement
ought, alone, to inculcate. They, yet, more frequently apply the Lash, for the
Indulgence of their own Weaknesses, and for the Gratification of the Virulence
of their own naughty Passions. And I have seen a Giant of a Pedagogue, raving,
raging, and foaming over a Group of shrinking Infants; like a Kite over a
crouching Parcel of young Turkeys.

There are, I admit some Parents and Preceptors who annex other Motives to that
of the Rod. They promise Money, gaudy Clothes, and Sweet Meats to Children;
and, in their Manner of expatiating on the Use and Value of such Articles; they
often excite, in their little Minds, the Appetites of Avarice, of Vanity, and
Sensuality. They, also, sometimes add the Motive of what they call Emulation,
but which, in Fact, is rank Envy, by telling one Boy how much happier, or
richer, or finer, another is, than himself.

Now, though Envy and Emulation are often confounded, in Terms; there are not
two Things more different, both in respect to their Object, and in respect to
their Operation. The Object of Envy is the Person, and not the Excellence, of
any one; but the Object of Emulation is Excellence, alone; as when CHRIST,
exciting us to be emulous of the Excellence of God himself, bids us be perfect,
as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect. The Operation of Envy is to pull
others down. But the Act of Emulation is to exalt ourselves to some Eminence or
Height proposed. The Eyes of Envy are sore and sickly, and hate to look at the
Light. But Emulation has the Eye of an Eagle and soars, while it gazes in the
Face of the Sun.

Were Tutors half as solicitous, throughout their Academies, to make Men of
Worth, as to make Men of Letters; there are a hundred pretty Artifices, very
obvious to be contrived and practiced, for the Purpose. They might institute
Caps of Shame, and Wreaths of Honor, in their Schools. They might have little
Medals, expressive of particular Virtues, to be fixed on the Breast of the
Atchiever, till forfeited by Default. And on the Report of any Boy's having
performed a signal Action of Goodnature, Friendship, Gratitude, Generosity, or
Honor; a Place of Eminence might be appointed for him to sit on, while all the
rest of the School should bow, in Deference, as they passed. Such Arts, as
these, I say, with that distinguishing Affection, and Approbation, which all
Persons ought to show to Children of Merit, would soon make a new Nation of
Infants, and, consequently, of Men.

When you, Mr. Vindex, iniquitously, took upon you to chastise my most noble
and most incomparable Boy, you, first, whipped him for his gallant and generous
Avowal of the Truth. And, next, you barbarously flead him; because he refused
to betray those who had confided in his Integrity.

When I behold so many Scoundrels walking, openly, throughout the Land, who are
styled your Honor, and your Honor, and who, impudently usurp the most exalted
of all Characters, the Character of a Gentleman. I no longer wonder, when I
reflect, that they have been principled, or rather unprincipled, by such Tutors
as Mr. Vindex.

The merry Devils, Mr. Vindex, who took you in Hand, were not of a Species, so
alienated from Humanity, as you might imagine. They have, therefore, appointed
me their Vehicle of some Smart-Money, in Recompense, but, desire no further
Advantage from your Company or Instructions.

So saying, Mr. Fenton put a Purse of five and twenty Guineas into the Hands of
the Pedagogue, and withdrew without speaking another Word.

Friend. Upon my Credit, this Mr. Fenton -- I long to know something more of
him -- he is a sensible kind of a Man, and has given us some very valuable
Hints upon Education. -- But, may I be so free with you as to drop some general
Remarks upon the whole of what I have read?


Author. Free, Sir? -- by all Means -- as free as you please, to be sure --
believe me, you cannot do me a greater Favor.


Fr. Why, there is the Plague on it now, -- You begin to kindle already. -- Ah,
were you Authors to know the thousandth Part of the Liberties that are taken
behind your Backs, you would learn to bear, with more Humility, a gentle
Admonition though uttered to your Faces. -- Few, indeed, have the Generosity,
or even Humanity to intimate what they themselves think, or what the World
speaks of you. We are seldom over forward to say any Thing that might give
Displeasure to others, because we like that others should be pleased with
ourselves; but, in your Absence, we pay ourselves largely for our Taciturnity
in your Presence; and I have often been in Company, where the Intimates and
Confidents of you Authors, have depreciated and ridiculed the very same
Passages, which they applauded with Cries and Claps in your Closets. The World,
my Friend, has substituted good Manners in the Place of good Nature, whoever
conforms to the former is dispensed with from any Observance of the latter.
Shall I add, (for the Misfortune of you Authors,) that there is a Set of Men
who, at once, dispense with common Manners and common Humanity. They go under
the Name of Crities, and must be Men of Wealth, that the Deference paid to
Fortune, may give a Sort of Stamp and Currency to the Dross of their Erudition.
In the strictest Sense, indeed, they may be called Men of Letters, their Study,
as well as Capacity, being nearly confined to a just or orthographical
Disposition of the Alphabet. Their Business is to reconoitre the Outworks of
Genius, as they have no Key to the Gates of Nature or Sentiment. They snuff
Faults from afar, as Crows scent Carrion, and delight to pick, and to prey, and
to dwell upon them. They enter, like Wasps, upon the Gardens of Literature, not
to relish any Fragrance of select any Sweets, but to pamper their Malevolence
with every Thing that savours of Rankness or Offense. Happily for them. their
Sagacity does not tend to the Discovery of Merit, in such a Case, a Work of
Genius would give them the Spleen for a Month, or possibly depress their
Spirits beyond Recovery.

To these high and dreaded Lords Justiciaries, the Critics, Authors deem it
incumbent to submit the Products of their Lucubrations; not in the Prospect of
any Advantage from their Advice or Animadversions; neither in the Hopes of
acquiring their Friendship or Patronage; but merely to sooth and deprecate the
Effects of their Malignity. Accordingly, I have been present, when some of
these Dictators have been presented with a Manuscript, as with an humble
Petition; they have thereupon assumed the Chair, as a Judge assumes the Bench
when a Criminal is called before him, not in order to Trial or Hearing, but to
Sentence and Condemnation. To what Scenes of Mortification have I been Witness
on such Occasions! to what a State of Abatement, of Abasement, of Annihilation,
have these Entertainers of the Public been depressed! -- I am sorry, Sir, to
tell you that this will not do. -- A few Attempts here and there, but that will
not compensate -- Here again how injudicious, absurd, unpardonable! -- Lord,
Sir, you should have considered that when a Man sits down to write for the
Public, the least Compliment they expect from him is that he should think --
Here, my Friend, I have seen enough, I cannot affront my Judgment so much as
either to recommend or patronize your Performance, all I can do for you is to
be filent on the Subject, and permit Fools to approve who have not Sense to
discern. -- Thus do these Critics-paramount, with the Delicacy and Compassion
of the Torturers of the Inquisition, search out all the Seats of Sensibility
and Self-Complacence, in order to sting with the more quick and killing
Poignancy.

Now, my dear Friend, as you have not applied for the Favor of these
established Arbitrators of Genius and Literature, you are not to expect the
least Mercy from them, and I am also free to tell you that I know of no Writer
who lies more open to their Attacks. You are excessively incorrect; your Works,
on the one Hand, have not the least Appearance of the Limae labor; nor, on the
other, have they that Ease which ought to attend the Haste with which they seem
to be written. Again, you are extremely unequal and disproportioned; one Moment
you soar where no Eye can see, and strait descend with Rapidity to creep in the
vulgar Phrase of Chamber Maids and Children. Then you are so desultory that we
know not where to have you; you no sooner interest us in one Subject than you
drag us, however reluctant, to another; in short, I doubt whether you laid any
kind of Plan before you set about the Building; but we shall see how your
fortuitous Concourse of Atoms will turn out.


Aut. Do I want Nature?


Fr. No.


Aut. Do I want Spirit?


Fr. Rather too much of Fire, at Times.


Aut. Do I want Sentiment?


Fr. Not altogether.


Aut. Then, Sir, I shall be read, and read again, in despite of my own
Defects, and of all that you and your Critics can say or do against me. The
Truth is, that the Critics are very far from being Bugbears to me; they have
always proved my Friends, my best Benefactors; they were the First who writ me
into any kind of Reputation; and I am more beholden to their Invectives, than I
am to my own Genius, for any little Name I may have got in the World; all I
have to fear is that they are already tired of railing, and may not deem me
worth their further Notice. -- But pray, my good Sir, if you desire that I
should profit by your Admonitions, ought you not to give me Instances of the
Faults with which you reproach me?


Fr. That would be Time and Labor altogether thrown away, as I have not the
smallest Hope of bringing you to Confession. You are a Disputant, a Casuist by
your Education; you are equally studied and practiced in turning any Thing into
nothing, or bringing all Things thereout. But don't flatter yourself that I
have yet given you the Detail of Half your Faults; you are often paradoxical,
and extremely peremptory and desperate in your Assertions. In this very last
Page you affirm that the Character of a Gentleman is the most revereable, the
highest of all Characters.


Aut. I did, Sir, I do affirm it, and will make it good.


Fr. I knew it, Sir, I knew it, but don't choose, at present, to enter into the
Discussion. At the next Pause, I shall willingly hear you on this Question.


CHAP. VII.
ON his Return, he ordered a Fire and a Bottle of Wine into his Study, and sent
for Mr. Clement. Mr. Clement, says he, sit down. I assure you, Mr. Clement, I
am inclined to think very well of you. But, pray, let me have the Narrative of
your Life and Manners, without Disguise. An ingenuous Confession and Sense of
past Errors, has something in it, to me, full as amiable or more, than if a Man
had never strayed.

Sir, says Mr. Clement, I have, indeed, been faulty, very faulty, in my
Intentions; though God has, hitherto, preserved me from any very capital Act,
and has, by your Hand, wonderfully brought me to this Day.

HISTORY OF THE MAN OF LETTERS.
BAR THOLOMEW CLEMENT, Sir, a Retailer of Hard Ware, on the Strand, is my
Father. He was low-bred, and, as I believe, of narrow Capacity; but, proceeding
in, what they call, the Dog-Trot of Life, and, having a single Eye to the
making of Money, he became vastly rich, and has, now, a large Income, from
Houses and Ground Rents in the City of Westminster, the Fruits and Acquisition
of his own Application.

I remember nothing of my Mother, except her Fondness for me, nor of her
Character, except the Tears that I have seen my Father shed, when occasional
Circumstances have brought her fresh to his Memory. She died, when I was in my
seventh Year. I was their only surviving Child; and my Father transferred all
his Tenderness, for her, to me.

The Love of my Father was not the mere Partiality or Prejudice of a Parent; it
was not an Affection, he had a Passion for me, that could be equalled by
nothing but his Vanity, in my behalf. He resolved, he said, that there should
be one Gentleman in the Family, and, with this View, he resisted his Desire of
having me, always, in his Sight, and sent me to Westminster School, and from
thence to Cambridge-College, where I continued till I was twenty Years of Age,
without any Thing happening, that was uncommon, or deserving of your Attention.

In the mean Time, my Father was as prodigal of his Purse, toward me, as he was
of his Caresses. He had me with him, every Vacation. He visited me, frequently,
during Term; and seemed to lose the better Half of his Existence, when we
parted.

He had infused into me a strong Tincture of his own Vanity and Views. I lost
even a Portion of that Tenderness and Respect which I had felt, in his Regard.
He was a Trader, a Mechanic, I sighed for his reptile State; and I looked down
upon him, as Icarus did on that very Father, from whom he had derived Wings for
so exalted a Flight.

My Application, accordingly, was equal to my Ambition. I was not, merely, a
Master, I was a Critic in the classical Languages. I relished, and commented on
the Beauties of the Greek and Latin Authors. Was a thorough Connoisseur, in the
Customs and Manners of the Ancients, and could detect the slightest
Transgression of a Sculptor or Designer, in their folding of the Roman Toga. I
also had the Honor to be intimate with all the Great of Antiquity, I
frequently sat, in Synod, with the whole Posse of Heathen Gods, on Olympus; and
I kept them as I imagined, in a kind of Dependence, by my perfect Knowledge of
all their secret Lapses and Mistreadings. I had traced the System of Nature,
from Aristotle and Pythagoras down to Epicurus and Lucretius, and from them
down to Des Carts, Gassendi, and Hobbes, and, I was so thorough paced an Adept
in all the Subtleties of Logic; that I could confute, and change Sides, without
losing an Inch of the Ground that I had gained upon my Adversary.

I now, imagined that I was arrived at the very Pinnacle of human Excellence,
and that Fortune and Honor were within my Grasp, on either Hand. I looked on
the Chancellorship; or Primacy, as Things that must come, in Course. And I was
contriving some Station more adequate to the Height of my Merits and Ambition,
when I received this Letter.

Son Hammel,
HAVE lately enquired into thy Life and Character, am sorry to find them too
bad to give Hope of Amendment. Have lost my Money, and my Child. Thou have cut
thyself from my Love. I have cut thee from my Fortune. To comfort myself, have
taken a Neighbor's Widow to Wife. Come not near me, I will not see thee. Would
pray for thee if I did not think it in vain.

Bartholomew Clement.


For some Time after the receipt of this cruel Letter, I remained in a State of
Stupidity. I could not believe the Testimony of my Senses. I gave a kind of
Discredit to all Things. But, awaking from this Lethargy into inexpressible
Anguish, my Soul was rent by different and contending Passions.

Whatever Contempt I might have for the Station of my Father, I still loved his
Person better than Riches and Honors. But he loved me no more, he was gone, he
was lost; he was already dead and buried, at least to me. I cast myself on the
Ground, I groaned, I wept aloud, I bewailed him, as though he had lain a
lifeless Corpse, before me. At length having vented the first Ravings of my
Passion; I rose and wrote to my Father an Answer, of which this, in my
Pocketbook, is the Copy.

SIR,
IF you had not wished to find those Faults you sent to seek after, in a Life
that defies Malice and is wholly irreproachable, you would not have given
Credit to Scoundrels who cannot judge of the Conduct of a Gentleman, nor have
condemned your only Child, without Hearing or Defense.

In cutting me from your Fortune, you only cut me from what I despise, but, in
cutting me from your Love, you have, unjustly, robbed me of that which no
Fortune can repair. I see that you are, irretrievably, taken away from me. I
shall never more behold my long indulgent and fond Father; and I shall not
cease to lament his Loss with Tears of filial Affection. But, for this new
Father, whose Heart could dictate so unnatural and inhuman a Letter, I equally
disclaim all Commerce and Concern with him. And, could it be possible that a
Person, of my Talents and Abilities, should be reduced to Indigence or
Distress; you, Sir, are the very last Man upon Earth, to whom I would apply, or
from whom I would deign to accept Relief.

But if, on the other Hand, it should please GOD, hereafter, to visit your
Hard-heartedness with Affliction and Poverty; and that I, like the Son of the
Blacksmith, in the Days of our eighth Harry, should stand next the Throne in
Dignity and Honors; you will then find me desirous of making you all Sorts of
Submissions, you will then find the dutifullest, the fondest, and tenderest of
Children, in,

SIR, Your little known and much injured, Hammel Clement.


Having thus vented the Gusts and Feelings of my Heart, I began, seriously, to
think of the Course I ought to take; and considered London as the Sphere in
which a Luminary would appear with the greatest Luster.

I discharged my Servant. Sold my two Geldings. Disposed of my Room, my
Furniture, and most of my Books. And, having mustered somewhat upward of three
hundred and fifty Pounds, I lodged the L300 with a Cambridge Dealer, from whom
I took Bills on his Correspondent in London; and set out, on my Expedition, in
the first Stage.

I took cheap Lodgings, near Charing Cross; I was, altogether unknowing and
unknown in that great City; and, reflecting that a hidden Treasure cannot be
duly estimated, I daily frequented Markham's Coffee-House, amidst a
promiscuous Resort of Swords-men, Literati, Beaus, and Politicians.

Here, happening to distinguish myself, on a few Occasions, where some Articles
of ancient History, or Tenet of Thales, or Law of Lycurgus, chanced to be in
Question; I began to be regarded with better Advantage.

An elderly Gentleman, one Day, who sat attentive in a Corner, got up and
whispered that he would be glad of my Company to take share of a Pint in the
next Room. I gratefully obeyed the Summons, and, when we had drank a Glass a
Piece; Mr. Clement, says he, you appear to have but few Acquaintance, and may,
possibly, want a Friend. My Fortune is small, but, I have some Influence in
this Town; and, as I have taken an Inclination to you, I should be glad to
serve you. If the Question is not too free, pray, what is your present
Dependence, and Prospect for Life?

Having, with a grateful Warmth, acknowledged his Goodness to me, I,
ingenuously, confessed that my Circumstances were very slender, and, that I
should be glad of any Place wherein I could be useful to myself and my
Employer. And pray, says my Friend, what Place would best suit you? I hope,
Sir, answered I, my Education has been such, that, laying aside the manual
Crafts, there is not any Thing for which I am not qualified. I am greatly
pleased to hear it, replied Mr. Goodville, and hope, soon, to bring you News
that will not be disagreeable.

Within a few Days, Mr. Goodville, again, entered the Coffee-house with a happy
Aspect. He beckoned me aside. Clement, says he, I have the Pleasure to tell you
that I have brought you the Choice of two very advantageous Places. Mr. Giles,
the Banker, wants a Clerk who can write a fine Hand, and has made some
Proficiency in Arithmetic. And, my good Friend Mr. Tradewell, an eminent
Merchant, would give large Encouragement to a Youth who understands the Italian
Method of Book-keeping; as his Business is very extensive and requires the
shortest and clearest Manner of Entry and Reference.

My Friend here paused; and I blushed, hung down my Head, and was wholly
confounded. At length, I answered, hesitatingly, Perhaps, Sir, you have
happened on the only two Articles, in the Universe, (Mechanics, as I said,
apart,) of which I have no Knowledge. Well, well, my Boy, says he, don't be
discouraged, I will try what further may be done in your Behalf.

Within about a Fortnight after, Mr. Goodville sent me a Note to attend him at
his Lodgings, in Red-lion Square. I went, flushed with reviving Hope. My Child,
said he, as I entered, I have, now, brought you the Offer of three different
Places; and, some one of them, as I trust, must surely fit you.

Our East India Company propose to make a Settlement on the Coast of
Coromandel, and are inquisitive after some Youths who have made a Progress in
Geometry, and are, more especially, studied in the Science of Fortification.
There is, also, the Colonel of a Regiment, an old Intimate of mine, who is
going on foreign Service, and he, in Truth, applied to me, to recommend a
Person who was skilled in the Mechanic Powers, and, more particularly, who had
applied himself to Gunnery and Engineering. There is, lastly, the second Son of
a Nobleman to whom I have the Honor to be known; he is Captain of a Man of
War, and would give any Consideration to a young Man of Sense and Letters, who
is a Poficient, in Navigation and in the Use of the Charts and Compass, and
who, at the same Time, might serve as a Friend and Companion.

Sir, said I, quite astonished, I have been a Student, as Goliath was a Man of
War, from my Childhood. If all my Tutors did not flatter me, my Genius was
extensive; and my Progress, in Learning, may prove that my Application has been
indefatigable. I know all Things, from the Beginning of Time, that the ancient
or modern World, as I was told, accounted Matters of valuable Erudition or
Recognizance; and, yet, I have not so much as heard of the Use or Estimation of
any of these Sciences required, as you say, by Persons in high Trust and
Commission.

Mr. Goodville, hereupon, looked concerned and shook his Head. My dear Clement,
says he, I do not doubt your Talents or Learning; but, I, now, begin to doubt
whether they have been directed or applied to any useful Purpose. My Cousin
Goodville informs me that the Bishop of St. Asaph is in Distress for a young
Gentleman, a Man of Morals and a Linguist, who has some Knowledge in the Canon
and Civil Law, as his Vicar General is, lately, dead. He tells me, further,
that a Gentleman, a Friend of his, who is in great Circumstances, and who is
now about purchasing the Place of Surveyor General, wants a Youth who has got
some little smattering in Architecture, and has an elegant Hand at the Drawing
of Plans and Sections. I am also known to one of the Commissioners of Excise,
and, if you are barely initiated in Gauging, or Surveying, I think I could get
you into some Way of Bread.

Alas, Sir, I replied, in a desponding Tone, I am equally a Stranger to all
these Matters.

Perhaps, said Mr. Goodville, I could get you into holy Orders, if you are that
way inclined. Are you well read in Theology?

Yes, yes, Sir, I briskly answered, I am perfectly acquainted with the Gods and
Manners of Worship, through all Nations, since the Deluge.

But, are you, replied my Friend, equally versed in the Christian Dispensation?
Have you studied our learned Commentators on the Creeds; are you read in
Polemic Divinity? and, are you a Master of the Sense and emblematical Reference
that the Old Testament bears to the New?

Sir, said I, I have often dipped, with Pleasure, into the Bible, as there are
many Passages, in it, extremely affecting; and others full of fine Imagery and
the true Sublime.

My poor dear Child, (mournfully answered Mr. Goodville,) by all I can find,
you know no one Thing, of Use to yourself, or any other Person living, either
with respect to this World or the World to come. Could you make a Pin, or a
Waistcoat Button, or form a Pill Box, or weave a Cabbage Net, or shape a
Cobler's Last, or hew a Block for a Barber, or do any of those Things by which
Millions, daily, maintain themselves, in supplying the Wants and Occasions, or
Fashions and Vanities of others; you might not be under the Necessity of
perishing.

The Ways of Life, for which your Studies have best prepared you, are Physic
and the Law. But, then, they require great Expense, and an intense Application
of many Years to come, before you can propose to enter on a Livelihood, by
either of those Professions. And, after all, your Success would be very
precarious, if you were not supported, by many Friends and a strong Interest,
at least on your setting out.

I have, already, told you, Clement, that I am not rich; and, if I were; it is
not he who gives you Money, but he who puts you into a way of getting it, that
does you a Friendship.

I am advised to go to Montpellier for the Establishment of my Health, after a
tedious Fit of Sickness that I had at Bath. I shall set out, in about a Month.
But, before I go, my Child, I earnestly wish, and advise you, to fix on some
Craft, or Trade, or Manner of employing your Time, that will enable you to earn
a certain Subsistence, and, at the same Time, make you a worthy Member of the
Community. For, believe me, my Boy, that it is not speculative Science; no, nor
all the Money and Jewels upon Earth, that make any Part of the real Wealth of
this World. It is Industry, alone, employed on Articles that are useful and
beneficial to Society, that constitutes the true Riches of all Mankind.

As soon as you have made your Election, let me see you again. And, in all
events, let me see you before I set out.

Hereupon, I bowed and retired, the most mortified and dejected of all Beings.
I was so low and dispirited that I could scarce get to my Lodgings. I threw
myself on the Bed. The Gildings of the Vapors of Grandeur and Ambition, that
like the Sky of a Summer's Evening had delighted my Prospects, now wholly
disappeared, and a Night of succeeding Darkness fell heavy on my Soul.

One third of my principal Fund was almost sunk; and my Imagination considered
the Remainder, as already vanished, without the Possibility of Supply or
Resource. I, now, secretly cursed the Vanity of my Father: He must breed me a
Genman, thought I, with a Pox, as though I had been born to no Manner of End.
Had I been the Son of a Cobbler, of a Porter, an Ostler, of the lowest Wretch
who wins his Bread by the Sweat of his Brow; I should not yet have been reduced
to the worst Species of Beggary, that of begging with sound Limbs and a
reasonable Soul, the least pitied, though most pitiable Object of the Creation;
for, surely, that is the Case of a poor Scholar and a poor Gentleman.

For some following Days, I went about, prying and enquiring into the various
and numberless Occupations that maintained so many Thousands of active Hands
and busy Faces, throughout that wonderful City.

One Evening, as I returned late, and fatigued, through Cheapside, I observed a
Man very importunate with a Woman who walked before me. Sometimes she would
hurry on, and, again, make a full Stop, and earnestly beseech him to go about
his Business; but, in spite of her Entreaties, he still stuck close to her,
till, coming to the End of a blind Alley, he, suddenly, seized her by the Arm,
and pulled her in after him.

She shrieked out for Help, with repeated Vociferation; when, recollecting all
my Force, and drawing my Sword; Villain, I cried out, quit the Woman,
instantly, or you are a dead Man. He perceived the Glittering of the Weapon and
retired a few Paces; but, taking out a Pocket Pistol, he discharged it full at
me, and ran off with Precipitation.

The Ball entered my Clothes and Flesh and lodged on the Rotula of my left Arm.
I felt a short Pang, but, not attending to it, I took the Woman under the Arm,
and, returning with her to the Street, I told her we had no Time to lose, and
desired to know where she lived. She answered, at the Sign of the Fan and
Ruffle, in Fleet Street, where she kept a Milliner's Shop. We had not far to
go; we made the best of our Speed, and were let in by a Servant Maid who showed
us to a back Parlour.

Jenny, said Mrs. Graves, (that was her Name) bring a Glass and a Bottle of the
Cordial-Wine, you look a little pale, Sir, I hope you are not hurt. Not much, I
think, Madam, but I feel a small Pain in my left Shoulder. Sir, here is my best
Service to you, with my best Blessings and Prayers for you to the last Hour of
my Life. You must drink it off, Sir, we both stood in Need of it; this was a
frightful Affair. Jenny, where is Arabella? within a few Doors, Madam, at the
Miss Hodginses. Come, Sir, said Mrs. Graves, I must look at your Shoulder,
then, opening the Top of my Waistcoat, she, instantly screamed out. God
preserve my Deliverer! I fear he is wounded dangerously. Jenny, fly to Mr.
Weldon's, bring him with you, immediately, do not come without him. Dearest,
worthiest of Men, let me press another Glass upon you. It is necessary in such
a Waste of Blood and Spirits. Madam, I replied, the Wound cannot be of
Consequence, but, I was greatly fatigued, at the Time that I had the Happiness
to rescue you from that Ruffian.

The Surgeon soon came, and, looking at my Wound, said something apart, to Mrs.
Graves, who, thereupon, ordered Jenny to get a Fire and to make, and warm the
Bed in the best Chamber.

Sir, said I to Mr. Weldon, don't alarm the Gentlewoman. I am not of a fearful
Temper and hope to bear my Fortune like a Man, Sir, said he, your Wound has
been made by a rifled Ball, and it may cost you much Pain to extract it. You
must not think of stirring from hence, for the present. By the Time your Bed is
ready, I will be back with the Dressings.

During the Surgeon's Absence, Mrs. Graves was all in Tears; while I sat
suspended between my natural Fears of an approaching Dissolution, and my Hopes
of being suddenly and lastingly provided for. The Cruelty of my Father, the
Disappointment and overthrow of all my elevated Expectations, and my utter
Incapacity of being of the smallest Use to myself or Mankind, had given me a
kind of Loathing to Life. I had not, indeed, attended to my Duty as a
Christian! but, I was, then, Innocent of any actual or intentional Evil, and as
my Conscience did not condemn me, I looked to Mercy with a kind of humble
Resignation.

Mr. Weldon came with the Dressings, his eldest Apprentice, and a Man Servant.
I was, then conducted to my Chamber and helped to Bed, where I was put to great
Anguish in the Extraction of the Ball; as the Periostium had been lacerated,
and that the Lead, being flattened, extended much beyond the Wound it had made.

Having passed a very painful and restless Night, I remembered nothing further
till at the Expiration of one and twenty Days, I seemed to awaken out of a long
and uneasy Dream.

I turned my Head and beheld as I imagined, all arrayed in shining White, and
at my Bedside, an Inhabitant of some superior Region; for never till then had I
seen, nor even conceived an Idea of any Form so lovely.

Tell me, said I, fair Creature, on what World am I thrown? But instead of
replying, it flew out of my Apartment and soon after, returned, accompanied by
Mrs. Graves, whose Hands and Eyes were elevated, as in some extraordinary
Emotion.

Mrs. Graves, said I, how do You do? I hope You are well. I now beign to
conjecture whereabouts I am. But, neither did she answer; but, falling on her
Knees by my Bed, and taking hold of my Hand, I thank, I thank thee, O my God,
she cried, and, bursting into Tears, she wept and sobbed like an Infant. Ah,
Mrs. Graves, said I, I fear that you have had a very troublesome Guest of me.
But then, says she, we remember that Trouble no more, now that you are, once
again, born into the World.

During the few succeeding Days, in which I kept my Bed, Mrs. Graves and her
fair Niece Arabella, whom I had taken for a Vision, constantly breakfasted and
spent their Evening in my Apartment.

I gave them a short Narrative of my foregoing History; and understood, on
their Part, that they were the Sister and Daughter of the late reverend Mr.
Graves of Putney, who had little more to bequeath than his Books and Furniture,
amounting to about five hundred Pounds, which they held, in joint Stock, and
had, hitherto, rather increased than diminished.

As I scarce remembered my Mother, and had now, as it were no Father, Relation,
nor Friend upon Earth, I felt a Vacuity in my Soul, somewhat like that of an
empty Stomach, desirous of seizing on the first Food that should present itself
to my Cravings. Delightful Sensibilities! Sweet Hungerings of Nature after its
Kind! This good Woman and her Niece became all the World to me. The one had
conceived, for me, all the Passion of a Parent; the other, that of the fondest
and tenderest of Sisters. On the other Hand, I had, for Mrs. Graves, all the
Feelings of a Child who conceives himself a Part of the Existence of her who
bore him; and my Eyes and Actions could not forbear to discover, to Arabella,
that my Heart was that of the most affectionate of Brothers, though too
delicate to indulge itself in those familiar Endearments which the Nearness of
Kindred might venture to claim.

When I was up and about the House, I requested Mrs. Graves to make out her
Bill for my Board, and for Physician, Surgeon, Drugs, etc. during my long
Illness. Hereupon, she looked eagergly and tenderly at me. Mr. Clement, says
she, I think you are too generous, designedly, to reproach us with what we owe
you. But, for what is it, my Child, that you desire us to charge you? Is it for
rescuing me from Death, or a Shame worse than Death, probably, from both? or,
is it for delivering this my Darling from the bitter Grief and Distress that my
Loss must have brought upon her? Or, do you, rather, desire to pay us for the
fearful Pains and Sickness which you suffered on our Account, and for having,
nearly, forfeited your Life in our Defense? No, Mr. Clement, you must not think
of paying us the very Debts that we owe you; more indeed, Mr. Clement, than all
our little Fortune, than the Product of the Industry of our Lives can ever
repay.

Here, I was silenced, for the present, but, in no Degree convinced. And I
felt, in a sort, the Disgust of an injured Person, uneasy and studious, till
some Revenge might be had.

In two Days after, while Mrs. Graves was at Market, and Arabella gone, with a
Brussels Head and Ruffles, to a young Lady of Distinction; I stepped into the
Shop, where Jenny waited the Commands of those that should call. I had scarce
entered, when a Sheriff's Officer, appeared at the Door, and, bolting in laid
an Execution on the Shop, for eighty five Pounds odd Shillings, at the Suit of
Mr. Hardgrave the Cambric and Lace-Merchant.

I was, at first, surprised and grieved, but Pleasure, quickly, succeeded to my
Concern on the Occasion. I took out my Pocketbook, immediately discharged the
Debt, with Costs, and gave a Crown to Jenny, on her solemn Assurance that she
would not betray a Syllable of what had happened to her Mistress or Arabella.

Soon after, this good Gentlewoman and her Niece returned, Dinner was ordered
up, and I sat down to Table with a Heart and Countenance more easy and cheerful
than ordinary.

Before the Cloth was removed, Jenny came and delivered a Note to her Mistress.
She read it over and over with apparent Surprise and Attention, asked if the
Messenger was waiting, and stepped to the Door. Again, she returned, sat down
without speaking a Word, and, the Muscles of her Countenance being strongly
affected, she could no longer retain her Passion, and her Tears burst forth.

What is the Matter, cried Arabella, my Aunt, my dear dear Mother, my only
Friend and Parent? and, breaking also into Tears, she threw herself about her
Neck?

Oh, there is no bearing of this, exclaimed Mrs. Graves. This young Man, my
Arabella, distresses us beyond Expression. He has, this very Day, my Love, for
the second Time, snatched us from instant Ruin. I would tell you, if I could
speak; but read that Note. Which she did, accordingly.

The Note was signed Freestone Hardgrave, and imported how sorry he was, that
his late Losses, by Sea, had put him under the Necessity of laying an Execution
on her House, without customary Notice. That he was glad, however, she had so
large a Sum ready as L90, the Receipt of which he acknowledged; and hoped that
this Affair would make no Difference with respect to their future Dealings.

And why, best and dearest of Women, said I to Mrs. Graves, why would you
grieve that I should endeavor to relieve myself from a Part of that Burden,
with which you Goodness and Obligations have so greatly oppressed me? Oh, that
it were, that it were in my Power, I cried, and my Hands pressed each-other
with an involuntary Ardour, but, it never will, it never can be possible, for
me, to prove the Passion that my Soul has for you and -- there I hesitated --
to show you, I say, the Love that I have for you, Mrs. Graves. You two make my
World, and all that I am concerned for or desire therein.

Since that is the Case, said Mrs. Graves, with a Smile and a Tear that
glistened together, if you will admit an equal Passion, from one so old as I
am, it were pity we should ever part. Send, my Child, this very Day, and
discharge your former Lodgings. The Time that we spend together cannot but be
happy, All Cares are lessened by the Society of those we love; and our
Satisfactions will be doubled by feeling for Each-other.

I did not, at that Time, know the whole Reason of the Delight with which I
accepted this generous Invitation. I settled at Mrs. Graves's without any
formal Agreement; and all my little Matters were, directly, brought home.

O, how happy were many succeeding Days! how, still, more happy, when
contrasted with the Misery that ensued! We spent all the Time together, that
Business and Attention to the Shop would permit; and we grudged every Moment
that was spent asunder. I related to them a thousand entertaining Stories, and
Passages, occasionally recollected from the Poets and Historians of Antiquity.
And a secret Emotion, and inward Ardour for pleasing, gave me, fluently, to
intersperse sentimental Observations and pertinent Digressions, more delightful
to my Auditory than all my quoted Authorities.

I was, now, daily gathering Health and Strength, to which the Complacence of
my Mind greatly contributed; when, one Evening, Mrs. Graves returned, more
dejected than ordinary. I inquired into the Cause, with a Solicitude and
Countenance that, naturally, expressed the Interest I took in her Concerns.
Why, my dear Child, says she, perhaps I have been both impertinent and
indiscreet, but I meant all for the best. You must know, then, that I have been
on a Visit to your Father. To my Father, Madam! Even so. I would to Heaven,
that he were worthy to be called Father to such a Son. But, as I was saying.

Your Father, Mr. Clement, is in great Circumstances; he keeps his Coach, has
taken a fine new House, and lives at a high Rate. I sent in my Name, with
Notice that I came to him on Business of Consequence. I was, thereupon, shown
to a back Parlour, where he sat, in Company with Mrs. Clement and a lusty ill
looking young Gentleman; but, your Stepmother has a comely and good humoured
Countenance; she also appears to be far advanced in her Pregnancy. Mrs. Graves,
said your Father, take a Seat. What are your Commands with me, Madam? I came,
Sir, to let you know that your Son, Mr. Hammel Clement, the best of human
Beings, has been on the Point of Death. Have you nothing to say to me, Madam,
but what concerns my Son Hammel? I have not, I confess, Sir, but that is more
than enough; it is very interesting and affecting, and concerns you most
nearly. Here, Mr. Clement, for I will never more call him by the sacred Name of
Father, here, I say, he started up, and, catching at a Book, he pressed it to
his Lips, and cried, I swear by the Virtue of this and all other holy Books,
that I will never listen to any Person who would speak a single Word in Behalf
of Hammel Clement, and so, Mrs. give me leave to show you the way out again. So
saying, he caught my Hand and drew me to the Door, while I turned, and cried to
your Stepmother, O Madam, what sort of a Heart is yours, that refuses its
Intercession on this Occasion? but she gave me an Eye and Sneer, of such a
mischievous Meaning, as expressed the whole Fiend under the Guise of an Angel.
When Mr. Clement had taken me to the outward Door, I just turned, and said, I
am sorry, Sir, that a Man, of your grave and sensible Appearance, should suffer
yourself to be so duped, by People whose Interest it is to deceive you. But,
swelling into Choler, he gave me a violent Push from him, and clapped to the
Door in my Face. So that, in short, my dear Child, I fear I have done you Harm,
where I meant you true Service.

It matters not, my Mother, said I, (endeavoring to suppress a Tear of tender
Resentment) I will soon, I trust, procure some kind of Independence on that
Barbarian and his Fortune; and, while I have you and your Arabella, I shall
want neither Father nor Friend.

Being, now, very nearly, re-established in my Health, I set out again, in
search after some Employment that might suit me. As I was strolling, on Tower
Hill, I observed a Shop on my left Hand; it was that of Mr. Wellcot, a
Bookseller and Printer. I stepped in, and, after some introductory Discourse, I
asked him if he had Occasion, in the way of his Business, for a Friend of mine;
a Gentleman, in Distress, but of Parts and Learning. Alas, Sir, cried Wellcot,
such Creatures, as you mention, are a Drug upon Earth; there is a Glut of them
in all Markets. I would give any one a broad Piece per Man who should deliver
me from three or four of them, who lie heavy on my Hands. Not, Sir, that they
are greedy, or idle, in the least. I can get one of these Gentlemen, as you are
pleased to call them, on whose Education more Money has been expended than, at
the common and legal Interest, would maintain a decent Family, to the End of
the World, I can get one of them, I say, to labor, like a hackney Horse, from
Morning to Night, at less Wages than I could hire a rascally Porter, or Shoe
Boy, for three Hours. I employ them, occasionally, in correcting the Press, or
folding, or stitching the Sheets, or running of Errands. But then, Sir, they
have, all of them, Aspects, of such a bilcous Despondence, that a Man may, with
less Melancholy, behold a Death's Head. And really, Sir, I could not stand it,
if Custom, as I may say, did not harden me by the perpetual Vision of these
Specter.

While Wellcot, was speaking, I made a secret Vow against having any kind of
Commerce or Concern, with Booksellers or Printers, for, at least, a Century to
come. But, fearing to be suspected as a Party concerned, I affected an Air, as
easy as possible, and, observing some Females, who were busy in stitching
Pamphlets, I asked him if they contained any Thing new or entertaining.

Sir, said Wellcot, this is an elaborate Performance of the most eminent of our
Patriot Writers; I pay him, at the lowest, five Guineas, weekly. And, could any
Man write, with double his Spirit and Genius, I could better afford to give
that Author an Hundred. For, good Writings are like Diamonds, that are valued,
according to their Carrats; do but double their Weight, and they, immediately
become of twenty Times the Estimation.

This Pamphlet consisted of a Sheet, sewed in blew Paper. I instantly, paid my
twopence, and sat down to peruse it, I found that it contained several very
free Remonstrances, against his Majesty, and the Ministers, for joining with
France in the War against Holland, in opposition to the civil and religious
Interests of England. Together, with a few collateral Digressions, in Assertion
of Magna Charta, of the Freedom of Man, in general; and of Britons, in
particular. I perceived that it was written with much more Judgment than
Genius. And what, said I to Wellcot, will you give to that Man who shall,
confessedly, excel this your most eminent of Patriot Writers, upon his own
Subject, and in his own Way? Give Sir? Cried the Bookseller, many Thanks, and a
proportionable Increase of Profits. Enough, Sir, I answered, you shall soon
hear from me again. I wish you a good Morrow.

On my Return, I called at Mr. Goodville's, but he had sailed for France, about
a Fortnight before. I, then, went about to a Number of Pamphlet-Shops, and
bought up all the political Papers that had any Reference to the Matter in Hand.

I sat down to my Work, like a hungry Man to his Victuals; and I grudged my
Heart those short Indulgencies, which it enjoyed in the Society of the two
Objects of its fondest Affections.

Having finished my first Paper, in about a Fortnight, I entitled it the WEEKLY
MONITOR, and took it directly to Wellcot's. Here, Sir, said I, is my Friend's
first Venture. But, has your Friend, demanded Wellcot, in a discouraging
Accent, sent the usual Indemnity for the first Impression of a young Author?
That shall not be wanting, I answered, if you require it, Mr. Wellcot. Why,
said he, I do not take upon me to be a Judge in these Matters; and yet, Custom
has given me a shrewd sort of a Guess. Come, Sir, I have a few Minutes to throw
away, and they are, at your Service.

He, then, sat down, and, having read about a Dozen Lines, Ay, ay! says he,
they don't, always, do thus at Newmarket; your Friend, I find, has set out at
the Top of his Speed. Going on, something further, he cried, well supported by
--! and, then, proceeding to the third Page, this, says he, must have been
stolen from one of the Ancients, because there is no modern who could write
like it. Well, Sir, you need not give yourself further Trouble, for the
present. I will print this first Paper at my own Suit. Desire your Friend to be
careful about the Second. Call to me, in a Week, and, I think I shall be able
to tell you something that will please you.

How diligent is Expectation, how elevated is Hope! I returned with the
Feathers of Mercury at my Heels. I set about my second Paper, with double
Genius and Application. My Ideas were more expanded, my Spirits more sublimed.
All the Persuasives of Cicero; all the Thunder of Demosthenes; all that I had
read, on the Topic of Liberty, in popular Governments, or Commonwealths,
occurred to my Remembrance.

I finished my second Essay, within the Week. I went with it to Wellcot, and he
presented me, at Sight, with twenty Guineas. It is more, said he, than hitherto
comes to your Share; but, I love to encourage, and I trust that, in the Run, I
shall not be a Loser. I sell this Pamphlet for two Pence. Nearly two Fourths
thereof go to Printing, Paper, etc. another Fourth I reserve, as an Equivalent
for my Application and Knowledge in this Way; and, the Remainder is a
Redundance which, on extraordinary Tides, ought to flow to the Writer. The
Demand, for this Paper, has been very uncommon; and, by what I can judge, the
Sale may, in Time, amount to twelve Thousand. You need not, Sir, be ashamed to
acknowledge yourself the Author. Preserve but a Moiety of the Spirit, of this
Elijah, with which you have set out, and my own Interests will instruct me to
serve you effectually.

I now returned, as in a triumphal Chariot. I never, before, received the
Prize, as I may say, of personal Prowess. The Fortune of my Father, the Fortune
of all Men living, who were merely born to Fortune, diminished beneath me. O,
how sweet, said I, to myself, how delicious are the Fruits of a Man's own
Plantation! Then, like the sagacious and independent Spider, his Labors will
be crowned, with personal Honor and Success, while he spins his Subsistence
from his proper Bowels. It is then, and then only, that a Man may be said to be
the true Proprietor of What he possesses; and the Value is endeared, and the
Enjoyment doubled thereby.

I hastened to impart my Transports to the two loved Objects of all my Cares
and Satisfactions. Jenny told me that her Mistress was not at Home, but, that
Miss Arabella was above in her Closet. I ran up. I tapped at the Door, but no
one answered. Again I tapped, and added the soft Voice of Affection, requesting
to be admitted. At length she opened, but looked pale, and with swollen and
downcast Eyes. I perceived she had been in Tears, and a sudden Frost fell upon
all my Delights. What is the Matter Miss, I cried, my Sister, my sweet Friend,
my dearest Arabella; and I gently took her Hand between both of mine. I wish
you had not come, at this Time, Mr. Clement, said she, coolly. But, you must
permit me to keep my little Griefs to myself. Yes, I replied, if it is your
Pleasure to torture, to kill me outright, refuse me my Portion in your
Interests and Concerns. O, Mr. Clement, says she, your Soul is too generous, I
dare not tell you. I feel what you would suffer, should you know that you are
concerned in the Cause of my Tears. But, we must part, Sir, indeed, we must; we
must part, Mr. Clement, and that suddenly.

Here, her Voice failed, and, throwing herself into a Chair, she burst out
afresh, into a Gush of Affliction. While I stood astonished; and, dropping
beside her on one Knee, awaited, with unspeakable Anguish, the Suspension of
her Grief.

At length perceiving my Situation, rise Sir, she cried, I entreat you to rise
and take a Chair beside me; and I will tell you, as fast as I can, of this
distressful Business.

You must know that I was, a while ago, to the Miss Hodginses. They are very
friendly, and good young Women, and told me, in Confidence, though with much
Concern, of a Whisper, in the Neighborhood, that my Aunt had entertained a
young Gentleman, in the House, who was admitted to such familiar and convenient
Intimacies as could not, at all Times, be without their Consequence,
especially, between Persons of our Age and Sex.

Now, Mr. Clement, I am no way ashamed to confess that I have nothing in Heaven
but my Innocence, nor on Earth but my Character; and, I think you wish me
better, than to desire that I should forfeit the one, or the other. Desire it!
O Heavens! I suddenly exclaimed, I will for ever guard them both, to the last
Drop of my Blood, and last Breath of my Life. Alas, cried Arabella, you are the
Man, of all others, whom the World would not admit for my Champion, in this
Case; they are absolute Judges, they ought to be obeyed, our Parting will be
painful, but it must be complied with.

But, my Sister, my Arabella, most lovely and most beloved of all the Human
Species; tell me, says I, my Angel, is there no other Way, no Expedient to
satisfy a misdeeming World, save a Remedy that is worse than Death itself? No,
said she, with an Air somewhat resolute and exalted, there is no other
Expedient, at least, no other, to which I can consent. O, Miss Graves, answered
I, with a hasty Dejection, if that is the Case, you shall be obeyed; I am,
indeed, very unhappy, but I will not be importunate, Adieu, dearest of
Creatures, adieu, for ever! I spoke, and suddenly withdrew, and gave her, as I
imagined, the last farewell Look.

Hold, Sir, she cried, pray stay a Moment. I should be wretched, beyond
Expression, if you went away in the greatest of all Errors. But, is it
possible, you should think that I could mean any Slight to you, Mr. Clement?
No, Sir, no, of all Men living, indeed, it was not possible. I spoke, through
an humble Sense of my own Demerits; my Determination was just, I do not repent
me of it. I -- I -- perhaps, Sir, I have not understood you -- Indeed I scarce
know what I say or mean, myself -- Of this however be assured, that I neither
do, nor ever did, nor ever can, mean any Offense to Mr. Clement.

While she spoke I had kneeled before her. I took her Hand and pressed it to my
Lips and Bosom. My Arabella, said I, I confess that this was no premeditated
Motion of mine. Nay, this very Morning, the World should not have prevailed
with me to have accepted this Hand, for which I now kneel. I was, then, poor
and wretched, without Resource. And, I could not think of bringing Distress
upon her, independent of whose Happiness I could have no Enjoyment. I was
sensible that I loved you, with infinite Tenderness, with unspeakable Ardour;
but, my Passion did not dare to admit of Desire. I could have suffered all
Things to have heaped Blessings upon you; but I would not permit to my Soul the
distant, though dear Wish, of being happy with you -- Ah, what Posture is this!
exclaimed Arabella. Nay, you shall not stir, I cried, nor will I rise till you
have heard me a few Words. Since Morning, I say, I have got Room to hope that
my Arabella would not be so unhappy, as I feared, in being united to me. I will
not urge her however. I leave her free, I leave her Mistress of her own Will
and Actions. But, here I vow to Heaven, that whether she live or die, consent,
or not consent, I will never marry another. I am, from this Moment, her Wedded
for Eternity, the faithful and fond Husband of her Image and Remembrance.

So saying, I rose and seated myself beside her. She looked astonished, and
affected beyond the Power of Utterance. But, covering her Face with a
Handkerchief, she gently leaned toward me, and shed a plenteous Shower of Tears
upon my Bosom.

When Mrs. Graves returned, I told her of my extraordinary Success at the
Booksellers, I had, before, made her the Treasurer of my little Possessions,
and I poured my twenty Pieces into her Lap.

Arabella, as I conjectured, did not delay to impart, to her Aunt, the late
Adventure; for I observed that the Eyes of that good Woman, dwelt upon me with
a fresh Accession of Fondness and Delight.

Having finished my third Paper, I took it to Wellcot, who presented me with
twenty Guineas, and, further, acknowledged himself my Debtor. Returning
homeward, I cast up, in a pleasing kind of mental Arithmetic, how much my
weekly twenty Guineas would amout to at the Years End, and found it much beyond
my Occasions, even in the State of Matrimony.

I now looked upon myself, as in the certain Receipt of a plentiful Income; and
this encouraged me to press for the Completion of my Happiness. Decency, alone,
could give Difficulty or Delay, in an Affair that was, equally, the Wish of all
Parties. We were privately married, in the Presence of the Miss Hodginses and
two or three other Neighbors; and I was put into Possession of the
blushingest, fearfullest, and fondest of all Brides.

Job, very justly, says, shall we receive Good at the Hands of God and not
receive Evil? And yet, I imagine, that the Recollection, of past Happiness,
rather heightens than alleviates the Sense of present Distress. My Soul, in
those Days, enjoyed a Tide of Delight, to the Fullness of its Wishes, and to
the Stretch of its Capacity. I thought that, till then, no Person had ever
loved, as I loved. But the Love, of my Arabella, was a kind of Passion, that
wanted a new Name whereby to express it. It was an Absence, a sort of Death to
all other Objects. It was a Pleasure too paining, a distressful Attention, the
Avarice of a Miser who watches over his Hoard, and joins to the Rapture, with
which he beholds it, the terrifying Ideas of Robbery and Loss.

I had now, within the Space of five Weeks, received about one hundred and
twenty Guineas, on the Sale of my Monitor. When, going abroad, one Evening, I
was stopped, within a few Doors of my House, by a genteel looking Person who
asked if my Name was Clement, it is, Sir, I answered. Then Sir, says he, I
arrest you, in his Majesty's Name, for Sedition and a Libel against the
Government. Then, beckoning to three or four Sergeants, that attended, he had
me directly seized and conveyed toward Newgate.

As I was not of a timorous Temper, nor conscious of the smallest Tincture of
the Crimes with which I was charged, I should have made little more than a Jest
of this Business; had I not trembled for the Apprehensions of those who I knew
would tremble for me.

On the Way, this Officer informed me, that my Bookseller had betrayed me, and
had confessed, to the Ministers, that I was the Author of a famous Pamphlet,
entitled the WEEKLY MONITOR. Being delivered to the Keeper, I put a few Pieces
into his Hand, and was conducted to a decent Apartment, considering the Place.

I immediately sent for Humphrey Cipher, Esquire Sergeant at Law, whom I had, once,
occasionally feed in behalf of Mrs. Graves; and I sent, at the same Time, for a
Set of the WEEKLY MONITOR. When Mr. Cipher came, I put five Pieces into his
Hand, and, having told him my Case, I requested him to peruse the Papers in
question, and to give me his Opinion thereon.

Having read them, with due Attention; Mr. Clement, says he, I perceive that
you are a learned and ingenious young Gentleman; but I find that you are better
acquainted with the Republics of Greece, than with the Nature and Constitution
of our limited Monarchy. Hence, alone, has proceeded some Lapses, and
Misapplications, that your Adversaries would lay hold of. Yet, there is
nothing, grossly, scurrilous or malicious, throughout; nor what may amount to
the incurring of a Praemunire, by the most violent Constraint or Wresting of
the Sense. If you are inclined, says he, to proceed in the Course of these
Papers, I would advise you to put in Bail, and to stand the Action. But, as I
am persuaded that the Court have commenced this Prosecution as a Matter, merely
in terrorem, to deter you from a Work that gives them great Disgust, if you
have any genteel Friend, who would solicit in your Favor, and promise a future
Conduct, more amenable to Power, you would, undoubtedly be discharged, without
further Cost or Trouble.

I returned my warm Acknowledgments to the Sergeant for his friendly Counsel,
and told him I would consider of it, before I gave him further Trouble. When he
was gone, I dispatched a Letter to Mrs. Graves, wherein I gave her an Account
of my present Situation, in a Manner, as little alarming as possible. I
requested her to provide Bail for my Appearance at Bar; but insisted that, till
this was done, neither she nor Arabella should come to my Prison; and, that I
had given express Orders that they should not be admitted.

Alas! had they complied with my Directions, how happy might we have been, all
together, at this Day. But, the Excess of their Goodness was the Cause of our
common Ruin. Their Affection would not be satisfied with simple Bail; and they
resolved never to rest, till they had procured my full Discharge.

They went about to all their Customers of any Distinction. They solicited,
petitioned, and bribed without Measure. They borrowed Money to the utmost
Extent of their Credit; and pawned, or sold all their Effects under prime Cost.
They gave a Purse to one, to bring them acquainted with another, on whom they
bestowed a larger Sum, to introduce them to a third. Having, at length, made
their Way to Lord Stivers, an Agent of the Minister, he thought he saw an
Advantage in granting their Request, and my Discharge was made out, without
further Delay.

On the fifth Evening from my Imprisonment, the Door of my Chamber opened, and,
in came my dear Aunt with my dearer Arabella. They flew upon me; they clasped
me, on each Side, in their Arms; and my Wife, instantly, swooned away upon my
Bosom. She soon revived, however, at the known Voice of Love, and, as every
Door for my Enlargement had been previously opened, we went down, stepped into
the Coach, and drove home, directly.

Here, I saw the first Subject and Cause of Alarm. The Shop was shut up. I was
shocked and felt a sudden Chilness come upon me; but did not venture to
inquire, except by my Eyes.

The Kettle being down, and all seated to Tea, I introduced the Affair, with an
affected Unconcern; and, by Question after Question, artfully extracted, from
my Companions, the whole History and Adventures of the five preceding Days;
whereby, I found that they had expended in my Behalf beyond the last Penny of
their own Substance; and that nothing remained, save one hundred and fifty
Pounds, to which the several Deposits amounted, which I had made with Mrs.
Graves.

I could now no longer contain myself. Cruel Women, inhuman Friends! I cried.
The Bitterness of Enmity, the Rancour of Malice could never have brought an
Evil, like this, upon me. Accursed Wretch that I am, ordained to be the
Instrument of Perdition to those, whom I would feed with my Blood and foster
with my Vitals. Would to Heaven I had not been born! or, would I had been cut
off by some quick and horrid Judgment ere this had happened!

Here Mrs. Graves drew her Chair close to mine, and catching me about the Neck,
and dropping upon me a few Tears, that she struggled to suppress; don't grieve,
my Child, she cried, don't afflict yourself for nothing. All is as it should
be. There is no Harm done. Your Arabella and I can always earn genteel and
independent Bread, without Shop or other Means than the Work of our Hands. We
can never want, my Hammy. We have done nothing for you. Neither has any Thing
happened wherewith you ought to reproach yourself. What we did was for
ourselves, for the Relief of the Anguish of our own Hearts; to bring you home
to us, again, as soon as possible, my Son, since we found that we could live no
longer without you.

Within a few Days, I perceived that my dear Aunt began to decline in her
Health, perhaps, occasioned by her late Fatigue and Anxiety of Spirits. I
brought an able Physician to her, but, he could form no Judgment of the Nature
of her Disorder, till, some Time aster, when her Complexion began to change,
and the Doctor declared her to be in the Jaundice. He began to apply the
customary Medicines, and, no Care nor Expense was spared for her Recovery.
Arabella and I sat up with her, alternately, every Night; and, all the Day, we
read to her some Book of Amusement, in order to dissipate the Melancholy of her
Disease. But, alas, all our Cares and Remedies; our Attention and Solicitude,
our Prayers and our Tears, proved, equally unsuccessful, and, at the End of
five Months, she expired within our Arms.

Arabella then quitted her Hold, and, crossing her Arms upon her Bosom, and
looking, eagerly, on the Face, once so lovely, and always boloved; you are then
at Peace, said she, my Mother. O Death, had thou not enough of Terrors, in
thy Aspect, without adding to thy Agonies those of tearing from us that which
we prized above Life. O my Friend! my only Parent! my dearest dearest Mother!
-- She could no more, but, immediately, fainted away upon the Body.

I took her up in my Arms, and, carrying her into the next Room, I laid her on
the Bed; I ordered Jenny and the two Nursekeepers to take Care of her Recovery,
and charged them not to permit her to see her Aunt, any more.

I, then, returned to the Chamber, wherein, the precious Ruins of the Half of
my World was laid. I locked the Door within side. I approached the Body, and,
hung over it, and gazed upon it, with inexpressible Emotion. I repeatedly
clapped my Hands together. I stooped down, and kissed, and rekissed her cold
Lips, in an Agony of Affection. I gave a free Scope to my Tears, Sobs, and
Lamentations. Ah, I cried, my Parent; my Patroness; ah, Mother to the Son of
your unhappy Election! Have I lost you, my only Prop? Are you, for ever,
departed from me, my Support and Consolation? I was abandoned by the World, by
Friends, Father, and Relations; but you became the World and all Relations to
me. I was a Stranger, and you took me in; I was sick, and in Prison, and you
ministered unto me. But, you are gone, you are gone from me, afar off. And I,
die a thousand Deaths in the Anguish of surviving you. Here you lie, my Mother,
the Victim of your Goodness to your unlucky Guest. Wretch that I am! doomed to
bring no Portion, save that of Calamity, to those who regard me. Woe of Woes!
Where, now, shall I ease my Soul of its insupportable Burden? Of the Debt, with
which it labors, to this kind Creature? She will no more return, to take aught
at my Hands; and I must suffer the Oppression, through Life, and through
Eternity.

Having thus vented the Excesses of my Passion, my Spirits subsided into a kind
of gloomy Calm, I returned to my Wife. -- But, I see, Sir, you are too much
affected. I will not dwell on this melancholy Scene any longer.

When I had discharged Doctor's Fees, Apothecaries Bills, and Funeral Expenses;
I found that our Fortune did not amount to fifty Pounds. My Wife was, now, far
advanced in her Pregnancy; her Labor was hastened by her Grief and late
Fatigues; and she was delivered of that Boy whom your Charity, a second Time,
brought into this World.

As I was, now, all Things, to my Arobella; the only Consolation she had upon
Earth, I never left her during her Illness. By the Time she was up and about;
what with the Charges of Child bearing, and a Quarter's Rent, etc. our Fund
was, again, sunk within the Sum of ten Pounds; and I was going, one Evening, to
look out for some Employment when we heared a Rapping of Distinction at the
Door.

Jenny came, in a hurry, and brought us word that Lord Stivers was in the
Parlour, and desired to speak with me. I went down, greatly surprised, and
something alarmed at his Visit. Mr. Clement, says he, with a familiar Air, I
have long wished to see you, but I did not think it seasonable to disturb you,
during the Misfortune of your Family and the Illness of your Wife. Your WEEKLY
MONITORS have Genius and Spirit, but they have done some Mischief which we wish
to have remedied. As how, pray, my Lord? Why, Mr. Clement, I never knew a
Writing, in favor of Liberty, or against any Measures of Government, which the
Populace did not wrest, in favor of Licentiousness, and to the casting aside
of all Manner of Rule. Now, Mr. Clement, we want you to undertake our Cause,
which is, by much, the more reasonable and orderly Side of the Argument; in
short, we want you to refute your own Papers.

O, my Lord, I answered, I should think it an Honor to serve your Lordship or
the Ministry, on any other Occasion. But, in a Matter that must bring public
Infamy upon me; indeed, my Lord, you must excuse me. I should be pointed at, as
an Apostate and Prostitute, by all Men, and bring my Person and Writings into
such Disgrace as would, for ever, disable me from serving either myself, or
your Lordship.

Well Sir, replied my Lord, I will not, then, insist on a formal Refutation of
your own Writings. I only ask, if you are willing to engage in our Quarrel, as
far as is consistent with Honor and Truth? I am, my Lord, I rejoined, as far
as is consistent with my own Credit and the Good of my Country.

The Good of your Country, Mr. Clement, says my Lord, I hope you do not think
that Government is contrary to the Good of your Country. Pray, in what do you
make this LIBERTY consist, of which you are become so eminent a Patron?

There are two Sorts of LIBERTY, my Lord, I answered. The first constitutes the
Duty and Happiness of a Man, independent of Community. The second constitutes
the Privilege and Happiness of a Man, merely, as he is a Member of any State or
Commonwealth.

Independent of Community, a Man is so far free and no further, than he acts up
to the Dictates of Reason and Duty, in despite of inward Appetite and outward
Influence.

As a Member of Community, a Man is, so far, free, and no further than as every
other Member, of that Community, is legally restrained from injuring his
Person, or encroaching on his Property.

Inimitably well definded, cried his Lordship; I have read Volumes, in Folio,
upon the Subject; but, never knew what LIBERTY was before. Well, Mr. Clement,
as this LIBERTY of yours, is in all Respects, so opposite to the Licentiousness
I was talking of; it cannot but make, mainly, in Favor of good Government. I
therefore request you to write a Treatise to the Purpose of your Definition;
and to take us with you, as far as you can. We shall not be ungrateful, we are
good Paymasters, Sir. Why do you hesitate? Did you not tell me you were
disposed to serve us?

My Lord, I replied, I fear I should fall greatly short of your Expectations. I
am not studied in the Constitution of modern States; and, how should I be able
to justify any Government, with respect to Measures that, perhaps, are a Secret
to all, except the Ministers? I must further observe, to your Lordship, that my
former Field would be greatly contracted, on this Occasion. It is very easy and
obvious to find Fault and to call in Question; but, to vindicate Truth itself
against popular Prejudice, hoc Opus hic Labor est.

Mr. Clement, says my Lord, I am proud that we have got a Gentleman of so much
Honesty and Ingenuity to befriend us. It shall be my Care to provide you with
Materials, and, I am confident that so great a Master of his Instrument, as you
are, will make excellent Music on a few fundamental Notes. Here are twenty
Guineas Earnest, and ten Guineas shall be paid you, weekly, till we can fix
you in some Station of due Honor and Advantage. I will take a Glass, or a Dish
of Tea with you, in a few Days, and wish you a good Evening.

On the third Morning after this Interview, my Lord returned with a large
Bundle of Anti-Patria Pamphlets, in his Chariot, and some manuscript Notes and
Hints for my Instruction. He breakfasted with us, and was easy, polite, and
cheerful.

I now entered on my new Province, but, not with usual Ardour. As I had,
formerly, lashed the Insolence, Encroachments, and Rapaciousness of Power, less
ambitious of Conquest, over Aliens and Enemies, than over the very People it
was ordained to protect: I now, on the other Hand, rebuked, with like Acrimony,
the riotous, factious, and seditious Propensities, of a turbulent, licentious,
and unsatisfied People; ever repugnant to Government, and reluctant to the Rein
of the gentlest Ruler. I proved, from many Authorities, and Instances, derived
from Greece and Rome, that Power is never so dangerous to a Populace as when it
is taken into their own Hands. That the Governors and governed, by the Violence
of Collision, are apt to fly to Extremes, on either Side. That Anarchy is the
most direct, of all Roads, to Tyranny. And that a People, who have no Will to
be governed, reduce themselves to the Necessity, of being crushed, insulted,
and governed, whether they will or no.

Now, Sir, though I, thus alternately, sided with the People against Power, and
with Power against the People; yet I struck at nothing but Faults, on either
Hand; and equally asserted, on both Sides of the Question, the Cause of my
Country, of Liberty, and Truth.

I took five Times the Pains with these latter Papers that I had with the
Former, and yet, I confess I had not equal Pleasure in the Delivery. I am,
also, persuaded, that these had more than double the Merit of the other; and,
in Point of Sentiment, Moral, and general Instruction, were of twenty Times the
Value to Mankind: But, how can that instruct which is not attended to? it was
intimated to the People that these had been written at the Instance of their
Governors; and they would not have listened to an Oracle, if uttered from that
Quarter.

Six Months had now elapsed in these Lucubrations. I had delivered, to my Wife
two hundred and sixty Guineas, the weekly Price of my Labors. We had lived
with great Frugality. Arabella had, again, taken in as much Work as her Nursing
and Attention to the Child would admit. And we had some Pieces left of our
former Remnant; when Lord Stivers called in upon me, with Pleasure and good
News, as it were, Prologue in his Aspect.

Mr. Clement, says he, I want to speak to you, apart. I had, Yesterday, some
Talk with the Minister about you, and he has promised me four hundred a Year
Pension for you, till something better can be done; and this is to be wholly
clear and over your weekly Wages of ten Guineas, while we keep you so hard at
Work. But, tell me, Clement, says he, laying his Hand with an affectionate
Familiarity upon my Shoulder, are you of a jealous Temper? The furthest from
it, my Lord, of any Man breathing. O, I Am glad of that, but, if you were, I
have nothing exceptionable to propose. To be short; Half a Dozen of Noblemen,
all my Friends, and People of strict Probity and Virtue, have engaged to spend
a Share of Tomorrow, in a Party of Pleasure upon the Thames; and, we have,
each of us, laid a Bet of a hundred Guineas, that, from the Number of his
Relations, his Friends, or Acquaintance, he will bring the prettiest Woman to
this Field of Contention. I had fixed on Lady Fanny Standish, a lovely
Creature, and a Relation of my own, but she, unfortunately, happened to be
pre-engaged to one of my Rivals. I am, therefore quite at a Loss, and must,
infallibly, lose my Wager, if you do not favor me with the Company of Mrs.
Clement. With her I can make no Question of Conquest; and I give you my Honor
to pour into her Lap, the whole five hundred Guineas, the just Prize of her
Beauty.

Why, my Lord, I answered, this is, indeed, a very pleasant Project, and has
nothing in it exceptionable, that I can perceive, if no one was to know any
Thing of the Matter. But, what will the World say to see your Lordship so
paired? Shaw, damn the World, Clement, I am your World, Man. Your Lordship has
a very good Right to damn an inferior World, I rejoined; but the World has an
equal Right, and would, certainly, make use of it, in the Damnation of my Wife.
What, said he, warmly, you will not, then, confide her to my Friendship and
Honor? I will not, my Lord, confide her Honor, unnecessarily, to any Man from
under that Guardianship and Protection which I vowed to her, in Marriage. It is
very well, Mr. Clement, you may hear from me Tomorrow. And away he went.

He was as good as his Word. The very next Morning, I was arrested at his Suit
for two hundred and fourscore Guineas, the Amount of all that I had received
from him; and I was hurried to the Fleet Prison, without being permitted to
speak to any one.

As my Lord knew that, on Issue, I must cast him in his Action, and, further,
come upon him for special Damage and false Duress; it instantly occurred that
this was, merely, a Stratagem for the Seduction of my Arabella; and her
defenseless State gave me inexpressible Torture. I, immediately wrote her an
Account of my Situation and Apprehensions which, unhappily for all Parties,
were too well founded. But, Sir, I will give you a Detail of these
extraordinary Events, in the Order of Time, in which they happened, as I,
afterward, learned them, from the Mouth of my Wife, and from the Testimony of
others, on Trial in public Court.

Before my Wife could have the least Intelligence of my Confinement, my Lord
paid her a Visit, and, entering with his accustomed Freedom and good Humor,
Mrs. Clement, says he, I am come to prevent your being alarmed, when you should
hear that I sent your Husband to the Fleet Prison this Morning. But, to
convince you that I intend him no manner of Harm; I have, here, brought you the
Money for which he was arrested; and it is at your own Choice to release him,
within this Hour, or on the Feast of Saint Simpleton, if you are not in a
Hurry. So saying, he put a large Purse into her Hand. And, pray my Lord, then
demanded Arabella, on what Account was it that you had him arrested? To punish
him, answered my Lord, for being the most jealous-pated Coxcomb in Europe.
Jealous, my Lord! pray of whom can he be jealous? Of you and I, Madam. Of us,
my Lord? Sure we never gave him Cause. No, that I Will be sworn, rejoined my
Lord; but more is the Pity; the Jealousy came first, and the Cause ought, now,
in all Conscience, to follow.

Before the last Words had escaped his Mouth, he sprung forward, and, catching
her in his Arms, he pressed and kissed her with the rudest Ardour. But, quickly
disengaging herself, and, pushing him, violently, from her. I see you're a
Villain, she cried, and desire that you will instantly quit my House; and, so
saying, she threw the Purse out at the Door. My Lord, however, stood his
Ground, and, looking at her with astonishing Ease and Unconcern; Mrs. Clement,
says he, the Destiny of your Husband and yourself is in my Hands; and I must
tell you it does not become you to treat your best Friend in so injurious a
Manner. I have, here, brought you a Settlement of five hundred a Year, for
Life. It is perfected to you without Condition, and, how far you will be
grateful, lies, wholly, at your own Election. May Heaven forsake me, she cried,
when I accept the smallest Advantage from you or your Fortune. Well, well,
Arabella, replied my Lord, I must and will have you, on your Terms, or my own;
but, if you had, really a mind to contest this Business with me, what a little
Fool you were, so simply, to cast away the Sinews of War? I leave you, Child,
for the present, to wiser Reflections; then insolently smiling in her Face, he
retired.

As soon as he was gone, my Wife hurried to the Miss Hodginses, and prevailed
upon one of them to keep her Company till she should be able to procure my
Enlargement. She, then, went to a Person, who dealt in Household Furniture, and
requested him to come, the next Morning, and make a Purchase of some Goods that
she had to dispose of. And, lastly, she writ me a Letter with an Account of all
these Matters, and a Promise to be with me the Day following.

I should have apprised you before this, that our faithful and affectionate
Jenny had forsaken us. A small Legacy had been left her, whereupon she quitted
Service and went to live with her Parents; and we were obliged to hire a
strange Maid in her Room.

The next Day, Arabella sold as much of her Furniture, to the forementioned
Dealer and some Neighbors, as amounted to upward of forty Guineas. She had put
these, with her former Deposit of two hundred and sixty, into her Pocket; it
was now Afternoon, and she was joyfully preparing to come and give me Freedom;
when our new Maid entered and told Miss Hodgins that a Lady waited for her, at
Home, on earnest Business, but promised not to detain her above five Minutes.
Alas! Miss Hodgins was scarce gone, when Lord Stivers entered, and my Wife,
giving a violent Shriek, dropped backward in a Chair.

Lord Stivers, thereupon, drew another Chair, and, with an impudent Appearance
of Tenderness, seated himself beside her. My dear Arabella, said he, don't be
alarmed. By, -- I am not come to do you the smallest Injury. I tell you,
however, that you're wholly in my Power. Your Street Door is bolted. I have two
able Footmen below in your Kitchen; and the Maid, who contrived to get your
Friend out of the Way, is much more my Servant than yours, I assure you. I have
loved you long, my Arabella, and the frequent Visits, I paid, are to be placed
to your Credit, and not to that of the stupid Polities, with which I amused
your Husband, and now, my Angel, if you will make any Concession, but the
slightest Return to the Excess of my Passion and Fondness for you; I, here, vow
to you perpetual Faith and Constancy for Life, and, both my Fortune and Person
shall be, wholly, devoted to you. But, don't attempt to impose; don't hope to
deceive me.

No, no, my Lord, she cried, I will not deceive you, by pretending to sacrifice
the least Article of Duty to your Person or Fortune. I see that I Am in Danger;
on the Brink of Perdition. I see that Hell is strong, and subtle at Devices.
Heaven save me, any how! strike, stike me dead, this Instant! You Thunders and
Earthquakes, that once were my Terrors, be now my Deliverers!

Why, my Arabella, says Lord Stivers, this is all very sine. It is the sweetest
Rant I ever heard. And you are the sweetest Girl, upon my Soul, that ever I
saw. I perceive that you are really alarmed, my Love; but, what is it that
frights you, you shall never receive any Treatment from me, save Proofs of the
Fondness and Violence of my Affection. Recall your Spirits, Child; and prepare
yourself, with Patience, for what must be. For I swear to you, Arabella, by --
etc. etc. that no Power, in the Universe, shall snatch you, this Hour, from the
Ardour of my Caresses.

The wretched Object of the Lust of this barbarous Man, then, dropped upon her
Knees in a frantic Agony. O GOD! she cried out, if you are in Heaven, if you
hear and see these Things. If Virtue and Purity are not an Offense unto you.
Send, send, and deliver me by some sudden Salvation! O, my Lord, once our
generous Patron and Protector, the Friend and Support of our declining House!
Would you now tumble into deep and irreparable Ruins, the Work of your own
Hands? Alas, you know not what you do; you cannot guess at the Horrors you are
about to perpetrate. If ever you had a touch of Pity. If ever -- but, what
shall I say. If you do not, like Devils, delight in the Miseries of Wretches,
damned for Eternity; shield, shield me, my dear Lord; be you, yourself, my
Savior, from this my Hour of Terrors, from this Hell that is come upon me. I
have, already, suffered the Pangs of Death, in the bare Apprehension. I will
never live to bear in me, and about me, a detestable Being. Hope it not; dream
not of it. By Heaven, I will not a Moment, survive my Pollution. O Mercy!
Mercy! Mercy! And, so saying, her Voice was stopped, by an Agony of Sobs and
Tears.

Charming Girl! enchanting Creature! exclaimed the deliberate Villain, every
Action, every Word, intended to dissuade, are fresh Fuel and Incitement to my
Passion for you, my Arabella. But, I see that you will not consent to my
Happiness; and that I must give you an Apology, for your Acceptance of any
Favor or Fortune at my Hands.

So saying he arose. And up she sprung at the Instant, and running to the
furthest Corner of the Room, recollected all her Spirits and Force for her
Defense. She struggled, and shrieked, and called out upon Heaven, and Earth, to
save her. But, no Help appearing nigh, she, suddenly, recollected a Pair of
long and sharp pointed Scissars that she had, in her Pocket, and, in the Moment
that Lord Stivers threw her, prone upon the Floor, she drew them forth, and,
aiming at him, with all her Strength, she almost buried the Weapon in his left
Side; whereat he gave a loud Curse, and over he tumbled gasping, and grovelling,
beside her.

Up she got, with all Haste, and, running to the Cradle where her Infant lay
crying, she caught him in her Arms; and, opening the chamber Door, softly, and
shutting it after her, she stepped down Stairs, as upon Feathers, and, stealing
to the Street Door, she opened it suddenly, rushed into the Street, and hurried
on till she came to a Stand of Coaches; where she hired the first she met,
threw herself hastily into it, and desired the Man to drive, with Speed to the
Fleet Prison.

On her Arrival, she discharged the Action and Fees of Arrest, with all
possible Dispatch, and, then, hurried up to my Apartment. On the first Glimpse,
I sprung to her, and caught her in my Arms with unspeakable Transport; but,
finding the Child with her, and observing that her Breath was quick and uneven,
I withdrew a Step or two, and looked eagerly at her; and, perceiving that she
was pale, and had a kind of Wildness in her Eyes and Motions; what is the
Matter, my Love, I cried, what has happened to you? I have not been well, she
answered, with an affected unconcern before the Keeper. But, pray come down, my
Dear, you are much wanted, and the Coach is in Waiting.

Nothing further passed, between us, till we got into the Coach, and that my
Wife desired the Man to drive to some Neighboring Street, and to stop at the
first Door where he saw a Bill for Lodgings. For Lodgings; again I demanded,
for whom does my Arabella desire to take Lodgings? For you and I Mr. Clement,
for you and I, she cried, wringing her Hands together; Lord Stivers lies,
weltring in his Blood at our House, deprived of Life within this Half Hour, by
my unhappy Hand.

I was, suddenly, struck dumb, with Surprise and Horror. All the Occasions and
Consequences, of this direful Event, whirled through my Imagination in a
fearful Succession. What must, now, become of my Soul's sole Enjoyment? what
Indignities must have been offered! what Violation might she not, or, rather,
must she not have suffered, before she could be brought to perpetrate so
terrible a Deed, I grew, instantly sick, and, putting my Head through the
Window, desired the Coachman to stop at the first Tavern. I ordered the Drawer
to nasten, with a Pint of Spanish White Wine, to the Door, and I pressed and
compelled my Wife to swallow a Part. Our Spirits being, in some Degree,
settled, thereby; we drove to a private Street, on the right Hand of Cheapside,
where I took a back Room and Closet, up two Pair of Stairs, at one Mrs.
Jennett's, an old Maid and a Mantua-maker. I, immediately, ordered a Fire to be
kindled, and the Tea-Things to be laid, and, giving the Servant a Crown,
desired her to bring the Value in proper Ingredients.

The Evening was, now, shut in; and, while the Maid was abroad, not a Syllable
passed between my Wife and me. I dreaded to enquire of what I, still, more
dreaded to understand; and Arabella seemed to labor under some mighty
Oppression; when, retiring to the Closet, where our Bed stood, she covered her
Child up warm, and, kneeling down by his Side, broke forth into a violent
Torrent of Tears, intermingled with Heavings and Half strangled Sobs.

I sat still, without seeming to observe her Emotion. I was sensible that
Nature wanted this kindly Relief. The Teas and Sugars were brought; the Kettle
put on the Fire; and the Maid, again, retired; when I, gently, called to my
Arabella to come forth, with a Voice, of the truest Love, and softest
Endearment, that ever yet breathed from a human Bosom.

Her Eyes were already wiped, her Countenance composed, and her Motions and
Demeanor much more settled, than before. She sat down with a rising Sigh,
which she checked with a Half Smile. My Arabella, said I, my only Joy! my
unmeasured Blessing! What is it that, thus, distracts my dearer Part of
Existence? Your Mind, your Spirit, my Angel, is still pure and unpolluted; and
Bodies are, merely as Bodies, incapable of Defilement, being doomed, from our
Birth, to Dissolution and Corruption.

Ah, my Hammy, she exclaimed, you are quite beside the Mark, I sigh not, I weep
not, I grieve not for myself. I fear not, nor regard the Consequences, however
fatal, of what has happened. Suppose a sudden and shameful Death, I thank my
God for it, Death will offer me up a Victim still pure and unpolluted. But, O,
the wretched Stivers, what is now become of him? sent, so sudden and
unprovided, to his eternal Audit. Unhappy that I am! perhaps, an Instrument of
Perdition to an immortal Being. Ah, rather, that I had not been born! would I
had perished in his Stead! A Death, in the Cause of Virtue, had been my
Advocate for Mercy.

How is this? my Arabella, I cried. Is Condemnation, then, to be brought upon
the Good, because they oppose themselves to Evil? Would you have censured any
one living, except yourself, for having given you this Deliverance, by the
Death of the Ravisher? No, surely. In the daily and nightly Robberies,
Massacres, and Assassinations, that the violent machinate against the Peaceful;
is it the Fault of those, who stand in the Defense of Righteousness, that
Villains often perish in the Act of Transgression? Tell me, my sweet Mourner;
in the Sacking of a City, when the lustful and bloody Soldiery are loosed to
their whole Delight in Burnings, Rapes, Rapines, Slaughters, Howlings, and
Violations; is it the Perpetrators of all these Horrors that you compassionate,
when they happen to be crushed in the Ruins they have wrought? Meritorious, my
Arabella, most meritorious were that Hand, who should cut a whole Host of such
Infernals from the Earth; remaining Innocence and Virtue would be his Debtors
for ever. Commiseration to the Flagitious is Cruelty to the Just; and he who
spares them becomes the Accomplice of all their future Crimes.

During Tea, my Wife gave me an ample Narrative of all that happened, at our
House, while I was in Confinement. As she spoke, I was, first, Speechless, with
fearful and panting Expectation, I was, then, kindled into Fury and a vehement
Thirst of Vengeance. And, lastly, I was elevated into an aweful Rapture. I
looked at my Wife, with Eyes, swimming with Love and Veneration. I rose from my
Seat. I threw myself on my Knees before her. Adorable Creature, I cried, divine
Arabella! supreme Excellence of Women! thus let me worship, through the pure^^
of all Mediums, that GODHEAD who inspires, and delights in such Perfections!

Our Fortune was, now, reduced to very little more than fifteen Guineas. We had
no Clothes but what we wore; and we did not dare to go or send, to our House,
for others; neither to make ourselves known to any Acquaintance. We went by the
Name of Stapleton; and on the following Night, I ventured abroad, and bought,
for myself a few second-hand Shirts, with a common Gown and some Changes of
Linen for my Wife.

On the fifth Day, at Breakfast, while Arabella was casting her Eye over a
Newspaper, that she had borrowed from Mrs. Jennett, she turned suddenly pale.
What, she cried, before I could question her, accused for Robbery, as well as
Murder? that is hard, indeed. But I trust that my Lot shall not exceed my
Resignation. And, so saying, she handed me over the Paper, with a Smile in
which Heaven appeared to open.

The Advertisement ran thus -- WHEREAS Arabella Clement, alias Graves, did, on
the 15th Day of September Instant, most barbarously stab and murder the Rt.
Hon. James **** late Lord Stivers, at a House of ill Report, where she formerly
had kept a Milliner's Shop, in Fleet Street: And, whereas she did, further, rob
the said Rt. Hon. etc. of a large Purse of Money, his Gold Repeater, Snuff Box,
Diamond-Ring, etc. and did, lastly, flee for the same, as may be proved, and is
evident, from the Examination and Testimony of three concurring Witnesses. Now
his Majesty, in his gracious Abhorrence of such Crimes, does, hereby, promise a
Reward, of three hundred Guineas, to any Person who shall stop, discover, or
arrest the said Arabella, so as that she may be brought to condign and adequate
Punishment, if any such may be found for such unequalled Offenses.

O, said my Wife, I perceive that my Enemies will swear home, indeed. Their
Plunder of Lord Stivers can, no Way, be assured, save by my Condemnation. But,
be it as it may, that Providence, who overules the Wickedness of this World,
may yet give Submission a Clue to Escape its Perplexities. And, my Innocence, I
trust, will be an Equivalent to all that the World can inflict, and much more
than an Equivalent to all that it can bestow.

I now had every Thing to fear for my Arabella, as well from the interested
Villainy of the Witnesses, as from the Power of the Ministry, and the Resentment
of the Relations of so great a Man; and I looked upon her Death to be as
certain as her Caption. Had I been the First, in Remainder, to the greatest
Estate in England, I would have exchanged my whole Interest, for as much ready
Cash as would have served to convey us to some Region of Safety. But this was
not practicable, with the very small Remainder of the Wreck of our Fortune;
and, we had taken our Lodging certain at fifty Shillings per Quarter.

We appeared, as little as possible, even to the Lodgers of the House; and I
intimated, to my Landlady, that it was the Fate of many a Gentleman to be
obliged to abscond, till his Affairs could be compounded, with hard hearted
Creditors.

During the Space of nine Months, our principal Diet was weak Tea and Bread,
and, if we ventured, at odd Times, on a small Joint of Meat, it served us cold,
hashed and minced, from one Week to the other.

As my Wife did not dare to take in Work, nor I to stir abroad to look for
Employment, our chief Entertainment was the reading some old Folio Books, of
History and Divinity, which I borrowed from Mrs. Jennett, and which had
belonged to her Father.

How small must be the Cravings of simple Nature, when, a Family, like ours,
accustomed to Affluence, could subsist, in London, without murmuring, for
upward of nine Months, on less than eight Guineas. But, our Fund was, now,
exhausted to a few Shillings; and my Sword, Watch, and Buckles were, also,
gone, in Discharge of our three Quarters Rent to the Landlady. Ruin stared us
in the Face. I beheld, as it were, a Gulf, unfathomable and impassable,
opening beneath our Feet, and Heaven and Earth joining to push us down the
Precipice.

We, yet, lived, a Month longer, on coarse Bread and cold Water, with a little
Milk which we got, now and then, for the Child; but, I concealed, from my Wife,
that we had not a single Sixpence now left upon Earth.

I looked up to Heaven, but without Love or Confidence. Dreadful Power, I
cried, who thus breakest to Powder the poor Vessels of thy Creation! Thou art
said to be a bounteous and benevolent Caterer, to the Spawn of the Ocean, and
to the Worms of the Earth. Thou clothest the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts
of the Forest; they hunger, and find a Banquet at Hand. Thou sheddest the Dew
of thy Comforts, even on the Unrighteous, thou openest thy Hand, and all
Things, living are said to be filled with Plenteousness. Are we, alone,
excepted from the Immensity of thy Works? shall the Piety of my Wife, shall the
Innocence of my Infant, thus famish, unregarded and unpitied, before thee?

Ah! it is I who am the accursed Thing. Who bring Plagues upon all with whom I
am connected. Even the Labors of my Life, the Issues of my honest Industry,
have been changed, by thy Ordinances into nothing but Damage. To the
Imprisonment of my Person; to the Ruin of those who had the Misfortune to
befriend me; and to the Death, Danger, and Desolation of all whom I held dear.
I strive, in vain, with thy Omnipotence, it is too mighty for me, and crushes
me below the Center. Pour out then the Vessels of thy Wrath upon my Head, but,
on my Head alone, O just Creator! and take these Little-Ones to thy Mercy, for
they cannot have participated of the Guilt thou art pleased to impute to me.

The Night was, now, advanced, but that, which fell upon my Soul, was a Night
which would admit no Ray of Comfort, nor looked ever to behold another Morning.
I wished for Dissolution to myself, to the Universe. I wished to see the two
Proprietors, of my Soul's late Affections, now lying pale and breathless before
my Eyes. I would not have endured my Hell another Moment. I would have given
myself instant Death; but I dreaded to leave my desolate Widow, and helpless
Orphan, without a Friend, as I then conceived, either in Heaven or Earth.

My Wife had lain down, with her Infant, on the Bed. A sudden Reflection
started. My Death, thought I, may yet be useful to those, for whom alone I
could wish to live. I rose, frantically determined. My Brain was on Fire. I
took down an old Pistol, which hung in a Corner, I put it into my Breast; down
Stairs I went, and issued to the Street.

I was bent on something desperate, but knew not what. I had not gone far, when
I saw a large Tavern open beside me. I passed through the Entry, and, running
up Stairs, boldly entered the Dining Room, where a numerous Company of
Gentlemen sat round their Bottle. I clapped to the Door; and taking out the
Pistol, Gentlemen, I cried, I starve, I die for Want; resolve, instantly, to
relieve, or to perish along with me.

They all fixed their Eyes upon me; but, the meager Frenzy, as I suppose, which
they saw in my Countenance, held them silent. The Person, who was nearest,
directly took out his Purse and presented it to me. I, again, returned it to
him, and, putting up my Pistol; no no, Sir, I cried, I will not take your Gold,
I am no Robber. But, give me some Silver, among ye, to keep, awhile, from the
Grave, three Creatures who famish amidst a plentiful World.

They all, as by one Consent, put their Hands to their Pockets, and, instantly
made a Heap of upward of three Pounds. I devoured it with my Eyes. I beheld it
as a Mint of Money; and panting, and grappling at it, like a Vulture, I stuffed
it into a side Pocket; and being too full of Acknowledgment to thank my
Benefactors, by Word or Token; I burst forth into Tears, and, turning from
them, I got, once more, into the Street, without any Interruption.

I made, directly, home, and, stepping softly up Stairs, I, first restored the
Pistol to its old Station. I, then, went to the Closet, where my Wife lay,
still, asleep. I gently awaked her, by the Fondness of my Caresses. My
Arabella, I cried, I have ventured out, for the first Time; and Heaven has sent
us some small Relief by a Friend that I happened to meet. Here my Love, I said,
putting a Crown into her Hand, call the Maid, and send out for some comfortable
Sustenance; our Fast has been long, indeed.

Within a few Days, our Strength and our Spirits began to recruit, though we,
still, continued to live much within the Bounds of Temperance. My Soul, again,
settled into a kind of sullen Calm, and looked forth, though at a Distance, to
some future Dawning.

One Day as my Landlady's Bible lay shut, before me, a sudden Thought occurred.
I breathed up, to God, a short and silent Ejaculation, beseeching him to
instruct me in what I ought to do, by the Passage, upon which my Thumb should
happen to rest, on opening the Book. I, instantly, made the Venture, and found
the following Words. I will arise and go to my Father and will say unto him,
Father, I have sinned against thee, and before Heaven, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son.

Alas, I was far from imagining at that Time, that it was no other than my
Father in Heaven, who called me, and who would, thereby, have directed and
conducted me to himself.

I puzzled and racked my Memory, to discover in what I had given just Offense
to my earthly Progenitor, but, resolved, in all Events, to observe the
Admonition.

In the Dusk of the Evening, I tied my Handkerchief, Sailor-like, about my
Neck, I pulled my Wig forward, and, slouching my Hat, I slid out of Doors; and,
stooping Half double, I limped, with a counterfeited Gate, toward my Father's.
I was, duly, appriz'd that, if I knocked at the Door, or directly enquired for
him, I should not be admitted. I, therefore, walked to and again, now near, now
aloof, for near an Hour, before his Door, in patient Expectation of his
Appearance.

I had repeated this Exercise, for five successive Evenings, when the Door, at
length, opened, and a Servant, in Livery, came up and accosted me. Is your Name
Clement, Sir? Suppose it were, says I. Supposing so, replied he, I am ordered
to tell you, that my Master is well informed of all your wicked Designs, and
that, if ever you appear, again, in Sight of his Windows, he will send you to
Newgate, without Bail or Mainprize, and prosecute you to the last of the Laws
of the Land.

We parted, without another Word, and I crossed over the Way to a Chandler's
Shop. The good Woman of the House also happened to sell some small Ale, in her
back Apartments. I called for a Mugg, and requested her Company for a few
Minutes. After some introductory Chat, I addressed her, in a Manner, that I
judged most engaging for one in her Sphere. She, very freely, told me the
History of my Father and his present Family, and further, that it was his
Custom, on every Monday and Friday, to repair to the Tradesman's Club, at the
Golden Anchor in Temple-Lane, about eight of the Clock, at Night, and not to
return till about eleven.

I went Home, something satisfied with this Intelligence, as I now knew where
to find my unnatural Parent, though his last barbarous and insulting Message
had rendered me hopeless, and quite averse to any kind of Application to him.

We had now lived, three Months longer, on the last Booty, or Charity, I know
not which to call it. We were, again, reduced to the last Shilling, and, what
was still worse, our Landlady became importunate for her Quarter's Rent. My
Wife had lately requested her, to look out for some Sempstry-Work, among the
Neighbors. This she promised to do, but, purposely, declined, as she and her
Family got the Benefit of her Labor, gratis.

I began, again, to return to my former evil Thoughts. I resolved to make War
upon the whole Race of Man, rather than my Wife and Infant should perish in my
Sight. But, I reflected that it was more equitable to begin with a Father, on
whom Nature had given me a Right of Dependence; than to prey upon Strangers, on
whom, Necessity, alone, could give me any Claim.

It was Monday Night. The Clock struck ten. I took down the old Pistol, and
marched toward the Anchor. I patroled near the Place of Expectation, above an
Hour. The Night was excessive dark, and no Lamps in that Part; at length I
listened to the Sound of distant Steps, and, soon after heard a Voice cry
Murder, Murder, Robbery! Watch, Watch!

I ran to the Cry, and perceived one Man on the Ground, and another stooping,
in Act, to rifle his Pockets. I, instantly, drew my Pistol, and, striking at
the Robber's Head with my full Force, I laid him senseless on the Pavement. I,
then, gently raised the other, who was bleeding and stunned by the Stroke he
had received. I supported him, Step by Step, toward a distant Lamp, where, at
length, we arrived and found a Tavern open. I entered and ordered a Room, with
Fire and Lights; and desired that a Surgeon should be, immediately, called. The
Gentleman, whose Face was, nearly, covered with Blood and Dirt, began now to
recover his Strength and Senses. I got him to swallow a small Dram of Spirits;
and he stepped, with me, up Stairs, scarcely leaning on my Shoulder.

While we sat at the Fire, and a Napkin and warm Water were getting ready; the
Stranger grew passionate in his Acknowledgments for the Life, which he said he
owed me, and which Service he promised to recompense, to the Stretch of his
Power and Fortunes. But, when he had washed and wiped away the Blood and Dirt
from his Face; Heaven! what was my Emotion, at the Sight of an Aspect, once, so
loved, and so revered! all my Injuries and Resentments vanished, instantly,
from my Memory. I fell at his Knees, with a great Cry. Is it you, then, my
Father! my once dear, my ever dear and lamented Father! is it the Face of a
Father that I, at last, behold? I burst into Tears. I wept aloud. I,
interruptedly demanded, will you not know me? will you not own me? will not
Nature speak in you? will you not acknowledge your Son, your once beloved
Hammel, so long the Comfort of your Age, and the Pride of your Expectations?

While I spoke, my Father looked wild and eager upon me. He, at length,
recollected me through all my Leanness and poor Apparel; and, hesitatingly,
replied; I, I, I believe indeed you are my Child Hammel; and, strait, fainted
away.

END of the FIRST VOLUME.

