THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.

VOL. IV.

By Mr. BROOK.

DUBLIN: Printed for the AUTHOR, By DILLON CHAMBERLAIN, in Dame Street, facing
Fownes's Street. MDCCLXIX.

THE FOOL of Quality, OR, THE HISTORY OF HENRY EARL of Moreland.
CHAP. XVII.
WHILE Harry was speaking, Ned saw a Woman standing before one of the Windows,
and, looking earnestly at her, he gave a sudden Jump, and, dancing about;
cried, O Sir, Sir, my Mammy, my Mammy, my Mammy! there is my Mammy, there is my
Mammy, as sure as Day!

Run Ned, instantly, cried Mr. Fenton, and call James to me -- James, yonder is
the Woman who stole Ned from his Parents, have an Eye to her, do not let her
escape! Order Frank to take a Horse and go with all speed to Mr. and Mrs.
Fielding, that they may come and know, of a surety, whether Ned is their Child
or not -- Stay a Moment; as soon as you have given Frank his Orders, take the
rest of the Servants and lay hold on this bad Woman, bring her into the House
by Force, and confine her in one of the Back Rooms till Mr. Fielding arrives.
By all Ned's Account, she must be a very sad Creature, and deserves no Favor.

James went out with Alacrity upon his Commission, and, having executed Matters
with his accustomed Punctuality, he returned to the Company.

Law! Sir, cried James, it is impossible that this Woman should be Ned's Mammy
as he called her. This is some unhappy decayed Gentlewoman, as innocent of the
Fact, I dare answer, as the Child unborn. I am sorry, with all my Heart, that I
had her used so roughly. Beside, Sir, she is so deaf, that she cannot answer to
any thing of which she may be accused.

When we took her in hand she was terribly frighted. Come, says I, Mistress,
you must now give an Account of all your Wickedness. -- Ennis, says she, Ennis?
no but Enfield; five Miles beyond Enfield, with the Rev. Mr. Catharines -- I
know nothing, said I aloud, of your Enfields or your Catharines; but I tell you
that you must now answer for the Life that you have led. Dead, dead, says she,
God forbid! A dear and a good Master he was to me, I am sure; I have lived with
him these five Years; and he gave me Money enough to bear my Charges; but I
fell sick at Saint Alban's and spent all; and I have been these three Days
creeping along, and begging wherewithal to keep Life in me on the way.

As you say, James, cried Mr. Fenton, this Account seems pretty feasible; a
deaf Servant however is something uncommon; and yet I once knew a deaf and dumb
Man the most ready and apprehensive Attendant I ever saw, he would instantly
collect whatever you wanted from the Motion of your Lips and the Cast of your
Eye. Go to her yourself, Ned, and observe her more exactly; for, if what she
says has any Truth in it, it is impossible she should be your Mammy.

Ned accordingly went, but returned under evident Confusion and Difficulty. I
don't know what to think, Sir, of this Matter, cries Ned. When I look at the
Gentlewoman's Face, I could swear, twenty times over, to every Feature, but,
when I look at her Dress and Manners, I could again almost swear against her
Face.

Ned's Perplexity added greatly to Mr. Fenton's Curiosity. He got up in haste
and went in Person to inspect the Party. When he entered, he saw a young Woman
who looked very pale and sickly, but of a genteel Appearance, and neatly though
plainly dressed. She cast upon him a sensible and penetrating Look, and
courtesying to him, with downcast Eyes, Sir, says she, your Presence tells me
that you are Master here. I know not for what Offense your People have confined
me, but if it is on any Suspicion of Misbehaviour, I have here the Certificate
of a worthy Man and a great Saint, who vouches at least for the Innocence of my
Conduct. -- Here she presented him with a Paper that contained the following
Words:

I certify that the Bearer has served me upward of five Years in quality of
Housekeeper and Intendant of my Family. That she is a young Woman of
distinguished Piety and Merit, and departs, at her own Desire, on some Business
to London.

Given under my Hand, etc. MARMADUKE CATHARINES, Cl'.

On reading this, Mr. Fenton bowed and made a Motion with his Hand for her to
sit down. He then took a Pen and Paper that lay beside him, and wrote to the
Purpose, that he requested her to allow him to detain her Certificate for about
an Hour, after which he would return it, and endeavor to make her amends for
the unbecoming Treatment which his People had given her.

On casting her Eye over the Paper, she made a low Courtesy, and said, I shall
willingly attend, Sir, during your Pleasure; but hope, in the mean time, that
your Charity will afford me a Morsel or two of the Fragments of your last Meal.

Mr. Fenton then pulled a Bell, and having ordered some cold Meats and
Whitewine to be served, he bowed, and withdrew to his Company.

Ned, said he as he entered, this Woman is just as much the Empress of Russia
as she is your Mammy. Here, Mr. Clement, look at this Certificate; I have no
Reason to doubt the Truth of the Character given in it, for her Person and
Manners are every way conformable. I am sorry, at Heart, that I sent in such a
Hurry for Mr. and Mrs. Fielding; I have thereby raised a Sort of Expectation in
them, and it may be very mortifying to have that Expectation so suddenly and so
wholly defeated.

Some time after, a Coach and six frothing Horses drove up to the Door, and Mr.
and Mrs. Fielding, alighted, with a Kind of Impatience and Trepidation apparent
in their Countenance. As soon as Mr. Fenton had duly received and seated them;
my dear Madam, says he to Mrs. Fielding, I think myself very unhappy in having
given you a deal of unnecessary Trouble. My poor Ned, here, has been utterly
mistaken in the Person of the Woman whom he took to be his Mammy. The
Certificate of her certain Residence bears a Date even previous to that in
which we found him; and her Deportment is more than a thousand Testimonies
against her being of the wandering or dissolute Class of People. Be pleased,
Mr. Fielding, to look over this Certificate; I think it has all the Marks of
its being genuine.

The Moment that Mr. Fielding cast his Eye on the Paper, a well known
Character, a well known Character indeed, he exclaimed. It is the Hand of Mr.
Catharines, my Tutor, my Friend; the Man of the World, excepting yourself Mr.
Fenton, for whom I have the dearest Respect and Affection. No Question can be
made of any thing to which he sets his Affirmative.

Alas, cried Mrs. Fielding, then all the Hopes we had conceived must again be
cast aside. Here comes our Nurse too, poor Woman, in great Haste; I sent her
Word that we had found the Person whom we suspected to have stolen our Child,
and desired that she would meet me here directly.

While Mrs. Fielding spoke, Nurse entered panting and almost breathless, and,
without saluting or taking any Note of the Company, Where, she hastily cried,
where is the Boy, Madam, whom you suppose to be your Child?

Ah! Nurse, said Mrs. Fielding, we were quite mistaken in the Woman whom we
suspected to be the Kidnapper, and so that Affair is all over again.

I have nothing to say, cried Nurse, to this Woman or the other Woman; but you
must not have another Body's Child put upon you; if he is indeed your Son, I
shall know him in an Instant; I should know him from all the Children that ever
were born. Why, Nurse, cried Mrs. Fielding, eagerly, do you know of any natural
Mark, or Mole, or Spot, by which you could guess at him. He had no such Spot
upon him, Madam, but, if he be a living Boy, he has a Mark of my own making
that never will out, and that is the Reason that I never dared to tell you of
it. What Mark, Nurse, what Mark? tell me instantly, I beg you.

Why, Madam, you must know as how the Weather was very cold, it being twelfth
Day in Christmas Holidays. So you and my Master were from Home on visiting, and
I had a rouzing Fire down, and my Child stood by my Knee, being just then
twelve Months nineteen Days old, and as sturdy a Fellow, of his Age and Inches,
as any could desire to see. So the Cat, all at once, threw down some crockery
Ware behind me. Up I started, to be sure, and run to save the Vessels; but,
hearing my Child scream, I turned much nimbler back again, and found him
fallen, with his little Neck against the upper Bar of the Grate. It was well
that I didn't die on the Spot, for then he must have died too. So I whipped him
up in my Arms, but he shrieked and roared terribly. So I got some softening
Cream and spread it over the Burn, and I put a Plaster upon that again; and I
covered the Place, from Day to Day, so well with his Cap, that neither you nor
my Master knew any thing of the Matter. But the Shape of his Hurt went so deep
into my Heart and into my Memory, that, as I was saying and still say, I should
know him by it again among all the Children in all the World.

Go then, my dear Nurse, cried Mrs. Fielding, go immediately and examine if
this Boy has your Mark upon him. Is this the Master, Madam, whom you suspect to
be your Son? It is, Nurse, it is; my Heart took a liking to him the first
Moment I saw him; he too was stolen from his Parents, and may as well be my Son
as the Son of another.

Here Nurse made a hasty Step or two toward Ned, but, suddenly stopping and
turning pale, ah! Madam, she cried, I wish you would go and try yourself; the
Wound, if he has it, is just under his right Ear; for if I should find, indeed,
that he is my very Child, I shall certainly run mad on the very Spot for Joy. I
dare not try, Nurse, I dare not try for the World, said Mrs. Fielding, I am
already all of a Tremble, I know not how.

Nurse, then, plucking up a little Resolution, stepped suddenly to Ned, and
turned up his Hair; when, giving a loud Scream, she had just the Power to cry
out, my Child, my Child, my Child, my Child! and dropped down in an anguishing
Fit of Hysterics.

Mrs. Fielding, on hearing her Nurse cry out, rose hastily from her Chair, and
would have gone to embrace her Son, but, falling instantly back, she fainted
away. The poor Nurse, however, was not so happy. She broke forth, at Times,
into convulsive Peals of Laughter that made the House ring; and again she fell
into Fits of Weeping, so outrageous and bitterly desolate, as no Heart, under
the Temper of Adamant, could support.

While the Family were all in Bustle, applying Remedies to their Patients, Mrs.
Fielding recovered, and, hearing the Cries of her Nurse, she went and kneeled
down by her, and wept with her and over her while her Tears proved a seasonable
Restorative to herself.

As soon as Mr. Fielding found that his Lady was well recovered, he turned to
Ned, and, lifting his Hair, observed the remarkable Seam that the Burn had
made. It is, it is my Child! he tenderly cried. O my God, how is this? wherein
have I deserved thy smallest Notice or Regard, that thou should thus visit
me with thy Wonders, and by thy Mercies put me to Confusion of Face?

Here Ned kneeled respectfully down for a Blessing, which his Father silently
called upon him with lifted Hands and Eyes. He then raised him, and sitting
down, took him fondly to his Bosom; thou art, thou art my Son, my beloved Son,
he cried; my first and my last, the only Offspring of my Bowels. Thou shall no
more be a Wanderer, no more be a Beggar, my Babe. Thrice blessed be our
Meeting, and tenfold blessed thy future Fortunes! O that our Lives, my Child,
might be made one whole Oblation to him from whom this amazing Salvation has
come!

By this Time, the Nurse's Distemper was greatly abated, though she still
continued extremely low and feeble, and did not seem to recollect, except by
faint Glimmerings, any Matter that had passed. Mr. Fielding then proposed to
take her to Town, to the Physicians; observing that there was Room enough for
her and Ned in their Carriage, and, as Mrs. Fielding made no Exception, the
Coach was ordered to turn directly to the Door.

Poor Ned, during this Time, was as a Person who fluctuated between the dread
of leaving known and certain Enjoyments, and the Hopes of his possessing
somewhat that he had not yet tasted.

Mr. Fielding then stepped up, in a Kind of quick Rapture, to Mr. Fenton. He
caught him in his Arms; my dearest Sir, he cried, I love, I respect, I revere
you, even next to my God! What can I return you? what shall I say to you? All
that I am or have sinks out of sight from your Benefits. -- I am blessed, my
dear Sir, I am blessed beyond Expression, replied Mr. Fenton, in being made an
humble Instrument of Happiness to a worthy Man. -- O Sir, cried Mr. Fielding,
what Events next to miraculous! we came to your Door, but we were not permitted
to pass; our Carriage broke for the Purpose; you then told us of this
Foundling, but what Likelihood that among Millions he should happen to be ours?
You then proposed an Expedient for ascertaining the Persons from whom he was
kidnapped. This Expedient failed. God, however, would discover him, and had
foreordained the Means. He set upon him an indubitable Mark for the Purpose;
none knew of this but his Nurse, and she has revealed it. Had any one of these
many Circumstances been wanting, our Child must have continued a Stranger to us
for ever. Indeed, Sir, said Mr. Fenton, they are all concurring Proofs that you
are under the especial Eye of Providence. But, Sir, I fear we shall have a
heavy Loss of our Friend Ned; for, though he does not want his small Faults, he
is a worthy hearted Child, and a very pleasant Companion. O Sir, cried Mr.
Fielding, you and Master Fenton have a Right to command both him and us at all
Times. But come, Ned, take Leave, for the present, of your best Friends.

Here Ned, with filling Eyes, stepped respectfully to Mr. Fenton, and, kneeling
before him, took each of his Hands and kissed them, crying, my Father! my
Father! whereupon Mr. Fenton tenderly raised him, and, pressing him
affectionately to his Bosom, cried, God be good to you, my Son, and make you a
Blessing to your true Parents and to all your Kin!

Ned then turned to Harry, and taking him by both Hands, and looking him fondly
in the Face, O Master Harry, Master Harry, he cried, I never shall be able to
say the Word Farewell to you, my Master Harry! I was hungry and you fed me, I
was naked and you clothed me, I was a Stranger and you took me in; the whole
World to me was fatherless and friendless, when you were Father and Mother, and
a whole World of Friends to me, my true Lord and Master Harry. Are you not my
Owner, am I not your Property, your own hard bought Bargain? Did you not
purchase me with your Stripes, and with your precious Blood, and will you
suffer me to be taken away from you, my Heart's Master?

Here Harry, swallowing his Passion as well as he was able, clasped Ned in his
Arms and cried, my Brother, my Brother, my Friend and Brother for ever! then
turning to Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, and wiping his Eyes, I hope, Madam, I hope,
Sir, says he, that you will excuse my young Friend, here, for his Partiality to
a Family who have loved him long and very dearly; in a little time, to be sure,
he will love and respect you both, above all the World, though put all
together. Though I grieve to part with him, I heartily rejoice at his being
found, and acknowledged to be the Child of such worthy Parents, and I hope, I
say, that you will not be offended at his Concern for parting with his old
Friends.

No, my noble Creature, cried Mr. Fielding, we are delighted at the Proof that
he gives of his Gratitude, and at the Strength of his Attachment where he has
been so highly obliged.

O Sir, O Madam, says Ned, (kissing the Hands of his Parents) did you but know
the Value of what I lose, when I leave, when I leave -- and here he burst
afresh into Tears.

Mrs. Fielding, then took Ned in her Arms, and tenderly embracing him, cried,
we do, my Love, we do know the Value of the Family that you leave, and it is
the first and the dearest Wish of my Heart that we should all become as one
Family and as one Household. This Angel here, as you say, is your rightful
Owner, and we owe him more, on that Account, than our whole Fortune can pay,
and he shall have you as long and as often as ever he pleases; but, for this
Night, my Darling, it would be very unkind not to go with your good Nurse, your
true and loving Mammy, who has suffered so much for your sake, and her Case
requires that we should take her immediately to the Doctors.

Here Ned acquiesced, and, having taken a weeping Leave of all the Family, not
forgetting the meanest Servant in the House, he stepped slowly into the Coach,
sat down by his Nurse, and away they drove.

As soon as the Family of the Fieldings were gone, Harry withdrew to his
Chamber and locked himself in, while Mr. Fenton went to enfranchise his late
Prisoner.

He first returned her Certificate to her, and then presenting her with twenty
Guineas, he bowed and made a Motion with his Hand to the Door, intimating that
she was at liberty to depart when she thought proper.

Having looked several Times, with Silence and Surprise, now at Mr. Fenton and
again at the Money, I should be very ill deserving of your Bounty, Sir, she
said, should I attempt any longer to impose upon you. I am not deaf as you
supposed, it was only an Artifice which I made use of, when taken into Custody,
to avoid answering Questions that might have brought a worthy Family into
Disgrace. But you look so altogether the Gentleman and the kind hearted
Christian, that I think I ought to have no Reserve of any Kind toward you.

Be pleased then, said Mr. Fenton, as far as Prudence will allow, to let me
know who and what you are.

I hope, Sir, she replied, that I am very far from being what I was, otherwise
I should be the very vilest of the Vile. Wherefore, if you will allow a weakly
Woman to sit, I will tell you the whole of my short Story, with the same
Openness that I make Confession of my Sins to Him from whom, alone, I can look
for Remission.

My maiden Name was Fielding, my Father was a Gentleman of large Fortune and
good Repute; he had by my Mother a very worthy Son who inherits his Estate, and
a very unworthy Daughter who now takes the Shame of confessing her Faults
before you.

My Mother was one of the holiest of Women, and brought me up, to the best of
her Power, in her own Principles and Practice; but she died when I was in the
thirteenth Year, an Age when the Blood is in the Tide of flow, before I had
acquired a due Relish for my Duty, before the Yoke of Christ became easy or his
Burden delightsome.

My Father then provided me a Governess, a Woman well skilled in French and
Needlework, and other such shewy Matters of Accomplishment; a Woman also of
much apparent Modesty and Decorum, though inwardly of a debauched and
lascivious Disposition.

There is nothing so pernicious to the Breeding and Morals of Children as their
being permitted to keep kitchen Company, where high fed Husseys and pampered
Fellows form a Hotbed of steaming Sensuality and Guilt.

My Governess, though something elderly, took a liking to my Father's Clerk, a
modest young Man, whom, however, she had the Art to seduce to her wanton
Purposes.

In order to promote her Intrigue, in my Father's Absence, at Evenings, she
used to procure Collations, and after we had eat and drank, to propose Plays
and other Matters of innocent Merriment, as she called them.

The Chief of our Men Servants was one Guilliam Rampant, the Butler, a comely
robust Fellow, and one in whom my Father had placed great Trust.

One Night, as we were playing at Hide and Seek, this Man watched the Place
where I sought to conceal myself, and coming softly and suddenly to me, he
caught me up under one Arm, and running with me to a distant Apartment, he
there ruined me.

A false Shame did not permit me to say any thing of the Matter, and the
Villain had, afterward, the Insolence to threaten me that, if I did not admit
him to further Familiarities, he would tell what had passed, and expose me to
the Family.

At length, both the Governess and I proved with Child, of which the
Housekeeper, in private, informed my Father; whereupon my Governess was turned,
with Infamy, out of Doors, and I was locked up and confined in a waste Room.

On the third Day of my Imprisonment my Father entered, and having examined me
with a stern though sedate Severity, on my Knees, and with a Flood of Tears, I
confessed the whole Affair.

The Butler was then sent for. Guilliam, said my Father, if you do not directly
marry this Strumpet, I will hang you for a Rape, but, if you marry her, I will
give you two hundred Pounds to set you going in some poor Way, on Condition
that I never see the Face of either of you any more.

The last Terms were immediately complied with. A License was sent for. We were
married in my Father's Presence. The Money was paid down, and we were directly
turned into the Streets.

Upon this small Fund, and about a hundred and fifty Pounds more which my
Husband had saved of his Vails and Wages, he set up a gaming Tavern to which
there was great Resort; and as he was a very bold, sensible, and enterprizing
Man, he became extremely agreeable to Numbers of his Customers, among whom
there were many Persons of Fortune and Distinction.

At length the Time of my Labor approached. I lay, for a Fortnight, in Agonies
that admitted of little Intermission. My Child died within me, and was brought
into the World Piecemeal.

I languished, for three Months after my Delivery, without being able to quit
my Bed; and the Remembrance of the Pangs and Miseries that I endured caused me
to vow, within myself, that I would never more have any Commerce with Mankind.

On my Recovery, therefore, I daily rejected the Caresses of my Husband, and,
every Night, I bolted myself into my Chamber, whereupon he began to behave
himself with great Coldness and Distance toward me, and to frequent the Company
of common and lewd Women.

In about fourteen Months after my Marriage, my Husband had a Run of Dice
against him, whereby he lost to the amount of fifteen hundred Pounds; and as he
had not wherewithal to discharge the full Sum, he determined, at all Events, to
pay to the last Penny of his Debts of Honor, as he called them. Hereupon he
began to raise Contributions on the Public, and, after several very bold and
successful Exploits, his Person became notorious, and he was taken, from amidst
his right-honourable Associates, at a Gaming-table in London, conveyed to
Newgate, tried, convicted, and executed at Tyburn.

Upon this, all our Substance was immediately seized by Creditors, or by the
Officers of the Crown; and I was turned into an unknown World, without any
Thing to sustain me, save a few Shillings in my Pocket, and the single Suit of
Clothes which I happened to have on my Back.

I forgot to tell you, my dear Sir, that my worthy but afflicted Father had
died before this Period; and this ought to have been the greatest of
Afflictions to myself; but the Season of my Feelings was not yet come, and I
barely dropped a slight Tear, without any Sense of Remorse for having been, in
all likelihood, his principal Executioner.

As my Brother was now the only Person, upon Earth, to whom I had any Right to
apply for Support; I accordingly went to his House with an anxious beating
Heart, and sent him in a written State of my very deplorable Case. But his
Answer was, that, if ever I should again appear before his Doors, he would take
me up, as a Vagabond, and transport me to the Plantations.

Wholly desperate, by this Disappointment, and stimulated almost to Frenzy, my
Blood boiled in my Veins. The horrid Thoughts of Vengeance could alone assuage
my raging Spirit; and I resolved to compass my Ends by Poison, by Dagger, or
any the speediest Means. For I looked upon my Brother as a Robber who had
despoiled me of my Title to my Father's Affection and Inheritance.

For this accursed Purpose it was necessary to get near him. I sold my Clothes,
and having disguised myself in the Dress of a Charwoman, I engaged as a Servant
in a Cellar over the Way.

From this Place I observed an Infant of about two Years old, who, at times,
was brought to the Door by the Hand of his Nurse; and I learned that he was the
only Child of my Brother, and that the Lives of his Parents were wrapped up in
him.

Here I conceived I had found an Object on whom I might execute my Revenge,
with better Safety to my own Person, and greater Torture to my Adversary, than
by any other Method that Invention could supply. I therefore couched on my
Watch, like a Lioness for her Prey, and spying the Child alone, I shot across
the Street, caught him up in my Arms, and away I flew.

I hastened with him as fast as I could till I reached the Fields. I then got
under a Ditch, and stripped him of his gay Raiment which I folded in a
Handkerchief; and having cut in Pieces an old Petticoat, and tacked it about
him, I made my way to a Cabin where they sold small Ale and Spirits, and there
took up my Lodging for the first Night.

I believe, Sir, I am the greatest Instance, that ever was, of the Length to
which human Nature can go in Reprobacy, when abandoned of God, and unvisited by
his gracious Motions in the Heart. The strong Bent which my Mother had given me
to Religion caused me only to recoil with the greater Force; and, when my
Father cast me off, I even reproached my God, and was at Enmity with him for
having suffered me to fall into my first Offense against Virtue.

I was yet urged and carried further down the Hill of Perdition, by the Example
of the licentious Set of Profligates that daily and nightly frequented my
Husband's House, insomuch that, in time, I began to relish their Profaneness,
and my Tongue as well as Ear, at length, became accustomed to Oaths and
Execrations; a Vice, of all others, the most unnatural, most shocking, and
abhorred in our Sex.

In fine, I became an Alien and even an Enemy to all Goodness; and I would
willingly have been a Party in any Kind of Wickedness, save that of personal
Prostitution, and this I avoided merely for fear of a second Childbirth, which
I dreaded more than I dreaded the Torments of Hell.

How pitiable, then, must have been the Case of the unhappy Infant who had
fallen into my cruel Gripe. I often suffered him, on purpose, to weep for
Hunger, and then would lash him for crying, that I might please myself, as it
were, with the Miseries of my Brother in the Person of his Child.

For four Years and nine Months I led a wandering and mendicant Life, in which
Trade my little Nephew grew very successful and useful to me, so that I began
to abate of my Severity toward him. Detested by my Relations, and outcast from
the World, I cared for nothing but Self, and nightly indulged my Appetite with
the best Victuals and Liquor that my Pocket could afford, from the Issues of my
own Petitions and of those of my fellow Traveller.

One Day, having passed through Enfield, where I had raised some petty
Contributions, I spyed an Infant on a Bank, at a Distance from any House, and
instantly the Project occurred of exacting the larger Charities by his Means. I
looked about, and thinking that I was not observed, I caught the Child up and
ran off with all my Speed. But I had not gone far, when I heard a Man shouting
after me, and perceived that I was pursued. Thereupon I cast down the Child,
with my Pouch of Provisions, and leaving little Ned behind me also, I made the
best of my Way through the opposite Thicket.

As my Terrors continued, I continued to run, till I was all in a glow and
faint with Fatigue, but still keeping forward, though slower and slower, God
conducted me within Sight of the Parsonage House of Mr. Catharines, which I
reached with much Difficulty, and then sunk away on the Threshold.

I knew nothing further of what passed till I found myself in a warm though
coarse Bed, with one Woman holding a Bottle of Salts to my Nose, and another
presenting me with a Cordial. I looked about and found myself something
revived, but, on the Sight of some Meat which was brought to me, I again
fainted.

Within some Hours after, I was seized with Pains in all my Bones, and fell
into a raging though intermitting Fever. Mr. Catharines, who was Physician to
the Bodies as well as Souls of all his Flock, visited and prescribed for me,
and had me attended with great Humanity.

On the third Night, I dreamed that an invisible Hand came and, seizing me by a
single Hair of my Head, hurried me aloft, through the Regions of the Air, till
it held me right over a fiery Gulf, in the Pinnacles of whose Flames a Variety
of Demons appeared to hover, the Horridness of whose Figures was indescribable
to Ears of Flesh and Blood. They all seemed to struggle toward me, and to
stretch forth their Fangs to receive me, while my Husband, Guilliam Rampant,
ascended swiftly in the Midst, and, rushing up with a Pair of Sheers, cut the
Hair that withheld me in twain, so, down I thought I fell, and, giving a great
Shriek, I awakened to Darkness and inexpressible Horrors.

Though no Light was in the Room, my conscious Spirit supplied the Office. All
my Transgressions arose minutely and distinctly to Memory. They appeared
substantially, as so many Fiends, within me and round about me; and I fell into
an Agony that threw me into a Fit.

I awoke again before Morning, but without any Abatement of my Terrors or
Desperation. The former Objects continued to present themselves before me, and,
no longer able to support Existence, I groped about for a Knife, or other
Instrument of self-Destruction, for I said, to myself, perhaps Death may bring
Rest to the Weary and Overladen, or, at least, afford some Respite before the
fearful Judgment of final Condemnation. So, finding no other Means that suited
my desperate Purpose, I grasped my Neck in my Hands, and exerted my Force to
strangle myself; but Nature proved repugnant to the Completion of an Office
against herself, and I sunk from my Agonies into a second Fit.

On the breaking of the Day Mr. Catharines entered, but, as the Room was
darkened I did not know who he was. He approached my Bed, and taking hold of my
Hand, he sighed and said, you are very ill, poor Woman, exceeding ill, indeed;
you have more Need of a Physician for your Soul than your Body; if you please
then I will kneel down and pray with you and for you, that God may receive your
departing Spirit.

O no, Sir, I cried, I cannot pray; even to hear a Prayer would be worse than
Hell to me. I have no God, no Savior, they have long since departed from me; I
am a Sinner to whom Hope can never come; Omnipotence itself can do nothing for
me; I feel that, if God would, he cannot save me, except he were to create me
over again.

And he can create you over again, cried the good Mr. Catharines; even in this
Instant he can make you a new Nature and a new Creature; he can save you from
all your Sins by an inward Salvation, by pouring the Abundance of himself into
your Bosom.

O Sir, I exclaimed, you do not know how vile I am. Even now I am in Hell; the
Fiends have the Property and Possession of me. O, if any single Soul were to
suffer, for everlasting, what I suffered last Night, better it were that
Creation had never been.

Here I recounted to him my Dream, with the Agonies that I felt, and my Attempt
to destroy myself; when the comforting Saint cried out, good Hopes, good Hopes!
very excellent Hopes, indeed. These are strong and blessed Compunctions. I see
that the Savior of Sinners is determined not to lose you. Be of good Cheer!
here, take this Julap to recruit your wearied Spirits, that you may be able to
lay open the Woundings of your Soul to the ministering Physician of your dear
and loving Lord.

But, do you think, Sir, said I, that there is any Hope for me? Hope, cried he,
there is Assurance, more stable than the marble Foundations of the Earth. God
is all Love, he is nothing but Love, he never rejected Any that once turned
unto him. His Incarnation, his whole Task and Business upon Earth, his
Sufferings and Crucifixion, his Agonies and Death were chosen, and embraced by
him for the love and sake of Sinners. It is in the Regions of sinning Nepthali,
in the Darkness and Shadow of Death, that the Light of the loving Jesus
delights to spring up. But, come, my dear Sister, tell me who and what you are.
Lay open, with Truth and Honesty, the manifold Distempers of your Sin-sick
Soul; your Weakness, your Poverty, your Nakedness, your Pollutions, your
Errors, and your Emptiness; and He, who shines in Darkness, will descend into
you, my Sister, and will be your Strength, and the Riches of pardoning Mercy to
you; and will cover your Nakedness, and purify your Pollutions, and turn your
Errors into Rectitude, and your Emptiness into the Fullness of the Joy and
Glory of your God!

Here I made him a full Recital of all the Passages of my Life, as openly but
much more minutely than I have done to your Honor. Never was Man so affected.
He groaned, he sobbed aloud, he wet his Handkerchief with his Tears as though it
had been drenched in the River.

As soon as I had concluded, do you not know me then? he cried, (breaking
afresh into Tears) do you not know me, Mrs. Phaebe? know you not Marmaduke
Catharines, your Brother's Tutor and your Tutor, the Man from whose Lips you
used to imbibe Instruction with so much Avidity? Ah, had I stayed, nothing of
this would have happened; but your Brother got me presented to a rich Living
here, and so I left my Vineyard and the Fruits thereof unguarded; Oh that
accursed Rampant! I left my Lamb to the voracious and remorseless Wolf! -- From
your Infancy, Mrs. Phaebe, you were the Darling of my Affections; the Day did
not seem to shine in which I saw you not. Your Smiles cheered my Spirit, and
your unaffected Graces played round my Heart.

Your Brother, too, saw and approved my Passion for You. What Happiness did he
not propose to himself in our Union! We will be Brothers, he cried, my
Catharines, folding me fast in his Arms, we will be Brothers in Reality as well
as Inclination.

But those blissful Prospects soon vanished away. You were seduced, my
Daughter, you were seduced from your Duty, from your God and your Lover. Your
Brother writ me an Account of your fatal Falling away; and I spent my Nights in
Tears, and my Days in Anguish.

Ah, how you are altered, even in Person and Aspect, I could not have known you
again. Sin has taken away the Innocence and Sweetness of your Countenance, and
spread a Cloudiness and Stain in the Place thereof. But, you are returned, my
Child, you are returned to Virtue and Piety, to yourself and to your God, and
he will once more beautify you, and make you, as the King's Daughter, all
glorious within, and deck you with living Saphirs, even the morning Stars of
the Preparation of the Appearance of Jesus!

While the holy Man spoke, the nether Millstone of my Heart began to dissolve,
my Agonies and Terrors departed from me; my Breast began to heave with a kindly
though sad Emotion, and a Torrent of Tears greatly eased my Distemper both of
Body and Mind.

Mr. Catharines, as I afterward learned, on hearing of my doleful Miscarriage,
had vowed to himself, in secret, never to have Commerce with Womankind.

A widowed Lady, however, of large Fortune and liberal Education, but much
advanced in Years, happened to reside in the Neighborhood. She was first
caught by the simple though affecting Piety of his Discourses from the Pulpit.
She visited and was visited by him. She was then further charmed by the Luster
of his Sentiments, the Sanctitude of his Manners, and the Sweetness of his
Disposition. Sir, said she to him one Day, I am, by Birth, a Foreigner, and
neither have Children, nor any Relation of my Blood in this Kingdom who, on my
Decease, may put in for a Title to my Fortune. I blush not to tell you that, if
I were young and beautiful, you are the Man of the World whom I would have
chosen for my Husband. But my Defects take nothing from your great Merits. You
are as precious in my Eyes as if I were deserving of you; and I am desirous of
making yo umy Own for Life, provided you swear to me, before the nuptial Knot
is tied, that my Fortune, my Company, and my Obedience are all that ever you
will require from me in Right of our Marriage. You shall live, and shall be as
an only Son to me; and I will have for you, at once, all the Duty of a Wife and
the Tenderness of a Mother.

I am not insensible of what Gibers may say, respecting the Impropriety of
certain Appetites at my Years; but I trust, by my Conduct, to disabuse their
Opinion, and to cause all Occasion of stumbling, in my Neighbor, to cease.

In the mean Time, my two capital Prospects will be compassed by this Scheme,
the One, of giving myself a legal Title to your Company; the Other, of giving
You a legal Title to my Fortune.

A Proposal, for such a Species of Marriage; answered exactly to Mr.
Catharines's Vow of Celibacy. The Lady, though considerably upward of Sixty,
shone in all the Graces and Attractions of Youth, excepting only those personal
Allurements to Concupiscence, toward which Mr. Catharines had resolved on an
Aversion; He could therefore form no rational Objection to the Scheme; and,
within a few Weeks, they were privately married.

While I wept, as I told you, Sir, under a kindly Remorse for my manifold
Offenses, Mr. Catharines kneeled down and poured forth his Prayers beside me,
with an Elocution so warm, and so deeply affecting, as entered and searched
through my Heart and my Reins, and seemed to tear out, by the Roots, all the
Evil that was in me.

As soon as he had ended, and that I had thanked him, with Words half
suffocated, for the Graciousness of his Consolations, Mrs. Catharines came in.
Would you then, Sir, said she, would you monopolize all the Charities? will you
not suffer a Sister near the Throne of Grace, who may assist in the under
Services to the Servants of our Master?

My Dear, said he tenderly, I was about to request your Presence. Here lies on
the Bed of Sickness, and perhaps of Death, the Daughter of my Patron, the
Sister of my Friend, and once the dearest Object of my Affections and Prospects
for Life. Pray order a Chamber for her more becoming her Station, and my Debts
to her Family.

She, instantly, went out with Alacrity, and without Reply, and, within a few
Minutes, several female Servants entered who, gently wrapping me in the Clothes
wherein I lay, conveyed me to a Bed ready sheeted and warmed, that stood in a
small but decent Apartment.

As soon as I was placed, Mrs. Catharines came up, and stooping, tenderly
kissed me and said, God be very gracious unto you, my Daughter!

Here I was treated with an Attention and Delicacy, that joined with my evil
Deeds to put me to utter Shame. However, I began to recover apace, and within a
few Days was able to sit up.

On the seventh Night I had a very singular Dream or Vision which will never
depart my Memory, and which, I trust, through Life and Death, will preserve its
happy and comforting Influence upon me.

Methought I walked, with vast Crowds of fine and merry People, along a Road of
a gentle and pleasant Descent, made easy to the Foot like the Mall in London.

On a sudden, my Husband Guilliam Rampant stood beside me. I surveyed him with
a Delight that I had never known before. He seemed to surpass in Beauty all the
Persons around us; his Garments were embellished with Gold and Gems, and his
Countenance shone with a wonderful Luster.

Come, Miss Phaebe, said he, gracefully taking me by the Hand, come with me to
yonder Paradise, where I will weave a Garland for you of never fading Flowers,
and treat you to Fruits of a heavenly Flavor. Immediately, a vast Garden opened
its Blooms and incomparable Beauties to my quickened Imagination. The Odours
thereof perfumed the Air far and wide, and the burdened Trees reached forth
Fruits of irresistible Temptation.

My Husband then plucked, and gave me to eat of the Clusters of the Grape and
Apples of the Pine, which I seized and devoured with an intemperate Relish;
when, happening to look down, I perceived that he had got the Legs and Hoofs of
a Goat, and it instantly occurred that he could be no other than the Tempter of
our first Parents. Terrified almost to Death, I did not dare to speak out; but,
lifting up my Heart in a secret Prayer, He and his Paradise immediately
vanished.

At once I found myself in a vast and dreary Wilderness, whose Trees were
barren of Fruits and the Brambles of Berries; through which there was no Path,
and from whence there was no Outlet. Go on what Side I would, I had scarce made
my way through one Thicket when I was presented with another; till, being spent
with Fatigue, I despaired of any Deliverance, and sat me down to die.

Soon after methought Mr. Catharines approached, in mean and beggared Apparel,
but with a majestic and stern Countenance. Wretch! he cried, are you at length
come to a Knowledge of the Evil of your Ways? are you now come to a Sense of
your vile and forlorn Estate? do you find at last that I, alone, can be your
Stay and your Helper? So saying, he seized me by the Hand, and his Touch filled
my Frame with Confidence and Delight. We rose into the Air, we moved together
over a boundless Tract of Desert, from whence the Lions roared and the Wolves
bayed at us. At length we alighted at the Entrance of a narrow Path that led up
the Ascent of a mountainous Country. The nearer Side was covered with Clouds,
and blasted by Tempest, through which the farther Part seemed to gleam with a
faint Radiance that promised the rising Day.

Courage! said my Conductor, we must ascend this Mountain, in spite of all
Opposition; in spite of the Toils, the Difficulties, and Dangers; the Pains,
Calamities, Distresses, and Discouragements of the Way. No Obstacles, I cried,
shall appal or discourage me, I will rejoice in Distresses and Pains while I
have You by my Side.

Hereupon I felt wonderful Strength and Alacrity, I ran up the Ascent with a
willing and eager Pace, and proposed in a few Minutes to reach the Top. But,
alas! I was widely out in my Account. The Way became straiter, and steeper, and
rougher. I began to fail through fatigue, and the edged Flints tore my Feet and
marked my Footsteps with Blood. Ah! Sir, I cried, this is very grievous,
indeed. Peace, said he, it is very salutary; these Flints are your kindest
Friends, your truest Physicians; and the Wounds that they give your Body will
be more than the Balm of Gilead to the healing of your Soul. I then summoned
all my Powers and proceeded, though with much Anguish, which often compelled me
to lean, with all my Weight, upon my Companion.

At length we came to a Pass that was thick set and interwoven with Briars and
Thorns, and, seeing no way, I made a full Stop. Good cheer, cried my Guide,
this must also be traversed, there is no quailing now, you must endure to the
End, my Daughter. The Thorn was pronounced a Curse to the first Adam and his
Posterity, but your second Adam has made it a Wreath of living Brightness;
These, accordingly, are appointed to twist the Garland of your Blessedness, and
to make you a Partaker of their Crown of eternal Glory.

Revived by this Promise, I rushed into the Midst, and struggled to get
forward, though screaming with Anguish; but, when the Thorns rent my Skin, and
entered into my Body and Soul, and lodged their Stings within me; I could
endure no longer; but, casting myself on my Conductor, O that Death, that
Death, I cried, would put an End to my Sufferings! He then turned and smiled
upon me, and, taking me under his Arm, bore me harmless through the Remainder;
then, seating me on a Bank, he placed himself beside me.

While I sat, still panting with Pain and Fatigue, He bent forward, and pulled
off his Sandals. I then saw the large Wounds that the Spike had made. My Spirit
instantly told me that it was my Lord, himself, under the Form of his Minister.
I threw myself prostrate before him. My Bosom opened wide; and taking hold of
his Feet, covered with Dust as they were, I pressed them to my Heart and would
have thrust them into my Soul; when, on their Touch, I felt such an ecstatic
Transport, that, if I had not awoke, my Body could no longer have retained my
Spirit, it must instantly have issued to Him who breathed it.

The Consolation of this Dream greatly strengthened and restored me, and I
hastened to get up that I might delight myself with serving the Servants of my
Benefactors.

When Mrs. Catharines rose, she found me busied in the basest Employments of
the Kitchen. She looked astonished. Why, my Dear, she cried, would you demean
yourself in this Manner? O, Madam, I replied, I beseech you to leave me to my
own Conscience, it tells me that even this Office is much too honorable for me.

When Breakfast was ready, Mr. Catharines came in from his Morning's Walk of
Meditation. As he entered I cast myself before him and, clasping his Knees,
cried, How blessed are the Feet of him who brings good Tidings of Salvation
to Sinners! but, above all, blessed is he who bears in his own Person the
Image and Impression of the Prince of Peace! Being much surprised and abashed
at my Manner of Salutation, he demanded the Reason of it, and I told my Dream,
whereupon they were so affected, that they Both shed Tears of tender
Congratulation.

I have already told you, Sir, that Mr. Catharines was Physician to the Bodies
as well as Souls of all his Parishioners; I might have added, to all the
Country about him.

For this Purpose, he provided a little kind of Apothecary's Shop where he kept
all Manner of Drugs for the Sick, as well as Matters of Surgery for the Sore
and the Wounded. On these Occasions I became his principal Deputy and
Assistant. I was, myself, often astonished at the Effects of my Application in
this Way. I scarce remember an Instance wherein I failed of Success. A Spirit
of Healing seemed to accompany my Walks. I have frequently cured Those who were
given up as irrecoverable by the Doctors and Surgeons. And I never had such
heartfelt Delight as when, on my Knees, I bathed the Feet of the Sick, or
washed the Ulcers of the Beggar; for in Them, methought, the great Physician of
Sin-sick Souls lay before me, who had healed my own Woundings, and done away my
Transgressions.

I should have told you, Sir, that when Mr. Catharines heard that I had stolen
and dropped my little Nephew, the only Child of his best and most beloved
Friend, He, that very Day, dispatched a Number of Emissaries to Enfield, and
throughout all the adjacent Country, with Orders to make the most diligent
Search and Enquiry after him; but, alas! all our Pains and Solicitudes, both
then and afterward, proved fruitless; this cost me, Day and Night, secret
Deluges of Tears, and served to imbitter the happiest Life that otherwise,
perhaps, could be spent upon Earth.

About three Months ago Mrs. Catharines began to decline, and peaceably
dropped, like over-ripe Fruit, into the Lap of ourgeneral Mother.

Mr. Catharines had often desired my Permission to write to my Brother in my
Favor; but, conscious of the Injury that I had done him in the Person of his
Child, I had hitherto declined the Proposal. At length, however, I determined
to throw myself at his Feet, and confess my Guilt, though without any Prospect
of obtaining his Pardon; perhaps, said I, he may think on some more successful
Means for the Discovery of his Son, than we have yet hit upon. My Benefactor
approved of my Resolution; he wrote a Letter to my Brother by me; and within a
few Days, I set out in his Chaise for London.

On the Road, I took it into my Head once more to make Trial of my Brother's
Nature, and to present myself before him as an Object of his Charity. For this
Purpose I dismissed the Chaise at St. Alban's. I also sent back my little
Baggage with an Account of my Project in a Note to Mr. Catharines, and retained
nothing but this poor Garb that I have on.

On that Night I was taken suddenly and extremely ill of a Cholic, and could
keep nothing on my Stomach for the six following Days. I sent to London for a
Physician, who attended and prescribed for me; and, by the time I was able to
creep abroad, what with Fees to the Doctor, the Apothecary's Bill, and a still
more exorbitant Bill from the Landlord, I had scarce three Sixpences left to
bear my Charges to the City. With that Sum, however, I set forward on Foot;
but, finding myself still very weak and sickly, I was tempted to repine for not
having brought more Money from Home, but, again, I remembered that my Master
had told me that Sufferings were the best Friends and Physicians to such a
Sinner. I was, therefore, content and pleased to be once more reduced to the
lowest State of Beggary, and, after three Days sore Travel, God was pleased to
conduct me to your charitable Door.

This, Sir, is the Letter which my Friend wrote in my Favor to my Brother. You
see it is open, but, before you read it, I ought to account to you, for some
Touches of uncommon Tenderness, which Mr. Catharines has expressed toward me.

Some Weeks after the Funeral of his Lady, He and I stood chatting in the Front
of the House. The Evening was exceeding pleasant, and the Maids sat singing and
milking the Cows before us; when the great Bull, suddenly tearing up the Ground
with his Feet, ran furiously at his Master. On seeing him approach, I shrieked
and rushed into the House, but, observing that Mr. Catharines did not follow, I
turned and ran as precipitately out again. There I saw that the terrible
Creature had pinned him up, between his Horns, against the Wall, at which he
butted with all his Force.

Then, casting Fear aside, I sprung up and, seizing the Bull by one of his
Horns, would have torn him away from my dear Protector. But, my Strength not
availing, I caught his Ear in my Mouth, and bit it through and through, while I
endeavored to tear out his Eyes with my Nails. In the mean time, a little
favorite Mastiff, scarce bigger than two Fists, came happily out, and leaping
up caught the monstrous Animal by the Nose, whereupon he gave a hideous Roar
and, flinging away, ran kicking and leaping about the Yard.

I remembered nothing more till I awoke from a Swoon, and perceived that Mr.
Catharines sat beside me. He held one of my Hands, which he had washed with his
Tears, and which, at Times, he pressed to his Lips, and again to his Bosom.

When he had prevailed upon me to swallow a Spoonful of Cordial, O my Phaebe,
my Phaebe, he cried, you have this Day offered up your precious Life, a Victim,
for the Preservation of Mine, and, from this Day forward, my Life, and all that
I am, is your Property for ever. But tell me, my Phaebe, whence could you get,
in a Moment, such astonishing Intrepidity, how attain to the Power of acting
against Nature, the constitutional Terrors and Delicacies of your Sex? Ah, Sir,
I replied, the Book of Life tells us, that perfect Love casts Fear away.

From that Time Mr. Catharines earnestly pressed me to Marriage. My first, and
my last, and my only Love, he would say, you know that in Womankind I can love
nothing but You. Your whole Image, your every Feature is impressed upon my
Soul; I am already wedded to them, they are inseparable from my Being. Why then
do you wish to have me cast forth from my Species, as a withered Branch,
without any kind of Fruit, without One, the least little One, to bind us up
together, and carry us down to Posterity? O, Sir, I would then say, let not our
Nuptials be sullied by any Gloom or Regret; let me first be reconciled, if
possible, to my Brother, and then dispose of me as you please, it is your Right
so to do.

I THANK you, Madam, said Mr. Fenton, I thank you for your very affecting and
still more edifying Narrative; and I will endeavor to recompense you for the
Trouble that I have given you by being the Bearer of very happy Tidings. Your
little Nephew has lived with me almost ever since you lost him. He has received
an Education becoming his Family, and was this Day discovered and restored to
his Parents.

My God, my Christ, she exclaimed, what a Wonder is here! how are blind and
erring Mortals, wilfully blind and wilfully erring, deserving of such a Clue as
this to guide them? My Nephew alive and well, discovered and restored this very
Day to his true Parents! -- I am confounded, I am crushed to the Center beneath
the Weight of thy Benefits, O, thou overflowing Fountain of Mercy and Grace!

Now, Madam, said Mr. Fenton, now it is at your Election to reveal or suppress
the Affair respecting your Nephew. I know, Sir, she replied, you proposed this
only to try me; I desire no Advantage from Fraud or Disguise, and, could I be
so base, this Letter, as you will find, would detect and betray me.

Mr. Fenton then unfolded the Letter, and read as follows:

TO EDWARD FIELDING, Esquire
Friend and Brother of my Soul,
I Have often reproved and always detested that cruel and impious Custom of
casting off our Friends, or Kindred, on account of their Errors or Frailty, or
even of their Fall from Honor. This Custom is more especially condemnable and
pernicious, when it affects the more tender and more pitiable Sex; the
Indiscretion of their nearest Parents begins the Alarm; the World follows and
increases the Cry; the Wretches, like marked Deer, are driven forth to the
Hounds, and must speedily become a Prey to Famine and Death, or for ever be
precluded from any Return to Virtue.

Had You, my dear Brother, had you given that Charity to your only Sister which
you slightly throw to a common Beggar, you might have saved her Soul alive, and
have continued a happy Parent of a promising Son at this Day. She resented your
Treatment, She rent your Child from you, you merited the Motive, but I am
grieved at the Consequence.

As God has been pleased wonderfully to restore your Sister to Virtue, she
would rejoice to restore your Son to you; but it is not in her Power, he
strayed from her within some Miles of this Place; we have used all possible
Means to recover him, but in vain; and his Loss has cost her Seas of Tears,
and Years of Anguish.

Receive her, then, as a precious Pearl from the Bottom of the Deep, as a
Casket of Gold and Jewels recovered from Shipwreck; She was dead but is alive
again, she was lost but is found. Receive her then, I say, as an Angel of God
sent on Purpose to effect your own Salvation.

I know not how it comes to pass that great Sinners often become the greatest
of Saints, and, in a Year, a Month, a Day, exceed in Growth and Stature a long
Life of leisurely Righteousness. Their Bows, as it should seem, being strongly
bent the adverse Way, they dart forward with the greater Strength and Rapidity.
It is even so with our precious Phaebe. She is become a gentle Flame of the
divine Loves and Charities. While she stands upon Earth and Bends, in her
Lowliness, beneath all Creatures, the Moon of changeable Things is put under
her Feet. She treads, as it were, upon the Stars of the Galaxy; and I behold,
at a Distance, and revere the Glory of her Steps.

Receive her then, I say again, as the dearest Boon and Blessing that Heaven
can bestow. But, O, restore her to me; give her to me, according to Promise,
that she may assist to conduct me to that Kingdom of little Children whereof
she is a blessed Inhabitant at this very Day.

Yours, etc. M. CATHARINES.


You see, Sir, said Mrs. Phaebe smiling, you see that Mr. Catharines must be a
Lover, by the Extravagance of his Praise. I see, Madam, said Mr. Fenton, that
he deservedly loves; and greatly deserves also to be beloved. But, Madam, if
you will be ruled by my Advice, you will stay here till your Brother shall call
upon me, which I expect he will do in a very little Time. Mean while I will
introduce you to a Sister-Saint, who has been long tried and refined in the
hottest Furnace of Affliction.

The very next Morning Mr. Fielding rode to the Door, attended only by a single
Servant. As soon as he had saluted Mr. Fenton, and sat down, he took out a Note
for 2000 l. and presented it to him. You must not refuse, Sir, said he, to
relieve my Distress, by accepting this in Part of what I owe You. I can spare
it, without the smallest Inconvenience. I have lately recovered a Tract of Land
that lies contiguous to Mr. Catharines, the worthy Man of whom you heard me
speak Yesterday; so that I shall soon have the Pleasure of taking Possession of
a considerable Accession to my Fortune, and, at the same Time, the greater
Pleasure of embracing so very dear a Friend. This Sum, Sir, said Mr. Fenton,
comes very seasonably to the Relief of a Person for whom I have conceived an
extraordinary Esteem and Affection, a Person who is entitled to my best
Service, and who may also be entitled to your further Munificence. So saying,
Mr. Fenton rose, went to the Door, took Mrs. Phaebe by the Hand, and leading
her toward her Brother, this Sir, said he, is the Gentlewoman of whom I spoke,
and whom I recommend to your tenderest Regards.

Mr. Fielding looked earnestly and inquisitively at his Sister, changed Color,
and, for a while, sat mute with Astonishment; when, suddenly rising, and
stepping hastily to her, he clasped her in his Arms, and cried aloud, my
Phaebe, my dearest Phaebe, my long lost, long sought, my long lamented Sister!
have I found you at last, are my Prayers at length heared, and are you once
more restored to my Bosom, my Sister! Ah, what must have been your Sufferings,
what have I not suffered myself, from the stinging Recollection of the
Barbarity of my Behavior? But, at the Time that you applied to me, I was
exasperated against you, by being told you had turned out a common Prostitute;
and, from your Connection with that Reprobate to whom my Father had unhappily
married You, I was ready to believe the worst that could be reported concerning
You. Pardon me, however, my Phaebe, do but promise me your Pardon, and I will
endeavor to compensate for my injurious Treatment of You.

Here, the Sister dropped on her Knees, and, breaking into Tears and Sobs,
replied, you want no Pardon, my Brother, you never wronged me. -- I deserved
all Sorts of Evils; they were due to my Transgressions -- but I have injured
you, I fear past Forgiveness, my Brother. -- It was I who stole your little
Darling, who robbed you of your only Child, and caused you so many Years of
Sorrow and Bitterness. -- I deserved it, I deserved it at your Hands, exclaimed
Mr. Fielding; let us then exchange Forgiveness, my Phaebe, for our Child is
restored to us, and we remember our Sorrows no more. So saying, his Eyes
filled, and, tenderly raising his Sister, he took her again to his Bosom.

Mr. Fenton, wholly melted by this passionate Scene, took them jointly in his
Arms, and then silently seated them opposite to Each other.

My Sister, said Mr. Fielding, you have promised me your Pardon, before you
were acquainted with the Extent of my Faults. Our dear Father, in his last
Illness, made me sit by his Side; when, heaving a deep Sigh, he thus begun. I
fear, I fear, my Son, that I have greatly wronged your Sister. I grieve at
Heart that I had her married to that Ruffian Rampant. With a little less of
Severity and more of tender Admonition, she might have arisen from her Fall;
she might have returned to Virtue and Honor; her Errors might have been
forgotten, perhaps restored to Rectitude; She might have been less wretched,
and my Days might have been longer. She was young, she was artless and obvious
to Seduction. I, myself, joined to betray her, by that she Wolf whom I
appointed the Guardian of my Lamb. Perhaps, as she affirmed, her Inclination no
way concurred with the Force that was offered her. We ought, as far as
possible, to have covered her Shame; Shame only serves to bronze over a bashful
Countenance, and make it altogether Shameless. Alas, my Child, all Things
appear quite different, at my Death, from what they did during my Lifetime;
and the Pride of Blood, and the Resentment for injured Gentility give Place to
the Calls of Nature and the Feelings of Humanity.

I intended your Sister five thousand Pounds, but by my Will I have cut her off
with a Shilling, lest the Villain, her Husband, should come in for any Share of
our Substance. Wherefore I leave You, in my Place, at once the Father, the
Brother, and the Guardian of my dear Child -- and here his bursting Tears
prevented another Word.

As soon as he was more composed he proceeded. I adjure you, my Son, in the
Name of our common Father, in the Name of that God to whom I am going, I adjure
you, I say, to keep a constant Watch over the Conduct of your still precious
Sister, my Son! and (if such a One may be found) to keep in Fee some discreet
and pious Matron, who may insinuate into her Acquaintance, and gain her
Confidence, and preserve her from a further Progress in the Paths of Vice; for
O, the Soul of my wrecked Child, at this Hour, is infinitely precious in my
Eyes.

I further enjoin you that, in case the Reprobate, her Husband, should perish
by Sword or Pistol, or by the Gallows, as is most likely, you will pay your
Sister the Sum of three thousand Pounds, but gradually at first, as her
Necessities may crave, and the Whole, on your Assurance of her Return to Virtue.

While her Brother was speaking, Mrs. Phaebe, had thrown her Apron over her
Face, and by her Groans and passionate Sobs prevented his Proceeding. At length
she exclaimed, Wretch, Parricide that I am! I have cut short the sacred Life of
him who brought me to the World. You then loved me, my Father, you still
continued to love me, though I knew it not; and I have murdered the kindest,
the tenderest of Parents, but I will die to make Atonement, I will not survive
you, my Father!

Mr. Fielding then arose, and stepped affectionately to his Sister, and taking
her in his Arms, and mixing his Tears with hers, endeavored to console her.
You did not, my dearest Sister, you did not murder him, he cried; you accuse
yourself of Faults of which you are no way guilty. Our Father was aged, and
labored under a Complication of Disorders that must, shortly, have put a
Period to all that was mortal in him. Be comforted then, I say be comforted, my
Sister!

When Mr. Fielding had resumed his Seat, and that the Violence of his Sister's
Passion had subsided, he looked earnestly and tenderly at her. I will, said he,
my Phaebe, at some other Time, account to you for the Motive of my Barbarity
toward you, and how I was imposed upon by the very Person whom I kept in pay to
give me Intelligence concerning you. But tell me how it comes to pass that, in
my Life, I never saw you look so charmingly? even during your infant Years, you
never had such a sweet Simplicity, such a heavenly Childishness of Countenance
as you now have. It is, said Mr. Fenton, because she is the King's Daughter,
she is all glorious within, and the Loveliness of her Spirit informs and shines
through her Aspect. -- But here is a known Character that will fully clear up
the Matter. -- And so saying, he presented him with the Letter from Mr.
Catharines, when, at the Sight of the Superscription, Mr. Fielding gave an
Exclamation of Surprise. -- Then, unfolding, he read it in deep Silence, but by
Fits, and Interruption; frequently putting, and long holding his Handkerchief
to his Eyes.

As soon as he had finished -- Yes, yes, my dear Catharines, my Brother, he
cried, the Wish of my Heart shall be accomplished for us both. You shall have
your Phaebe restored to you, and she shall be restored to you with Benjamin's
Portion, even a double Portion! -- But, O my God, how wonderful, how miraculous
is all this! to have my only Child, and my only Sister, at once restored to me
by one and the same Hand! Teach me, teach me, Mr. Fenton, by some new Method of
Gratitude, to express a Part of the Sense of what I owe you!

You have already, Sir, cried Mr. Fenton, done and said by much too much upon
that Head, and have thereby given me great Pain instead of Gratification. The
Payment that I get is a Treasure hidden from all Men, save him to whom it is
given. I will not, however, do you the Offense to return you your Bill, but
shall dispose of it in a Manner that, I trust, will be nearly as equitable.
Mean while, my dear Friend, I most cordially congratulate you on the signal
Evidences that have been given of the Favor of your God to you, and of his
watchful and intending Providence over You and Yours. I suppose you will soon
set out, with your amiable Sister here, on your Visit to your Friend and
Brother the worthy Mr. Catharines. I shall heartily pray for a blisful Issue to
the Union of the sainted Pair, and I request you to favor me with a Call on
your Way.

Within an Hour after, Mr. Fielding set off for London, on Horseback; and Harry
accompanied his Sister, in Mr. Fenton's Post-chaise, upon a short Visit to his
Friend Ned.

As soon as they were departed, Mr. Fenton took Paper, and wrote the following
Letter to Mr. Catharines.

Reverend and dear Sir,
ALLOW a Stranger, but a very warm Lover of yours, to felicitate you with his
whole Heart on the Success of Affairs. Our precious Phoebe was received with
Transport by her Brother, and you cannot be more impatient than he is for your
Union. He generously presented me with the enclosed Bill for 2000 l. merely
because God had appointed me an humble Instrument for doing him some little
Matter of Service. Though I determined not to accept of any Part thereof, yet I
dreaded to grieve him by an avowed Refusal. I therefore restore it to you and
your Phaebe, as a Matter of Equity next to that of returning it to himself. It
is surely full as proper that your Family should take charge of that wherewith
Providence had been pleased to entrust them, as that I should be encumbered
with the disposal thereof. And indeed, my dear Sir, I am already burdened with
more Trusts of this Nature than, I fear, I shall be able duly to account for.

That your Heart may always continue where your true Treasure is already laid
up, is the Wish of, dear Sir, etc.

When he had folded and sealed his Letter, he took Bills from his Pocketbook
to the amount of 1300 l. and, on Harry's Return from London, presented them to
him. Here, my Dear, said he, here is what will enable you to be more than just
to your Engagements, it will enable you to be generous also. And I desire, my
Harry, in Matters of Charity, that you may never stint the sweet Emotions of
your Heart; for we have enough, my Child, and we are but the Stewards of the
Bounty of our God.

Here Harry's Speech was stopped, but his Silence was more eloquent than a
thousand Harangues. He suddenly threw his Arms about his dear Dada, and, hiding
his Face in his Bosom, he there vented the Tears of that Pleasure, Love, and
Gratitude, with which he found himself affected.

On the Afternoon of the following Day Harry and Arabella went to drink Tea
with the Widow Neighbourly, who received them with a Countenance that spoke an
uncommon Welcome. Some other Company had arrived before them, and rose on their
Entrance. When All were again seated, Mrs. Neighbourly, very affectionately
questioned Harry concerning his Dada.

On hearing the Name of Master Fenton, an elderly Gentlewoman started. Pray,
Madam, said she eagerly, is this Master Fenton, the Son of that noble Gentleman
who lives on the Hill? He is, Madam, said Mrs. Neighbourly. My God! exclaimed
the Stranger, can this Suckling be the Father of the Orphan and the Widow? Is
this He who goes about turning Sorrow into Joy? Who wipes the Tears from the
Afflicted, and heals the Broken of Heart? Permit me then, thou beloved Child of
the Father which is in Heaven, permit me to approach and throw myself at the
Feet of my Preserver!

So saying, she rose with a rapturous Motion, and, dropping at Harry's Knees,
she clasped his Legs and kissed his Feet, before he could prevent her.

Poor Harry, much to be pitied, sat astonished, abashed, and distressed to the
last Degree. At length, recollecting, and disengaging himself with Difficulty,
my dear Madam, he cried, you hurt me greatly, what have I done that you should
put me to so much Pain?

Babe of my Heart, she cried, I am the Wife of your Vindex, your own Vindex,
whom you redeemed from Beggary and Slavery; whom you restored to his wretched
Partner, whom you restored to his infant Daughter; All pining and perishing
apart from Each other, but now united by you, my Angel, in Joy and Thanksgiving.

Here, her Words were suffocated, and throwing herself back in her Chair, she
was not ashamed to give Way to her Tears, and putting her Handkerchief to her
Face, she vented her Passion aloud.

Harry then rising, and going tenderly to her, put his Arms about her, and
kissed her Forehead, and then her Lips. You owe me nothing, my dear Mrs.
Vindex, said he, I am still greatly in your Debt: I was the very naughty Boy
who brought your Misfortunes upon you. But I am willing to make you Amends, and
that will do me a great Pleasure, instead of the Punishment which I deserve.

The Tea-table was now laid, and Mrs. Vindex grew more composed; when her
Husband entered, leading his Daughter by the Hand, a very pretty little Girl of
about six Years old. Harry instantly sprung up, and running, and throwing
himself with a great Leap upon him, he hung about his Neck, crying, how glad I
am to see you, my dear Mr. Vindex! Boy of Boys, cried Vindex, am I so blessed
as to have you once more in my Arms!

The Company then rose and saluted Mr. Vindex, and congratulated him on his
Return to his ancient Habitation. But Harry took him aside, and having
cautioned him, in a Whisper, not to take any Notice of what should pass, he
stole a Bill for 160 l. into his Hand, saying softly, it is good first to be
honest, so there is what I owe you. And here also is a small Matter for your
Daughter; I did not know, till now, that we had such a sweet little Charge in
our Family. So saying, he slipped to him another Bill of 50 l. and then,
turning from him, stepped carelessly to his Seat, as though nothing had
happened.

Mean time the astonished Vindex was greatly oppressed. He did not dare to
offend Harry by any open Intimation of his recent Bounty, and yet he could feel
no Ease till the Secret should be disclosed. He therefore stole softly to the
Back of our Hero's Chair, where, unperceived of Harry, he displayed the Bills
to the Company, beckoning, at the same time, in a way that forbad them to take
any Notice; then, raising his Hands over his Head, and lifting his Eyes toward
Heaven, he blessed his Benefactor, in a silently ardent Ejaculation, and,
taking an empty Seat, joined in with the Company.

While they were in Chat, the little Susanna slipped, unnoticed, from beside
her Mamma, and veering over toward Harry, she went on one Side, and then on the
other, and surveyed him all about; then, coming closer, she felt his Clothes,
and next his Hands, in the Way, as it were, of claiming Acquaintance with him.
At length, looking fondly up to his Face, she lisped and said, Me voud kiss Oo,
if oo voud ask me. Indeed then, said Harry, me vill kiss oo, fedder oo vill or
no. And so, catching her up on his Knee, he pressed her to his Bosom, and
kissed her over and over again.

You All see, cried Mr. Vindex, it is not One of the Elders with whom our
Susanna has fallen in love. My sweet Babe, cried Mrs. Vindex, her little Heart
instinctively led her to her best Friend, to the One of All living who best
deserved her Love. Miss Susanna, said Mrs. Clement, put me in Mind of some very
delicate Lines in Milton, respecting our Virgin Mother. For she also refused to
kiss the loveliest Man that ever was created, at least till she was asked.

-- "And though divinely brought,
"Yet Innocence and virgin Modesty,
"Her Virtue and the Conscience of her Worth,
"That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
"Not obvious, nor obtrusive, but retired,
"The more desirable."
It is happy, said Mrs. Neighbourly, for our weakly and over-affectionate Sex,
that God has been pleased to fix a Monitor within us, who struggles against our
Inclinations, who fights against our Affections, and is, with Difficulty, won
over to acquiesce in our Desires. I know not else, what might become of the
most of Womankind.

But then, said Mrs. Vindex, are we not rather to be pitied, that, even when
our Propensities are warrantable, we are prohibited, by Custom, from giving any
Intimation thereof to the Object. While the licentious Reprobate, Man, roves
and riots at large and unreproved, beyond the Pale over which it is Treason for
us to look.

I do not pity you, Ladies, said Mr. Vindex, I do not at all pity you on
Account of any Restraints, that Custom has laid you under, respecting Chastity,
or its Environs, called Decorum. The Chastity of Woman is the only Basis upon
which the Order, Honor, and Peace of the World can be built. It twists the
sacred and endearing Chord of Society. Without it there could be no Amity, no
Brotherhood upon Earth. But then, surely, there is much Respect and Tenderness
due to those from whom such Advantages are derived. Whereas I have observed, on
the contrary, that the most Amiable of your Sex are generally mated to Tyrants;
to Men who, being born and appointed their Protectors, pervert every End of
Nature and Duty, and treat with Injury, Contempt, and Insult, the gentle Saints
whom they should have cherished with their most respectful Endearments.

The Question yet occurs, said Arabella, whether your Devils of Husbands find
us Angels, or make us Such. Tyrants are like Files, they serve to smooth and
polish whatever they are applied to. I was once in Company with a Man who was
called the Saint-Maker, he had married five Shrews, in Succession, and made
Grizels of every One of them before they died.

But pray, Ladies, said Harry, are there no Tyrants among the Wives? I lately
took a Walk to Tower Hill, and, growing hungry, I turned in to a little Shop of
Groceries. A slender skinny Woman, of about four Foot high, stood behind the
Counter, and taking out a Sixpence, I threw it on the Board, and desired her to
give me the Value in Almonds and Raisins. She had scarce weighed my
Merchandise, when a huge jolly looking Quaker came up to the Hatch Door, but
seemed fearful of opening it. The Moment the little Woman had cast her Eye
toward him, she exclaimed, in a shrill and exasperated Accent, Art thee there,
thou Rogue, thou Hangdog, thou Gallows-faced Vagabond? when, gathering up the
whole Dignity and Importance of his Person, and clapping a Hand on each Side,
he cried, with an undaunted Air, -- I tell thee, Mary, I fear thee not! -- Ah,
thou Villain, she vociferated, dares thee then appear in my Presence? get thee
back to thy Fellows and Husseys on whom thee spendest my Substance! still,
however, he kept his Ground, and courageously repeated -- I tell thee, Mary, I
fear thee not! -- Not fear me? Sirrah, Sirrah, not fear me, says she, we shall
see that in a Twinkling. So saying, she whipped up the measuring Yard, and
skudding round the Counter, she flew to the Door. But he was already vanished
as fast as his fat Sides would let him. And, to tell you the Truth, Ladies,
there was something so authoritative and tremendous in the little Body's Voice
and Manner, that I was glad to get out and to skamper after him.

The Company laughed heartily, and Mr. Vindex added: I forget the Hero's Name,
a great General he was, and I think a Frenchman. He won every Battle abroad,
but was sure to be beaten in his Turn also, as often as he returned Home to his
Wife.

Well said Hercules and the Distaff, cries Harry; but to the Point, the bravest
Man I know is one Peter Patience, a Currier, who lives in the Suburbs. My Tutor
and I were walking one Day through Islington, when we perceived the Likelihood
of a Scuffle at a Distance.

As we approached, we saw one Man making up, with great Fury, to Another who
would have avoided him, and who, retiring backward across the Street, parried
his Blows, and kept him off as well as he could. His enraged Adversary would
then have closed in upon him, but, grasping his Shoulder with a long and very
strong Arm, he still held his Enemy aloof, who nearly spent all his Efforts and
Blows in the Air.

Never did I see so living a Representation of Heaven and of Hell as was
visible in the Faces of those two Men. The Muscles of the One were frightfully
distorted, his Eyes shot fire, and his Mouth frothed with Madness: While the
Countenance of the Other was as a Lake, in a Summer's Evening, that shows
Heaven in its Bosom, and reflects all the Beauties of Nature around it.

Be quiet, Ben, he said, you know that I would not hurt you, you know that I
love you. What a Fool the Man makes of himself, are you not sensible that I
could demolish you with a single Blow, but I cannot find in my Heart to do it.
Be quiet, Ben, I say, I see you want to vex me, but I will not be vexed by you, my
dear Ben.

While the gentle Peter was thus expostulating with his exasperated Friend,
Mrs. Patience, as it should seem, had seen all that passed from an upper
Casement, and flying down Stairs, and rushing out at the Door, she seized her
Husband, behind, by the Hair of his Head, and tore and cuffed away at a
terrible Rate.

Poor Peter, finding himself thus between two Fires, gave a slight Trip to his
male Assailant who, instantly, fell with his Shoulder against the Pavement,
and, rising with Difficulty, limped homeward, muttering Curses all the Way.

Then Peter, turning meekly to the Lady Mistress of his House, Gatty, my Love,
says he, what have I done to provoke you? -- O, she cried, you mean spirited,
Hare-hearted, Milk-liver'd Poltroon; I Will teach you what it is to suffer every
Fellow to pommel you! -- Sirrah, Sirrah (and still she cuffed) I Will have you
tied down at the Foot of the Market Cross, with Notice on your Breast, for All
who pass to p -- s upon you.

Then, quite angry to see the Man so abused, to whom I had taken such a Fancy,
I rushed in between Man and Wife, and seized Mrs. Patience by both her Hands;
but wrenching One of them from me, she gave me a round Cuff on the Side of my
Head. I was, however, too well used to Cuffs to matter that much; and so,
catching one of her Hands in both of mine, I gave her a Pluck to me, and a Foot
at the same time, and laid her on the Broad of her Back in the Kennel.

My Friend Peter looked quite astonished at this, and fearing what might happen
to me, on the rising up of his Wife, he tucked me like a Gizzard under the Wing
of a Turkey, and off he scoured with me down the Street, while Mr. Clements
also made pretty nimbly after us, for Fear, as I suppose, that Mrs. Patience,
when on her Legs, might take him for One of our Company.

As soon as we had turned a Corner, and were out of Harm's Way, honest Peter
set me down. My Friend, says I, if you would be advised by me, you will not be
in a mighty Hurry to get back to your Wife; I see a House of Entertainment
yonder, and I wish to be further acquainted with you. Adad, said he, you are
the boldest little Body that ever I knew; you performed a Feat, to Day, that
made me tremble for you. Had any other Man though used my Wife so -- but I pass
that Matter over; I see you're too great a Hero to be threatened by any One,
and I should consider that you did what you did for my Sake.

So saying, we all went into a Sort of a Tavern, and, being shown to a little
Parlour, I called for a Pint of Whitewine.

As soon as we were seated, I took my new Acquaintance very lovingly by the
Hand. My dear Friend, said I, I have conceived a great Respect and Fondness for
you, and should be glad to know who and what you are. I am a Currier by Trade,
Sir, and my Name is Peter Patience. You are Patience itself, indeed, said Mr.
Clement, but your Wife, as I think, has taken the whole Trade of the Currier
into her own Hands.

Peter laughed and replied, She is a dear and a sweet Girl as ever lay by the
Side of a Man, and she loves me as she loves her own Soul. Her Blows were sweet
Blows to me, they were the Blows of her Affection. For, though I did not matter
the Strokes of my Friend Benjamin a single Philip, yet every one of them went
to her Heart, and she wanted to frighten me from ever taking the like again.

But pray, says I, how happened the Quarrel between you and your Friend
Benjamin, as you call him? Why, there it is too, said Peter, he also beat me,
out of his downright and true hearted Kindness to me.

As this is Holiday in the Afternoon, among us Trade-folk, Ben Testy invited me
to share of a Can of Flip, at the Cat and Bagpipes over the way. Just as we sat
down, Peter, says he, I am told that your Gatty is with Child; I believe it may
be so, says I. I am glad of it, Peter, with all my Heart; and so now remember
that I bespeak myself Gossip. Why that may happen, says I, just as Matters
shall turn out. If the Child is a Boy, you shall be one of the Godfathers and
welcome; but if it is a Girl, this cannot be, for my Uncle Geoffry has already
engaged himself, and I have some Expectations from him. And so, says he, you
refuse to admit me for your Gossip. If it is a Girl, says I, you see that I
cannot. O, he cried, I had forgot, I was a Rascal for proposing it, You're of
high Blood, have high Relations, and so scorn to have Connexions with a poor
Tradesman like me. That is not the Case indeed, my dear Ben, but -- Damn your
Dears, says he, I will have no more of them, you are a covetous Scoundrel and
value Money more than Love. Well, says I, but will you be patient, will you
hear Reason, my Friend? Friend, Friend, says he, my Curse upon all such
Friendships! I see into you now. You're an ungrateful, unloving, cold-hearted
Villain, and I would sooner be Godfather to the Child of the Turk. So saying,
he struck at me, and repeated his Blows across the Table. But, as I saw that
his Choler was enflaming more and more, I got up and retreated, merely
intending to defend myself till his Passion should be spent upon me. But you
saw what happened, Gentlemen, which I am heartily sorry for, as I fear that my
poor dear Fellow is much hurt.

Well, said my Tutor, I have heard many Definitions, and many Disputes
concerning the Word Courage, but I never saw the Thing itself, till this Day.
Pray Mr. Peter, were you never angry? Scarce ever, Sir, that I remember, at
least on my own Account, for I do not fear any Man that steps upon Earth, and
what is it then that should make me angry? A Man may be angry, said Mr.
Clement, from other Motives sure, besides that of Fear. God himself can be
angry, and yet he cannot possibly fear.

I am feelingly assured, Sir, replied the valiant Peter, that God was never
angry in his whole Life, and that is a long Time that has neither Beginning nor
Ending. Don't you believe the Gospel, says Mr. Clement; the Scripture assures
us, in a hundred Places, of the Anger of God against impenitent Sinners. I am
the Son of a Clergyman, Sir, said Peter, and mayhap could quote Scripture as
well as Another. The Scriptures were written for Man, but how should Man
understand them, if they were not written according to his own Language and to
his own Passions? I will ask you a Question, Sir, Can you be angry at a Mite or
a Worm which you can crush into nothing at pleasure? I think not, said my
Tutor. No certainly, said Peter, because you cannot fear a thing that has not
Power to offend you. Now, all the World is but as a Worm or Mite to God, and
neither Men nor Angels can disturb or affect him with any thing, except
Delight, on their Acceptance of that Happiness which he desires to give to all
his Creatures.

Ay but, says Mr. Clement, you see that God's Anger and Indignation was so
great against Sin, that nothing could satisfy for it save the Death of his
beloved Son. Ay but, says Peter, the Scripture, which you quote, tells you that
it was not his Anger but his Love that sent him to us. For God so loved the
World (a very sinful World indeed) that he gave his only begotten Son to take
his Death upon the Cross. And I am as fully assured, as I am of my own Being,
that the same gracious God, who has already redeemed poor Sinners, would
willingly redeem the poor Devils also, if they could but find in their Hearts
to desire his Salvation.

Here, catching and clasping his Hand, my dear Peter, says I, I embrace and
wish from my Heart that your Doctrine may be true. I have many Tutors, Mr.
Peter, and my Dada pays them all with Pleasure for the Instructions that they
give me. Tell me then, Mr. Peter, what must he give you for the Lesson which
you have taught me? What Lesson, my Hero? a very precious Lesson, says I, a
Lesson that will always teach me to despise myself for a Coward whenever I
shall be angry.

Peter then sprung up, without speaking a Word, and hugged, and clasped, and
kissed me with all his Affections. Then, plucking a Button from the upper Part
of my Coat, I will accept of this Token, my Darling, says he, and will look at
it, many a time in the Day, for your Sake.

But Mr. Peter, says I, I think it would be my Advantage to keep up an
Acquaintance with you, and this cannot be so well done, while your dear Gatty
is angry with me. You must therefore promise me to carry a Token to her also,
as an Olive Branch of that Peace which I want to be made between us. I will, my
Love, says he, I never refuse to give or accept the Favors of a Friend. You
must be upon Honor then, not to reject what I offer You. I am upon Honor, he
said.

I then slipped Something into his Hand, at which he looked and looked again;
and then cried out, from the overflowings of a good and grateful Heart, You are
either of the Blood Royal, or ought to be so. For the Man was very poor, though
so very sensible and well descended, and so he looked upon a little as a great
Matter.

Here, Harry closed his Narration, and all the Company gathered about him, and
nearly smothered him with their Caresses, in which little Susanna came in for
her full Share.

On the following Day, Harry introduced his Friend Vindex and Family to his
dear Dada, who received them with a Graciousness that soon dispelled that
awkward Diffidence and humbling Sense of Obligations, under which the late
unhappy Preceptor apparently sunk.

As soon as it was known abroad that Mr. Vindex enjoyed the Patronage and good
Countenance of Mr. Fenton and his Family, his former Friends resorted to him,
his Acquaintance was sought by all the Neighborhood, his Credit was restored,
his School daily increased, and, like Job, his latter End was far more blessed
than his Beginning.

Within a few Weeks, Mr. and Mrs. Fielding, with their Sister Phoebe, our
Friend Ned, and a splendid Equipage, called and breakfasted at Mr. Fenton's;
and, soon after, Mr. Fenton and his Harry, with Mr. and Mrs. Clement, attended
their Visitants to St. Albans, where, All together, they spent the happiest
Night: But that this Happiness was blended, at times, with the affecting
Consideration of parting in the Morning.

For two succeeding Years and upward, little interesting happened, save that
our Hero increased in Stature and all personal Accomplishments, and had happily
got over the Measles and Smallpox. He was now nearly Master of the Latin and
Greek Languages. He could outrun the Rain-Deer, and outbound the Antelope. He
was held in Veneration by all Masters of the noble Science of Defense. His
Action was Vigor, his Countenance was Loveliness, and his Movement was Grace.

Harry, by this time, was also versed in most of the select and interesting
Portions of History. Mr. Clement had instructed him in the use of the Globes
and Maps, and, as he there led him from Clime to Clime and Country to Country,
he brought him acquainted with the different Manners, Customs, Laws, Polities,
Governments, Rise, Progress, and Revolutions of the several Nations through
which they passed. Finally, said Clement, you see, Master Fenton, that the
mightiest States, like Men, have the Principles of Growth, as likewise of
Dissolution within their own Frame. Like Men, they are born and die, have their
Commencement and their Period. They arise, like the Sun, from the Darkness of
Poverty, to Temperance, Industry, Liberty, Valor, Power, Conquest, Glory,
(OPULENCE) and there is their Zenith. From whence they decline, to Ease,
Sensuality, Venality, Vice, Corruption, Cowardice, Imbecility, Infamy, Slavery.
And so good Night!

Mr. Fenton now judged it full time to give our Hero an Insight into the Nature
of the Constitution of his own Country; a Constitution, of whose Construction,
Poise, Action, and Counteraction, the lettered Mr. Clement had scarcely any
Notion, and even the Learned in our Laws, and the Leaders in our Senate, but a
very confused Idea.

For this especial Purpose he called Harry to his Closet. You are already, my
Love, said he, a Member of the British State, and, on that Account, have many
Privileges to claim, and many Duties to perform toward your Country in
particular, independent of your general Duties to Mankind.

Should it please God to bless your Friends with the Continuance of your Life
for eight or ten Years longer, you will then be a Member of the Legislature of
GREAT BRITAIN, one of the highest and most important Trusts that can be
confided by Mankind.

Here, my Harry, I have penned or rather pencilled, for your use, an Abstract
in Miniature of this wonderful Constitution. But, before I give it, for your
Study and frequent Perusal, I would give you some Knowledge of the Claims
whereon it is founded, as also of the Nature of Man in his present depraved
State, and of his several Relations as a Subject and as a Sovereign.

Man comes into this World, the weakest of all Creatures, and, while he
continues in it, is the most dependent. Nature neither clothes him with the
warm Fleece of the Sheep, nor, the gay Plumage of the Bird; neither does he
come forth in the Vigor of the Fool or the Fawn, who, on the Hour of their
Birth, frisk about and exult in the Blessing of new Existence.

Sacred History, indeed, intimates that Man was originally created invulnerable
and immortal, that the Fire could not burn him, Stones wound, Air blast, or
Water drown him. That he was the angelic Lord and Controller of this Earth, and
these Heavens that roll around us; with Powers to see, at once, into the
Essences, Natures, Properties, and Distinctions of Things; to unfold all their
Virtues, to call forth all their Beauties, and to rule, subdue, and moderate
these Elements at Pleasure.

These, truly, were Godlike Gifts, illustrious Powers and Prerogatives, and
well becoming an Offspring produced in the EXPRESS IMAGE of an all-potent,
all-wise, and all-beneficent CREATOR.

True Sir, said Harry, but then we see nothing, now, of all this Greatness and
Glory. Man, on the contrary, is himself subjected to all the Elements over
which, you say, he was appointed the Ruler; he has every thing to fear from
every thing about him, even the Insects and little Midges fearlessly attack and
sting this boasted Lord of the Creation; and History shows, from the Beginning
of the World, that the greatest of all Enemies to Man, is Man.

This, replied Mr. Fenton, is continually to remind him of the depraved and
guilty State into which he is fallen. Man indeed is now no better than the
Remains of Man; but then these Remains are sufficient to prove the Luster and
Dignity of his original State. When you behold the Ruins of some lofty and
spacious Palace, you immediately form an Idea of the original Beauty and
Stateliness of the Structure. Even so, in our present feeble and fractured
State, a discerning Eye may discover many Traces and Fragments of MAN'S
MAGNIFICENT RUIN, Thoughts that wing Infinity; Apprehensions that reach through
Eternity; a Fancy that creates; an Imagination that contains a Universe; Wishes
that a World has not wherewithal to gratify; and Desires that know neither
Ending nor Bound.

These, however, are but the faint Glimmerings of his once glorious
Illumination; All his primitive Faculties are now lapsed and darkened; He is
become enslaved to his natural Subjects; The World is wrested out of his Hands;
he comes as an Alien into it, and may literally be called a Stranger and
Pilgrim upon Earth.

All other Animals are gifted with a clear Knowledge and instant Discernment of
whatever concerns them. Man's utmost Wisdom, on the contrary, is the bare
Result of comparing and inferring, a mere Enquirer called Reason, a Substitute
in the want of Knowledge, a Groper in the want of Light, he must doubt before
he reasons, and examine before he decides.

Thus ignorant, feeble, deeply depraved, and the least sufficient, of all
Creatures, in a state of Independence, Man is impelled to derive Succor,
Strength, and even Wisdom from Society. When he turns a pitying Ear and helping
Hand to the Distressed, he is entitled, in his Turn, to be heared and assisted.
He is interested in Others, Others are interested in him. His Affections grow
more diffused, his Powers more complicated; and, in any Society or System of
such mutual Benevolence, Each would enjoy the Strength, Virtue, and Efficacy of
the Whole.

You have Sir, said Harry, here drawn an exceeding sweet Picture of Society,
and you know I Am but a Fool and a Novice in such Matters. But, if any other Man
breathing, had given me such a Description, I should, from all my little
Reading, have withstood him to the Face. Look through all the States and
Associations that ever were upon Earth; throughout the Republics of Greece,
Italy, Asia Minor, and Others, the most renowned for Urbanity and Virtue, and
yet, what do you find them, save so many Bands of public Robbers and Murderers,
confederated for the Destruction of the rest of Mankind? what Desolations, what
Bloodshed, what Carnage from the Beginning! what a Delight in Horrors! what a
Propensity in All to inflict Misery upon Others! the Malignity of the Fiends
can, I think, pierce no deeper!

Neither is this, Sir, as I take it, the Extent of their Malevolence. For, when
any of these Bands, or States as you call them, have conquered or slaughtered
all around them, they never fail, for want of Employment, to fall out among
themselves, and cut the Throat of their very Confederates; and this puts me in
mind of what is said by the Prince of Peace, the Prince of this World comes
and has no Part in me. And again he says to the Purpose, that Fathers and Sons,
and Mothers and Daughters shall be divided against Each Other, and that a Man's
Enemies shall be those of his own Household.

I lately met with a Fragment of an epic Poem, it struck me wonderfully at the
time, and I recollect some of the Lines that contain, in my Opinion, the most
genuine, the truest Picture that ever was drawn of the state of Mankind.

"Man comes into this passing World in Weakness,
"And cries for Help to Man, -- for feeble is he,
"And many are his Foes. Thirst, Hunger, Nakedness,
"Diseases infinite within his Frame,
"Without, Inclemency, the Wrath of Seasons,
"Famines, Pests, Plagues, devouring Elements,
"Earthquakes beneath, the Thunders rolling over. him;
"Age and Infirmity on either Hand;
"And Death, who shakes the certain Dart behind him!
"These, surely, One might deem, were Ills sufficient.
"Man thinks not so; on his own Race he turns
"The Force of all his Talents, exquisite
"To shorten the short Interval, by Art,
"Which Nature left us -- Fire and Sword are in
"His Hand, and in his Heart are Machinations,
"For speeding of Perdition. -- Half the World,
"Down the steep Gulf of dark Futurity,
"Push off their Fellows, pause upon the Brink*
"And then drop after.
Say then, my dearest Father, tell me, whence comes this worse than flinty,
this cruel Heartedness in Man? Why are not All like You? Why are they not happy
in communicating Happiness? If my Eyes did not daily see it, in Fact, as well
as in History, I should think it impossible that any One should derive Pleasure
from giving Pain to Another. Can it be more blessed to destroy than to
preserve, to afflict than to gladden, to wound than to heal? My Heart wrings
with Regret for being cast into a World, where Nation against Nation, Family
against Family, and Man against Man, are perpetually embattled, grudging,
coveting, grasping, tearing every Enjoyment, every Property, and Life itself
from Each-other.

Here Harry, for a while, held his Handkerchief to his Eyes; while his fond
Uncle dropped a silent Tear of Delight, at beholding the amiable Emotion of his
Beloved.

Take Care, my Harry, rejoined Mr. Fenton, beware of the smallest Tincture of
Uncharitableness? You see only the worse Part, the outward Shell of this World;
while the Kernel, the better Part is concealed from your Eyes. There are
Millions of worthy People and affectionate Saints upon Earth; but they are as a
Kingdom within a Kingdom, a Grain within a Husk; it requires a kindred Heart
and a curious Eye to discover them. Evil in Man is like Evil in the Elements;
Earthquakes, Hurricanes, Thunders, and Lightnings are conspicuous, noisy,
glaring; while Goodness, like Warmth and Moisture, is silent and unperceived,
though productive of all the Beauties and Benefits in Nature.

I once told you, my Darling, that all the Evil which is in you belongs to
yourself, and that all the Good which is in you belongs to your God. That you
cannot, in or of yourself, so much as think a good Thought, or form a good
Wish, or oppose a single Temptation or evil Motion of any kind. And, what I
then said of You may equally be said of all Men, and of the highest Angels now
in Bliss.

No Creature can be better than a craving and dark Desire. No Efforts of its
own can possibly kindle the smallest Portion of Light or of Love; till God, by
giving himself, gives his Light and Love into it.

Here lies the eternal Difference between Evil and Good, between the Creature
and the Creator; the Spirits who are now in Darkness, are there for no other
Reason, but for their Desire of a proud and impossible Independence, for their
rejecting the Light and Love of that God, in whom, however, they live and move
and have their desolate Being.

God is already the Fullness of all possible things; He has, therefore, all
things to give, but nothing to desire. The Creature, while empty of God, is a
wanting Desire; it has all things to crave, but nothing to bestow. No two
Things, in the Universe, can be more opposite, more contrasted.

Remember, therefore, this Distinction in yourself and all Others; remember
that, when you feel or see any Instance of Selfishness, you feel and see the
coveting, grudging and grappling of the Creature: But that when you feel or see
any Instance of Benevolence, you feel and see the informing Influence of your
God. All possible Vice and Malignity subsists in the One; all possible Virtue,
all possible Beauty, all possible Blessedness subsists in the Other.

As God, alone is LOVE, and nothing but Love, no Arguments of our own can
reason Love into us, no Efforts of our own can possibly attain it. It must
spring up, within us, from the divine Bottom or Source, wherein our Existence
stands; and it must break through the dark and narrow Womb of SELF, into
Sentiments and Feelings of GOOD WILL for Others, before this CHILD OF GOD can
be born into the World.

SELF is wholly a MISER, it contracts what it possesses, and at the same time
attracts all that it does not possess. It at once shuts out Others from its own
proposed Enjoyments, and would draw into its little Whirlpool whatever Others
enjoy.

LOVE, on the contrary, is a Giving, not a Craving; an Expansion not a
Contraction; it breaks in Pieces the condensing Circle of SELF, and goes forth
in the Delightfulness of its Desire to bless.

SELF is a poor, dark, and miserable Avaritiousness, incapable of enjoying what
it has, through its grappling and grasping at what it has not. The
Impossibility of its holding all things makes it envious of Those who are in
Possession of any thing, and Envy kindles the Fire of Hell, Wrath, and
Wretchedness throughout its Existence.

LOVE, on the other Hand, is rich, enlightening, and full of Delight. The
Bounteousness of its Wishes makes the Infinity of its Wealth. And it cannot
fail of finding (without seeking or requiring) its own Enjoyment, and
Blessedness, in its Desire to communicate and diffuse Blessing and Enjoyment.

But is it not, Sir, a very terrible thing, said Harry, for poor Creatures to
be evil, by the Necessity of their Nature?

Why, answered Mr. Fenton, how do you wish that Matters should have been
managed, my Harry?

That All, Sir, at once, should have been made so wise and good, as never
possibly to be otherwise to all Eternity -- What, infinitely wise, and
powerful, and good, and happy? -- As near to infinite, Sir, as possibly could
be.

Any thing less than infinite, replied Mr. Fenton, must fall infinitely short
of it.

But, supposing that God had made his Creatures infinitely and necessarily
wise, powerful, and happy; then here would have been, as it were, an Infinity
of distinct Beings and separate Wills, unmitted by any Connection,
undisciplined and unarrayed by any Subordination; and, should any Cause of
Contention arise among them, the Universe must have been turned into a more
horrible Hell than Any that Fancy has ever yet formed.

I see, Sir, said Harry, I see, in all Lights, that my Wish was absurd,
impossible, and ridiculous.

Your Error, my Harry, consisted in this. You took the Emptiness, Darkness, and
Desire, in the Creature, to be the Evil of the Creature. They are, indeed, the
only possible Cause of Evil, in or to any Creature, but they are exceedingly
far from being an Evil, in themselves; they are, on the contrary, the only, the
necessary and indispensable Foundation, whereon any Creaturely Benefit can be
built. It is extremely good for the Creature to be poor and weak, and empty,
and dark, and desiring; for, hereby, he becomes a Capacity, for being supplied
with all the Riches, Powers, Glories, and Blessedness of his God.

As God is, every where (in and of himself) the Fullness of all possible Beings
and Beatitudes, he cannot create any thing independent or out of himself; they
cannot be but by being both in him and by him. Could it be otherwise, could any
Creature be wise, or powerful, or happy, in and of itself, what a poor and
stinted Happiness must that have been; its Blessedness, in that Case, must have
been limited, like its Being; and how infinitely, my Child, should we then have
fallen short of that eternal Weight of Glory intended for us. But God has been
graciously pleased to provide better things. If we humbly and desirously depend
upon him, we become entitled to All that he has and that he is. He will
enlighten our Darkness with his own Illumination; he will inform our Ignorance
with his own Wisdom; his Omnipotence will become the Strength of our Weakness;
He, himself, will be our Rectitude and Guide from all Error; He will purify our
Pollution; put his own Robe on our Nakedness; enrich our Poverty with the
Heartfelt Treasures of himself; and we shall be as so many Mirrors, wherein
our divine Friend and Father shall delight to behold the express Image of his
own Person, his own Perfections and Beatitudes represented for ever!

O Sir, exclaimed Harry, how you gladden, how you transport me! I shall now no
longer repine at my own Weakness, or Blindness, or Ignorance, or Insufficiency
of any Kind; since all these are but as so many Vessels prepared to contain
Pearls of infinite Price, even the Riches, the Enjoyment and Fullness of my
God. Never will I seek or desire, never will I accept any thing less than
Himself.

You must, my Child, said Mr. Fenton, you are still in the Flesh, in a carnal
and propertied World; your old Man must be fed, though not pampered; it must be
mortified, but not slain.

You read, in the third Chapter of Genesis, how our first Father lusted after
the sensual Fruits of this World; how he wilfully broke the sole Commandment of
his God; how he added to his Apostasy the Guilt of aspiring at Independence;
how he trusted to the Promise and Virtue of Creatures for making him equal in
Godhead to the Creator; how in that Day he died the fearfullest of all Deaths,
a Death to the Fountain of Life, Light and Love within him; and how his Eyes
were opened to perceive the Change of his Body into Grossness, Corruption,
Disease, and Mortality, conformable to the World, to which he had turned his
Faith, and into which he had cast himself.

Now, had Man continued in this State, his Spirit which had turned, from God,
into its own creaturely Emptiness, Darkness, and Desire, must have so continued
for ever, in its own Hell and Misery, without the Possibility of exciting or
acquiring the smallest Spark of Benevolence or Virtue of any kind. But God, in
Compassion to Adam, and more especially in Compassion to his yet unsinning
Progeny, infused, into his undying Essence, a small Embryon or Reconception of
that lately forfeited Image which, in Creation, had born the perfect Likeness
of the Creator.

From hence arises the only Capacity of any Goodness in Man. And, according as
we suppress or quench, or encourage and foster this heavenly Seed, or infant
Offspring of God within us; in such Proportion we become evil, malignant and
reprobate; or benevolent and replete with divine Propensities and Affections.

Now, Harry, let us turn our Eyes to our gross and outward Man, for, as I told
you, it must be cared for and sustained agreeable to its Nature; and it is well
deserving of our Attention; for as much as it is the Husk, the Habitation and
Temple of that Godlike Conception which, when matured, is to break forth into
never ending Glory.

Lastly, this same outward Man is further to be regarded by us, for as much as
his Infirmities, Frailties, Distemperatures. Afflictions, Aches, and Anguishes
are so intimately felt by his divine Inmate, that they occasionally excite
those thousand social Charities, Relations, and Endearments that, with Links of
golden Love, connect the Brotherhood of Man.

It is therefore worth while to enquire into the Claims and Rights of this
close, though gross Companion, at least so far as may be requisite for his
necessary, if not comfortable Subsistence upon Earth.

We find that God has entrusted him with Life, Liberty, and Strength to acquire
Property for his Sustenance. It is therefore his Duty to preserve all these
Trusts inviolate; for, as they are wedded to his Nature, what God has so
joined let no Man put asunder.

If these were not, my Harry, the natural, inheritable, and indefeasible Rights
of all Men, there would be no Wrong, no Injustice, in depriving All you should
meet, of their Liberty, their Lives, and Properties at Pleasure. For, all Laws
that were ever framed for the good Government of Men (even with the divine
Decalogue) are no other than faint Transcripts of that eternal LAW OF
BENEVOLENCE, which was written and again retraced in the Bosom of the first
Man, and which all his Posterity ought to observe, without further Obligation.

The capital Apostle, Saint Paul, bears Testimony, also, to the Impression of
this LAW OF RIGHTS on the Consciences and Hearts of all Men, where he says in
the second Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, Not the Hearers of the Law are
just before God, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified. For, when the
Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the Law,
These, having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. Which show the work of
the Law WRITTEN, IN THEIR HEARTS, their Consciences also bearing Witness, and
their Thoughts, the mean while, accusing or else excusing One another.

But Sir, interrupted Harry, I am quite astonished at the Falling-off of the
Father of Mankind. So infinitely benefitted and obliged as he was, so
necessarily dependent also on his omnipotent Benefactor; how foolish, how base,
how ungrateful, how unpardonable, as I think, was his wonderful Apostasy!
Wretched Creatures that we are! no sound Branch, to be sure, could ever spring
from so debased, so cankered a Stock.

Let us not be prone to judge of Others, my Harry. I am confident, as I am of
my Being, that had You or I been in the Case and Place of Adam, we should have
fallen in like Manner. He had an old and a very subtle Adversary to deal with.
He felt himself powerful, glorious and happy. He had no Notion that his present
State could change for the worse. He was yet a Novice in Existence. He could
form no Conception of the Depravity, Pains, and Mortality that afterward
ensued. And he was strongly tempted by sensual Objects from without, and by the
Emotions of his creaturely Nature within him. But, of this I am assured, Harry,
that, if he was the greatest Sinner, he was also the greatest and most contrite
Penitent that ever existed; as the Comparison of his first, with his latter
State, must have given him the most poignant and bitter Compunctions, and must
have caused him, with tenfold Energy, to cling to that Rock, from which he was
hewn, but from whence he had fallen.

I have already shown you, Harry, that every Man has a Right in his Person and
Property, and that this Right is natural, inheritable, and indefeasable. No
Consent of Parties, no Institution can make any Change in this great and
fundamental Law of Right; it is universal, invariable, and unalienable to any
Man or System of Men. It is only defeasable in particular Cases, as where one
Man, by assailing the Safety of Another, justly forfeits the Title which he had
to his own Safety.

If human Nature had never fallen into a State of inordinate Appetence, all
Laws and legal Restraints would have been as needless and impertinent as the
Study and Practice of Physic, in a Country exempted from Mortality and Disease.
But, for as much as all Men are Tyrants by Nature, All prone to covet and grasp
at the Rights of Others; the great Law of SAFETY TO ALL can no otherwise be
assured, than BY THE RESTRAINT OF EACH FROM DOING INJURY TO ANY.

On this lamentable Occasion, on this sad Necessity of Man's calling for Help
against Man, is founded every Intention and End of civil Government. All Laws
that do not branch from this Stem are cankered or rotten. All political
Edifices that are not built and sustained upon this Foundation, of defending
the Weak against the Oppressor, must tumble into a Tyranny even worse than that
Anarchy which is called the State of Nature, where Individuals are unconnected
by any social Band. But, if such a System could be framed, whereby Wrong should
not be permitted or dispensed with in any Man, Right would consequently ensue
and be enjoyed by all Men, and this would be the Perfection of CIVIL LIBERTY.

Sir, says Harry, I have heard some very learned Men affirm, that God, in whom
is the Disposal of all Lives and all Properties, has given to Some a Right of
ruling over Others. That Governors are his Vicegerents and Representatives
upon Earth. And that he has appointed the descendible and hereditary Rights of
Fathers over Families, of Patriarchs over Tribes, and of Kings over Nations.

In a qualified Sense, my Harry, their Affirmation may be just. All the Agents
and Instruments and Dispensers of Beneficence, whether their Sphere be small or
great, are God's true Representatives and Vicegerents upon Earth. He has given
Authority to the Tenderness of Parents over their Progeny; and he has invested
Patriarchs and Kings with the Rights of Protection. But God never gave the
Vulture a Right to rule over the Dove-cote. Never gave up the innocent Many for
a Prey to the tyrannous Few. God never can take Pleasure in the Breaches of the
Law of his own Righteousness and Benignity. Arbitrary Regents are no further of
his Appointment than the Evils of Earthquakes and Hurricanes, as where he is
said to give the Wicked a King in his Anger; and to set over the Nations the
Basest of Men.

The God of all Right cannot will Wrong to Any. His Service is perfect Freedom.
It is his Pleasure to deliver from the Land of Slavery and the House of
Bondage. He is the God of Equity and Good Will to all his Creatures. He founds
his own Authority, not in Power but Beneficence. The Law, therefore, of Safety
and Well-being to All, is founded in the Nature of God himself, eternal,
immutable, and indispensable.

One Man may abound in Strength, Authority, Possessions; but no Man may have
greater Right than Another. The Beggar has as much Right to his Cloak and his
Scrip, as the King to his Ermines and Crown Lands.

To fence and to establish this divinely inherent Right, of SECURITY TO THE
PERSON and PROPERTY OF MAN, has been the Study and Attempt of Hermes,
Confucius, Minos, Lycurgus, Solon, Numa, and of all the Legislators and Systems
of civil Polity, that ever warmed the World with a single Ray of Freedom.

But, so strong is the Propensity to Usurpation in Man; so dangerous is it to
tempt Trustees with the Investiture of Power; so difficult to watch the
Watchers, to restrain the Restrainers from Injustice; that, whether the
Government were committed to the ONE, the FEW, or the MANY; the Parties
entrusted have generally proved Traitors; and deputed Power has almost
perpetually been seized upon as Property.

Monarchy has ever been found to rush headlong into Tyranny; Aristocracy into
Faction and multiplied Usurpation; and Democracy into Tumult, Confusion and
Violence. And All these, whether distinct or compounded with Each-other, have
ended in the Supremacy of some arbitrary Tyrant, enabled, by a Body of military
Mercenaries, to rule, oppress, and spoil the People at Pleasure.

How England has come, after the many Wrecks and Ruins which you have read of
in History, to survive, to recover, to grow sounder from her Wounds, and
mightier from her Discomfitures; and to rise superior, as we trust, to all
future external and internal Attempts, has been owing to the Peculiarity of
her Constitution.

Her Constitution, it is true, is not yet quit, perhaps never ought to be quit
of some intestine Commotions. For, though Liberty has no Relation to Party,
Dissension, or Cabal against Government; there is yet a Kind of Yest observable
in its Nature, which may be necessary to the fermentation and working up of
Virtue to the Degree that is requisite for the Production of Patriotism and
public-Spirit. But, when this Yest of Liberty happens to light upon weak or
vapid Tempers, they are immediately affected, like Small-beer Casks, and rave
and boil over in an Abundance of factious Sputter and Turbulence. Party and
Faction therefore, being the Scum and Ebullition of this animating Yest, are
sure Signs and Proofs of the Life of Liberty, though they neither partake nor
communicate any Portion of its Beneficence; as rank Weeds are the Proof of a
hot Sun and luxuriant Soil, though they are the detestable Consequence of the
One and the Other.

I will endeavor to image and exemplify to you the Nature and Tendency of
these Commotions, by bringing some of our old Plays to the Memory of my Harry.

First, there is ROBIN'S ALIVE AND ALIVE LIKE TO BE, if he dies in my Hand, my
Mouth shall be bridled, my Back shall be saddled, with Sticks and Stones and
marrow-Bones, and sent to the King's black Hall.

This is always supposed to be the favorite Diversion of the Children of a
free People. Where the Stick, which is fired at one end, and handed about
through the Society, represents the Light and Comfort which they derive from
LIBERTY, and which they endeavor to keep alive, by the Quickness of
Communication and by the Supplies of their own Breath.

They all please themselves with the Assurance that Liberty is not only alive,
but alive like to be; and they denounce the most heavy and tremendous
Consequences against any who shall suffer it to expire in their Hands. Their
Mouth is first to be bridled, they must not dare to speak or even mutter their
Complaints; and, after being laden with all Kinds of Grievances and
Oppressions, they are to be led to the gloomy Receptacles of their insulting
Proprietor, there to be further dealt with according to his Pleasure.

FOUR CORNERS AND A FOOL is a most apt and animated Representation of those
personal and selfish Competitions that never fail to intrude into the freest
States. Where the Meaning and Import of the several Contests amounts to the
single Question of, Who shall be in Place? And where All, who get in, are
allowed a prescriptive Right of laughing at the Expense of Those who are kept
out.

Your favorite Play of FOOTBALL is a most perfect Image, or rather
Counterpart, of those Dissentions and Oppositions that are entitled Parties,
and which are almost peculiar to the British Constitution.

As soon as the Parties for FOOTBALL are formed, Each enters as
affectionately, as zealously, as furiously in the Interests of All, and Every
of the Posse, with whom he is connected, as though they were so many Limbs of
his proper Person. Though Townsmen, Friends, Brothers should be arrayed on the
opposite Side, it makes no Abatement of Warmth or Hostility. All Concerns of
Kindred and Country, all Memory of former Attachments are instantly cast aside,
or absorbed in the Engagement and Eagerness for Conquest. They enter upon
Action; they run, labor, sweat, wrestle. While the BALL, which each Party
endeavors to bear away from the Other, represents the PUBLIC INTEREST or
COMMONWEAL, which is tossed and bandied to and fro, and kicked about, and
almost rent to Rags in the Heat of the Contention.

It is, however, observable that, in these FOOTBALL Conflicts, there are
certain BOUNDARIES entitled GOALS, emblematical of the CONSTITUTION, within
which the Parties are enjoined to limit their Contention: And when some
extravagant and dissolute Spirits have, wantonly, born away the Ball beyond the
said Bounds, we have seen both Parties join in Pursuit of such Vagrants, in
order to recover and bring back the Ball to the regulated and appointed Sphere
of its Activity.

The pacific Institution, of WATER MY CHICKENS COME CLOCK, seems an Invention
of Eastern Policy; and calculated rather to recommend an obsequious Dependence
on Asiatic Despotism, than as any Hieroglyphic of the Freedom of Grecian,
Roman, or Gothic Commonwealths. And yet the Time may come when even in Britain,
a Minister may arise who shall have the Art and Address to bribe and corrupt a
Majority of the Legislature with the Money of their Constituents. He will
thereby be enabled to take the Lead at the Head of the Representatives of the
Nation. When, All shall follow him in implicit and orderly Procession, Each
duly and decently attending the Posteriors of him who immediately precedes in
the Arrangement.

Now, Harry, let us return to the great Object first proposed, an Object in
which you are most intimately concerned; and which, I trust, you will
invariably assert and support, even the Liberties and Claims of the Meanest of
your Countrymen.

SALUS POPULI -- PUBLIC SAFETY -- SECURITY TO THE PERSONS AND PROPERTIES OF THE
PEOPLE; constitutes the Whole of England's Polity. Her Empire is IMPERIUM
LEGUM, the Sway of Law; it is the Dispensation of Beneficence, of equal Right
to All; and this Empire rises supreme over King, Lords, and Commoners, and is
appointed to rule the Rulers, to the End of Time.

Other States, before now, have been compounded like Ours, of Prince, Peers,
and People, the One, Few, and Many united. But the Error and Failure of their
Constitution was this: The PEOPLE, who are the FOUNTAIN OF ALL POWER, either
retained, in their own Hands, an Authority which they never were qualified to
wield; or deputed it to Trustees without Account; without a provident Resource
or due Reserve of Potency, when Those entrusted with Government should be found
to betray.

The People of England, on the contrary, claim no Authority in Government;
neither in the framing, administration, or execution of the Laws, by which they
consent to be governed. They are themselves imaged and as it were epitomized,
in their three several Estates. The King represents their Majesty; the Lords
their Nobility; and the Commons, more immediately, their legislative Power. The
Constitution is the Inheritance of them and their Posterity; and theirs is the
Right and Duty, at all Times, to watch over, assert, and reclaim it. Wherefore,
as you find in History, when Any of the three Estates have usurped upon the
Others; even when All of them together have dared to violate the Frame of this
salutary Constitution; the People, to whom it belongs, have never failed, as on
the other Day's Revolution, to restore and reinstate it.

England's three Estates, of King, Lords, and Commons, are Parts of the People,
under Covenant with the People, and accountable to the People; but the People,
as a People, make not any of the said Estates. They are as a perpetual Fountain
from whence the three Estates arise; or rather as a Sea of Waters, in which
three exalted Waves should claim Preeminence; which yet shall not be able to
depart from their Fund, but, in Rotation, are dissoluble and resolvable therein.

Thus, however complicated the System of England's Polity may be, it is all
rooted in and branches from the TRUST OF THE PEOPLE, the Trust of Powers which
they have granted to be returned in Protection. And, in Truth, it makes little
Difference whether the Powers, in such Cases, be granted or assumed: Whoever
either receives or assumes such Powers, save to the Ends of Beneficence, is
equally guilty of Usurpation and Tyranny.

Government can have no Powers, save the Powers of the People; to wit, the
Power of their Numbers, Strength, and Courage, in Time of War, and in Peace, of
their Art and Industry, and the Wealth arising therefrom. Whoever assumes to
himself these Powers, or any Part thereof, without the Consent of the
Proprietors, is a Robber, and should, at least, be divested of the Spoil.

On the other Hand, if such Powers are granted by the People, the People cannot
granted them for Purposes to which they, themselves, cannot lawfully apply
them. No Man, for Instance, can arbitrarily dispose of his own Life or Liberty,
neither of the whole Product of his own Labors; forasmuch as the Lives of
himself and his Family should be first sustained thereby, and his Obligations
to Others fairly and fully discharged. He cannot, therefore, grant an arbitrary
Disposal of what he has not an arbitrary Disposal in himself. Much less can
any Man grant a Power over the Lives, Liberties, or Properties of other People,
as it would be criminal and highly punishable in himself to assail them.

Hence it follows, as evident as any Object at Noon, that no Man or Body of Men
can rightfully assume, or even accept, what no Man or Body of Men can
rightfully grant, to wit, a Power that is arbitrary or injurious to Others. And
hence it necessarily follows, that all Usurpations of such Powers, throughout
the Earth; with all actual or pretended Covenants, Trusts, or Grants, for the
Investiture or Conveyance of such illicit Powers, are null and void, on the
Execution. And that no Man, or Nations of Men, can possibly be bound by any
Consents or Contracts eversive of the Laws of God and their own Nature, of
common Sense and general Equity, of eternal Reason and Truth.

I beg Pardon, Sir, says Harry, for interrupting you once more, but you desire
that I should always speak my Mind with Freedom. You have delighted me greatly
with the Account which you give of the Benefits and Sweets of Liberty, and of
its being equally the Claim and Birthright of all Men; and I wish to Heaven
that they had an equal Enjoyment thereof. But this you know, Sir, is very far
from being the Case, and that this animating Fire, which ought to comfort All
who come into the World, is now nearly extinguished throughout the Earth.

O Sir, if this divine, this GOLDEN LAW OF LIBERTY were observed, if ALL WERE
RESTRAINED FROM DOING INJURY TO ANY; what a Heaven we should speedily have upon
Earth! the Habit of such a Restraint would, in time, suppress every Emotion to
Evil. The Weak would have the Mightiness of this Law for their Support, the
Poor would have the Benevolence thereof for their Riches. Under the light and
delightsome Yoke of such a Restraint, how would Industry be encouraged to plant
and to multiply the Vine and the Fig Tree, how would Benignity rejoice to call
Neighbors and Strangers to come and fearlessly partake of the Fruits thereof!

How has the sacred Name of All-benefitting LIBERTY been perverted and
profaned, by the Mouths of madding Demagogues at the Head of their shouting
Rabble, who mean no Other than a licentious Unmuzzling from all Restraint, that
they may ravage and lay desolate the Works and Fruits of Peace.

But Liberty, in your System, is a real an essential Good; the only Source,
indeed, whence any Good can arise. I see it, I revere it, it shines by its own
Light in the Evidence of your Description.

How is it then, Sir, that there are Persons so blind, or so bigoted against
their own Interests and Those of their Fellows, as to declaim with much Energy
and studied Argumentation against this divine, inheritable, and indefeisible
Right (not of Kings as should seem) but of Humankind?

I lately happened in Company with a Number of discontentedly looking
Gentlemen, whom I supposed to have been Abettors of the late King James, and
Friends to the arrogating Family of the Stuarts. Among them was One of some
Learning and great Cleverness, and he paraded and showed away, at a vast Rate,
concerning the divinely inherent Right of Monarchs, implicit Submission,
passive Obedience, Non-Resistance, and what not.

Our God, said he, is one God; and the Substitutes of his Mightiness should
resemble himself; their Power ought to be absolute, unquestioned, and
undivided. The Sun is his glorious Representative in the Heavens, and Monarchs
are his Representatives and Mirrors, upon Earth, in whom he is pleased to
behold the Reflection of his own Majesty.

Accordingly we find that the Monarchs, over his chosen People, were of his
special Appointment, and that their Persons were rendered sacred and awfully
inviolable, by Unction or the shedding of hallowed Oil upon them. Many
Miscarriages and woeful Defaults are recorded of Saul, as a Man, yet, as a King,
he was held perfect in the Eyes of his People. What an unhesitating Obedience,
what a speechless Submission do they pay to all his Behests! Though he
massacred their whole Priesthood, to a Man, in one Day, yet no Murmur was
heard; no One dared to wag a Tongue, and much less to lift a Finger against
the Lord's Anointed.

I own to you, Sir, that this last Argument staggered me; such an express
Authority of the sacred Writings put me wholly to Silence. Say then, my dearest
Father, give me the Benefit of your enlightening Sentiments on this Head; that
I may know, on all Occasions, to give, to all Men, an Account of the political
Faith that is in me.

It is extremely surprising, rejoined Mr. Fenton, that all our Lay and
ecclesiastical Champions for arbitrary Power, who have raised such a Dust, and
kept such a Coil about the divine, hereditary, and indefeisible Right of Kings,
and the unconditional Duty of Passive Obedience in the Subject, have founded
their whole Pile of Argument and Oratory, on the DIVINE APPOINTMENT of the
Regal Government of the Jews, as the perfect Model and Ensample whereby all
other States are, in like Manner, required to form their respective Governments.

Now, if these Champions had engaged, on the opposite Side of the Question, and
had undertaken the Argument against arbitrary Power, they could not have done
it more effectually, more conclusively, more unanswerably, than by showing that
ARBITRARY POWER was the very EVIL so displeasing to the Nature of God, that he
exhibited his Omnipotence, in a Series of public and astonishing Wonders, in
order to deliver this very People from the Grievance thereof; and, more
especially to proclaim to all Nations and Ages the Detestation in which his
ETERNAL JUSTICE holds all lawless Dispensations, all Acts of SOVEREIGN POWER
that are not Acts of PROTECTION.

Could these Champions, again, have better enforced the Argument against
arbitrary Power, than by showing that this People, so miraculously
enfranchised, but now fat and wantonly kicking under the Indulgence of their
God, had taken a Loathing to the Righteousness of the Dispensations of their
Deliverer, had rejected him (as he affirms) from reigning over them; and had
required a KING, like to the Kings of the neighboring Nations? the very EVIL
from which God had redeemed their Forefathers.

Could these Champions, further, have better demonstrated the Miseries, the
Iniquities, the Abominations of such a Government, than by reciting the
Expostulations, the tender and earnest Remonstrances of God himself, on the
Sufferings that these Rebels were about to bring upon themselves from the
Enormities of an arbitrary and unlimited Sovereignty? And, lastly, could they
have better recommended, to the Free and the Virtuous, to stand out, to the
Death, against arbitrary Oppression, than by showing the Obstinacy of these
apostate Jews, when they answered to the compassionating Expostulations of
their God -- Nay, but we will have a KING, like all the Nations, to rule over
us.

Nothing, my Harry, can be more unaccountable, more astonishing, than the
Perverseness of that stiffnecked Nation.

They daily drank the bitterest Dregs of Slavery; they had been galled by
double Chains; and had groaned under an unprecedented Tyranny and Oppression.
They cried out to their God, and he miraculously delivered them from the Land
of their Misery and from the House of their Bondage. Yet, on the first Cravings
of Appetite these Soul-sensualized Wretches desired to be returned to their
Chains and their Fleshpots; and longed to groan and gormandise in their old
Sty.

Hereupon, God gave them Flesh and Bread to the full; and he brought them into
a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and abounding with all the good things of
this Life. He made them a free and sovereign People, discomfitted their Enemies
before them; and informed their Judges with his own Spirit, for the
Dispensation of Righteousness; insomuch that every Man sat under his own Vine,
and did what was right in his own Eyes. And yet, they lasciviously petitioned
to be subjected to a State of absolute Despotism; and this, for no assigned
Reason, save because it was the Fashion; make us a King to judge us, like to
all the Nations around us.

Here God, in the same Act, approves his Attributes of Mercy and reluctant
Justice to his erring Creatures. He punishes their Rebellion by no greater a
Severity than the Grant of their Request.

And the Lord said unto Samuel, hearken unto the Voice of the People in all
that they say unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, that I should not reign over them. Howbeit, protest solemnly unto
them, and show them the Manner of the King that shall reign over them.

And Samuel told all the Words of the Lord unto the People that asked of him a
King. And he said, this will be the Manner of the King that shall reign over
You.

He will take your Sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots and to
be his Horsemen. And Some shall run before his Chariots. And he will appoint
him Captains over Thousands, and Captains over Fifties, and will set them to
ear his Ground and to reap his Harvest. And he will take your Daughters to be
Confectioners, and Cooks, and Bakers. And he will take your Fields and your
Vineyards, and your Olive Yards, even the best of them. And he will take your
Men Servants and your Maid Servants, and your goodliest young Men, and your
Asses, and put them to his Work, and ye shall be his Servants. And ye shall cry
out in that Day, because of your King which ye shall have chosen you; and the
Lord will not hear you in that Day.

Nevertheless, the People refused to obey the Voice of the Lord and of Samuel;
and they said, nay, but we will have a King over us.

And now, Harry, what do you gather from all these sacred Authorities? I
gather, Sir, answered Harry, from the express and repeated Declarations of holy
Writ, that, whoever he be, whether Sovereign or Subject, who does not wish that
all Men should be limited and restrained from doing Injury to Any, is a Rebel
to the Will of the God of BENEFICENCE, and an Enemy to the WELLBEING OF
HUMANKIND.

You have, exclaimed Mr. Fenton, You have, in a few Words, spoke the Whole of
the Matter. On what you have said hang all the Law and the Prophets.

Again, my Dear, continued Mr. Fenton, it is evident from the History, that the
Jews, themselves, did not pay the smallest Regard to the divinely hereditary
Right of Kingship. Both David and Solomon, the second and third in succession,
were established on the Throne in direct Contradiction to such pretended Right.
And on the Succession of Rehoboam, the fourth King, ten of the twelve Tribes
repented of their Submission to an arbitrary Monarchy, and required the King to
consent to a Limitation of his Authority, and to enter into a Contract with the
People.

And they spoke unto Rehoboam, saying, thy Father made our Yoke grievous: Now
therefore make thou the grievous Service of thy Father and his heavy Yoke,
which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

But, when Rehoboam, by the Advice of his sleek-headed Ministry, refused to
covenant with the People, the ten Tribes cried out, What Portion have we in
David? neither have we Inheritance in the Son of Jesse; to your Tents, O
Israel! And thus the ten Tribes revolted from the arbitrary Domination of the
Houses of Saul and David. For, as the sacred Text says, THE CAUSE WAS FROM THE
LORD.

Now, when these ten Tribes sent and called Jeroboam: he Son of Nelat, and made
him King over Israel; it is most evident that they obliged him to limit the
regal Authority, and to covenant with them for the Restoration and
Re-establishment of their Popular Rights. For, in the sixth Succession, when
Ahab sat upon the Throne, the Regal Prerogative had not, yet, so far usurped on
the constitutional Rights of the People, as to entitle Ahab to deprive his
Subjects even of a Garden for Herbs.

And Ahab said unto Naboth, give me thy Vineyard, that I may have it for a
Garden of Herbs, because it is near unto my House; and I will give thee for it
a better Vineyard; or if it seems good to thee, I will give thee the Worth of
it in Money. But, Naboth said to Ahab, the Lord forbid that I should give the
Inheritance of my Fathers unto thee. So Ahab came into his House heavy
displeased, because Naboth had said I will not give to thee the Inheritance of
my Fathers: And he laid him down upon his Bed, and turned away his Face, and
would eat no Bread.

Here, we see that the People of Israel had so far recovered their originally
inherent and hereditary Rights, that the Regal Estate had not the Privilege of
wresting, from any Subject, so much as an Herb-Garden.

This was a mortifying Circumstance to royal Elevation; but Power is seldom
unfruitful of Expedients. A Method was found of rending away Naboth's Property
(without his Consent) UNDER COLOR OF THE LAW TO WHICH HE HAD CONSENTED. He was
falsely impeached, and forfeited his Life and Inheritance together. But God, by
the signal Punishment which he inflicted, for this Breach on the natural Rights
of his People, evinced to the World how dear they are in the Eye of ETERNAL
JUSTICE.

How deplorable then, my Harry, is the Suppression of these Rights, now nearly
universal throughout the Earth. But when People, from their Infancy, and from
Generation to Generation, have been habituated to Bondage, Oppression, and
Submission; without any Tradition or Memorial delivered down to them, of a
happier or more equitable Manner of Life; they are accustomed to look on
themselves, their Possessions, and their Progeny, as the rightful Property of
their Rulers, to be disposed of at Pleasure; and they no more regret the want
of a LIBERTY, that they never knew, than the Blind-Born regret the want of THE
LIGHT OF THE SUN.

Before I give You this Paper that I have in my Hand, this Epitome or Picture
in Miniature of the incomparable Beauties of the Britanic Constitution, it may
be requisite to premise a few Matters.

Travelers, when they survey a grand Egyptian Pyramid, are apt to enquire by
whom the stupendous Pile was erected, and how long it has stood the Assaults
of Time? But, when nothing of this can be developed, Imagination runs back
through Antiquity, without Bounds; and thence contemplates an Object, with
peculiar Veneration, that appears as it were to have had no Beginning.

Such a Structure is the Constitution of Great Britain. No Records discover
when it had a Commencement; neither can any Annals specify the Time at which it
was not.

William the Norman, above seven hundred Years ago, on his entering into the
ORIGINAL CONTRACT with the People, engaged to govern them according to the
bonae et approbatae antiquae Regni Leges, the good well approved and ancient
Laws of the Kingdom, this Constitution was therefore ancient, even in ancient
Times.

More than eighteen hundred Years are now elapsed since Julius Caesar, in the
sixth Book of his Commentaries, bore Testimony as well to the Antiquity as
Excellency of the System of the Laws of Britain. He tells us that the venerable
Order of the Druids, who then administered Justice throughout Gaul, derived
their System of Government from Britain; and that it was customary for Those,
who were desirous of being versed in the said ancient Institutions, to go over
to Britain for that Purpose.

Caesar seems to recommend, while he specifies, one of the Laws that was then
peculiar to the Constitution of Britain. He tells You that, if a Woman was
suspected of the Death of her Husband, she was questioned thereupon with
severity by her Neighbors; and that, if she was sound guilty, she was tied
alive to a Stake and burned to Death. The very Law used in Britain, by a Jury
of Neighbors, to this Day.

It is, hence, very obvious that our Gothic Ancestors either adopted what they
judged excellent in the BRITISH CONSTITUTION, or rather superadded what was
deemed to be excellent in their Own.

The People who went under the general Name of Goths, were of many different
Nations, who, from the Northern, poured down on the more Southern Parts of
Europe.

Their Kings were, originally, Chiefs or Generals, appointed to lead voluntary
Armies, or Colonies, for the forming of new Settlements in foreign Lands; and
they were followed by a free and independent Multitude, who had previously
stipulated that they should share and enjoy the Possessions which their Valor
should conquer.

Next to the General, in Order, the Officers or principal Men of the Army were
attended, on such Expeditions, by their Kinsfolk, Friends, and Dependents, who
chose to attach themselves to their Persons and Fortunes, respectively; and
such Attachments gave these Officers great Power and Consideration.

On their Conquest or Seizure of any Tract of Country, a certain Portion
thereof was allotted to the General, for the Maintenance of his Person and
Household. The General then divided the Remainder among his Officers, to hold of
him, in Fief, at the certain Service of so many Horse or Foot, well armed and
provided, etc. and proportioned to the Value and Extent of the Land assigned.
And the said Officers, again, parcelled out the greatest Part of the said
Possessions, among their respective Followers, to hold of themselves, in like
Manner and Service as they held of their General.

On the Conquest of a Country, they seldom chose to exterminate the Natives or
old Inhabitants, but allotted to them also separate Remnants of the Land; and
admitted them to the common and equal Participation of such Laws or Usages as
they brought from their own Country, or chose to adopt.

Independent of the military Services above reserved, the Prince or Chief,
further, reserved the civil Service or personal Attendance of his feudatory
Officers, at certain Times and for certain Terms, at his general or national
Court. This Court was composed of three Estates, the Prince, the Nobles, and
such of the Priesthood, whether Pagan or Christian, as held in Fief from the
Prince; and, from this NATIONAL COUNCIL our PARLIAMENT took its Origin.

The feudal Officers also, on their Part, reserved the like Service and
personal Attendance, of their proper Tenants and Vassals, at their respective
Courts of Judicature. And for as much as, in such Courts, no civil or criminal
Sentence could take place, till the Voice of the Judge was affirmed by the
Court, which consisted of such as were Peers, or Equals to the Party accused;
from thence we derive our free, ancient, and sacred Institution of JURIES.

If we look back upon One of those Fief or Feudal Kings, seated high on his
Throne, and encircled with all the Ensigns of Royalty; when we find him
entitled the sole Proprietor of all the Lands within his Dominions; when we
hear his Subjects acknowledge that he, alone, is the Fountain from whence are
derived all Possessions, Rights, Titles, Distinctions, and Dignities; when we
see his most potent Prefects and Nobles, with lifted Hands and bended Knees,
swearing Fealty at his Feet; who would not take him for an arbitrary and most
absolute Prince?

Such a Judgment, however, would have been very premature. No Prince could be
more limited. He had not the License of doing Hurt to the Person or Property of
the meanest Vassal throughout his Dominions. But, was he the less powerful,
think you, for being less absolute? quite the contrary. While he acted within
the Sphere of his Compact with the People, he acted in all the Persons and
Powers of the People. Though prescribed, with respect to Evil; the Extent of his
Beneficence was wholly unconfined. He was not dreaded indeed, but, on that
Account, he was the more revered and beloved by his Subjects. He was a Part of
themselves; the principal Member of their Body. In him they beheld, with
delight, their own Dignity and Strength so gloriously represented; and, by
being the Proprietor of all their Hearts, he became the Master of all their
Hands.

O, exclaimed Harry, who would wish, after this, to be unrestrained from any
Kind of Evil? how frightful, how detestable is that Power which is not
exercised in Acts of Benevolence alone! And All, who please, may be infinite in
the Stretch of a good Will.

True, my Dear, said Mr. Fenton -- I have now, continued he, given You the
rough and unformed Rudiments of our Britanic Constitution. And here, I deliver
to you my little Model of the finished Construction thereof, as it now stands
on the Revolution just achieved by his present glorious Majesty King William.

Your Reading has informed you, and may further inform you of the several Steps
and Struggles, whereby this great Business was finally effected. It was not
suddenly brought to pass; it was the Work of many Ages; while Britain, like
Antaeus, though often defeated, rose more vigorous and reinforced from every
Foil. Of Times long passed, what stupendous Characters, what sacred Names! what
watchful Councils! what bloody Effusions! what a People of Heroes! what Senates
of Sages! How has the Invention of Nature been stretched! how have the Veins
of the Valiant been exhausted, to form, support, reform, and bring to Maturity
this unexampled Constitution, this Coalescence and grand Effort of every human
Virtue, BRITISH LIBERTY!


[Here follows Mr. Fenton's short System of the Beauties and Benefits of our
Constitution. But, if the Reader loves Amusement, preferable to Instruction; he
is at liberty to pass it over, and proceed in the Story.]

The REGAL ESTATE.
THE KING, in the Constitution of Great Britain, is more properly the King of
than a King over the People, united to them, One of them, and contained in
them. At the same time that he is acknowledged the Head of their Body, he is
their principal Servant or Minister, being the Deputee of their executive Power.

His Claim to the Throne is not a Claim, as of some Matter of Property or
personal Right; he does not claim but is claimed by the People in their
Parliament; and he is claimed or called upon, not to the Investiture of
Possessions, but the Performance of Duties. He is called upon to govern the
People according to the Laws by which they, themselves, have consented to be
governed; to cause Justice and Mercy to be dispensed throughout the Realm; and,
to his utmost, to execute, protect, and maintain the Laws of the Gospel of God,
and the Rights and Liberties of all the People without distinction. -- And this
he swears on the Gospel of God to perform -- And thus, as all Others owe
Allegiance to the King; the King himself owes Allegiance to the Constitution.

The Existence of a King, as One of the three Estates, is immutable,
indispensable, and indefeisible. The Constitution cannot subsist without a
King. But then, his personal Claim of Possession, and of hereditary Succession
to the Throne, is, in several Instances, precarious and defeasible. As, in Case
of any natural Incapacity to govern; or of an open Avowal of Principles
incompatible with the Constitution; or in Case of Overt-Acts demonstrative of
such Principles; or of any Attempt to sap, or overthrow a fundamental Part of
that System, which he was called in, and constituted, and sworn to maintain.

Though the Claim of all Kings, to the Throne of Great Britain, is a limited
and deseasible Claim; yet the World can afford no Rival, in Power or Glory, to
a constitutional Sovereign of these free Dominions.

For the Honor of their own Body, they have invested this their Head with all
possible Illustration. He concentrates the Rays of many Nations. They have
clothed him in royal Robes, and circled his Head with a Diadem, and enthroned
him on high. And they bow down before the Mirror of their own Majesty.

Neither are his the mere Ensigns or external Shows of Regency. He is invested
also with Powers, much more real than if they were absolute.

There are three capital Prerogatives, with which the King is entrusted, which,
at first sight, appear of fearful and dangerous Tendency; and which must
infallibly and quickly end in arbitrary Dominion, if they were not
counterpoised and counteracted.

His principal Prerogative is to make War or Peace, as also Treaties, Leagues,
and Alliances with foreign Potentates.

His second Prerogative is to nominate and appoint all Ministers and Servants
of State, all Judges and Administrators of Justice; and all Officers, civil or
military, throughout these Realms.

His third capital Prerogative is, that he should have the whole executive
Power of the Government of these Nations, by his said Ministers and Officers,
both civil and military.

I might here also have added a fourth Prerogative, which must have been
capitally eversive of the Constitution, had it not been limited in the original
Trust, I mean a Power of granting Pardon to Criminals. Had this Power been
unrestrained, all Obligations to Justice might be absolved at the King's
Pleasure. An evil King might even encourage the Breach of Law. He must,
unquestionably, have dispensed with all illicit Acts that were perpetrated by
his own Orders; and this Assurance of Pardon must, as unquestionably, have
encouraged all his Ministers and Officers to execute his Will as the only Rule
of their Obedience.

But God, and our glorious Ancestors be praised! he is restrained from
protecting his best beloved Ministers, when they have effected or even imagined
the Damage of the Constitution. He is also limited in Appeals brought by the
Subject for Murder or Robbery. But, on Indictments in his own Name, for
Offenses against his proper Person and Government, such as Rebellion,
Insurrection, Riot, and Breaches of the Peace by Murder, Maim, or Robbery, etc.
here he is at liberty to extend the Arm of his Mercy, forasmuch as there are
many Cases so circumstanced, so admissive of pitiable and palliating
Considerations, that summum Jus, or strict Justice, might prove summa Injuria,
or extreme Injustice.

All pardonable Offenses are distinguished by the Title of Crimina laesae
Majestatis, Sins against the King. All unpardonable Offenses are distinguished
by the Title of Crimina laesae Libertatis, Sins against the Constitution. In
the first Case, the Injury is presumed to extend no further than to One or a
few Individuals; in the Second it is charged as a Sin against the Public,
against the collective Body of the whole People. Of the latter Kind are
Nuisances that may endanger the Lives of Travelers on the High Way; but, more
capitally, any Imagination, proved by Overt Act or evil Advice, tending to
change the Nature or Form of any One of the three Estates; or tending to vest
the Government, or the Administration thereof, in any One, or any Two of the
said Estates independent of the Other; or tending to raise standing Armies, or
to continue them in time of Peace without the Consent of Parliament; or tending
to give any foreign State an Advantage over these Realms by Sea or by Land, etc.

The King has, also, annexed to his Dignity many further very important Powers
and Prerogatives; though they do not so intimately interfere with the
Constitution as the capital Prerogatives above recited.

He is first considered as the original Proprietor of all the Lands in these
Kingdoms; and he founds this Claim, as well on the Conquest, by William the
Norman, as by the limited Kings or Leaders of our Gothie Ancestors.

Hence it comes to pass that all Lands, to which no Subject can prove a Title,
are supposed to be in their original Owner; and are therefore, by the
Constitution, vested in the Crown. On the same Principle, also, the King is
entitled to the Lands of all Persons who die without Heirs; as also to the
Possessions of All who are convicted of Crimes subversive of the Constitution
or Public-Weal.

His Person, while he is King or inclusive of the first Estate, is
constitutionally sacred, and exempted from all Acts of Violence or Constraint.
As One of the Estates, also, he is constituted a Corporation, and his
Teste-Meipso, or written Testimony, amounts to a Matter of Record. He also
exercises, at present, the independent Province of supplying Members to the
second Estate, by a new Creation; a very large Accession to his original
Powers. Bishops also are now appointed and nominated by the King, another
considerable Addition to the royal Prerogative. His is the sole Prerogative to
coin or impress Money, and to specify, change, or determine the current Value
thereof; and for this Purpose he is supposed to have reserved, from his
original Grants of Lands, a Property in Mines of Gold and Silver, which are
therefore called Royalties.

As he is One of the three constitutional Estates, no Action can lie against
him in any Court; neither can he be barred of his Title by length of Time or
Entry. And these Illustrations of his Dignity cast Rays of answerable
Privileges on his royal Consort, Heir apparent, and eldest Daughter.

The King has also some other inferior and conditional Powers, such as of
instituting Fairs and Markets; and of issuing Patents for special or personal
Purposes, provided they shall not be found to infringe on the Rights of Others.
He is also entrusted with the Guardianship of the Persons and Possessions of
Idiots and Lunatics, without Account.

I leave his Majesty's Prerogative of a negative Voice in the Legislature; as
also his Prerogative (or rather Duty) frequently to call the two other Estates
to Parliament, and duly to continue, prorogue, and dissolve the same; till I
come to speak of the three Estates, when in such Parliament assembled.

Here then, we find that a King of Great Britain is, constitutionally, invested
with every Power that can possibly be exerted in Acts of Beneficence. And that,
while he continues to move within the Sphere of his benign Appointment, he
continues to be constituted the most worthy, most mighty, and most glorious
Representative of Omnipotence upon Earth.

IN treating of the Second and third Estate, I come naturally to consider what
those Restraints are, which, while they are preserved inviolate, have so happy
a Tendency to the mutual Prosperity of Prince and People.

The ARISTOCRATICAL; or, SECOND ESTATE.
THE NOBILITY or Second Estate, in the Constitution of Great Britain, is
originally Representative. The Members were ennobled by Tenure, and not by Writ
or Patent; and they were holden in Service, to the Crown and Kingdom, for the
respective Provinces, Counties, or Baronies, whose Name they bore, and which
they represented.

A Title to be a Member of this Second Estate, was from the Beginning
hereditary. The King could not, anciently, either create or defeat a Title to
Nobility. Their Titles were not forfeitable, save by the Judgment of their
Peers upon legal Trial; and when Any were so deprived, or happened to die
without Heirs, the Succession was deemed too important to be otherwise filled,
than by the Concurrence of the three Estates, by the joint and solemn Act of
the PARLIAMENT or COMMUNE CONCILIUM REGNI.

These Truths are attested by many ancient Records and parliamentary Acts. And,
although this most highly ennobling Custom was, at particular Times, infringed
by particular Tyrants; it was inviolably adhered to by the best of our English
Kings, and was observed even by the Worst, excepting a few Instances, till the
Reign of Harry VII. who wished to give Consequence to the third Estate, by
deducting from the Honors and Powers of the Second.

In Truth, it is not to be wondered that any Kings, who were ambitious of
extending their own Power, should wish to break and weaken that of the
Nobility, who had distinguished themselves, by so many glorious Stands, for
Maintenance of Liberty and the Constitution, more particularly during the
Reigns of John, Henry III. the Second Edward, and Second Richard.

Till Harry VII. the Nobles were looked upon as so many Pillars whereon the
People rested their Rights. Accordingly we find that, in the Coalition or grand
Compact between John and the collective Body of the Nation, the King and People
jointly agree to confide, to the Nobles, the Superintendance of the Execution
of the great Charter, with Authority to them, and their Successors, to enforce
the due Performance of the Covenants therein comprised.

What an illustrating Distinction must it have been, when Patriot Excellence
alone (approved before the Country in the Field or the Council) could give a
Claim to Nobility, and compel, as it were, the united Estates of King, Lords,
and Commons, to call a Man up to the second Seat in the Government and Steerage
of the Nation.

Such a Preference must have proved an unremitting Incitement to the
Cultivation and Exercises of every Virtue; and to such Exertions,
Achievements, and Acts of public Beneficence, as should draw a Man forth to so
shining a Point of Light, and set him like a Gem in the Gold of the
Constitution.

The Crown did not, at once, assume the independent Right of conferring
Nobility. Henry III. first omitted to call some of the Barons to Parliament who
were personally obnoxious to him, and he issued his Writs or written Letters to
some Others who were not Barons, but from whom he expected greater Conformity
to arbitrary Measures. These Writs, however, did not enoble the Party till he
was admitted, by the second Estate, to a Seat in Parliament; neither was such
Nobility, by Writ, hereditary.

To supply these Defects, the arbitrary Ministry of Richard II. invented the
Method of ennobling by Letters Patent, at the King's Pleasure, whether for
Years, or for Life, or in special or general Tail, or in Fee-simple to a Man
and his Heirs at large. This Prerogative, however, was thereafter, in many
Instances, declined and discontinued, more particularly by the constitutional
King HARRY the Vth. till meeting with no Opposition from the other two Estates,
it has successively descended, from Henry VII. on nine crowned Heads, through a
Prescription of near a Century and a Half.

Next to their King, the People have allowed, to their Peerage, several
Privileges of the most uncommon and illustrious Distinction, their Christian
Names, and the Names that descended to them from their Ancestors, are absorbed
by the Name from whence they take their Title of Honor, and by This they make
their Signature in all Letters and Deeds. Every temporal Peer of the Realm is
deemed a Kinsman to the Crown. Their Deposition on their Honor is admitted in
place of their Oath, save where they personally present themselves as Witnesses
of Facts; and saving their Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and Abjuration.
Their Persons are at all times exempted from Arrests, except in criminal Cases.
A Defamation of their Character is highly punishable, however true the Facts
may be and deserving of Censure. During Session of Parliament, all Actions and
Suits at Law against Peers are suspended. In Presentiments or Indictments by
Grand Juries, and on Impeachments by the House of Commons, Peers are to be
tried by their Peers alone; for, in all criminal Cases, they are privileged
from the Jurisdiction of inferior Courts, excepting on Appeals for Murder or
Robbery. Peers are also exempted from serving on Inquests. And, in all Civil
Causes, where a Peer is Plaintiff, there must be two or more Knights impanneled
on the Jury.

The Bishops, or spiritual Lords, have Privilege of Parliament, but have not
the above Privileges of personal Nobility. In all criminal Cases, saving
Attainder and Impeachment, they are to be tried by a Petit-Jury. Moreover
Bishops do not vote, in the House of Lords, on the Trial of any Person for a
capital Crime.

All the temporal and spiritual Nobles that compose the House of Lords, however
different in their Titles and Degrees of Nobility, are called Peers (Pares) or
Equals; because their Voices are admitted as of equal Value, and that the Vote
of a Bishop or Baron shall be equivalent to that of an Archbishop or Duke.

The capital Privilege (or rather Prerogative) of the House of Peers consists
in their being the supreme Court of Judicature, to whom the final Decision of
all Civil-Causes are confided and referred, in the last Resort.

This constitutional Privilege is a weighty Counterpoise to his Majesty's
second Prerogative of appointing the Administrators of Justice throughout the
Nation; forasmuch as Judges (who are immediately under the Influence of the
Crown) are yet intimidated from infringing, by any Sentence, on the Laws or
Constitution of these Realms, while a Judgment, so highly superior to their
Own, impends.

The second great Privilege of the House of Peers consists, in their having the
Sole Judicature of all Impeachments commenced and prosecuted by the Commons.
And this, again, is a very weighty Counterpoise to his Majesty's third
Prerogative of the executive Government of these Nations by his Ministers,
since no Minister can be so great, as not justly to dread the coming under a
Judgment, from which the Mightiness of his royal Master cannot protect him.

The third capital Privilege of the House of Peers subsists in their Share, or
particular Department of Rights, in the Legislature. This extends to the
framing of any Bills, at their Pleasure, for the Purposes of good Government;
saving always to the Commons their incommunicable Right of granting Taxes or
Subsidies to be levied on their Constituents. But, on such Bills, as on all
Others, the House of Lords have a Negative; a happy Counterpoise to the Power
both of King and Commons, should Demands, on the one Part, or Bounties, on the
Other, exceed what is requisite.

The Change of the ancient Modus, in conferring Nobility, has not hitherto, as
I trust, been of any considerable Detriment to the Weal of the People. But,
should some future Majesty, or rather some future Ministry, entitle Folk to a
Voice in the second Estate, on any consideration, save that of eminent Virtue
and Patriot-Service; might it be possible that such Ministers should take a
further Stride, and confer Nobility for Actions deserving of Infamy; should
they even covenant to grant such Honors and Dignities, in lieu of Services
subversive of the Constitution; a Majority of such a Peerage must either prove
too light to effect any public Benefit, or heavy enough to effect the public
Perdition.

The DEMOCRATICAL; or, THIRD ESTATE.
THE ELECTION of Commoners, to be immediate Trustees and apt Representatives of
the People in Parliament, is the hereditary and indefeisible Privilege of the
People. It is the Privilege which they accepted and which they retain, in
Exchange of their originally inherent and hereditary Right of sitting with the
King and Peers, IN PERSON, for the Guardianship of their own Liberties and the
Institution of their own Laws.

Such Representatives, therefore, can never have it in their Power to give,
delegate, or extinguish the Whole or any Part of the People's inseparable and
unextinguishable Share in the legislative Power, neither to impart the Same to
any One of the other Estates, or to any Persons or Person whatever, either in
or out of Parliament. Where Plenipotentiaries take upon them to abolish the
Authority of their Principals; or where any secondary Agents attempt to defeat
the Power of their Primaries; such Agents and Plenipotentiaries defeat their
own Commission, and all the Powers of the Trust necessarily revert to the
Constituents.

The Persons of these temporary Trustees of the People, during their Session,
and for fourteen Days before and after every Meeting, Adjournment, Prorogation,
and Dissolution of Parliament, are equally exempted, with the Persons of Peers,
from Arrest and Duress of every Sort.

They are also, during their Session, to have ready Access to the King or House
of Lords, and to address or confer with them on all Occasions.

No Member of the House of Commons, no more than of the House of Peers, shall
suffer, or be questioned, or compelled to witness or answer, in any Court or
Place whatsoever, touching any thing said or done by himself or Others in
Parliament. In order that perfect Freedom of Speech and Action may leave
nothing undone for the Public-Weal.

They have also (during Session) an equal Power with the House of Lords, to
punish Any who shall presume to traduce their Dignity, or detract from the
Rights or Privileges of any Member of their House.

The Commons form a Court of Judicature, distinct from the Judicature of the
House of Lords. Theirs is the peculiar Privilege to try and adjudge the
Legality of the Election of their own Members. They may fine and confine their
own Members, as well as Others, for Delinquency or Offense against the Honor
of their House. But, in all other Matters of Judicature, They are merely a
Court of Inquisition and Presentment, and not a Tribunal of difinitive Judgment.

In this Respect, however, they are extremely formidable. They constitute the
Grand Inquest of the Nation; for which great and good Purpose they are supposed
to be perfectly qualified by a personal Knowledge of what has been transacted,
throughout the several Shires, Cities, and Boroughs, from whence they assemble
and which they represent.

Over and above their Inquiry into all public Grievances; wicked Ministers,
transgressing Magistrates, corrupt Judges and Justiciaries, who sell, deny or
delay Justice; evil Counselors of the Crown, who attempt or devise the
Subversion or Alteration of any Part of the Constitution; with all such
overgrown Malefactors as are deemed above the Reach of inferior Courts, come
under the particular Cognizance of the Commons, to be by them impeached, and
presented for Trial at the Bar of the House of Lords. And these inquisitory and
judicial Powers of the two Houses, from which no Man under the Crown can be
exempted, are deemed a sufficient Allay and Counterpoise to the whole executive
Power of the King, by his Ministers.

The legislative Department of the Power of the Commons is in all Respects
coequal with that of the Peers. They frame any Bills at Pleasure for the
Purposes of good Government. They exercise a Right, as the Lords also do, to
propose and bring in Bills, for the Amendment or Repeal of old Laws, as well as
for the Ordaining or Institution of new Ones. And each House, alike, has a
Negative on all Bills that are framed and passed by the Other.

But the capital, the incommunicable, Privilege of the House of Commons, arises
from that holy Trust which their Constituents repose in them; whereby they are
empowered to borrow from the People a small Portion of their Property, in order
to restore it threefold, in the Advantages of Peace, equal Government, and the
Encouragement of Trade, Industry, and the Manufactures.

To impart Any of this Trust would be a Breach of the Constitution: and even to
abuse it would be a felonious Breach of common Honesty.

By this fundamental Trust and incommunicable Privilege, the Commons have the
sole Power over the Money of the People; to grant, or deny, Aids, according, as
they shall judge them either requisite, or unnecessary to the Public Service.
Theirs is the Province, and theirs alone, to enquire and judge of the several
Occasions for which such Aids may be required, and to measure and appropriate
the Sums to their respective Uses. Theirs also is the sole Province of framing
all Bills or Laws for the imposing of any Taxes, and of appointing the Means
for levying the Same upon the People. Neither may the First or second Estate,
either King or Peerage, propound or do any thing relating to these Matters,
that may any Way interfere with the Proceedings of the Commons; save in their
Negative or Assent to such Bills, when presented to them, without addition,
deduction, or Alteration of any Kind.

After suchlike Aids and Taxes have been levied and disposed of; the Commons
have the further Right of enquiring and examining into the Application of said
Aids; of ordering all Accounts relative thereto to be laid before them; and of
censuring the Abuse or Misapplication thereof.

The Royal Assent to all other Bills is expressed by the Terms (Le Roy le veut)
the King wills it. But, when the Commons present their Bills of Aid, to his
Majesty, it is answered, Le Roy remercier Ses loyal Sujects et ainsi le veut,
the King thanks his loyal Subjects and so wills. An express Acknowledgment
that the Right of granting or levying Moneys, for public Purposes, lies solely,
inherently, and incommunicably, in the People and their Representatives.

This capital Privilege of the Commons constitutes the grand Counterpoise to
the King's principal Prerogative of making Peace or War; for, how impotent must
a warlike Enterprise prove, without Money which makes the Sinews thereof! And
thus the People and their Representatives still retain in their Hands the GRAND
MOMENTUM of the Constitution, and of all human Affairs.

Distinguished Representatives! Happy People! immutably happy, while WORTHILY
REPRESENTED.

As the Fathers of the several Families, throughout the Kingdom, nearly and
tenderly comprize and represent the Persons, Cares, and Concerns, of their
respective Households: So these adopted Fathers immediately represent, and
intimately concentrate, the Persons and Concerns of their respective
Constituents, and in them the collective Body or Sum of the Nation. And while
these Fathers continue true to their adopting Children, a single Stone cannot
lapse from the GREAT FABRIC OF THE CONSTITUTION.

The THREE ESTATES, in PARLIAMENT.
WITH the King, Lords, and Commons, in Parliament assembled, the People have
deposited their Legislative or absolute Power, IN TRUST, for their whole Body;
the said King, Lords, and Commons, when so assembled, being the Great
Representative of the whole Nation, as if all the People were then convened in
one general Assembly

As the Institution, Repeal, and Amendment, of Laws, together with the Redress
of public Grievances and Offenses, are not within the Capacity of any of the
three Estates, distinct from the Others; the FREQUENT HOLDING OF PARLIAMENTS is
the vital Food, without which the Constitution cannot subsist.

The three Estates originally, when assembled in Parliament, sat together
consulting in the open Field. Accordingly at Running-Mend, five hundred Years
ago, King John passed the great Charter (as therein is expressed) by the Advice
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, by the Advice of several Commoners (by
name recited) et aliorum Fidelium, and of Others his faithful People. And, in
the twenty-first Clause of the said Charter, he covenants that, For having the
Common Council of the Kingdom to assess Aids, he will cause the Lords spiritual
and temporal to be summoned by his Writs; and moreover, that he will cause the
principal Commoners, or Those who held from him in Chief, to be generally
summoned to said Parliaments by his Sheriffs and Bailiffs.

In said Assemblies however, the Concourse became so great and disorderly, and
the Contests frequently so high between the several Estates, in Assertion of
their respective Prerogatives and Privileges; that they judged it more
expedient to sit apart, and separately to exercise the Offices of their
respective Departments.

As there is no Man or Set of Men, no Class or Corporation, no Village or City,
throughout the Kingdom, that is not virtually represented by their Delegates in
Parliament; this great Body politic or Representative of the Nation consists,
like the Body natural, of a Head and several Members, which, being endowed with
different Powers for the exercise of different Offices, are yet connected by
one main and common Interest, and actuated by ONE LIFE or SPIRIT OF PUBLIC
REASON, called the LAWS.

In all Steps of National Import, the King is to be conducted by the Direction
of the Parliament, his great national Council; a Council, on whom it is equally
incumbent to consult for the King with whom they are connected, and for the
People by whom they are delegated, and whom they represent. Thus the King is
constitutionally, to be guided by the Sense of his Parliament; and the
Parliament alike is, constitutionally, to be guided by the general Sense of the
People. The two Estates in Parliament are the Constituents of the King; and the
People, mediately or immediately, are the Constituents of the two Estates in
Parliament.

Now, while the three Estates act distinctly, within their respective
Departments, they affect and are reciprocally affected by Each-Other. This
Action and Reaction produces that general and systematic Control which, like
CONSCIENCE, pervades and superintends the Whole, checking and prohibiting Evil
from every Part of the Constitution. And, from this Confinement of every Part
to the Rule of RIGHT REASON, the great LAW OF LIBERTY TO ALL arises.

For Instance. The King has the sole Prerogative of making War, etc. But then
the Means are in the Hands of the People and their Representatives.

Again. To the King is committed the whole executive Power; but then the
Ministers of that Power are accountable to a Tribunal, from which a Criminal
has no Appeal or Deliverance to look for.

Again, to the King is committed the Cognizance of all Causes. But, should his
Judges or Justiciaries pervert the Rule of Righteousness, an Inquisition,
Impeachment, and Trial impends, from whose Judgment the Judges cannot be
exempted.

Again, the King has a Negative upon all Bills, whereby his own Prerogatives
are guarded from Invasion. But, should he refuse the royal Assent to Bills
tending to the general Good of the Subject, the Commons can also withhold their
Bills of Assessment, or annex the rejected Bills to their Bill of Aids; and
they never failed to pass in such agreeable Company.

Lastly. To the King is committed the Right of calling the two Estates to
Parliament. But, should he refuse so to call them, such a Refusal would be
deemed an Abdication of the Constitution; and no One need to be told, at this
Day, that an Abdication of the Constitution is AN ABDICATION OF THE THRONE.

Thus, while the King acts in Consent with the Parliament and his People, he is
limitless, irresistible, omnipotent upon Earth; He is the free Wielder of all
the Powers of a free and noble People, a King throned over all the Kings of the
Children of Men. But, should he attempt to break Bounds, should he cast for
Independence; He finds himself hedged in and straitened on every Side; He finds
himself abandoned by all his Powers, and justly left to a State of utter
Impotence and Inaction.

Hence is imputed to the sovereign Head, in the Constitution of Great Britain,
the high and divine Attribute, THE KING CAN DO NO WRONG; for he is so
circumscribed from the Possibility of Transgression, that no Wrong can be
permitted to any King in the Constitution.

While the King is thus controuled by the Lords and the Commons; while the
Lords are thus controuled by the Commons and the King; and while the Commons
are thus controuled, by the other two Estates, from attempting any Thing to the
Prejudice of the general Welfare; the three Estates may be aptly compared to
three Pillars, divided below at equidistant Angles, but united and supported at
Top, merely by the Bearing of each Pillar against the Others. Take but any One
of these Pillars away and the other Two must inevitably tumble. But, while All
act on Each-Other, All are equally counteracted, and thereby affirm and
establish the general Frame.

How deplorable then would it be, should this elaborate Structure of our happy
Constitution, within the short Period of a thousand Years hence, possibly in
Half the time, fall a Prey to Effeminacy, Pusilanimity, Venality, and
Seduction; like some ancient Oak, the Lord of the Forest, to a Pack of vile
Worms that lay gnawing at the Root; or, like Egypt, be contemptibly destroyed
by Lice and Locusts.

Should the Morals of our Constituents ever come to be debauched; Consent,
which is the Salt of Liberty, would then be corrupted, and no Salt might be
found wherewith it could be seasoned. Those who are inwardly the Servants of
Sin, must be outwardly the Servants of Influence. Each Man would then be as the
Trojan Horse of old, and carry the Enemies of his Country within his Bosom. Our
own Appetites would then induce us to betray our own Interests; and State
Policy would seize us by the Hand of our Lusts, and lead us a Willing Sacrifice
to our own Perdition.

Should it ever come to pass that Corruption, like a dark and low hung Mist,
should spread from Man to Man, and cover these Lands. Should a general
Dissolution of Manners prevail. Should Vice be countenanced and communicated by
the Leaders of Fashion. Should it come to be propagated by Ministers among
Legislators, and by the Legislators among their Constituents. Should Guilt lift
up its Head without fear of Reproach, and avow itself in the Face of the Sun,
and laugh Virtue out of Countenance by Force of Numbers. Should public Duty
turn public Strumpet. Should Shops come to be advertized, where Men may dispose
of their Honor and Honesty at so much per Ell. Should public Markets be opened
for the purchase of Consciences, with an O yes! We bid most to Those who set
themselves, their Trusts, and their Country to Sale! If such a Day, I say,
should ever arrive, it will be Doomsday, indeed, to the Virtue, the Liberty,
and Constitution of these Kingdoms. It would be the same to Great Britain, as
it would happen to the Universe, should the Laws of Cohesion cease to operate,
and all the Parts be dissipated whose orderly Connection now forms the Beauty
and Commonwealth of Nature -- Want of Sanity in the Materials, can never be
supplied by any Art in the Building -- A Constitution of public Freemen can
never consist of private Prostitutes.

WITHIN little more than a Month, Harry made himself perfect Master of the
foregoing System, and wrote Comments upon it much more voluminous than the Text.

As he had lost his Friend Ned, who was now under the Tutelage of his Uncle,
Mr. Catharines, little Dicky Clement became the principal Companion of his
Hours of Amusement, and Dicky with his good will would never be from his Heels.

One Morning, as they strolled up the Road, some Distance from the Town, Harry
observed a Crowd gathering fast on the Way, and hastened, like Others, to see
what was the Matter.

As soon as he arrived, he perceived Mr. Gripe the Constable at the Head of the
Posse, with his painted Staff of Authority exalted in his Hand. Pray, what are
you about, Mr. Constable, says Harry? I am going, Sir, to seize a Robber, who
has taken Shelter in yonder waste Hovel -- And who did he rob? -- He robbed Mr.
Niggards here, that is to say, his Boy here of a Sixpenny Loaf. Perhaps the Man
was hungry, said Harry, and had not wherewithal to buy One. Pray, tell me, my
Lad, how the Affair was.

Why, Master, you must know as how Mr. Niggards, my Master here, sent me this
Morning to the Town with a Shilling to buy two sixpenny Loaves. So, as I was
coming back, I met an able looking Man, who made me afraid with his pale and
eager Face. My good Boy, says he, will you give me one of those Loaves in
Charity? I dare not, Sir, says I, they are none of my Own. Here, says he, I
will give you my Hat for One of them; but this I refused, as his Hat, to my
thinking, was not worth a Groat. Nay, says he, I must have one of the Loaves,
that is certain, for I have a Wife and seven Children all starving in yonder
Hovel, and, while there is Bread in the World, I cannot but snatch a Morsel for
them. So, as I told you, I was frighted. I gave him One of the Loaves without
any more Words, and away he run as fast as his Legs could carry him; but I
followed him with my Eye till I saw him safe lodged.

Here, Harry wiped his Eye and mused awhile. Tell me truly now, my good Boy,
continued he, if both those Loaves had been your own, would you willingly have
given One of them, to keep the poor Man and his Family from perishing?

I would, Sir, said the Lad, with a very good Will. And, had I six Pence of my
own, I would have gone back with all my Heart, and have bought another Loaf.
But, my Master is a hard Man, and so I was forced to tell him the Truth.

Here, my Lad, says Harry, here is a Crown. Go back, buy two Loaves for your
Master, in Place of the One he has lost, and keep the remaining four Shillings
to yourself for your Trouble. You see, Mr. Constable, continued he, you never
can make any thing like Felony of this Matter. The Boy confesses that he gave
the Bread with a very good Will, and that he would not have informed, had it
not been for fear of his Master.

It is very true, please your Honor, replied Mr. Gripe, I myself do pity the
poor Man from my Heart, and will have nothing more to say in this Business.

Stay awhile, says Harry, perhaps we may find some further Employment for you.
I think I should know the Face of yonder Man. Is not that the Niggards whom you
had in Custody, the other Day, and for whose Deliverance I paid five and twenty
Pounds to his Creditor? The very Man, Sir, says Gripe.

Harry then put his Hand in his Pocket, and, taking out a small Scrap of
Parchment, exclaimed, I am glad of what you tell me with all my Heart! Indeed,
I did not like the Looks of the Man at the time, and that made me accept an
Assignment of this Action. Here, Mr. Gripe, take your Prisoner to fresh Custody
in my Name. Away with him to Gaol directly! as the holy Gospel has it, He shall
not depart thence till he has paid the uttermost Farthing. No, no, Mr.
Niggards, I will not hear a Word. Go and learn hence forward to be merciful
yourself, if you would look for any Mercy from God or Man.

Dicky, my Dear, go back again, says Harry, our Neighbor Joseph here will see
you safe home. I will not suffer any One to go in my Company, for fear of
putting the poor Man or his Family to shame.

Harry had not advanced fifty Paces toward the Hovel, when his Ears were struck
with the Sound of sudden and joint Lamentation; and turning, he perceived that
the inquisitive Crowd had gathered at his Heels. My Friends, says he, I
entreat, I beseech you to leave me for the present. I would not choose any
Witnesses to what I am about. Pray, oblige me so far as to depart on your own
Occasions.

Hereupon, being loath to offend him, they retired a few Steps, and stood
together, aloof, attentive to the Event of this uncommon Adventure.

Mean while the Cry continued with a Bitterness that thrilled through every
Nerve of our Hero; and, as he now approached the Place, he did his utmost to
restrain himself and quell the Feelings within him, and he drew his Hat over
his Eyes, to prevent the Parties from seeing the Emotion that they caused.

The Hovel was of Mud Walls, without any Roofing; but, as there was an Opening
where a Door had once been, Harry stole to the Entrance, casting an under Eye
of Observation about him.

Hereupon, a Woman turned. She had been fearfully peering over the Wall at the
Crowd which had not yet dispersed, but having Notice of Harry's Entrance, she
looked toward him and dropped on her Knees.

O Sir, she cried, if you are the Gentleman who owned the Loaf, for Christ his
Sake I pray you to have Mercy upon us! Money, indeed, we have not, but we have
these Shreds remaining, and we will strip ourselves of our Covering to make you
a Recompense. Alas, alas, could we have guessed how my Husband came by it, we
would have famished a thousand Times rather than touch a Morsel. But he, dear
good Man, did it all for our Sakes, for the Sake of the heavy Burden with which
he is overladen. Ah, I would to Heaven we were all dead, hanged or drowned out
of his Way. He might then walk the World at large, and be happy, as he deserves.

Here again, she set up her Wailing, which was accompanied by her seven
Children, with such a woeful Consort, as the Heart of Harry could not sustain,
neither suffer him, for a Season, to interrupt or appease.

At length he said, with a faultering Voice, pray be not alarmed, Madam. For I
discern that you are a Gentlewoman, though in a very unhappy Disguise. The
Affair of the Loaf is settled to your Satisfaction, and here are ten Guineas,
it is all that I have about me, and it is only to show you, for the present,
that you are not quite so friendless in the World as you thought. Meantime I
request that you will All come with me to Hampstead, where we will try to do
something better for you.

Here, the Woman looked with an earnest and eager Rapture at him. May Jesus
Christ, she cried, be your Portion, my Angel; and he is already your Portion,
he is seen in your Sweet Face, and breaks out at your Eyes in Pity to poor
Sinners.

Harry was now stepping forth, and the Rest prepared to follow him; when the
poor Man, who, for Shame, had not yet uttered a Syllable, gently staid him at
the Opening. Turn, generous Master, said he, pray turn and hear a small Apology
for my Transgression. I am a very unhappy Man, I have seen better Times; but I
am driven, by cruel Usage, from House and Home and Maintenance. I was going to
London to apply to the Law for Relief, when my youngest Child, who was on the
Breast, fell desperately sick about four Days ago. As we had no Money to hire
Lodging, and had begged the Means of Life for the two foregoing Days, we were
compelled to take up with this shelterless Hovel. From hence I frequented the
Road, and for the three last Day, begged as much as sustained us in coarse
Bread and Water. But, this Morning my Boy died, and his Brothers and I, with
our Sticks and our Hands, dug his Grave that you see yonder, and I placed that
Flag over him to preserve his tender Limbs from the Pigs and the Hounds; till
it may please Heaven to allow me Means to bury him according to the holy Rites
of our Church. This melancholy Office, Sir, detained me so long; and Exercise
had made the Appetites of my Children so outrageous, that I was, in a manner,
compelled to do what I did. As I had no Coffin nor winding Sheet, I took the
Waistcoat from my Body and wrapped it about my Babe, and would willingly have
wrapped him with my Flesh and my Bones, that we might quietly have lain in one
Grave together.

Harry answered not a Word, but, walking onward before his Company, plentifully
watered the Ground with his Tears as he passed. While the poor Man took his
youngest Son in his Arms, and the Woman her youngest Daughter on her Back, and
thus, with a leisurely Pace, they all arrived at Mr. Fenton's.

The Door being opened, Harry led his nine Guests to the back Parlour, where he
instantly ordered plenty of Bread and Butter and Milk for the Children, with
cold Meat, Ale and Cakes for the Father and Mother; and this was a Matter too
customary, in this House, to be any Cause of Wonder to any Member of the Family.

As soon as they were refreshed, he took them all to his Wardrobe, where he
constrained the Parents to take of the very best Things for themselves and
their Children; and having so done, he walked out and left them to dress.

Mr. Fenton was in his Study, and had just finished a Letter as Harry entered
with a smiling Countenance. I have been very lucky this Morning, Sir, says he,
I think I have got the prettiest Family of Boys and Girls that is to be found
within five Shires. Do you know any thing about them, Harry? Nothing further as
yet, Sir, than that they and their Parents are exceeding poor, and have fallen,
as they say, into great Misfortunes. The Mother is a very handsome and genteel
young Woman, and the Father a portly and very comely Man, save that he has a
large purple Mark on the left Side of his Face. A purple Mark! cried Mr.
Fenton, and started. Go, my Dear, and bring that Man to me directly. Why pray
Sir, do you know him? No, my Love, I should not know him though he stood before
me, but I would give a thousand Pound that he may prove the Man I mean, and
that I shall discover on a short Examination.

By this Time, the Father of our new Family was dressed, and Harry took him by
the Hand, bid him be of good Courage, and led him in to his Uncle. He bowed
twice with an awful and timid Respect; while Mr. Fenton rose and looked
earnestly at him. I rejoice, Sir, says he, to find that my Son, here, has been
of some little Matter of use to you and your Family. Pray take a Seat, nearer
to me, Sir, if you please. He tells me you have met Misfortunes, I also have
had my Share. I think myself nearly of Kin to the Unhappy; and you will
singularly oblige me by as much of your Story as you shall please to
communicate. I am interested in it.

I have nothing to conceal from your Honor, answered the Stranger. And I shall
willingly give you an open and faithful Narrative of my short but sad History.

My Name is Giffard Homely. My Father was a Farmer in easy Circumstances near
Stratford. He bound me Apprentice to a Tanner; and when my Time was out, gave a
hundred and twenty Pieces to set me up in my Business. But, dying soon after,
he bequeathed the Bulk of his Substance to my elder Brother.

Though my Brother was a Spendthrift, I loved him dearly; and, when his
Creditors fell upon him, I became his Bail for two hundred Pounds. Within a few
Months after, he suddenly disappeared, and I never could learn further Tidings
concerning him.

A Writ was thereupon marked against me, and put into the Hands of Bailiffs.
But Liberty was precious. I left all my Substance to the Possession of my
Pursuers, and, passing at a great Rate, I escaped into Lincolnshire.

There I joined myself to Anthony Granger the Tanner. Independent of his Trade,
he held a very beautiful and well parked Farm, under Sir Spranger Thornhill,
the Lord of the Manor. And, as I served him with great Zeal, Affection, and
Application, his Affairs prospered mainly under my Hands.

He had an only Child, a very lovely Girl of about ten Years of Age, her
Manners, like her Countenance, were extremely engaging; and I took vast
Delight, at all leisure Hours, in teaching her to read and write, and in
diverting her with a Variety of little Plays and Amusements.

I had no Intention, at that Time, of gaining her young Heart; but that
happened to prove the miserable Consequence; and a heavy Price it is that my
poor dear Girl has since paid for her Affection.

Year after Year, she now grew in Stature, but much more in Loveliness, at
least in my Eyes. And yet I flattered myself that I affected her merely for her
own sake. I used to please myself with the Prospect of her being advanced to
high Fortune; and I thought that I would willingly have given her up at the
Altar to some Lord of the Land.

One Hollantide Eve, a Parcel of young Folk, of us, were diverting ourselves
about the Fire with several Pastimes; and, among the rest, the Play was
introduced of, I love my Love with an A because She Is amiable, and so on
through the Alphabet.

When it came to my Peggy's Turn, she said, I love my Love with an H, because
he is very honest, and I never will hate him for his being Homely. And this
might have passed without any Observation, had she not cast a Glance at me and
blushed exceedingly, which threw me also into equal Confusion.

As this was the first Discovery that I made of her Affection, it also served
to open my Eyes to the Strength of my own Passion; and this cost me many a
sleepless Night and aching Heart. I did not look upon myself as a sufficient
Match for her; I reflected that it would be very ungenerous to lessen the
Fortune or Happiness of the Girl that I loved; and I resolved a hundred times
to quit the Country, that my Absence might cure both her and myself of our
foolish Fondness for Each-Other. But, though this was what my Reason still
prompted and approved; my Heart still held me back, as it were for a while
longer, when I was on the Brink of Departure.

Peggy was just arrived to her fifteenth Year, on the 24th of April, and was
elected by the Neighbors to be Queen of the following May, and to deliver the
Prizes to the Victors at the Wake.

I had made a Vow, within myself, to forsake her and the Country, the very Day
after her Regency. But, in the mean while, I could not resist the Temptation of
showing my Address before the Queen of my Wishes.

Accordingly, on the Day, I entered the Lists among the other young Candidates.
But, I will not burden your Honor with a particular Detail of our
insignificant Contests. You have unquestionably been Witness to the like on
several Occasions.

It will be sufficient to inform You, that as I had the Fortune to get the
better at the Race, and at Wrestling; when I successively went to receive the
respective Prizes, my Peggy's Eyes danced, and her Feet went pit-a-pat with Joy
as I approached her.

Cudgels came next in play, and a little Stage of Boards was erected for the
Purpose, that the Spectators might see with the better Advantage. I had long
learned this Art from a famous Master in Stratford; and, as I was confident of
my Superiority, I hurt my Rivals as little as possible; only just sufficient to
make them acknowledge that they were foiled.

At length, one Hector Pluck, a Butcher, mounted the Stage. He had, it seems,
been quite an Adept at this Sport, and, for ten foregoing Years, had carried
off the Prize from several neighboring Shires; but he was now come to settle
near Lincoln, and was to have been married, the following Day, to a Farmer's
Daughter who was One of the fair Spectators at the Wake.

The Moment he assailed me, I perceived that his Passions were up, and that his
Eye was a plain Interpreter of the Deadliness of his Heart. He fought
cautiously however, and kept on a watchful Reserve; and we had long attacked
and defended, without any Advantage on either Part; when, with a Motion and
Fury quick as Lightning, he made a side Stroke at me, and aimed to cut me
across the Face with the Point of his Stick. This was a Blow which I had not
Time to intercept or even to see. The Villain however happily missed of his
Intention; for his Cudgel, being something advanced, only bruised my right
Cheek; when instantly I gave him an exasperated Stroke on the Head, and,
cutting him to the Skull, laid him sprawling on the Stage; whereat All who knew
me gave a great Shout.

After some Time he rose, and advancing a little toward me, he stretched out
his left Hand, as if in Token of Reconciliation; while, pulling out his
Butcher's Knife, from a Sheath in his Side-pocket, he, with his right Hand,
made a Stab at my Heart, and suddenly leaping off the Stage, attempted to
escape.

Immediately the Blood poured from me, in a Stream, and ran along the Boards. I
found myself growing weak, and, sitting down on the Stage, I had the Presence
of Mind to rip open my Bosom, and taking out my Handkerchief, I held it to the
Wound.

In the mean time the whole Concourse was in an uproar. The Cry went about that
Giffard Homely was murdered, Giffard Homely was killed. My poor dear Peggy fell
senseless from her Throne, and was carried home in the Fit. Several Horsemen
hasted away, of their own accord, for a Surgeon. And the Butcher was pursued,
knocked down, hard pinioned, and conveyed with following Curses to the Gaol of
Lincoln.

Among Others who came to condole with me, little Master Billy Thornhill, our
Landlord's Son and Heir, came running, and desired to be lifted up on the Stage.

As soon as he saw the Blood, and how weak and pale I looked, he broke out into
a passionate Fit of Tears. O Giffard, my Giffard, my poor Giffard, be cried, I
fear you are a dead Man! You will no more be my Holiday Companion, Giffard.
Never more will you go a Birding with me; or set Gins for the Rabbits, or catch
little Fishes for me; or carry me on your Back through the Water, or in your
Arms over the Mire. Alack, alack, what shall I do, if I lose you, my poor
Giffard!

The Surgeon came at full Gallop. As soon as he had seen the Greatness of the
Gash, say your last Prayer, my Friend, he cried; in a very few Minutes you must
be a dead Man. But, when he had probed the Wound, his Face turned to
Cheerfulness. A most wonderful Escape, he cried; the Weapon has missed your
Vitals, and only glanced along the Rib. Be of good Courage; I engage, in a few
Weeks, to set you once more upon your Legs.

Mean time, my loving Neighbors made a Litter and Bed for me of the Tents and
Tent-Poles, All striving who should carry me, and All escorting me home.

The good Mr. Granger had been that Day confined by a Sprain in his Ancle, and
now sat weeping by his Child, who fell out of one fainting Fit into Another,
till she was told that I was brought home, and that the Doctor had pronounced
me out of Danger.

As soon as I was put to Bed, and my kind Attendants withdrawn, Mr. Granger, on
a Crutch, came limping and sat down by me. He had endeavored to restrain his
Tears before the Crowd, but as soon as he was seated they broke out anew.

O Giffard, Giffard, he cried; my dear Peggy is very ill, and You are very ill,
and to lose you both at once would be hard upon me indeed!

Notwithstanding a short Fever, the Doctor happened to keep his Promise, with
the assistance of Youth and a good Habit; and I began to gather Strength and
recover apace.

As soon as I was up and about, I observed that Miss Peggy seemed no longer
desirous of restraining her kind Looks or her kind Offices; and this gave me
some Concern, till I also observed that her Father took no Unbrage, or no
Notice of it.

One Evening, as we sat over a Tankard of October, Giffard, says he, bluntly,
what would you think of my Peggy for a Wife? Nothing at all, Sir, says I. I
would not marry your Daughter, if she would have me tomorrow. Pray why so,
Giffard? Peggy is very pretty, and deserving, as I think, of as good a Man as
you. Her Deservings, Sir, said I, are my very Objection; I scarce know a Man in
the Land who is deserving of her. If that is the Case, Giffard, her Hand is at
your Service with all my Heart. O, Sir, I replied, I have no suitable Fortune;
but I know you are pleased to banter; I am no Match for her. You are an
industrious and a making young Man, said he; and such a One is richer, in my
Eye, than a Spender with Thousands. Beside, you are loving and goodnatured, my
Son, and I shall not lose my Child by you, but gain another Child in you, as
dear to me as herself.

Here, I was so transported, so overpowered by the Kindness of the dear good
Man, that I could not get out a Syllable; but, sinking before him, I eagerly
grasped his Legs, and then his Knees, and, rising, went out to vent my Passion.

In about a Month after, Sir Spranger Thornhill and my young Friend, Master
William, honored our Nuptials with their Presence; and all our kind Neighbors
came crowding to the Solemnity, and, by their Joy, appeared to be Parties in
our Union.

For eight following Years, never was known a happier Family. But, about that
time, Sir Spranger Thornhill sicken'd and died; and was attended to the dark
Mansion of the Bodies of his Ancestors, by the greatest Concourse of true
Mourners that ever was seen in the Shire, All lamenting that Goodness was not
exempted from Mortality.

Our dear Father could never be said to hold up his Head, from that Day. He
silently pined after his old Friend, and Patron, Sir Spranger; and all our
Cares and Caresses were not able to withhold him from following the same
appointed Track.

Never, sure, was Grief like mine and my Peggy's. In looking at each Other we
saw the Loss that we had sustained; and, while we lay Arm in Arm, often, often
have we watered the good Man's Memory with our Tears.

Time, however, who has many severe Sorrows in Prospect, helps to soften and
lessen those that he brings in his Train. An increasing Family of Children,
sweetly tempered like their Mother, called for all my Concern; and our young
Landlord, Sir William, whenever he came from College, used to make our House
his Home, and take me with him wherever he went; till Lord Lechmore, his
Guardian, took him from the University, and sent him abroad, with a Tutor and
Servants, on his Travels.

As I had made considerable Savings, and now looked to have a Number of
Children to provide for, I resolved to realize all that I could for the poor
Things: So I built a Malt-House, and Windmill, and planted a large Orchard,
with other profitable Improvements, that cost me to the Amount of about eight
hundred Pounds.

While these Things were in Agitation, Sir Freestone Hardgrave, one of the
Knights for our Shire, came into that Part of the Country. He had lately
purchased a fine Estate, adjoining to the West Side of my Concern; and was a
Man of vast Opulence, but a Stranger among us, at that time.

Though Sir Freestone was an old Bachelor, and had one of the most remorseless
Hearts that ever informed the Shape of Man, he had yet a pleasing Aspect and
insinuating Address, and always applied those Qualities to the Purpose of
Betraying. Alas! I was informed, but too late, of his Character; that his
Avarice outgrew even the Growth of his Wealth; and that his Desires increased
in exact Proportion, as Age happened to deduct from his Ability to gratify them.

Unhappily, he cast a greedy Eye at my little Farm. Like another lordly Ahab he
coveted the Vineyard of poor Naboth; and, at length, compassed his Ends by
Means equally iniquitous.

When he proposed to give me more than Value for it, I answered, that I myself
had taken a Fancy to it, for the sake of the dear Man who had given it to me,
in Trust for his Child and her Posterity; and that I would not part with it for
twenty Times an Equivalent. With this, however, he did not appear in the least
disconcerted; but said that he esteemed and affected me the more for my
Gratitude to the Memory of my old Benefactor.

I was afterward told, and learned by dear Experience, that he never pardoned
an Offense, nor even a Disappointment; but nothing of this Disposition appeared
for the present. He visited, made it his Business to meet me in several Places;
sought and seemed quite desirous of cultivating an Acquaintance with me; did me
many little friendly Offices among my richer Neighbors; condescended to toy
with my Little Ones; appeared to take a huge Liking to my two eldest Boys;
stood Godfather to my little Girl that is now in her Mother's Arms; said he
wondered how I contrived it to maintain so numerous a Family upon such slender
Means; and promised to procure me a beneficial Post in the Collection of the
Customs.

After a Course of such specious Kindnesses, and while my Heart glowed with
Gratitude, in the Recollection of his Favors both past and proposed; he came
to my House in a mighty Hurry. My dear Homely, says he, I have just struck up a
most advantageous Bargain with our Neighbor Squire Spendal. But he wants the
Money immediately. I have not the Whole about me; and yet if I don't pay him
down directly, some cursed Disappointment may intervene. Do, run and bring me
all that you have, quickly! I will repay you within two or three Days at
furthest.

Here I hasted, with Joy, to the Corner where I had deposited my Cash, as well
for Payment of Rent as another little Matter that I had in my Eye; and,
bringing out a leathern Bag, I laid it on the Table. There, Sir, said I, are
two hundred and thirty Guineas; take but the Trouble to count them out, and
give me a short Acknowledgment. No, said he, my dear Homely, never heed it for
the present, I will be back with you the Moment I have paid the Purchase; and
so saying, he caught up the Bag, and huddled away as fast as his old Legs could
scamper; while I sat still, through Astonishment, my Heart misgiving me, at the
Time, as if it foreboded the Mischiefs that were to follow.

I waited, with great Anxiety, for his Return till Evening, when hastening to
his Lodge, I was there informed that he had set out for London five Hours
before. This threw me into a Pannick, though not altogether without a Mixture
of Hope, and so I waited till the three Days of his Promise should expire. Mr.
Snack then came to me and demanded the Rent. He was a Lincoln Attorney, whom
Lord Lechmore had lately preferred to the Care of my Landlord's Concerns, upon
the Death of Mr. Kindly, the good old Agent. I told him ingenuously how Matters
had happened, and said I would hurry to London, and bring back the Money
directly.

Accordingly, I posted away, and rested not till I arrived at the great City.
There, for seven Days successively, I besieged the Doors of Sir Freestone,
hourly knocking and requesting to be admitted to his Presence. But he was
either not up, or just gone out, or had Company with him, or was just then very
busy and not to be spoken to, and so forth.

At length, when he found that I would not quit his House without an Answer, he
ordered me before him. His Chariot waited at the Gate, and he stood dressed in
the Hall. As I approached, and bowed with the Respect and mortified Air of a
Petitioner, he put on a Look of the most strange and audacious Effrontery I
ever beheld. Who are you, Friend, said he, and what may your Business be with
me? I am come, an' it please your Honor, humbly to tell you that I am called
upon for my Rent, and to beseech your Honor to restore me the two hundred and
thirty Pieces you had from me the other Day. Here, says he to his Servants,
this must be some Desperado who is come to rob me in broad Day, and in the
Middle of my own People; the Fellow says I owe him Money, I know not that I
ever saw his Face before; I desire that you will not suffer such a dangerous
Villain to enter my Doors any more. And, so saying, out he stepped, and away he
drove.

O Sir, how I was struck to the Heart at that Instant! I snaked out, scarce
half alive; not remembering where I was, or whither I was to go. Alas, I was
far from making the Speed back again that I had done in going. I knew not how
to show my Face to my Peggy or her dear Little Ones, whom I had plundered and
stripped of their Substance by stupidly surrendering it, without Witnesses or a
single Line whereby I might reclaim it. At length I got Home, if Home it might
be called, that had, then, Nothing in it, or at least Nothing for me.

Mr. Snack had taken the Advantage of my Absence to possess himself of my Farm
and of All that I was worth. Under color of distraining for Rent, he had
seized every thing, even the Beds whereon my Wife and Children lay, with all
their wearing Apparel, save what they had on their Backs. The Bill of
Appraisement, which I have here, comes to upward of six hundred Pounds. But,
when the Cattle and other Effects were set up to Sale, the Auctionier and
Bidders proved of Mr. Snack's providing; All were intimidated from offering any
thing, save Those who offered in Trust for this Charitable Agent. And the Whole
of my Substance went off within the Value of one Year's Rent, being one hundred
and eighty five Pounds.

Never, exclaimed Mr. Fenton, never did I hear of so barefaced and daring a
Violation of all Laws divine and human, and that too under Sanction of the most
perfect System of Law that ever was framed. But, what will not Power effect,
when unrestrained of Conscience, when prompted by Avarice, and abetted by
Cunning! And, is there no Remedy, Sir, cried out our Hero? None that I know of,
my Harry, save where Power opposes Power in Favor of Weakness, or Wealth
opposes Wealth in Favor of Poverty. But we will see what may be done. Mean
while, let Mr. Homely proceed in his Narrative.

When my Family, continued Homely, were thus turned out of Doors. An old
Follower made way for them in his own Cottage, and retired with his Wife and
Daughter to a Cow-house hard by. Mean while my loving Neighbors supplied them
with sufficient Bedding, and daily kept them in Victuals, even more than they
could eat.

While I went slowly to see them, stopping, and turning every Minute toward our
old Habitation; all the Horrors of our Situation flew upbraidingly in my Face:
And I accused myself as the Robber and Murderer of eight Persons, for any One
of whom I would have spent my Life.

When I stooped to enter their lowly Roof, all trembling and sick at Heart, I
expected to meet nothing but Faces of Aversion and Expressions of Reproach.
But, when they all set up a Shout of Joy at my Appearance; when they All
crowded clasping and clinging about me; the Violence and Distraction of my
inward Emotion deprived me of Sensation, and I swooned away.

When I revived, I cast a Look about me, and perceived that their Grief had
been as extreme, as their Joy was at my Arrival. Ah, my Peggy, I cried, how
have I undone You! By you, I got all my Possessions, and, in Return, I have
deprived You of All that you possessed. You were every Blessing to me, and I
have repaid you with nothing but Misery and Ruin.

Don't be concerned, My Love, says she; neither repine at the Consequences of
your own Goodness and Honesty. You are not as God to see into all Hearts; the
Wisest may be deceived; and the Best, as I believe, are the most subject to be
imposed upon. Common Charity must have supposed that there could not be such a
Soul as Sir Freestone upon Earth. But be of good Courage, my Husband, I have
good News for you. I dreamed that our dear Father appeared to me last Night.
Don't be disheartened, my Child, says he; bear the Cross that is laid upon.
You, with a cheerful and free Will, and All shall be restored to You seven fold
upon Earth, and seventy seven fold in the Life that has no ending.

When I found that my Peggy, instead of Distaste and Upbraiding, had nothing
but Love in her Looks and Consolation in her Expressions; I folded her to my
Bosom, and to my Soul that went to meet her, and I would willingly have made
her One with my own Being.

My Neighbors were not as Birds of the Season. They neither despised nor
forsook me because of my Poverty. They came crowding to condole with me. They
advised me to apply to the Law against Sir Freestone and Attorney Snack; and
they offered to contribute toward my Journey. They also joined in this written
Testimony of my Character and prosperous Circumstances, before Snack made his
Seizure. And Two of them have witnessed in this bit of Paper that, when the
Alarm came of Mr. Kindly's Death, and of a strange Agent's being put in his
room, they heard my say that I did not matter the worst he could do; and saw me
count down twenty Pieces over and above my Year's Rent.

The late Frights and Fatigues which Peggy underwent during Snack's Operations;
together with her Extremes of Joy on my Return, and of Grief at the Fit into
which I had fallen, hastened on her Labor; and She was delivered, before her
Time, of that weakly little Babe whom I buried this Morning.

Within six Weeks after her Childbirth, we prepared for our Journey. Our
Neighbors, like the good Samaritan, had Compassion upon him who fell among the
Thieves. They made me up a Purse of thirty and five Pounds, and promised to
contribute further toward the carrying on of my Suit.

We traveled happily by easy Journeys of a few Miles a Day, till, nine Days
ago, we reached a small Village the other Side of St. Albans. There we took up
our Rest, for the Night, at a House that had no Sign, but set occasional
Lodgings and sold. Bread and small Drink.

As I desired a separate Apartment for ourselves, we were put into a kind of
waste Room, that had no Fastening to the Door except a Latch. After a slender
Supper, we lay down on our Floor Beds, and I stuffed my Breeches close under my
Head with all possible Caution. We had made an extraordinary Journey that Day,
and I was particularly fatigued by carrying several of my tired Children
successively in my Arms; so that we All slept but too soundly, and when I awoke
in the Morning, neither Money nor Breeches were to be found.

Such a Loss, at another time, would have been as nothing to me. But, in our
present Circumstances, it was a Repetition and Doubling of All that we had lost
before. I instantly summoned the People of the House, and, in a good deal of
Warmth, charged our Landlord with the Felony, telling him that I had been
robbed of above three and thirty Pounds. Why, Master, says he, I know of
nothing to the contrary, but it would be very hard, indeed, if I was to be
answerable for the Honesty of every One who goes this Road. If you had given
your Money in charge to me, I would have been accountable for it. I believe, by
the Grief You are in, that You must have been Losers; I will therefore forgive
you your Reckoning, and give you a Pair of Breeches of my own into the Bargain;
but this is all I will do, till the Law forces me.

As there was no Remedy, at least for the present, I accepted his Overture and
set out. But, O Sir, it is impossible to describe the Horrors of my Soul, as I
silently stepped along, casting an Eye of mingled Pity and Despair upon my
Children. I cursed in secret my own Existence, and wished for some sudden
Thunderbolt to crush me into Nothing. All Trust in God or his Providence had
now wholly forsaken me, and I looked upon him as neglecting all other Objects
of his Wrath, and exerting his Omnipotence against me and Mine alone.

Peggy, as I suppose, perceived how it was with me, and kept behind awhile,
that she might give way to the present Tumult and Distemper of my Mind. At
length, hoping to administer some Matter of Comfort to me, she came up and
silently put a few Shillings into my Hand, saying, Courage, my dear Husband,
All cannot be lost while we have a God who is infinitely rich to depend upon.
Ay, said I, these are the Fruits of your Dreams, these are Your promised
Blessings that Heaven had in Store for us. And still has in Store, she replied;
the same Hand that holds the Rod holds the comforting Staff also. Tell me not
of Comfort, I cried, I see that the Face of God is set in Blackness and
Blasting against me. But, for me it matters not, had he not taken me at an
Advantage. He sees that I have eight Lives, All dearer than my Own, and he is
determined to kill me in every One of them.

Do not cast from you, my Love, she said, the only Crutch that the World and
the Wretched have to rest upon. God is pleased, perhaps, to take all human
Means from us, that he may show forth the Wonders of his Power in our Relief.
While any other Hope is left, we are apt to trust to that Hope, and we look not
toward the secret Hand by which we are fed and supported; but, when All is
lost, All gone, when no other Stay is left, should sudden Mercy come upon us,
our Comforter then becomes visible, He stands revealed in his Greatness and
Glory before us, and we are compelled to cry out, with unbelieving Thomas, My
Lord, and my God!

Though these pious Expostulations of my dearly beloved Preacher had little
Influence, at the time, for appeasing my own Passions, I was yet pleased that
my Peggy had her secret Consolations, but little imagined that her Prophecy
approached so near to its Completion.

For two Days we held on, living on such Bread and Milk, as we could purchase
at the Cabbins that had the Charity to receive us. But my Boy, who was on the
Breast, grew exceeding sick; so we were obliged to shorten our Journeys, for
the two succeeding Days, partly begging and partly paying for such Victuals as
we could procure. Toward Evening we came within Sight of this Town. Our little
Money was quite exhausted, and our Child grown too ill to bear further Travel.
So, I looked about, and perceived some roofless Walls that stood off from the
Highway, and thither we turned and took up our bleak Abode.

For the three following Days I frequented the Road, and by begging procured
what scantily kept my Family from perishing. Mean time, my Spirit was tamed and
subdued by the Habit of Mortification; and I looked up to Heaven and cried,
Pardon, Pardon, O my God, the Offenses and Blasphemies of my Murmurings against
You! You formerly blessed me with an over Abundance of Blessings, and that too
for a long Season; and, as Job justly says, shall we receive Good at the Hand
of God and not receive Evil? -- O Friend, and Savior of Sinners! if thou
love whom thou chastenest, and receivest Those whom thou do scourge; when
Death shall have put a Period to the Sufferings of Mortality; may I not humbly
look to find Grace at the Footstool of the Throne of thy Mercy-Seat?

At length our Child died this Morning, and we buried him in our Hovel, and
watered his Grave with the Tears that we shed for him and for Each-Other. The
rest, Sir, you know, till this Angel of God was sent, to accomplish the
Prediction of my Peggy in all its Fullness.

Here Homely concluded; and, after a Pause and a deep Sigh, Mr. Fenton
demanded, Have you told me the Whole of your History, Mr. Homely? I have, so
please your Honor, through every Particular of any Signification. -- I am
sorry for it. Pray think again. Did you never meet with any Adventure that is
yet unrecited? did you never save any Person at your own Peril? -- No, Sir --
O, now I recollect.

Some two or three and twenty Years ago, as I fled from the Bailiffs who
pursued me, as I told you, for the Bail of my Brother, I came to the River
Avon. The Flood was great and rapid after the late Rains, and I thought of
looking for a Place of smoother Water for my Passage, when a Gentleman and
Lady, attended by a Train of Servants, came riding along the Banks. As they
rode, chatting and laughing, a Fowler, who was concealed in a Copse just at
Hand, let fly at a Bird; whereupon, the fiery Horse, that the Gentleman was on,
took Fright, and, with a Bound, suddenly plunged into the Current; whereat the
Lady gave a loud Shriek, and fell senseless to the Ground. The Horse rose
without his Rider, and swam down the Stream. Soon after, the Rider appeared,
and the Attendants were divided between their Care of the Lady and their
Lamentations for their Master on the Edge of the Bank. Then, seeing no other
Help, my Heart smote me, and I cast myself in without Reflection. I kept aloof,
however, for fear he should grapple at me and sink us both together. So, I
supported and shoved him before me toward Land, till, having reached the Bank,
I laid hold on it with one Hand, and with the other raised him up within the
Reach of his Servants, who had stretched themselves flat upon the Brink to
receive him. Then, being already drenched, and having nothing further to do, I
turned and swam over, and so made my Escape.

Did you ask the Name of the Party, whom you saved in the Manner you say? No
truly, Sir, there was no Leisure for such an Enquiry. -- Why did you not wait
for the Recompense that was so justly your Due for so great a Deliverance? --
Recompense? please your Honor, I could have done no less for the Beggar who
begs at the Corner.

Noble, noble Fellow! exclaimed Mr. Fenton, I am he, I am he whom you saved
that Day, my Brother! -- And so saying, he arose, and caught Homely in his
Arms, and pressed, and pressed him over again to his Bosom. While Harry, all
impatient, seized hold of Homely also, and struggled hard to get him to himself
from his Father.

When they were something composed, and All again seated. Ah, Homely, says Mr.
Fenton, I have sent and made many Enquiries after You; but, not for many Years
after the Day in which you saved me. I hated, I loathed you for having
prolonged my Life to such a Misery as no other Man ever endured. O -- h, that
Lady, that Lady! -- But, no Matter for the present -- (and, so saying, he wiped
the swelling Tear from his Eye.) -- Tell me, Homely. -- That Devil, Sir
Freestone! -- I am not of a malicious Temper, and yet I wish for nothing more
than full Vengeance on his Head. -- Don't you believe that he went to You, with
a felonious Intention of defrauding you of your Property? -- Believe it, Sir? I
can swear it. The Circumstances and their Consequences are full Evidence
thereof.

Very well, said Mr. Fenton, though we may not be able to carry a civil Action
against him; we may assail him with better Advantage in a criminal Way. I will
draw up and take your Deposition, myself; and, tomorrow, I will send you with
a Note to Lord Portland, where more may be done for you, my Homely, than you
think.

In the mean time, You and your Family shall take up your Abode in the back
Part of my House, and from thence You shall not depart till, as your Peggy's
Dream has it, all your Losses shall be restored to You sevenfold upon Earth;
what your Portion may be in Heaven must be your own Care, and may the Spirit of
Grace guide You in the Way you should go.

Early the next Morning, Mr. Fenton sent Homely to London with his Deposition
and several Papers, accompanied by a Letter from himself to Lord Portland. In
the Evening Homely returned, and, entering with a Face of Triumph, he seized
Mr. Fenton's Hand, and eagerly kissing it, Blessed, blessed be the Hand, he
cried, that has the Power of God, among Men, for good Works. When I sent in
your Honor's Letter, I was not detained a Moment. His Lordship made me sit
down, perused my Papers with Attention, questioned me on the Particulars, grew
enflamed against Sir Freestone, and gave him two or three hearty Curses for an
execrable Villain. He then called a Gentleman to him who was in waiting, and
ordered an Attachment to be instantly issued against the Knight. It was
accordingly executed upon him, and he now lies in Newgate. God be praised! said
Mr. Fenton, so far there is Equity still extant upon Earth.

It is not unnatural to suppose that Mr. Fenton's Family were immoderately fond
of Those, whose Father had saved the Life of their most dear Master. Mr.
Clement, in particular, took Pains and Pleasure in forwarding the Boys in their
Letters; and Mrs. Clement passed most of her Time very happily with Peggy and
her little Girls.

Frank, the Butler, had been abroad upon an Expedition, at the time that Mr.
Homely's Family arrived; and did not return till Homely had come back from Lord
Portland's. He was then informed, with Joy, of the Guests they had got; and he
waited with Impatience, till the Man he longed to see should come out from his
Master. As soon as he appeared, he catched one of his Hands in both of his,
and, looking lovingly at him, cried, Do I once more behold that happy Face, Mr.
Homely? I was the Man to whose Hands you delivered my precious Lord from the
devouring of the Floods. Gladly, Heaven knows, would I have sacrificed my own
Life for the Salvation of his. But, alas! I had no Skill in contending with the
Waters, and the sure Loss of my own Life would not have given the smallest
Chance for the Recovery of my Master. You are the Person, Mr. Homely, to whom
God committed that blessed Task and Trust. And Mr. James, and I, and all of us
have agreed to make up a hundred Pound, apiece, for your Children, in
Acknowledgment of the Benefit you did us on that Day.

Here, Homely took Frank very affectionately into his Arms, and, with a
faultering Voice, said, Your Offer, Sir, is dear, very dear, indeed, unto me,
as it is a Proof of that Love which you All so warmly bear to our common Lord
and Master. If there is any Occasion, I will not refuse this extraordinary
Instance of your Benevolence; but, our Master's Influence and Bounty are doing
much in my Behalf. And, in the mean time, I will take it as a very particular
Favor, if you will be pleased to introduce me to my Fellow Servants of this
House.

Within the following Fortnight, a Servant came, on a foaming Horse, and in a
golden Livery, delivered a Letter at the Door, and rode away directly.

The Letter ran thus:

To HENRY FENTON, Esquire
Dear Sir,
THE Trial of our recreant Knight is at Hand; and, if you insist upon it, shall
be prosecuted to the utmost Extent of our Laws. The Wretch, indeed, deserves to
be gibbetted. But he has Relations of Worth and Consideration among us. They
have besought me to shield them from Shame on this Occasion; and I join them in
requesting you to accept the enclosed Order for three thousand Pounds, in
favor of your Client, together with his Farm, and Effects, which Attorney
Snack shall immediately restore.

Let me have your Answer within three Days, and believe me

Your true as well as obliged Servant, PORTLAND.


The Day following Mr. Fenton sent Harry, in his Chariot, attended by Mr. James
and two Servants in Livery, to return his Acknowledgments to the Favorite of
the King.

Lord Portland received our Hero with Pleasure and Surprise equally evident in
his Countenance. As he, unknowingly, piqued himself on being One of the finest
Personages in the Nation, he secretly respected his own Resemblance in Another.

After a few mutual Compliments and some occasional Discourse, the Earl told
Harry that he must take a private Dinner with him. We are quite alone, says he,
only two Viscounts, a Baronet, and four or five Gentlemen of the Ministerial
Quill. Pray, my Lord, said Harry smiling, is a Dinner the whole of their
Pension? Not so, Sir, I confess; they are the Swiss of the lettered World, and
fight for Pay. They were formerly of the opposite Junto; but they have changed
their Opinions along with their Party; and our Honor obliges us to give them
at least as much in the Cause of the Crown, as they formerly got in the Cause
of the Populace. I doubt, my Lord, returned Harry, that their Silence would
answer your Ends, full as well as their Oratory, unless your Treasury could
hold out in bribing People to read also. Very pleasantly severe, indeed,
replied the laughing Earl. But come, the Bell calls us to our Bit.

When Dinner was over, and Cheer circulating with the Bottle, I would give a
good deal to know, Master Fenton, said the Earl, what you and your Father think
of his Majesty and his Ministers? Should I speak my downright Sentiments, my
Lord, answered Harry, in some Things I might offend, and in Others appear to
flatter. O, you cannot offend, in the least, cried the Earl; we are daily
accustomed to be told of all the Faults, whereof we are, or may be, or might
have been guilty; and, as to Flattery, you know it is the Food of us Courtiers.
Why, my Lord, you want no Champion, for the present, said Harry; You are All,
as I perceive, on one Side of the Question; and if some One does not appear,
however impotent to oppose You, the Shuttlecock of Conversation may fall to the
Ground. Right, very right, my sweet Fellow, rejoined his Lordship; proceed, you
shall have nothing but fair Play, I promise you.

To be serious then, said Harry, my Father thinks, in the first Place, (for I
have no Manner of Skill in such Matters) he thinks, I say, that his Majesty is
one of the greatest Warriors and One of the wisest Statesmen that ever existed.
He thinks, however, that he has Attachments and Views that look something
further than the mere Interests of the People by whom he has been elected; but
he says that those Views ought, in a Measure, to be indulged, in return of the
very great Benefits that he has done us. He is, therefore, grieved to find that
his Majesty has met with so much Reluctance and Coldness from a Nation so
obliged.

You are a Darling of a Politician, exclaimed the Earl; but we will not thank
you for your Compliments, till we know what you have further to object against
us.

My Father admits, my Lord, that his Majesty and his Ministers have
re-established and exhibited, in fair and open Light, the most glorious
Constitution that ever was constructed. But then, he apprehends that You are
beginning to sap the Foundations of the Pile that You, yourselves, erected.

As how, my dear young Mentor? By being over bounteous in paying former
Friends, and by being still more profuse in procuring new Adherents. -- Child
of Honor, cried the Earl; Another, less elegant than yourself, would have said
that we are sapping the Constitution by Bribery and Corruption. You have,
indeed, my Harry, delicately tempered your Admonitions, even like the Cup of
Life, the Sweets with the Bitters. But, what say You, Gentlemen, shall a Babe,
lately from the Breast, bear away the whole Palm from People grown gray in
Politics?

The young Gentleman, says Mr. Veer (the Principal of the Court-Writers) talks
wonderfully for One not versed in the Subject of which he treats. The People of
England are stupidly proud and licentiously ungovernable; they are the most
ignorant and yet most obstinate of any People upon Earth; it is only by their
being selfish that they become in any Degree manageable; if their Voices were
not bought, they would either give them to Persons of their own stupid Cast,
unknowing in our Laws or our Constitution, or to Men of an antimonarchal and
republican Spirit, who would be perpetually putting Rubs before the Wheels of
good Government.

I never knew, till now, Sir, returned Harry, that, in order to make People
true to their Country and their King, that is, in order to make Men honest, it
was necessary to corrupt them. But I have still good Hopes that the Picture,
which you have drawn of our Governors, is not altogether a just One.

Governors? cries Veer, I spoke not a Word of Governors. You spoke of the
People, Sir, says Harry, and they, as I take it, are our Governors. The People
our Governors! this is the most wonderful and the newest Doctrine that ever I
heard, A Doctrine even as old as the Constitution, rejoins Harry: They are not
only our Governors, but more absolutely so than Any so styled. His Lordship is
the only Man in Company whose Person, in some Instances, is exempt from their
Jurisdiction; but his Property remains still subjected to their Decision.

No Law can be made in Britain but by the People, in their Proxies. And when
those Laws are made, the People are again constituted the Judges thereof on
their Jury-Tribunals, throughout their respective Shires; as also Judges of
Facts and Rights, whether civil or criminal, throughout the Realm.

Thus, their Privilege of making Laws for themselves in PARLIAMENT, and of
judging of the said Laws (when made) on JURIES, composes, as it were, a Rudder,
whereby the People are admitted (gloriously) to steer the Vessel of their own
Commonwealth.

Would it not be a Pity then that so great a People should be no Other than
Such as Mr. Veer has described them, a Parcel of ignorant, licentious, selfish,
base, venal Prostitutes, unenlightened by Reason and uninfluenced by Conscience?

If they should be reduced, if it is possible, I say, that they should ever be
reduced to so very vile and deplorable a State, it can only be by the very
Measures that Mr. Veer has recommended. The Character, as ye know, of a certain
old Tempter is not over amiable, and I should be sorry that Any, whom I love
and respect, should follow in his Steps.

And now, Gentlemen, take the Argument home to yourselves. The People have the
Disposal of our Lives, Liberties, and Properties. Which of You then would like
to have Life itself and all that is valuable in it, at the Arbitration of a
Pack of Wretches who, being wholly selfish, can have no kindred Feelings or
Compassion for You? Who being, themselves, devoid of Honor and Equity, cannot
judge according to the One or the Other; who, being already accustomed to
Influence and Prostitution, have their Ears and Hands open to All who would
whisper or bribe them to your Prejudice?

I, as a Fool, Gentlemen, utter the Dictates of Wisdom, for I speak the
Sentiments of a much wiser and much better Man than myself. Should a general
Corruption take Place in the Land, adieu to all Virtue; adieu to Humanity and
all social Connections! all Reason and Law, all Conscience and Magistracy, all
public and private Weal, must vanish or be confounded in one Chaos together.
And, from hence it is self-evident that He, who debauches the Morals of the
Least of his Majesty's Subjects, is an Enemy to his King, to his Country and
Mankind.

I protest, said his Lordship, with some little Confusion, I never beheld this
Matter in the same Light before; but I shall take Care to inspect and examine
it at better Leisure.

Here the Company rose to separate; when Harry, stepping toward Veer with an
affectionate Pleasantry in his Countenance; Mr. Veer, says he, I fear I have
misbehaved a little to Day, I am naturally warm, and am apt to be too much so
on particular Subjects. O Sir, says Veer, I am an old Prizefighter, and
accustomed to Cuts; but I now know my Man, and shall hereafter avoid engaging,
or keep barely on the Defensive; do me the Honor, however, as old Combatants
were wont, to shake Hands, at parting, in Token of Hearts free from Malice. In
the Contest of Love, Mr. Veer, you never shall foil me, cried Harry.

Now, my Lord, if you have any Commands for my Father, pray let me have the
Pleasure of being your Messenger. Upon my Honor, my dear Boy, and that is the
Oath of a Lord, you shall not part me, for this Night at least. My Father, Sir,
will be uneasy. I will dispatch One to him directly; I have particular Designs
upon you; you must with me to the Levee; I cannot refuse myself the Pleasure of
introducing you to his Majesty; I expect to get Credit by you. I rather fear,
my Lord, that I may do you some Disgrace.

O, cried the Earl, you think you are not fine enough. Why, truly, you will see
Folk there, of much more lustrous Attire. But, let Others disgrace their
Ornaments; be you humbly content, my Child, with adorning your Dress. Harry
blushed and bowed.

When they arrived at Court, the Earl left his young Friend awhile in the
Levee-Room, and went to impart some Matters to the King in his Closet.

While our Hero stood in the Crowd, some One came and, with Birdlime, stuck a
Paper to his Back, whereon was written in capital Letters, THE FOOL.

However, it did not remain long enough to do him much Disgrace. A young
Gentleman, of a graceful Figure and very amiable Aspect, pressed close behind
Harry, and gently stole the Writing away; then, taking him by the Hand,
requested to speak with him apart.

I wonder, Sir, said the Stranger, who it was that could be so malicious, or so
base as to fasten this Title on your Back; I am certain he must never have seen
your Face. O Sir, said Harry, blushing and smiling together, this must have
been the Office of some old Acquaintance; it is the Title to which I have been
accustomed from my Infancy; and I am well contented to carry it with me to the
Grave; I am much affected, Sir, however, by this uncommon Instance of your
Humanity to an Unknown; pray add to the Obligation by letting me know to whom
it is that I am so endearingly bound.

My Name, Sir, is William Thornhill. I am just arrived from my Travels; and I
would willingly go my long Journey over again to become just such another Fool
as you are.

Harry seized him by the Hand, and gave him at once the Squeeze and the Look of
Love. -- Sir William Thornhill, I presume? -- The Same, my dear Sir -- I have
been enamoured of your Character before I saw You, Sir William. My Name is
Harry Fenton; I live on Hamstead Hill; I see that your Pleasure lies in
communicating Pleasure, I am therefore persuaded you will indulge me with a
Call, at some leisure Hour -- I will not defer that Advantage a single Day -- I
shall have the Lougings of a Lover, till you arrive.

Here the King entered, and all Converse was broken off. Lord Portland, looking
about, discovered Harry, and, taking him by the Hand, led him up and left him
standing before his Majesty. Then, approaching the royal Ear, may it please
you, Sire, says he, this is the Son of the Gentleman who advanced us two
hundred thousand Pounds on our Expedition from Holland.

The King turned to Harry with a solemn and piercing Look; and, having eyed him
for some Time, he again turned to the Earl and cried; Ay, Portland, this is
Something, this, indeed, is a Gem fit to set in the Crown of a Monarch. He then
reached forth his Hand, and while our Hero stooped to kiss it, He pressed
Harry's Shoulder with his other Hand.

My dear Child, said the King, we are much obliged to your Father. You, by
Inheritance, are attached to our Crown, and you may justly demand whatever we
can bestow. We humbly thank Your Majesty, answered Harry, we only claim the
Privilege of serving you with all our Hearts and all our Powers.

What Post would you choose, my Dear, in the Army, or in the Court? indeed, I
should best like to have You about my own Person. That is the Pitch to which I
aspire, answered Harry, as soon as I am capable of so high a Duty.

But, why have you been such a Stranger, said the King; had we seen you before,
I think we should not have forgot you. O Sire, said Harry, I am but as a Bird
from the Nest, and this is the first of my unfledged Excursions. If a Bird,
cried the King, it must be a young Eagle. Not so, Sire, answered Harry, I
should then better support the Brightness of the Sun that is now before me. --
I would give one of my Kingdoms that you were my Son! -- I am already One of
Millions of happy Sons and Daughters who have the Glory of calling You their
royal Father!

So saying, our Hero bowed twice, and drew back; while the King looked toward
him, in Silence and Wonder.

After some Talk with his Courtiers, his Majesty retired. And Lord Portland
took Harry, and was followed by a Number of the young Gentry, to the Ball-Room.

There the Queen, at the upper End, was seated under a Canopy, her Maids of
Honor attending, and two brilliant Ranges of Foreign and British Ladies, were
seated on either Hand.

The Earl gave a Whisper to the Master of the Ceremonies, and he immediately
led Harry up to the Presence, where he had the Honor of kissing Queen Mary's
fair Hand.

After some whispering Chat between her Majesty and Lord Portland, the Ball was
ordered to be opened by our Hero and the lovely young Princess of Hesse.

All Eyes were fixed upon them, with Attention still as Night, while they moved
like Homer's Gods, without seeming to press the Ground; or like a Mist, before
the Breeze, along the Side of some stately Hill.

As soon as the Minuet was closed, the Princess said softly to Harry, in
French, the Louvre, Sir, if you please.

This was a Dance of the newest Fashion, and was calculated to show forth and
exhibit a graceful Person in all the possible Elegances of Movement and
Attitude.

As soon as they had finished, the whole Assembly could scarce refrain from
breaking forth in loud Plaudits, as at the public Theater; and a Humming of
mixed Voices and patting Feet was heard throughout.

When Harry had led the Princess to her Seat, and left her with a Bow of the
most expressive Respect, He looked about for some Lady whom he might choose in
Succession; and, spying Lady Louisa Bottom at the opposite Side, he stepped
toward her, and, bending, gracefully offered to lead her forth.

She gave him her Hand, tremblingly, and whispered, as she rose, You are a
great Stranger, Sir, but we deserve you should be so, since we did not treat
you with the Respect that your Merit should have commanded. That, Madam,
answered Harry, is not wholly the Cause of my Distance; but, there are Persons
whose Loveliness is more formidable to me, than an Arrangement of sabred
Hussars with their fierce looking Mustaches.

Harry had no sooner said this than his Heart smote him with Remorse; for,
though Louisa was indeed lovely, and that he felt for her the Propensities and
Tenderness of a Brother; yet, She was not of that Species of Beauty that was
formed to fix his Heart: And he secretly reproached himself for having
attempted to raise the Vanity, or draw the Affections of an innocent Girl, with
no further View than of making a Parade of his own Talents; a Measure, he
justly judged, unbecoming a Man of a Spark of Honor or Integrity.

When Harry had finished, and left Louisa on the Floor; the Master of the
Ceremonies honored Sir William Thornhill with her Hand; and, after four or
five more Minuets by the younger Folk, the Parties were appointed and paired
for Country Dances; except young Lord Bottom, who refused to step forth, and
sat apart, ruminating and feeding on his own Cogitations.

The Princess and our Hero led up the Dance, and Louisa and Sir William were
appointed the next in Course, in order to do the principal Honors to the two
young Strangers.

As soon as the Dances were ended, and that All had mixed, and chatted, and
roved about awhile, Harry observed Sir William coming toward him in a little
Fluster. What is the Matter, my Friend, says Harry, pray what has discomposed
you? -- Tell me, my dear Harry, that Jackanapes in the Blue and Gold, do you
know who he is? I protest, had it not been for the Respect I owe the Presence,
I would have chastised him on the Spot. The Dance was no sooner done, than he
came up with a most provoking Sauciness in his Look. I wonder, Sir, said he, at
the Insolence of One of your Rank; you ought to have had more Modesty than to
suffer yourself to be paired with a Lady so far above You.

O, cried Harry, taking Sir William very lovingly under the Arm, pass this
Matter over, my sweet Friend, I beseech you. That is young Lord Bottom, the
very Person who, I Am pretty confident, contrived the honor of the Pasquinade
on my Back this Day. But, he is Brother to the sweet Girl with whom you danced.
For her Sake, for my Sake, forgive him, I entreat you; but, above all, forgive
him for the Sake of his dear Father the Earl of Mansfield, One of the noblest
Nobles, and One of the worthiest Men that ever stepped on English Ground. He has
been, these two Years past, abroad upon an Embassy; and, while he is promoting
the Interests of the Public, has left his own Household unchastened and unguided.

Here, the Converse of the Friends was suddenly broken off. The Master of the
Ceremonies came and, tapping Harry on the Shoulder, told him that the Queen
desired to speak with him.

When he had, with a lowly Reverence, advanced to the Throne; You are, said the
Queen, the most accomplished Cavalier that ever I beheld; and, had I sufficient
Youth and Beauty, I would choose You for my Knight to bear my Fame through the
World. I would rather, said Harry, that your Majesty would employ me on some
more dangerous Enterprise. How is that, said the Queen? Why, answered Harry,
your Majesty's Champion could have little or nothing to do, as All would
willingly acknowledge the Justice of his Cause.

You are, cried the Queen, the loveliest and the sweetest Fellow I ever knew.
My Eye has followed you all along, and marked You for my Own, and I must either
beg or steal You from our good Friend your Father. I, therefore, want no Token
to put me in mind of You, but You may want some Token to keep your Friends in
your Memory. Here are two Pictures; the One is the Portrait of our Master and
sovereign Lord, justly enriched with Diamonds to the value of some Thousands.
The Other is the Picture of the Woman who sits before you, lowly, simple, and
unadorned; choose which you please.

Give me the plain Picture, cried Harry, with a kind of Rapture, it shall
henceforth become my Riches and my Ornament.

So saying, he bent his Knee, and, taking the little Portrait, he pressed it to
his Lips with the Ardour of an ancient Lover in Romance. Then, putting it into
his Bosom, he gracefully rose; made three retiring Bows, and went from the
Presence.

O, The Fool, the egregious Fool! muttered Some. Nobly, most nobly done, cried
Others!

As Harry was following the Earl of Portland through the Palace-Gate, Lord
Bottom came up with the Crowd and, in a half Whisper, said; You are too great a
Man to Day, Sir, to acknowledge your old Acquaintance. But not so great a FOOL,
retorted Harry, as not to be taught my Distance with Those who, like Lord
Bottom, have a Right to look down upon me.

After a short but sound Sleep, Harry hurried Home to prepare for the Reception
of his new Friend. He told Mr. Fenton that Sir William was returned; how he had
been obligingly made known to him in the forementioned Instance of his Humanity
to a Stranger; and that he had promised to be with them that Morning. But, pray
Sir, don't tell Homely a Word of the coming of his Landlord, till we place
them, as it were by Surprise, Face to Face.

In about an Hour after, a Chaise and Four came rapidly to the Door; and Harry
instantly sprung out, and caught his Friend in his Arms before he came to the
Ground.

The two Friends entered the Parlour, caressing and caressed, and casting Looks
of cordial Love and Delight on Each-Other. My Father, Sir, said Harry, and led
Sir William by the Hand to Mr. Fenton, who received him with a Countenance of
that Heart-speaking Complaisance, which never fails to attach the Soul of the
Person to whom it is directed. Ah, my Harry, cried Sir William, I no longer
wonder at You; I see that You are All, that you are, by Inheritance.

But Sir, continued he, You had like to have lost your Son, last Night. Their
Majesty's were most unwilling to quit their Hold of him, and, I believe in my
Soul, would willingly have adopted him the Heir of their Crown. I should be
very sorry, Sir William, replied Mr. Fenton, to see a Circle about his Head,
that would give him an aching Heart. I am sure that is the Case with the
present royal Proprietors. In a limited Monarchy like ours, the Station of the
Prince is looked upon with a malignant Eye by the Envious, and, at the same
Time, rendered uneasy by the perpetual Contests, between Rights and Privileges,
on the one Part, and Prerogative on the Other.

Moreover, Sir William, I shall never wish to see One, of my Child's
Disposition, on the Throne of Great Britain. I should be jealous of such a
Person, in Behalf of my Country. No People could be more tenacious of their
Liberties than the Swedes, till Gustavus, the Son of Erie, ascended the Throne.
His Manners were so amiable, his Virtues so conspicuous, his Government so
just, and he made so popular a Use of all his Powers, that his Subjects thought
they could never commit enough into his Hands. But, what was the Consequence?
His Successors made his Power a Precedent for their Own, without attending to
the Precedent of his Administration.

Thus, you see, that a Prince, of Qualities eminently popular, might prove of
dangerous Tendency to a free People, forasmuch as he might charm the Eyes of
their Jealousy to sleep, and so seduce them from that Guard, which is ever
necessary to preclude the Encroachments of Ambition.

But, Sir William, may we not order your Horses up? You must not think of going
till you take a plain Dinner with us. A Supper too, Sir, most joyfully,
answered the Knight. I leave London in the Morning, on a certain Expedition,
and shall not have the Pleasure of embracing you again, for some time.

Here the Bell was rung, and the Cattle and Carriage disposed of. When Mr.
Fenton thus addressed the Baronet, with a Smile. Our Harry here, Sir William,
never saw a Court, before; it is natural therefore to think that he must have
been greatly amused, and his young Heart deceived by the Splendour and Parade.
But you have seen, and observed upon many Courts, of late; pray what do you
think of the Entertainment they afford?

As of the dullest of all dull Farces, answered the Knight. All the Courts that
I have seen are nearly of the same Cast. Conceive to yourself, Sir, a Stage or
Theater of Comedians, without Auditors or Spectators. They are All Actors and
all Act, nearly, the same Part, of solemn Complaisance and nauseous Grimace.
Each intends to impose, and yet no One is imposed upon; where Professions are
taken to imply the very Reverse of what they express.

What do you say to this, Harry, says Mr. Fenton? I have very little to say,
Sir, in favor of the Actors, but the Actresses, as I take it, afford better
Entertainment. Here, Sir William and Mr. Fenton, laughed; and Harry, upon a
Wink, stepped out to bring in Homely, as it were by stealth.

Sir William, said Mr. Fenton, there is a Man come to this House, who once
saved my Life at the risque of his Own. It is a great many Years ago, and I
have not seen him since the Action, till very lately. I have sent Harry for
him, that you may learn the Particulars, and advise with me what Recompense he
ought to receive.

If the Recompense is to be proportioned to the Value of the Life he saved, my
honored Sir, I should not know where to fix the Bounds of Retribution. And in
Truth, Mr. Fenton, from my Knowledge of you this Day, I also hold myself very
highly his Debtor.

At this Instant Harry led in Homely by the Hand, and left him standing
directly opposite to the Baronet.

Homely gazed with all his Eyes, and stood mute through Astonishment. -- At
length he exclaimed, Bless me! -- Mercy upon me! -- as sure as I hope for
Heaven, -- it is -- I think it is, my dear young Master!

Sir William, at the Voice, lifted up his Eyes to Homely, and, remembering his
marked Man, rose quickly and, springing forward, embraced him with much
familiar Affection; while Mr. Fenton sat, and his Harry stood beside him, Both
rapt in their own delicious Sensibilities.

My dear Homely, my old Companion and brother Sportsman! cried Sir William, how
in the World comes this about? so joyfully, so unexpectedly to meet you here!
-- How is your Wife, and pretty Babes? I hope you left All well at Home.

Yes, please your Honor, they are All well, wonderfully well in this House, I
assure you; for, indeed, your Homely has no other Home upon Earth.

What you tell me is quite astonishing, replied the Knight; no Home for you
within the Manor and Demesne of your Friend? What Misfortunes, what Revolutions
could bring this Wonder to pass?

Sit down, said Mr. Fenton, pray be seated Mr. Homely, and give your Lord a
succinct but deliberate Account of the inimitable Pair, Sir Freestone and his
Coadjutor.

As soon as Homely had told his Tale, from the Commencement of his Distresses
to his Arrival at the Hovel, he stopped short and said -- I have something more
to impart, -- but I hope your Honor will pardon me, -- I am loath to deprive
your Friends of your Company; but then my Peggy and my Boys will be so
transported to see your dear Face again, that I cannot but beseech you to
indulge them, a Minute or two, with that Blessing.

Sir William rose, with a troubled Humanity in his Countenance, and followed to
a back Apartment, where Homely again stopped him short; and, before he would
take him to his Peggy, he there gave him a minute Detail of all his Obligations
to what he called this wonderful Family. But, pray Sir, continued he, let them
know very little of what I have told you, for nothing puts them to so much
pain, as any kind of Acknowledgments.

After a short Visit to Peggy and her Children, Sir William returned to his
Friends, with such an inward Awe and Veneration for their Characters as, for a
while, sunk his Spirits and solemnized his Features. This poor Man, Sir, said
he, has been miserably treated; but God has been exceedingly gracious to him,
in casting the Shipwreckt Wretch on such a happy Shore as this. But this makes
no Discharge of any Part of my Duty toward him.

Mark me, Homely, I am now of Age, and Lord Lechmore has no further Authority
in my Affairs; wherefore, before I leave this House, I will give you a Letter
of Attorney for the whole Agency of the Manor. Thank your Honor, thank your
Honor, cried Homely, in a Kind of Transport! if I do not prove as faithful to
you as Another I will do you Justice on myself with the first Rope I can lay
hold on.

As for that Reprobate Snack, continued the Knight, I will take Care to be up
with him. He owes the Executors of my Father six hundred and seventy Pounds. I
will have that Matter put directly in Suit, and, as soon as it is recovered, it
shall be laid out on a Commission for your Son, my Friend Tom; as I do not
choose yet to ask any Favor from the Ministry. Lastly, that you may no more be
distressed for Rent, I will never accept a Penny of it, till all your Children
are decently and competently provided for.

O Sir, exclaimed Homely, I shall be too rich, quite overburdened; I shall not
know where to lay my Treasures. Not so fast, my good Friend, replied Sir
William, smiling; you have not heard of the Draw-back that I propose to have
upon you. Whenever I reside in the Country, You are to have a hot Dish, ay and
a cool Hogshead too, ready for me and my Company. Agreed, Sir, cried Homely,
provided I may have the Liberty, during your Absence, to drink your Honor's
Health out of that same Hogshead. -- A just Reserve, said Harry, laughing. --
And full as grateful as it is jovial, cried Mr. Fenton. -- Why, Gentlemen,
rejoined Homely, a Man of Spirit would scorn to accept such Benefits, without
making Conditions.

After twelve o'Clock at Night, and an affectionate and tender Adieu, Sir
William set out by Moonlight for London.

The two following Days, were employed in preparing for Homely's Departure; and
a Coach and Four, with a Chaise, were provided for the Conveyance of him and
his Family.

The Night before their parting, Mr. Fenton desired that Homely and his Wise
should be sent to him to his Closet. As soon as they entered, he closed the
Door. My dear Friends, said he, I may not be up in the Morning to take a timely
Leave of you, it may do as well to go through that melancholy Office to Night.
-- Here, Mrs. Homely, here is some little Matter, apiece, toward beginning a
Fortune for your three pretty Daughters. Pray, Homely, take Care to have it
disposed of for them upon good Securities. Here he put three Orders, upon his
Banker, into Peggy's Hand, Each consisting of the Value of five hundred Pieces.
Then, turning to Homely, and taking him straightly in his Arms, God be with you
and your dear Peggy, my Homely, he cried, and give us All a blessed Meeting
where Friends shall part no more!

The distressed Homely was past utterance; but disengaging, and flinging
himself at the Feet of his Patron, while Peggy kept on her Knees weeping and
sobbing beside him; O, he cried, at length, Next to my God, O, next to my Lord
and my God! -- My Lord, and my Master, my Master and my Lord!

The next Morning, before Sunrise, Harry was up, and, going to Homely's
Apartment, embraced him and his Wife. He then kissed and caressed all the Girls
and Boys, round, and gave to each of them a Gold Medal to keep him in their
Remembrance.

They then adjourned to the Hall, where they found already gathered, Mr. and
Mrs. Clement with their little Dicky, Mr. James, Frank, Andrew and George, with
Mrs. Hannah, Susan, and Sarah, etc; all deploring the Departure of their
beloved Guests. The Carriages were at the Door, and Time pressed, when Homely
and his Peggy, with open Arms, trembling Lips, and swelling Eyes, began to take
their Leave. Then Homely cried aloud, God be with you, God be with you; never,
never, till I get to Heaven, shall I meet with such another dear Assembly! All
then broke aloud into Tears, and Sobbings; while Homely took his weeping Peggy
by the Hand; and breaking forth, with a heavy Heart, placed her and his Family
in the Carriages: And away they went, though in opulent Circumstances, yet with
much more oppressed Spirits, than when they arrived.

Mr. Fenton now judged it time to forward his Harry's Education, especially
with respect to his Knowledge of the World, of the Views, Pleasures, Manners,
Bents, Employments, and Characters of Mankind.

For this Purpose he proposed to leave Arabella sole Regent of his Family. And,
for a few Weeks, to stay with Clement and Harry in London, there to show him
whatever might gratify his Curiosity or merit his Inspection.

While the Coach was in waiting, and they All stood on the Hill, the great City
being extended in ample View beneath them, Mr. Fenton exclaimed: "O! London,
London, thou Mausoleum of dead Souls, how pleasant art thou to the Eye, how
beautiful in outward Prospect! but within how full of Rottenness and reeking
Abominations! They Dealers are all Students in the Mystery of Iniquity, of
Frand and Imposition on Ignorance and Credulity. Thy public Offices are hourly
exercised in Exactions and Extortion. Thy Courts of Judicature are busied in
the Sale, the Delay, or Perversion of Justice, they are shut to the Injured and
Indigent, but open to the wealthy Pleas of the Invader and Oppressor. Thy
Magistracy is often employed in secretly countenancing and abetting the Breach
of those Laws it was instituted to maintain. Thy Charities, subscribed for the
Support of the Poor, are lavished by the Trustees in pampering the Rich, where
Drunkenness swallows till it wallows, and Gluttony stuffs till it pants, and
unbuttons and stuffs again. Even the Great Ones of thy Court have audaciously
smiled away the Gloom and Horrors of Guilt, and refined, as it were, all the
Grossness thereof, by new inverting Terms and palliating Phrases. While the
Millions that crowd and hurry through thy Streets, are universally occupied in
striving and struggling, to rise by the Fall, to fatten by the Leanness, and to
thrive by the Ruin of their Fellows. Thy Offenses are rank, they steam and
cloud the Face of Heaven. The Gulf also is hollow beneath, that is one Day to
receive thee. But the Measure of thy Abominations is not yet full; and the
Number of thy Righteous has hitherto exceeded the Proportion that was found in
the first Sodom."

That Evening they went to the Opera, where Harry was so captivated by the
sentimental Meltings and varied Harmony of the Airs, that he requested Mr.
Fenton to permit him to be instructed on some Instrument. Not by my Advice, my
Dear, answered Mr. Fenton, I would not wish you to attempt any thing in which
you may not excel. Music is a Science, that requires the Application of a Man's
whole Lise in order to arrive at any Eminence. As it is enchanting in the Hand
of a Master, it is also discordant and grateing in its inferior Degrees. Your
Labors have been employed to much more valuable Purposes; and I would not, as
they say, give my Child's Time for a Song. Harry instantly acquiesced, with the
best Temper imaginable; as the Will of his beloved Patron was, truly speaking,
his own Will; and that he only wanted to know it, to be at all Times, and on
all Occasions, conformable thereto.

A few following Days were employed in visiting the Tower, in surveying the
Armory, Regalia, etc. in viewing the royal Beasts, the Monument, and Exchanges,
and lastly, in contemplating the Solemnity of Westminster Pile, with the
marbled Effigies and monumental Deposits of the Renowned in Death; the Place,
as Mr. Fenton affectingly observed, to which all the Living must finally
adjourn.

The next Night they went to the Theater, to see the Feats of Signor Volanti,
the celebrated Italian Posturemaster, Ropedancer and Equilibrist. Such Wonders
are now so common as to be scarce entertaining; but, at that Time, they were
received with Bursts and Roars of Applause.

Our Hero felt himself attached, by the similar Excellences of his own Activity
in Another; and, going behind the Scenes, he accosted Volanti in French.
Signor, said he, I have been highly entertained by your Performance this Night,
and here are five Guineas in return of the Pleasure you have given me. The
Foreigner looked at Harry, and then at the Money, with a kind of Astonishment.
I thank you, noble Sir, he cried, my poor Endeavors are seldom so liberally
rewarded. Pray, how long do you stay with us? In about a Fortnight, so please
your Nobleness, I intend to leave London. But, before I go, I would do
something to leave a Name behind me. A Day or two before my Departure, I will
fly from the Spire of Saint Clement's Church, in the Sight of all the People;
and this I will do gratis, or rather in Acknowledgment of the Favors I have
received in this Kingdom. But is it possible to execute what you propose? With
all Ease and Safety, Sir, I have done nearly as much, three Times in Germany,
and once at Madrid.

Here an arch Thought struck Harry, and, musing a Moment, will you permit me,
said he, to be the Conductor of this Affair? Allow me only to appoint the Day
and draw up your Advertisement, and I will make you a Present of twenty Pieces.
Agreed, Sir, cried Volanti, and twenty thousand Thanks to confirm the Bargain.
Accept these five Guineas then, in Earnest of my Engagement; my Servant, here,
will tell or show you where I am to be found.

That Night, at Supper, Mr. Fenton remarked an unusual Pleasantry in the
Muscles of his Darling's sweetly sober Countenance. My Harry I find, said he,
does not always impart all his Secrets to his Friends; he has certainly some
roguish Matter in Cogitation. Magicum calls, Sir, cried Harry, You are a
Conjurer, that is certain. Why, the Public, as you know, Sir, have put the FOOL
on me from my Birth; Homer says that Revenge is sweet as Honey to the Taste;
and so I am meditating in turn how to put the FOOL upon the Public. And how do
you contrive it, Harry? only by acting the old Proverb, that, one Fool makes
Many. But pray ask me not about the Manner, till I bring the Business to some
Bearing.

The next Day, being Thursday, they All went, in Mr. Fenton's Coach, to
Smithfield, where Numbers of Tents were set up, and several Drolls and
Pantomimes, etc. prepared, in Imitation of the Humors of Bartholemew Fair. The
Weather was fair and calm, and they let down all the Glasses, that they might
see, without Interruption, whatever was to be seen.

Their Coach stopped just opposite to an itinerant Stage, where a Genius, who
comprised, within his single Person, the two important Functions of a Tumbler
and Merry-Andrew, by his successive Action and Oratory, extorted Plaudits and
Huzzas from all the Spectators.

Among the rest, a Countryman, who rode upon a Mule, sat gaping and grinning,
by Intervals, in all the extatic Rapture that can be ascribed to Enthusiasm.
While his Attention was thus rivetted, two knavish Wags came, and, ungirthing
his Saddle, supported it on either hand, till a Third of the Fraternity led his
Mule away from under him, and a Fourth came with a three legged Horse, such as
Houswives dry their Linen on, and, having jamm'd it under the Saddle, they all
retreated in Peace.

The Populace were so delighted at this humorous Act of Felony, that, instead
of interrupting it, it only served to redouble their Joys and Clamours. Harry,
too, greatly chuckled and laughed at the Joke. But, when he saw the Beast led
off, and that the amazed Proprietor, on stooping to take the Bridle, had fallen
precipitately to the Ground, his Heart twitched him with a Kind of Compunction,
and, throwing himself out at the Coach Window, he made all the Speed that the
Press would admit, and, recovering the Mule, brought it back to its Owner.

Here, Friend, said he, here is your Beast again, take Care the next time that
they don't steal your Teeth. Thank you, Master, said the Clown, since you have
been so honest as to give him to me back, I will never be the One to bring you
to Sizes or Sessions. I am much obliged to your Clemency, answered Harry, but
pray let me have the Pleasure of seeing you safe mounted. So saying he held the
Stirrup, while the Booby got up and said, Well, my Lad, very well, if we happen
to meet at Croydon, we may take a Pot together.

Mr. Fenton beheld and contemplated this whole Scene with all the cordial
Gratifications that the Heart of Man could seel; and langhing, as his Favorite
entered the Coach, my honest Friend, said he, your Officiousness might have
brought us All into a Scrape; for, had you been given in Charge to the
Constable, you would probably have applied to your Companions for Bail. I don't
think, Sir, said Clement, that the Action would have been bailable, neither
could we deny that we saw the stolen Beast in his Custody. In Truth, Gentlemen,
said Harry, I partly begin to be of Mr. Veer's Opinion, that the Peasantry of
England are the most boorish and insensible of all the human Species.

In the Evening, they adjourned from Coffee to David's Harp in Fleetstreet, in
order to hear Marmulet the famed Genoese Musician, who performed on the
Psaltery, the Viol d'Amor, and other Instruments not known till then in England.

They took Mr. James with them, to partake of the Entertainment, and were shown
to a large Room, where Each paid Half a Crown at the Door.

The Room was divided into a Number of Boxes, where each Company sat apart,
while they were jointly gratified and charmed by the inimitable Execution of
the Musician.

A Flask of Burgundy was set before Mr. Fenton and his Friends, while Mr. Hardy
and Mr. Hilton, who sat in the next Box, were regaling themselves with a Flask
of Rosa Solis.

All was Silence and Attention till there was a Pause in the Performance. Then,
said Mr. Hardy, do you know, Jack, that the Earl of Albemarle is to have a
Masque on Monday Night? I am sorry to hear it, said Mr. Hilton, as I am obliged
to be out of Town. I may happen to save something by that, said Hardy, you must
lend me your Domino. Indeed, I cannot, it was torn to Fritters in a Scuffle as
I came out from the last Masquerade. Lend me your Masque then. That, too, was
lost at the same time, but what occasion can you have for a Masque, Hardy? I am
sure no One will take that for a natural Face. Mine is the Face of Mars,
Hilton, yours that of Adonis, with which no Modern Venus will ever be sinitten,
I promise you. I will engage to outrival an Army of such Jackanapes in an
Assault on the Fair. If Impudence may compensate for the Want of other
Artillery, I believe you may do Wonders, Hardy. And it does compensate, my
Friend. Women, take my Word and Experience for it, love nothing of their own
Resemblance, except in the Glass. They detest any thing that looks like an
Ambiguity in the Sex. While what you are pleased to call Impudence, Jack,
spares their Modesty, saves them the Appearance of an Advance on their Part,
and gives them the Pleasure of piquing themselves on their extraordinary
Virtue, in Case they should happen to make a Defense. However, since you have
complimented me, on my Assurance, I will put it to the Test on this Occasion;
and go to his Excellency's Ball, without any other Vizard save this which
Nature, in her great Bounty, has bestowed.

When our Company were on the Return to their Lodgings, Harry, said Mr. Fenton,
would you not like to go to this Masquerade? Why, Sir, as I have not yet seen
One, perhaps it might not be amiss to satisfy my Curiosity for once in my Life.
In Truth, said Mr. Fenton, I wish they never had been introduced into this
Kingdom, as they are Inlets to Intrigue, and give Countenance to
Licentiousness. However, for once in your Life, as you say, you shall be
gratified, my Harry. Be pleased to tell me, Sir, are they very entertaining?
They would be extremely diverting, my Dear, if People acted up to the
Characters that they pretend to represent. But, on the contrary, they have
Sailors who don't know a Point in the Compass or the Name of a Rope in the
Ship. Shepherds and Shepherdesses who never eloped from the cockney Dialect of
the City. Indian Queens who can say nothing as to their Subjects or their
Sovereignty. Gods and Goddesses totally ignorant of their own History in the
Mythology. And Italian Cardinals who will swear you in the Phrase of a
Yorkshire Foxhunter.

But, what shall we do for Tickets, Harry? I don't care to apply to my Friends,
for Fear of discovering that we are in Town. O Sir, said Mr. James, I am
acquainted with his Excellency's Major Domo, and can procure you as many
Tickets as You please.

Mr. Fenton assumed to himself, for the present, the Appointment of Harry's
Character and Dress. As the Plainness of your Garb has hitherto, said he, been
a Masque and Disguise to your internal Ornaments; the Brilliancy of your Dress
shall now, on the other Hand, disguise and conceal the Simplicity of your
Manners.

About two Hours before the Opening of the Ball, Harry wrapped himself in a
Cloak of black Bays, and stepped into a hackney Coach with Mr. James, who had
promised to introduce him to his Friend Mr. Dominic, in order for him to
reconnoitre the several Scenes of Operation before the Action began.

The Major Domo received Harry with the utmost Complacence; for he held his
Masque in his Hand, and the Loveliness of his Aspect shone with peculiar Luster
through the Blackness of his Attire.

After surveying several Apartments, they passed through the long Room and
entered, by an arched Gateway, into a Kind of Saloon, at the upper End of which
was a Pedestal of about five Feet in height, whereon a celebrated Statue of the
Hercules Farnese had formerly stood.

Harry eyed it attentively and, conceiving a sudden Frolic, he instantly cast
away his Cloak, clapped on his Mask and winged Helmet, grasped his Caduceus
with his Right, and, laying his Left on the Top of the Pedestal, sprung lightly
up; and threw himself into that Attitude, to which the Statuaries have formed
their Mercury, when just prepared for flight.

His Headpiece was of thinly plated but polished Gold, buckled together at the
joining by four burning Carbuncles. His Jacket was of Genoa Silk, died in Ultra
Marine, exceeding the Tint of an Egyptian Sky. It was braced close to his Body
with Emerald Clasps, that showed the Finess of his Proportion to inimitable
Advantage, and over the Whole, in celestial Confusion, were sown Stars, of
different Magnitudes, All powdered with Diamonds.

The Moment that Harry cast himself into his Posture, Mr. Dominic started back
seven or eight Paces, and, raising his Hands, with stareing Eyes, and a Mouth
of open Amazement, at length he exclaimed; Stay a little, my dear sweet Master!
do now, do but stay just as you are for a Minute, and you will oblige me past
Expression, I will be your Own for ever.

So saying, he turned off, and running to an adjacent Apartment, where their
Majesty's, with the Princess of Denmark, the Princess of Hesse, and the Chief
of the Court were gathered; he told his Master aloud, that he had the greatest
Curiosity to show him that human Eye ever beheld.

All rose with Precipitation, and crowded after the Earl and the royal Pair, as
close as Decency would admit, till they came to the Saloon and beheld, with
Astonishment, the Person, Shape, Attitude, and Attire of our Hero.

Some doubted, but Most believed that he was a real Statute, placed there by
his Excellency on Purpose for a Surprise. Sir Fielding, who was the
acknowledged Connoisseur of the Age, and was, in Fact, what the People of taste
call an elegans Formarum Spectator, exclaimed with some Vehemence, Never,
never, did I behold such Beauty of Symmetry, such Roundings of Angles; where,
where, my Lord, could you get this inestimable Acquisition? Others cried,
Phidias, Phidias never executed the like; all the Works of Praxiteles were
nothing to it!

The Earl, however, was well apprised of the Deception, and knew that our
Mereury was no Part of his Property. -- Son of Maia, said he aloud, what
Tidings from Heaven? -- A Message, answered Harry, from my Father Jupiter to
their Majesty's -- And pray, what may your Errand intend? -- Matters of highest
Importance; that they are the favorite Representatives of my Father upon
Earth. And that, while their Majesty's continue the Monarch of a free and
willing People, they are greater than if they were Regents of a Universe of
Slaves. -- All buzzed their Applause and Admiration. -- It must be he,
whispered the King -- it can be no Other, cried the Queen -- Albemarle,
whispered his Majesty, we have marked this Youth for our Own; keep your Eye
upon him, and do your best Endeavors to engage and bind him to us.

In the mean time, Harry, on delivering his celestial Message, flew like a
Feather from his Post, and casting his Cloak about him, vanished into an
adjoining Closet.

The Company now began to gather fast, and Harry, stealing from his Retreat,
kept his Cloud about his Sky, and mingled in the Crowd. Mr. Clement had
accompanied Mr. Fenton in Dominos. They soon discovered Harry, and were highly
diverted by the Account which he gave them of his Metamorphosis into a Statue.

While the Assembly was dividing into Pairs and chatty Parties, a Phenomenon
entered that drew all their Attention. The Honorable Major Gromley, the
lustiest and fattest young Man in the Kingdom, advanced without a Masque, in
Petticoats, a slobbering Bib and Apron. He carried a large Round of Bread and
Butter in one Hand, while Lady Betsy M^nit, an elderly Miss of about three Feet
high, held his Leading Strings with her Left and, in her Right, brandished a
Birch Rod of lengthened Authority. His Governante pressed him forward and
seemed to threaten Chastisement for his Delay; while the jolly, broad, foolish,
humourous, half laughing, half crying, Baby Face of the Major extorted Peals of
Laughter from All who were present. And this is sufficient to convince us that
the Performers of the ancient Drama could not possibly, in Masks, excite the
Passions of Nature. No Excellence of Voice or Gesture, of Action or Emphasis,
could compensate for the Exclusion of the immediate Interpreters of the Soul,
the living Speech of the Eye, and varied Expression of the Countenance.

After the Major had leisurely traversed the full length of the Room, and
inimitably executed the Whole of his Part, he retired to undress and assume a
new Appearance.

Mean while, two Females entered in very unusal Habits. The First was dressed
in a choice Collection of old English and Scotch Ballads, from Chevy Chase and
the Fragment of Hardy Canute, down to Barbara Allen and the Babes in the Wood.
The Other was all hung from Top to Bottom with Looking-glasses.

Immediately the Crowd gathered about them. All, who were fond of their own
History, preferable to that of Others, paid their Homage, in a circling
Throng, to the Queen of the Looking-glasses. While the Few who preferred
Instruction were intent in perusing the Fair who was covered with Knowledge.
But, the Lady of the Mirrors did not long retain her Votaries; her Glasses were
all Emblems of her own Disposition, they were the Glasses of Scandal and
Calumny, and represented the human Species in the most distorted View; Some
lengthened and Some widened their Objects (...) Measure, while Others wholly
in^^^^^ and turned them topsy turvy. All (...) away in Disgust from such
Prospects or their own Persons, and the reflecting Lady was justly lest to
glitter apart from Society.

The next who entered was a Goliath, all sheathed in complete Steel. He advanced
with slow and majestic Steps to the Sideboard, and asking for a Flask of
Champain, turned it down without taking it once from his Head. He then demanded
Another, and Another, and so on, till the Providore, who had looked and longed
in vain to see him drop, ran pannic-struck to his Master, and, in a half
Whisper, said, my Lord, your Cellars will scarcely suffice to quench the Thirst
of one Man here, he has already turned down fifteen Flasks of Champain, and
still is unsatisfied and calls for more. Then give him fifteen Hogsheads,
replied the Earl laughing, and if that will not answer, send out for another
Set.

In the mean time, the mailed Champion had withdrawn from the Sideboard, and,
with a large drinking Glass in his Hand, advanced till he got into the midst of
the Assembly. He then turned a little Instrument that was fixed in a certain
Part of his double cased Armor, and, filling the Glass to the Brim, he
unclasped the lower Part of his Bever, and accosting a Peruvian Princess who
stood just opposite, permit me the Honor, Madam, says he, of drinking your
Highness's Health. So saying, the Liquor was out of Sight in a Twinkling. Will
your Royal Highness, continued he, be pleased to try how you relish our
European Wines? I am obliged to you, Sir, said she, I am actually athirst;
then, raising her Mask below, she pledged him to the Bottom. Her Companion, a
shining Arcadian, advanced and requested the same Favor. Then Another, and
another Lady, and several Others in Succession, All of whom he graciously
gratified, till he was nearly exhausted. Some of the Men then pressed to him,
and entreated for a Glass; no, no, Gentlemen, said he, go and be served
elsewhere, I am a Merchant for Ladies alone, I import no Liquors for vile male
Animals.

Our former Acquaintance, Mr. Hardy, had adventured according to Promise
without a Masque. After looking about a while for some Object of his Gallantry,
he fixed upon a Lady of a very elegant Shape and sprightly Appearance.

When they had bandied, between them, some occasional Chat, of more Smartness
than Humor, and more Wit than Meaning, He called for a favorite Air and led
the Fair One a Minuet, in which they Both performed assez bien.

He now began to grow more warm in his Addresses. If your Face, Madam, said he,
should happen to be answerable to the Enchantments of your Form, and the Siren
in your Voice, I beseech you to keep that Mask on for ever, the Safety of
Mankind is interested in my Request. But suppose, said she, that my Face should
happen to prove an Antidote to the Danger of my other Charms? then, Madam, let
me see it by all Means, and make haste, I pray you before I am past Remedy. I
see, said she, tittering, I see that you are already more than half a dying
Man; poor Wretch, I pity you, and have taken it into my Head to slay you
outright, in order to put you out of Pain.

So saying, she drew her Mask on one Side, and showed him, indeed, a very
lovely Countenance. But while his Flood of complimentary Eloquence was just
upon breaking forth, hush, Sir, cried the Lady, I will not hear a Syllable,
till you first return the Compliment that I have paid you, and let me see what
you have got under that Vizard of yours. Here Hardy, in spite of Impudence,
stood mute with Astonishment. The Lady burst into a Laugh; the Joke was caught
and spread like wild Fire; the Laugh grew universal; all Eyes were on poor
Hardy, and a hundred Tongues cried, at once, your Masque, Sir, your Masque,
take off your Masque for the Lady! This was something more than human Assurance
could stand. Hardy retired with precipitate Confusion; and justly suffered for
the Presumption of his boasted Facility of Conquests over the Fair.

Our Hero had hitherto kept himself concealed, being secretly ashamed of the
Luster of his Apparel; but, at Mr. Fenton's desire he laid his Cloak aside,
and, instantly, all the Eyes of the Assembly were upon him. In order to avoid
their Gaze, he advanced into the Throng, where a Parcel of circling Females
asked him a Number of insignificant Questions, to which he returned, in Kind,
Answers pretty nearly as insignificant.

At length a Diana approached, whose Diamond Crescent was of the Value of a
princely Ransom. She took him carelessly by the Hand, and said, come, Brother
Mercury, let us give these Mortals a Sample of what we Coelestials can perform.
Lead where you please, Madam, said Harry, I cannot miss my Way while I tread in
the Light of so fair a Moon.

The Lady called to the Orchestre for a Saraband, and All made ample Room,
attentive to the Motions of the shining Pair.

The Dance began, and the Spectators in a Manner suppressed their Breathing for
fear of giving or receiving the smallest Interruption. The Performers stepped
Music, their Action was Grace, and they seemed with Difficulty retained to the
Floor over which they moved. They ended, and the Assembly was still mute with
Astonishment, till they broke out into a general Murmur of Praise.

Mr. Mercury, said Diana, the Story of Argus tells us that you were formerly
accustomed to set Folk to sleep; but, for the present, you have opened all Eyes
to Observation. Ah, Madam, answered Harry, could I have guessed at the Moon
that was to shine this Night, I should have assumed a very different Character.
What Character, I pray you? that of Endymion, Madam. I wish, she whispered,
that You were a Prince, or that I were a Peasant, and so saying, she turned
from him and mixed in the Crowd.

Harry was next addressed by a Shepherdess, and again by a Nun. But, he
declined, as honorably as he could, to tend the Flock of the One; or to be the
Cause of any Breach of Vows in the Other, observing to her, that she had
already taken the Veil. The Boy's a FOOL, said she; I know, said Harry.

A Gipsy then accosted, and taking him by the Hand, will you be pleased, Sir,
to be told your Fortune, said she? By no Means, my sweet voiced Cassandra,
answered Harry, I would avoid, above all things, prying into Futurity.
Knowledge, Sir, is surely desirable, and above all Foreknowledge. Not so, said
Harry; Foreknowledge of Evil would but double the Misery; and Foreknowledge of
Good would deprive me of Hope by Certainty, and Hope is a Blessing, perhaps,
preferable to Possession. Tell me, Sir, and tell me truly, did you ever yet
see the Girl that you could like? Yes, Madam, two or three, for whom I have
conceived a very tender Friendship, but no One yet for whom I have conceived a
Passion. Ah then, Mr. Mercury, said the gentle Prophetess, I have only to
desire the last Cast of your Office; when I am dead, be so grateful as to waft
my friendly Spirit to the Shades of Elysium, there to join Dido and other
unfortunate Lovers.

So saying She turned and retired, with a Sigh, that entered, and sunk into the
Heart of our Hero.

The Company now began to depart, when the Earl of Albemarle, coming up to
Harry, took him a little apart, and, throwing his Arm over his Shoulder,
pressed him to him and said, my dear Fellow, you have done me signal Honor
this Night; pray double the Favor to me, by letting me see you again speedily
and as often as you can. For the present, you must not go till their Majesty's
have spoke with You. Not to Night, so please your Excellency, answered Harry;
at all other Times, I shall be ready to attend and serve their Majesty's,
without any Masque.

The next Morning, Mr. Fenton was much surprised by a Visit from the great Man;
Mr. Dominic had apprised his Master where he was to be found. During Breakfast,
the Earl pressed eagerly for Harry's Attendance at Court, and promised every
Advantage and Honor that the Crown could bestow. You must pardon me, my Lord,
said Mr. Fenton. I am willing to advance to You two hundred thousand Pounds
more, toward his Majesty's present Expedition against the French, whom I look
upon to be our natural and salutary Enemies. They are as Carthage was to Rome,
they hold us in Exercise, and keep a quarrelsome People from falling out among
themselves. Indeed, my Lord, I am desirous of gratifying my royal Master with
any Thing except the Sacrifice of my Child. I cannot part with him till his
Education is completed; and then, if he answers my Expectations, I doubt I may
be more unwilling to part with him than ever.

In the Afternoon our Company went again to the Tower, to see as well as to
hear the recent Story of the great Lion and the little Dog.

They found the Place thronged, and All were obliged to pay treble Prices, on
Account of the unprecedented Novelty of the Show; so that the Keeper, in a
short Space, acquired a little Fortune.

The great Cage in the Front was occupied by a Beast who, by Way of
preeminence, was called the King's Lion; and, while he traversed the Limits of
his straitened Dominions, he was attended by a small and very beautiful black
Spaniel, who frisked and gambolled about him, and, at Times, would pretend to
snarl, and bite at him; and again the noble Animal, with an Air of fond
Complacence, would hold down his Head, while the little Creature licked his
formidable Chops. Their History, as the Keeper related, was this:

It was customary for All, who were unable or unwilling to pay their Sixpence,
to bring a Dog or Cat as an Oblation to the Beasts in lieu of Money to the
Keeper. Among Others, a Fellow had caught up this pretty black Spaniel in the
Streets, and he was accordingly thrown into the Cage of the great Lion.
Immediately the little Animal trembled and shivered, and crouched and threw
itself on its Back, and put forth its Tongue, and held up its Paws, in
supplicatory Attitudes, as an Acknowledgment of superior Power and praying for
Mercy. In the mean Time the lordly Brute, instead of devouring it, beheld it
with an Eye of philosophic Inspection. He turned it over with one Paw, and then
turned it with the Other; and smelled to it, and seemed desirous of courting a
further Acquaintance.

The Keeper, on seeing this, brought a large Mess of his own Family-Dinner; but
the Lion kept aloof and refused to eat, keeping his Eye on the Dog, and
inviting him as it were to be his Taster. At length, the little Animal's Fears
being something abated, and his Appetite quickened by the Smell of the
Victuals, he approached flowly, and, with trembling, ventured to eat. The Lion
then advanced gently, and began to partake, and they finished their Meal very
lovingly together.

From this Day the strictest Friendship commenced between them, a Friendship
consisting of all possible Affection and Tenderness on the Part of the Lion,
and of the utmost Confidence and Boldness on the Part of the Dog; insomuch that
he would lay himself down to sleep, within the Fangs and under the Jaws of his
terrible Patron.

A Gentleman, who had lost the Spaniel, and had advertised a Reward of two
Guineas to the Finder, at length heared of the Adventure, and went to reclaim
his Dog. You see, Sir, said the Keeper, it would be a great Pity to part such
loving Friends. However, if you insist upon your Property, you must even be
pleased to take him yourself; it is a Task that I would not engage in for five
hundred Guineas. The Gentleman rose into great Wrath, but finally chose to
acquiesce, rather than have a personal Dispute with the Lion.

As Mr. Fenton had a Curiosity to see the two Friends eat together, he sent for
twenty Pounds of boiled Beef, which was accordingly cut in Pieces and given
into the Cage; when, immediately, the little Brute, whose Appetite happened to
be eager art the time, was desirous of making a Monopoly of the whole, and
putting his Paws upon the Meat, and grumbling and barking, he audaciously flew
in the Face of the Lion. But the generous Creature, instead of being offended
by his impotent Companion, started back and seemed terrified at the Fury of his
Attack, neither attempted to eat a Bit, till his Favorite had tacitly given
Permission.

When they were Both gorged, the Lion stretched and turned himself and lay down
in an evident Posture for Repose, but this his sportive Companion would not
admit. He frisked and gamboled about him, barked at him, would now scrape and
tear at his Head with his Claws, and again seize him by the Ear, and bite and
pull away; while the noble Beast appeared affected by no other Sentiment save
that of Pleasure and Complacence.

But, let us proceed to the tragic Catastrophe of this extraordinary Story; a
Story still known to Many, as delivered down by Tradition from Father to Son.

In about twelve Months, the little Spaniel sickened and died, and left his
loving Patron the most desolate of Creatures. For a time, the Lion did not
appear to conceive otherwise than that his Favorite was asleep. He would
continue to smell to him, and then would stir him with his Nose, and turn him
over with his Paw; but, finding that all his Efforts to awake him were vain, he
would traverse his Cage from End to End at a swift and uneasy Pace, then stop,
and look down upon him with a fixed and drooping Regard; and again lift his
Head on high, and open his horrible Throat, and prolong a Roar, as of distant
Thunder, for several Minutes together.

They attempted, but in vain, to convey the Carcass from him, he watched it
perpetually, and would suffer nothing to touch it. The Keeper then endeavored
to tempt him with a Variety of Victuals, but he turned from all that was
offered with loathing. They then put several living Dogs into his Cage, and
these he instantly tore piecemeal, but left their Members on the Floor. His
Passions being thus inflamed, he would dart his Fangs into the Boards and pluck
away large Splinters, and again grapple at the Bars of his Cage, and seem
enraged at his Restraint from tearing the World to Pieces.

Again, as quite spent, he would stretch himself by the Remains of his beloved
Associate, and gather him in with his Paws, and put him to his Bosom; and then
utter under Roars of such a terrible Melancholy, as seemed to threaten All
around, for the Loss of his little Playfellow, the only Friend, the only
Companion that he had upon Earth.

For five Days he thus languished, and gradually declined, without taking any
Sustenance, or admitting any Comfort; till one Morning, he was found dead, with
his Head lovingly reclined on the Carcass of his little Friend. They were Both
interred together, and their Grave plentifully watered by the Tears of the
Keeper and his loudly lamenting Family. -- But, to return.

When our Company were on their Way from the Tower to their Lodgings, Sir, said
Harry, what we have just seen reminds me of the Opinion of my Friend Peter
Patience, that One who is fearless cannot be provoked. You saw how that little
teasing, petulant Wretch had the Insolence to fly in the Face of his
Benefactor, without offending or exciting in him any Kind of Resentment. True,
Harry, for the Lion was sensible that his testy Companion was little, and
impotent, and depended upon him, and had Confidence in his Clemency, and
therefore he loved him with all his Faults. Anger, however, in some Cases, is
not only allowable but becomes a Duty. The Scripture says, be angry but sin
not. We ought to feel and fear for Others; and Lust, Violence, and Oppression
of every Sort, will excite the Indignation of a generous and benevolent Person,
though he may not fear for himself.

After Supper, Harry appeared to ruminate, and said, How comes it, Sir, that
Creatures, not endued with Reason or Conscience, shall yet, in the Affections
that are peculiarly called humane, exceed even most of the human Species? You
have seen that it was the Case between the Lion and little Dog.

It was the Opinion, my Harry, of an ancient Philosopher, that God was the Soul
and Spirit of Brutes; and this he judged from observing that what we call
Instinct, was incomparably wiser, more sagacious, and more accomplished for
attaining its Ends, throughout its Sphere of Action, than the most perfect
human Reason. Now, had this Philosopher, instead of saying that God was the
Soul of Brutes, barely alleged that he ruled and dictated within them, he
would not have gone a Tittle wide of the Truth.

God indeed is, himself, the Beauty and the Benefit of all his Works. As they
cannot exist but in him and by him, so his Impression is upon them, and his
Impregnation is through them.

Though the Elements, and all that we know of Nature and Creature, have a
Mixture of natural and physical Evil; God is, however, throughout, an internal,
though often, a hidden Principal of Good, and never wholly departs from his
Right of Dominion and Operation in his Creatures: But is, and is alone, the
Beauty and Beneficence, the whole Glory and Graciousness that can possibly be
in them.

As the Apostle says, the invisible Things of God are made manifest and visible
by the Things that are seen. He is the secret and central Light that kindles up
the Sun, his dazzling Representative; and he lives, enlightens, and comforts in
the Diffusion of his Beams.

His Spirit inspires and actuates the Air; and is, in it, a Breath of Life to
all his Creatures. He blooms in the Blossom, and unfolds in the Rose. He is
Fragrance in Flowers, and Flavor in Fruits. He holds Infinitude within a
Speck, and opens his World of Wonders in the Minims of Nature. He is the Virtue
of every Heart that is softened by a Sense of Pity or Touch of Benevolence. He
coos in the Turtle, and bleats in the Lamb; and, through the Paps of the stern
Bear and implacable Tygress, he yields forth the Milk of loving Kindness to
their little Ones. Even, my Harry, when we hear the delicious Enchantment of
Music; it is but an external Sketch, a distant and faint Echo of those
sentimental and rapturous Tuneings that rise up, throughout the Immensity of
our God, from Eternity to Eternity.

Thus all Things are secretly pregnant with their God. And the Lover of
Sinners, the universal Redeemer, is a Principle of Good within them, that
contends with the Malignity of their lapsed State. And thus, as the Apostle
speaks, all Nature is in Travail and groaneth to be delivered from the Evil.
'Till the Breath of the Love of God shall kindle up the final Fire, out of
which the new Heavens and new Earth shall come forth, as Gold seven times
refined, to shine for ever and ever!

HARRY, agreeable to his Covenant with Signor Volanti, had penned the following
Advertisement, and inserted it in all the public Papers, to wit. -- On Saturday
next, between the Hours of Ten and Twelve in the Forenoon, the celebrated
Dominico Jachimo Tonino Volanti will take his Flight from the Spire of
Clement's Steeple, and alight, at the Distance of two Bows shot, on the Strand,
and this he will perform before the Eyes of all People.

On the impatiently expected Morning, Harry took Mr. Clement with him in a hack
Chaise, and found an innumerable Concourse, as well of the Gentry in their
Coaches, as of the Populace on Foot. London had poured forth its Numbers to
behold this astonishing Flight. The Windows were all Eyes on every Side, and
the House Tops were hung with Clusters of People as of Bees.

After Harry had surveyed the Crowd, with inward Titillation, he whispered to
Clement and said, You shall see now, what a sudden Discomfiture I will make of
this huge Army.

He then put forth his Head, and said to All around, Don't Ye yet perceive, my
Friends, what Fools we are all made, don't ye remember that this is the First
of April?

He had scarce spoke the Words, when they spread from Man to Man, and soon were
muttered throughout the Assembly. And then louder, and more loud, the First of
April, the First of April, was repeated all about.

The Company now began to be in Motion. All Heads were instantly withdrawn from
the late thronged Windows, and the House Tops began to be cleared with a
shameful Caution.

Immediately was heard the rolling of many Wheels, and the Lashing of many
Whips, while every Coachman pressed through the Crowd, impatient to deliver his
honorable Freight from the public Shame. But the Populace, now, began to
relish a Joke that was so much against their Betters; and, in Peals of
Laughter, and united Shouts of Triumph, they echoed and reechoed after them,
April Fools! April Fools!

Among Others, Lord Bottom had come with his Friend Rakely, in an elevated
Phaeton, of which his Lordship was Charioteer. As they happened to brush close
by Harry's Carriage, swearing, and puffing, and lashing, and cursing at the
Crowd, Harry cried to his old Enemy, you need not be in so violent a Hurry, my
Lord, perhaps you are not so great a Foot as you imagine.

The Fools of Fashion were scarce withdrawn, when a long and strong Rope was
let down from the Top of the Steeple, to which it was fastened at the upper
End. A Man then, laying hold on it below, dragged it along through the Crowd,
and braced it, at a great Distance, to an Iron Ring that was stapled into a
Post, purposely sunk on a level with the Pavement. They then brought a large
and well stuffed Feather Bed, and fixed it under the Cord where it joined the
Ring.

In the mean time, Volanti appeared on the Top of the Steeple, and bending
cautiously forward, and getting the Cord within an Iron Groove that was braced
to his Bosom, he pushed himself onward, and, with a kindling Rapidity, flew
over the Heads of the shouting Multitude, poising himself with expanded Legs
and Arms, as he passed, till he was landed, without Damage, on his yielding
Receiver. And, in the very next Papers, Harry published the following
Advertisement, to wit.

Before the First of April next, Signor Dominico Jachimo Tonino Volanti, by the
Help of Canvas Wings, contrived for the Purpose, proposes to fly over Sea, from
Dover to Calais, and invites all his London Friends to come and see him set
out.

On the Evening of the following Monday, our Company went to the King's
Theater, and Mr. Clement told Mr. Fenton, by the Way, how Harry had made double
Fools of the Citizens, first in bringing them together, and then in sending
them away.

The Moor of Venice was the appointed Entertainment for the Night. Mr. Montfort
was to perform the Part of Othello, Mrs. Montfort that of Emilia, and Miss
Bracegirdle, their young Ward, the Part of Desdemona.

All was carried on to the Satisfaction of the Audience, till they were
somewhat advanced in the Fourth Act, when Lord Mohun (as Milton has it) flown
with Insolence and Wine, entered and seated himself in one of the Stage-Boxes.

He gave his whole Attention and Applause to the fair Desdemona, and, as soon
as the Act was over, he slipped behind the Scenes, and began to address her in
a Strain of licentious Gallantry. But, as Miss Bracegirdle answered him with a
cold Kind of Disdain, his Nobility was piqued, and, catching her about the
Neck, he thrust his Hand into her Bosom.

The Girl instantly shrieked, and Montfort coming up, forbear, my Lord, said
he, the young Gentlewoman is virtuous and of good Education, and such Treatment
is unbeseeming a Man of Honor. Virtue and Education among Actors and
Actresses! exclaimed his Lordship, hence, vile Plebeian, and know your Distance
better. And, so saying, he proceeded to an Action of still greater Indecency.

The unhappy Montfort then cried, I will not suffer such Usage from any Man
under the Crown; I am her Guardian, it is my Duty to protect her, and, at the
same Time, he pushed away his Lordship with some Violence. A Blow, a Blow,
cried Mohun, and from a Vagabond too, Wretch, take the instant Chastisement of
your Insolence. Then springing back, he suddenly plucked out his Sword, and ran
the worthy Montfort through the Body, who immediately dropped and expired on
the Spot.

The Women instantly uttered Shriek after Shriek, and, falling on the Body,
sent forth repeated Cries of the bitterest Lamentation. The Audience were then
in an Uproar, and called aloud to know the Meaning of the Disturbance: when an
Actor hastily advanced to the Front of the Stage, and, with wringing Hands,
informed them of what had happened.

Our Hero, thereupon, started up, and putting one Hand between the Spikes, he
vaulted high over them into the Stage, and, drawing out his Sword, he ran
about, searching for and enquiring after the Murderer; as did some other
Gentlemen who hastened round for the Purpose. But Lord Mohun, for the present,
had made his Escape. And, though he was afterward indicted, the Great Ones
contrived Means for quashing the Affair, and he was never brought to Trial.

The Blood of the Good Montfort, however, was not long unattoned. Lord Mohun,
shortly after, fell by the Hand of the Duke of Hamilton, in a Duel behind
Montague House.

Harry had now seen whatever London could exhibit of elegant, curious, or
pleasing; and Mr. Fenton judged it Time to hold up to him the melancholy
Reverse of this Picture, to show him the House of Mourning the End of all Men;
to show him the dreary Shades and frightful Passages of Mortality, which
Humanity shudders to think of, but through which human Nature, of Necessity,
must go.

For this Purpose, he took him to the GENERAL HOSPITAL, where Death opened all
his Gates, and showed himself in all his Forms. But, the great Poet, on this
Occasion, has anticipated all Description.

-- Immediately a Place
Before his Eyes appeared -- sad, noisome, dark.
A Lazar-house it seemed, wherein were laid
Numbers of all Diseased, all Maladies
Of ghastly Spasm, of racking Torture, Qualms,
Of heart-sick Agony -- all fev'rous Kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestine Stone and Ulcer; Cholic Pangs,
Daemoniac Phrenzy, moping Melancholy,
And Moon struck Madness; pining Atrophy,
Dropsies, and Asthmas, and joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the Groans -- Despair
Tended the Sick, busiest from Couch to Couch,
And over them triumphant, Death his Dart
Shook, but delayed to strike, though often invoked
With Vows, as their chief Good.
MILTON. While Mr. Fenton led his Pupil, through groaning Galleries and the
Chambers of Death and Disease, Harry let down the Leaf of his Hat, and drew it
over his Eyes, to conceal his Emotions. All that Day he was silent, and his
Countenance downcast; and, at Night, he hastened to Bed, where he wept a large
Tribute to the mournfully inevitable Condition of Man's miserable State upon
Earth.

The next Day, Mr. Fenton took him to the Bethlehem Hospital for Idiots and
Lunatics. But when Harry beheld and contemplated Objects, so shocking to
Thought, so terrible to Sight; when he had contemplated, I say, the Ruin above
all Ruins, human Intelligence and human Reason so fearfully overthrown; where
the Ideas of the Soul, though distorted and misplaced, are quick and all alive
to Horror and Agony; he grew sick and turned pale, and, suddenly catching his
Uncle by the Arm, come, Sir, let us go, said he, I can stand this no longer.

When they had reached Home, and that Harry was more composed; Are all the
Miseries, Sir, said he, that we have witnessed these two Days, the Consequences
of Sin? Even so, indeed, my Harry, all these and Thousands more, equally
pitiable and disgusting, are the natural Progeny of that Woe-begetting Parent.
Nor are those Miseries confined to Hospitals alone; every House, nay every
Bosom is a certain though secret Lazar-house, where the sick Couch is
preparing, with all the dismal Apparatus, for Tears and Lamentations, for
Agonies and Death.

Since that is the Case, Sir, who would laugh any more; is it not like Feasting
in the Midst of Famine, and Dancing amid the Tombs?

All Things in their Season, my Dear, provided that those who laugh be as
though they laughed not, rememb'ring that they must weep. And provided that
those who weep be as though they wept not, having Joy in their Knowledge that
the Fashion of this World quickly passes away.

On the following Day, Mr. Fenton returned to Hamstead, but left three thousand
Pounds with Harry and Mr. Clement, to be disposed of, at their Discretion,
among the Poor of the several Parishes of London and Westminster.

For this beneficent Purpose, they applied to the Clergy and Churchwardens of
the respective Parishes, but did not wholly trust to their Recommendation. They
witnessed in Person the Merits of the several Objects. After the Example of
their divine Master, they went about doing Good; changing the Face of
Affliction into Cheer; turning the Voice of Mourning into Songs of
Thanksgiving; lightening every Burden, supplying every Want, and binding up the
broken of Heart.

One Evening, as our Companions were drinking Tea in the Temple-Exchange
Coffee-House, a Man, advanced in Years, but of a very respectable Appearance,
got up and addressed the Assembly.

Gentlemen, said he, among the several Hospitals and other charitable
Foundations that have done Honor to the Humanity of the Inhabitants of this
City, there is one still wanting, which, as I conceive, above all others, would
give Distinction to the Beneficence of its Founders; it is a House for
repenting Prostitutes, an Assylum for unhappy Wretches who have no other Home,
to whom all Doors are shut, to whom no Haven is open, no Habitation, or Hole
for Rest upon the Face of the Earth.

Most of them have been seduced from native Innocence and Modesty by the Arts
of cruel Men. Many have been deceived under Promise and Vows of Marriage; some,
under the Appearance of the actual Ceremony, and afterward abandoned, or turned
forth to Infamy by their barbarous and base Undoers. Shall no Place then be
left for Repentance even to those who do repent? forbid it Charity, forbid it
Manhood. Man is born the natural Protector of the Weakness of Woman, and if he
has not been able to guard her Innocence from Invasion, he ought at least to
provide a Reception for her Return to Virtue.

I have the Plan of this charitable Foundation in my Pocket; and, if any of
you, Gentlemen, approve my Proposal, and are willing to subscribe, or to
solicit your Friends to so beneficent a Purpose, I request your Company to the
Leg Tavern over the Way.

Here, the Speaker walked toward the Door, and was followed by Harry and
Clement, and thirteen or fourteen more of the Assembly.

When a Flask of Port was brought, and the Company seated round a large Table;
the Gentleman produced his Plan, with a Summary of the Rules and Institutes for
the Conduct of the House, which he proposed to call the Magdalen-House. A Plan
which has since been espoused, and happily executed by others, without
ascribing any of the Merit to the first Projector.

As all present applauded the Manner of the Scheme, and Intention of the
Charity, each of them subscribed from a hundred to twenty Pounds, till it came
to Harry's Turn, who subscribed a thousand Pounds in Mr. Fenton's Name.

I suppose, Sir, said one of the Company, that your largest Contributions will
arise from the Ladies, as the Whole is intended for the Benefit of the Sex. I
shall not, answered the Gentleman, apply to a single Lady on this Occasion. Not
one of them will dare to contribute a Penny, lest it should be thought that
they partly allow, in themselves, the Vices that they can pardon or patronize
in others. It is this that makes the Case of the Wretches, whom we are about to
befriend, deplorable beyond Measure. They are first betrayed by our Sex, and
then driven out to irretrievable Infamy and Misery by their own. For Women to
Women, are as Turkeys to Turkeys, do but cast a little Dirt upon the Head of
any one of them, and the rest of the Flock combine, in an Instant, to pick out
her Eyes and to tear her to Pieces.

Mr. Mole, a learned Philosopher, and a Man of principal Figure in the present
Company, then addressed the Projector and said, if you will admit me, Sir, into
Partnership in the Conduct of your Scheme, I will engage to levy Contributions
to the amount of some Thousands, over and above the Hundred I have already
subscribed. You are heartily welcome, Sir, replied the Gentleman, either to
join or take the Conduct of the Whole upon yourself. Provided the Good is done,
I care not by what Means, all my Ends will be answered, I wish to be nameless.
That is not fair neither, said another of the Company; you, Mr. Goodville, had
the Trouble of contriving this Business, and you ought, at least, to have the
Honor, if not the Conduct of your own Plan.

Mr. Goodville, Mr. Goodville! exclaimed Clement in a Surprise, eagerly staring
at him, and recollecting, as from a Dream, the altered Features of his quondam
Friend and Benefactor. Pray, Sir, do you remember any thing of one Clement, a
worthless young Fellow, whom once in your Goodness you condescended to
patronize? Clement, Clement! cried Mr. Goodville, getting up and hastening to
him, and catching him in his Arms, my dear, my dear Clement, my Man of Merit
and Misfortunes, how rejoiced am I to find you! God be praised, God be praised,
it is at length in my Power to do something material for You. But, come with me
to another Room, I have something to say to You. We will leave these Gentlemen,
the while, to think further of the Plan that lies before them.

When Mr. Goodville and Clement had withdrawn, Mr. Mole, said one of the
Company, you are concerned in a Number of these public Benefactions. Yes,
Gentlemen, answered Mole, I believe there is no charitable Institution of any
Note in London, in which I am not a Trustee, and to which I am not a
Contributer. For, though I do not set up for Sanctification by Faith, yet, I
think, I may pretend to some Justification by Charity. Let the vulgar Herd pay
their Priesthood for cheating them out of their Senses, I give nothing to the
fat Impostors, or their lucrative Fable; my Substance is little enough for
myself and the Poor. Why, pray Sir, said Harry, are you not a Christian? No
indeed, Master, answered Mole, nor any Man who has Sense enough to think for
himself. Be pleased then, cried Harry, to hand me that Paper a Moment; here,
Sir, I dash my Name and Contribution from the List of the Subscribers. He, who
denies Glory to God in the highest, can never have Peace or good Will toward
Men, and so, Sir, you shall never be the Almoner of a Penny of my Money.

You talk as you look, my Dear, cried Mole, like One just eloped from the
Nursery, where you were affrighted by Tales of Ghosts and Hobgoblins. I
acknowledge, Gentlemen, the Benefit and Beauty of Morality in its fullest
Extent; and, had Jesus, the Christian Prophet, confined himself to his System
of moral Precepts, I think he would justly have been esteemed the greatest
Philosopher and Legislator that ever breathed. But, when he, or rather his
Disciples, in his Name, in order to enhance the Authority of their Mission,
pretended to Divinity in their Master, the low bred and ignorant Wretches
pulled together, against the Grain, and compounded such a strange Medley of
fighting Inconsistencies, and self-evident Absurdities, as are wholly eversive
of every Principle of right Reason and common Sense. They taught that God was
made a Man; that, in order to expiate the Sins of the World, the Innocent was
appointed to suffer for the Guilty. That the Sins of all Offenders were to be
imputed to One who had never offended; and that the Righteousness of him, who
had never offended, was to be imputed to Criminals of the deepest Dye. That the
Creator submitted himself to the Malignity of his Creatures, and that God
himself died a shameful Death on the Cross. And this, Gentlemen, makes such a
Heap of ridiculous Incoherencies, such Contradictions in Sense and Terms, as
exceeds even the Worship of Apes and Serpents, Leeks and Onions, and the other
Garbage of Egypt.

You are a Villain, and a Thief, and a Liar, cried Harry, altogether enflamed
with Choler. Mole, on hearing these Terms of highest Affront and Reproach,
instantly caught up a Bottle and threw it at our Hero's Head, but it happily
missed him, and only bruised the fleshy Part of the Shoulder of the Gentleman
who sat next. Harry instantly sprung up and made at Mole, while the Company
rose also and attempted to interfere; but some he cast on one Hand, and some on
the Other, and overturning such as directly opposed him, he reached Mole, and,
with one Blow of his Fist on the Temple, laid him motionless along the Floor.
Then looking down on his Adversary, I should be sorry, said he, that the Wretch
would die in his present State of Reprobacy; here, Drawer, run quickly and
bring me a Surgeon. Then returning to his Place, he sat down with great
Composure.

After a Pause he looked around. I hope, Gentlemen, said he, that none of You
are hurt. Indeed I am much concerned for having, in any Degree, contributed to
your Disturbance. But, had any of You a dear Benefactor and Patron, to whom you
were bound beyond Measure, whom you loved and honored above all Things, could
ye bear to hear him defamed and vilified to your Face? No certainly, answered
One; no Man could bear it, cried Another; but pray, asked a Third, how came you
to call the Gentleman a Thief? -- Because, replied our Hero, he attempted to
rob me of my whole Estate. He endeavored to thieve from me the only Friend I
had in the Universe, the Friend of my Heart, the Peace and Rest of my Bosom; my
infinite Treasure, my never ending Delight! the Friend without whom I would not
choose to be; without whom, Existence would become a Curse and an Abhorrence
unto me. Happy young Creature! exclaimed an elderly Gentleman, I understand
you, you mean your Christ and my Christ, the Friend who has already opened his
early Heaven within You.

By this, Mr. Mole began to move, whereupon Harry rose and, putting his Hand in
his Pocket, here, Gentlemen, said he, is one Guinea for the Surgeon and another
for the Reckoning. When my Companion returns, be pleased to tell him I am gone
to our Lodgings. For I will not stay to hold further Converse or Altercation
with that Bane of Society, that Pest, which the Rulers in Darkness have
commissioned to spread Contagion, Distemper and Death among Men.

Harry went early to Bed, but lay restless and much disturbed in his Spirit all
Night. Mr. Clement had heared the Particulars of our Hero's Behavior, which he
partly disapproved; but, as he saw him already dejected, he did not choose to
expostulate with him for the present.

The next Day they returned to Hamstead, where Mr. Fenton, notwithstanding the
constrained Smiles of his Harry, observed an unusual Cloud and Uneasiness in
his Countenance. I want to speak with You, my Love, said he; and beckoning him
into his Closet, he took him affectionately by the Hand and made him sit beside
him. What is the Matter, my Dear, said he, looking concernedly in his Face,
what is it that has disturbed the Peace of the Bosom of my Beloved?

Ah! Sir, cried Harry, I am, indeed, very unhappy. I doubt that I am partly
losing my Faith, and the Fear of that has given me inexpressible Horror. It is
like tearing me from a Fort, out of which there is no Home or Rest for me in
the Universe.

Here Harry made a Recital of the late Affair to his Patron, and having closed
his Narrative, is not this very wonderful, Sir, said he, how or where in the
World could this Mole have mustered together such Arguments against Reason,
such Appearances against Truth? How must the Vulgar and Illiterate be staggered
by such Objections; when, even I, who have been bred, as I may say, at the Feet
of such a Gamaliel, have not been able to answer them, otherwise than by the
Chastisement which the Blasphemer received at my Hand.

Here Mr. Fenton smiled and said, don't be alarmed, my Love. We shall quickly
dispel the thin Mists of Infidelity that were collected to shut the Sun of
Righteousness from your Eye. I confess, indeed, that this Spawn of Antichrist
has compiled a Summary of All that has ever been uttered, against the Lamb who
was slain from the Foundation of the Word; yet he is but a Mole in Nature as
well as Name; and he, with his Brother-Moles, know no more and see no further
than the little Heap of Dirt and Rubbish, that the working of their own
purblind and floundering Reason has cast about them.

Sacred Depths and stupendous Mysteries belong to this Matter, and when you are
able to bear them, they shall be clearly and fully unfolded to you, my Harry:
In the mean Space, a few simple Observations will suffice to re-establish the
Peace of your sweet and pious Heart.

As Christianity was instituted for the Salvation of the Vulgar, the principal
Truths thereof are very obvious and plain, and want no Learning, no Letters, to
inculcate or teach them. They speak the Language of Nature, and all Nature is
expressive of the Sense and the Sound thereof. Whatever is within you, whatever
is without you, cries aloud for a Savior. For Sin has been as the Mezentius,
of whom you read in Virgil, who bound the Bodies of the Dead to the Persons of
the Living. Thus it is that the Sin of fallen Angels, and of fallen Man, has
bound Change and Corruption, Distemperature and Death, to the Elements, to the
Vegetables, to Animals, and even to the immortal Image of God himself in the
Humanity; so that all Things cry out, with the Apostle Saint Paul, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death? So that all Things cry out, with the
Apostle Saint Peter, save Lord, or I perish!

These are inevitable Truths, my Harry, which all Men, at some time, must feel
throughout their Existence, whether they read them or not. And he alone who
never experienced nor ever shall experience Frailty, Error, or Sickness, Pain,
Anguish, or Dissolution, is exempt from our Solar System of Salvation from Sin.

But, what Sort of a Savior is it, for whom all Things cry so loudly? Is it a
dry Moralist, a Legislator of bare and external Precepts, such as your
Mole-Philosopher required our Christ to be? No, my Darling, no. The Influence
and Existence of the Redeemer of Nature must, at least, be as extensive as
Nature herself.

Things are defiled and corrupted throughout, they are distempered and devoted
to Death from the inmost Essence of their Being; and nothing, under him, in
whom they live and move and have their Being, can redeem, can restore them.

O Sir, exclaimed Harry, his Countenance brightening up, why could I not think
of this? I should then have been able to foil my malignant Adversary, even at
his own Weapons.

Our Jesus himself, continued Mr. Fenton, appeals to the Truth I have told you,
where he says to the Sick of the Palsy, Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins are
forgiven thee. But, when the Pharisees, thereupon, concluded that he
blasphemed; he demonstrated his Influence in and over the Soul, by the sensible
Evidence of his Operation and Influence in and over the Body. What reason ye in
your Hearts? said Jesus; whether is it easier to say thy Sins be forgiven thee,
or to say, rise up and walk? Then said he to the Sick of the Palsy, arise and
take up thy Couch, and go to thine House. And immediately he rose up before
them, and took up that whereon he had been carried, and departed to his own
House, glorifying God.

Here it was necessary, for the performance of this wonderful and instantaneous
Cure, that Jesus should instantly operate in and through every Member, Nerve,
and Fiber of the Sick of the Palsy. And it was equally necessary, for that
Purpose, that the Sick of the Palsy should have lived, and have had his Being
in Jesus. In like Manner, also, his Sins, must have been pardoned, by an inward
Salvation, by imparting to the Will of the Sinner a new and rectified Will; and
by informing his Spirit with a Detestation of Evil and a Love of Goodness and
Virtue.

But, pray Sir, if it is not too profound a Mystery for me, be pleased to
inform me, how God could be made Man? for this was one of the principal
Objections of Mole.

God was never made Man, my Harry. God cannot be debased. He could not degrade
himself by any Change into Manhood, though he could exalt and assume Humanity
into God. Neither could God die or suffer. To this, Christ himself, who was God
and Man, bears Testimony; where he cries out, in the Agonies of his suffering
Humanity, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And again, where, crying
with a loud Voice, he said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. -- But,
you are leading me something deeper than I chose to go, for the present.

From Eternity, God saw that, should he produce any Creatures in his own Image,
to be glorious by his Likeness and happy by his Communication, he must of
Necessity create them intelligent and free; and that consequently; as
Creatures, they must be finite; and that, as Creatures who were free, they
should also be fallible.

He, therefore, saw that all might fall, and he also foresaw that some would
fall. But his Graciousness had provided two infallible Remedies for this Evil
of Fallibility. He had provided a Savior, and he had also provided Suffering.
The Savior was to restore them by an inward Redemption, by a Reinfusion and
new Birth of his own Nature in their Essence. And Suffering was to prepare and
open his Way, by humbling their Pride, by mortifying their Lust, and thus
compelling them to unfold their Hearts to their own Happiness.

Indeed, had no Creature ever fallen, God could not have been duly glorified
to all Eternity. Millions of his infinitely amiable Qualities must have lain an
inscrutable Secret to Worlds upon Worlds. While all his Creatures were happy in
him, and participated of him, no Distinction could be duly made between them
and their Creator. Had Evil never been, Goodness would have sunk unspeakably in
the Sense of its Value, which is now infinitely heightened and glorified by the
Contrast. Free Grace and free Mercy on the Part of our God, and Penitence and
Thanksgiving on the Part of humbled Sinners, would have been prevented of their
thousand endearing Connections. And all the Amities and Charities, throughout
the Brotherhood of Man; all the melting and fond Relations, which the
Vine-Christ infuses throughout his ingrafted Branches, bearing Blossoms and
Fruits of divine Fragrance and Flavor, must ever have remained, unblessing and
as dead, from Eternity to Eternity.

But, our God, my Child, is as powerful, as he is gracious and wise, to bring
Light out of Darkness, and Life out of Death, and infinite and ever enduring
Good out of the limited and short State of transitory Evil.

To prove that no Being, beneath himself, could stand of their own Sufficiency,
God permitted his two principal Creatures, the most immediate and most glorious
Representatives of his divine Perfections, to fall off from their Allegiance,
and consequently from their Happiness, with all their Progeny. The first was
the Angel Lucifer who fell through Pride, and the second was the Man Adam who
fell through Lust. These two capital Sins of Pride and of Lust are the genuine
Parents of all moral and natural Evil, of all the Guilt and Misery that ever
did or ever can arise throughout Duration; and our heavenly Father, in his
Love, has appointed intense Suffering, to abate and abase the one, and to
mortify and slay the other, that Transgressors may finally be capable of his
Mercy, through the Salvation and Grace of his Christ.

The first of these Arch-felons deemed himself worthy of Deity, and, being
unexperienced in the Power with whom he had to contend, he attempted to
arrogate all Worship to himself, and to rob his divine Benefactor of Glory and
Godhead.

The second of these Felons was tempted, by the first, to aspire, through his
own Merits, at a godlike Independence; to cast off his Allegiance to the Author
of his Being; and to expect. Intelligence and Knowledge from the sensual Fruits
of this World, after which he lusted. He accordingly took and eat of the Tree
that was pregnant with all the Goods and all the Evils of this external,
elementary, and transient System, according to his Faith it was done unto him;
according to his Lust his Desire was accomplished; his Nature became a Partaker
of temporary Nature; and he fell, with his Progeny, into all the Depravity and
Evils, that the Sin of fallen Lucifer had introduced into these vast Regions;
now made more exceedingly corrupt and sinful by the Sin of fallen Adam.

Why, pray Sir, demanded Harry, had Lucifer any Concern in this World, before
the Fall of our first Parents?

Yes, my Dear, all the Space, that is now occupied by this Earth, and these
Elements with the Sun, Moon and Stars, to an inconceivable Extent; was once the
Heaven and Dominion of Lucifer and his Angels. But when, by their Apostasy from
the Light and Love and Goodness of God, they had caused Darkness and Malignity,
Envy, Rage, and Uproar, and every Species of Evil and Horror, to be predominant
throughout their Kingdom; God determined, by a new Creation, to take it out of
their Hands. Accordingly, he compacted it into the present System of temporary
Nature, whose Duration is to be measured by the Revolution of our Luminaries,
until the appointed Period of the great Consummation, when all the Malignity
that remains, and is compacted therein, shall be finally done away.

To this Truth Moses bears Testimony, where he tells you that, at the
Commencement of Creation, Darkness was upon the Face of the great Deep. And
again, where he tells you, that the Tree of the Knowledge of the Goods and
Evils of this World sprung up, even in the Midst of the Paradise of God. But it
is altogether impious and blasphemous to suppose, that God would create Evil,
or infuse a Tendency thereto into any of his Works. Again, the same Truth is
attested by many Passages of the sacred Writings; where Lucifer, or Satan,
tells Christ, to his Face, that this World, with all its Glories, are his
Portion and Property, that they were delivered unto him, and that he gives
them to whomsoever he will. And again, where Christ calls him the Prince of the
Air; and again, where he says the Prince of this World comes and has no Part
in me.

Now, when God, by his new Creation, had delivered this System of Things from
the Influence and Dominion of evil Spirits, they became altogether Prisoners in
their own Darkness. But when Adam, the second Lord of this vast Domain, by a
second Apostasy, had brought additional Sin and Evil into temporary Nature, the
Paradise of God, that was over all, vanished; and the new Guilt of Adam opened
a new and wide Gate, for the Readmission of Lucifer into his ancient
Possessions. And he remains a Prince and a Ruler in the Elements and Hearts of
Men unto this evil Day.

These two capital Apostates, Lucifer and Adam, who had thus robbed their kind
God of their Affections and Allegiance, were thereafter represented by the two
Thieves who suffered in Company with Christ who reached out to them a bleeding
Arm of his Mercy on either Hand. The One accepted his Grace and, on that Day,
entered Paradise along with his Lord. The Other rejected the Christ with
Contempt and Reproach, and therefore, if ever reclaimable, must be constrained
by Suffering to open his Heart to Redemption; when after a Process of many many
agonizing Ages, blaspheming and indignantly spurning at the Power of his
Punisher, he may be compelled to cry out, O Seed of the Woman! heal, heal the
Head thou have crushed, and admit me also, though last, to some Part, the least
Portion of thy pardoning Salvation!

These Two, my Harry, even Lucifer and Adam, were also the Thieves among whom
the Traveller fell, going from Jerusalem to Jericho, from the City and Place of
Peace to the Place of Destruction. He represented the wretched Race of fallen
Man, whom Lucifer and their first Father had robbed of all their Substance, and
stripped of their Robe of Righteousness, and wounded, and left half dead in
Trespasses and Sins. Neither did the Law or the Priesthood avail any Thing for
their Cure till JESUS the GOOD SAMARITAN had Compassion upon them, and bound up
their Wounds, pouring therein the Oil of his Grace and the Wine of his
Gladness; and expended two Pence, even the two precious Pence of his own Body
and Blood for perfecting their Recovery.

But, my dearest Sir, said Harry, if my Question does not intrude, pray how was
it consistent with Justice that the Sufferings of the Innocent should atone
both for, and instead of, the Guilty? For this also was one of Mole's cardinal
Objections.

Your Question, said Mr. Fenton, falls aptly in its Place. When Adam, as I have
told you, apostatised from his God, and lusted after the gross and sensual
Fruits of this World, and fed upon them, and thereupon, became a Partaker of
their Nature and Malignity; he fell from his Paradise and Sovereignty together,
and he became a poor Subject and miserable Slave to all the Evils and
Inclemencies of that temporary Nature, over which he had been constituted a
throned Lord and Controuler.

Here was a deep and a woeful Fall, my Harry, from Sovereignty to Slavery, from
Eternity into Time, from Immortality into Corruption, from Bliss into Misery,
and from Life into Death. The very State, in which the wretched Heirs of his
fallen Nature find themselves at this Day. How then was he to rise, if ever to
rise again? could this be effected by any Powers of his own? if he did not
stand in the State of his Strength, how shall he recover and be able to
reascend in the State of his Weakness? how think you, my Harry? A self evident
Impossibility, answered Harry.

Here then, continued Mr. Fenton, we find the Universe of Man depraved, fallen,
and sunk into the Darkness of Sin and Error, into the Dungeon of gross and
corruptible Flesh, and circled about and closed in by the Barriers and Gates of
Death. And these Prisons were to be broken through, these Gates were to be
burst open, before he could re-enter upon Light and Immortality. All the
Enemies who had conquered Man, Sin, Satan, and Temptation were also to be
conquered. But, how was this to be done? A World lay at Stake, and the great
Question was, whether the whole Race of Man should continue in endless Guilt
and Misery, or be restored to ever-during Purity and Blessedness? Wherefore,
what all the Powers of Creation were not able to attempt, Jesus, in the
Humanity, undertook to accomplish.

Here you see, my Child, that Justice had little to do in the Case. It was not
the Justice of Punishment, but the Mercy of Deliverance that the Love of our
heavenly Father required. Justice indeed affirmed that Suffering was due to
Sin, and was the necessary Attendant and Consequence thereof; but this also the
Love of our Christ willingly took upon himself. He conquered Suffering, through
Sufferings, and was thereby made the perfect and accomplished Captain of our
Salvation. He entered into our Flesh, he went through all the Passages of this
Vale of Tears and Region of Misery, into which we were fallen; through Poverty,
Contempt, Rejection, Reproach; through all that the Rage and Rancour of Men and
Devils could inflict, his bloody Sweat and anguishing Horrors of Hell, Bonds,
Buffetings, Spittings, Scourgings, the bloody Mockery of a thorny Crown, and
all the Soul-rending Tortures of an agonizing Crucifixion, till at last, he
triumphantly cried it is finished! and gave up the Ghost. From the Cross he
descended into the Grave; from the Grave again, he rose in Glory and ascended
into Heaven, where he led Captivity Captive, and showed the Powers of Darkness
bound; that he might lead all the Followers of his beatific Cross, in his own
divine Process, to Conquest through Sufferings, to Glory through Abasement, to
Exaltation through Humiliation, through Death unto Life, and through the
Calamities of Time to a never ending, ever blessing, ever joyful Eternity!

But, Sir, said Harry, was the Humanity of our blessed Savior the same as ours
is? for so the Scripture seems to intimate, where it says, he was made Man,
like unto us in all Things, Sin only excepted.

This was only spoken, answered Mr. Fenton, with respect to his outward
Humanity. His creaturely Soul indeed, and the Flesh which he derived from his
mortal Mother, were even as ours are, Sin only excepted. But, these were only
as the Husk or Case of his internal and divine Humanity, which was conceived
from the Essence of the FATHER, by the Operation of the HOLY SPIRIT in the Womb
of a pure Virgin. It was this Humanity to which JESUS was intimately united,
and that became one with the ever blessed TRINITY. And it was of the Ubiquity
of this Humanity that Christ speaks, when he says to Nicodemus, no Man has
ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man
which is in Heaven. But, when the external Humanity of Jesus was, by Suffering
and Death, prepared to be swallowed up of Glory, the whole CHRIST was then
assumed up into Godhead. He saw all Things in Jesus, as they were and shall be
from Eternity to Eternity. And, though the Glory of his personal Appearance may
be visible in certain Places, yet he is invisibly present in all Places and in
all Hearts, begetting in them a new Birth of his own divine Humanity; that
their Bodies may also be fashioned like unto his glorious Body; and that, when
our Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and when that our Mortal shall
have put on Immortality, We All may be made One, as He is in the Father and the
Father in him, that we also may be One in them. An Elevation, sure, well worth
the hardest Striving, the highest Ambition!

Thus I have shown you, my Harry, the inevitable Necessity of the Suffering of
our innocent Christ for the Salvation of guilty Sinners. And this also shows
you the equal Necessity of his taking upon himself the external Imputation of
the Sins for which he suffered; that he might, thereby, be inwardly imputed to
us, and become to us and in us the LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS; and be to us a
better Adam, a second and divine Father, regenerating us to a Birth of his own
heavenly Nature. And thus, as the first Adam died unto God, and lived to fallen
Nature; there was a Necessity that Christ, as well in his own Person, as his
redeemed Progeny, should die to the fallen Nature, that through him they might
live again unto God.

O thank you, thank you, Sir, cried Harry, I shall henceforth be enabled to
give an Account, to all who ask, of the Faith that is in me. But pray, did the
divine Humanity of our Christ suffer in the Crucifixion?

I believe it did, Harry, even as our Souls are found to suffer in our Bodies,
though of a Nature so very different from them. It was the Suffering of this
divine Humanity that caused such violent Repugnance and Convulsions in Nature;
that shut up the World from Light even at mid Day; that rent the Rocks, that
opened the Graves, and gave up the Dead to attend their Lord and revive in the
Life of his Resurrection.

Will you be pleased, Sir, to indulge me in one Question more? Could not God,
in his Omnipotence, have affected the Salvation of Man by some other Means than
the Suffering of our dear Christ? I think, were it to be done again, I would
rather forfeit my Salvation, than that He should endure such Agony on my
Account.

I will not pretend, my Harry, to give Limits or Directions to the Measures of
my God, neither to say what he might or might not do within his own World, and
with regard to his own Creatures. But, it is certain that he chose the most
effectual Method, for compassing his great and eternal Purpose, that infinite
Love could dictate, infinite Wisdom contrive, and infinite Power execute. O my
Harry, how unutterably endeared must this Measure make our God to the Universe
of his Creatures, and that to all Eternity! It is herein that the Nature of our
God is revealed, it is hereby alone that he could ever have been duly known;
known to be the God of Love, to be nothing but Love, in this his wonderful Work
of Mercy transcending Mercy, and of Grace transcending Grace, that he might
bring us to Glory transcending Glory!

In this stupendous Work of Redemption, I say, Jesus makes himself as it were
little, that we may become great; He stoops into Manhood that he may exalt us
into God. He came not arrayed in the Fool's Coat of the Luster of this
despicable World, nor in the Weakness of its Power, nor in the Meanness of its
Dignity; but over his Immensity he threw the Appearance of Limitation, and with
Time he invested his Eternity; and his Omnipotence put on Frailty, and his
Supremacy put on Subjection; and with the Veil of Mortality, he shrouded his
Beauty, that he might become familiar to us, that we might behold and converse
with him Face to Face, as Man converses with Man and grows fond of his Fellow.

Before the Incarnation, God was feared in his Thunders, and adored in the
Majesty and Magnificence of his Works. But, it is in the meek and lowly Jesus
that he becomes the Object of Affection, in the bleeding, the suffering, the
dying Jesus, we behold him with weeping Gratitude, we love him with a Love of
Passion and Burning, a Love that languishes for him, that cannot bear to exist
without him.

How could that perverse People shut their Eyes to the Divinity of their
gracious Messiah, while he gave such hourly and occular Proofs of the Power and
Extent of his Godhead, in and over all Things? while he went about doing Good,
carrying Healing in his Breath, in his Touch, in his Garments; while the Lame
sprung up as a bounding Roe at his Bidding; while the Tempest heared his Voice
and was still, and the Sea spread itself as a Carpet beneath the Foot of its
Creator. While the deaf Ear was opened, and the dumb Tongue loosed to
Utterance; while he poured the Beams of his Light upon the new-opening Eyes of
the blind-born Gazer; and while in Death and amidst the Tombs his Word was Life
and Resurrection.

Thus, my Harry, you find yourself united to your Savior by many endearing and
intimate Connections; by Creation, by Redemption, by Brotherhood, by
Fatherhood, in the Flesh, in the Spirit; by his being Bone of your Bone; and
Spirit of your Spirit, by being the Firstborn of many Brethren, and by being
the divine Father of a new and celestial Progeny.

But, what need we further? the World, from the Beginning, is fraught with him
and speaks of him. The World is, in itself, no other than a History of the two
capital and eternally important Truths, THE GREATNESS OF THE FALL in Lucifer
and Adam, and THE GREATNESS OF THE REDEMPTION in Jesus Christ. These Truths are
engraven in the Rocks as deep as the Center; they are written on both Sides of
every Leaf in Nature. All that is within us, All that is without us utters
forth the same Language, proclaims the same Tidings aloud. All Ceremonials, all
Institutions of divine Authority, all ancient Predictions and Prophecies were
pregnant with and in Travail of the GREAT DELIVERANCE to be achieved by the
Shiloh who was to come. They give us a previous History of his whole Process
upon Earth, from his Birth to his Resurrection, as circumstantially, as
minutely, as though it were a bare Transcript of what had recently passed
before their Eyes. But I shall only dwell a Minute on three principal Articles,
first, that Messiah was to be God -- secondly, that he was however to be a
suffering Messiah -- and thirdly, that he was to give himself to Death for the
Salvation of Sinners.

FIRST, with Respect to his Divinity, Daniel says: I saw in the Night Visions,
and behold, One like unto the SON OF MAN came with the Clouds of Heaven, and
came to the ANCIENT OF DAYS, and they brought him near before him. And there
was given him DOMINION and GLORY, and a KINGDOM, that all People, Nations, and
Languages should serve him; his DOMINION is an EVERLASTING DOMINION which shall
not pass away. Again Isaiah: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. For
unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be
upon his Shoulder; and his Name shall be called WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, the
MIGHTY GOD, the EVERLASTING FATHER, the PRINCE of PEACE. Of the Increase of his
GOVERNMENT and PEACE there shall be NO END, upon the Throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it, with JUDGMENT and with JUSTICE,
from henceforth even FOR EVER.

SECONDLY, with Respect to his Character of Rejection and Suffering: Who has
believed our Report and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? He is despised
and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, and we hid as
it were our Faces from him; he was despised and we esteemed him not. He was
oppressed and he was afflicted; he is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and
as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so opens he not his Mouth. He was
taken from Prison and from Judgment; and who shall declare his Generation? for
he was cut off out of the Land of the Living, for the Transgression of my
People was he stricken. And he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the
Rich in his Death. Isaiah. -- David too says, Dogs have compassed me, the
Assembly of the Wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my Hands and my Feet.
They part my Garments among them, and cast Lots for my Vesture. -- But, a Bone
of him shall not be broken. -- They shall look on him whom they pierced.

THIRDLY, with Respect to his being a willing Offering for Sin. Isaiah says, in
the same Chapter: Surely he has born our Griefs and carried our Sorrows; yet
we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But, he was wounded
for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of
our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed. All we like Sheep
have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own Way, and the Lord has
laid on him the Iniquity of us All. Jeremiah too --

Here, Mr. Fenton was interrupted. His Man Frank entered, booted, and all
bespattered with Dirt, and having whispered Something in his Master's Ear, Mr.
Fenton turned aside his Head, to hide his Concern from Harry, and stepping to
his Closet, locked himself in.

BUT, it may be thought full Time to return to the Head-Branch of this noble
Family.

Nearly nine Years had now elapsed, since the Earl and his Lady had seen or
heared of their Harry, except by two or three anonymous Notes, in a Year,
giving a short Account of his Health and Accomplishments; insomuch that Time
and long Absence had, in a Measure, worn him from the Regrets of the Family;
excepting his Brother Richard, on whom Harry's Generosity, in taking his
Quarrel upon himself, had left an affecting, and indelible Impression.

Lord Richard was, indeed, sweetly dispositioned by Nature, and of an Aspect
and Person extremely elegant; and as he had Tutors in all Branches, in which he
chose to be instructed, he learned sufficient, by Way of Amusement, to render
him One of the most accomplished Youths in the Nation. He was also, naturally,
unassuming and modestly disposed; but the unremitted Adulation of Domestics and
Dependents, with the complimentary Artillery of all the Neighbors and
Visitants, could not fail of some Impression, at least so far as to make it
evident that he was conscious of his Condescension when he became familiar with
you.

He was, however, easy to All who applied to him for any Favor, exceeding
charitable to the Poor; and particularly fond of our Harry's Fostermother, and
kind to her for Harry's Sake.

With such amiable Qualities, he was esteemed and beloved of All, and became
the little Idol of the adjacent Country, insomuch that, when he was seized with
the Small Pox, the Apprehension and Anxiety for him was universal, and the
great Mansion. House was hourly circled by People who came crowding, to enquire
concerning his Danger.

The Eruption was but slight, only a few Spots on his Face and other Parts, so
that my Lady was in high Triumph, on observing, that the Beauty of her Darling
should not be defaced. But ah, how frail is the Foundation on which Mortality
builds for Happiness! who can ensure it, who can arrest it for an Hour, for a
Moment? On the eleventh Day, when the Physicians pronounced that All was
promising and full of Hope, Lord Richard was suddenly taken with Convulsions,
and, in less than an Hour, expired.

Lady Enna, Countess of Moreland, from whom the Seat had been newly denominated
Enna's Field or Enfield, was present at the Death of All that she held most
precious upon Earth. She had never left his Chamber since he had taken to his
Bed; and was now carried off in a deep and death-like Swoon. She never after
recovered her Senses, except by deplorable Starts, to lament that she was the
most wretched of All that ever were created; and, on the second Day, She also
expired, and was interred in the same Tomb with the Offspring of her Body and
the Idol of her Heart.

Never was seen such a Concourse at any Funeral, since the Funeral of Jacob on
which all Egypt attended. They crowded from a Distance of thirty Miles round.
But, when they saw the old and revered Patron of the Country, all covered with
sad and solemn Weeds; when they beheld his Countenance exceeding all Pomp of
Sorrow, and conceived the Weight and Wringing that was then at his Heart; Envy
was quite blunted and robbed of its Sting. They now lamented the Living more
than they mourned the Dead; and the poorest among the Poor looked down, with an
Eye of Compassion upon the great Man, now rendered, as they deemed, more
pitiable and desolate even than themselves; without Child or Kindred; without
Any to continue his Name or his Honors; without Any who could claim a Share in
his Wealth or his Woe; without any Cause of further Comfort or further Care
upon Earth.

During the following Week the Earl kept his Chamber, and would admit of no
Visitor, till Mr. Meekly arrived.

Mr. Meekly had long estranged himself to Enfield; he had gone elsewhere,
seeking the Houses of Mourning, and breathing Peace and Consolation wherever he
went; but as soon as he heared of the Affliction of his noble Friend, he
hastened to help him to bear up under the Weight of his Calamity. He entered,
and seating himself in Silence beside the Earl, he there wept near an Hour
without uttering a Syllable.

My Lord was the first who spoke; Mr. Meekly, said he, my Heart gratefully
feels this melting Proof of your Love. You weep for me, my Friend, because You
see, and kindly feel, that there is no other Comfort for me on this Side the
Grave.

God forbid, God forbid, said Mr. Meekly, the best and greatest of all Comforts
is coming to you, my Lord. Eternal Truth has promised it, and he will make it
good to you; blessed, blessed are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Ah, Mr. Meekly, replied the Earl, the Comfort that you mention is promised
only to the deeply contrite and broken of Heart; to those who duly lament the
Baseness of their Offenses against so great and good a God. Neither do I
despair, my Friend, but that I also may finally share some Portion of that same
Comfort; for, as I feelingly acknowledge myself the greatest of all Sinners, so
I wish for Grace to make me the greatest of Penitents.

God be praised, cried Meekly, for the Grace already given! There was a Time,
my Lord, when, as you told me, you had nothing of these divine Dispositions;
when the World, as you said, seemed to hold out Happiness to you in either
Hand; when Fortune, Title, Precedence, circling Honors about you, and within
you Youth and Health, and a revelling Flow of Blood and Spirits wholly
disguised and concealed the State of your Nature from you; when they hid from
you your own Body of Frailty, Distemper, Sin and Death, and left you no
Occasion to call out for a Savior, as you felt nothing from which you desired
to be saved. But God has now been graciously pleased to send you his Monitors,
and to call upon you by Affliction, that you, in your Turn, may call upon him
who alone can give you Consolation.

It is not, my Lord, to the Mourners for Sin, alone, to whom Comfort is
promised. The State of Suffering and Mourning is in its Nature extremely
salutary and of happy Tendency to Man, and it is, therefore, that the suffering
Jesus has pronounced it blessed.

The God of ALL LOVE takes no Delight in the Sufferings of his poor and
pitiable Creatures; neither would he have made this State of our Mortality a
Vale of Tears and a State of Misery, had it not been in order to conduct us,
through transitory Evils to ever enduring Bliss, where he himself will wipe all
Tears from our Eyes.

When Adam, by his Apostasy and falling off from his Maker, had converted all
the Goods of this temporary State into evil Incitements to Lust, Covetousness,
and Sensuality; God determined, by a gracious Reverse, to turn all the Evils of
corrupt and fallen Nature into Means of enduring Good to his fallen and frail
Creatures; he therefore appointed Pain, Affliction, Distress and Disease to be
his Ministers, his Monitors, and Preachers within us, to convince us of all the
Evil of our depraved and mortal Nature; to wean us from a World that is full of
false Promises but empty of true Enjoyment; to remind us that we are Strangers
and Pilgrims upon Earth, to turn our Eye to the Star that has visited us from
on high; and finally, through our Sufferings, to accomplish the great Work of
his own Salvation in us.

Thank you, thank you, Mr. Meekly, these are comforting Things indeed. They
pluck Comfort from the very Depth and Abyss of Affliction. I love that my God
should be lovely to my Heart. You have now rent the dark Veil that long hung
before my Eyes; and the Sun of Righteousness breaks upon me through the Clouds
of my Mortality. -- But, what of Death, Mr. Meekly, what of Death, my Friend? I
am interested in the Question; my Time is approaching. When this Body shall
fall to Dust, and all these Organs of Sensation be utterly cut off; what
remains, what then shall follow? by what Means shall my Spirit attain the
Powers of new Perception; or am I to lie in the Grave, in a State of total
Insensibility, till the last Trumpet shall sound? my Nature shrinks, I confess,
from a total Deprivation of the Sense of Existence.

It is no Way evident to me, my Lord, that Body, or at least such gross Bodies
as we now have, are necessary to the Perceptions and Sensibilities of our
Spirit. God himself is a Spirit, an all-seeing, all-hearing, all-tasting,
all-smelling, all-feeling, all-knowing, and all-governing Spirit. He who made
the Eye, shall he not see? He who made the Ear, shall he not hear? Wherefore,
as our Spirits are the Offsprings of his divine Spirit, we may justly presume
them endowed with like Capacities. But, if Body is necessary to the Perception
of Spirit, as Zoroaster, the illuminated Philosopher, seems to intimate, where,
speaking of God, he says, whose Body is Light and whose Soul is Truth, in this
Case, I say, we may reasonably suppose that when our Spirits shall be parted
from these gross and frail Bodies, they shall be instantly clothed upon with
more pure and permanent Bodies. Or, as I rather think, that those pure and
permanent Bodies are already forming and pregnant within our gross and
corruptible Bodies; and that when the Midwife Death shall deliver us from the
dark Womb of our woeful Travail and Mortality; we shall immediately spring
forth into Incorruption and Glory.

Of this, my Lord, I am confident as I am of my Being, that He who, by Faith,
has already put on Christ, shall break through Death in the Brightness of the
Body of his new Birth, incorruptible, immortal and blessed to all Eternity.

Tell me then, my dearest Meekly, what mean you by the Body of this new Birth?
For alas, I am but too apt to cry out with Nicodemus, How can these things be?

I mean, my Lord, the forming of Christ within us. Our being formed anew of a
divine Seed of our second Adam, even as our gross Bodies were formed in the
Womb from a corruptible Seed of the old Adam. I mean the clothing of our
Spirits with the heavenly Substantiality of the spiritual Body and Blood of the
heavenly Jesus himself; for, as the Apostle says, there is a spiritual Body as
there is a carnal Body. I mean a Body the same as that, in which the believing
Thief entered Paradise with his Lord on the Day of the Crucifixion. I am the
Resurrection and the Life, says JESUS, whosoever believes in me, though he were
dead yet shall he live, and he who lives and believes in me shall never die.
Death shall become a new and divine Birth unto him. And the great Apostle says,
there are celestial Bodies and Bodies terrestrial; but the Glory of the
Celestial is one, and the Glory of the Terrestrial is another. And again he
says, for we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

These are great Things, indeed, Mr. Meekly, and full of Hope as well as
Incitements to divine Ambition.

But why, my Lord, should a new Birth from Jesus Christ be thought wonderful?
is there any thing more wonderful in it than in the forming and unfolding of
the whole stupendous Mechanism of the Body of our old Man, from a scarce
visible Speck of Entity? Is there any thing more wonderful in it than in the
Growth and unfolding of any common Vegetable from some latent Principle or
invisible Speck in the Seed, which not all the Optics and Glasses of a Galilaeo
should be able to discover? Were not these the known Facts of every Day and
Hour, Incredulity would have laughed the Supposition to naught. But, I think, I
have got, about me, Something most surprizingly analagous and apposite to the
Nature and Manner of our new Birth in Jesus.

Mr. Meekly then put his Hand to his Pocket, and took out a Lump of Matter, in
Form like a long and huge Maggot, evidently without Motion, apparently without
Life, and hard and incrusted all about to the Feeling.

What have you got there, my Friend, said the Earl? An old Worm, my Lord, that,
at this Instant, is pregnant with the Birth of a new Creature. Impossible,
cried the Earl, the Thing is absolutely dead. The Body of the old Worm is dead,
indeed, my Lord; but there is certainly a Principle of a new Life within it,
that will soon manifest itself in the Birth of a very beautiful and wonderfully
glorious Creature. And this you will find, if you leave it for a few Days where
it may get the fostering Warmth of the Sun through one of your Windows. Have
you ever seen the Fly they call the Dragon-Fly, my Lord?

Yes, and have admired the Elegance of its Shape, the Mechanism of its double
Wings, and the Luster of its Irradiations.

This Mass, my Lord, of apparently insensible Matter, is now actually pregnant
with One of the same Species. The Parent, through whose Death it is to attain
Life, was no Other, as you see, than a vile and grovelling Maggot, who once fed
and took its Delight in the Stench and Ordure of a Jakes. But the new Creature
that is to be born from it will be quite of a different Nature and Tendency. It
will loath the Food and Occupation of its foul Progenitor. It will soar sublime
over carnal and earthly Things. It will drink the Dews of Heaven, and feed on
the consummate Nectar and Fragrance of Flowers.

This, indeed, Mr. Meekly, rejoined the Earl, is to make the invisible Things
of God visible, even to the naked Eye, by the Things that are seen.

While my Lord and his Friend were thus deeply in Discourse, Mr. John, the
House-Steward, came in and told his Master that One waited in the Hall with a
Letter for him.

A Letter, cried the Earl, what can I have to say, John, to any Letters, or any
of the Writers thereof? -- But, something is due to Humanity, and it shall be
paid; desire him to step in.

Hereupon a Stranger entered, whose Figure instantly caught the Eyes and
Attention of the Earl and his Companion in an astonished Captivity. The Youth
was dressed in simple Fustian; and his dark brown Locks, tied behind with a
black Riband, flowed carelessly between his Shoulders; while some of the front
straying Curls, as in Sport, alternately shaded and discovered a Part of his
lovely Countenance. He bowed, he moved Attraction; and gracefully advancing
toward my Lord, he again bowed, laid a Letter before him, on the Table, and
then silently retired backward a few Steps.

They viewed him, they gazed upon him, as it had been the sudden Vision of an
Angel of Light. Mr. Meekly was not able to utter a Word; neither had my Lord
the Power to lay a Finger on the Paper that was directed to him; till Mr.
Meekly, at last, giving a great Stroke on the Table, cried suddenly out, I
would lay a thousand Pounds of it! It is He! it is he! -- My Heart tells me he
can be no Other but your Harry Clinton!

Here Harry sprung forward and, casting himself precipitately at the Feet of
the Earl, he clasped his Knees with an eager Reverence, crying, My Father, my
honored, my dear, my dear Father! and broke into Tears.

My Lord, all in a Tremor, attempted to raise him to his Arms; and Harry,
perceiving this, rose and threw himself into the Bosom of his Father. But the
Earl gently and fondly put him off a little, and gazing intently at a
Countenance that appeared to him lovely, above All that was lovely in the
Circle of Creation, he gathered new Strength, and catching Harry to his Breast,
he exclaimed in a Transport, Let me die, let me die, since I have seen thy
Face, my Son!

END of the FOURTH VOLUME.
Advertisement.
AS the Author found it impracticable to condense all his Matter within the
Compass of the Four Volumes first proposed. He intends to add a Supplement for
the Satisfaction of his Readers.

NEW BOOKS of ENTERTAINMENT, Just published by D. CHAMBERLAIN, at Faulkner's
Head in Dame Street.
TWO NOVELS, viz. The DELICATE-DISTRESS; and, The GORDIAN KNOT By the Authors
of Henry and Frances. In Two Volumes. (Price 5 s. 5 d.)

The LIFE of ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire Compiled from original Manuscripts; with a
critical Essay on his Writings and Genius. By OWEN RUFFHEAD, Esquire To which are
added, Mr Pope's LETTERS to a LADY, (never before published.) In Two Volumes.
(Price 5 s. 5 d.)

The ADVENTURES of TELEMACHUS, the Son of Ulysses. Translated from the French
by JOHN HAWKESWORTH, L. L. D. (Price bound, in Sheep. 3 s. 6 d. in Calf tooled
and filetted 3 s. 9 d.)

The COTTAGE; a Novel. By Miss MINIFIE, Author of Barford Abbey. (Price 2 s. 8
d.)

The HISTORY of EMILY MONTAGUE. By the Author of Julia Mandeville. In Two
Volumes. (Price 5 s. 5 d)

LETTERS concerning the PRESENT STATE of the FRENCH NATION. (Price 5 s. 5 d).

The HISTORY of the REIGN of the Emperor CHARLES V. By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
In Three Volumes. (Price 16 s. 3 d.)

The HISTORY and ADVENTURES of an ATOM. By the Author of Roderick Random (Price
2 s. 8 d.)

AGREEABLE UGLINESS: or the Triumph of the GRACES. (Price 2 s. 2 d.)


