Heaven upon Earth; OR, THE Best Friend, In the Worst Times: BEING A LEGACY TO
LONDON.

By JAMES JANEWAY.

The Second Edition. Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Eben. Tracy, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1710.

THE PREFACE.
TO My Dearly Beloved in Christ, The CITIZENS of LONDON, with all that bear a
Good Will to that CITY.
THE Great and Dreadful God has been pleading with poor England in these last
Years, in such a manner as is scarce to be paralelled in foregoing Ages: He
has left the Print of his Fingers behind him, and written Divine Displeasure
in Letters of Blood. The Righteous Judge began his Circuit the last Year in
London, and in that one City above one hundred thousand received the Sentence
of Death from his just Tribunal. He has not yet ended his dismal Circuit, but
he rides still from one Shire to another, and does not only keep his Assizes
in one or two Places in a County, but he visits most of their Market Towns, and
some smaller Villages also; doing terrible things in Righteousness amongst
them. The Wound was scarce healed in the City, the Plague not quite removed,
before another amazing Judgment is sent to succeed in the Place of it: God does
again break forth upon poor London in greater Fury still, pleading his Cause
with us in a lamentable Fire, which in a few Days space, has turned one of the
most glorious Cities in the World to Ashes. The Voice of the Sword was not
heard; the Language of the Plague was not understood; wherefore the dreadful
Jehovah speaks louder and louder still. He has now spoke as he did once from
Mount Sinai, in Fire, Flames, and Smoke, and in the thundering Crackings of
falling Houses, Churches, Halls, and stately Buildings; in the Howlings,
Skreekings, and doleful Outcries of poor Creatures, that were almost at their
Wits end. He rode upon the Wings of the Wind, he rode in a Chariot of flaming
Fire; neither Bricks nor Stones can hinder his Course, but the Fury of the Lord
drove over them all; at whose Presence, the Rocks are thrown down, and torn to
pieces. The Bells did ring their own Knells as they were tumbling; and it is to
be feared, were more melted at the Anger of the mighty God, than thousands of
hard-hearted Men and Women were: The Leads of the Churches were dissolved into
Showers, more easily by far, than stupid Professors that were wont to sit under
them. That was a black Cloud indeed which no Wind could blow over, till it fell
in such scalding Drops! How few of those that were eating and drinking, and
roaring but the Day before, dreamed that such a Storm should rise before the
Morning, that would not be laid till it had turned such wicked Inhabitants out
of their Seats, and made their Houses a ruinous Heap? I believe if they that
were feasting on Saturday, had foreseen what would have come to pass in one
Week's time, they would have had but little Stomach to their Dainties. Whereas
if Sinners would give any Credit to the Word of Truth, that does more than once
tell them, that when they are most secure, usually they are nearest the Danger.
The old World were as merry and as jovial the Day before the Flood, as if no
Evil were nigh them. The Men of Sodom little thought when the Sun rose so
gloriously in the Morning upon them, that it would, long before Evening, be so
dark a Night with them. And though the World hear of these things a hundred
times, yet they will not take warning, but they will be as jocund and cheerful
within a few Weeks of Eternity, as though all were very well with them. But
alas, alas, poor Creatures! How miserably is the Case altered with them, when
they see their Mistake in another World; then they will cry out that they had
little Cause to be so merry; and that Tears and Groans had much better become
Persons in their State than Mirth and Jollity. O that poor Sinners would learn
Wisdom by fairer Means! O that they might not be taught by Scorpions, Flames,
and Burnings; when the merciful God is so loath to take such a severe Course,
if any thing less would do the Work: But if Sinners will persist in their
obstinate Rebellions against God, and will not be reclaimed by lesser
Judgments, they must expect a greater still; God will make the proudest, first
or last, to bow or fall, to bend or break, to turn or burn. They which will not
hear one Judgment, shall before it be long feel another. If the Sword cannot be
heard, the Plague shall; if neither the Sword nor the Plague, the Fire shall:
If none of these, God has his Treasuries of Wrath, and can plague us yet seven
times more for our Sins. O stupid Creatures that we are, when shall we hear the
Rod and him that has appointed it! What! do all these things come by chance?
Was there nothing of God in that Plague? Nor in these Flames? When was such a
Fire heard of, that was not kindled by the Coals of his Jealousy? I will not
say but there was abundance of the Policy and Malice of Hell in this Business;
but I will affirm this, that had not our Sins exceedingly kindled the Wrath of
God against us first, this devilish Popish Plot should have proved as abortive
as some of the former; had not our Wickedness made our City more combustible
than Briers and Thorns, the Jesuit should with more Ease have set the Sea on
Fire, and dried up the vast Ocean, or pulled the Sun out of the Firmament, than
to have laid London in the Dust. If there were nothing of God in this Fire, why
was it not as easily quenched as other Fires have been? What meant that unheard
of Stupidness that was upon the Spirits of the Magistrates? How came it to pass
that the most probable Means to suppress its Rage, should not be made use of?
Whence came that great Wind that did like a Pair of mighty Bellows, give a
double Strength to those greedy Flames? Whence was it that there was such a
general Consternation of Spirit, that Men should so forget their Work, and run
away, and leave the City to the Mercy of the Fire? I might add a more
significant Token of Divine Retaliation than all these, but I wave that,
because he that runs may read it. All the Circumstances of this Fire speak
aloud, Anger, Displeasure, Judgment.

Those three angry Heralds, the Blasing Stars I (...), proclaimed War with
England, from the just Jehovah, who would not put up such daring Affronts as
were offered him by the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, without taking notice of
them. If ever God's Dealings with a People speak any thing of Displeasure, then
those that England has been exercised with, do: All his dreadful Providence
toward us do read their Commission, from a holy, just, and angry God. But if
all that has been said speak nothing to the convincing of us, that God himself
had the chief Hand in these things; if they all seem but humane Conjectures, I
pray hear what God himself speaks, Amos 3.6. Shall there be Evil in a City, and
God has not done it? The Lord takes it as a very great Indignity, not to have
the Operation of his Hands regarded; not to have his Judgments taken notice of,
as coming from himself; and a hundred to one but they are near a second, who
are not sensible of the first; and they near a third, who wild not be warned by
the first and second.

Our next Enquiry shall be, wherefore God does thus contend with us. Such
Judgments as these are, never come only to try the People of God's Patience.
No: Such great Judgments speak great Sins; and sometimes God writes the Sin in
the Forehead of the Punishment: Will it not therefore be our great Concern, to
find out what may be the Cause of this fiery Displeasure. Truly we need not
search long to find the cursed Traitor, that had the chief Hand in this
Business. You are all ready to ask the same Question, which Ahashuerus, did
Esther, Who is he, and where is he that durst presume in his Heart to have any
thing to do in so devilish a matter? I answer as she did; The Adversary and
Enemy is thy wicked Heart: Have you never read, That Wickedness burns like
Fire? Isa. 9.18. That Sin which we make so much of, that Lust which we hug in
our Bosoms, that Dalilah which we do so often embrace, has done us all this
Mischief: It Is Sin that is the only procuring Cause of Judgment. Holiness may
set Men against us. It Is nothing but Wickedness that can set God against us.
Thine own Wickedness, O England, has corrected thee, and thine own
Backslidings have reproved thee: Know therefore and see, that it is an evil
thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my Fear is
not in thee, says the Lord of Hosts. There is never a Sinner in England but
carries a Wildfire about with him to do Mischief with it: The best natured
unconverted Man that lives, whatsoever fine Name he may be called by, is no
better than a Madman, that casts abroad Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death; and
yet he says he meant no harm, he is but in sport. O that foolish Sinners
should find out such dangerous things to play with! And such is his Folly
still, that when he has set his Body, his Soul, his Relations, his Estate, his
House, and his Neighbors too on fire; he makes a great Outcry, Fire! Fire!
Where did it begin? Who was that careless Wretch by whose Neglect it first
came? Could there be such a barbarous unmerciful Monster on this side Hell that
would do such a thing? Could any Man living have the least Hand in so hellish
an Act? Yes. How! Bring out that -- (I know not what to call him bad enough)
that we may tear him in pieces, we'll knock out his Brains, we'll send him to
Hell, where he shall have Fire enough, if Fire be so good for him; a hundred
Deaths are too little for him: O that I had him here (says the furious Sinner)
I would soon have the Heart-blood of him! Who now would imagine that a Fellow
that talks at this rate should be the Man, that was Head and Heart deep in this
firing Work? Whereas if the Man were thoroughly searched, you might find
abundance of sulphurous Stuff about him; and if one should follow him from
place to place, he might find that he seldom comes into any Place, but he
leaves some Brimstone, Gunpowder, and a lighted Match, in some secret Corner
behind him.

But general Accusations are no Accusations, wherefore I shall descend to a few
Particulars, and name some of those fiery Sins, which, it is more than possible,
have made poor England like Stubble and Tinder; and have turned our Capitol
City into Ashes. And, O that all the Tribes of Israel would set themselves
before the Lord, and make a diligent Enquiry after those accursed Achans, those
God-provoking Sins, which have been the Troublers of London! O that we could
resolve their Death, though they be never so dear to us: My meaning is, O that
upon the Discovery of the Sin that has kindled the Wrath of God, and caused
him to break out upon us in such flery Indignation, we could in good earnest
labor the mortifying of it, as we would endeavor to see Execution done upon
the vilest Traitor in the World. What say you Citizens? Will you promise that
you will to the uttermost of your Power, and with the Strength of your Souls,
oppose those Sins which have done you so much wrong? And because you are weak,
and they are mighty ones, will you call in the Help of the Almighty against so
wicked an Enemy? In hope of this I shall proceed in the Search, and as I go
along, as you would not have to do with Fire again, as you value your own
eternal Safety, Riches, and Peace; as you would not be harbourless when your
House of Clay shall be pulled down; as you desire to have a House not made with
Hands, and to live for ever in the New Jerusalem, be faithful in the
Examination of your own Souls; and if you find them guilty, arraign, condemn,
and crucify that great Malefactor.

What do you think of the Fire of Lust and Uncleanness? Will not that burn
Kingdoms, Countries and Cities, as well as the Bones, Marrow and Strength?
London is not the first City that has been turned into Ashes by that burning
Sin. O how has this Sin reigned in London! How many thousands of Solomon's
strange Women were there, not in Corners only, but in their Shops (as I may
call them) whole Streets standing in the Attire of Harlots; (I would to God my
Informers were mistaken.) It would make a Christians Heart ^ake to hear what
Narratives some have made of these things, whose Profession has given them too
clear Demonstration of the Truth of what they spoke. How many of the Citizens
Wives themselves have given understanding modest Persons cause of Suspicion,
that they have not been the least guilty in this burning Sin? Nay, how many of
them which look very soberly, and go for Religious Persons, have taken these
Coals into their Bosoms? May not God justly take up the same Complaint against
some of the Inhabitants of this City, as he did once against Jerusalem; that
when he has fed them to the Full; they then committed Adultery, and assembled
themselves together by Troops in Harlots Houses; and that they were as fed
Horses in the Morning; every one neighed after his Neighbor's Wife. Shall I
not visit for these things? Wherefore says the Lord to his Servant Jeremiah, I
will make my Words in thy Mouth Fire, and this People Wood, and it shall devour
them, Jer. 5.7, 8, 9, 14. O that the Hand of some of our great Ones were not
chief in this Matter! O what dreadful daring Sins of this Nature have been done
in the Sight of the Sun! Have not some of our young Absaloms, even, as it were,
spread their Tents to commit Folly in the Face of the whole City, as if
Fornication alone were too little to sink them into Hell, except joined with
Sodomy and horrible Blasphemy; how have they added one to another? And then
rejoiced, as if it were an Honor to be a Devil incarnate, and an high Piece of
Gallantry to bid Defiance to the Almighty. Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and
see, go to Kedar and consider: Was there ever greater Sins in Sodom, or more
prodigious Wickedness heard of in France or Italy? Not only Fornication, but
Adultery goes now for a venial Fault, a Peccadillo: And so impudent are some
grown in their Sin, that they make but a laughing Business of such foul
Abominations as these. O unspeakable Madness! What! is there less Danger in
this Sin now than there was in former times? Shall that Wickedness which once
ascended up to Heaven in a black Cloud, and fell down again in Showers of Fire
and Brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, seem to us but Vapors that will quickly
vanish? Why should not the Sin of Uncleanness burn London, as well as the
Cities of the Plain? Is God less offended with Sin than he was then? Is not God
as holy, just, and powerful now as ever? Is his Hand weaker now than ever? No
such matter Sinners; Sin has still its old Nature; and if there be any
Difference it is now of a deeper Dye, as being committed against incomparably
greater Light. Wherefore deceive not your selves, if God condemned Whoremongers
and Adulterers then, they are not like to be acquitted now, if they die in that
Sin; and let me add this, that that is a Sin that is seldom truly repented of.
O that those brutish Sinners would but seriously ponder these two or three
Scriptures, Heb. 13.4. Rev. 21.8. Prove. 6.26. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Jude, ver. 7.

2. What do you think of fiery Spirits, who if it lay in their Power would turn
all to Ashes that are not as furious as themselves? How many are there in
England, that would be glad with all their Souls to be at this burning Work
again? We cannot yet forget the Marian Days, those black and dismal Days,
wherein in was an high Crime to desire the Light; wherein poor Creatures must
go hood-winked to Hell, or to Heaven in a Flame. We cannot let that Powder Plot
slip out of our Minds, though some of Rome's Friends could be contented that
the Memory of it should quite be quenched, and those Jesuitical Incendiaries
should be received into our Embraces. Nay, we cannot but shrewdly suspect that
that hellish Cabal, had their Heads and Hands, as well as their Hearts in the
fireing of London. These, these are the Persons that have always traded much
with Fire and Blood; and we can scarce think that so many of them as were in
London, have been altogether idle. Who is it that has rent and torn us into so
many pieces? Who is it that foments our Divisions? He must be blind that sees
not the Hand of the Jesuit in all these. And are there none we call
Protestants, that forget what Spirit it is which acts them, while they are so
implacable against those which they should love as Brethren, and not spare to
lay down their Lives for them, if called to it. O where is the sweet Spirit
that was amongst Christians in the Primitive Times? Did the Commands of our
great Master bind none but his Apostles and Disciples? Did that Law of Love
continue in force only for an Age or two? Does it signify nothing with us, that
Christ did so highly commend this Duty of loving one another? O England,
England, when will thy bitter Heart-burnings be cooled! I speak to the hot
Spirits of England. Do you think that he which condemned James and John when
they would have been at this fiery Work, will commend you for imitating of
them? Is this forgiving of Enemies? Is this praying for them that persecute us?
Is this blessing them that curse us? What is that which we so earnestly contend
for? Is it the Faith once delivered to the Saints? Is it, who should love one
another most? What is it that we labor so much for? Is it to pluck Firebrands
out of the Fire? To quench the Flames of Hell that are ready to seize upon
Christ-despising Sinners? When God has sent us into his Vineyard to work, do
not many of us play, or sleep, or that which is worse, make use of those Tools
which God has given us to work with, to fight withal, and to beat our
Fellow Servants? If any be angry at what I say, I must add this one Word more
to him; I am sure he is guilty. Let me in sober Sadness expostulate the Case
with thee, before thou let fly too violently; let me ask this hot spirited
fiery Creature, Are you sure your Zeal is according to Knowledge? Are you
certain the things you are so hot about are the weighty things of the Law? Are
they as necessary as the Salvation of Men's Souls? Are you sure they are the
grand Fundamentals, without which it is impossible to escape everlasting Wrath?
If so, I must confess I blame thee not? Dare you say that those that you are so
fiery against, are all in a damnable State? If they were, they have the more
need of your Pity, and compassionate Endeavors to convince them of their
Misery: But what if those which you so madly breath out Threatenings against, be
the Children of God? I tell you, I would not be found guilty of offending one
of those little ones for all that you are worth, if it were ten thousand times
more than it is. Do you think that their Father does not see? Or do you think
that the God of Love, which has made it your Duty to love your Children, has
none for his? Or do you hope to make your Party good with him, and them too? If
this be your Mind, I know what will become of the Stoutest of you all shortly.
Do you never look into the Bible, O ye fiery ones, which make nothing of
smiting with the Tongue! Did you never read the first Chapter of the Second
Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians? There you may find what Wages you shall
have for such Work, what Recompense for such Service. Who is it, that the Lord
Jesus will give Rest to? And who is that he will take Vengeance of in flaming
Fire? When you intend next to trouble any of those that are dear to Christ,
read and study that Chapter, and then as you like Fire and Flanies go on in
your Work. When you are envying against your Christian Brethren, then before
you be too hot turn to Jude 14.15. Remember that hard Speeches shall be
punished with no easy Judgment. Consider how the Great Indictment runs, Matt.
25. It may be you may think that as to the main Thing, Religion, you are safe
enough; but did you never hear that it is more than possible that such a one's
Religion is but a seeming vain Religion, who bridles not his Tongue, Jam. 1.
26. What do you say to these Scriptures, O ye hot ones! Do you well consider
what Fire warms you? And what Furnace those Coals must glow in for ever? Your
fiery Tongues will shortly be scorched in such Flames, as that they will roar
out for a Drop of Water to cool them. What shall be given unto thee, or what
shall be done unto thee, thou false Tongue? Sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with
Coals of Juniper. O when shall these unnatural Heats be abated! I speak all
this to violent ones of all Persuasions soever: And I say again, I am sure none
but the Guilty will be offended; but I fear the Fire burns on every side so
terribly, that these few Drops will do little to the quenching of it; but
however, who can choose but draw Water that knows what precious things are near
the Burning? Who can forbear pulling away some of the Fuel, that understands
how dreadful the Fire may be if it burn a while longer. I am the larger upon
this, because this great Sin has already been burning many Years; and has
miserably weakened us, and is now of more dangerous Consequence than ever. Is
it not enough, England, that thou art compassed about with Flames, but that
thou must be still kindling Fires, gathering Fuel, and blowing it up, and that
even in thy own Bowels? Is this a time for Englishmen, for Christians, for
Protestants to be ready to tear one another's Throats out? Woe is me that I
dwell among them that are set on Fire! Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that
I dwell in the Tents of Kedar! My Soul has long dwelt with them that hate
Peace. I am for Peace, but when I speak, they are for War, Psalm. 120. Shall
nothing make us lay aside our unnatural Feuds? Woe, woe to those which are so far
from quenching this Fire, that they still labor to make it burn more
furiously: It may be that Fire which now warms them, may one Day burn them.
This fiery Sin also has not had the least Hand in burning London to Ashes. And
what say thou, O Sinner, to this Indictment, guilty, or not guilty? O
blessed are the Meek! But if thou art guilty, run speedily to the great
Conduit, the Fountain, and fill thy Bucket, and pour, pour abundance of Water
upon this Fire; nay, upon the very Smoke: Thoa little think what it will
else come to at last.

3. Has there not been a strange Coldness and Indifferency in the Things of
God? And since preaching would not warm us, God will try whether the Fire will:
While we heard of the unsearchable Riches of Christ, which should have thawed
our Hearts, and turned them into a Flame of Love, we were as cold and as
lifeless as if the Tenders of a Christ to the lost Sons of Adam were no such
great Mercy, and the Gospel of Reconciliation but an inconsiderable Kindness.
While we heard the Sons of Thunder, our Souls were not rent; while the Flames
of Hell have been set forth warmly, we have been as little affected as if the
Fire of that burning Pit, were but a painted Fire, and the Torments of the
Damned a politic Fable to scare Men into Civility. While we have heard of the
Day of Judgment so often, and have not seen it, we are almost of the Mind, that
things will always be as they are; and are ready to think, that because God
stays long, therefore he will never come. But hold there Sinner, that would be
good News indeed to thee; but flatter not your selves so; God will e're long
convince you by an undeniable Argument, that Heaven, Hell, and Eternity are the
greatest Realities in the World; and that God's Judgment and Damnation are not
things to be jested with. Some of us have been ready to talk in our Hearts, as
those Atheists did with their Tongues, Isa. 5.19. Let him make speed and hasten
his Work, that we may see it. And now God has answered that Request with a
Vengeance. Faith would not see, and therefore Sense shall. God has let the
Sins of London see a little Emblem of the Day of Judgment; He came like a Thief
in the Night, he came irresistibly and dreadfully, and in a little space has
despoiled us of our Glory, and filled our Hearts with Horror, and our Souls
with Astonishment; and if we continue still our old Luke-warmness, we may be
visited with new heating Judgments still. But some will say, what do I mean to
reckon this amongst the God-provoking Sins? When was there ever more praying?
When more of the outward Acts of Religion? What Fasting? How many Solemn
Assemblies?

Did not Israel and Judah do as much as we, think you, when God laid their
Country desolate, and burnt their Cities with Fire, and scourged them with one
Judgment after another, till he was ready to throw away his Rod, and give them
up as utterly incorrigible? Read but the first Chapter of Isaiah, and you shall
find that at that very time they made as glorious a Profession of Religion as
any People in the World. They listed up their Hands with a great deal of
seeming Devotion, they made many Prayers, and they hung down their Heads for a
while like Bullrushes, and as to the external Part of Religion seemed to be a
People that delighted in God; and yet you see how exceedingly the Lord
undervalued all that they did. Why, what was the matter that the Lord takes no
more notice of them, than if they were the vilest Wretches on this side Hell?
And calls them by a Name which spoke no less, Men of Sodom, and Inhabitants of
Gomorrah. Why, the reason was, because they played the Hypocrites so
abominably; while their Tongues were as hot as could be, their Hearts were as
cold as Stones; while they sacrificed the Beast to God, they devoted their Life
and Love to their Lusts; and the Sum of all their Religion was, to tell God
they were Sinners, and to desire that he would give them leave to be so still,
and after they had sin^ed as long as they could, bestow a^^ Happiness and Glory
upon them in another World that God would be pleased to accept the Shell, and
let the Devil have the Kernel. And how can you think such Petitions as these
could be well accepted of? Oh that England were not as like them in Si^ as it
is in Suffering! O that we did not give our God as just Cause to complain of us
as he did of them We cry out as they did, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord: We boast of our Church, of ou^ Baptisin, and this is all that the
most of us have t^ distinguish us from Pagans and Infidels. O where where are
the Men and Women to be found, whos^ Professions and Actions correspond? How
few an^ there that know what it is to worship God in Spi^^^^^ and in Truth?
Nay, is not Godliness and Saint b^ come a Word of Contempt and Scorn? Does not
b^ that departs from Iniquity make himself a Prey? An yet we must go for the
most unquestionable Christians. If this be Religion, what is Irreligion? If
this be Holiness, what is Wickedness? Should not the Lord visit for such things
as these? And if God should not be avenged on such a People as this, they would
be confirmed in their Wickedness, and think that Holiness it self approved of
the greatest Impieties. The Truth of it is, considering all things, it is a
Miracle that our Condition is not far sadder than it is; it is a wonder that
our Fire was not mingled with Brimstone. Pride, Idleness, and Fullness of Bread,
were the Sins of Sodom; and was London less guilty? May we not add Oppression,
Falseness, Perjury, prodigious Insensibility of former Judgments? The Plague
which sell chiefly upon the Poor, began to be thought nothing by the Rich, though
most of them flew from it; and some of them were as merry in the Country, as if
London ailed nothing: but now they also shall feel what it is to lie under the
Scourge: And they that would not abate any thing of their Pride and Luxury to
keep others from starving, shall do it now whether they will or not, to keep
themselves from it. They which would give but little to supply the Exigencies
of others when they had it, shall now have but little to supply their own. I
tell you some of the faithful Ministers that staid in the City, when they
beheld the brutish Stupidness of the Generality of People, much feared another
Judgment upon the Neck of the Plague. Was there not one more especially, who
declared himself thus in public; O London, London! If thou do not repent,
and reform in another kind of manner than thou have yet done, if God does not
speedily send another great and visible Judgment upon thee, then the Lord has
not spoken this Day by me. O London, London! said another, O that thou had
known in this thy Day the Things of thy Peace! I tremble, said another, (who is
now in his Chamber, hid till the Indignation be over-past) to see what a Storm
is ready to fall upon our miserable rich ones, who are now feasting and faring
deliciously every Day in the Country, whilst we are ready to famish some of us,
and dying by thousands in the City. So that we cannot say but that we had fair
Warning. Should I go on still to read God's Indictment against us, when should
I have done? O where is that sweet Spirit that was once stirring in London! Is
not Religion in the Life of it almost out of fashion? Is it not laid aside as a
Garb not becoming our present Times? But I believe before God has done with us
he will make us put it on again, as well as our old cast-away-Suits: O how have
we forsaken our first Love! O the dreadful Apostasy of some of our Hearts! O
how little have those of us that should have encouraged Holiness troubled our
selves with it, except to suppress, brow-beat and oppose it. Has it not been a
sport to some in this City, to abute the Holy Scriptures, and those that
desired to go to Heaven by that Light. Who have been the Song of the Drunkard?
What have the profane Wits made the great Subject of their scurrilous Tongues,
but sacred Things? As if it were the greatest Credit to dishonor our Maker,
and true Courage to despise the Laws and Power of an Almighty God. At what a
high rate do the Devil's Champions act, as if they were afraid they could never
do their Master Service enough, and after all should miss of his Company for
ever. But never fear that Sinner; Hell may be had at a great deal cheaper rate.
If you desire to be so familiar with God's Judgment, Damning, and the Devil, it
may be sooner than you are aware you may have enough of them. Neither have we
cause to censure the Layety alone, as only guilty in these fiery Sins: The
Ruins of the Churches, and the burning of the Pulpits, speak those which claim
the greatest Interest in both, not to be altogether innocent. Give me leave to
lay my self and you in the Dust, O ye Ministers of England. Have we been indeed
true and faithful to the Interest of Christ and Souls? Have we not minded the
Fleece as much as the Flock? Have we taught the Word in season and out of
season? Have we been in Travail to see Christ formed in the Souls of our
Hearers? Have we besought Sinners in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God?
Have we watched over Souls? Have we warned Sinners Night and Day with Tears?
Have we taught them publicly, and from House to House? Have we been like
burning and shining Lights? Has the Honor of our great Master been our
greatest Design? Have we labored hard in God's Vineyard, and in good earnest
prayed that God would send more Laborers into his Harvest? Have we preached by
holy Lives and sound Doctrine? This it is to be a Gospel-Minister. But has this
indeed been the Practice of the Ministers of England? Have we not rather given
Campian and his Brethren the Jesuits cause to insult and say, Nihil eorum
ministris vilius? Have not abundance of us by our vile and abominable Lives
exposed the Sacred Function, and caused the Offerings of the Lord to be
abhorred? Have not our Actions spoke more for the Devil, than our Tongues have
done for Christ? Do not the common People begin almost to question our Office,
and look upon it as a Cheat? Are not they far more hardened by ourwicked, or
unprofitable Conversation, than softened by our Preaching? Preaching did I say?
Perhaps I might have put in another Word? For that was a Work that some of us
troubled our selves little enough with. And it is observed by some, that we left
our Pulpits and made them almost useless, before God burnt them: And when we
did preach, did we preach Christ, or our selves? The Moralist (Epic.) thought
it a ridiculous thing to call two thousand People together, to tell them that
he was a good Scholar, in a Periphrasis of two hours long; he tells us (though
a Heathen) That it was God and Souls that he was to speak for, and not himself.
And shall a Christian Minister, judge it greater Wisdom wittily to commend
himself, than warmly to commend Christ. Pudet haec opprobria nobis vel dici
potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.

I expect that those which are most guilty should least relish this Accusation;
but let me tell such, they have already more disgraced themselves by acting,
than I dare by speaking; and as for those that are not guilty, all this is
nothing to them. These are no secret things, but such as the World rings of;
and Confession of Sin, and Humiliation for them, and reforming of them, will be
a surer Guard to our Credit than our hiding them. I may say, shall we be so
tender in the Matter of our Honor, and shall not God's be at all vindicated?
And if I may not censure others, I hope you will give me leave to accuse my
self: And for my part I had far rather judge my self here, than be judged
hereafter.

Well now, is England guilty or not guilty? Is not London tried and cast? And
shall we not yet humble our selves, and give Glory to the God of Israel? Shall
we still like Pharaoh harden our Hearts against all these Plagues? O that we
may be wise at last! That before it be too plate, we may know the Things of our
Peace! O that we may come refined and purified out of this Fire! O that it may
purge away our Dross, and take away our Tin! O that like burnt Children we may
for ever after dread the Fire! O that those dreadful things which we have seen
and heard, may engage us more deeply against Sin, which brought them all upon
us! And let me tell you, this is nothing to the Mischief that Sin intends to do
us if we look no better after it. O shall we easily be reconciled to that which
has robbed us of so many of our sweetest Enjoyments, that has spoiled us of
our Goods; which has turned us out of our Houses, but with a little warning,
and given them to our Servant, who will never restore them again, I mean the
Fire. Shall we lodge that in our Bosom which has turned our beloved and
beautiful City into Ashes? Shall we look upon that as no Enemy, which has done
us such a great deal of harm? Shall we again join in Affinity with that Prince
of Darkness, who first or last undoes all that have any thing to do with him,
except to resist him. Shall the Wrongs that this old Adversary has done to
poor London be revenged by a new Covenant with him? Is it a small Injury to
dismantle, rifle and burn such a City as London was? O that one Fire might
kindle another! O that our Souls were inflamed with Indignation against Sin!
When Satan sollicits you next to Folly, then think of Eden, London and
Golgotha; I mean the Injuries that Sin did you in all those Places. Let me a
little incense your Souls against that Enemy that we are ready so soon to
receive into Favor. Was it not this Enemy which ran without Pity the last Year
from one end of the City to the other, and left in most of our Houses one dead,
in some scarce one living? It was this which fed the greedy Grave with some
hundreds at a Meal. This, this tore our dear and precious Relations out of our
Embraces; and shall we still have as much Kindness for it as for the dearest
Friend in the World? I wonder how Sin and Satan came to deserve so well at our
Hands, that we should prefer them both above all that we have in the World! O
how has the Devil bewitched poor Sinners, that they should rather part with
their greatest Friends, than the least Sin! What good did Satan ever do us,
that we should make so much of his Brats! O desperate Madness! O prodigious
Folly, that Men and Women should value Sin above their nearest Relations, above
their Souls, their God! O that Sinners would believe once that Sin is none of
their Friend, for all they are so well acquainted with it. It Is this which laid
our glorious City in the Dust. This is that great Robber (for all he speaks us
so fair) that has made us poorer by some Millions than we were three Weeks
ago; and shall we for all that let him go away without Revenge? O that I could
prejudice all the Sinners in London against Sin; O that they may hate it with a
perfect Hatred, and then I believe none of them would complain of their Loss.
Come and see what Desolations, what dreadful Havoc it has made among our
stately Buildings! How are they become a ruinous Heap! How are those brave and
magnificent Structures, the Gifts of our Noble Ancestors, levelled with the
Ground! Where is our Royal Exchange? What is become of most of our Halls and
Churches? How sad a Spectacle is it now to look upon Lombard Street, Cheapside,
and Paternoster Row? How ghostly a Sight is it to see the Place where London
stood! Of all that Glory, how little is left! What can we find but a few
Bricks, smoking Cellars, and a Heap of Rubbish? How does the City sit solitary
that was full of People, she that was great among the Nations, and Princess
among the People, how is she become poor! From the Daughter of London all her
Beauty is departed. London remembered, in the Day of Affliction and of her
Misery, all her pleasant Things that she had in the Days of old; When her
Daughters were clothed like Ladies, and her Citizens were like so many Princes.
But what an Alteration has Sin made! What -- let Sighs and Groans speak the
rest. O let it not be told in Gath, let it not be published in the Streets of
Askelon! Let it not be spoke in Holland; let not this be reported in France!
Triumph not, O Spain! Rejoice not, O Italy! The Cup shall pass over unto Edom,
and Babylon shall (...) drink the Dregs of it. Shall London be brought to the
Dust, and shall Rome sit as a Lady for ever? Tremble, O Babylon, tremble, for
thy Day is coming. The Day of the Lord will be terrible, it will burn like
Fire. If Judgment begin at the House of God, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly
appear? Rejoice not against me, O my Enemy, though I fall, I shall rise again;
but when Babylon falls, she shall fall with a Vengeance, like a Millstone in the
mighty Waters. Thy Turn, O Rome, is coming. When thou heardst of the
Desolations of London, thou skippest for Joy; thou sit and think thy
self safe, and do not fear but that thy Glory shall run parallel with the
Being of the World, thou shall be a Queen for ever. But does God say so too?
No; thy Plagues shall come in a Moment, and thy Desolation like a Whirlwind:
E're long the Kings of the Earth shall hate the Whore, and tear her Flesh in
Puces, and burn her with Fire. Has the Lord stretched out upon Zion the Line
of Confusion, and the Stones of Emptiness, and shall thou go altogether
unpunished? Come near, O ye Nations, and hearken, O ye People; let the Earth
hear, and all that is therein; the World, and all things that come forth out of
it; for the Indignation of the Lord shall be upon all Nations, and his Fury
upon all their Armies; he shall utterly destroy them, and their Slain shall be
cast out, and their Stink shall come up out of their Carcases; and the
Mountains shall be melted with their Blood; for the Sword of the Lord shall be
bathed in Blood, it shall come down upon Idumaea, and upon the People of my
Course, to Judgment; for the Day of the Lord's Vengeane is coming, and the Year
of Recompenses, for the Controversy of Zion, and the Streams thereof shall be
turned into Pitch, and the Dust thereof into Brimstone; and the Land thereof
shall become burning Pitch, it shall not be quenched Night nor Day. This shall
be the Condition of the Adversaries of Zion, and their Breach shall never be
made up: But the Lord will heal the Breaches of London, and build up her Wastes,
and she shall yet be inhabited, and shine in her Glory, if she return to him
that has torn her, he will heal her.

Come therefore, let us search and try our Ways, and turn again unto the Lord.
We will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him:
We will take with us Words, and go unto our God, and say, Heal our Backslidings
and love us freely. It is time for London to fall down before the mighty
Jehovah, to humble thy self, and to lick the very Dust. Thus says the Lord to
the Inhabitants of London, Seek ye me, and ye shall live; but seek not Bethel,
nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not over to Beershebah. Take heed of Idolatry,
take heed of unscriptural Worship; the Ark and Dagon cannot dwell long together.
Gilgal shall surely go into Captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught. O let
England have a care of Idolatry, that People-wasting and City-burning Sin. Take
heed of Popery: Stick to the Scripture as you value your Souls. It may be I may
not have much less Cause to renew my Advice than the Prophet had, wherefore I
say again, Have a care of Gilgal, Bethel and Beershebah. Seek ye the Lord, and
ye shall live, lest he break out like Fire in the House of Joseph, and devour
it, and there be none to quench it in Bethel, Amos 5.4, 5, 6. Awake O London,
and repent quickly, for yet there is Hopes! Repent in good earnest, and thy God
will yet look upon thee, and raise thee out of the Dust, and take thee off from
the Dunghill, and thy Glory shall be double to what it was. The Lord will lay
thy Stones with fair Colors, he will lay thy Foundations with Saphires, he
will make thy Windows of Agates, and thy Gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
Borders of pleasant Stones; In Righteousness shall thou be established, thou
shall be far from Oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it
shall not come near thee. Cry, cry mightily unto the Lord, ye that make mention
of his Name, and give him no Rest till he establish the Glory of England, and
make London a Praise in the whole Earth: For London's sake I will not be
silent, for our Zion's sake I will not hold my Peace: The Place of the
Sepulchers of my Fathers lies wast, the Place of my Nativity; the Sanctuary and
Shelter of God's People lies desolate. The City wherein sometimes dwelt
Righteousness, is fallen to the Ground! London is in Ashes! Christians, how can
you bare such a Sight without Tears! This is the Place where your Souls were
sometimes fed with Marrow and Fatness; Here thousands and thousands were born
to God. Christians, can you forget the Place of your spiritual Nativity? Here
you enjoyed sweet Communion with the Saints. For your Brethren and Kindreds
sake, let London lie near your Hearts! O pray, pray, pray for poor desolate
London! They shall prosper that love her. Remember London, O ye praying ones!
You Favorites of Heaven, when you are in the King's Presence, speak a good
Word for dear London! Remember her in your Fasts, forget her not in all your
Addresses to God, but wrestle with him for a Blessing for her. O let us fall to
Fasting, Prayer, and Reformation from Dan to Beersheba! Let us buckle to our
Work in sober Sadness. I promise you Englishmen, it is now no time for to be
jesting; our Glory is departed! The Fire of the Lord is burning on every side.
Come, bring your Buckets, fill them with Tears: O that mine Eyes were Waters,
and my Head a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night over thee, O
London. Hear, O ye that are afar off, lissen to the Groans of London! Do you
not hear her crying out as a Woman in Travail? Wherefore do I see Paleness upon
all Faces? Is there not a Cause? Come let us gird Sackcloth upon our Loins, and
cast Ashes upon our Heads for London's Calamity; and if Men and Women cannot
speak, Ashes, double-burnt Bricks, and that dismal Chasma where London stood,
opens its Mouth, and cries, Have Pity upon me, O ye my Friends, have Pity upon
me, for the Hand of the Lord has touched me! Is it nothing to you, O ye that
dwell in the Countries? Come up to London and see, and let your Eyes affect
your Hearts. Behold, how many disconsolate Creatures walk up and down upon the
Rubbish of London. Come and see what Desolation the Lord has made: How
dreadful has his Displeasure showed it self, upon some that are better than
your selves! Consider how many thousands of suffering Families there be which
were sometimes able, and some of them willing to relieve others in such a
State. Behold the Merchants and Citizens of London, like Persons amazed, struck
through with Horror, and filled with Perplexity; and if you have any thing of a
Christian in you, let it now be seen: Let your Heart and your Purse too be
opened wide; and go home and mourn over that calamitous Place, and weep for
their Sins which had a Hand in bringing that Misery upon them. Stir up others
to pity them: Tell them what a sad Sight your Eyes have seen, and labor to
make them and your Heart more sensible of their Sufferings. I may say of theirs
too: Can the Head be deadly sick, and the rest of the Body very well? I believe
the Country will quickly feel the sad Effects of London's Poverty. Go home
therefore and pour out your Souls before God, and let your Eyes run down with
Tears: Let England's Mourning be like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley
of Megiddo. Pity poor London, O ye Nobles and Gentry of England. This is not a
time for an Englishman, for a Christian, to be hoarding up Treasure in, except
it be on the Backs and Bellies of Christians: This is no time to be drinking
Wine in Bowls, to be slaying of Oxen and killing of Sheep: This is no season to
fare as Dives did, except you will be content with his Reckoning. If therefore
you have any Bowels, any Compassion, contract all your superfluous Expenses for
more noble Uses. Act for the Lord's sake as Men that are not void of Humanity,
and as those that might have been, and may be in a suffering Condition before
you die. Let not your Charity begin and end too at home. Let not your Charity
be cold after such a Fire, lest your Turn be next to know what Fire is.
Consider for Christ's sake, and for your own sakes too, whether be more
necessary, the pampering of Horses, the feeding of Hounds, or the relieving of
distressed Christians? Which do you think you shall reflect upon with most
Comfort when you come to die? Which do you believe will be the best Account at
the Day of Judgment, when God shall ask you how you spent your Estates? To say,
I spent so many hundreds by the Year in sumptuous Housekeeping, so much upon
idle unnecessary Attendants, so much at Cards and Dice, so much upon Plays and
Whores, so much given to make Men drunk, and so much at the Tavern; Or so many
hundreds for the feeding and clothing of God's Poor; so many hundreds for a
Stock to set up diligent young Men, that were undone by the Fire; so much for
the present Relief of those that were brought into pressing Exigencies by that
calamitous Flame, and such like Uses? Which of these do you think will be the
most comfortable Account at the Day of Judgment? Remember that those that will
not show Mercy at such a time, shall have Judgment without Mercy. Your Sin
helped to lay London wast: O that I could be as confident that your Charity and
Reformation would help to build it again! O that you may have as great a Hand
in its Reparation, as you had in its Devastation! But I say again, if the
Groans of London be not heard by you, if her Calamities do not affect you, know
this, that the Day is coming when you shall cry and not be heard, when you
shall groan and not be pitied.

O let not me rejoice till I see thy Glory, O England, returning. London shall
never be forgotten by the while my Breath lasts. The Servants of God favor
the very Dust of our Jerusalem. Once more Christians let me with all
Earnestness bespeak your Help. Help all you that love London, that love God,
that love your Souls, help with your Tears and Prayers, help with your Hands,
Hearts, and Purses: It may be the Lord will be gracious to us, and cause his
Face to shine upon us, and then we shall be saved. I say again, and let all
that wish well to poor England say so too, Let us gird us with Sackcloth, and
cast Ashes upon our Heads, and cry mightily unto the Lord for her that sits in
the Dust. Proclaim a Fast, call a Solemn Assembly, gather the People together,
sanctify the Congregation, gather the Children, and those that suck the
Breasts, let the Bridegroom go forth out of his Chamber, and the Bride out of
her Closet; let the Ministers of the Lord weep bitterly between the Porch and
the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not up thy
Heritage to Reproach: Wherefore should our Enemies say, Where is their God?
Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his People; yea, the Lord
will answer, and say unto London, I will raise thy wast Places again, and I
will build thy Streets, and the Voice of Joy and Gladness shall be again heard
in thee; yea, the Voice of Praise and Thanksgiving; I will send you Corn, Wine
and Oil, and thou shall he satisfied therewith. I will restore the Riches to
thee, which the Fire has taken from thee. I will send Peace into your Walls,
and Prosperity into your Borders; I will restore your Teachers which are
removed into Corners; I will send the Gospel of Peace in its Power and Purity
among you; I will write Holiness to the Lord upon the Foundations of your
Houses, upon your Gates and Palaces; your Riches, Trade and Glory shall return
unto you; and you shall be blessed and your Posterity after you: But if you
will still do wickedly, and will not repent, I do here declare, that all these
are but the Beginnings of Sorrows; for all this the Anger of the Lord shall not
be turned away, but his Hand shall be stretched out still; and he will yet
plague you seven times more for your Sins: And your God will be a consuming
Fire, which will again break out and devour what you have saved out of these
Flames; and through the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts the whole Land shall be
Darkness, and the People shall be as the Fuel of Fire, and no Man shall spare
his Brother, and he shall snatch on the right Hand and be hungry; and he shall
eat on the left, and not be satisfied; they shall eat every one the Flesh of
his own Arm. Manasseth shall be against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh,
and both of them against Judah. For all this his Anger will not be turned away,
but his Hand is stretched out still. Wherefore, repent, O London, of thy
abominable Uncleanness and Pride; repent of thy Backsliding and Idolatry;
repent of thy Perjury, lying and cheating, repent of thy Luke-warmness and
Hypocrisy; repent of thy Covetousness, Worldly-mindedness and Cruelty; repent
of thy Gluttony and Drunkenness. Ye Daughters of London which were haughty, and
walked with stretched-forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as ye
went, the Lord has taken away much of the Bravery of your tinkling Ornaments,
of your changeable Suits of Apparel, your Mantles and Glasses, Fine Linen,
Hoods, and Vails, he has stained the Glory of your Pride; and will you again
be as foolish as ever? Will you never understand your Sin till God has burnt
the rest of your fine Things and you too? O ye Citizens of London, has not God
written Vanity upon your greatest Enjoyments? Have not your Riches taken
themselves Wings and flew away? And will you again after all this set your
Hearts upon such short-lived uncertain Riches, and undervalue those true and
everlasting Riches. O look upon the World as it is, as an empty, dissatisfying,
transitory thing, and too mean a Match for a Soul. Is it not now high time to
look after a House that cannot be burnt, A House not made with Hands, which is
eternal with God in the Heavens? Is it not now high time to get into that City
which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God? Will it not now be for
our Interest to look after our Freedom in that New Jerusalem? There we may have
a Dwelling more safe than a House of Brick or hewn Stone, which a greater Fire
than this was cannot demolish or impair.

But if any be so hardened and incorrigible, as to make a Pish of all this, I
come to such with dreadful Tidings e're long; O stupid Sinner, thou shall
behold a far more dismal Fire, and hear far more lamentable Outcries, and see
thousands of thousands at their Wits Ends, filled with unspeakable Horror and
Perplexity, not being able to save the least Rag to cover their Nakedness, nor
to save themselves from those dreadful Flames; and if thou repent not speedily,
thou shall be one of them; and thou also shall wish thou might be so happy
as to be covered with the Ruins, or consumed to nothing with the Flames; thou
shall call and cry to the Rocks to cover thee, and to the Mountains to hide
thee from that terrible Sight, the Lord Christ the Judge, whose Eyes are like
flaming Fire. Beloved, the Day of the Lord is coming which shall burn like
Fire, in which not Houses and Cities only, but Lands also, yea, the whole World
shall be all in a Flame, Heaven and Earth will be on Fire: That will be a Fire
indeed! Let your Losses be never so great now, I am sure if you do not repent,
they will be infinitely greater then. Those three Nights were sad Nights
wherein you could not take a wink of Sleep for the Fire; but that will be a far
sadder Night, which will never have a Day following it, in which you cannot be
able to take a Moment's Rest for those intolerable Flames. You will then think
the burning of your Houses nothing to the burning of your Bodies; and the
burning of your Bodies nothing to the Torments of your Souls. I tell thee, O
Sinner, if thou continuest an Enemy to God, God has not done with thee yet,
the worst is still to come. Upon the Wicked he will rain Fire and Brimstone,
and an horrible Tempest; and this shall be the Portion of their Cup; and the
Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and cast into that Lake that burns for ever
and ever: A Fire that shall never, never, never be quenched. O that is a
terrible Fire which shall not burn four Days, nor four Years, nor four
thousand, nor four Millions, nor four Millions of Millions (O happy were it for
Sinners if it might at last be quenched, though it lasted never so long) but it
shall burn for ever, for ever, for ever! O that will be a dismal Day when that
Fire begins to break out! When the Sinners in Zion shall be afraid, and the
Hypocrites shall be surprised! Who among us shall dwell with devouring Fire?
Who among us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? Tremble, O Sinners of
England, tremble ye Sinners of London, left those unquenchable Flames seize
upon you, which are infinitely more dreadful than those which your Eyes have
seen with abundance of Terror. That Is a Fire which shall be felt more than
seen; the Lord deliver poor London from that Fire, and then we shall the more
patiently bear this! O that some of them which have saved most of their Goods
out of this Fire, may not lose them all, and their Souls too in that! O happy
would it be if this Fire should put us all into such a Fright that we may be
afraid of Fire ever after! I mean of the Fire of Sin, of the Fire of God's
Wrath, of the Fire of Hell. But let me add a Word or two more to them which
have been great Loosers by this dreadful Fire. Remember that you have that
within you which kindled this great Flame; be as careful to quench that Fire
within you, as you were to quench that without you, and more too: Fear Sin more
than Fire, more than Hell, and then neither of them shall do you any hurt. And
again, I say, speedily make sure of such a House, such Goods, such an Estate
which is not subject to such Hazards. And now many of you are turned out of
your Habitations, and have lost a great part of that little which you had, and
are out of a great deal of your Employments, whereby you might again stand upon
your Legs; I must tell you among other Losses, I believe some of you have lost
your Friends too. Most of them which in your Prosperity seemed much to respect
you, will in your Adversity forget your Acquaintance. Perhaps by this time some
of you have experienced that a true Friend is a greater Rarity than you thought
it was; and that among all your Acquaintance (if you be very poor) you can
scarce go to one that will receive you and yours, and make himself a Sharer in
your Sufferings, and you a Sharer with him in his Comforts. You might be
welcome while you had a free Trade, and good Comings in, but now their Houses
are too straight, and they are sorry that they cannot accommodate you, and with
some such poor Excuses you are shaken off; or if they do receive you for a
while, they are quickly sick of your Company, and you shall soon perceive that
their Countenance is not toward you as formerly. But suppose, which I believe
too few will find, that some Friend will do all that I speak of; yet where is
there such a Friend that will not only supply your present Exigencies, but also
make up your past Losses, and make abundant Provision for you, for the future,
against all manner of Wants? Such a Friend as this I may confidently say you
shall rarely find. But now my Errand to you is to bring you Tidings of such a
Friend; one that (if you will be quiet, and let him alone to do with you as he
pleases) will make you a far greater Gainer than a Looser by this Fire.
Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, and hereby Good shall come
unto thee. Get but Acquaintance with God, and he will provide you a convenient
House, he will lay you in the best Wares, and that without Money and without
Price, he will make you to forget your Losses, and you shall drive a better
Trade than ever you did in your Lives; and you shall say, that as for your
part, it is well that you were thus undone. Your Incomes shall be far greater,
your Returns quick and surer, your State shall be as much altered for the
better, as Job's was at his latter End. Now, if ever, it is seasonable looking
out for such a Friend. He alone is the best Friend in the worst Times. He knows
Job upon the Dunghill, as well as David upon the Throne. He will be most kind
when others are like to be most unkind. He will visit you when others will
scarce look upon you. In his House you shall be as welcome as ever; in his
House are many Mansions; if it were not so, he would have told you. In his City
there is room enough, and you shall have Entertainment there, and be more
welcome than if you staid away; his Doors will be open to them which have no
Houses to hide their Heads in. Come to him, ye harbourless ones, he invites you
earnestly and heartily, and he will give you Shelter. You that have no Friends,
or but sorry ones, come to him now in your Straights, and he will never cast
your Poverty or his Kindness in your Teeth, except your Carriage be proud and
unbecoming your State: But let me tell you this for your Comfort, that if you
do once come to him, he will in no wise cast you out again; once your Friend,
and so for ever. Now, now is the time that such a Friend would be worth the
having: This is a Friend indeed. Now is the time, if ever, to look after
something, that greater Flames than those which turned this City to Ashes cannot
consume. God has lately read to us a Lecture of the Vanity of all
Creature-Enjoyments. The last Year he took away many of our dearest Friends (we
now see from what:) This Year he has taken away many of your Estates, and I
fear the most of the Friends that you have left will go with them; you must not
expect them to be so sweet, loving, and kind, as sometimes they were: (the more
will be their Shame.) And will you after this refuse Acquaintance with him, who
will be better to you than a thousand of the best Friends that ever Man had
upon Earth. If you have lost your House, he will find you a better, one that is
admirably furnished, gallantly seated, where you shall sit Rent-free, or pay
but a Pepper-corn; he will also bear all your Charges for you, keep your House,
and you shall want for nothing as long as an infinite Store will hold out: You
shall live higher, sare better, be clothed better, have a better Trade, keep
better Company, and have every thing better than before. O that you would but
try what this Friend will do for you! And if after you have made a through Trial
of him, you do not find him far better than I can express, then also let me go
for one of the most unfaithful Friends in the World.

My Love to poor London, the Place of my Nativity, is great, and upon many
Accounts you may claim a greater Interest in my Affections, than any place in
the World besides: And I could not tell how more lively to express my dear Love
to you, than by commending you to the Care of this great Friend, and by
endeavoring all that I could possible to get you acquainted with him, whose
Favor is better than Life, and whose Friendship will infinitely supply all
your Wants. I have in this following Discourse given you a rude Character of
this Friend, and I have labored to show you what unspeakable Advantage will
accrue to you by your Acquaintance with him in such a time as this is: I have
given you some Directions how you may come to be acquainted with him. Pray for
a Blessing upon this Book, which has cost the Author some Pains, Prayers,
Tears, and Groans, that what was here written, might be the Transcript of his
own Experience, and might be some way subservient to the Glory of God in the
Conversion and Comfort of Souls. Peruse it with Seriousness, and it may be you
may find that in it, that may make you more glad, than when your Corn and Wine
and Oil increased. You can now scarce say that you want time for such a Work as
this is; if you do, I shall say you shall not want time to repent. I thought if
any Providence were wak'ning, such as these were, wherefore I desired to
strike while the Iron was hot. O that the Lord would strike in too! O that the
Effect of my poor Labors, may be the bringing in of some of them that were
formerly without Christ, and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the
World, to be acquainted with God in Christ Jesus; that they who were sometimes
afar off might be made nigh by the Blood of Christ: That you may be no more
Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of God. O if I may be but an Instrument of the Good of one Soul, I
shall think my Labor well spent, and my Losses turned into Gain. If you find
any Good in the Use of this Book, give God the Praise, and labor to keep a
constant warm Sense of the Excellency of such a Friend upon your Spirit; and
commend this Friend to all your Relation and suffering Acquaintance, that none
of them may after their great Losses, lose God, Heaven, and their Souls too. O
that will be a dreadful Loss indeed! I again beseech you, forget not to pray
for one of the most unworthy Instruments that ever Infinite Goodness made use
of in so glorious a Work.

Sept. 24, 1666. James Janeway.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
UPon the serious Perusal of this Soul-profiting Piece, I have found so much of
the Divine Spirit breathing in it, that I cannot but commend it to thy serious
Consideration. The Doctrinal Part is a Posthume of one that lived at a high
rate in Acquaintance with God: And no wonder he writes so excellently about it;
like Elihu, Job 32.18, 19. I am full of Matter, the Spirit within me
constrains me. Behold, my Belly is as Wine which has no Vent, it is ready to
burst like new Bottles. Or as that Prophet, Micah 3.8. But truly I am full of
Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment, and of Might. This Posthume
had likely perished, had not a dear Brother, both in Natural and Spiritual
Bonds, performed the Office of a Brother in raising up of Seed: So as thou
have, as it were. Twins in this Piece; but not like Jacob and Esau, struggling;
but rather as those Twins conjoined in Body, sweetly sympathizing, rejoicing
and condoling with each other: I am sure both mutually conspire for thy Soul's
eternal Welfare. In the Doctrinal Part thou will meet with Solidity of
Judgment: In the Applicatory, no want of Judgment, but abounding Affection, and
Strength of Argument to persuade and prevail with thee. I confess if thou be
a curious Reader, thou will not find Quotations of Fathers to please thy Fancy;
but if conscientious, thou will find serious Truths to profit thy Soul. I
reverence the Fathers, I highly esteem Learning; but Pieces stuffed with Greek
and Latin Quotations, larded with Rhetorical Flourishes, prove oftentimes but
as painted Glass that darken Churches. Here are some few Sparks of Nature's dim
Light from some Heathen Philosophers, that may shame thee a Christian, if thou
know not more, and live not at a higher rate. Whoever thou art, I beseech
thee, who am one that unfeignedly loves thy Soul, read this Piece but once over
with a composed calm Frame of Spirit for my sake, and I am confident thou will
read it over again the second time for thine own Soul's sake. Read much, but
read not many things; live lowly, but let thy Heart be lifted up in the Ways of
God; be resolved for Heaven, and I assure thee here are excellent Helps to set
thee forward in thy Journey. I am but thy Porter to open the Door, and let thee
into this well-founded Fabric; thou will find enough within to welcome thee,
and such a Friend, that it will prove thy best Day thou came acquainted with
him. I will not detain thee at the Door; but before thy Entrance (which I would
have thee to retain in mind after thy Return) I give thee this solemn Charge in
the Name of my Great Master, my dear and precious Lord Jesus Christ, who is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and in the Presence of his holy Angels, that
after thou have seriously weighed the Doctrine, considered the Reasons, and
solemnly perused the Uses, that thou appear before Jesus Christ, these my Elect
Brethren, and me, at the Judgment approaching, unacquainted with God, if thou
dare. My Heart's Desire to God is, that thou may be saved; and so I shall
commend thee to God, and the Word of his Grace, that thou may receive
Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance among those that are sanctified by Faith
that is in Christ. From a Lover of Souls, willing to have no Name, so the Name
of Jesus may be glorified in thine everlasting Glory.

Twelfth Month, vulg. February the 25th, 1666.
HEAVEN UPON EARTH.
JOB xxii. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace: thereby Good
shall come unto thee.
THose who have improved their Experience of things by Wisdom, and gathered up
the Value of Man's Life by comparing his Desire with his Enjoyments, his
Troubles and Sorrows with his Content and Joy, have concluded the worth of the
Life of Man to be below nothing; they have drawn a black Line upon the whole,
and shut up all in Darkness. Thus Jacob of old, in the account which he gives
of his Life to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. and Job 5.7. And also Solomon, who had an
extraordinary measure of Wisdom by Divine Dispensation, who had a large Spirit,
like the Sand of the Seashore, he gave himself great Liberty in trying what
that Good under the Sun for the Sons of Men was, Eccles. 2.1. When he had taken
a Taste of all the World's Contents, yet he finds a Bitterness mixed in all
Delights, which abides longer than the Pleasure, ver. 11, and 17. And
whosoever shall enter into himself, and feel the Workings of his own Mind,
shall be able to read over the Transcript of the same in his own Conscience.
Who is he among the Sons of Men, that in his natural Life has attained to a
state wherein he was able to say, Here I will stay, it is now well with me, I
desire no Addition to my present Condition? If there be any such, I dare
undertake to prove him unacquainted with himself. Where now shall I fasten the
Blame of this universal Evil? Shall we fall out with our Life, as a thing not
worth the having? Shall we shrink unto our former Nothing, and cast up our
Being and Life into the Hands of God, as that out of which we gathered nothing
but Bitterness and Disquiet? Far be this from us, this were to justify that
evil and wicked Servant, who said of God, That he knew he was a hard Master,
reaping where he had not sown, and gathering where he had not strawed. This
would be to accuse God of having made us to an unavoidable Necessity of Misery.
How then comes it to pass, that we are all held fast in this common Calamity?
It is from thy self, O Man, it is from thy self; this Evil is because of our
falling from God. It is a righteous thing with God, that when Man departed from
him, he should reap the Fruit of his own Doings; and indeed it is impossible
for a Creature of our Composure and Constitution, but to feel it self
dissatisfied with all worldly material Employments, and to find Trouble and
Disquiet in it self, while it is deprived of its true Good. If we would have a
true Account of our Disquiet and Dissatisfaction, this it is. God made Man of
all the Works of his Hands, to be the nearest to himself, and has fitted his
Principles for a higher Life, than that which has the Things of this World for
its Object; but Man has made himself like the Beasts that perish. We have
given our Souls into captivity to our Bodies; or rather, we are fallen from our
Union with God, and are gathered up into our selves, and become deprived of a
Sufficiency in Separation from God; then it must needs be, that we being gone
down into a lower State than that which we were made to, should find nothing
but Dissatisfaction and Emptiness; here we are by Nature, and hitherto we have
brought our selves by forsaking God.

Now the great Enquiry will be, what Remedy there is for this our woeful
Condition; is there any way whereby we may be delivered from this Misery? If
there be, what way is it? These Words, which I have chosen to speak to, do
contain the Answer to this Enquiry.

Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby Good shall come unto
thee. This is the Counsel of one of Job's three Friends to him in the time of
his great Affliction. You have heard of the Affliction of Job, and how his
three Friends came to relieve him with their Counsel; but the Devil, who had a
Commission from God to try his utmost with Job, yet sparing his Life, made use
of his Friends, who are to be a Comfort in the Hour of Adversity, to be a great
means of his Disquiet, so that he cries out of them, Miserable Comforters are
ye all, Chap. 16.2. And the great way of their troubling him, was, by
misapplying, by making false application of true Principles. In their
Discourses there are many excellent Truths; yet by their hard construing, and
ungrounded condemning of him, they by God are reproved, as not having spoken
the thing that was right, Chap. 41. 7. yet in many things their Counsel was
suitable and seasonable, of which sort the Words in the Text may be accounted.
In this Chapter Eliphaz had been inquiring into the cause of Job's great
Affliction, and holding this for an undeniable Principle, that the righteous
God, being the great Disposer of Affliction, did bring this Evil upon him
because of his Sin; he measured the greatness of his Sins by the greatness of
his Afflictions; he made account, because God's Hand was gone forth in an
extraordinary manner against Job, therefore there was some extraordinary Guilt
upon him, Ver. 5, and 13. And thou say, How does God judge through the dark
Clouds? Thus we have his Apprehension of Job, as one under great Affliction,
because of his great Sins; and the Text is Eliphaz his Counsel to Job under
this Character; and so is suitable Advice to those that are under Sickness, or
great Afflictions, and that are under the Guilt of great Sins.

Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby Good shall come unto
thee. The Words are a Doctrine for the Soul under a Sense of its lost
Condition, with a Promise very comfortable upon the embracing thereof.

The Doctrine is, Acquaint thy self with him, and be at Peace.

The Promise: Thereby Good shall come unto thee.

These Words, Be at peace, may be referred either to the former, as an addition
to the Doctrine; Be at peace, that is, keep your selves in a quiet Submission
to the Hand of God; or to the latter, and so, Be at peace, is as much as, Peace
shall be to thee.

In the Doctrine we are to consider the Act, and Object.

The Act, Acquaint.

The Object is God.

DOCTRINE. So that the Doctrine is, To enter into acquaintance with God. This
Proposition stands forth to the view of every Eye, that it is the Duty of Man
to be acquainted with God.

Now the first thing that is before us to enquire after, is, What this
Acquaintance with God is.

Secondly, to evidence and clear it to be the Duty of Man to acquaint himself
with God. Acquaintance with God implies several things.

1. It signifies a full and determinate Knowledge of this Truth, that there is
a God, and so to know him, as to his Nature, distinct from all other Beings.

There is a threefold Knowledge of God.

1. A Rational. 2. A Natural. 3. A Supernatural.
First, there is a Rational Knowledge of God, which is a clear Discovery of an
Almighty, All-sufficient Cause of all things, which is attained by a reasonable
discussing Power of the Soul, which argues from things that are visible and
sensible, to an invisible and self-principled Cause of all things. Man found
himself brought into the World furnished with an innumerable Variety of
Creatures, and none of these having Power to make it self; we see likewise such
an accurate Order in every particular Creature, and in all the Creatures one
with another, that we cannot but see clearly that there is a Supreme Almighty
Cause of all things, who has by his Power brought forth all things into Being;
who is likewise the most wise Agent, who by his unsearchable Wisdom has
curiously framed every Creature, and by his wonderful Counsel has set them in
such an order, that they all serve one another, till at length they all meet in
Man, as in the common Center.

Secondly, there is a Natural Knowledge of God, which is the inward Touch, and
mental Sensation of a Surpeam Righteous Judge, to whose Trial we feel our
selves under an unavoidable Bond, in doing Good and Evil. This is that which is
commonly called Conscience; this a Man finds in himself, if at any time he have
committed any secret Sin whatsoever, which none in the World knows but himself:
He feels it to be a Pressure upon his Spirit, as being under the examination of
a Power superior to himself. Now this is nothing else but a secret Impression
that God has made of himself upon the Minds of Men, by which Man is bound to
stand before the Tribunal of God. These two ways of knowing of God were very
clear to Man in his perfect State; but since the Fall of Man they are much
weakened and decayed. But,

Thirdly, There is a Supernatural way whereby we come to know God, which has
repaired our Loss by Adam's Sin, and that is by God's extraordinary Revelation
of himself in his holy Scriptures; by these we may come to have a more clear
distinct Knowledge of God, both that he is, and what he is. To these three ways
of letting in the Knowledge of God into the Soul, three mental Acts of the Soul
do answer.

First, A rational Discourse, by which we find out God by the Creatures.

Secondly, An inward Sensation, which feels God as just in Good and Evil.

The third mental Act is Faith, which for its Foundation has the Word of God.

There is a fourth way of knowing God, which is by Experiment; which is when
God manifests himself to his peculiar ones, and lets out the Knowledge of
himself to their Souls; as when the Sun breaks forth with a bright shining in a
cloudy Day. But this belongs rather to another Head.

Thus you see the first thing implied in this Acquaintance with God, which is
the lowest.

Yet how many are there that have little Acquaintance with God in these Signs?
May we not come to many who profess they know God, and yet among all their
Thoughts, they have had few or none to satisfy themselves concerning him? How
gross are the Apprehensions of some concerning God? Some Men resist and stifle
that natural Knowledge that they have of God, such as those, Romans 1.20. they
did not like to retain God in their Knowledge, and God gave them over to a
reprobate Mind, or a Mind void of Judgment, as the Word signifies. Others have
lived all their Days upon the Bounty and Goodness of God, and yet have not been
led by the Streams to the Fountain, from which all has flowed. Others can busy
themselves all their time in other things, and little inquire into the Word of
God, by which they may be lead to the knowledge of him: But woe to those on
whom the Fury of the Lord shall be poured out, because they know not God, Jer.
10.23.

Secondly, Acquaintance with God, implies frequent Access unto God. We do not
usually reckon our selves acquainted with any Person by a bare Knowledge that
such a Person there is, and that we are able to give some general Description
of him; but when we say we are acquainted with any, it is understood that we
have been in such an ones company, we have come to him, and been with him: such
is our Acquaintance to be with God.

Under this Head I shall speak,

First, Of that Separation that is of the Soul from God.

Secondly, Of the Return of the Soul to God.

Thirdly, Of the Abiding of the Soul with God.

First, Of the Separation and Distance of the Soul from God. That corrupted
Estate in which every Man comes into the World, is a State of Separation from
God. This Distance is not to be understood as a Physical Natural Distance, for
so God is near to every one of us by his Omnipresence, and by his Infinite
Power, sustaining us in our Being and Actions, Acts 17.27, 28. Though he be not
far from every one of us; for in him we live, move, and have our Being. But
this is to be understood,

First, Of a moral Separation from God. There is a great Strangeness between
our Souls and God: We reckon our selves to have little to do with him, and to
be very remotely concerned in him; we reckon that God takes very little regard
of us, we look upon God as far from us, and we think God looks upon us as at a
great distance; we love not God, and think that God loves not us.

Secondly, This Separation may be understood of a Judicial Distance, at which
God has set sinful Man from himself. Man is kept out from God, as being unfit
to approach to him in his Sinfulness and Impurities; and that is either in this
Life, in which condition every one is, till he be made nigh by Christ, and set
before the Father without Sin in him; till they are born again of the Spirit,
and justified, and sanctified by Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. Ye that sometimes were
afar off, were made near by the Blood of Christ. Here this judicial Separation
is the Execution of that terrible Sentence, Depart from me ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Thus ye see
the Distance at which Man is from God, which is not Physical, but either Moral
or Judicial.

Secondly, When we are thus separated from God, if we will be acquainted with
him, there is required a returning to God. Acquaintance does necessarily imply
an Union: Now where there was a former Separation and Distance, there is
required a Motion to Compliance, and a Return, either in both Parties, or in
one at least; so that before ever we can be acquainted with God, there must be
a forsaking our former Distance, the Separation must be removed. Now God has
done what could be conceived, and beyond what could be expected toward the
reducing of us to an Union with himself; whereas he might justly have ^hrust us
away from him for ever, and never ^ave given us liberty to come near him more,
as ^eing so filthy by Sin, that his Holiness cannot endure us: yet he has
freely set open a Door o^ Hope for our Return: he did not come thus nigh^ to
Angels when they fell, but they were turned away from him, and are bound in
Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day: it is impossible for them
to return any more. And so i^ would have been for us, had not God made i^
possible by an Act of free Love; and he has likewise revealed his Willingness
to receive us, i^ we return, yea, his earnest Desire, Turn ye, wh^ will ye die?
Yea, his rejoicing in our Return, a^^ a Father rejoiceth to receive a prodigal
Son tha^ has departed from him. But that God should go further, to close with
us while we retain ou^ Impurities, and remain at a distance from him it is
impossible, because of the Unchangeablenes^ and Simplicity of his Nature, and
because of the Purity and Exactness of his Holiness; it mu^^ therefore
necessarily follow, that a yielding an^ return must be on our parts, or else
there is (...) possibility of Compliance between God and (...) after that we
have forsaken him by Sin. A^^ this is most righteous and equal; for Man d^^
forsake God, God did not forsake Man; M^^ made the difference; Man ran away
from Go^ God follows Man as far as his Holiness and unchangeable Nature will
permit him; he calls (...) us to return, he is ready to meet and embrace (...)
in the Arms of his Love, and to receive us i^^ acquaintance with himself, as
the Father in th^^ Parable met his prodigal Son, Luke 15.20. (...) saw him afar
off, and had compassion on him, ran a^^ fell upon his Neck and kissed him.
Herein have (...) shadowed out to us the great readiness of God (...) receive
returning sinful Man; but as the Pro^^ Son must return to his Father, so Man
must return to God. Now it is Sin that separates between us and God, and keeps
good things from us, Isa. 59.2. Your Iniquity has separated between you and
your God, and your Sins have hid his face from you. Therefore while we cleave
to our Sins, we are separated from God: till we are separated from our Sins, we
cannot be united to God. Thus ye see our Separation from God, and our necessity
of returning to God, before there can be any Acquaintance with him.

Thirdly, To our Acquaintance with God, is required an abiding with God. We
reckon not our selves acquainted with any Person upon the first Meeting, or
when there has passed but a Word or two between us; but it is supposed to
acquaintance, that we have made a considerable stay with him, and have had
frequent access to him. Thus it is between God and us; we must not only come to
him, but abide with him, or else we shall never be acquainted with him, John
8.13. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples. So I say, if you
return to God, and continue with God, then shall ye be acquainted with him
indeed. Acquaintance signifies not a bare Act, but a State or Habit. Now this
is the difference between an Act and a State; that an Act is passing and gone;
but a State signifies an abiding and continuance. There may be a drawing nigh
to God without abiding and continuing with God, upon some deep Conviction, or
strange Providence, or eminent Danger; as it is said, In their Affliction they
will seek me early. Yet they may soon forget and forsake God. This is but a
seeming and practical approaching to God, a drawing nigh in appearance, when
the Heart is far from God: but that approaching to God which makes acquaintance
with God, is abiding with him: Those that are acquainted with a spiritual Life
know these things what they are, and that they are the greatest Realities in
the World; they know that sometimes there is a greater nearness of their Souls
to God, they are sensible of the Approaches of their Heart to God, and of the
withdrawing of their Souls from God; they know what it is for the Soul to feel
the Approaches of God, and his Smiles fill their Souls with unspeakable
Comfort: and to feel God withdrawing from the Soul, this clouds their Joy, and
makes them go mourning: they can tell you at such a time they were brought unto
his Banqueting House, and his Banner over them was Love: They can tell you at
such a time Christ came into his Garden to eat his pleasant Fruits; at such a
time they heard the Voice of their Beloved, saying, Open to me, my Sister, my
Spouse, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled. And when the Soul has neglected this
Knock of Christ to open to him, that then he has withdrawn: I opened to my
Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. These things are
the Experiences of a precious Child of God, which I fear are little felt, and
little known amongst us: but where these things are not, there is no
Acquaintance with God. For,

First, They do know him.

Secondly, They draw nigh to him, they have near access to him.

Thirdly, They have intimate Converse with him. This is another thing required
to Acquaintance. We are not said to be acquainted with any Person, unless we
have had intimate Converse with him. We may be next Neighbors, and yet have no
acquaintance, unless our Conversation has been mutual. So it is between God
and us; there may be a nighness between the Soul and God, and yet no
acquaintance between the Soul and God. We are nigh to God in our Dependence
upon him, we are near to God by his immediate Providence and Sustentation of
us, and by his Omnipotence. There is a Nearness to God by way of Dedication. As
God set apart the Children of Israel to be a People near unto himself; so the
visible Church of God is nearer to him than those that are not of the Church.
There is a Nearness of Dedication among us by Baptism. But all this may be
without acquaintance. There is therefore required to our acquaintance with God,
an intimate Converse with God. We have great Converse with those who are of the
Family or Society with us. Now such is our acquaintance with God, as those who
are of his Family. God is called the Father of the Families of all the Earth:
and the visible Church is reckoned as God's Family; but in a great Family there
may be little acquaintance with those Persons which be of remote Employments:
but to acquaintance with God there must be such a relation as implies familiar
Converse. This Intimacy that the People of God have to him, is expressed by the
nearest Relations in Scripture. As Abraham is called the Friend of God, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Jehoshaphat prays unto God, and says, Art not thou our God, who
did drive out the Inhabitants of this Land before thy People Israel, and gave
it to the Seed of Abraham thy Friend for ever? And the Lord spoke unto Moses
face to face, as a Man speaks to his Friend, Exodus 33.11. John 15.15.
Henceforth I call you not Servants, but Friends, for the Servant knows not what
his Lord does; but I have called you Friends, for all things that I have heard
of my Father, I have made known unto you. Now by Friend is commonly understood
a State of Converse and Society one with another. And this Intimacy is
expressed likewise by the Relation of Husband and Wife, Isa. 54.5. For thy
Maker is thy Husband. Hos. 2.7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my
Husband, for then was it better with me than now. By Husband there is meant
God. And the whole Book of the Canticles is a Relation of the mutual Converse
betwixt God and his People, betwixt Christ and his Church, under the Relation
of a Bridegroom and his Spouse. Now what Converse more intimate than between
Husband and Wife? Such is that between a Soul acquainted with God, and God.
Again, this is shadowed out to us under the Relation of a Father and his
Children, 1 John 3.1. Behold, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called his Sons! And the holy Spirit is given to be the
Spirit of Adoption in the Hearts of God's People, Romans 8.15, 16. Ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry Abba, Father. The Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. What is
signified by this Relation, but a nigh Union and intimate Converse between the
Soul and God^ And this is necessary to our acquaintance with God, even intimate
Converse with God. By this (...) ^ean a Nearness of Employment, when the
Objects of our Employments are the same, then are we said to converse with God,
when we are employed about those things wherein God is most. When there is, as
it were, a mutual Commerce and Trading between the Soul and God; Man giving
himself up to God, and God giving himself out to Man; Man taking up the
Interest of God, and God undertaking for the Interest of Man; these and such
like actings are the converse which the Soul has with God. I speak of things
which the Men of the World are not acquainted with; but those that are
acquainted with God, know these things; and upon the mention of them, their
Hearts leap within them. As Face answers to Face in a Glass, so Experience
answers these things. When this String is struck, their Hearts do harmonize;
as when a Lute^tring is struck, the other Strings of nighest Con^ord with it
move also. But these things are a Mystery to the World, and they say as those
of Christ's Word, We know not what he says. And (...) is no wonder, for they
are the Actings of a Divine Life, to which all are naturally dead, till they
are raised to Newness of Life by the quick^^ing of the Spirit of God. But I
proceed to ^ew what is meant by this Acquaintance with God.

Fourthly, To this Acquaintance with God, ^here is required a mutual
Communication. Where there is Acquaintance between Man and ^an, there has been
a mutual Interchange of conference and Discourse. Thus when the Soul acquainted
with God, there is an Interchange Conference between God and the Soul. The ^ul
opens its Wants, breaths out its Complaints, spreads its Necessities before
God; God opens the Treasures of his Love in his Son, the rich Mines of his
precious Promises, and the Secrets of his Good Will to the Soul. Thus Psalm.
25.15. The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him and he will show them
his Covenant. Genesis 18.17. The Lord says, shall I hide from Abraham the thing
that I do? Those that are Friends and Acquaintance, they will let out their
Thoughts and Purposes one to another, and they give out them selves mutually
into Communion one with another. Thus Christ knocks at the Door of the Soul
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock if any Man hear my Voice and
open the Door, I will com in and sup with him, and he with me. Here is Christ
offering himself to the Soul, and the Soul is to entertain him; at another time
the Soul goes to God, and God entertains it: God has promise that he will
open, Mat. 7.28. Knock, and it sha^^ be opened unto you; and to him that knocks
it sha^^ be opened. There are frequent Actings among those that are acquainted:
And by these are empressed to us the Acquaintance of the Soul with God.

Now the Communications that are between the Soul and God, are exceeding
transcending a^ communications that are between Men's acquaintance. Men may
communicate their Thought^ their Estates, their Assistance to one another; b^^
they cannot communicate their Life, not th^^ Nature, nor their Likeness; but
such Communications there are between God and the Soul th^^ is acquainted with
him. All Being is a Communication from God the first Being; nay the several
Degrees of Being have several Communications from God, some greater and some
lesser; spiritual Beings have a higher Communication than natural; but God's
highest Communications have been to Man in that mystical Union of the Divine
Nature to the Humane Nature in Christ; and next in the mystical Union of the
Sons of God to Christ, and in him to the Father. Thus Christ is said to live in
us, Col. 2.20. I live, says Paul; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Thus
Christ prays the Father for his Children, that they may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee; that they be one in us, John 4.17, 21. and John 1.15,
16. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God. He that dwells in Love dwells in God; 2 Pet. 1.4. We are
said to be Partakers of the Divine Nature. This Expression implies high
Communication of God to Man. Again, there are high Acts of Communication from
Man to God (for though God receives not from Man, yet Man is to act as giving out
himself to God) such as to give up the Will to God's Will. As that of Eli, It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And that of David, 2 Samuel 15.16.
If he thus say, I have no Delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do with
me as seems good unto him.

Another Act of high Communication of a Man's self to God, is parting with
present Enjoyments for future Hopes, in confidence of God's Promise. Thus the
Spirit of God works in the Children of God a Readiness to forsake Father or
Mother, and Brethren, and Sister, and Life it self for the Cause of God. Thus
John Baptist was willing to become Nothing, that Christ might become All; to be
cast down, that Christ might be lifted up, John 3.13. He must increase, but I
must decrease. Thus Abraham gives his Isaac to die when God calls for him. Thus
Moses esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11.26. Paul counted not his Life dear for Christ, Acts 20.24. These
have been the actings of the Souls of those that have been acquainted with God;
and such Workings as these, are the feeling of a Child of God.

I have showed you four things which are requisite to Acquaintance with God.

First, Knowledge of God.

Secondly, Access to him.

Thirdly, Converse with him.

Fourthly, Communication to him and from him.

Fifthly, There is likewise required to Acquaintance a loving Compliance.
Amongst Men Acquaintance implies Affection. And so it is between God and Man.
Never any Soul was acquainted with God, that did not love God; and such a Soul
is an Enemy to God; therefore very few are acquainted with God: but all that
are not acquainted with God, are Enemies to him. If we should come to a Person
that is not acquainted with God, and say, Thou art an Enemy to God; this would
seem a heavy Imputation: but I speak it freely, thou, whosoever thou art, that
art not acquainted with God, thou art an Enemy to God; for thou art still as
thou were born: but we are all Enemies to God according to our corrupt Nature,
and abide Enemies till we come to be acquainted with God. Love to God, and
Acquaintance with God go together, are heightened by one another. First, God
lets into the Soul by his Spirit a partial Discovery of himself, and by this,
with the working of his Spirit, he inclines the Heart in Love to him. Then, on
the first working of the Soul toward God, he lets in a clear Light, whereby he
draws the Soul to a further degree of Love. A clear place for this, Ephesians.
3.17, 18. And that being rooted and grounded in Love, ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the Length, and Breadth, and Depth, and
Height, and to know the Love of God which passes all Understanding: that ye
might be filled with all the Fullness of God. The Love of God fits the Soul to
comprehend the glorious Discoveries of God; and the Discoveries of God does
heighten our Love to God. Acquaintance with God makes us like unto God, as in
John 3.2. We shall see him as he is. And our Likeness to God, as it makes us
the Delight of God, so it makes us delight in God; for the cause of Complacency
and Love is a Likeness between the Lover and Beloved. God does not love us with
a Love of Complacency, till we are like him; nor do we love God, till we are
made like God. Now our beholding God, and being acquainted with him, is a great
way to our being made like to God, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open Face,
beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Thus you see
that Love is likewise required to our Acquaintance with God; without it no
Acquaintance.

I have in the first part spoken of the Nature of Acquaintance with God in five
Particulars. There must be,

First, A Knowledge of God.

Secondly, Nigh Access to God.

Thirdly, Familiar Converse with God.

Fourthly, Mutual Communication between us and God.

Fifthly, An affectionate Love toward God.

The next thing should be to show that Man is to be acquainted with God; but we
will first take a review of these things. We have taken these things into our
Understandings; now let us set our Hearts to these things, for in these things
is the Life of Religion. If there be acquaintance with God, then gross
Wickedness drops off, as Scales from an ulcerated Body, when the Constitution
of the Body is mended. In acquaintance with God will be your only true Comfort
in this Life; and the Perfection of it, is the very Happiness of Heaven. Let us
then behold, till our Hearts earnestly desire, till our Souls be drawn out
after acquaintance with God. If God be to be known, to be approached unto, to
be conversed with by me, will he communicate himself to me? and I my self to
him. Oh that he would love me, that I might love him! Oh, blessed are they that
know him, as they are known of him! It is good for me to draw nigh to him. A
day in his Court is better than a thousand elsewhere. My Soul longs, yea,
faints, for the Courts of the Lord My Heart and my Flesh cries out for the
living God O that I were received into Converse with God that I might hear his
Voice, and see his Countenance, for his Voice is sweet, and his Countenance
comely! Oh that I might communicate my self to God, and that he would give
himself to me! Oh that I might love him! that I were sick of Love! that I might
die in Love! that (...) might lose my self in his Love, as a small Dro^ in the
unfathomless Depth of his Love! that (...) might dwell in the Eternal Love of
him! This is Acquaintance with God.

Acquaint now therefore thy self with God, and be at peace, so shall Good come
unto thee. We now proceed to the next thing, which is to evidence it to be the
Duty of Man, to acquaint himself with God. This then is that into which the
whole Scripture runs, as into a Common Channel. The Scriptures are a Discovery
of God's Proceedings with Man under a double Covenant, and this is the Great
Design of God in both Covenants. The first Covenant was, That while Man did
remain in obedience to God, God would give Man free and intimate Acquaintance
with himself. But if Man became Disobedient, then he should be dispossessed of
an Interest in God, and of Communion with him; which was that Death threatened
upon the eating the Forbidden Fruit. The Death of the Body is its being
separated from the Soul; but the Death of the Soul, is in Separation from God.
Now immediately upon Adam's Transgression, Man becomes unacquainted with God;
so that upon the hearing of the Voice of the Lord, they hid themselves from the
Presence of the Lord, among the Trees of the Garden. What a woeful Case is Man
naturally in? He has lost his Acquaintance with God, and was in a way, never,
never to recover it: Upon God's approach he flees. And such is the Nature of
all Sin, it puts a Man into a Disposition to greater Sins: every Departure from
God inclines toward a greater. In the first Covenant this is the Whole of it;
it is both a Command to keep nigh to God, and a Promise of God's being nigh to
them, and a threatening of God's putting them away far from him, Man breaking
the first Covenant. The immediate Effect of it was the Sin of Fleeing from God,
quite contrary to that Acquaintance. Instead of their former Apprehensions of
God, they seem to have forgotten his Omnipresence; instead of Peace with God,
they have nothing but Dread and Torment in the Thoughts of God; instead of
drawing nigh to God, they run away from him; instead of Converse with God, they
choose never to have to do with him more; instead of giving themselves up to
God, they, if it had been possible, would have hid themselves from God.
Acquaintance with God is the Sum of the first Covenant; Unacquaintance with God
is the Misery of the Breach of the Covenant. This is likewise the great Design
and Purpose of God in the second Covenant. The second Covenant is this: When
God beheld Man in a Miserable Condition, by reason of the Breach of the first
Covenant; in the unsearchable Riches of his Goodness, according to the Eternal
Purpose of his Good Will toward Man, he made an Agreement with his Son, to
send him amongst a Generation of Sinful Men, that if he would undertake to
bring them back into Acquaintance with the Father, he was willing and ready to
receive them again into Acquaintance with him; the Son being the express Image
of his Father's Will, and Person, has the same Good Will to Man with the
Father, and is ready to close with his Father's Proposals; and so enters into a
Covenant with the Father, to satisfy Divine Justice, and to take away Sin, and
to take away the Middle-Wall of Separation, to recover a Chosen Generation, and
to bring them back again to God. Thus he became the Head of another Covenant
between God and Man. And as the first Covenant was made with Adam for him and
his Seed; so the second Covenant is made with Jesus Christ, for him and his
Seed. Because that the first Covenant was broken in Adam, therefore the second
Covenant was put into surer Hands, into the Hands of the Son, the second Adam,
the Lord from Heaven. Now, I say, that the Great Design and Purpose of this
second Covenant is in reference to Man's Acquaintance with God, is clear. This
is held forth to us in that Parable of the Lost Sheep, Luke 15.4, 5. When the
Shepherd had lost one Sheep, he leaves the Flock, and seeks for that which was
lost. So when Man was lost by Sin, Jesus Christ leaves all, to recover and
fetch home that which was lost. We all are gone astray like Lost Sheep, as
David says of himself, Psalm. 119. Christ is come to seek, and to save, that
which was lost, Luke 19.10. and Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus they
who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ; for he is
our Peace who has made both one. In Verse the Tenth, is a Description of our
State without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, being
Strangers from the Covenant of Promise, and having no Hope, and without God in
the World. This is a Description of our Unacquaintance with God. But Christ
makes up the Breach, and that by a double Act.

First, By Covenant with the Father, to make Man fit for Communion with him.

Secondly, His giving Man Assurance that the Father will receive him upon his
Return.

This then is the Great Design in all those Glorious Accomplishments of Christ,
for this he left his Father's Bosom, that he might bring us into Acquaintance
with the Father; for this end did he who thought it no Robbery to be equal with
the Father, make himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the Likeness of Man; and being found in Fashion of a
Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the
Cross, that he might bring Man into a Reunion with God; for this End did
Christ live a Wearisome Troublesome Life among a Company of Rebels and Enemies,
as if a Man should live among Toads and Serpents: So that he cried out, as
weary of any longer abiding with them, Oh Faithless Generation! How long shall
I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? For this did he make himself an
Offering for Sin; that by taking away Sin, he might bring Men to God. This is
the Great Purpose of Christ in all his Offices. Ye have heard of the Three
Offices of the Mediator, that he is a Priest, a Prophet and a King. This is the
end of the Priestly Office. The Purpose of Christ's offering up himself a
Sacrifice, was by Satisfying the Justice of God, to make way for Sinners Return
to God. This is the End of his Prophetical Office, to lead Men into Knowledge
and Acquaintance with God. This is the End of his Kingly Office; That Governing
them, and Ruling their Hearts by his Spirit, he might effectually bring Men to
God, to Acquaintance with him. Now then, since this is the Great Design of God
in his Great Dispensation toward Man, to keep Men in Acquaintance with
himself, and to reduce him when he had lost it! does it not concern us to do
our part for the bringing to pass this great Work? Shall God lose his End in
making us, and in setting Man in the World every way furnished for his Service?
And shall God lose his End in sending his Son to receive us, when we had
forsaken him? Shall Christ leave his Father's Bosom to bring us home to the
Father, and shall we refuse to return? Shall he pour out his Soul, an Offering
for Sin, that he might make way for our Access to God, That we who were afar
off, might be made nigh by the Blood of Christ? And shall we frustrate all by
our refusing to go to him? Shall Christ come and offer us his Help and
Direction to come to the Father, and shall we abide still Strangers? Shall the
King's Son come into our Cottages to invite us to dwell with his Father at
Court, and shall we shut the Door upon him, esteeming our Cottages better than
his Palace?

Secondly, It is the Duty of Man to acquaint himself with god, because therein
is the Improvement of his highest Excellency. Every one acknowledges an
Excellency in Man, above all the rest of this lower World: Now what is this
Excellency of Man? Is it not that he is made in a Capacity of knowing God, and
enjoying God, and having Communion with God? This is the Height of his Glory,
Jer. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom,
let not the mighty Man glory in his Might, nor the rich Man in his Riches; but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that
I am the Lord that exercise loving Kindness, and Righteousness in the Earth,
and Judgment, for in these things I delight, says the Lord. Ye see here,
wherein Man is to glory, for which he may value himself as truly glorious. In
his understanding, and knowing of God, Man stands above the rest of the
Creatures, in that he is a rational intellectual Agent. This is part of the
Image of God, even Knowledge, Col. 3.15. Which is renewed in Knowledge after
the Image of him that created him. The nigher any thing resembles God, the
greater is the Excellency of that Thing: Now in this we resemble God more than
any other Creature, in that we are knowing, understanding Agents; and the
highest Improvement of this Excellency of Man, is in the Knowledge of God, and
Acquaintance with God, Prove. 20.27. The Spirit of a Man is called the Candle of
the Lord; that is, it is a Light set up in the Soul, to direct the Soul to a
Discovery of God. This is the highest Improvement of our greatest Excellency,
and this is the Excellency of Man above other Creatures: This is that whereby
one Man excels another. Who are those whose Names are as precious Ointment
poured forth? Who are those which have obtained a good Report? Are not they
those who were most acquainted with God? Enoch is said to walk with God; an
Expression which signifies intimate Acquaintance with God; and therefore was
translated that he should not see Death. And Noah, whose Family alone was
preserved when God destroyed the whole World by Water, he was said to walk with
God, Genesis 6.9. Among all the Sons of Men he kept close to God; and God took
care of him alone. Abraham, who was the Father of the Faithful, he was called
the Friend of God. Moses, who was the Mediator of the Old Covenant, he was said
to speak, with God Face to Face, as a Man speaks to his Friend. I might make
mention of many more, who were the excellent ones of the Earth; because they
did delight in God, and God delighted in them, Mal. 3.16, 17. They that feared
the Lord, spoke often one to another; and the Lord hearkened and heard: and the
Book of Remembrance was written for them that fear the Lord, and that thought
upon his Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in the Day when
I make up my Jewels. Ye see how God accounts of those that are of his
Acquaintance, that met together and spoke of God, and that thought upon his
Name; he reckons them amongst his Jewels, his peculiar Treasure: Such Honor
have all those that are acquainted with God. Ye see then the Excellency of Man
above all the rest of the other Creatures. Now if Man fail in this which is his
highest Excellency, he will become the vilest of Creatures. Every thing if it
fail in its chiefest End and Purpose, and highest Excellency, becomes base and
of no account: If Salt lose its Savor (says our Savior) it is good for
nothing. If Man have lost his Acquaintance with God, he is henceforth good for
nothing. The Mind of Man is his Eye, by which he is to behold God; now if this
Eye be blind, if the Light be Darkness, how great is that Darkness! The Jews,
in Ezekiel. 15.1. are likened to a Vine, which, if it be barren, is good for no
use: shall Wood be taken thereof for any Work? It is fit for nothing but to
burn. So it is in Man, his great Use and Excellency is his Acquaintance with
God; now if he fails in this, he is good for nothing. Verily, Man is a base,
vile, worthless thing without Acquaintance with God. None are less esteemed
among Men than they that want Wisdom to converse among Men. None are less
esteemed before God, than they that know him not, that have not Acquaintance
with him, to converse with him. Ye see wherein the Excellency and Worth of Man
consists, and that if there be a Deformity, where ought to be our chiefest
Beauty, the whole is accounted as a deformed Piece. It concerns us then to look
that we keep our Glory unspotted, our Excellency in its due Value; that we do
not degrade our selves below what God has placed us in. If we are not
acquainted with God, our Souls serve us to little purpose: It is a causing the
Prince, the Soul, to go on Foot, and to serve the Body, which should be as a
Servant; it is to let the Candle of the Lord burn out in waste.

Thirdly, Another Enforcement of this Duty of Acquaintance with God, is this.
If we refuse Acquaintance with God, it is a slighting the greatest of all the
Mercies that God bestows. Favors are to be valued, either by their proper
Excellencies, or according to the good Will of him that bestows them: both
these Ways this is to be accounted the greatest of Mercies. In God's giving us
leave to be acquainted with him, he gives out himself to be known, to be loved,
to be conversed with, to be enjoyed. What greater Gift can God give than
himself? God is the Portion of his People, he is the greatest Portion, the
surest, the most suitable, and the only durable Portion. Thus they that know
him esteem of him, Psalm. 73.26. My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the
Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ^ver. Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the
Portion of mine inheritance: The Lines are fallen to me in a pleasant Place:
yea I have a goodly Heritage. Blessed are the People that are in such a Case;
yea, blessed are the People whose God is the Lord. No greater Mercy can be
bestowed upon any People, Family, or Person, than this, for God to dwell among
them. If we value this Mercy according to the Excellency and Worth of that
which is bestowed, it is the greatest; if we value it according to the good
Will of him that gives it, it will appear likewise to be the greatest Favor.
The Greatness of the good Will of God in giving himself to be our Acquaintance,
is evident in the Nature of the Gift. A Man may give his Estate to them to whom
his Love is not very large; but he never gives himself but upon strong
Affection. God gives abundantly to all the Works of his Hands, he causes the
Sun to shine upon the Evil, and upon the Good; and the Rain to descend upon the
Just and the Unjust: But it cannot be conceived, that he should give himself to
be a Portion, a Friend, Father, Husband, but in abundance of Love. Whosoever
therefore shall refuse Acquaintance with God, slighteth the greatest Favor
that ever God did bestow upon Man. Now consider what a high Charge this is; to
abuse such a Kindness from God, is in Act of the greatest Vileness. David was
never so provoked, as when the King of Ammon abused his Kindness in his
Ambassadors, after his Father's Death. And God is highly provo^ed when his
greatest Mercies, bestowed in the greatest Love, are rejected, and cast away.
What could God give more and better than himself? And how heavy will this
Imputation be These are those that look upon God, as not worth being acquainted
with. Let us therefore consider how we shall be able to stand to these
Accusations. Shall we not be speechless, when these things shall be charged
upon us? Shall we not be confounded, when we stand to the Trial of him to whom
we had offered these great Indignities? How shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation, so great a Mercy?

Fourthly, it concerns us to acquaint our selves with God, for without it we
are in a Necessity of Sin, and Misery.

1. The Soul unacquainted with God is in a Necessity of sinning, Ephesians. 4.14.
Having their Understanding darkened, alienated from the Life of God, through
the Ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their Hearts. For
want of Acquaintance with God, every Thought and Imagination of their Heart is
evil continually, Romans 3.10, 11. There is none righteous, no not one: There is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. Not understanding,
nor seeking after God, is the necessary cause that there is none does good. The
Soul of Man is an Active Being, which is continually in motion; if it be not in
motion to God, and in God, it will be in motion from God. Hence it is that the
Prayer of the Wicked is an Abomination; that which goes for Prayer, God abhors,
because they are not acquainted with him, Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his Owner, and
the Ass his Master's Crib, but Israel does not know me, ver. 13, 14. To this,
says he, your Incense is Abomination unto me, their new Moons and Sabbaths,
the calling of Assemblies, I cannot a^ay with; it is Iniquity, even your solemn
Meetings. ^ow the Reason why there is a Necessity of Sin without Acquaintance
with God, is, because whatsoever is not done with a good Heart, is ^ot good,
Luke 6.45. The good Man out of the good ^reasure of his Heart brings forth
good Fruit, and ^n evil Man out of the evil Treasure of his Heart ^ingeth forth
evil Fruit: For out of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. As an
evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, so an evil Heart cannot bring forth a
good Action. Now without Knowledge the Heart is not good, Prove. 19.2. That the
Soul be without Knowledge is not good. And there is no Knowledge like the
Knowledge of God, and Acquaintance with him, to make the Heart good, Hos. 4.2.
Because there is ^ot Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the ^and;
therefore by Swearing, and Lying, and Kil^ing, and Stealing, and committing
Adultery, they ^reak out, etc. Thus want of Knowledge of God, and Acquaintance
with God, we may plainly ^ee is the necessary Cause of Sin. Now there ^s no
greater Evil on this side Hell, than that of Necessity of sinning, 2 Pet. 2.14.
Those of which it is said, they cannot cease from sinning, are called cursed
Children. He that chooses any Sin ^ther than Affliction, does it through the
Blindness of his Mind. This is laid as a heavy Accu^tion, Job 39.21. For this
have thou chosen rather ^an Affliction. To chose Iniquity rather than
^ffliction, is the greatest Folly imagina^^. It is one great part of the Misery
of Hell, ^at they never cease from sinning; and ^s is the greatest Misery on
Earth, our being so much under the Power of Sin? I appeal to any gracious Soul
that has the Feeling of the^ Burden of Sin; what is its great Trouble and
Sorrow? Is it not because of Sin? What are hi^ secret Moans to God? Is it not
the Sense of Corruption? Oh wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the Body of this Death, says Paul, Rom^ 7. He had been complaining of the Mass
of Corruption that did still press hard upon him, and in the strong Workings of
his Spirit against it, h^^ calls it the Body of Death. It was as grievous to
him as if he had been bound to a stinking rotter Carcass. How wretched then is
the State of every Soul unacquainted with God? who can d^^ nothing but sin,
because they want the right Rul^^ of Action, a right Pattern of Imitation, a
righ^ Principle for Action, a right Object for Action a right End for Action,
the only Assistance o^ Action. It concerns us then as we make any Difference
between Good and Evil, if we have any Respect unto Holiness and Purity before
Sin and Iniquity, to see to get Acquaintance with God; because without
Acquaintance with God we are in a woeful Necessity of sinning.

2. Without Acquaintance with God, we a^^ in a Necessity of Misery. Indeed Sin
is a great Misery; and to be in a Necessity of sinning, part of the Necessity
of Misery. But beside that, there is a Necessity of Misery of another kind.
What is the great Employment of Me^^ unacquainted with God? Men labor in the
very Fire, and weary themselves for very Vanity Habak. 2.13. This was the
Misery of Men, beca^^ they knew not God. But in ver. 14. there is a Promise of
better Days, When the Earth shall be fill with the Glory of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea. Then and not till then will there be a Deliverance from
laboring in the Fire, when there is the Knowledge of God. The Reason of it is,
because true Satisfaction and Peace cannot be, till our Desires and Enjoyments
are alike; and this cannot be till the Soul is acquainted with God: For nothing
can fill up the Desires of the Soul but God. The Soul of Man is mighty
spacious, so that it cannot be filled with the World; and while it feels an
Emptiness, it still cries out for more, and cannot be filled till it be filled
with the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. The prodigal Son had nothing but Husks to
feed upon, when he was gone from his Father's House; he would fain have filled
his Belly with the Husks, but could not; they were not Food for the Soul. When
we are departed from God, we have nothing to feed on but the World, and we
would sill our Souls with the World, but cannot; for it is not Food for the
Soul. Acquaintance with God is the Food of the Soul. Job 23.12. I have esteemed
the Words of his Mouth more than my necessary Food. So that a Soul that is not
acquainted with God, is famished for want of Food, Psalm. 42.2. My Soul
thirsts for God, for the living God. When shall I come and appear before God?
David was acquainted with God, but for want of an actual Enjoyment, how does he
here breathe out the Trouble of his Spirit? As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. The Soul is still panting.
Some pant after the Dust of the Earth, Amos 2.7. These were of the Serpent's
Seed, whose Curse from God was, Dust shall thou ^at: but the Seed of Christ,
they pant for God, and they that pant after God shall be filled with the
Fullness of God: but he that pants after any thing besides God, will never
find any Fullness; he will feed as upon the Dust of the Earth. And what can
follow but Dissatisfaction and Misery? Acquaintance with God is the only way to
be freed from a necessity of Sin and Misery.

Fifthly, Acquaintance with God is the Duty of Man, because God himself does
acquaint himself with Man. Shall the King seek after Acquaintance with the
meanest of his Subject, and he refuse Acquaintance with his Sovereign? Shall
God acquaint himself with Man, and shall not Man acquaint himself with God? It
is expected among Men, that the Inferior should seek for Acquaintance with the
Superior, and not the Superior with the Inferior; but yet God out of his
wonderful Love has sought first to Man for Acquaintance. Thus Prove. 8.31. It
is said concerning the Son of God, who is meant by the Eternal Wisdom of the
Father, that he rejoiced in the habitable Parts of the Earth, and his Delight
was with the Sons of Men. If God thus delights in Converse and Acquaintance
with the Sons of Men, how much more ought Men to rejoice in Converse and
Acquaintance with God? Isa. 65.1. God says, I am found of them that sought me
not. All Men were departed from God, and not a Man that did seek after God;
there is none that understands of seeks after God, yet God is found of them.
The good Shepherd seeks his lost Sheep, before the Sheep sought him; Cant. 5.2.
When the Soul is a-sleep, it hears the Voice of its Beloved that knocks,
saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. Revel. 3.20.
there Christ says to the revolting Church, that he was ready to spew them out
of his Mouth, Behold I stand at the Door, and knock: if any Man will hear me,
and open the Door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me. Psalm.
68.18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity captive; thou have
received Gifts for Men, yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them. It it not becoming then that Man should open when God knocks?
He seeks to dwell among the Rebellious; is it not fit that Man should enter
into Acquaintance with God, when God does thus acquaint himself with Man? Thus
I have opened to you the Nature of Acquaintance with God, and evidenced it to
be the Duty of Man, to acquaint himself with God; let us now make some
Improvement of this Truth.

USE 1.
First, Is there to be an Acquaintance between the Soul and God? Let us then
stand and wonder at the great Condescension of God! This may surprise our Souls
with an Ecstasy of Admiration, that God should dwell with Man, that the mighty
Jehovah should have such Respect to the Work of his Hands. Psalm 113.5, 6. Who
is like unto the Lord, who dwells on high; who humbled himself to behold the
Things that are in Heaven, and in Earth? The Psalmist admireth God, that he
humbled himself to behold things that are in Heaven; and how much more then is
he to be admired, that he humbled himself to acquaint himself with Man? Let us
then be filled with Admiration, that God should take us so nigh unto himself:
As Psalm. 8.4. What is Man that thou art mindful of him! or the Son of Man that
thou should visit him! And Job 7.17, 18. What is Man that thou should
magnify him! and that thou should set thy Heart upon him! and that thou
should visit him every Morning! Man in the Pride of his Heart sees no such
great Matter in it; but an humble Soul is filled with Astonishment; Isa. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty One, which inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
Holy; I dwell in the high and holy Place: with him also that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart
of the contrite Ones. Oh says the humble Soul, will the Lord have respect unto
such a vile Worm as I am? Will the Lord acquaint himself with such a sinful
Wretch as I am? Will the Lord open his Arms, his Bosom, his Heart to me? Shall
such a loathsome Creature as I find Favor in his Eyes? Ezekiel. 16. 25. We have a
Relation of the wonderful Condescension of God to Man, who is there resembled
to a wretched Infant cast out in the Day o^ its Birth in its Blood, and
Filthiness, no Ey^ pitying it; such loathsome Creatures are we before God, and
yet when he passed by, and saw us polluted in our Blood, he said unto us, live.
(...) is doubled, because of the Strength of its Nature it was the Time of
Love, ver. 8. This was Lov^ indeed, that God should take a filthy, wretched
thing, and spread his Skirts over it, and cove^^ its Nakedness, and swear unto
it, and enter into a Covenant with it, and make it his; that is that he should
espouse this loathsome thing t^ himself, that he would be an Husband to it this
is Love unfathomable, Love unconceiveable, self-principled Love, this is the
Love (...) God to Man; for God is Love: Oh the Dep^^ of the Riches of the
Bounty and Goodness of God! How is his Love wonderful, and his Grace past
finding out! How do you find and feel your Hearts affected upon the report of
these things? Do you not see matter of Admiration and Cause of Wonder? Are you
not as it were, lanched forth into an Ocean of Goodness, where you can see no
Shore, nor feel no Bottom? Ye may make a Judgment of your selves by the Motions
and Affections that ye feel in your selves at the mention of this. For thus
Christ judged of the Faith of the Centurion, that said unto him, Lord, I am not
worthy that thou should come under my Roof, Mat. 8.8. When Jesus heard this,
he marvelled, and said to them that followed him, I say unto you, I have not
found so great Faith, no not in Israel. If then you feel not your Souls
mightily affected with this Condescension of God; Say thus unto your Souls,
What aileth thee, O my Soul, that thou art no more affected with the Goodness
of God? Art thou dead, that thou can not feel? Or art thou blind, that thou
can not see thy self compassed about with astonishing Goodness? Behold, the
King of Glory descending from the Habitation of his Majesty, and coming to
visit thee; hear not thou his Voice, saying, Open to me my Sister: behold, I
stand at the Door and knock. Lift up your selves, O ye Gates, and be ye lifted
up ye everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may come in. Behold, O my Soul,
how he waits still, whilst thou have refused to open to him! O the wonder of
his Goodness! O the Condescension of his Love! to visit me, to sue unto me, to
wait upon me, to be acquainted with me! Thus work up your Souls into an
Astonishment at the Condescension of God.

USE 2.
Secondly, Is there to be Acquaintance between the Soul and God? Then let us
learn to make a right Judgment of our own Excellency; let us judge of our
selves as too high and noble to converse with this base and beggarly World. I
am of a nobler Original, than to debase my self to such mean things; I am the
Offspring of God, and shall I acquaint my self with Earth? I am of the Family
of God, and shall I converse with Satan? Is there Bread enough in my Father's
House, and shall I perish for Hunger? Lift up thy self, O my Soul, shake off
the Intanglements of the Flesh, break out of that Bondage of the Devil, trample
upon the Glory of the World, and scorn to let out thy precious Desires upon
Dung and Dross; get the Moon under thy Feet, cloth thy self with the Sun, put
on the Son of Righteousness, come into the Palace of God, and acquaint thy self
with him, for this is thy Glory, this is thy Excellency. Ye precious ones, who
can call God Father, and the Son Brother, who have Fellowship with the Father
and the Son, who may have Communion with the Holy Ghost? What do you lying
among the Pots? What do you raking in Dunghills? What do you conversing with
the World? Have a holy Scorn of these things, as below the Dignity of your
Souls: know your Worth, esteem of your selves, as of more value than all these
lower Treasures. This is your Glory and your Excellency, that ye are of God's
Acquaintance, that ye are Sons of God, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with
Christ, that ye understand and know God.

There are two things wherein most Men are mistaken.

First, In the Nature of Pride. Some look upon that only as Pride, which
manifests it self in costly Apparel, and bodily Ornaments, beyond the Degree
and Rank of the Person. Some look no further than the Carriage of one Man
toward another. Now favorably consider with me, that the greatest Pride in
the World is Man's undue Esteem of himself toward God; and this is in the Heart
of every one by Nature. Every one by Nature does lift up himself against God,
goes about to dethrone God, and to crown himself: Every one takes Counsel in
his Heart against the Lord, saying, Let us break his Bands asunder, and cast
his Cords from us. This is the Voice of every one that dares wilfully to sin,
We will not have God to rule over us. Yet this is the working of the Pride of a
Man against God, to thrust God out of the Throne of his Majesty, and to set
himself in. For what is God's Glory and Respect among his Creatures? Is it not
this; that he being the Beginning, and Author of all, should be likewise the
End of all? And this is the very Purpose of God in making of Man, that having
received himself from God, he should have what he might freely give up to God;
so that all Man is, and all that he has, is to be offered to God, as the End
and Center of all. Now a sinning Creature brings God under to serve him, to
provide for-him. Now though this Pride of Man against God be not so much taken
notice of, yet it is the very daring Sin of the World. It is indeed to be
wondered at, that ever Creatures did cast out the first Thoughts of such an
Attempt. Now consider how far Man's Pride is from his true Excellency in his
Union with God. We are therefore to distinguish between that high Esteem that
Man is to have of himself, and Pride. For Man to look upon himself as a noble
Being, and of a Rank above all the natural World, it is not Pride, for thus he
is (being a spiritual understanding Agent) in a Capacity of being acquainted
with God, of being united to God, and, as I may say, of exchanging himself with
God.

Secondly, Another Mistake of most Men, is concerning their Dignity and
Excellency, and in the Rule and Measure of their Excellency. Most measure their
Dignity by the Advantage which they have over others in this World: As some in
their Power and Authority; some in their Friends and Relations; some in their
Riches and Estates; some in their Wisdom and Faculties; some in their Strength
and Power. And what more universal Evil is there than this, for every one in
something or other to lift himself up in his own Esteem, and in his Thoughts to
tread upon others, as something inferior to himself? But Men lie blinded in
their own Delusions, not considering what is the true Excellency of Man; nor
know the right Rule by which Man's Worth is to be judged of. The way for us to
judge rightly concerning our selves, is to see how we stand toward God. God is
the Perfection of Excellency; and the nigher we are to God, the greater is our
Excellency. This is the Greatness of a Nation, to be nigh to God, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
What Nation is there so great which has God so nigh unto them? And Amos 8.7.
God is called the Excellency of Jacob. God swears not by any thing below
himself; therefore God is here meant. Isa. 60.19. God is called the Glory of
his People. The Lord shall be to thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy
Glory. Now God is the Glory of those that are acquainted with him.

First, By Virtue of the Relation wherein God stands toward them. An intimate
Relation to those that are Persons of Dignity and Worth, does communicate Worth
and Dignity to those who are so related to them. As the Son of a mean Man is
not so highly valued and esteemed as the Son of a Prince. David reckoned it to
be a great thing to be Son-in-Law to a King, 1 Samuel 18.18. Who am I, and what
is my Life, or my Father's Family in Israel, that I should be Son-in-Law to the
King? Thus are we to reckon it our Dignity and Excellency to be in nigh
Relation to God, to be Sons of God, to be Heirs of God, and to be the Friends
of God; what greater Honor than this, to be in such a nigh Relation to the God
of Glory? Now the Excellency that we have from this Relation, arises from the
Excellency of that Act which is the Foundation of this Relation, and that is
our being born of God, as we are Sons, John 1.12, 13. God marrying us to
himself as he is our Husband, Jer. 3. Turn, O backsliding Children, says the
Lord, for I am married unto you. God takes us into Fellowship and Communion,
and Acquaintance with himself, as he makes us his Friends, and his
Acquaintance. This Act of God does instamp a Worth and Excellency upon Man, as
the Impression of the King's Seal upon Wax, and makes it of value, Rev. 22.4.
It is here spoken as the Glory of the Servants of God, Those that follow the
Lamb, they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads; that
is, God has chosen, and as it were, marked them out for his own: and this
marking them, and owning them, it sets a high Dignity upon them, such as
secures them from the Curse that is to be upon all besides; as Rev. 9.4. They
are commanded to hurt none but those who have not the Seal of God in their
Foreheads. This Relation of the Soul to God, gives the Soul an Excellency, as
it does interest the Soul in the Glory and Excellency of God himself; they are
God's, and God is theirs, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk with
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, ver. 17. He argues
from the Dignity of this Relation, that they should count themselves too good
to converse with the World; Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separated, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing: and I will receive you,
and be a Father to you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord.
Thus you see the Dignity that is upon the Soul by its Acquaintance with God.
Our relation to God in our Acquaintance with him, does enoble us, lift us above
the World, make us that we are too good for the Company of those that are not
acquainted with God. It is then no Pride in us thus to esteem of our selves, to
have high Thoughts of our selves, because of that Acquaintance which our Souls
are to have with God. It is Pride for to think too highly of our selves: But it
is Sobriety to think of our selves according to that Acquaintance which we have
with God, Romans 12.3. I say, through the Grace of God given to me, to every one
that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think;
but to think soberly according as God has dealt to every Man the Measure of
Faith. Here the Apostle commands them to measure the Esteem which they have of
themselves, by the Measure of Faith which they have from God; because by Faith
they come to be valued excellent in the Eye of God. So likewise we are to
measure our Esteem which we have of our selves, by the Measure of our
Acquaintance which we have with God: because by Acquaintance with him, we come
to be truly excellent. And while we do thus, we shall not think more highly of
our selves than we ought to think; for while we account our selves excellent
because of our Acquaintance with God, we in lifting up our selves magnify God;
and while we thus glory, we glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.31. But now herein we
are to beware of two things.

First, That we distinguish carefully between our Capacity of being acquainted
with God, and our being actually acquainted with him: for our Capacity, or
being so as that we may be acquainted with God, is of no Worth, unless we be
actually acquainted with him. We are in a remote Capacity naturally as Men, and
we are in a more nigh Capacity by the Mercy and Covenant of God; but this adds
no true Worth to the Soul without the actual Acquaintance of the Soul with God.
Yea, Man is the worse for this, if he be without the other; for if Man being
made fit for Enjoyment of God, and Communion with him, never attain to an
Enjoyment of him, he becomes more vile than those things whose Nature is
inferior, if they attain to the Perfection of that Nature. And it is like to
fare worse with Man, if he fall short of the Glory of God, because he was
capable of the Glory of God, than with Beasts which are not capable of it. And
again, in regard of that more nigh Capacity wherein we are by Jesus Christ of
Acquaintance with God; if we are not really acquainted with God, we shall
thereby not only have no Addition of Excellency, but thereby we shall be more
vile and miserable: and therefore those who through the Mercy of God have been
in the visible Church, and have heard of the good Will of God to Man through
Christ, and know that God is ready to entertain them into Acquaintance with
himself; if they shall fall short of this, their Condemnation will be greater
than that of those who never heard of God's Invitation, and his Grace in Jesus
Christ. If we therefore shall glory in our Capacity of being of the
Acquaintance of God, and neglect to be really acquainted with him, we do but as
the Jews of old, who cried out, The Temple of the Lord are these, Jer. 7.4. And
the nigher we are to God, if we do not come to a through Closure with him, the
nigher we are to the Stroke of his Wrath: as the nigher any is to Musquetshot,
the greater will the Force of it be upon him. Distinguish therefore between our
Capacity of being acquainted with God, and our actual Acquaintance with him.

Secondly, We must beware lest in our Esteem of our selves, we lay the
Foundation of our Glory in our selves. There is that in every ones corrupt
Nature which does provoke him to it: so that I dare boldly say, that there is
not a Man in his corrupt natural State, who does not some way or other lift up
himself in his own Esteem for something of his own. And we are apt to make
every spiritual Excellency to be matter for Pride and Self-conceitedness. We do
not sufficiently eye God as the Fountain, the Author, the Foundation, the Rule
and Pattern of all our Excellency. Such is the way wherein God receives Man to
Acquaintance with himself, that he might hide Pride from his Eyes, and that no
Flesh might glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1.29. If we therefore lay the
Foundation of our Glory in our selves, and please our selves in the Sparks that
we have kindled, we shall glory in our Shame, and lie down in Sorrow. This high
Esteem which we are to have of our selves, because of our Acquaintance with
God, it does not at all contradict that precious Grace of Humility, but they
rather help forward one another; for the more any esteems of himself, because
of that relation which he has to God, the less is the Esteem of himself,
because of any thing of his own; the more we make God the matter of our Glory,
the less do we glory in our selves. The more we apprehend of our Excellency
being from God, the less account do we make of all other seeming Excellencies.
When the Light of the Sun arises, then all Starlight disappears.

First, All Dignity we have, seems to arise from that relation which we have to
God in Acquaintance with him.

Secondly, By Acquaintance with God, we come to have an absolute positive
Dignity which is real in our Persons, yet still depending upon God. As by our
Union with Christ we come to have a Righteousness imputed, which is our
justification; and a Righteousness likewise in^erent, which is our
Sanctification; so by our Acquaintance with God, we have a Dignity, a^ it were,
imputed by our Relation to God, and a Dignity real, which is that Excellency
whereby we are made absolutely better. By Acquaintance with God, we come to be
like God; and the Image of God in us, is the greatest Excellency that we are
capable of. When Moses had been forty days in the Mount with God, his Face did
shine with such a Brightness, that the People could not behold him: so those
that converse with God, they retain a Luster, which shines in their Converse
with Men. The Image or Picture of any worthy Person, is esteemed by them that
esteem the Person; and this Esteem of it, is from a relation which it has to
that Person; but now the Children of any Person whom we love, being a lively
Image of their Father's Person, have another Value upon them, having not only a
Relation worthy, because of their Resemblance in the outward Lineament, buts
real Participation of Nature and Disposition which they receive from their
Father: So there is an Excellency in those that are acquainted with God, not
only as being in relation to him, but as receiving, and being Partakers of the
Divine Nature. As Children learn to pronounce their Words according to the
Pronunciation of the Mother, or Nurse with whom they converse, (as every one is
apt to be formed unto the manner and disposition of the Company wherein they
most usually are) thus those who converse with God, they become in some measure
like unto God; and this is positive personal Excellency which those have which
converse with God Thus the Apostle John argues concerning that Perfection of
Glory and Excellency, which hereafter is to be upon those that are the Sons of
God. But it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. In Heaven we
shall be like God, because we shall see God; and on Earth those that converse
with God, shall in some measure be like God, according to their measure of
Acquaintance with him. And so Paul argues concerning this present Life, 2 Cor.
3.18. But we all with open Face beholding, as in a Glass, the Glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Here we see clearly that beholding the Glory of the Lord,
does change into the same Image of God, and likewise that this Image of God
only is the Glory of Man; for that is meant by, from Glory to Glory: that is,
from one degree of glorious Similitude, to another degree of glorious
Resemblance and Likeness to God. Thus ye have seen that the Excellency of Man
consists in his Acquaintance with God; and that by the virtue of his relation
to God, he has an imputed Excellency; and an Excellency by his Propriety in
God, in whom is all Excellency; and that by his Converse with God, and
Acquaintance with him, he becomes eally like God, which is his inherent
Excellen^y. Let us then reckon of our selves as those who have their Dignity
and Excellency from God, and in this let us glory, That we know God, and are
acquainted with God. This is the Second Use of this Proposition.

USE 3.
Thirdly, If Man ought to be acquainted with God, then let us all enquire into
our selves, whether we are acquainted with him or no. Let (...) every one turn
into our own Bosoms, and a^^ our selves this Question; Thou have heard, O m^^
Soul, that which is thy great Duty, that which is the very end of thy Creation,
and thy Redemption, and that the highest Perfection of the noblest Faculty
consists in knowing God, an^ being acquainted with him, which contains (...)
nigh Union to him, and intimate Converse wit^ him, and mutual Communion to God,
and from God, and radicated unmovable Love to God these are excellent things,
O my Soul, what (...) thy Case? Art thou one of those precious one which
conversest often with God, and talk often (...) God, whom he will make up with
his Jewels Or art thou one of those wretched Creature who are alienated from
the Life of God, by reason of the Ignorance that is in thee? Or art the one of
those who having been sometimes af^^ off, art now made nigh to God by the Blood
(...) Christ, and so art led into Fellowship and Communion with the Father and
the Son by the Spirit? Or art thou one of those who looks upon God afar off,
and upon whom God looks af^^ off? I beseech you, every one of you, deal
seriously and accurately with your selves in the Inquiry, for it is most
certain that most Men (...) the World, yea, in the visible Church, are n^^
acquainted with God. Thus it has been in a^^ Generations from the beginning of
the World and thus it is at this day: the People of God ha^ been like a little
Flock of Sheep, while the rest are like Locusts, covering the whole Face of the
Earth. The People of God have still complained that they are but as the
gleaning of the Vintage, and as two or three Olive-berries in the Top of the
utmost Branches, when the rest have been gathered. The visible Church of God,
in respect of the rest of the World, how small a part is it! In the visible
Church how few live up to their Religion, by any considerable Profession! How
little difference is there between most among us, and Heathens! And of those
that profess, and lay Claim to something beyond others, among whom they live,
how many betray their Profession by their wicked Practice and worldly
Conversation? So that when we have made Enquiry, there will remain very few of
those that are really acquainted with God; it concerns us then to be very
diligent in Enquiry, what is our Case, how we stand toward God.

Secondly, I shall be the more earnest in pressing you upon a diligent Search
into what Acquaintance you have gotten with God; because, I know that those
that have least Acquaintance with God, are most apt to neglect this Enquiry, It
may be a tender Soul that has been much with God, will be ready upon the first
Hint to enter into the Secrets of its own Heart, to look over his Evidences, to
call to mind, when have I drawn nigh to God? When have I conversed with God?
When have I Communion with God? Has my Life been a walking with God? Have I
dwelt with God, and made my Abode with him? Thus the Soul that makes high
Account of its Acquaintance with God, will be trying and examining it self; and
it may be upon its more awakened Signs of its sometimes departing from God, or
feeling some present strangeness, it will be apt to conclude of it self, surely
I am none of those precious ones, whose Life is a^ Converse with God. But the
common Generation of the World, Oh how hardly will they be brought to ask
themselves this Question, whether they are of the Acquaintance of God or no^
How often have they been urged with a great and vehement Affection upon trial
how their Souls stand toward God? and hitherto they have neglected it. Many
are so inconsiderat^^ as to think what is spoken is nothing to them They come
and sit in the Congregation, b^^ their Hearts are out of reach, out of the Shot
(...) the Word; so they go away, and the Word (...) them is, as if it had not
been. Many are (...) light, and vain, and frothy in their Spirits, a^ that the
Streams will almost as soon return (...) their Fountain, as they will be
persuaded (...) turn in and enquire into their own Souls. I^^ all naturally
there is an Averseness to come (...) the Light, that their Works and Hearts may
(...) manifested. If I should come to you one (...) one, and beseech you with
the greatest Earnestness, wherewith I were able, when you g^ from the
Congregation to take Opportunity to go in secret, and enter upon trial with
you^ Hearts, and ask your selves thoroughly the Question, and let them not alone
till you have a clear determinate Answer, whether you are in a State of
Acquaintance with God; fear you would go, one to his Pleasures, anoth^^ to his
Vanity, and another to his Covetousnes^ and almost all of you neglect this Work
of so great Concernment. Let me therefore urge you with all Earnestness, that
you will not account it a small marter, whether you be acquainted with God or
not; and so neglect this Trial of your selves: But bring your Hearts up roundly
to the Examination, yield not to their unreasonable with drawings, force them
to answer. If you make any Account of the Charge of God, if you make any
Account of the Excellency of Man, if you would not lose the highest Privilege
of the Creature, if you have any Esteem of the Life of Heaven, know your selves
in this, whether you are in a State of Acquaintance with God, and be serious
and diligent in this Enquiry.

Thirdly, Because Men are so exceeding apt to be mistaken, and to misapprehend
concerning themselves, that they are in a State of Acquaintance with God, while
they are mere Strangers unto him; such as those whom our Savior speaks of,
Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name
done many wonderful Works? And then he will profess unto them, I never knew
you: depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity. They take it for granted, that
because of such Privileges, and Gifts, and common Graces which they had,
therefore they were well acquainted with Christ; but our Savior answers, I
never knew you; that is, I never had any Acquaintance with you. Such are those
who are resembled to us by five foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.11. The five foolish
Virgins come when the Door is shut, and say, Lord, Lord, open unto us; but he
answers, Verily I say unto you, I know you not; that is, never had
Acquaintance with you: you never knew me in the time of your Life, and I will
not know you now: You were ashamed to own me before Men, and I will be ashamed
to own you before my Father. Men are so apt to be mistaken in Judgment of
themselves, that they think themselves rich and increasing with Goods, and to
have need of nothing; when they are wretched, miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. And this makes David, Psalm. 139.24. to cry out after he had been
trying himself, Search me, O God, and know my Heart; try me, and know my
Thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting. This Unaptness in us to make a right Judgment of our selves in our
relation to God, arises,

First, From that deep Root of Self-love that is in us by Nature, whereby we
are apt to apprehend well of our selves, and be pleased with a good Conceit of
our selves, though we are never so bad. And such is the Nature of this
Affection, that it blinds our Eyes, and prejudiceth the Mind, that it cannot
make a right Judgment. As Affection in some Parents to their Children, makes
them reckon that which is a Blemish, to be a Beauty in their Children; so does
inordinare Self-love work in Men, in the Judgment of themselves. Men when they
judge themselves, they look into a flattering Glass which presents them in
greater Beauty than that which is their own.

Secondly, We judge amiss of our selves, because we take not a right Rule for
our Judgments, as those whom Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 10.12. Some commend
themselves, but they measure themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves
with themselves, are not wise. If we take our selves to be the Rule and
Measure, then we cannot discern our own Crookedness and Irregularness.

Thirdly, We judge amiss of our selves, because of the Deceitfulness of our
Hearts. The Heart of Man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;
who can know it? Jer. 17.9. Gross Wickedness is apparent to the pur-blind Eye:
But where there is an abstaining from gross outward Sins, there are special
Workings of Corruption, such as Pride, Self-love, distrust of God, and love of
the World; any of which shut up the Soul against God, as with Bolts and Bars;
and these lying inward are not discerned. Other Accounts may be given of the
Unaptness to make a due Judgment of our selves: It concerns us therefore to be
exact in our Trial, and trust not to a sudden Answer; for we are ready to make
a short Work of it, and to save our selves the Labor, and to sit down with
charitable Thoughts of our selves. Whatsoever Answer therefore our Hearts give
us, let us see cleared, and have such Reason for it, that we may know how to
proceed with our selves, upon a right Judgment of our selves. The chief Work of
Trial in this particular Acquaintance with God, will be from those Particulars
wherein I opened the Nature of the Soul's Acquaintance with God. Let us
therefore take those Heads and our own Experience of our selves, and by a
rational Deduction, let us find out our own Estate.

As thus, Those that are acquainted with God are brought night to God. Whereas
sometimes there was a Strangeness and Remoteness, a vast Separation, now the
Partition is taken out of the way, and I am made one in Christ. I have took God
to be my Portion, and my Father; I have been a Prodigal, and have departed from
him; but I finding my self lost and undone, and that nothing could satisfy my
Soul in the World, therefore I resolved I would return to my Father's House,
and try if he would receive me again into his Family; and so I have done. I
have cast off my old Converse with the World, and with Corruption; I have
broken my League with Hell, and have entered into a Covenant with the Father,
through his Son Jesus Christ; therefore I may comfortably conclude that I am
now in a State of Acquaintance with God.

But if in the Enquiry into my self I find not these things, if I find that now
I am as in former Days; I have felt no such Change in my self, and that all
things are with me as they were of old; I never was sensible of any Loss in my
self; I never knew what Strangeness and Nighness to God meant; I never
understood what Union with God, and Distance from God was; this signifies ill,
it is a Symptom of a bad State, of a State of Unacquaintance with God.

2. So again, for our Converse with God. He that is acquainted with God, he
has had his Converse with God, he has dwelt with God, and God with him; he
has supped with Christ, and Christ with him; his great Business and Employment
has been nigh God, in those things wherein is most of God. If I find my Soul
much conversing with God, often sending out Breathings to Heaven, often casting my
Eye toward God, if I find the great Work of my Mind to be with God, my great
Business lies in Heaven, my Treasure is laid up there, and my Thoughts, and
Desires, and Joys, and Delights, and Meditations are there; I may comfortably
conclude that I am in some measure acquainted with God. But if in the Inquiry
into my self, I find that I have my whole Converse with the World, that I can
afford no time for Prayer to God in my Family, and in secret; if I find all the
Day long my Cares, and Desires, and Thoughts, run out most naturally and sully
without Control toward the things of the World, or that I will mind my self in
a natural carnal way, and mind not the things of God; this signifies to me my
Unacquaintance with God, and it will be an ungrounded Presumption in me to
reckon of my self any other than a Stranger to him.

3. So for Communion and Fellowship, which is in Acquaintance. Those that are
intimately acquainted, their Communion in the way of Discourse is very
frequent, in making known their Thoughts and Apprehensions, their Fears and
Wants; their Minds are open one to another, and that which is the Propriety of
one, is by their Acquaintance communicated to the use of both. If then I can
find in reviewing the Workings of my Soul, that there has been this Sight of
Heaven, this Spiritual Communion between my Soul and God; that my Heart has
been open to God; that I have gone to God when my Heart has been burdened with
Sorrow, I have discharged it into the Bosom of God, as into the Bosom of a
Friend; that in my Doubts I have betaken my self to him, expecting Comfort from
him; that upon hearing his Voice I have opened to him, and upon my opening he
has come in with Smiles of Love, and given me Tokens of his Favor; these
things signify a State of Acquaintance with God; but if I know not what it is
to have given up my Soul to God, to be his, and to have taken God to be mine;
if I have had Experience of receiving nothing else from God, but a partaking of
the things of the World; if I have not been wont to communicate the Workings of
my Mind to God, it betokens my Unacquaintance with God.

4. And again, For that friendly Working of Love and Affection in the Soul
toward God. Those that are in a State of Acquaintance are supposed to comply
with each other in Kindness, and Love, and Good Will, and Affection. If then I
can upon search into my self, find that God has the highest Room in my
Affections, that my Heart is his, that his Love is prevailing with me, above
the Love of all things beside, and that I love those that are his beloved for
his Sake, then I have in me a Sign of real Acquaintance with God; for Love is
the very Quintessence of Acquaintance: but if in the Search into the Workings
of my Mind I can find no such friendly Compliance, but that God was still
thwarting and crossing my Designs, that I should find my self better content if
there were no God, and that those Workings of my Mind that are about God are
sower, harsh, and tearing upon my Spirit, then it is to be feared, that I have
no Acquaintance with God.

And have thou made an impartial Inquiry into thy State? And how stand things
between thy Soul and God? Art thou acquainted with him, or art thou not?
Consider seriously, O Sinners, that this is one of the weightiest Questions in
the World; and if this Question were but well resolved, it would put an end to
a thousand other Questions. He that can say of God and Christ, this is my
Beloved, and this is my Friend, he need not very solicitously ask, What News?
He has heard good News from Heaven, which will easily balance all; come what
will come, he need not much fear, as long as there stands that one Text in the
Bible; That all shall work together for good to them that love God. He has no
Cause to go a begging to the World, and to say, Who will show me any Good? as
long as the Lord has shined upon him with the Light of his Countenance. He
need not complain, What shall I do? I have lost this or that dear Friend; when
he has found him, who can make up all with one Look, whom he can never lose.
In a word, He need not ask, How shall I do to live? and what shall I eat, and
what shall I drink, and wherewithal shall I be clothed? So long as he knows
that he has a Noble Friend, who will ease him of all his Care, and never see
him want. Well then, have thou answered this great Question or not? Or will thou do by thy Conscience, as Felix, put it off; and say, thou will hear of
these Matters, at some more convenient Season; and I wonder when that more
convenient Season will be, and why not now, I pray? What Season more fit than
the present? I am sure God says, Now is the acceptable time; and do you know
better than he? What have thou to do that is more necessary? Speak out I pray,
Is the following of thy Pleasures? Is the serving of Satan? Is the damning of
thy Soul, more necessary than the saving of it? Is the Life and Death of a Soul
nothing? Are everlasting Glory and Misery small Matters? Is the Love or Hatred
of thy God so inconsiderable a thing? Awake, O Sinner, what meanest thou? Arise
speedily, and look about thee, Man. Consider seriously as thou valuest thy
Soul, what best becomes a Sinner in thy Condition: What answer shall I return
to my Master? Are not these things worth the thinking of? Shall I say for all
this, that thou art not at leisure to look after an Interest in his Favor, or
any thing that tends to it? Shall I tell him that thou have something of
greater Weight, and higher Importance to trouble your Head with? And do you in
sober Sadness think so? For you make account, that Excuse is sufficient: I pray
then make use of it your self (for I dare not.) When God shall come to ask you,
why you did no more vigorously mind the getting Acquaintance with himself, tell
him then if you think that Answer will serve your turn, that you were not at
leisure, you had such urgent Occasions which took up the whole of your Time,
such and such a Friend you had, who sent for you to the Tavern, and you could
not possibly come when he invited you; tell him, if you believe that Plea will
hold Water, that you would have been glad to have come upon his Invitation, but
that you were taken up with such good old Friends, the World, the Flesh and the
Devil. How do you think such an Answer will be taken? You may think to put us
off with such kind of Reason as this, but do you hope by this Answer to
satisfy your Judge? Believe it, Sinner, God will not thus be put off.
Wherefore I do again with all the earnestness I can for my Soul renew my Suit
to thee, that thou would act like a Man in his Wits; make some serious
Inquiry into the State and Condition of thy Soul: And consider for the Lord's
Sake again and again, before you send me away thus, what Errand I come to you
on: It is to treat with you about a rich Match for thy poor undone Soul;
therefore consider well what you do before you make light of this Business, and
know when you are well offered; believe it, God will not long send after you in
this manner, and you are not like every Day to have such Proffers; Divine
Patience and Goodness will not always plead at this rate with you; God will
ever long say, Let them alone; the Lord will ever long speak to Scornful
Sinners in such Language that will make their Ears to tingle; he will despise
and slight as well as they; and who is like to have the worst of it at last? I
leave to any Rational Man to judge. The time is coming, whin your ungodly
Hearts shall ache to see him whom you might have had for your Husband; when you
shall have him for your Judge, whom you might have had for your Advocate. And
though we could not get you to be willing to be acquainted with him, no, not so
much as to have any serious Thoughts about it, or to make any Enquiry after him
to inform your self concerning him; yet you shall have him for your Enemy,
whether you will or no. But O let us not part thus! lot me, a Man like thy
self, reason the Case a little more with thee; come tell me, poor ignorant
Creature, thou that still stand demurring, and say, Shall I, shall I?
What Evil (...) there in thy God, that thou should be thus hardly brought,
so much as to discourse this Business with thy own Soul? What is the reason
that thou scarce think it worth the while t^^ trouble thy Head about any
thing that does concern your Interest in his Love? Thou that mindest his Love
so little, tell me what do thou think had become of thee long before this,
if God had regarded thee as little as thou do him? What would thou have
done, had the Lord said to any Disease, the least of his Messengers, fetch that
Rebel before me, that values not my Favor; he shall know what my Anger is,
seeing he will not prize my Love. O what a lamentable Gase had thou been in,
had God but done by thee a^^ thou have by him? Acquaintance with God! methinks
sinful Man should stand and wonder at such a Word; methinks he should be even
sur-prized with an Ecstasy of Admiration; and say, and will God indeed be
acquainted with such a Worm, such a dead Dog, such a Rebel as I^ Lord, what is
Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man, that thou should make
such an Offer to him? One would think thou should no more dispute the Matter
then Ester did, when that great Monarch made her his Queen. Were it but in
sensible Things, that nothing near such an Offer were made (which is
impossible) Man would think the very questioning in such a Case a strange
Folly. One would think that every one of God's Enemies that have been in open
Rebellion against him, and are utterly unable to make their part good against
him, when they hear of such Terms of Mercy from their Prince, who has all
their Lives in his hand, should rejoice at this News, and say, How beautiful
are the Feet of them which bring such Tidings? How did Benhadad look, when
instead of a Halter he had a Coach? When instead of Rebel, he heard Brother?
Whatever we may think of these things, David thought it high time for him to
bid such a Messenger welcome, and to open his Heart for the receiving his God:
Hear what he says to his own Heart and others, Psalm. 24. Lift up your Heads, O
ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may
come in. And because the Door of Men's Hearts is locked, and barred, and
bolted, and Men are in a deep Sleep, and will not hear the knocking that is at
the Gate, though it be loud, though it be a King; therefore David knocks again,
Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting Doors: Why,
what haste, says the Sinner? What haste? Why here is the King at your Gates;
and that not an ordinary King neither, he is a glorious King that will honor
you so far, if you open quickly, as to lodge within, to take up his Abode in
your House, to dwell with you; but the Soul for all this does not yet open, but
stands still questioning, as if it were an Enemy, rather than a Friend that
stood there, and asks, who is this King of Glory? Who? he answers again, ^t is
the Lord of Hosts; he, that if you will not open quickly and thankfully, can
easily pull your House down about your Ears; He is the Lord (...) Hosts, that
King who has a mighty Army always at his Command, who stand ready for their
commission, and then you should soon know who it is you might have had for your
Friend; ^^ft up therefore your Heads, O ye Gates; open quickly, ye that had
rather have God for your Friend than for your Enemy. O why should no^ the Soul
of every Sinner cry out, Lord, the Door is locked and thou have the Key; I have
been crying what I can do, but the Wards are so rust that I cannot possibly
turn the Key; but Lord throw the Door off the Hinges, any thing in the World,
so thou will but come in and dwell here Come, O Mighty God, break through Doors
(...) Iron, and Bars of Brass, and make way for th^^ self by thy Love and
Power. Come, Lord, and make thy self welcome, all that I have is at the
Service: O fit my Soul to entertain thee! B^^ where is the Sinner that is in
this Note? How seldom do poor Creatures desire God's Company or bewail his
Absence? Where (almost) are the Men and Woman to be found, that do in good
earnest long to be acquainted with God? Me^^ are naturally Strangers to God,
and it is a wonderful difficult thing to persuade Men to enter in^ so much as a
serious deliberate Consideration (...) these Things: Though it be so insinitely
f^^ their Interest; though the God that made them out of pity to their Souls
desires it; though (...) send his Ambassadors in his Name to besee^ them to be
reconciled unto God, against whom they have been in open Arms; though in
infini^^ Mercy he persuade them to lay down their We^^ pons, and promise them
Free and General Pardon, and to receive them into Favor, and to forget and
forgive; yet where is the Sinner almo^^ to be found that with any Thankfulness
do^^ close with these Tenders? Now it being a Business of such infinite
Concernment, and it being the very Work and Business of a Minister Christ to
bring God and Man into Union, to get Man acquainted with God, I shall in the
next place labor to enforce this Exhortation upon the Hearts of Sinners, and
do what I can possible to prevail with them that are as yet Strangers, to get
acquainted with God, that they may have Peace, and that thereby good might come
unto them.

EXHORTATION.
Once more, poor Sinners, That God which can in a Moment stop thy Breath, and
send thee into Hell, does offer to be Friends with thee. If thou will come upon
his Invitation, well and good, thou art a happy Man for ever; if not, thou will
rue the Day that ever thou were born: yet, through Mercy the Matter is not gone
so far, but that thou may (if you will now at last in good earnest humble
thy self to him) be received into Favor. Behold, a Pardon, Mercy and Grace!
Stand astonished, O ye Heavens, at this Infinite Condescension! Wonder O ye
Angels, and pry into this Kindness. Was there ever such Condescension, Love,
and Goodness heard of? If thou did but understand, O stupid Sinner, what an
Offer is made to thee, thou could not but adore that Goodness that can
pardon and forget such Offenses, and receive such a Creature into Favor; thou
would also cry out with as great Admiration as he did; what manner of Love!
You would think it Mercy not to be paralleled, a Kindness never to be
forgotten, a Proposal by no means to be ^ffused. Now that I may, if possible,
prevail with some that are yet afar off, to come near, shall enforce this
Exhortation with many powerful Motives, the least of which (were Men bu^ well
in their Wits as to Spiritual Matters, were the World not to a wonder Fools, in
the great Affairs of their Souls and Eternity) might easily prevail. O that I
might prevail! O that some might be persuaded! O that God would pu^^ Life and
Power into these Words, that they might prove Effectual to the intended Ends! O
that some poor rebellious Sinners might be made to close with the most
advantageous Offers that even were, or could be made to Creatures in our
Condition!

MOTIVES.
The first Head of Motives that I shall insist upon to enforce this
Exhortation, shall be taken from the Nature of the Person that I would have you
acquainted with. Consider well what kind o^ Friend you are like to have of him;
and if, after you have well weighed what I shall (with God's leave) say, you
can find out any one in Heaven or in Earth that will be a better Friend to you
and stand you in more stead; if in all the World you bring one that deserves
better at your Hands and is more worthy of your choicest Love, and
Acquaintance, if I bid you to your Loss, why then let me bare the Blame of a
Cheat for ever And if after Trial, through Trial, and intimate Acquaintance, you
find your self deceived, an^ that it was not worth the while to give your self
so much Trouble, why then let me be branded t^ Eternity for the veriest Liar
and Impostor in the World. For my part, I envy not Men their Happiness but I
wish with all my Heart, that Men would do that which may be most for their
Interest. It was the Counsel of Epictetus, none of the weakest Men, though a
Heathen, Make choice of that which is really most excellent; and if there be a
Friend to be found better than thy God, the first thing thou do get an
Interest in him. But consider whether there be not a Contradiction in the
Terms, Better than the best; it is perfect Nonsense. I know it is impossible for
any one that has right Apprehensions of God; such cannot but believe him to be
infinitely Lovely, Wise, and Powerful, and to be obeyed in all things, and all
the Reason in the World to acquiesce in his Will, who is so good and so wise;
such will place Happiness in nothing below his Favor. Wherefore I think
Plutarch was not mistaken, who affirmed, That Man's Life was given him of God,
only to get the Knowledge of God. But I shall be a little more particular in
speaking to the excellent Qualifications of him, whom I would fain get every
poor Sinner acquainted with.

First, He is the most loving and kind Friend. Poor ignorant Creatures that are
Strangers to him, they talk at a mad rate concerning him: those that know him
not will be speaking bad, and thinking worse of him; but, O did they but know
what God is to them that are acquainted with him, had they but conversed with
him themselves, did they but see what Entertainment ^e gives, had they but been
in his Company, and experienced what some have experienced, had they ^ut beheld
how affectionately he embraces them which come to him; they would quickly say
that it was a false Report and wicked Scandal, that the Devil and the World,
which know not God, had raised of him; they would soon cry out, that they would
not for a World but that they had been at his House, and that they have cause
to bless God for the Day that ever they knew such and such who brought them
acquainted with such a Friend; they will never while they live, for the future,
believe any thing that is spoken against God or Christ, let who will speak it.
Is this the God they had such hard Thoughts of? Is this the Kindness that they
did so slight? Is this the Friend that they were so loath to come to? And thus
an ingenious Soul will even be ashamed that it should ever harbor such low
Thoughts of him, whom now to their Comfort they have found beyond Apprehension
kind. Believe it, Sirs, you cannot conceive what a Friend you shall have of God,
would you but be persuaded to enter into Covenant with him, to be his, wholly
his; I tell you, many that did sometimes think, and do as you do now, that is,
set light by Christ and hate God, and saw no Loveliness in him, are now quite
of another Mind, they would not for ten thousand Worlds quit their Interest in
him. O who dare say that he is a hard Master? Who that knows him will say he is
an unkind Friend? O what do poor Creatures ail that they do entertain such
harsh, sower Thoughts of God? What, do you think there is nothing in that
Scripture, Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee? Does the Psalmist speak too largely? Does he say more than
he and others could prove? Ask him and he will tell you, in ver. 21. that he
blesses God these were things he could speak to, from his own personal
Experience, and many thousands as well as he, to whom the Lord had showed his
mavelous Kindness; and therefore he does very passionately plead with the
People of God to love him, and more highly to express their Sense of his
Goodness, that the World might be encouraged also to have good Thoughts of him.
What Nation under Heaven can say they have not tasted of his Goodness, Psalm.
33.5. All the Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord. Read over the hundred
forty fifth Psalm, and let us hear then what you have to say against God. Some
indeed may speak of the Might of God's terrible Acts: Some that have despised
his Love, have felt his Power and Justice; as for these we cannot think them
competent Judges in this case, they will not, it may be, commend God's
Goodness: Yet even they cannot, will not condemn God of Injustice, but exclaim
against themselves for their unspeakable Folly in slighting his Kindness when
it was tendered to them. But as for others, ask them, and they will declare the
Goodness of God, they will abundantly utter the Memory of his great Goodness,
and sing of his Righteousness. Do but try, poor Sinner, do but try, come a
little nearer, and believe your own Experience; and if after a through Knowledge
of God, and a real Acquaintance with him, you can say that his Favor is not to
be sought after, his Love not worth the desiring; why then I have done, I have
no more to say. I am sure if God were, as the Devil and the World represent him
to be; in so many thousands of Years, among so many thousands and millions that
have been acquainted with him, and enter tained by him, some of them would have
complained before this, we should at one time or other have heard something
against him. Now I challenge all the World to produce me but an experienced
solid Saint, that when he acted like himself, and after he had been in the
Company of God, and had been feasted by him, could say that he kept a short
House, especially could we but enquire of those that sit down at his Table, and
are always in his Presence; which of them all have a Word to say against him?
But of that more hereafter. No no, it is in Sinners themselves, there lies the
Fault; they believe the malicious Father of Lies, they easily credit the
unexperienced ignorant World: And how little reason you have to believe so
malicious Enemies before the Word of Truth, I leave your selves to determine. O
why will you take up a Slander against your Creator so easily? Why will you
receive such great things wherein your eternal Welfare is concerned, upon
Trust? Do but search diligently, turn over the Bible, consult the Experiences
of wiser Men, and see whether things be not as I tell you. And how does the
matter stand now poor Heart? What must the Devil be believed before God? What
is God a hard Master still? of all the Creatures in the World, some of you have
little reason to say so. Have thou not been fed, clothed, and delivered a
thousand times by him? Who is it that provided so richly for you? Who filled
your Barns? Who restored your Heatlh at such and such a time, when the Doctor
gave you over? Was that one of his Unkindnesses? Are these the things for which
you slight him? God himself makes a Challenge in Jer. 2.5. What Iniquity have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
Vanity, and become vain? Neither said they, Where is the God that brought us
out of the Land of Egypt, and led us through the Wilderness, through a Land of
Desert and Pits, through a Land of Drought, and of the Shadow of Death, where
no Man dwelt: And I brought you into a plentiful Country, to eat the Fruit
thereof, and the Goodness thereof, and yet you know not me, faith the Lord. Was
there ever such Ingratitude heard of? Pass ye over the Isles of Chittim, and
send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing:
Has a Nation changed their Gods? But my People have changed their Glory for
that which does not profit. And what say thou, O ungrateful Israel? Have the
Heathens more reason to cleave to their Idols? Are the Pagans more beholding to
their Stocks and Stones than thou art to the living God? And now what have thou
got by all this? Have thou increased thy Riches? Are thy Barns more full of
Gorn? Are there ever the more Cattle in thy Pastures? Are thy Presses more full
of Grapes? Art thou not now grown poor? Is not the Heaven become as Brass, and
the Earth as Iron? Do not thy Cattle groan for want of Food? Are not thy Vines
and Fields grown barren? Why, you may thank your selves for all this; you did
not know when you were well. Return therefore, O backsliding Israel, and ^hou
shall know the Difference between my Service, and the Service of Devils, Jer.
2.30, 31. ^et me therefore again plead with thee, O God^espising Sinner. If for
all this thou will not be persuaded, let me expostulate the Case with thee, as
God did with Israel. Did not God bring thee into a World every way furnished
for thy Use? Has he not subjected the Creatures of the World to thee? Who
waters thy Fields out of his Treasuries? Who opens the Clods of the Earth, and
sends thee out of his Storehouse Provisions Year by Year? What would quickly
become of thee, if thou had not a fresh Supply from him every Year, nay,
every Moment? Oh! is this his Unkindness for which thou hate him? And is it
for this that thou have such sower Thoughts of him? And if all this were too
little, he would do greater Things than these: Has he not sent his Son out of
his Bosom? Does he not offer thee Heaven and Glory? What can thou in reason
ask, that is good for thee, that he would deny thee, if thou would but be
acquainted with him? And if this be an unkind Friend, I do not know who is
kind; if this be not Love, I know not what is. What could he have done more to
express his Love to the World than he has done, Isa. 4.4. Ask David what he
thinks of God, he was well acquainted with him, he dwelt in hi^ House, and by
his Good Will would be never ou^ of his more immediate Presence and Company
Enquire, I pray, what he found amiss in him^ that you may know his Mind the
better, he has left it upon Record in more than one or two Places, what a
Friend he has had of God, Psalm. 16.6 The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places: yea, have a goodly Heritage. Why, what is that you boast of so much, O
David? have not others ha^ Kingdoms as well as you? No, that is not th^^ thing,
a Crown is one of the least Jewels in (...) Cabinet, The Lord is the Portion of
mine Inheritance, and of my Cup. So in Psalm. 23. quite through. Nay, does he
not sometimes come out and becken to the poor beggarly starved World, to come
and eat their fill of the same Dish; O taste and see that the Lord is good,
Psalm. 34.8. If you will give any Credit to his Word, he will tell you, No
Friend like to God, Psalm. 73.25, 26, 27, 28. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is none in Earth that I can desire besides thee. My Flesh and my
Heart fails, but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever.
For, lo, they that are far from him shall perish: Thou have destroyed all them
that go a whoring from thee; but it is good for me to draw near to God. Let
others think, or do as they please, as for him he values the Light of God's
Countenance above Corn, and Wine, and Oil, Psalm. 4.6, 7. 1 John 3. 1. Cant.
1.4. And what say thou now poor Creature? Art thou still of the same Mind?
Will thou have God for thy God and Friend, or no? Is he Good and Kind, or not?
Is his Favor worth the desiring and seeking after? Psalm. 94.8. Understand O ye
brutish among the People, and ye Fools when will ye be wise: If God himself
may not be believed, if David his Servant may not be credited, hear what one of
your Brethren, a Heathen I mean, says in this Case. I shall translate his
Words into English; they are as follows, The Goodness and Providence of God to
Man is so great, that if he were well in his Wits, he would do nothing
publicly or privately, but praise God, and speak well of his Name, Ar. Epic.
l. 1. c. 16. Does it not become Man, while he is Plowing, and Digging, and
Eating, etc. to be Singing, Great is that God that has given us Land to Till,
Instruments to work with; great is that God who has given us Hands and Feet,
and other Members; above all, that he has given us an understanding Soul? And
seeing most Men are blind in these things, is it not fit that some that are
more wise and able should publicly praise God for all these Things? And now I
am a lame old Man, but Partaker of Reason, God is to be praised by me, this is
my Work, and this I will do, and I will not leave this Station as long as I
live; and I wish that all the World would join with me in singing a Song of
Thankfulness to this good God. Hear what a Testimony he gives of the Goodness
of God; Hark how he invites you to join in that sweet Consort of Singing
Praises to your Maker; hark at what a rate he talks, that never read a Bible,
or heard of a Christ, or knew what this Acquaintance with God that I am
speaking of, meant; how bravely does he set out the Goodness of God? What say
you? Will you yet be persuaded to think well of God? Methinks I am loath to see
my good Master thus slighted and undervalued; methinks it grieves me to see
thee too, so foolishly to refuse such an Offer. I shall conclude what I have to
say upon this Head, with another notable Expression of the same Divine and
God-admiring Stoic, Idem, c. 6. If Men would study the Nature of Things, and
had but grateful Minds, they might see Cause sufficient to praise God from
every Creature in the World. It is not therefore because God has no Goodness
or Beauty in him, that Men do no more earnestly desire Acquaintance with him;
but because their Eyes are shut, or they look upon him through a wrong
Perspective. This is the first Qualification of this Friend, which may commend
his Acquaintance to you, that he is the most loving and good Friend.

Secondly, He is a most comfortable Friend. It is a vulgar, and yet a dangerous
Error, which the Devil would fain keep up the Credit of, That a Religious
Life, is a sad, melancholy, pensive Life; and that upon our Acquaintance with
God, we must bid an everlasting Farewell to Joy, Pleasure, and Comforts. And is
it true, that a Christians Life is so uncomfortable a Life? What then does
David mean to take his Harp so often in his Hand? What makes him so frequently to
warble out those melodious Notes? How seldom is his Viol out of tune? Why is he
so often Singing and Rejoicing? Read the last Psalms at your leisure, and then
tell me, whether that be the Language of a sad, mournful, melancholy Man? Do
you never hear him speak of God, his exceeding Joy? Does he not tell God
plainly sometimes, that he can scarce relish any thing but that which comes
from his Table? Nothing else can comfort him. Hence it is in Psalm. 119.76, 77.
that he puts up this earnest Request to God; Let, I pray thee, thy merciful
Kindness be for my Comfort. As for his part he could take comfort in nothing
below that, and that was it that the Lord had graciously promised to feed his
Servant with, as ^ong as he lived; whereupon he urges God with his Promise,
According to thy Word unto thy Servant. And that none might think this to be
only God's ^ommon Kindness that he means, he adds, Let by tender Mercies come
unto me, that I may live. God's common Mercies would not serve his turn, that
was a Dish that the World fed upon as well the; if he might not have these
sweet Dainties, peculiar, spiritual, fatherly Mercies, he could not live, he
should even pine away for Hunger. Wherefore he says a little after, That his
Soul did even faint for God's Salvation. And the Soul that has had a full Meal
here; O how is it raised? How does it cry Roast-meat, Cant. 4.1. The King has
brought me into his Chambers; and what had you there? Nay, that is more than the
Soul can express; only this she can say, The taste of that Mercy, she hopes to
keep in her Mouth for ever; she shall remember his Love more than Wine. Nay, so
comfortable a Friend is God, that those who have an Interest in him can rejoice
in such times, when others would be weeping and wringing their Hands. God's
Company is so refreshing, that it turns a Prison into a Palace; it brings Joy
and Pleasure into a Dungeon. Stand forth O ye suffering Saints, and speak your
Experiences; the World objects your State to us as a sad State, and they think
you have good reason to accuse God, and if any have any thing to say against
the Comfortableness of a Religious Life, and this Friend, it is you. Well then,
will you promise, O Sinners, to stand to the Judgment of the greatest
Sufferers. We will enquire of them that have been sawn asunder, tormented,
roasted for God's Sake; look into that little Book of Martyrs, and you shall
find, as uncomfortable as their Stat^ was, yet they would not accept of
Deliverance, none of them all that would open his Mouth against this Friend for
all this. What say you O Paul and Silas, now your Backs are raw, and your Feet
are in the Stocks? Their Singing speaks significantly enough for them that they
were not over sad; and they are so busy in crying Hallelujahs, that they cannot
attend to give an Answer to so sorry a Question. What say the Martyrs out of
the Flames? Does not their Love burn as hot then as ever? Did ever any of them
from Abel to the last that suffered in Christ's Cause, say, that God was an
uncomfortable Friend? Do not all the Children of Wisdom from first to last
justify Wisdom, and say, That all her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all
her Paths, Peace? Of those that have God for their Friend and know it, bring me
any of them all that complain of God. How does he come and cheer them up when
all the World is against them? John 16.33. What made that Holy Man in Psalm. 23.
say, That though he should walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death be
would fear no Evil. What, not fear then? Why what Friend is it that keeps up
your Spirits? that bares you Company in those black and dismal Regions; he will
soon tell you God was with him, and in those slippery Ways he leaned upon his
Staff, and these were the Cordials that kept his Heart from fainting. I
challenge all the Gallants in the World out of all their Merry Jovial Clubs, to
find such a Company of Merry Cheerful Creatures as the Friends of God are. It Is
not the Company of God, but the want of it that makes sad. Alas, you know not
what their Comforts be; and Strangers intermeddle not with their Joy. You think
they cannot be merry when their Countenance is so grave; but they are sure you
cannot be truly merry when you smile with a Curse upon your Souls. They know
that he spoke that Sentence who could not be mistaken, Prove. 14.13. Even in
Laughter the Heart is sorrowful, and the end of that Mirth is Heaviness. Then
call your Roaring, and your Singing and Laughter, Mirth; but the Spirit of God
calls it Madness, Eccl. 2.2. When a Carnal Man's Heart is ready to die within
him, and with Nabel to become like a Stone; how cheerfully then can those look
that have God for their Friend! Which of the Valiant ones of the World can
outface Death, look joyfully into Eternity? Which of them can hug a Faggot, and
embrace the Flames? This the Saint can do, and more too, for he can look
infinite Justice in the Face with a cheerful Heart, he can hear of Hell with
Joy and Thankfulness, he can think of the Day of Judgment with great Delight
and Comfort. I again challenge all the World to produce one out of all their
Merry Companies, one that can do all this; Come muster up all your Jovial
Blades together; call for your Harps and Viols, add what you will to make the
Consort complete: bring in your richest Wines; come lay your Heads together,
and study what may still add to your Comfort: Well, is it done? Now come away
Sinner, this Night thy Soul must appear before God. Well now, what say you Man?
What, does your Courage fail you? Now call for your merry Companions, and let
them cheer thy Heart. Now call for a Cup, a Whore, never be daunted Man; shall
one of thy Courage quail, that could make a Mock at the Threatenings of the
Almighty God? What so Boon and Jolly but now, and now down in the Mouth? Here Is
a sudden Change indeed! Where Is thy Merry Companions, I say again? All fled!
Where are thy darling Pleasures? Have all forsaken thee? Why should thou be
dejected, there is a poor Man in Rags that is smiling? What, art thou quite
bereft of all Comfort? What Is the Matter, Man? What Is the Matter? There Is a
Question with all my Heart, to ask a Man that must appear before a God to
Morrow Morning. Well then, it seems your Heart misgives you; what then did you
mean to talk of Joy and Pleasures? Are they all come to this? Why, there stands
one that now has his Heart as full of Comfort as ever it can hold; and the
very Thoughts of Eternity, which do so daunt your Soul, raise his; and would
you know the reason? He knows he is going to his Friend, nay, his Friend bares
him company through that dirty Lane. Behold, how good and how pleasant a thing
it is for God and the Soul to dwell together in Unity! This it is to have God
for a Friend. O Blessed is the Soul that is in such a Case; yea, Blessed is the
Soul whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. Psalm. 69.15, 16. 2 Cor. 1.3. John
14.16. Isa. 51, 11, 12. Neh. 8. 10. Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 43.4. Prove. 14.10. Isa.
29. ^9. Romans 14.17. 1 Pet. 1.8. Nay, David when ^he seemed to be somewhat out
of tune, leaves this upon Record as undoubted Truth, Psalm. 13.1. That God is
good to Israel, even to such as ^re of a Clean Heart; Let the Devil and his
Intruments say what they will to the contrary, I will never believe them; I
have said it before, and I see no reason to reverse my Sentence; Tru^y God is
good. Though sometimes he may hide ^is Face for a while, yet he does that in
Faith^ulness, and Love; there is kindness in his very Scourges, and Love bound
up in his Rods; he (...) good to Israel: do but mark it first or last, The ^^ue
Israelite in whom there is no Guile, shall be re^eshed by this Savior. The
Israelite that wrestles with Tears with God, and values his Love above the
whole World, that will not be put off without his Father's Blessing, he shall
have it with a Witness; He shall reap in Joy, though he may at present so^^ in
Tears: Even to such as are of a clean Heart. The false hearted Hypocrite indeed
that gives God only his Tongue and Lip, Cap and Knee, but reserves his Heart
and Love for Sin and the World that has much of Complement, but nothing o^
Affection and Reality; why, let such a one never expect, while in such a State,
to taste those reviving Comforts that I have been treating of while he drives
such a Trade, he must not expect much of God's Company; but of that hereafter.
What a Charge does God give to his Minister to keep up the Spirits of his
People. Comfort y^^ comfort ye my People, says their God, speak (...)
comfortably to Jerusalem. It Is a gross Mistake, (...) think that God loves to
see his, drooping an^ hanging down their Heads; no, no, he counts (...) his
Honor to have his Servants cheerful. (...) why then should any of the precious
Sons an^ Daughters of Zion walk up and down, as if the^^ Friends Company were
not sufficient to sola^ them, even in the lowest State that a Child (...) God
can be conceived to be in. While you thi^^ God is honored by you, you cannot
imagine wh^^ wrong you do him. The World stands by a^^ looks upon you, the
Devil bids them look (...) still, and asks them, how they like such a dupish
Life, and the Service of such a Master, (...) whose Servants and Friends lead
such a dolef^^ Life. Stay, hold there Satan, that is a Lie, a^^ a loud one too;
there are and have been thousan^ of God's Children that have lived, as it were
the Suburbs of Heaven, while they have been upon Earth; many thousands there
have been, that have spent their Days in true solid Joy and Peace; many that
have gone from one Heaven of Comfort here, to another of Glory and Comfort in
that other World. As I said before, so I say again, It is not the Company of
God, but the want of it, makes those sad which you see so; besides, let me tell
you, Tears and Joy are no way inconsistent. It may be also those Tears, that
sad Countenance may be for thy sake; when he sees what Comfort thou despisest,
and knows what a God, what a Friend thou refusest, he cannot but weep; it is no
Rarity for the People of God in the midst of their spiritual Enjoyments to pity
poor foolish Sinners, that slight those things which they know to be so
refreshing: Thus David did when his Heart was solaced with the love of God,
when his Soul was ready to be over-burdened, overpowered with the abundant
incomes of God's Kindness, he cannot but with Grief and Pity think of their
State, who have nothing to live upon but Husks, whilst he feeds thus high. O
let my Soul be but acquainted with God, let me but taste more of those true
Comforts, drink of that River of Pleasures that is at his right Hand, and then
I could spare these low^r sensual Pleasures, then I should scarce envy ^^ie
most merry ranting Blades their Comforts; I will not say, but then I should
with Sorrow think of their Wants. It was spoken by Galeacius Ca^xiola, one that
sometimes had none of the least ^hares of worldly Enjoyments, and might have
^ad more, could he have dispensed with the Ab^ence of this Friend, could he but
have been willing to have wanted those spiritual Comforts Let him perish that
values not one Hour's Communion with God, and the Comforts of a Divine Life,
abov^ all the Pleasures and Comforts that the Earth can afford. Give me such
Comforts, such a Friend whose Smiles may refresh me upon a Deathbed whose
Presence may revive me when nothing else can. Naturalists tells us of a Bird
called Charadius, that being brought into the Room where ^^ny one lies sick,
if he look upon the sick Person with a fixed Eye, he recovereth, but if he tur^
away his Eyes, the Person dies. It is true, I am sure, of this Friend, in whose
Favor is Life, and in whose Frowns there is Death. [ Ar Epie, l. 3. cap. 24.]
Can you help me to such a Friend (may all say with as good Reason as he) that
(...) keep me from all Fears. O for such a Friend This is instead of all
Pleasures to me, to thin^ that God is my Father, and to know that I have loved
and obeyed him to the utmost of my Power, not only in Words but in Deeds; this,
this is the Pleasure, here is a Friend indeed. No^ what do you say to all this,
is God to be desired Is his Acquaintance to be sought after? Can such a Friend
be too much valued? The Truth of it is I would not give a Rush for any of your
Comfort^ which come not from a Sense of our Interest i^ Christ, and which have
not a solid Foundation Scripture Consolations. It is not he that smiles but he
that can look up to God as his, and loo^ into his Soul, and see things there in
a goo^ Composure, and kept in a cheerful Subjection to his Maker and Redeemer;
this, this is the State here dwells Joys and Comforts that deserve su^^ a Name.
This lower Region sometimes is stormy, but above there is a constant Calm. Sen.
And is God still to be slighted? Are his Favors, is his Acquaintance little
worth? I know you cannot be an Enemy to Comforts and Joys; why let me tell you,
here is the Well of Consolation, here is the Fountain, and all other Joys which
are drawn out of the Cisterns will ever long be dry. Come away therefore, poor
Soul, and do not refuse such Joys as all the Carnal World cannot parallel for
their Hearts. And this is the next Motive, taken from the Consideration of the
Nature of this Friend, which I would persuade you to get acquainted with.

First, He is a loving and kind Friend.

Secondly, He is the most chearing, comforting Friend.

Thirdly, He is the most able and powerful Friend. He has all Power in his
Hand; and as long as he is but thy Friend, who ever is thy Foe, thou shall
never be overpowered, never be crushed. Thou may challenge all the Devils
in Hell, and all his Instruments upon Earth to do their worst, God is on thy
side, thou needst not fear. Thou art in thy self a poor weak Creature, easily
conquered and broken by a thousand Enemies; but if thou have a God to fly to,
thou also may sing as well as those did, Isa. 26.1. Thou also have a strong
City, Salvation has God appointed for Walls and Bulwarks. Thy Enemies may rage
indeed, they may threaten, but that is all; the Dogs may bark, but they cannot
bite. Should all the Kings of the World muster up their Forces, and be led in^o
the Field by that great and politic Warrior, ^he Prince of Darkness; should
they all resolve they will sit down before this City and block it up; should
they raise their Engines, and mount their best Artillery; should they discharge
their mighty Volleys; should they resolve to prosecute their hellish Designs to
the utmost, and attempt to storm this City, may not the Inhabitants sit down
with scorn, and pity them which are so prodigal of the Blood of Souls; would it
not be as fruitless a Project, (...) if they should endeavor to scale the
Clouds, and to pluck the Sun out of the Firmament, and to Dethrone the
Almighty? For God himself is in the midst of her; and if Omnipotence can
protect her, if Salvation it self can secure her, she need not be afraid; every
Denizen in that City has an Interest in that great General the Lord of Hosts,
who can muster a thousand thousand Soldiers at a moments warning; and if they
be too few, he has ten thousand times ten thousand at his Command, all of them
expert Warriors, and able to lead an Army; the least of them with the General's
Commission would not turn his back to the greatest Force that all his Enemies
can possibly raise; how safe then must he be that has such a Guard? How unlike
is he to be overcome that has such a^ Defense? The Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against him. The God of Heaven is on his side, the Almighty is up in
Arms in his Defense, the Lord of Hosts is for him. It is he that made proud
Pharaoh to stoop, it is he who made a Path for his in the midst of the mighty
Waters, it is (...) who led his by the Hand of Moses and Aaro^^ through the Red
Sea, it is he who looked the Egyptians into Confusion, and made their Captains
and Princes to quake, who died the Se^ again with the Blood of those cruel
Oppressors This is our God in whom we have trusted, this is he who is able to
save to the uttermost those that come under the Shadow of his Wings for
shelter. O who would not love thee, O God, who that knows thee, would not be
willing to have such a Friend, in whose Court there is sure Protection from all
the Sons of Violence, none of his Favorites need fear an Arrest, Psalm. 27.3,
4. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation: of whom shall I be afraid? The Lord
is the Strength of my Life; whom should I fear? When the Wicked, even my
Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my Flesh, they stumbled and fell:
though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear: though War
should rise against me, in this will I be confident. No wonder then that he
counts it infinitely for his Interest, to keep his League with God; no marvel
he counts this his best hold, his one thing necessary, ver. 4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of
God all the Days of my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire
in his Temple; for in the time of Trouble he shall hide me in his Pavillion, in
the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock:
and now shall mine Head be lifted up above mine Enemies round about me. It was
a Heathen that said, There is no stronger Fortification than the Love of the
Citizens, Seneca. He had spoke to much better Purpose, and more Truth, had he
said, There can be no surer Fortification than the Love of God. Hear how the
Apostle boasts, when he is quartered in this Garrison; I can do all through
Christ that strengthens me; yet not I, but Christ that dwells in me. O how
safe must he needs be that has Almighty Power for his Guard: And this is the
Condition of every Soul that has Acquaintance with God; he has an able
Friend: behold him marching out in Majesty, and challenging all the World to
compare with him, Isa. 40.18, etc. To whom will ye like God? or what Likeness
will ye count unto him? Wh^^ among the Sons of the Mighty dare show his Head
when he appears? Who is there that is a Match for him (...) where is the Man
that thinks himself able to grapple with the Almightty? Stand forth thou
valiant Champion, gird up thy Loins like a Man, and show thy Power and Majesty:
have thou an Arm like God? or can thunder with a Voice like him? Deck thy
self now with Glory and Excellency, and array thy self with Majesty and Beauty,
cast abroad the Rage of thy Wrath, and behold every one that is proud, and
abase him; look on every one that is proud and bring him low, and tread down
the Wicked in their place, hide them in the Dust together, and bind their faces
in secret: then will I confess unto thee, that thine own Right Hand can save
thee. Alas the poor Worm shrinks, the Thunder of God's Voice makes him tremble,
one glance of his Glorious Face makes daring Man to eat his Words, and quake.
You see then, O Sinner, how they are like to fare that enter into the Lists
against him, and rush upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler. Cheer up, O
Christian, the very Looks of thy Captain will make thine Enemies like dead Men.
Thou can never be brought into such a Condition, as that thou shall be beyond
the Help of him whose Power is Infinite. Who would have thought but that Israel
was a Lost People, when Pharaoh was behind them with a huge Army bravely
Harnessed, and the Sea before, Mountains, Deserts and Enemies on each side of
them? And yet even then the Lord lets Israel and Egypt too know what it is to
have a Living God for them. In what a low Condition were the People of God in
Haman's time, when that wicked Decree was passed, and they look like them whom
it was next to impossible to save: and yet their mighty Friend did deliver them
from that Death too. Time would fail me to speak of the famous Acts of his
Power and Might, in delivering the Three Children, Daniel, and many others, who
through Faith in this Friend, and with his Assistance have subdued Kingdoms,
and wrought Wonders. This it is to have God for a Friend! He it is who can shake
Rocks, and remove the Mountains out of their Places; he it is that can set the
Stars in array, and make them to sight his Battles against the Wicked; it is he
that can soon cool the Courage of daring Sinners, that venture to strike at him
through his People's Sides. If the proudest of them all say, Who is the Lord?
it may be a company of Frogs, or Flies, or Lice, shall take up his Quarrel, and
say, Who is that bold Sinner that durst make such a Challenge: behold, we are
here to answer him. Should God but alarm his stoutest Enemies with but such
Forces as he raised sometimes in the like case, Joel 2.6. How would their Faces
gather blackness, and their Joints be unloosed? Was not that blaspheming Prince
that asked, Who was that God that could deliver out of his hands? soon answered
with a Vengeance: Who ever hardened himself against him and prospered? or any
to oppose him or his, is for a Worm to contend with a Giant, for Thorns and
Straw to ^ight with the Flames. David knew what Friend ^e had for his Second,
when he fought a Duel with that monstrous Philistine. Is not all this enough to
prove the Power of God, whom I would commend to weak Man for a Friend? And that
which puts Life into this Motive, all this Power of God is employed for the
People of God, and upon their Reconciliation with God, it is all engaged for
their Security, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, etc. And he
that has this Shield, may laugh at the shaking of the Spear. And what say you
now to such a Friend; would it not be good fighting under such a Banner, where
one should be sure never to be conquered? Though the Coasts be now clear, as
you think, and the Enemy has not taken the Field; but what if he should what
force have thou to resist him? Have tho^ Strength enough of thy own to oppose
thy God (for I shall tell you, that if you look to your Business no better than
you have done, you will find him amongst your Enemies) and art thou able to
stand it out against the Devil and the World? for as fair as they speak you,
ever long you may find to your cost, they will break their League, and side
with the strongest. And now you that are contented to live without God, that
are so confident of your own Strength, and think you have no need of the
Alliance of the Mighty God; before you venture thus desperately into the Field
let me request of you to muster up all the Force^ and let us see their Number
and Power, and so^^ Acts of their noble Gallantry; let us see some
Demonstrations of your Power, that we may tremble before you, and that we may
be induced to believe that you are strong enough to look your Enemy in the
Face. Can thou by thy Power rai^ such another Building as this is? Can the
spread out the Heavens as a Curtain, or cover the Sun with Darkness? Can thou
call to the Lightnings, and will they answer thee, and say, Here we are?
Should thou speak to that hasty Champion, and command him to stand still one
quarter of an hour, would he obey thee? Come try thy Strength, and if these
things be too much, what do thou talk of Power? When thou art but a Worm, why
do thou boast, as if thou had more Strength than all the Angels in Heaven.
Alas poor -- I know not what to call thee, that art not able to deal with a
Fly or a Frog, do thou think thy self a Match for the Almighty? Well then,
is it not good Prudence to agree with the Adversary quickly, while he is in the
way? Will it be counted Cowardice or Folly to submit thy self, when as if you
persist, you are sure to perish, and if you accept of his Terms, all that
Strength of his is yours; and if God be for you, what need you care who is
against you? Your Enemies may do their worst, and you laugh at them; they may
kill you, but they cannot hurt you. Here, here is the Wisdom of those the World
calls Fools: Epic. Enchirid. c. 79. They see Men are weak like themselves, and
therefore they will make sure of such a Friend that may stand them in some
stead against their most Potent Adversaries. And this is another Qualification
of this Friend which I would commend to your Acquaintance, he is an able Friend.

First, He is the most kind and loving Friend.

Secondly, He is the most comfortable Friend.

Thirdly, He is the most able and powerful Friend.

Fourthly, He is the most active Friend. He is not indifferent whether his
Friends sink or swim, neither is he active in his own Affairs, and remiss and
slow in theirs; but he minds his Friends and his Acquaintance as himself, he
concerns himself in their Interest, and that to some purpose. It would be sad
indeed for the People of God, if God should stand neuter, when their Affairs
are in agitation. But God takes up their Interest, and makes it his own; they
have committed Themselves and their All to him, and he will not see them
wronged. His Eye runs up and down through the whole World, to show himself
strong on the behalf of them that fear his Name; he keeps constant Watch and
Ward about his: and he that can injure any of his out of his Sight, shall go
unpunished, Isa. 27.3. The Lord speaks this concerning his dear ones, under the
Metaphor of a Vineyard, and does this great Husbandman neglect his Vineyard?
Does he not dig, manure, and stone it, and keep out the wild Boar and Foxes;
does he not prune it, and tender it charily? I the Lord do keep it, none shall
come into it to gather the Fruit of it without my leave, I will water it every
moment. So that you see what Pains God takes for his. They that dare to engage
any of God's Darlings, shall have enough of it before they have done: whosoever
they be that do any of his wrong, shall soon know to their cost, that they had
an active Friend that will not let their Injuries pass over unobserved. Do not
think that God stands by all this while looking on like an idle Spectator; do
you believe that he sits in Heaven, and looks down upon the Earth for nothing?
no, his Designs are carrying on apace, and God can make Haman hold Mordecai's
Stirrup, and lead his Horse for him, and to proclaim the high Respect that the
great King of Heaven has for him; I mean, make the greatest of his Peoples
Enemies do that which shall at the long run, promote the real Interest,
Comfort, Honor and Peace of his People. Be not deceived, O Sinner, that
sitest, and talkest, and actest, thou think without Control, thou speak
against no ordinary Persons, not thy Brother, but God's Friends, His Anointed
Ones, for whose sake he has rebuked Kings. And because God does not presently
brandish his glittering Sword, and sheath it in thy Bowels; therefore thou
think him to be like thy self, a Hater of them; but know this for a certain,
that their God whom they serve, their God whom they love, he can and will
deliver them; he that sits in the Heavens laughs, and the Lord has all their
Enemies in Derision: and they themselves shall ever long prove the Truth I am
now affirming, that the Saints Friend is an active Friend. Sinners and Saints
too shall both ever long know that God does his Work quick enough. What speedy
Dispatch does God make when he begins to avenge the Quarrel of Zion? And
nothing in the World does provoke Divine Justice to show it self with a
Witness, as the unmerciful Oppres^ing of his People. When God comes to deal
with Babylon, and all her Upholders, what short work ^oth he make of it? Isa.
47. It was so before, and (...) will be so again, Rev. 18.8. Her Plagues shall
^^me upon her in a moment, even then when she thinks (...) self most far from
Danger, when she talks of sit^ng like a Lady for ever, and reckons upon Ages,
God soon confutes her. Let the Enemies of God People, whoever they be, look to
it, if they who they oppose be of the Seed of the Jews, (...) Friends of God,
before whom their Predecessor in all Ages have fallen, they shall not stand
When God begins he will go through stitch, (...) will make short work of it.
When the Iniqui^^ of the Amorites is full, when the set time to de^ver Zion is
come, then, then you shall soon (...) Zion has an active Friend; The Lord will
roar (...) of Zion, and make the Beasts of the Forest to tremble. Therefore in
the Faith of this, the Virg^ Daughter of Zion can despise her Enemies, (...)
can laugh them to scorn: The Daughter of Je^salem can shake her Head at them,
and say, Wh^^ have thou reproached, blasphemed, and against wh^^ have thou
exalted thy Voice, and lift up thine Eyes even against the holy one of Israel,
Isa. 37.22. (...) God ever come too late to help his? Did he ev^^ stay too long
to do them any good? Hasty unbelieving Man may think so, but the wisest kn^^
God's time is time enough; make sure of the Friend, and you will find it: God
so works the dark, and we see him not, his Paths are the deep Water, and we
behold not his Step his Ways are sometimes in the Clouds; but (...) for all
that the Wheels of his Chariot run sw^^^ly. How long was it after Rab-shakeh's
Blasphe^^ before his Host was discomfited by an unseen Po^^er? How long does
Pharaoh oppress Israel bef^^^ he knows that God saw it? How long was it (...)
fore proud Haman tumbled after the hatching devilish Decree? How long is it
after (...) staying of the Witnesses that their Murderers gin to quake? What a
while is it many times fore an earthly Friend (especially if there be any
Inequality or Decay in their Estates) be brought to act with any Life for his
Friend, when it will stand him in some Trouble, Hazard, and Cost? Such Friends
are Rarities. When you come at Midnight, and ask for to borrow Bread, he is a
bed and cannot rise from his Children: and thus he would put you off with some
lazy Excuse or other. And if he do answer your Desires, perhaps'tis more to be
rid of you, than out of true Affection. But when does God put off his thus?
when does he say, I am not yet at leisure, and I cannot yet help you? God does
indeed many times let his stay long, as Men count long before he visibly helps
them. But are invisible Helps to be slighted? Is it nothing, that even when he
seems to delay, that he bares up their Spirits, and makes his People even then
to praise, love, and rejoice in him more than they did before; whereas others
would be cursing and fuming, and letting fly at God in a time of less
suffering. It is nothing that he sends his Cordial after Cordial to keep them
from fainting? Does not one Servant or other come from his House Day and Night
to comfort them? Does he not send Letters to them, and visit them by his
refreshing Spirit? Does he not show them by Faith how things work apace, even
when their Enemies little think of it? so that they would not change Conditions
with the happiest of all their Persecutors. They know that they have such a
Friend that will not be a^ rest till he has brought them safe to Heaven; they
know that, let the Wind sit in what Corner it will, it shall sill their Sails,
and bring them nearer the Harbor. As little as the World think this Friend of
God is minded by him, why, yet for all that, he dare trust his God with Estate,
Body, and Soul, and a thousand times more if he had it; they know in whom they
have believed, they understand who it is they trust. Let Us see any of the Men
of the World that count themselves so wise in their Choice of a Friend: Let Us
see any of them all that can bring a Friend that has been so active for them
as God has been for his. One has chosen Silver and Gold and a great Estate,
and such a one in the World's Calendar is writ down for one of the Wisest in
his Choice. Well, let us see now what this Friend can do for you; your Body is
upon the Rack, your Hands are weak, your Legs tremble, your Stomach fails, your
Sleep departs from you; where now is your Friend, call for him speedily, come
let us see now if he be a Friend indeed, let us see it. Can he give you one Hours
Sleep? Can he help you to one Moment's Ease? Can he give you no Refreshment, no
Help? Take him, lay him by you on your Bed; O it is so heavy I cannot endure it:
lay it in your Bosom; O I cannot breath for it; take it away, take it away, it
will not do. Why, Sir, do you know what you say? It is your old Friend, which
you valued above God himself, it is as a Bag of Gold; I know it, I know it, but
it presses me down, it is so heavy I cannot bare it, away with it, away with it:
and is this the Friend that you prized so very highly, is this all the Kindness
that he has for you now. Is this all the Help that he can give you at such a
time, when a Friend should stand one in some stead? And who would trust such a
Friend? Were you not told as much long ago, how you should be served at last?
Would God, think you, have done no more for you, if you had valued his
Acquaintance as much as you did Gold and Silver? Try once more what your Friend
will do for you; pray him now, if ever, to show himself a Friend. Cry aloud,
Sir, he is your God, your Friend, either he is Talking, or he is Pursuing, or
he is in a Journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be awaked, 1 Kings
18.27. but will not hear; can he not help? Well then, at last be wise, and
trust him no more, make a better Choice before you are quite ruined; choose a
Friend that can do something for you, for I perceive he that you trusted so
much cannot. What say you to one that is never well (with Reverence be it
spoken) but when he is doing some Kindnesses or other for his? It Is he who was
projecting great Things for his Friends before they had a Being; it is he who
will, ever long, do Wonders for them, who seem to be forgotten, the Dead I
mean; he will gather up their scattered Bones, and restore that Flesh which the
Worms had devoured; it is he, who will in the twinkling of an Eye, raise, or
change these vile Bodies, and make them like the glorious Body of his Son; it
is he who will acquit you against all the Accusations of the Law, Conscience
and the Devil; it is he that will set a rich Crown upon your Head, the least
Jewel in which does sparkle more than all the Diamonds in the World; and before
all this, it is he that does infinitely concern himself in all thy Affairs; not
a Kindness done for thee, but he will reward; not an Injury but he observes;
not a Word thou speak, not a good Thought thou think, not an Action that
thou do that ^s good, but he has a hand in it: and thou shall shortly know
all this, and wonder that thou should no more love, admire, and delight in
such a Friend, who kept thee Sleeping and Waking, who did all thy Works in thee
and for thee, Matthew. 25.35. Rev. 2.2. Psalm. 12.5. Psalm. 18.4, to ver. 18. Deuteronomy.
33.26, 27. There is no^^ like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the
Heavens for thy Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. The eternal God is thy
Refuge, and underneath thee are the everlasting Arms: and he shall thrust o^^
the Enemy from before thee, and shall destroy them. And this is the next
Qualification of this Friend, which may commend him to your Acquaintance. He is
an active Friend, he is the most kind and loving, he is the comfortable and
refreshing, the most able and powerful Friend, the most vigorous and active
Friend.

Fifthly, He is the most humble and condescending Friend. He does not scorn to
be acquainted with the Meanest, the Beggar may be as welcome to him as the
Prince; the Poor and Rich are all one to him, he is no respecter of Persons. He
takes as much notice of Job upon the Dunghill, as David upon the Throne. He
knows any of his Friends in Rags, as well as in Silks, in Sheep-skin and
Goat Skins, as well as in Scarlet and fine Linen. Nay, I may well venture to
speak it, such have usually most of his Company. Look up, poo^ Creature, and
consider what a Privilege the have; behold God himself, the King of Glory
willing to be acquainted with thee; hark, he call thee, the Gospel is Preached
to the Poor, the Great Ones of the World hold Scorn to look upon thee; the Rich
disdain thy Society; Laza^^ is fitter for the Company of Dogs than Dives, ^e
thinks; but it is well for poor Lazarus God is not of the same Mind; for when
Lazarus is received into the Court, Dives is shut out among the Dogs. David
does not like that the Lame and the Blind, and such like Creatures should be in
his Palace, none of those must dwell in his Zion, but of such as these is the
Kingdom of Heaven, such as these dwell in that Jerusalem, with such God is and
may be acquainted, he does more frequently visit the Smoking Thatched
Cottages, than the Glistering Courts. Who are the Persons that live in Heaven
upon Earth? Who are those honored Ones that are most in their Princes
Presence, who have this King's Ear most? Are they not such as I have been
speaking of? It is their Company that the great God is most pleased with, he
loves to hear their Voice, and see their Faces; how is he delighted when he
hears a Knot of poor honest Souls together, praying and talking of his
Excellency, and discoursing of the Glory and Beauty of their Noble Lord and
friend! He accounts the shining ruffling Gal^ants but Rubbish in comparison of
these: and though now these precious Sons and Daughters be ^rampled under Foot,
and counted as Dirt in the ^treet, yet ever long the World shall know their
Worth, when they shall see them made up among God's Jewels, Mal. 3.16. God has
chosen the poor in the World Rich in Grace. What say thou to this, O Poor
Man, does not thy Heart ^^ap within thee for Joy? In this World, if a poor Man
have any Business of Consequence to do, ^y Petition to put up, though it be
never so Just, though it be for his Life; yet how difficult a thing it for him
to get Audience? How hard is it for such to have Access to their Prince? But
lo! here is a Prince that is more above the greatest Monat^^^ in the World, than
he is above the meanest Wor^^ and yet so infinite is his Condescension and
Goodness, that the Meanest may be admitted into h^^ Presence and welcome. He
will hear their Suits, answer their Requests, and be as free with them, and
give them leave to be as free with him, as if they were the greatest Persons in
the World: Are there not many thousands of poor Christians that ca^^ Subscribe
to this Truth? Are there not man^ who know not what it is to feed on Dainties,
and fare deliciously every Day, that have no more than Pilgrims, that upon the
matter live from Hand to Mouth, whose greatest Dainties are Brea^ and Cheese,
and Small Beer? And yet they complain not of hard Usage, they think their
Master a good Master for all this? Are there not many that have no Servants to
command, not a Foot (...) Land to Till, no Bags of Money to tell over, n^
Change of Raiment to put on, and yet for all this are Company for God? These
are those that can tell you strange Stories of God's wonderful Kindness; they
will tell you, at such a time in such (...) Duty the Lord came in and sweetly
revived them at another time he brought them into his Banqueting House, and
his Banner over them was Love at another time he brought them some Cluste^ from
that goodly Vine, and they sat down under his Shadow with great Delight, and
his Fruit was pleasant to their Taste; and on such a Sabbath they were taken
into Mount Pisgah, and had a lovely Prospect of that goodly Land. Who a^^ the
Persons that can speak most Experimental of Communion with God? Alas, alas,
few (...) the great Ones of the World know what these things mean; nay, the
very first Step toward Zion, they have not trod, I mean, they know not what
Conversion and Regeneration signifies; they are as greatly to seek here as
Nicodemus himself. Not many Noble; O methinks, that Scripture should make some
of the Ungodly Great Ones of the World to quake, as much as that Handwriting
upon the Wall did one of their Predecessors. O the infinite Goodness that
reveals these things to Babes, which are hid from the Wise and Prudent! even so
Father, for it has seemed good in thy Eyes. O that God should look upon such
and such poor contemptible Creatures, and pass by the Grandees of the World;
that such poor Creatures may converse with his Holy Majesty every Day, and go
as freely and as frequently as to the dearest Friend in the World, and not be
grutched, but the oftener the welcomer. Lift up your Heads with Joy and
Thankfulness, O ye Poor of his ^lock; though the Great Ones scorn your Company,
and disdain to set you with the Dogs of their Plock, though they think it below
them to speak to you, much more to converse with you, yet the mighty God, your
great Lord, does not think it below him to converse with you. That Is a strange
Expression, yet he spoke it that cannot lie; therefore, O ye humble despised
one, that value the Favor of this Friend above the World, and prize his
Loving Kindness above Life it self: hear and read it, and make the best of it,
it is yours, feed upon it, it is a sweet bit indeed, Isa. 66.1, 2. Thus says the
Lord, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool; where is the House that
ye will build me, and where is the Place of my Rest? For all these things has
mine Hand made, and all those things have been, says the Lord: but to this Man
will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles
at my Word. I shall have occasion hereafter, a little to open these Words under
another Head, wherefore I shall now but name it. O what Encouragement is here
for the most despicable Creature in the World, that may be as happy in the
Acquaintance with God, as the Mightiest Lord in the World. Here Is one that will
not be ashamed to own thee, when others will take little notice of thee. Thou
think these Things strange, it may be, and so they be indeed, but yet not
more strange than true. It does not a little engage the Affections of the
Meaner Rank, if a Person of Quality do but give them a kind Look; especially if
they may have freedom of Access to him, O what a Privilege they count it; but
such a one to undertake the whole Managing of a Poor Man's Affairs, for him to
come to his House, and to look into his Cupboard, and to take care of supplying
all his Wants, and coming frequently to him, and Supping with him, and he with
him, and to make great Provision for him, as if he were a Prince; where is such
a thing as this heard of? But if such a thing were, it were a light matter in
comparison of what I am speaking? Where do we ever read of a great King sending
Ambassador after Ambassador to a poor Beggar? What History does record such a
Story as this, that a great Monarch should make earnest Suit for many Years
together to a worthless Slave, that he can hang when he will, that has not a
Rag to her Back, to make her his Queen; this is rare indeed, this is beyond
President among Men; but yet it is that which the great God does not disdain to
do; Nay, let me tell thee, whosoever thou art remaining in a State of Nature,
that read these Lines, that at this very time God is doing no less than all
this comes to for thee; and I in the Name of my great Master do come to
expostulate the Case with thee; that God that gave thee thy Breath, and can
take it away as soon as he pleases; that God that made Heaven and Earth, to
whom all Nations of the Earth are but as the drop of a Bucket to the vast
Ocean, who holds the Sea in the hollow of his Hands, that weighs the
Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance: that God that has no less
than a Heaven to reward with, and a Hell and everlasting Flames to punish with,
he it is, that does by me beseech thee to be reconciled unto him, he it is that
would be your Friend, your Acquaintance. O unheard of Mercy! O infinite and
unparalled Condescension! I have often thought there are two great astonishing
Wonders in the World? The one is God's infinite Mercy and Condescension to
Rebellious, Apostatized Man; and the other is Man's Insensibility and
Ingratitude; that there needs such a Stir, and so many Words to persuade him to
close with this Wonder of Kindness, and that so very few should be prevailed
with. See this set forth to the Life in Ezekiel. 16. Isa. 1.2, 3. Psalm. 11.3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. The Lord is high above all Nations, and his Glory above the
Heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles
himself to behold the things that are in Heaven, and the things that are in the
Earth: he raises up the Poor out of the Dust, and lifts the Needy out of the
Dunghill, that he may sit with Princes, etc The Psalmist therefore had no small
reason to cry out with admiration, Psalm. 8.4. What is Man that thou art mindful
of him, and the Son of M^^ that thou visitest him? What is Man that thou take^^
knowledge of him, or the Son of Man, that thou m^^ kest account of him? Psalm.
144.3. Job 17.17, 18. What is Man that thou should magnify him, and that
thou should set thy Heart upon him; and the thou should visit him every
Morning, and try h^^ every Moment? Behold his Majesty, and yet how he stoops?
Nahum 1.4. Psalm. 18. Job, chap 37, 38, 39. Isa. 40. Psalm. 138.6. Though the
Lord be high, yet has be respect unto the Lowly: b^^ the Proud he knows afar
off. That which ( Senec^^ Epist. 17.) the Moralist speaks of Wisdom, may be
said of God, Epist. 61. It is lawful to come to him without rich Attire and
great Attendance; come nakes and you shall be as kindly entertained, as if you
did shine in Cloth of Gold, and were besparkled with Diamonds. He will not give
freer Access to the Rich than the Poor, neither does he value a Strong
Healthful Person, before a Sick and Crazie one, a Beautif^^ and Well-trimm'd
Gallant, before a Cankered, Old, Deformed Creature. Thus far Seneca and the
Scripture speak the same Language. Neither Job's Boyls, nor Lazarus's Soars,
made God keep ever the further off from them. I knew one all of a Scab with the
Small Pox, whom this Friend came to visit, and in that Condition, how many
Kisses had that sweet Creature from God? O it would do ones Heart good to have
such a Friend! And this is the next Qualification of this Friend which may
commend him to thy Acquaintance be thou never so Poor, never so Vile and Sinful
in thy own Eyes, such as thy self he has made welcome; and upon his Word, will thou but come away speedily, thou shall be welcome too. Sixthly, He is the most
faithful Friend. Where is the Man that can tax him of the least Unfaithfulness?
Which is the Man that can say, that he ever forsook any of his in their
greatest Exigency? He has been trusted more than once with more than the World
is worth a thousand times over; and they which trusted him most, never accused,
never thought their choicest Jewels, their whole Estate could be left in safer
hands: his Promise, and his Performance have kept touch, he never failed his in
the least Punctilio or Circumstance of time. Ask Abraham, who was one of God's
Friends, God tells him that his Seed shall inherit Canaan, and that they shall
be Strangers in a Land that was not theirs four Hundred Years; and did he not
at the expiring of the time, though it was at Midnight almost, bring them out
of Egypt: God keeps his time with them to a minute. Ask Joshua whether he did
not live to see this Promise made good? Inquire of David, and he will tell you
again, that no Friend is so trusty. The Unfaithfulness is on Man's side, there
indeed, there I say is many an unhandsome thing done, and yet for all that God
does not (as you shall hear hereafter) presently break with them; if they
forget that they are Children, he will not forget that he is their Father; if
God should have done thus by them, many thousands of them that are now in Glory
had been somewhere else. He promises indeed great things unto his Friends; but
does he not do as he says, if not in the very thing, yet in that which is
better; and who would account himself wronged, if on^ that promised him ten
Pound in Silver, should in the stead of it give him ten thousand Pound in Gold
and Jewels? I believe such a one would not be thought to be worse than his
Word, no^ the Person to whom he made this Promise, count himself injured. And
this God does frequently, did Men but understand the Worth of what God pays
them with. It may be God does not clothe^ them in Silks and Sattins, (neither
do I know that he ever promised to do so) but yet he clothe^ them with the
Righteousness of Christ, and bestows those glorious Robes upon them, in which
they look more trim and neat than in Clothes of Gold; he has made him such a
Suit that is the handsomer for the much wearing; he may eat and drink, and
sleep, and work in it, and keep it on his Back Day and Night, and it shall not
be wrinkled; it is the better for use: He is a faithful Friend, and none that
ever had to do with him can say any thing to the contrary; he never forgot any
Business that any of his Friends desired him to do for them, he never neglected
it or did it by halves; where did any of them com^ to him to reveal some
secret, loathsome Distemper to him, that he reproached them with it? To which
of them did he promise a Heaven, and p^^ them off with this World: When this
Pilot undertakes to steer their Course, their Vessel sh^^ never split upon the
Rock, run upon the Sand^ or spring a Leak, so as to sink in the Seas; to be
sure he will see them safe in the Harbor. A^ Epict. l. c. 26. He was no
Christian, yet I suppose none will deny but he spoke good Divinity who said, If
a Man will choose God for his Frien^ he shall travel securely through a
Wilderness, that has many Beasts of Prey in it, he shall pass safely through
this World, for he only is safe that has God for his Guide. Does he not speak
a little like David himself, Psalm. 37.26. Who never expected to come to Glory,
except he were guided by his Counsel? Now if a poor Heathen could say thus, and
see good reason to trust God, and admire his Faithfulness, as he does
frequently; and so does Seneca, justifying God's Faithfulness in all his
Dealings with the best Men in all their Sufferings, and the Prosperity of the
Wicked; what then shall the heavenly Christian say, who has experienced so
much of God's Faithfulness in answering his Prayers, in fulfilling his
Promises, and supplying all his Exigencies. David will tell you as much, and
justify God in his most severe Dispensations toward him; In very Faithfulness
have thou afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75. In our Earthly and Bodily Affaris, we
should never count that Physician faithful that will rather open a Vein, or put
his Patient to exquisite Torture to save his Life, than let him die easily. We
believe a Father may whip his stubborn child with more Love than let him alone.
To prevent the Ax or Halter with a Rod, is no Cruelty. Faithful are the Wounds
of a Friend, Prove. 27.6. It was not for nothing that the Psalmist sticks so
close to God, he had a little Experience of the Unfaithfulness of other
Friends, Psalm. 38.9, 11. His Lovers and his Friends stood aloof from his Sore,
and his Kinsmen stood afar off. May not a great many complain as well as Job,
That their Brethren have dealt deceitfully as a Brook, and as the Stream of
Brooks they pass away, Job 6.15. A Friend may forget one, a Brother may disown
one, Father and Mother may cast one off, but here is a Friend that sticks closer
than all. Nay, he is a better Friend to his than they are to themselves; when
they love themselves so little as to undo themselves, he loved them so well as
to save them; when they loved themselves, so as to poison themselves, he loved
them, so as to give them a powerful Antidote; when they like Children would
have the Knife, he takes it out of their Hands least they should cut their
Fingers; when they are so careless as to surfit themselves, he is so Faithful
as to keep them short, and diet them; and all this I hope they that understand
themselves will not call Unkindness or Infidelity. David had in his time some
Friends that made no bones of hazarding their Lives for him; some of them were
willing to quench his Thirst though with their Blood, and yet for all that in
all his Life he never met with so faithful a Friend as his God, Psalm. 89.8. O
Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong God like unto thee, or to thy Faithfulness
round about thee? He had rather trust his God than any of them all. God is a
real, true, faithful Friend; he tells us things as they be; he does not speak
more of things than the Nature of them does require; he does not tell the best,
and hide the worst; he does not speak all of Heaven, and nothing of Suffering,
but says plainly, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, they must suffer
Persecution; and Christ says, Those that will be his Disciples, must take up
their Cross and follow him, and that through many Tribulations, they must enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. He speaks of sowing in Tears, as well as reaping in
Joy; of Affliction as well as Glory. And when he speaks of the Glory of another
World, he does not too highly advance his Excellency. When he speaks of his
Wrath, or Hell, or Sin, he does not make them greater Evils than they be. The
Lord is faithful in all his Dealings, and that they which love him know right
well. Whatsoever does happen in the World, does happen justly and faithfully;
and so if thou will but well observe, thou shall find. And what say thou
after all this, thou who have tried many and many a Friend, so called, and have
by sad Experience first or last found them all Unfaithful, and art almost ready
to say of all Men, that they are Liars, and that Truth and Reality are
Rarities; thou think there is scarce a Man upon the Earth to be trusted? And
will thou never be afraid of such a Friend? Will thou at last be wise, and be
acquainted with a Friend that never proved unfaithful? Behold, such a one that
would be glad with all his Heart to entertain you, would you but forsake your
old treacherous Acquaintance. Here, here is one that never fails, not forsakes
those that put their Trust in him. The Heavens shall depart, and the Hills he
removed out of their Places, but his Faithfulness, his Love shall never depart
from his; and will thou not think such a Friend after all this worth the
having? Come, come, never stand fretting thy Heart out with Discontents, Men
will be Men, that is, Unfaithful as long as the World lasts. Do you expect as
long as Sin reigns in Men's Souls, that as long as Satan does so much act
^herein, that they should forget to be Selfish, Covetous, Deceitful? But now
God will always be ^ike himself, a God, Faithful, True, Holy, Just; and if any
one in Heaven, or in Earth can condemn God justly, of the least Unfaithfulness,
my Mouth shall soon be stopped. In this thing I confess my self to be of
Antoninus his Mind, who said That if there be a God, as there is most
certainly, w^^ that God must necessarily be most Faithful, most Wis^ most Good;
but if there be no God, it is not worth the while to live in a World, in which
there is nothing b^^ Sin, Confusion, Disorder, and no hopes of a Redress^ the
Excellency of our Being, our Reason, would mak^ our Misery more exquisite, and
our Lives less desirable. But blessed be God it is not come to that pass, that
we should need question the Being of^ God; for as one says wisely, Thou have
far more reason to question thy own Being than God's. Now, say again, Methinks
he that has been so often perplexed with many unfaithful, unworthy Carriage from
them which he called Friends, should be a^ last persuaded to try what this one
Friend would do for him. O what abundance of Sorrow would it prevent, if Men
would but trust God more and Men less. This, this is the Friend sick and well,
rich and poor, living and dying, always the same. Make sure of this Friend, and
tho^ art safe; thy All is then in safe and faithful Hands.

Seventhly, He is a rich Friend. The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness
thereof; Cattle upon a thousand Hills are his. He it is that has the absolut^
Disposal of Crowns and Scepters, he it is that ca^^ easily raise all his
Favorites to a high Estate. (...) the World and all its Glory can do his any
goo^ if Kingdoms and vast Dominions can advantage them, he can with better
reason than he did (...) Christ, say, All this is mine, and if thou wi^^ love
me and worship me, I will give you as much of it as will do thee good; and who
would account it a Kindness to be given that which will do one hurt? But these
are but Toys and Trifles in comparison of what God has to bestow upon his
Friends. Lift up thine Eyes, and behold those glistering Stars; look upon that
stately Canopy that hangs over thy Head; why, all this is nothing almost to the
Glory which shall be revealed; there is a far greater Disproportion between
what we see and enjoy at the best here below, than there is between the
Footstool and the Crown. O could you but by Faith draw the Curtain and see what
is within; O did you but know what is behind those Hangings which you see
wrought so curiously, the Work of his Fingers! O that, that is the Place,
there is a House indeed, there is a Palace, could thou but by Faith and
Meditation take a view of it; could you but make a Voyage into that Far
Country, and see that City of God, and discourse with the Inhabitants of the
New Jerusalem; what Discoveries should you then have of the Riches, State, and
Grandeur of that Prince's Court! Should thou but see those Treasuries opened,
and know the Worth of God's Jewels, thou would wonder what Men and Women
meant, that they should need so much Persuading to be acquainted with him that
had such things to bestow; you would judge him worse than mad, who should not
joyfully embrace any Overtures of this nature; in a Word, they would reckon
that Person besotted that should not with all possible Gratitude, close with
such kind of Proposals. Come along therefore with me, poor Soul, thou that art
not worth a Groat, and have never a Friend that can or will give you any thing
to speak of, come along with me, and take a short Prospect of the Territories
of this mighty Monarch, let us get up to Mount Pisgah, and make a Survey of that
goodly Land, let us take a turn or two in the Courts of his Palace; consider
well the Pleasantness of this Seat, how rarely it is accommodated, the Richness
of the Furniture, the Nobleness of the Inhabitants, the Sweetness of that
Harmony that sounds Night and Day in that Temple, the unconceiveable
Costliness, Riches, Glory, and Excellency of every thing. Do but look a little
about thee, are not thine Eyes even dazelled at the sight? Do you see what
Building that is, whose Walls are Jasper, and the City is all of pure Gold,
like unto clear Glass, and the Foundation of the Walls of that City are
garnished with all manner of Precious Stones, Rev. 21, etc. And what think you
now, where is the Prince upon Earth that ever was Master of such an Estate?
What are his Attendants? The meanest of those that stand in his Presence, is no
less than a King; the least of his Servants is more Rich and Glorious than the
mightiest Potentate that ever trod upon Earthly Mold, that was a Stranger to
God. This God does not grudge to give that which is more worth than a thousand
Kingdoms to his Darlings. I might tell also at what a rate they live, who are
fed always at his Table, and what dainty Dishes they feed upon; I might speak
of their Clothing and Robes, all which speak the Riches of that Lord which
maintains his Servants so highly. But what am I doing, Can I grasp the Heavens
in my Arms? or take up the Sea in the hollow of my Hands? Can I measure the
Heaven of Heavens, or weigh the Mountains in Scales, or the Hills in a
Balance? Could I do all and a thousand times more, yet could not give you an
account of the Estate of him who would be your Friend, your Husband: at the
best, I can but give you a superficial gross Relation of it; and when I have
said all that I can speak of, and all the Men in the World with all their
Tongues have spoke what they can too, nay, let Angels with their heavenly
Rhetoric do what they can to set out the Glory of his Kingdom; I say, when all
this is done, you must remember all falls short of what it is; and that since
the beginning of the World Men have not heard, neither can it enter into the
Heart of Man, to conceive what a God is worth, what a Friend you may have of
him, if you will but speedily be acquainted with him. His Kingdom has no
Bounds, and his Dominions reach further than both the Indies. The small Love
Tokens that he sends now and then to his Beloved into a Far Country, are of
infinitely more value than all the Lockets of Diamonds, and richest Pearls and
Jewels in the World, Prove. 8. Behold how merrily Rebekah looks upon a sorry
Jewel or two presented by Eliazer from his Master, how soon is her Heart
conquered? And why should we not be more taken with Things of far greater
Worth? What, is all this as much as nothing with you? Methinks your Hearts
should be all in a fire; methinks you should quickly say, O that I could but
see him! Who will bring me acquainted with him, he shall have my Heart, my
dearest Love? Methinks, should I ask you the same Question that they did
Rebekah, Will thou go along with me to such a Friend? You should readily,
without any further Dispute say, Yes, with all my Heart, and think long to be
up and going. Why then do you talk of a Year, a Month longer? O what ail poor
Creatures to make us stand waiting so long for an Answer? Do you ever expect a
better Offer? Do you look to advance your selves somewhere else? Can you hope
for a better, a richer Match? Go then and search out among all thy Lovers which
make suit to thee, which of them can feed thee with such costly Vines, which of
them can clothe you in such Royal Apparel? Which of them can make you such a
Jointure? Consider wisely and speedily, that I may turn to the Right Hand or
the Left. What say thou, can thou amongst them all better thy self? Is
there any one like him? Is there any of the Sons of the Mighty comparable to
him? Are any of the Kings, or Great Ones of the Earth able to make you such an
Offer, or should they, can any of them make it good? What, have you yet
resolved upon the Point of not? What is it you stand for, I pray do you
question the truth of what I speak? Do you make account I speak of the Highest,
and make the best of things? Why, then let me tell you further, I have not, I
cannot tell you the half of what you will find to be true, if you would come to
be thoroughly resolved, or of what you will believe hereafter, to your Sorrow,
if you still refuse him. And I must further add to what I said before, that
whatever Riches God possesses, he will Jointure you in, as soon as you shall in
good earnest be willing to accept him for your Friend; all that I can speak of,
and more too, you may call your own. Ask, and it shall be given without
prescribing how much more than you can ask or ^hink shall be given you. Your
Lord and Husband is not so niggardly as Ahashuerus, who said, What is thy
Request, and what is thy Petition, Queen Esther, and it shall be given thee, to
the half of my Kingdom? But God says, What is thy Request, and what is thy
Petition, poor Soul, and it shall be granted to the whole of my Kingdom; what
is it thou want, what Attendants do thou lack to wait upon thee to my
Court? Are they Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, Angels, they shall be given, 1
Cor. 3.21. Do but try him; he ^ids you ask, and you shall have: Let me give you
this one Memento, Ask like one that has to ^o with a rich King, who hates to
do any thing below himself; remember it is he that delights to ^ive like a God:
Widen therefore thy Desires as ^arge as Heaven, be bold and speak a great Word,
and I warrant thee thou shall not be denied; tell God, that seeing in his
infinite Goodness and Condescension, he has been pleased to give thee ^eave to
ask without restraint, thou do humbly ^equest his Son for thy Lord and
Husband; himself for thy Father, God, and Friend; his Kingdom for thy Dowry;
the Righteousness of his ^on for thy Ornament; Clothing, and Beauty, the
Comforts of his Spirit, and abundance of his Grace to bear thy Charges
handsomely, till thou ^omest to his House. This is high indeed! but thy Great
and Noble Lord loves dearly to hear such Covetous Petitioners, who will be put
off with nothing but such great Things. When do any of ^hese go sad from his
Court? When do any of ^^e Seed of Jacob seek his Face in vain? This, this the
Generation of Thriving Ones, who seek for Life, Immortality and Glory; who seek
thy Face O God of Jacob. And now what do you say, will you believe all this?
Dare you take my Word I am persuaded none of you all think I dare tell you a
Lie, and do you any wrong; but for all that, I do not desire you should take my
Word nor the Word of any Man living in a thing tha^ concerns Eternity; but take
his Word who cannot lie, Psalm. 8.18. Riches and Honor are wit^ me; yea,
durable Riches and Righteousness, ver. 15. My Fruit is better than Gold, yea,
than fine Gold and my Revenue than choice Silver. The Wise Man tell us, That
Wealth makes many Friends Prove. 19.4, 6. And that many will entreat the Favor
of the Prince; and that every one is a Frien^ to him that gives Gifts. If this
might be in Spirituals, I should not fear, but that I should prevail with all
my Hearers, to seek the Friendship of God; if their real Interest did weigh
with them, if true Riches and Wealth could win their Affections, if the most
substantia^ good Things might signify any thing, if soli^ Reasons might biass
them, I should not fea^ going away without them. But, alas, alas, ho^ little
Power have all these things with the sensua^ World? What are Men and Women
turned to What Sots and Brutes are they in the Concern of their Souls, and the
Affairs of that other World? Men run up and down hunting afte^ good things, and
have taken a false Seat, the^ hope to catch that at last which they will fee^
upon, and satisfy themselves with. I tell thee O Man, who ask, who will
show us any good Here, here it is; Riches thou meanest: well the^ let it be so;
and if I do not prove that what offer thee from my great Master, to be a
thousand times more worth thy seeking than Gold or Silver, and better Coin than
that which bore Coesar's Stamp upon it, than say you were cheated. Thou tellest
over thy Moneys very fast, methinks, but are you sure all that is Gold which
does so glister? Is all that current Silver? Will it go in another Country? Is
it not possible, but that you may be mistaken? Here, here is the Gold that is
tried, it will go any where; here is one that will give you, will you but
desire earnestly his Acquaintance, such Treasure that will not perish, such
Silver that has no Tin, such Gold which has no Dross, such true Riches that
cannot be taken away from you. Ask that Saint which looks so merrily, that lives
so bravely, how he got his Estate, and how he came to be so rich all of a
sudden; he will soon tell you how, and where his Treasure lies, and yet not
fear being robbed. He has of late been acquainted with a Friend that has
given him that which makes him esbeen himself more worth, than if he were
possessed of ten times more than ever Alexander or Coesar was. A Friend of
Cyrus in Xenophon being asked where his Treasure was, which made him to think
so highly of himself? his Answer was, Where Cyrus his Friend was. A Christian
may with much better Reason and Cheerfulness, if asked, where his Riches and
Estate lies, anwer, Where God his Friend is. Ask the poorest of them that are
acquainted with God, the weakest of all his Children, what they will sell their
Portion for, and what you shall give them for to reign up all their Interest in
God, to quit their ^laim to this Inheritance: Would they not all be of Paul's
Mind, and even scorn the Motion, and count the Glory of a thousand Worlds but
as Dung and Dross in comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus their Lord, Phil. 3.8. Nay, hear what one says that was far less
acquainted with God than any of them which I have been speaking of, when he
talks of such a kind of bargain as this. (Epict.) Offer me a Kingdom, and you
offer me to my Loss. For, says the same Author in another place, A good Man
may look up to Heaven, as the Seat of his Friend, and not fear want. Inquire of
David what Portion God gave him? And he will soon answer you, A goodly Portion
indeed; and that he gave him no less than himself, and that the Lines are
fallen to him in pleasant Places, and that he has a goodly Heritage; Psalm 16.
and therefore he counts himself richer than if he had all his Enemies in
Chains, and their Royalties at his Disposal; he takes himself to be a far
happier Man than if he were absolute Monarch of the Universe, and were to give
Laws to the inferior World; he reckons himself now as well to pass, and better
too, than Adam, when he was sole Landlord of the World. It was true spoken of
some Body; I do well remember who: He that has rich Friends, must not look
upon himself as poor. O then that you would be indeed Friends to your selves,
and have respect to your own real Interests! And what, will not thi^ mighty and
powerful Argument, which weighs a^ much as a thousand others, prevail? And do
you still say, what Profit will there be in serving the Lord and what Advantage
shall I get if I be acquainted with him? To what account will it return? again
answer, to a very good Account every way Try but this Trade with the wise
Merchant, and you shall soon feel the Benefit of it. (Bolton) Conceive to thy
self Mountains of Gold, and Rocks of Diamonds; and to this a vast unmeasurable
Tract of Ground, Land of Inheritance, the most fertile Soil in the World,
bringing in such a Burden every Year that shall trouble the Owner to reap it;
imagine his Pasture as great as his Arable, and all clothed with thousands of
Cattle, small and great, and none of them barren neither; suppose his Barns and
Storehouses could never be emptied; and his Presses should burst out every
Year with new Wine. Again, let the Merchant store his Cellars with the most
pure Oil, and furnish him with such rich Spices as the Queen of Sheba brought
to Solomon; suppose he were provided with all the exquisite Rarities that the
Air, Sea, or Earth can afford, yet for all this he were a Beggar, in comparison
of one that has God for his Friend: Such a one possesses him that possesses
all things. Well then, be persuaded at last to be wise. I remember the Moralist
( Sen. Epist. 6.) brings in one acting like a wise Man, and a good Proficient
in Philosophy, who begins to be a Friend to himself. And this is that which I
am pleading with you for. If I came to rob you of all Hopes of Happiness, and
to give away all that you have or expect, and to turn Mendicants; If I came to
persuade you to espouse a beggarly Interest, and to match your self so as that
you should be sure to be unlone, I should not wonder, if after I had spoke
much, I should prevail but little. But when it such a Cause that I am pleading,
when it is for ^our own unspeakable Advantage, when it is Ri^les, true Riches
that I would have you look after, an Estate that I would have you mind, which,
may be had for the looking after, have I not cause to admire what need a Man
should have to use so many Words? Had you Money to spare, and could I tell you
of a Brave Purchase, that you might have an excellent penniworth, I am
persuaded I should not be very unwelcome: could I tell you of a vast Estate
that you might have, upon the matter, for accepting or looking after, I believe
I need not spend ten Years in earnest begging and entreating you to look after
such a thing. Should I offer to bring you to the Place and Person of whom you
might buy it, should I not soon have your Company? Should not your Necessaries
be quickly made ready for such a Journey? Would you not be up betimes in the
Morning? Nay, would you not travel all Night, and think it no Folly nor
Madness, both to lose some Rest and to take some Pains, so you might but come
to possess what I speak of. Nay, were there but a Possibility of obtaining it,
at least a Probability, I persuade my self you would not fail to look after it
the very first thing you did. I am ready to think you would neither spare for
Pains or Costs, so that after all you might but make sure of enjoying it. Why,
what then is the matter that I can do no more in the Business that I am about?
I am sure I bring you Tidings of a better Bargain, a braver Purchase, and surer
Inheritance, and what need I then spend so much time in arguing with you? Good
Lord, what mea^ People? Are they out of their Wits, and quit^ beside
themselves? What, is a Feather better than a Crown, Brass than Gold? Is a Glass
to b^ prefered before a Diamond, sinite Enjoyment before everlasting Riches,
Darkness before Light the World before God? O how is Man sunk below himself?
What has Sin made Men and Women? If this be not Folly and Madness, what is?
Such may go for wise Men in the World's Account that make such Choices; and
it is possible a Man in Bedlam may say his Neighbor that tore all his Hair off
from his Head, is well in his Wits. O that this were not the Condition of the
far greater Part of the World. And what meanest thou, O my Soul, that thou art
no more affected to see such vast Multitudes of brainsick frantic Sinners,
that make light of the Tender of the Gospel, that take them for their Enemies,
who would do their utmost to make them happy for ever? I must profess I am even
ashamed of my own Heart, that I do not mingle my Words with Tears; that I
should speak for God and Souls, with so indifferent a Spirit! Well, now you
have heard of a great Match by which you may be made for ever; are you for all
this of the same Mind you were? Well then, complain not if you be a Beggar.
Remember how you were offered, remember you might have been worth more than a
World. O that inconsiderate Souls did but know, and indeed know what an Offer
this is! O that they would not carelessly undervalue such a Proposal! O what
shall I do? How shall I persuade you? What Arguments will prevail? O thou great
and mighty God, give Men and Women but a spiritual Understanding of these
things, make them deeply apprehensive of their Excellency and Reality, and then
I should soon have them with Thankfulness complying with these Tenders which
thou command me to make unto them. when shall it once be! How long shall the
Devil and an unbelieving Heart undo so many Millions? How long shall Satan
triumph over Souls, and cheat them thus miserably of their All? O pity, pity
dear Lord, the besotted foolish World, and give me more Compassion to Souls,
that I may with incomparably greater Earnestness and Tenderness plead thy Cause
with them, and resolve to give them no Rest, till I have persuaded some of them
in good earnest, to look after the great and weighty Affairs of Eternity, and
the making sure of this Friend.

Eighthly, He is a sympathizing Friend. It goes to his Heart (with Reverence be
it spoken) whe^^ any Injuries are done to any of his; when his Friends are
wronged, it touches him to the Quick He is as tender of them, as of the Apple
of his Eye. Again, He that despises you, despises (...) Never was
tenderhearted Mother more piti^^^ over her only Child, than God is to them
which love him; never was any Friend so much concerned for another as God for
his. (...) What else mean those high Expressions of Pity in Isa. 63.9. In all
their Afflictions he was afflicted, and the Ang^^ of his Presence saved them:
In his Love and in hi^^ Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carrie^^
them all the Days of old. It was not once or twice that God did so by them; but
in all their Afflictions, he was afflicted; which was not expressed (...) some
cold formal Words, such as these. Alas poo^ Creatures, they are quite undone,
their Enemi^^ are very barbarous, but he showed it in that mo^^ real
Demonstration, by saving of them by the A^^ gel of his Presence. A verbal
Kindness costs little and helps little. But suppose his Friends are carri^^
captive, are they not quite out of the Reach of his Help? No, his Love, Pity
and Power, will find them out in any place under Heaven; and if they be Slaves,
he will redeem them, though he gives Kingdoms and Nations for their Ransom. In
his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them; and when by hard Usage they are
grown so weak and seeble, that they can scarce go nor creep, why, he will carry
them in his Arms, and bare them. And thus he did of old; and his Affections are
rather greater than lesser now than they were then. The Mother can be weary of
carrying a dirty screaming Child; she thinks it less trouble to whip him, or to
let him lie till he has cried himself weary; she is loath to lug such a
troublesome thing up and down all the Day long. But yet such is the Tenderness
of this Father, that he carries his all the Day long, though they be so heavy,
so unquiet, so dirty. But of that presently. How often do you read of strange
Pity in the Book of the Judges; when they had by their own Folly more than once
brought themselves into Calamity, how do his Bowels yern over them; and when
any of his are groaning under any Trials or Temptations, what sending and
running is there? How many Cordials are prepared for them? What calling to this
Servant and that Servant to attend them with all the Care that may be, and to
comfort them in this State: And in case of abuse, how does he show his Love to
them? If you should ask Pharaoh, he would tell you, that God's Friends are
edge-Tools: Why else does the Lord lay about him with so much Indignation, when
they are oppressed. Nay, for their sakes he rebukes Kings, saying, Touch not
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; if they do, be it on their Peril.
How did he bare the Afflictions of his People Israel in Egypt? did he stand
still as if he were unconcerned? Did he shut his Eyes and not see? Or did he
stop his Ears to their Cries? No, no, he sees the Sufferings of his in Egypt,
and that both Enemies and Friends too shall know the one to their Comfort, and
the other to their Cost, Exodus 3.7. How does he awaken for their Help, and gird
on his Sword upon his Thigh, and march out with Fury? how does he clothe
himself with Vengeance, as with a Robe, and brandish his glittering Sword, and
sheath it in the Hearts of his and their Enemies? Wherefore is it that God has
so many Controversies with Edom, Ammon, and Amalek? Why does he muster up his
Forces with Violence against Babylon? Whose Quarrel does he engage in? What was
the Ground of that War? If you read over all the Indictments that are before
this great Judge, you will find this a common one, their Hatred of his People;
and this to be sure he will not put up. And that which puts an Accent upon all
this, is the unworthy Carriage of most of them toward him all this while: But
of that under the next Head, which is this.

Ninthly, He is the most patient Friend. Never any one in the World could have
disgested such Affronts, born such Indignities, as God has many a time, and
even from the best of those that he takes into this Intimacy with himself. Had
it not been for this Covenant of Friendship, Judah and Ephraim too had been
soon unpeopled; as for them they soon forgot their Covenant, yet for all that
God remembers his; though Ephraim forget to be a Child, yet God cannot forget to
be a Father. Read that Text and wonder, Hos. 11^ 7, 8. And my People are bent
to backsliding: though they called them to the most high, yet none at all
would exalt him. Though they had many compassionate Prophets that called after
them Day and Night, when they saw them turning their Backs upon God, yet they
were not minded. Who now would conceive that God should ever think a Thought of
Kindness toward them more? Yet hear what God says, How shall I give thee up,
O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
and how shall I seat thee as Zebulun? My Heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine
Anger. I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am God and not Man, the holy
One in the midst of thee, and I will not enter into the Gity. Well, now tell me
if ever there were such a compassionate, meek, patient Friend. Ephrains was up
in open Arms against his Maker, he did rebel most unworthily against his good
Lord and Friend, to whom he was bound by infinite Engagements. Ephraim had
quite cast off God, and he will have nothing to do with him; and Judah is not
far inferior to his treacherous Brother; and what will God do? One would
think, as I said before, he should ease himself quickly of such false Friends;
one would think that after such Unfaithfulness, he should for ever banish them
his Court; one would soon conceive that he should think of Disinheriting such
Rebellious Children; for theirs was not the first, second, nor third time that
they had served God thus; who then could imagine that he should ever trouble
himself with them any more? Should one not look every Day when he should quite
cast them off? Why, God seems sometimes to threaten as much, and seems ever and
anon to act toward them as if he would never look upon them more while the
World stands. Go, faith God, to your Idols, let them save you? What do you come
to me for, you have refused to have me for your God; go cry to your Gods, and
let them deliver you. Thus he seems to turn away his Face; yea, for all that,
see how soon he forgets his Displeasure; Ephraim is his Child, his dear Child,
and he cannot but pity him; and how shall I give thee up, O Ephraim, etc. How
hardly is God brought so much as to chastise his Children; he never corrects
them, but when there is an absolute need of it; ask the Church under the Rod,
and she cannot but say as much, Lam. 3.32, 33. For though he cause Grief, yet
will he have Compassion according to the multitude of his Mercies. For he does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. He calls Judgment his
Work, his strange Work: and when he does correct his stubborn Children, how
does he many times give them a Lash and? Kiss, a Frown and a Smile? O what
would have become of the Holiest Men living, if God should upon every
Provocation have broke with them. If God should mark Iniquities, O who should
stand? Which of the fallen Sons of Adam has not abused his high Kindness? And
yet for al^ that, how is his Patience and Goodness exercised toward them; well
might the Psalmist make tha^ the burden of one of his Songs, O that Men would
praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works toward the
Children of Men; and that of another, For his Mercy endures for ever. What
Created Being could have born the thousandth part of that from any Hand, that
God does every Day from his dearest Children? What Peevishness, and unfriendly
Quarrelling, what Murmuring and Repining does he bear, even from them for whom
he has done such great Things? How strangely do they carry themselves! how
seldom and complemental in their Visits of him! how cold and formal in their
Addresses to him! how frequently are they conversing with his basest Enemies!
how much Treachery und Underhand-dealing does he find in them! Yet for all
this, how great are his Kindnesses, and how open are his Arms, upon their
Acknowledgment, to receive them again! Little do we think what Unkindnesses the
Lord overlooks; and indeed except we knew what it was to be infinite in
Holiness, could we any way conceive how infinite his Patience is, Psalm. 106.43,
44. Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their counsel,
and were brought low for their Iniquities. Nevertheless he regarded their
Affliction, when he heard their Cry, and he remembered for them bis Covenant,
etc. Here, here is Patience, here is Love and Goodness with a witness! What
Prince under Heaven would trust a Rebel, that has been in Arms a hundred times
against him, and that at the best does serve him with so little delight? What
Friend would continue his Familiarity and Kindness there, where he has found
abundance of Falseness? And who but thou, O God, is so Merciful and Gracious,
Long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and Truth? As for the trouble that any
of his meet with, most commonly they may thank themselves for it; and it is
always sent them in kindness: there is none of them all but may say, This is my
Iniquity, This is the Fruit of my Backsliding, this I have got by my
Estrangement from God.

Tenthly, He is an Honorable Friend, and to be acquainted with him is the
highest Honor in the World. This Word Honor, sounds great in the Ears of this
proud World; what running and catching to get a little of it! How do many
undervalue their Lives, and make nothing to hazard their Blood for a little of
that Men call Honor; some prize it above Riches and Wealth, and care not
almost at what rate they purchase it; and yet in the mean while they are
furthest from that which they so greedily desire, and they run away from that
which they seem to pursue. Poor Ignorant Man is fearfully mistaken, he calls
that his Honor which degrades him, and takes that for his Glory which is his
Shame: How is he pleased with that which when he has, he neither sees nor
feels, and scarce knows what it is! (Epict.) What is it, O Man, that thou
loosest thy Sleep for? What is it that thou art at so much Charge to buy? That
rather than you will want it, Estate, Blood, Life and Soul, and all must go for
it? Knight, Lord, Earl, etc. Worshipful, Right-worshipful, Honorable,
Excellent, Gracious, are big Words, and make a great Noise; but is this the
true Honor? Will these Words without the Thing do a Man so much good? A Man, I
said, and so does God say too; and Death will make the biggest of them all know
as much ever it be long, for all those big Words? What if his Breath stinks
that speaks these Words, and his that hears them, be not much sweeter.
(Antoninus) Is it such an Honor to have a company of Fools to call him wise,
that it may be is like themselves? Is it worth a Soul to have it said when I am
in Hell, there lived a brave Gentleman, that kept a noble House, and brave
Table, his Celler was always open, one might come when one-would, and drink as
long as one could stand, and never hear, Why do you so? And be always welcome:
that is in plain English, where a Man might be encouraged to damn his Soul.
There lived a Noble Gallant Person who bid defiance to the Almighty, that had
Courage enough to go to Hell merrily, and had a desire to carry as many along
with him as might be; Damning, Swearing, Cursing, was their Language; Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, Whoring, and Persecuting the People of God, their Business.
And are these your Honorable Persons? Nay, Go higher, To bustle up and down in
Cloth of Gold, with a vast Retinue; to have Men on this side and that side,
bowing and cringing; and is this such a Business? Is it worth the while to keep
such a stir about that which a wise Man may want, and a Fool have (Anton.) Will
those Names, that Grandeur and State, those high Titles, render you more
acceptable to God? Will they procure you a freer Access into the Presence of
that great King? Will those great Words scare Death? Will he say when he comes
to your House, This is a Person of Quality, I must not be so bold as to come
near him? Will your Honor procure you a Protection from the Arrests of this
Sergeant? Where is the Honorable Personage, the Gentleman, Knight, Lord, King,
or Monarch, that has lived a thousand Years? (Lucian) Are the Worms afraid to
gnaw thy Heart? Will thy Flesh never putrify? Will your Servants, or your
Master either honor you in Hell? And is this all that you keep so much stir
for, that can do you no good in the Grave, or in another World? Can that be
better worth than Heaven, than God? O that we might but know what it is, that
great Thing is, which is preferred before Christ and everlasting Glory? Again,
I ask, What is it that the Grandees of the World do so much idolize? Is it to
be called Wise, Great, and Noble? But what if the Wise God call such a one a
Fool? (Epict.) What if he know neither himself, nor his God, nor his Interest?
Has he much greater reason to boast than a Feather that some body will say it
is heavy; or Dung, that the Swine says it is sweet. (Juven.) What Profit is it
for a Man to be made Great for betraying his Country, and flattering a Tyrant,
who yesterday was the Son of a Stage Player, and to morrow shall be shorter by
the Head? What good will it do a Beggar that is ready to be starved, to be told
that he is a Prince, a brave Fellow, worth some thousands by the Year? But
would you know which is the ready way to true Honor? I tell you, it consists
not in the Favor of them that must die like themselves, and before that few
Years be over, must stand but upon even Ground with the Meanest; it consists
not in the sorry Acclamations of them which measure a Man's Worth by his
Estate, and their Dependence upon him; it consists not in the Praise of them
whose Commendations some wise Men have counted a Discredit. But he has showed
thee, O Man, what is truly Honorable; to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God, Micha 6.8. To bare Relation to God as a Father, and to
carry themselves as his Children, to be a Servant, and a Friend of God, this,
this is Honorable, truly Honorable, this is the height, the top of the
Creature's Preferment. To converse with, and delight in his Maker. To love,
admire, and rejoice in God, and to love God, to take Complacency in the Soul;
this is something indeed, this is Honor, a wise Man would not g^utch to
venture his Estate, his Blood, his All for this. And how few of the Gallants of
the World understand the nature of this Honor? How do most of them account
that which is the only true Badge of Nobility, a term of Disgrace; and that
which speaks a Person highly Honorable, and to have brave Blood running in his
Veins, to be low, sordid, and much beneath them; as if it were below a Creature
to serve his Maker, and a pitiful Preferment to be advanced to Glory. O that
Men of Parts and Learning, that Persons of Quality should be so mistaken! O
what is become of their Reason? Is it an Honor, a Preferment for a Man to
become a Brute? We are ready to pity Madmen, and to laugh at Fools; but
whether there be not more reason to bemoan the Condition of most of the
Honorable Persons in the World. I leave Christ and Christians to judge. Well
then, will you be informed after all this by him, who has all Preferments and
Honors in his Gift, I mean the great King, and he will tell you that Glory and
Honor are in his Presence, 1 Chronicles. 16.27. Man's only Honor and true Dignity
lies in his Nearness, and Acquaintance with God. A practical Knowledge of his
Maker is the Creatures greatest Preferment. David was of the mind, that it was
none of the lowest Honors to be God's Servant, Psalm. 84. It is upon the
account of Israel's near Relation to God that Moses reckons them the happiest,
the most honorable People in the World. Because God had avouched them to be
his peculiar People, therefore they might well be said to be high above all the
Nations which God had made, in Praise, in Name, and in Honor, Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19.
And upon this account, might a Wise Man have his Choice, whether he will wear a
Crown, and be a Stranger to God; or Rags, and be one of his nearest Servants;
he will not stand long before he determine the Case, he will soon answer with
him, That he had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than dwell in
Tabernacles of Wickedness. If Men's Actions may speak their Judgments, most of
the Gallants of the World are of a far different Opinion. But, O let me dwell
for ever in his House, and stand always in his Presence; happy are they that
see his Face, happy are they that behold his Beauty. This, this is Man's Crown,
this is his highest Honor and Dignity, for God to be mindful of Man, and for
his Maker to visit him; this sets him but little below the Angels, this crowns
him with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.45. This is that which puts a true Personal
Worth upon any one; and therefore the Psalmist thinks those the excellent
Persons, in whom is his Delight. Upon this account the Scripture says, The
Righteous Man, who is in Covenant with God, is more excellent than his
Neighbor. The pur-blind World, they judge altogether by the outward Garb; they
see the Face, the rich Apparel, they see the Estate, but they see not that
inward Excellency and Beauty that may b^ under but mean Habit; they are ready
to despise the Noble Worthies of the World, such as can look upon Kingdoms as
small things in comparison of what they have an Interest in. Who can call God
Father, and Christ Brother. Have you never heard of a King in mean Apparel, of
a Prince without his Robes upon his Back; or his Crown upon his Head? And will
you say that therefore he was but a common Person? But those heavenly Creatures
that have a more spiritual refined Sense, that understand something of things
and Persons, are quite of another Mind, they can look upon great ones in the
midst of their Gallantry, without a Friend in Heaven, as mean Persons that have
no Interest to speak of; and many of them, for all their Greatness, to be in a
far worse Condition than Dogs and Toads. They can also look upon a poor
despised Saint, a contemned Christian, though as to a carnal Eye, he should
look as if he could scarce speak Sense, to be a Favorite of Heaven, a Person
of Quality; such a one as this he values as the Son of a King, a Citizen of
Zion, one of the Royal Race, one of that Glorious Retinue, that stand always in
the Presence of God to serve him, the least of which are Kings and Priests to
their great Lord, Rev. 1.6. By Faith he sees their Crown, and looks upon that
Royal Diadem, which shall e're long be put upon their ^^incely Heads. This was
the great Preferment they sought, this was the Honor they most de^red; as for
the World and all its Glory, they an well spare it for those that shall never
be advanced to any higher Dignity, to any better Preferment. As for the Saint,
as contemptible as (...) looks, he has higher Designs, nobler things, greater
Honors in his Eye; and if that which the World so admires were the highest
Glory that a rational Creature were capable of, the Top of Man's Preferment,
why then he could look upon Brutes themselves as his Equals, except in this,
that their Pleasures are more certain, and their Miseries less understood.

It is storied of Constantine and Valentinian, two Roman Emperors, that they
subscribed themselves Vassellos Christi, the Vessels of Christ; and that Numa
Pompilius esteemed it a higher Honor to be a Friend of God, than a Lord of
Men. Consider, poor Sinner, consider what Honors you slight, what Preferments
you refuse, what Dignity you undervalue, when you make light of Acquaintance
with God. Had that brave Stoic, Epictetus I mean, known God in Christ, he
would much more have wondered at the Inconsiderateness of them, which make
nothing of being related to God as a Father, he would much more have pitty'd
them which cleave to their lower, meaner Kindred, Beasts, who had rather be
like Swine than God, and rather be Companions to their Servants than their
Maker. Seems it to you but a light matter to be a King's Son? Is it but a small
matter, think you, to call God Father? Is it nothing to be born to a Crown
Immortal, that fades not away? This is Honor, this is Preferment worth the
having, worth the looking after, worth the venturing one's Life for This is
true Nobility, to stand thus nearly related to him, before whom the Angels do
vail their glorious Faces, and at whose Feet the four and twenty Elders lay
their Crowns. The Queen o^ Sheba thought Solomon's Servants happy, who stood
always in his Presence, and heard his Wisdom; but what would she have said, had
she but known the Honor and Glory of this Prince! O blessed are those that
stand always in thy Presence, O God, blessed are thy Servants, blessed are
those which see thy Glory, and hear thy Wisdom, blessed are they that may have
free Access to thee. O let me have this Preferment, though I live like Job at
his lowest, and dye like Lazarus. Let others sue for the Favor of Princes, let
them make the best of what the World can give, let them desire that which has
been dangerous to more than Haman; I hope I should never envy them, might I but
have more frequent and intimate Converse with God, may I be but acquainted with
him; O may I have but a Heart more to admire, love and delight in him, and
serve him with the Strength and Intenseness of my Soul while I am here, and
stand for ever in his Presence, and behold his glorious Face with Joy
hereafter. O my Soul, what meanest thou, that thou still speak so faintly
and coldly of such insinitely glorious things? Why does not a new Life animate
thee at the very mention of these things? Have thou not far more Cause to raise
up thy desponding Spirits with Cheerfulness, than old Jacob, when his Son
Joseph, who was Lord of that Land, sent for him into Egypt? Thy Father, O my
Soul, thy Brother is Lord, not of Egypt, nor of Goshen, but of Eden, of Zion;
he is the King of that glorious City, the New Jerusalem; Heaven is his Throne,
and Earth is his Footstool, and yet behold the Wagons that he has sent for
thee, behold the provision that he has sent to maintain thee comfortably in
thy Journey from Egypt to Canaan; is not this enough? O my Soul awake, up and
see him before thou dyest; behold, he is coming, the Bridegroom is coming,
Joseph is coming, to meet thee with a gallant Train, in a glorious Equipage; it
is but yet a little while, and thy Husband will come and fetch thee in Royal
State, attended with a numberless Retinue of Saints and Angels. O had thou
but an Eye to behold their Chariots and Horsemen coming upon the Mountains; he
is coming, he is coming, he will be here quickly, he will not tarry, he is at
the Door. Contemplate sometimes on these things, and a little antedate that
Glory by Spiritual Meditation, do but think what a brave Sight that will be to
see the Mountains covered with Chariots of Fire, and Horses of Fire, when the
Heavens shall bow before thy Friend, and the Earth shall melt at his Presence,
and yet thy Heart not faint within thee; when the King shall come in the Clouds
to fetch his Friends to his own House, where they shall dwell for ever. This
Honor have all the Saints.

Eleventhly, He is a suitable Friend. It is Suitableness that sweetens Society.
I can easily believe, a poor Country Peasant can take as much Content in the
Company of a poor Man like himself, as in the Society of a Prince; an unlearned
Country Man is no way fit to converse with Courtiers, and Statesmen; the
Vastness of the Distance would so much swallow his Mind, and the Unsuitableness
of his Spirit to such Company takes off that Content which otherwise he might
enjoy. But yet in Spirituals, though the Distance between God and Man be beyond
a Possibility of our Conception, and the Disproportion infinite; yet the Soul
of Man being immediately from God, and Spiritual like God, and having a Divine
new Nature infused into it by the Spirit in Regeneration, it finds an infinite
Suitableness, Pleasure and Content in the Enjoyment of God's Presence, and it
is not sunk, but raised by an Union, Converse and Society with its Maker. The
Truth of it is, did Man but understand his own Original a-right, he would think
it infinitely below his noble Parentage to converse with, and have intimate
delightful Society with any but God, and those which bare the same Relation to
God with himself, or to bring poor Strangers acquainted with him as well as
themselves. There is not a Match upon Earth fit for the Soul of Man to be
matched to: But in that other Country there is a Match indeed every way
suitable, a Spirit for a Spirit, an everlasting God for an everlasting Soul, a
precious Jesus for a precious Soul, a holy God for those which he has made
holy like himself; and that is none of the least of Man's Happiness, that
notwithstanding that infinite Distance that is naturally between him and his
God, yet that God should make in his Creature such noble Dispositions, and such
Divine Qualifications, that there should be the greatest Suitableness in the
World between God and the Soul, and the Soul and God; and they both take
wonderful Content in the Enjoyment of one another. This is in part here, but
completed in Glory. This we may find often in Scripture expressed in the nearest
Relations, and dearest Affections. Hence God is said to be a Father, and they
his Children; a Husband, and they his Spouse. Now what greater Suitableness can
there be than between Father and Children, Husband and Wife? God is also said
to delight in them, and they in him; to rejoice in their Company, and they in
his; and how could this be, except there were a Suitableness in them one to
another. Their Wills are suited; what God wills they will, and what God loves
they love; and so what they love, as his Friends, God loves; one does not
thwart and contradict the other. O how sweet then must the Company, the
Communion of such Friends be! O were our Hearts as they should be! Were we more
like God, we should quickly experience the unspeakable Joy of our Souls, how
suitable a Friend he is to a Soul; we should soon find, that as Clay and Stones
are as unsuitable Food for the Body, so the World is unsuitable Food for the
Soul to feed on, and that it is God alone that can fill and satisfy the vast
Desires of it. O, I say again, were we but as we came out of our Maker's Hands,
or rather were we trimmed up in our eldest Brother's Robes, and brought into
the immediate Presence of this great King, were we set before that glorious
Throne, where the infinite Brightness of his Majesty shines so that the Angels
themselves do vail their Faces before him; yet for all that we should not long
stand silent, as if the Place and Company were unsuitable to us, it would not
be long before we should carry it as those that were nearly related, and had
intimate Acquaintance with him that sits upon the Throne. O the unspeakable
Sweetness that will be in the Enjoyment of his Company! No Tediousness, no
Irksomness at all upon our Spirits. We shall quickly understand our Work, our
Privilege. O infinite Goodness! O boundless Love! O let me be always solacing
my Soul in the Contemplation of these things! O let the very Thoughts of them
be a Heaven upon Earth to my Soul! But here, O here is the Grief while we are
here in a strange Country, there is something (in all the poor fallen Children
of Adam, nay, in those of them that are recovered, and by Grace brought into
are-union with God) there is, I say, something in God unsuitable to them, and
in them unsuitable to God; and this, O this makes our Lives so uncomfortable:
But converse with God will wear off a great deal of that. When thou come to
lay off thy Rags, and to put off thy old Suit, and to put on that new one that
is making for thee, I mean after Death, when thou come to Glory, thou will
find the Case strangely altered with thee. In Heaven there will be a perfect
Harmony, Suitableness and Agreement between God and thee for ever; and thou will take infinite Complacency and Delight in him, and he in thee. And thus
shall thou spend Eternity in unconceivable Joy, Delight and Pleasure. This is
Heaven, a perfect Suitableness to God, and enjoying him for ever. O when, when,
when shall it once be! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Come, O blessed Father by
thy Spirit, and burn up what is unlike thee! O create a greater Suitableness
between my Soul and thee! O come thou down to me, or take me up to thee! O
could we but talk with one of those happy Creatures that has been in the very
Presence of God in Glory, and should we ask him, whether he were not weary of
the same Work, of the same Company, the same Place; what Answer do you think he
would make you? No more weary than a Man upon the Rack, but just before would
be of perfect Ease; no more than a^ healthful hungry Man is of eating; no more
weary than the Sun is of running, than the Fire of ascending, or a Stone of
falling toward the Center. Sen. Epist. 10. I know not where I had rather be
than with him. I was once upon Earth as you are now, and now I am in Heaven,
and in neither of both these Places can I find one that I can take more Delight
in than God. I must say as he, Psalm. 73.24. Whom have I in Heaven but him? And
there is none upon Earth that I can desire in comparison of him. I ca'nt desire
a better Employment than a delightful constant attending upon my God: Can I
have better Company than such a Father? Can a greater Happiness be conceived
than eternal Glory, a pleasanter Place than Heaven? That which I can speak, you
cannot hear; and could you (though in this perfect Glory) I cannot express what
you will find and feel when you come hither. O had I but known so much as I do
now, when I was in your Condition upon Earth, I should with incomparably
greater Earnestness have sought after Acquaintance with God than I did. In his
Presence is Fullness of Joy, at his right Hand are Pleasures for evermore: Now I
feel, now I know it. I thought one Smile sweet upon Earth, but now I see and
fell infinitely more; what you enjoy now, is a Shadow, in comparison of what
you will enjoy hereafter. O what do you mean that you prize his Favor no more,
that you get no more intimate Acquaintance with him? What do you mean that you
are so unwilling to come to this Place of Joy? O, were you but possessed of what
I speak of, you would say what I say, you would never be weary of praising and
serving him, you would never wish your self out of his Presence, and think it
not possible to be in more suitable Society. Is it so, O my Soul, what then
do thou here? Make haste, O my Soul, stay no longer here below, but know thy
Privilege, understand where thy Comforts are.

Twelfthly, He is a wise Friend, All the Men and Women in the World have great,
mighty Affairs to manage; and they want Skill, Wisdom and Discretion, for the
right Management of these Things, they are woefully to seek as to their great
Business; they are wise to do evil, but in Spirituals they are become stupid,
sottish Fools; and as to the carrying on of their great Work, they do it with
the greatest Imprudence in the World: and they will most certainly for ever
undo themselves, except one that is wiser than themselves undertake to help
them. All things go backward with them, and they labor in the very Fire whilst
they act without God, and it is impossible it should be otherwise, as long as
there is such a Disproportion between Man's Business, and his Spirit; Man is
Carnal, and his Work is Spiritual. Would an ignorant poor Creature, that is but
one Remove above a Beast, be fit to manage the great Matters of Government? How
ridiculously would he behave himself in a Chair of State! how strangely would
an unlearned Man bungle, should he go about to open one of the profound
Demonstrations of Mathematics! But a natural Man is far more Unskilful than
any of these, as to the carrying on of that great Employment that he has to
look after, while he is on this side Eternity; his Business is to serve his
Maker, but what pitiful Work does he make of it? Man is made for an Everlasting
State, he is sent into this World to provide for another; a Good, a Happiness
there is, which he is to look after; he once had a fair Estate, but he has
spent and lost it all, and he is to see to the recovering of it again. He has
been in Arms against his Lawful Sovereign, and been guilty of the highest
Treason, and thereby has forsitted his Life, his Soul; now he has his Pardon
to sue out, and how does he go to work in this one thing? to mention no more.
Why he goes to beg a Pardon arm?d Cap-a-pe, and with his Sword drawn, he comes
to ask Pardon for one Treason, and he is found acting of another. Lord have
merey upon me, and give me leave to break thy Laws, is the sum of all his
Prayers. He talks of Heaven, and yet makes all the have he can to Hell; he is
told he is out of the way, but he laughs at him that tells him so; and that is
his best: Sometimes he rages, and desires with all speed to remove him that
would set him in the Road to Zion; he calls for a Harchet to cut down the Bough
upon which himself stands. And this is your Man of Wisdom. The Man is under
sail in the midst of Rocks and Sands; and if he would but look, he might see
many doleful Spectacles, the tops of Masts, Ship-wreck'd Souls I mean; and
though the Pilots tell him of the danger, yet he says, he will never believe
but that is the best and safe^^ Road to the Harbor, and so on he goes as if he
were sure he could not miscarry; and all this while he will not be persuaded
but that he acts very wisely; he judges it one of his greatest Comforts, that
he runs to Misery without any hindrance; and how can it otherwise be, except
Men were spiritually Wise? And who can teach Man this Wisdom? Who shall
instruct him? Who shall help him, now his Affairs are upon the Matter almost
desperate? Why, if thou will but hear, here is one that will yet undertake your
foul Cause; if you will be advised by him, he will set all at rights. And O how
does he call after you! How willing to give you his Advice! How desirous to
assist you, Prove. 1.20, etc. Wisdom cries without, she utters her Voice in
the Streets: She cries in the chief Places of Concourse, in the openings of
the Gates, she utters her Words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye
love Simplicity? And ye Scorners delight in Scorning, and Fools hate Knowledge?
Turn ye at my Reproof: Behold. I will pour out my Spirit upon you, I will make
known my Words unto you. And will you set at naught all his Counsels, and have
none of his Reproofs? Will you rather be ruined than be beholding to him for
Advice? Let me put in one Word; if this wise Counselor be not for you, he will
be against you; and if you find any that can order your sad Affairs more to
your Advantage, I pray make use of him; but if you will be ruled by him, you
cannot miscarry, as ill a Condition as you are in; though thou be quite
broke, yet he will give you such a Stock as that you may set up again, and such
Directions as that you cannot but thrive, if you will but follow them. It is he
that teaches his Spiritual Frugality, not to part with that for a Trifle,
which will be a rich Commodity ever long; it is he who persuades us to make the
best Use of every thing; it is he that teaches Fools more true Wisdom than the
great Politicians of the World, though the World judge them weak, yet they have
wit enough to make a good Bargain, to value Heaven before Hell, to fly from
everlasting Burnings. They are wise enough to know what is for their real
Advantage, and what not. This is he that would bring thee acquainted with him,
it is he who gives his so much Understanding, as to know the true Worth of
things; and the Difference between Good and Evil, Finite and Infinite, Time and
Eternity. Who is it that David goes to for Counsel, when his politic Enemies
combined against him? Where does he advise? Who brings him out of all his
Intricacies? Is it not he that I am persuading you to go to, who was never out
witted, who can easily turn the Counsel of Achitophels into Foolishness; it is
he who can infatuate the great Sages of the World, and make them weaker than
Children in their Counsels. And this is he who will be a constant Counselor to
all those that are his Friends, his Acquaintance, Seneca, Epist. 41.81. gives
excellent Counsel indeed, which if we will precisely follow, our Matters cannot
but succeed. Art thou never in any Streights? Are all thy Affairs carried on
with so much Prudence, both as to Time and Eternity, that thou stand'st in no
need of Advice? Art thou sure that this will always be thy Condition? If not,
why then will thou not be persuaded to strike in here? Why, if you will believe
them, which to their Comfort have tried him again, and again, it is your
unspeakable Interest and Wisdom to get God for your Friend, and then whatsoever
you do, shall prosper by his Advice: A poor Christian can outwit all the Policy
of Hell, and show himself more wise than those which call him Fool, and count
him mad, Psalm. 73.24. David durst trust none else to guide him; but with his
Conduct he does not fear but that he shall come safe to his Journey's end, Thou
shall guide me by thy Counsels, and bring me to thy Glory. And again he says,
by the Help of this Counselor he was wiser than his Teachers, Psalm. 119.18.
Hear therefore what you had best to do as Matters stand with you, Prove. 4.11.
He will teach thee in the Way of Wisdom: He will lead thee in the right Paths.
When thou go, thy Steps shall not be straightned, and when thou runnest,
thou shall not stumble, etc. 1 Cor. ^1.15. Because the Foolishness of God is
wiser than Men. That which looks most contemptibly, if thoroughly understood,
will be found to have more depth in it than the wisest Men of the World can
reach. To choose such a Friend, this is Wisdom, this is Prudence. The godly Man
knows that he has a great Cause to be decided e're long, and that it will be
no lost Labor to make the Judge his Friend. Well what say you, Sinners, is
this considerable that I do now propound, or is it not? Can you plead your own
Cause, can you clear your Title to Glory without him; if not, be well ^dvised
before you slight such a Motion, as I now do make to you.

13. He is an immortal Friend. I, that is a Friend indeed. If one Friend could
be sure to live ^ust as long as the other; and were Friends sure never to want
the Advice, Comfort, Society, and Help one of another, it would not a little
advance the Worth of a Friend. But where is such a one to be found? What
Histories can give us an Account of such Amities? Let Persons be united in
never so close an Union, conjoined in the fastest Knot that Nature can tie: Yet
Death will first or last dissolve it. So that sometimes I have been almost of
this Mind, as to all worldly Friends, considering them abstract from God (for
Grace in any Friend does unspeakably sweeten the Relation, and such a Relation
will not die) if we compare the Shortness and Uncertainty of possessing, and
the Bitterness in loosing, with the Sweetness of enjoying; that it is somewhat
difficult to resolve, whether such short-lived Comforts are worth the looking
after. Not but that I think a Friend, a true Friend, a great Mercy, and much to
be desired; but really, if our Affections be not for God's sake, if our Love be
not regulated by Religion, I can easily believe that the Bitterness in losing
does over balance the Pleasure in enjoying. And who would much trouble himself
to get that with Care, which must be posses^ with Fears, and will be parted
with with Tears. All worldly Enjoyments will serve us thus. When we expect most
from them, and please our selves to think what Content we enjoy in them, ten to
one, if God love us, but that he either imbitters or takes away that Comfort
from us. One says I had a dear Husband, such a one as never Woman had, but he
is dead, I have lost him. Another says, I had a precious Child, a Brother but
he is gone. And every Body will be in this Note, first or last. And if the Case
be thus who would be so foolish as to let out the Strength of his Soul, upon
that which he may soon be de prived of? But here, here is a Friend whom you need
not fear over-loving nor losing, a never dying Friend, one that will be sure to
out live you ( Ar. Epic. l. 3. c. 22.) Say of what you will, that is mortal,
and you have disgraced it enough; for how can that be of any great Worth which
can die, and when I have most need of it I may want; but this cannot be said of
God, he only is immortal, and not subject to Changes. As for the Favor of
Princes and Great Ones, at the best, it is but an Uncertainty; for it may be
all thy Hopes are bound up in his Life, and that Hour which puts an End to his
Days, puts a Period to thy Comfort? But it is another kind of Friend, that I
would have you acquainted with. O why do Christians dote upon that which is so
shortliv'd? Make but choice of this Friend, and you shall never say of him, he
is dead, I have lost him. Wherefore put not your Trust in the Son of Man, in
whom there is no Help; for his Breath goes forth, and he returns to his
Earth -- But happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his Help, whose Hope
and Love is fixed upon the Lord his God, which made Heaven and Earth, etc. That
God who is called the Living God, Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5, 6.

14thly, He is a present Friend, a Friend that is always in all Places. Man's
Condition may possibly be such, as that he may be deprived of the Company of
his dearest worldly Relations, he may be sequestered from the Society of his
most helpful and necessary Friends! How often have the dear Children of God been
clapped up in Dungeons, not only from the Sight, but from the Knowledge of their
most affectionate Acquaintance? It Is no unusual thing for them to be banished
from their Native Country. Wives and Children, among Savage Men and Beasts;
they have no Man to make their Complaints to, but such as will inprease their
Sorrows. How frequently may they be in such a Condition, as that they may not
see, hear, or speak to any Friend? What Bolts and Bars, what Walls and Guards
to keep them from them, which if they could not free them from, yet might in
some measure alleviate their Misery? But now God is such a Friend, who cannot,
who will not be kept out from his by Walls of Brass, or Bars of Iron, he will
find out his Friends in the darkest Hole, and bare them Company there in spite
of all the Powers of Hell. O how reviving are his Visits? What Cordials does he
bring along with him. This is that which makes the People of God so very
cheerful, when their Enemies make account their Condition is such, as that it
has no Mixture of Joy or Comfort in it. Was that a Prison or Heaven where
those Martyrs were singing Halelujahs? Was that a time to be so merry, when all
the World disowned them, when they were loaded with Reproaches, and Irons, and
Chains, counted the Troublers of the Nation, Madmen, Heretics? The Case is
clear: The sight of this Friend made them forget their Scorns, and think their
Chains Gold, and their Prison Liberty. It was God that spoke it, and he has
been found to be as good as his Word, Isa. 43.1, 2. Thus says the Lord that
created thee, O Jacob, and that formed thee, O Ifrael, Fear not: For I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine. When thou passest
through the Waters I will be with thee: And through the Rivers, they shall not
overflow thee: When thou walk through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt:
Neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee. Who was that which bore the three
Children Company in the fiery Furnace? Who was that which went into the Lions
Den to visit Daniel? Who brought Paul alive to the Shore when the Ship in which
he went was wrecked? Was it not this Friend that I am now speaking of? I might
be large in reciting the miraculous Preservations which God has vouchsafed to
his, which is a manifest Token of his Presence, when none can come near;
besides, he will not be far off. In the greatest Extremities, when none durst
own them, then God reckons it time for him to show himself. It was not for
nothing that the Psalmist could speak so cheerfully when others were quaking,
Psalm. 46. 12, etc. What was it that bore up his Spirits, when there were such
dreadful Commotions? What Refuge has he to shelter himself under in time of
such Calamity? In what does his Strength lie that he is so confident? Whence
does he expect a Supply, that he holds it out so bravely, when his Enemies are
so numerous, and his Friends so scarce? Why, David has his invisible Friends,
as well as visible Enemies. Ask him, and he will tell you, That God is his
Refuge and Strength, and he is his Confidence, and he will come in when he has
the greatest Need; he will be a very present Help in trouble. And that is the
reason that David will not fear, though the Storm were far greater than ever
yet he was in; though the Earth were removed, and the Mountains were cast into
the midst of the Sea; though the Foundations of the Earth were shaken, though
the Sea should roar and threaten the Earth with another Deluge, he can sleep as
securely as a Person little concerned; and this be can speak, not only for
himself, but for the whole City of God; God is in the midst of her, she shall
not be moved. The Saint has a Friend that will bare him company in all Places,
in all Dangers, and in his Company he need not be afraid. Let the least Child
that God has, give but one Cry, and he will soon awake. It cannot but be so
from the Spirituality of his Nature, the Immensity of his Being, and the
Infiniteness of his Love. It was Orthodox Divinity and Doctrine that Are.
Epictetus, l. 2. c. 14. preached (though but a Heathen) when he said, That the
first Lesson that became a wise Man to learn, was, that there was a God, and
then, that nothing in the World could be concealed from him, and that he knew
not only our outward Actions, but our most secret Workings, our closest curtain
Businesses; and not only so, but even our Thoughts, Projects and Principles:
which speaks him every where, and consequently ready at Hand to help his
Friends at a dead lift. Wherefore (says the same Author, Idem, l. 3. c. 22.)
think not that thou art alone when thou art in thy Chamber, in thy Bed, when
thy Curtains are drawn, when thou art locked up in a Prison never so dark under
Ground; if thou art good, thou shall have two Companions in spite of the
Malice of all thy Enemies, a good Conscience, and thy God. This made that brave
Moralist to dare his Enemies to do their worst to exclude his Friends from him.
Can (says he) any Man be banished out of the World? Wheresoever you send me,
there will be the Sun, Moon, and Stars; but if not, God is there, I am sure,
with whom I may talk, to whom I may pray; he will bare me company, though all
the rest of my Friends be kept from me. And as long as you cannot banish me from
God, nor keep him from me, I shall reckon my self at Liberty; and should I be
sent out of this Worldinto another, even there I should find my Friend; and he
will scarce complain that is removed from a Place where almost all are his
Enemies, to a Place where even all are his Friends. One would have thought
these poor Heathens had been reading, Psalm 139. Do you hear, O Christians,
what Language those forementioned Persons speak? And shall these that never had
the thousandth part of that Advantage for the knowing of God, speak and act
thus, and shall Christians have such low Thoughts of God? Because we do not see
God, shall we therefore not believe that he is present every where? He that
denies God's own Presence, had upon the Matter as good deny his Being; for were
it not so, how could he judge the World with Justice? How could all things be
sustained by his Power? God takes this as a very high Indignity, that any
should in the least question this glorions Attribute; Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a
God at hand, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret Places,
that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says
the Lord? And is not this a Friend worth the having, who will be sure not to be
absent when you have need of him? The Wicked indeed say, how does God know, and
can he see through the thick Clouds, and therefore they sin with Confidence,
and oppress the Friends of God without any Fear; they hope God does not behold,
they think Omniscience knows not. I wish there were not something too like this
sometimes in the Thoughts of God's People too; but let me only leave that one
Scripture with the first fort, Psalm. 94.9, etc. He that planted the Ear, shall
be not hear? He that formed the Eye, shall he not see? He that teaches Man
Knowledge, shall not he know. The Lord knows, etc. As for the desponding
Christian that begins to think God is out of the Reach of his Prayers, let me
ask thee, O thou of little Faith, when did God ever absent himself from his in
a time of need? When was he quite out of the hearing of their Cry? Know indeed
he may hide himself, yet then he is near them also, to try their Love, and hear
their Voice, for God loves to hear his Children cry; (earthly Parents may
correct their Children for crying, but God chastises his Children usually for
their Silence.) When he seems furthest off, he is but behind the Curtain, he is
there where he with Pleasure sees how earnestly his Children look up and down
for him: And then when they are ready to sit down weeping as if they had lost
their Father; when they think they are quite forgot, and their Enemies begin to
triumph, and to ask, Where now is your God? Then he lets both Friends and Foes
know that he is near. And what say you to all this, you that as yet are
^trangers to God? Have you gotten such a Friend as he is, that will always be
at your Elbow, that can and will come to help you (when other Friends are far
enough off) whether Man will or no? Have you got such a Friend? If not, why
then will you not now accept of his Acquaintance, who will be such a Friend to
all that love him? No good Man is without the Company of God, he walks with
God, he talks with God, he eats with God, he drinks with God, and is
entertained by him, and he sleeps in his Arms. God is with him in his Shop, in
the Rode, at Home and Abroad, and who can miscarry that has so helpful a
Companion always with him? When thy Burdens are too heavy, do but complain, and
he will either take them off thy Back, or put under his own Shoulders, and help
thee to go away lightly with them, he will assist thee in six Troubles, and in
seven he will give thee Help.

15. He is a Soul Friend, Soul Friends are the best Friends. As Soul Affairs
are the mightiest Affairs; so those that give us the greatest Help in those
Matters ought to be valued. God is the great Soul Friend; expect not to find
him a Friend to thy Lust, this scares the Wicked from him, who would be glad to
be acquainted with God, if he would gratify their Lusts, and please their
wicked Humors, and give them eternal Happiness after a Life of Wickedness,
that is, would ungod himself for their sakes. But hold there Man; you shall
sooner see the Sun black, and have Fire cold, and find a Heaven in Hell, than
have God a Friend to your Sins. God does not promise to furnish all his
Acquaintance with Provision for their Sensuality, he will not put a Knife into
thy Hands to stab himself, or to cut thy own Throat. There are too many of such
Friends in the World, and Men are generally so foolish as to count them
Friends, which deserve another Name; these are they which help Men to Hell, and
show them the shortest Cut to eternal Misery, and this must go for a special
Kindness. Sure Men and Women will scarce be always of this Mind. Must Poison in
a gilded Cup go for a Cordial, and a Kiss, though with a Dagger, be taken for
true Love. Seneca had more wit than to reckon such among Benefactors. He that
can teach me the way to true Happiness, he that can help me to a^orn, dress and
trim my Soul; he by whose Instructions I shall be more in Love with Virtue, ^^d
out of Love with Sin; he by whose Direction I may be acquainted with my self,
and made truly to value that which is really most excellent, this shall be my
Friend, this shall be my Companion. And where are such Friends to be found? How
few of them in the World? Do not most, that go under that sweet Name of
Friends, do one another the greatest Unkindness that can be imagined! How do
they encourage one another in an evil way, Prove. 1. Psalm. 2. How do Men tug and
pull to get one another a-pace into Damnation; and if the wise World may be
Judges, none must go for a Friend, but he that would do me most Mischief; none
must be counted an Enemy, but he that desires to do me the most real
Kindnesses. This sounds strangely: Yet for all that, did it lie in my way, I
could easily prove it. Yet I must confidently affirm, that every one's
Experience, first or last will say as much. Some thing of this I have taken
notice of in my conversing with dying Men. I remember, once more particularly,
being by a poor Creature that was just a going into another World, one of his
old Friends looked in to see him, at the sight of which Person he gnashed his
Teeth, and could not endure him in the Room, but cry out, This was he that
brought me to this, I may thank him, or (...) had not been in so sad a
Condition upon a Deathbed. But this by the by. Open Enemies are better than
such Friends. I say again, do not expect to have God such a Friend. God loves,
his too well to let them undo themselves; he knows the worth of Souls, and
pities them that would part with their Souls for a Trifle, and therefore (...)
tells Men plainly, that which may be really prejudicial to the Health of their
Souls; he cannot b^ let them know what is Food, and what is Poison: What else is
the meaning of those vehement Expostulations? Why does he send so many
Messengers one after another? To what purpose else does he tender such
Promises, such Encouragement? Be it known therefore unto thee, O Man, if thou
understand'st the Worth of thy own Soul, and would have that Soul of thine
do well for ever, and would have a Friend for thy Soul, that there is but
one such a Friend to be found in the whole World, and that is God. O have thou
no Regard at all for thy precious and immortal Soul? Do thou never think of
that excellent Thing within thee? Do thou not care though thy Soul starve, be
naked and miserable for ever? Is it nothing to thee, that thy Soul has not so
much as a Shelter to hide it self under, when a dreadful Storm shall rise, and
Death shall turn it out of his old Tenement? Do thou not believe that it must
have a Being somewhere for ever, and that either in everlasting Glory or
eternal Burnings? and are these small Matters with you? What, will you for all
this take no care in the World about these grand Affairs? Had a special Friend
committed but a Dog to thee to take care of, you would have thought your self
engaged in Gratitude and Honor, to have suited your Care of him, to your
respect to the Person from whom you had him. (Epict.) But do thou not know, O
Man, that thy God has committed a Soul to thy Care, and has told thee what
thou shall do to preserve the Life and Health of this thy Soul, that it may be
in good plight when he shall call for it. He does tell thee what is its most
natural Food, and what is not whol^some. He tells thee what thou shall do to
have that Soul within thee everlastingly happy. And is all this of so little
Consequence, as to go in at one Ear and out at the other? Are these things to
be indifferent in? If Man's Soul were like the Soul of a Beast, the Case were
altered; if when his Breath went out of his Body there were an end of him, the
Matter were the less considerable; if he had ever a Friend in another World,
that could do as much for him as God can do, I should have little to say in
this Business. But since this is impossible, how can I bear to see thee neglect
the making sure of such a Friend? How can a Christian with any Patience think,
that those that he lives with, and dearly loves, should miss of such a Friend,
without whom their Souls must be everlastingly miserable. If it were only for
your Bodies or Estates I should scarce use so many Words, neither I believe
need I; but when it is for your Souls and Eternity, who can be silent? Once
more consider what a Friend thou may have; it is a Friend for thy Soul. Alas
Man, it is thy Soul, thy precious Soul that lies at Stake; that Spirit within
thee, which is more worth than a World; it is that which is in hazard, and here
is a Friend that offers thee to make that Soul of thine happy for ever. Thy
Soul has abundance of Enemies: Some would debase it, others would rob thee of
it, others would clap up a hasty Match between that Noble Creature and a
Servant, the World, I mean: And there are very few that have any true Kindness
for it, and thou know not the Worth of that Jewel, thy Soul; but here,
here is a Friend, if thou will but leave it with him, he will take care of it,
it shall not be marted away for nothing. Here Is one will do that for its
Security, Honor and Happiness, that all the World besides cannot do. If
therefore thou have any Love for thy poor Soul, if thou set any Price upon
that precious Thing within thee; in a word, if thou would have thy Soul do
well in another World, O strike in here, close with these Tenders, listen to
the Counsel of him who offers you the best Advice in the World. He, he it is
that now offers thee that thou can never value enough; he it is that will
feed, clothe, and portion that Soul of thine, and after that marry thee to his
only Son, by which Match you will be made for ever. O did Men and Women but
know what a Soul is, did they imagine what a dreadful Miscarriage of a Soul is,
did they but in any measure understand the things of their Peace, could they
but conceive what God could and would do for their Souls, I need to spend but
little time in persuading them to commit their Souls to him, to be acquainted
with him, who will be sure to take special care of their Souls, that they may
do well, whatever is neglected. O could you but see, did you but know what a
sad taking they are in, that go into the other World with a poor naked Soul,
and know no body in the World there, and have never a Friend that does take any
notice of them, you would then think I spoke what I do with reason enough, and
that my Words were too short, and my Expostulations too faint in a Matter of
such Concernment. O Sinners, I tell you, nay, God tells you Soul-matters are
the greatest Matters in the World. I am sure Christ thought so, or else he
would not have been at so much cost about them; those that are in their Wits,
and understand themselves, they know as much too, and so will you, e're a few
Years, it may be Hours, be past. Those that now make but a pish of all this,
when they have been but one Quarter of an Hour in another World, will say as I
do, that a Soul-Friend is the only Friend, and that Soul-Concerns are the great
Concerns, things of weight and moment indeed; and that it would have quitted
the Cost to have taken some Pains to have looked out for such a one that could
have stood the Soul in some stead in that other World; and that above all it
would have been no Folly nor Madness to have accepted of the Kindness of one
that desired earnestly to be acquainted with them, and to do their Soul a good
Turn. O that they had but been so considerate, as to have embraced such a
Motion when it was offered! And this brings me to the next Qualification of
this Friend.

16. He is a necessary Friend. There is an absolute Necessity of being
acquainted with him. It Is possible for a Man that has very few Friends upon
Earth, to live as happily as he that has many. Multitude of Acquaintance, such
as they are, may contribute much to a Man's Care and Sorrow. And as for most
Friends, such as are commonly so called, it is better to have their Room than
their Company. A Man may live without the Acquaintance of Nobles, he may be as
free, cheerful, and rich without the Knowledge of such as them. One may live
holily, and die joyfully, and may be happy for ever, though he never saw the
Face of a Prince, though he was never at Court, though he lived and died a
Stranger to all worldly Friends. One may be disowned by his Father, hated by
his Mother, slighted by all his Relations, and have never a Friend under the
Sun that will own him, and yet for all that be in a State of truer Felicity,
than those that are daily attended with Troops of Visitors, whose Gates are
seldom shut, whose Houses are never empty: but amongst all that comes, God
never comes to them, as for his Company they are Strangers to it; this Man I
may write miserable for all his great and many Friends. And him that has the
Company of God in Acquaintance with his Redeemer I Will call happy, though he
have never a Friend in the World besides. Multitude of Friends seldom add much
to our Comforts, but always to our Cares. A Man may go to Hell for all his
great Acquaintance with Men; but it is impossible, if we are greatly acquainted
with God, to miss of Heaven. When Men are unkind, if God be kind, it is well
balanced; but if God frown, whose Smiles can comfort? I may be happy, though I
am very little in Man's Favor; but it is impossible to be happy without God's
Favor. To be a Stranger to God, is to be a Stranger to Peace, Joy, Heaven. O
it is sad being without God! If I should declare the Judgment of most in the
World, at least if their Practice may speak for them, they see very little Need
of Acquaintance with God. They do not write, Must, upon the things of Religion.
They must eat, they must drink, they must sleep, and if they want any of these
things, they count themselves in a sad Condition. But further, they must riot,
they must be drunk, they must whore, they must have what their Lust calls for,
let it be what it will, they must get into the Favor of such and such a great
Person whose Displeasure they have incurred: These are things that the World
say must be; they are reckoned among the necessary things: but they do not say
they must have a Christ, they must be reconciled to God, they must deny
themselves, they must seek first the Kingdom of Heaven; No, these are
indifferent things amongst them, these are things minded by the by, if not
matter of scorn and jesting, these the World think unnecessary things. It Is
necessary their Flesh should be pleased, it is necessary the Devil should be
obeyed, it is necessary they and theirs should be some body in the World, these
are Matters of weight, for these they think it worth the while to toil and
moil, to ride early and late, and to lose their sleep, and think they can never
do too much; and all this while they see no need at all of getting a Friend for
their Souls, no need at all of knowing, loving and delighting in God, Well,
seeing the Case is thus, seeing it is no great matter whether you know God, or
be known of him; be not then troubled at the Day of Judgment, if God look upon
you as a Stranger then, be not grieved (seeing the Knowledge of God is nothing
with you) if God say he knows you not; if God's Presence be no such material
thing, complain not them for the want of it; be content, if you can, to hear
him say, Depart, I know you not. O, but shall I thus leave you, poor ignorant
Sinners? Consider for the Lord's sake, for thy Soul's sake, whether it be a
necessary thing to avoid everlasting Burnings; is it a necessary thing to be
saved? Is eternal Glory and Heaven necessary? dare you say these are
unnecessary things? If these be necessary, then I am sure God and Christ are
necessary; For this is Life Eternal to know God, and him whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ. O how will the Case be altered e're long with the God-hating and
Christ-despising World? when they shall be quite despoiled of all that which
they prized above the Knowledge of God, when all their Friends shall appear to
be Enemies, when all their Hopes shall be swept down like a Spider's Web. O
will they not then be of this Mind, that it was no such slight matter that I
was so earnest with them about, that Acquaintance with God was no such
unnecessary thing as they took it to be, and that there was more need of
getting an Interest in Christ, than of running to a Playhouse, or a
Whore-house. How will they rend the Skies with their Fruitless Wishes? How will
the Mountains echo with their doleful Lamentations? O that God would but know
them, O that they might not hear that Word, Depart! But seeing all that to
little purpose, how then will they exclaim against themselves? O that they
should be such Fools, that they should be so madly besotted, as to neglect the
looking after Acquaintance with God. Time was, that God would have had them to
come to him, he called after them, and sent for them again and again, but they
would none of his Company, they desired not the Knowledge of the most High;
they said to him, Depart from us: And now they have what they then desired; now
they see that the Ministers had cause enough to say what they did, and a
thousand times more. As troublesome as it was to hear of Hell, it is worse to
feel it. They see now Must is for the Soul, and not the Body. O that Men and
Women would be now as serious in their Judgments about these things as they
will be shortly? Consider, O Man, that as little as thou mindest these things,
these are the only things that are necessary. Thou must have a God for thy
Friend, a Christ for they Savior to save thee from thy Sins, or else thou must
be damned, or else thou must be cursed for ever. Thou may lie racked upon
thy Bed of Sickness, where none can help thee; thou may rot in a stinking
Dungeon, where no Man can relieve thee; thou may be roasted in the Flames,
and yet for all this be a happy Man. Worldly Ease, Pleasure, Health, Riches,
are none of those absolutely necessary things. A Man may go to Hell and have
them all, and a Man may go to Heaven and want them; Thou may have Eternal
Rest in another Life, though thou have scarce a Day of Ease in this. One may be
a Favorite of God, though as miserable as Job. But what will you say of that
Man that has not a God to go to? This, this is the miserable Man with a
Witness? O that seeing Men's Lives are so short, they would wisely husband their
precious time in minding nothing but necessary things! O that Unnecessaries
might be cut off. When I am about to undertake a Business, let me ask my Soul
this Question: O my Soul, is this a Business of absolute Necessity? Have thou
not something of greater Importance that is yet undone? We enter not into the
Lists for Honor, where it is no great matter, whether we conquer, or no; we
persuade not Men to busy themselves about Toys, we are not so importunate about
a thing of nothing. No Sirs, as unnecessary as you think these things we speak
of are, e're long you will say as much as we do, and more too; you will shortly
find, that it was as much as your Life and Happiness was worth that lay at
Stake. These are things we must mind you of, or else we hazard our Souls; and
they are things that you must mind also, or else you hazard yours. I want
significant Words enough, to express the Weight and Importance of these things.
O that what is wanting of that Nature, might be supplied with Tears, Groans and
Compassions. I am through Mercy ashamed of my own Heart, (O that I were more
so) that I should speak of such serious Matters so slightly. It is not now a
time to jest, O my Soul, when thou art to discourse with miserable Men and
Women, which refuse their Happiness, and dote upon their Misery. Thou art now
about a Work that concerns Souls, and their eternal State. Tell me, dear
Friends, do you in sober Sadness believe that you have immortal Souls? Do you
indeed know that your Souls are naturally Enemies to God, and that if you be
not reconciled to God, that you must be dealt with as Enemies? Do you really
believe all this? Do you believe what a dreadful thing it is to look such an
Enemy in the Face when he shall sit in Judgment? Further, do you believe what
it is to lie down in devouring Flames, and to dwell with ever lasting Burnings?
Do you not think it a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of a living God? And
if you do not, let me tell you, you are worse than mad; if you do believe all
this, why, then let me ask you again, whether you conceive it unnecessary to
use the utmost Care and Diligence to get acquainted with him: who can deliver
you from the Wrath to come? O Friends, I call you so, and I believe most of you
love me dearly! O that you would do me one Kindness; I should count it the
greatest Kindness that you can do me! Why, what is that you say! Why, it is but
to pity your own Souls, and to mind that one thing necessary, and to pity them
that are mourning for your dry Eyes, and hard Hearts? What say you to all this?
If you have any thing to say against the Necessity of these things, I am ready
to plead the Case with you, etc. Well, if it be not necessary to know God and
Christ, and lay in Provision for Eternity, what then is necessary? If it be not
necessary to serve, love, and delight in him, who can deliver from everlasting
Death, and reward with everlasting Life; what then is? Once more, for your
Souls sakes consider what you do, when you vigorously pursue worldly things,
and look upon the Favor and Displeasure of God, as small things! O write not
these things down amongst the superfluous things which are to be minded by the
by. Remember this, that it is very possible for a Man to be exceeding holy, and
yet to be altogether unknown to the World; but it is altogether impossible to
be truly happy, and yet unacquainted with God.

17. He is a tried Friend. Thousands and Millions can from their own Experience
say all this, which I have said of him, and much more; but I shall pass this
over at present, having hinted it already, and because it may be I may touch
upon something of the same Nature hereafter.

18. He is an everlasting Friend. I shall be but brief in speaking to this
Head, because what might have been spoken of this, fell under that of his
Immortality. Yet because it is impossible to conceive God immortal in himself,
and yet by reason of Man's Default, his Kindness to him to be finite; so it was
in respect of the Angels that fell from him. But now blessed be free Grace, Man
stands upon surer ground than ever he did, the Children of God have a firmer
Bottom by far than Adam had when he was in Paradise; his State is more secure,
being once united to God in Christ, than that of the Angels of Heaven in their
first Creation. For that their State was mutable, is, de facto, proved; but now
blessed be rich Goodness, if we can but make sure of Reconciliation with God,
again it is impossible for us to miscarry. God has sworn, and he will perform
it, that the Heirs of Glory might have the more strong Consolation, Isa. 54.9,
10. For this is as the Waters of Noah: For I have sworn that the Waters of Noah
should no more go over the Earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wrath
with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be
removed, but my Kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my Peace be removed, says the Lord, that has Mercy on thee. God's Children
need not fear disinheriting; his Gifts and Callings are without Repentance. If
God loved us while we were Enemies, how much more being reconciled will he
continue his Love to us: once a Child of God, and a Child of God for ever: once
in Favor, and never out of it again; Romans 8.35, 39. Who shall separate us from
the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine,
or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword. Nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other
Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Who can pluck us out of the Arms of the Almighty? Who, or what
is that which can alienate our Father's Affections from us? If the Promise of
God, which says, I will never, never, never, never, never leave nor forsake
you, be valid, if his Oath bind him, if the Blood of Christ continue always to
be satisfactory, if his Mediation can prevail, if the Nature of God be
unchangeable, we are well enough, we are safe, if this be but clear that we are
really reconciled to God, if we be acquainted with him. We are kept by the
mighty Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. If they had been of us, says
the Apostle, no doubt they would have continued with us. It is possible indeed,
yea, common for Men to pretend Love to God, and to seem to have a true
Friendship for him, and yet not to be truly so. To have a Name to live, and to
live, are two things. It is not unusual to bare God company (as I may say)
abroad, and yet at home to have some body that they have a greater Kindness
for. It is common to go along with God (if I may so call it) in the external
Actions of Religion, and yet to desert him at last, Isa. 58.1, 2, 3. Mat. 7.21.
There are many that seem to bid fair for Heaven, and if Cap and Knee will do,
God shall have that; they will give him the Husk and Shell, that they may keep
the Kernel for one that they love better. Thousands there are of such Persons
in the World; and these profess abundance of Kindness for God, they come often to
his House, and sit down there, and make as if they were his Friends, and his
Acquaintance; and some of God's Servants, by a Mistake, may bid them welcome,
but yet for all this they may be Strangers; only they have heard of God, and
can talk of him, and it may be have given him many transient Visits, but yet
they want the real Properties of Friends: they never knew what it was to be
brought nigh to the Father, by the Son; to have a Sense of their lost State and
Estrangement from God, and under a Sense of this, to make earnest Inquiry after
him; they never knew what it was to converse with God, to have an intimate
Acquaintance with him, to be sending out the Breathings of their Souls after
him, and to be unsatisfied without him; they took up a Trade of lifeless
Duties, and that was all. As for the Life and Power of Religion they never
understood it; Communion with God, they heard often of, but never understood what
it meant, they never savoured and relished the things of God, nor with any
Suitableness or Complacency engaged in his Service: And as for those more
secret Actings of Religion, to take up the Interest of God, to design his
Glory, to be deeply concerned for his Honor, observing their Affections, and
the Workings of their Hearts in Duty; to take notice of Answers of Prayers, or
to look after their Petitions, when they are out of their Mouths, they know not
what these things are. So that from hence it appears that God and they were
never really acquainted; no wonder then that they do forsake God, and are
forsaken of him. The building might look neatly, and the House seem to be
strong; but because it was built upon the Sands, it need not seem strange, if
it fall when the Winds rise, and the Waves beat against it: But I say it, and
say it again, the House that is built upon a Rock, will not, cannot fall: If a
Man be really united to God in Christ, and the Work of Grace thoroughly wrought
upon him, it is impossible that God should forsake such a one. God cannot but be
true though Man be false, he cannot but value the Satisfaction and Intercession
of his Son, he cannot forget his own Nature, Isa. 44. 15, 16. Can a Woman forget
her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her Womb?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee
upon the Palms of my Hands: Thy Walls are continually before me, etc. I do not
say but that God may suspend the refreshing Intimations of his Love; nay, he
may quite hide his Face, and his dearest ones may look upon themselves as free
among the Dead, they may reckon themselves such as have no Acquaintance with
God, and yet for all this be exceeding dear to God; this is cleared by every
Day's Experience. Nay, I may say, I believe that there are very few of them
which know what God's Presence, Smiles and Love is, but know in some measure
what it is to have his Face hid, to walk in the dark, and to see no Light. It
is no unusual thing of a Child of God to question his State, to fear whether
all that he ever did were not in Hypocrisy and Formality; have not the best
been made sometimes to question (especially upon some notable Fall) whether
what they did formerly did not proceed from mere common Grace, or some less
spiritual Principle than the Life of Grace, and a Divine Nature within them.
Were there ever any of the Sons of Adam, whom rich Mercy has plucked as
Firebrarnds out of the Fire, to whom the Lord has showed his mavelous
Kindness, and Love in Christ, that has kept their Watch so exactly, that have
walked so closely with God, so as never to have the least Frown from him? Were
there ever any that lived all their Days under a constant lively Sense of their
Interest in divine everlasting Love? If there be, they have fared better than
Job did, they enjoyed more than ever Heman or David did. A Child of God may often
be in a sad State, but yet he is always in a safe State: The Purpose of God
stands firm. Though for a small Moment he seem to forsake them, yet with
everlasting Mercies will he gather them? O Everlasting! That Is a sweet Word
indeed in the Saint's Ear; he would not that one Word should have been out of
the Bible, left out of the Promise, for a World, Isa. 54. If thou be once
truly acquainted with God, thy State is as safe, thy Condition as sure as if
thou were already in Heaven. God may and will chastise his with Rods, but his
loving Kindness he will never remove from them, his Mercy indures for ever. All
that God gives to his Friends and Acquaintance, that is spiritual, is like
himself, Everlasting. God is not like short-spirited Man, every Moment
changing, one day doting upon an Object, and the next day hating it as much.
An earthly Prince may one Moment set his Favorite at his Table, and the next
command that he should be hanged. But far be it from the unchangeable God, that
he should do thus. As for the great ones of the World; it has been counted by
some, and those none of the weakest, no small piece of Policy, to keep out of
their Knowledge: Their Favors are so dearly bought, their Kindness so
uncertain, their Displeasure so dangerous, and yet so easily procured. But here
it is far otherwise. It is God, and God alone that is an everlasting Friend, in
whose Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and Pleasure for ever more. O these
everlasting Things are great Things! An everlasting Friend, an everlasting
Inheritance, everlasting Glory, everlasting Joy, everlasting Life, and
everlasting Death, they are Matters of Weight! O why should not our very Souls
be overpowered with the very Thoughts of such things! O this Unbelief, this
Unbelief!

19. He is one that is willing and desirous to be acquainted with you. What I
have said before had signified little to us, were it not for this. It Is a
Misery, and no Comfort, to hear and know the great things which we must go
without. But this is that which puts Life into all those powerful Motives which
I handled before. God is the most loving, most strong and rich Friend, and
withal he has in him a sweet Inclination to be acquainted with us. The Terms
that he offers are the most reasonable in the World. This, this is the Comfort
of the poor fallen Sons and Daughters of Adam; that though they have run away
from God, though they have left their Father's House, and turned Prodigals; yet
their tenderhearted compassionate Father is ready to receive them again, his
Arms are open, he meets them; while they are yet a great way off, he runs to
them and falls upon their Neck, and kisses them, and expresses the greatest
Kindness to them, and Joy for their Return. O unparalleled Love! O infinite
Goodness! God has expressed this his Willingness to receive poor lost Sinners
abundantly throughout all the Scripture. If God had not been willing to have
been Friends again with Man, what needed he to have given himself the trouble
of parting with his dearest Son, and sending him into the World to manage this
great Work of reconciling Man to himself? Why else was that precious Blood
shed? And to what purpose should he send so many Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers, for so many hundreds of Years, rising up early, and sitting up late?
Why are they commanded to cry aloud, to use so much Earnestness, to compel poor
wandering Strangers to come to his House, but that he might be acquainted with
them? Can any one conceive that he should do all this without the least Design
of Kindness? If all that God has done to the reconciling Man to himself, does
not speak his Willingness to be reconciled to them, what can? Isa. 5.4. Nay, so
willing is he to receive them, notwithstanding all their Backslidings, that he
teaches them how they may address themselves to him most acceptably, he puts
Words into their Mouths which they may use with good Success when they come
before him, Hos. 14.1, 2, 4. Nay, that Sinners may be the more confirmed in
their Expectation of his Favor, he has most solemnly sworn, That he delights
not in the Death of Sinners, but had rather that they should return and live.
Wherefore else is it that we are so straightly commanded, as we will answer the
Neglect upon our Peril before God at that terrible Day, that we preach the Word
in season and out of season? To what purpose should Paul expose himself to so
many Hazards both by Sea and Land? Why should he teach this Doctrine of
Reconciliation Night and Day with Tears? Does he not tell you that he did all
this by Divine Dispensation, and that it was as much as his Soul was worth to
wave this Work? And does not all this speak his Willingness to be Friends again
with Man? Could not God have sent Legions of Angels with flaming Swords in
their Hands, when he sent his Son, and thousands of Prophets, Apostles,
Ministers and Teachers? Might he not have proclaimed War against them for ever,
when he followed them with the Ambassadors of Peace? If he had had no Thoughts
of Agreement with them, could he not have spoken to them in Thunder and
Lightning, with Fire and Brimstone, as well as in the still Voice of the
Gospel? He could if he had pleased have made them to have known the Breach of
his Covenant, by giving them up to the Will of their cruel Enemies. God could
as easily have cut off a whole World of us, as we can crush a Moth, and easier
too. But he is willing to show forth the Riches of his Patience and Goodness,
that thereby Sinners might be brought to Repentance. How does God further
express his Willingness to receive returning Sinners, by engaging them by many
temporal Favors? Who preserved that tender Creature in the Womb, and brought
it out of those dark Chambers into light? Who kept that helpless Infant after
it was in the World? Whose Flax and Wool do we wear upon our Backs? To whom is
it that we are beholding for every Crumb we eat, and every Drop we drink? Who
spreads our Table for us, and makes our Cups to overflow? Who brought us from
the Brink of the Grave, when we had received the Sentence from our Doctor and
our Disease? And what is the Language of all these Mercies, but return, O
backsliding Sinner, for in me is thy Help found. Love, delight in, and be
acquainted with him, from whom thou have received so many Kindnesses. If thou
would accept of him for thy Lord, Husband, and Friend, who has sent ^^ee
these Tokens, thou shall have other Favors ^han these be. Is not this the
meaning of all the common Mercies that we daily receive from him? Why, was not
thy Breath stopped with an Oath in thy Mouth? Why is it that so many thousands
that were born since thy self, are gone to their eternal State, when thou art
still standing? What have thou done to engage God more than others, that Worms
should not be feeding on thee, when thou art feeding upon the Fat and Sweet?
What is the English of all this? What are all these Droves of Mercies which God
sends to thee, but to cool thy Enmity against him, and to make thee, who art
marching out in thy warlike Furniture, to meet him with Tears of Joy and
friendly Embraces? Is not, Love the Giver, written upon all his Tokens? What
means his frequent visiting of thee, but desire of Acquaintance with thee? Had
he had no Desire at all to know you, and to be known of you, do you think he
would have called so often and so kindly at your Door, would he have stood
knocking with so much Patience, and have spoke to you so lovingly, if he
desired still to be a Stranger to you? Is this like one that desires your Ruin?
Did God never plead with thee by his Ministers, and urge the same Argument that
I do now? Did you never hear such kind of Expostulations as these? Why will thou go on to despise thy God, and to refuse his Love? What reason have thou to
harbor such hard Thoughts of him? Does he deserve such Unkindness at your
Hands? How long ye simple ones will ye love Simplicity? Why will ye make light
of that you cannot possibly overvalue? The Favor of God, and Acquaintance with
thy Maker. How often have you grieved his Spirit by your unworthy Contempts? How
many times have you given him cause to complain of your unhandsome Usage, when
he in very Pity and Compassion came to visit you: He has reason to say now, as
well as of old, Hear O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for I have nourished and
brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O ye foolish People, and unwise? is not he thy Father that
bought thee? Has he not made thee and established thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. O that
they were wise. And be instructed O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee,
Jer. 6.8. Is not this the Voice of Mercy? Have not these been Expostulations of
the mighty God with his rebellious Creatures? And yet how do they stand it out
all ihis while, as if God were like to get so much by their Acquaintance?
Return, O foolish Sinner, if thou make any thing of Salvation and Damnation,
if thou valuest everlasting Glory, if thou think the Commands, Threatenings,
and Promises of the Almighty to be minded, come away and make no Delay. O why
will thou go on thus madly to undo thy self? Come away, poor Soul, for all this
it is not yet quite too late, thy Glass is not yet quite run, thy Soul is not
yet fully fixed in its unchangeable State. Once more I make such an Offer to
thee, as I am sure none but a mad Man will refuse; such an Offer as none of the
Kings and Lords of the World can make. The great and mighty Monarch of Haaven
tenders thee an Alliance with himself; he sees how far thou art spent, how poor
and low thou have brought thy self by a dangerous and long War against thy
Maker; he foresees what a Condition thou will be in after a few more merry
Hours, except thou repent and turn. Wherefore in Compassion to thy precious
Soul he has commanded us to follow thee, and not to set thee be at quiet till
thou have given us a Promise, that thou will return and humble thy self to thy
God; and what shall we still lose our Labor! Shall all this come to nothing! O
Prodigy of Unkindness! O wonder of Patience! Thou have slighted the Friendship
of thy God, thou have set light by Christ, and undervalued Heaven and Eternity
for ten, twenty, thirty Years already, and yet the Lord sends us once more in
his Name to ask you whether you are willing to have God for your Friend; God
has not yet said, Cut him down, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into that
Lake that burns for ever. Bring those mine Enemies that would not that I should
reign over them, and slay them before my Face. God has not yet spoke that
dreadful Word, Depart. O what is it thou stayest for? What is it that makes
this Business to hang so long? What Lover is it that does so long hold back thy
Heart? What is the matter that we can no more speedily and effectually manage
this great Affair? What is it that thou do prefer before God? What is it that
thou think more worthy of thy warmest Love than Christ? What is that great
thing that thou stickest not to venture thy Soul for? Act like a Man that is
rational and not beside himself. If the World be God, if Earth be better than
Christ, then choose that; if Christ be God, then choose him. How long will you
stand halting between two? Love that which will last longest, be acquainted
with him that is willing and able to do most for thee. Is the World worth more
now than it was in David's time, when he preferred the Favor of God before
thousands of Gold and Silver? Is the Price of it raised? Can it bribe Death,
and stop the Mouth of Divine Justice, and procure thee a real Respect in
another World? Go chaffer and see what Bargain thou can make; tell God that
thou will give him thousands for thy Brother's Life, and as much more for the
lengthning the Lease of thy own to Eternity. What does God say? Is the Bargain
made? Is it not enough? Why, add a World to it, will that do? If it will not do
this, if this Purchase be too great for thy Purse, then go lower; can all thou
have keep thee from Fears, get thee a Stomach, procure thee Ease, rectify thy
Constitution; will it do this, or will it not? If not, why should thou value
that which can do so little for thee, before that which can do all things for
thee? Be persuaded at last to be wise. What is God like to get by your Love, or
lose by your Hatred? What have you to boast of? What Excellencies to set you
out? What Portion to advance you, that you stand thus upon your Terms? Come,
let us hear a little what it is thou think so highly of thy self for. I am
sure your overgreat Beauty cannot commend you; for a Black-moor may with better
reason brag of Comeliness, than such a deformed loathsome Creature can of
Beauty. I am sure your Helpfulness will not speak for you; for thou art a
crazy, decrepid, sickly Creature, that will cost God more to cure thee, than
thou art worth a thousand times. It cannot be for thy Estate that thou art so
much desired, for all thy Gold is adulterate, thy Jewels counterfeit, thy All
forfeited; and that is it then that thou have yet to boast of? Come and set it
before us, that we may acknowledge our Mistakes. Are the Clothes upon thy Back
(as fine as thou art) thy own? Is the Food that thou eatest paid for? And is
this the Creature that must be wooed with so much Earnestness? Behold all ye
Inhabitants of the World, and admire! Hear, O Heavens! This is that -- (I want
a Name to call her by) which thinks it below her to be matched to Christ, and
an undervaluing to be acquainted with her Maker, and a shame to have God for
her Father! From the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot there is nothing
but Wounds and Bruises, and putrified Soars, running plague Soars that are
broken are her greatest Beauty: And here is a thing to be loved with all my
Heart! Ezekiel. 16. Whosoever thou art that read these Lines, this was once thy
Condition, in these Ornaments he found thee, when God came to ask thy Heart,
this was thy Dress, though thou art thus highly advanced. And such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are cleansed.

And after all this, O Sinner, art thou still as stout and proud as ever? Is
Christ so willing to bring thee to his Father? Is he willing to clothe thee
from Head to Foot with glorious Robes, such a Dress as may become thee in the
Presence of a King? Does he offer to lead thee in his Hands to his own Palace?
Is God so willing and desirous to be your Father, and Christ to be your
Husband? are all the Ministers of Christ so willing to do their utmost to bring
this Match to Perfection? Shall they lie at you Day and Night to give your
Consent, and to be willing; and are you still unwilling? Well, if all this
signify little, and you miss of Christ at last, and be not acquainted with God;
after all, remember it was your own Doings* And that you thought it greater
Wisdom to marry the Servant than the Master, to obey the Rebel rather than your
loving Prince. Remember you preferred Darkness before Light, Hell before
Heaven. I call Heaven and Earth to record this Day, that I have set Life and
Death before you and you stand as if it were so difficult a matter to resolve
which were the best. This founds strangely, and every one will be ready to
write Fool upon that Man's Forehead that acts thus Hold Man, be not too ready
to pass thy Censure before thou look within thee. Do thou see an absolute
need of Christ? Do thou adore his infinite Love and Kindness? Do thou give
up thy self to him for thy Lord, and receive him for better for worse, come on
it what will? Or do thou not rather spend thy Thoughts, and let out thy
Affections upon the Vanities and Pleasures of the World? Do thou not love
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, House and Lands
more than him? Why, if this be thy Case, I must say thou art one of the Fools
that loves Death and ha^est Life, thou call that Folly in another, which in
thy self thou countest Wisdom. I wonder who it is that you strive to please all
this while! Is not the Hand o^ Joab in all this? Has not Satan been deep in
retarding this Match? Has not he a Design to marry thee to some painted Lust,
though he u^ do thee for ever, and must he be pleased rath^ than God? Is it
more necessary to gratify him th^^ ever yet intended to do any of the Sons of
Adam any Kindness, rather than thy best Friends? Come away for shame, and let
us lose our Breath ^o longer; and let that time we spend in pleading with you
for God, be spent in singing with you, and praising God for you, and
congratulating your happy Acquaintance with God, and you, matching to his only
Son.

20. But because Man is so wedded to the World, and dotes upon his Lust, that
all the Arguments that we can use are most commonly unsuccessful; I shall add
one more upon this sort of Motives drawn from the Qualifications of him whom I
would fain have you acquainted with, and that shall take in all that can be
said on this Head, and that is this, consider that he is altogether lovely, he
is made up of Love, Goodness, and all Excellencies; and whatsoever Pleasure,
Delight and Content you find in the Creature, it is transcendently in him, he
is the chiefest of ten thousands: Ask of them that by Faith have seen him,
inquire of the Spouse in the Canticles, and ask her what is her Beloved, more
than another Beloved? What there is in God and Christ more than in the World,
and she will almost wonder, that any one that is rational should ask so foolish
a Question; she thinks you might with as much Judgment and Reason have asked,
what there is in Heaven, more desirable than in Hell? What there is in Ease
more than in Torments? In Gold and Jewels, more than in Dross; in a living,
healthful, beautiful Creature, more than in a stinking rotten Carcass? Did you
but see his Face, you would soon think that there were something in him more
than in another; could you but see his Eye, your Heart would be in a flame: Di^
you but understand what it is to be brought into his Banqueting House, you
would say that they are neither Fools nor Madmen, that can find i^ their
Hearts to scorn the Beauties and Glories (...) this World in comparison of one
look or smil^ from God; and believe that his Love was better than Wine, to be
preferred infinitely before the greatest worldly Pleasures, and think that the
Virgins had reason enough to love him, Cant. 1^.4. How high does the Church run
in his Commendations? How does she endeavor to set him out to the Life, that
every one may admire hi^ Excellencies, and be taken with his Beauties as well
as her self; neither does she fear to loose him by this, nor indeed is
unwilling that others should fall in Love with him as well as she, Cant. 5.9,
10, etc. She begins first with his Face, it is white and ruddy, the most exact
Beauty, so that she must be blind that is not taken with him; and so she goes
on as well as she can to set him out; but he is so infinitely above her
Commendations, that she wants Words to express her self, therefore she speaks
one great one, He is altogether lovely; and if you will not believe, come and
see. Do but look upon him by Faith and Meditation; contemplate his Beauties,
and then if you have any thing yet to object, if after you have had a true
sight of him, and have well weighed all, you do not find that there is in him
infinitely more than I can tell you, why then let me bear the blame for ever.

Well, now let us gather up all these things together; and if a Multitude of
Arguments, and if Weight and Reason, if Vehemence and E^^nestness may prevail;
I should have some good Hopes that I should not want Success in this Work, nor
you of the Acquaintance with God, and everlasting Glory. Therefore I say again,
if Kindness and Love be taking, who so sweet and obliging as he? If Comfort,
Joy and Pleasure, be desirable, who is there, when the Soul is surrounded with
a Multitude of Perplexities, that can so much delight, refresh and raise it? If
Power, Glory and Majesty, if Ability to defend from Injuries, and revenge
Wrongs, might signify any thing with poor shiftless Creatures, who is there
that ever yet prevailed against him? Who ever contended with God and prospered?
If Vigor, Activity and Care in all the Affairs of his Friends can entice the
dull helpless Sinner to receive him; who will take more care for, and do more
for them than he? If his Humility may engage us, if Freedom of Access,
notwithstanding that infinite Distance that is between us and him, signify any
thing as to the commending of him to our Acquaintance; where can a poor Beggar
be more welcome than at the House of this mighty Prince? Can Faithfulness in
the greatest Straight raise the Esteem of a Friend? Who ever yet trusted him
that was deceived? Are Riches and Wealth taken? Who is there that can give a
Kingdom for a Portion, a Love-token, and give everlasting Glory and Heaven for
a Jointure, but God? Does Pity in Misery, Simpathy in Suffering, Compassion in
Distress, indear and commend a Friend, who is more tenderhearted than he? Are
Honors and Preferments such great things? Who is that which will make all his
Favorites Kings and Priests, and set them upon Thrones, and reward and commend
them before the whole World? Is Suitableness a considerable Qualification to
make up this Match? Who so suitable for the Soul, a Spirit, as God a Spirit?
Who can satisfy its vast and infinite Desires, but Infinity it self? Have poor
simple Creatures that have quite undone themselves by their Folly and
Indiscretion need of a wise Counselor to wind them out of their sad
Intricacies? Who is there among the profound Politicians and grave Sages of the
World to be compared unto him? Does a dying Man that has a never-dying Soul,
that is to pass speedily into an eternal State, lack a never-dying and immortal
Friend, that may stand him in some stead, when all his Relations are dead and
rotten? Is not God immortal? Are not Friends sometimes furthest off from one,
when one has most need of them? Is not he then a Friend highly to be prized,
who can, who will never be absent? Does not God fill Heaven and Earth? What
think you of a Soul-Friend? Is not such a one worth the looking after, who
takes care that your Soul to be sure shall not miscarry? Whoever did more for
Souls than Christ? Will it not be true Prudence to make sure of such a Friend
as we must have for our Friend, or we are miserable for ever? And where is such
a one to be found, but he that has the Keys of Heaven and Hell? Which is most
considerable, Time or Eternity? And whom shall I most value, him that promises
present Pleasures that are lost as soon as felt, or him that will bestow
everlasting Favors? And are there not at God's right Hand Pleasures for
evermore? If the Trial and Experience of so many Millions may speak his
Commendation, will not all that ever knew God say, truly God is good to Israel.
Will God's Willingness, Desire, and Earnestness prevail with you to come to
him? What is the Substance of the whole Bible? Does not almost every Chapter
speak the Desire that God has to be reconciled to Man? If the Perfection of
all Excellencies meeting in one can render him amiable; how can he be slighted,
who is altogether lovely? And what say you now, are you resolved, or are you
not? Shall the infinite Majesty of Heaven condescend to offer himself to be
loved and embraced by sinful Dust? Shall God say, I will be thy Father? And
shall not the Sinner say, I would be thy Child? Why should not the Heart of
every Apostate rebellious Traitor, that has forfeited Estate, Life and Soul,
leap at such good News, and say, Will God for all this lay aside the
Controversy, and conclude a Peace? Will he receive the Rebel to Mercy? Will he
open his Doors to his Prodigal? And is there yet any Hope? Is it possible that
such Sins as mine should be forgiven? Can it be conceived that such a Creature
as I should be embraced? What, look upupon me, will God indeed take me into
Favor? Yes, thee, behold he calls thee, he offers thee his Son, a Kingdom, a
Crown, behold the Father meets, he makes have to meet his returning Prodigal;
behold the King has sent to invite thee to the Feast; nay, he will give thee
his only Son in Marriage, the Wedding Garment is made ready, the Bridegroom is
coming, the Wheels of his Chariot run apace, the Friends of the Bridegroom are
come to bid you make ready: Up, deck your self, put on your glorious Apparel,
make have, make have ye Virgins, your Companions are ready, all stay for you,
the Bridegroom is at the Door? Behold he is at the Door, and will you still let
him knock? What! Father, Husband, a Kingdom? What Words are these? Will thou O
mighty Jehovah be my Father? Will thou O blessed Jesus be my Husband? Shall I
have a Kingdom? What me, a Child, a Spouse for the King of Glory, an Heir of
Glory! Grace! Grace! Amen, Hallelujah. Be it to thy Servants according to thy
Word! But who are we, and what is our Father's House, that thou have brought us
hitherto? And now O Lord God, what shall thy Servants say unto thee? For we are
silenced with Wonder, and must sit down with Astonishment, for we cannot utter
the least Title of thy Praises? What means the Highth of this strange Love? O
that the God of Heaven and Earth should condescend to enter into Covenant with
his Dust, and to take into his Bosom the viperous Brood, that have often spit
their Venom in his Face! We are not worthy to be as the Handmaids, to wash the
Feet of the Servants of our Lord? How much less to be thy Sons and Heirs, and
to be made Partakers of all those blessed Liberties and Privileges which thou
have settled upon us; but for thy Goodness sake, and according to thy own
Heart, have thou done all these great things. Even so Father, because so it
seemed good in thy sight. Wherefore thou art great, O God, for there is none
like thee, neither is there any God besides thee. And what Nation on Earth is
like thy People, whom God went to redeem for a People to himself, and to make
him a Name, and to do for them great things and terrible? For thou have
confirmed them to thy self, to be a People unto thee for ever, and thou, Lord,
art become their God. Wonder, O Heaven, and be moved, O Earth, at this great
thing! For, behold, the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with
them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be
their God. Be astonished and ravished with wonder, for the infinite Breach is
made up, the Offender is received, and God and Man are reconciled, and a
Covenant of Peace entered, and Heaven and Earth are agreed upon the Terms, and
have struck their Hands and sealed the Indentures. O happy Conclusion! O
blessed Conjunction! Shall the Stars dwell with the Dust? Or the wide distant
Poles be brought to mutual Embraces and Cohabitation? But here the Distance of
the Terms is infinitely greater, Rejoice O Angels! Shout O Seraphims! O all the
Friends of the Bridegroom and Bride prepare an Epithalamium, be ready with the
Marriage Song. Lo here is the Wonder of Wonders? For Jehovah has betrothed
himself for ever to his hopeless Captives, and owns the Marriage before all the
World, and is become one with us, and we with him; he has bequeathed to us the
precious things of the Earth beneath, with the Fullness thereof, and has kept
back nothing from us. And now, O Lord, thou art that God, and thy Words be
true, and thou have promised this Goodness unto thy Servants, and have left us
nothing to ask at thy Hands, but what thou have already freely granted. Only
the Word which thou have spoken concerning thy Servants, establish it for ever,
and do as thou have said, and let thy Name be magnified for ever, saying, The
Lord of Hosts he is the God of Israel. Amen. Hallelujah. And how do you like
this Music, O ye the lost Sons and Daughters of Adam? How do you relish these
Dainties? What do you think of this Match? Some you see have been so wise, as
with the greatest Gratitude they can for their Souls, to close with those happy
Offers of Grace; you hear how bravely such and such have bestowed themselves,
and now they are made for ever. And what do you say to the same Proposals? Have
they so much reason to bless the Day that ever such a Motion was made? Have
they cause to rejoice for ever for those blessed Overtures, or are they all to
be slighted by you? Will Christ be worse to you than them? Is Heaven and
Happiness less necessary for you than them? Will the Loss of a Soul be more
inconsiderable to you, than it would have been to them? Will not Heaven, Christ
and Glory be as well worth your Acceptance as theirs? What, are you willing to
be shut out when the Bridegroom comes to fetch his Spouse home? Can you bare
it, to see such as you thought your Inferiors, advanced, and your self
despised? What shall I say? What Words shall I use? What shall I do to prevail?
O that I could pity you a thousand times more than I do! O that my Eyes might
weep in secret for thy Folly! O that you also might do as some have done before
you! Though indeed they be but few that be so wise! O that you would also
bestow your Heart upon Christ! Give him your Heart-love, or he will have your
Heart-blood. Do not make your self miserable to please any living; do not
slight Christ, because most do so; go not with them to Hell for Company. But
that if it be possible I might persuade you, I shall add some more Motives, to
prevail with you to get acquainted with God, which I am certain will either
work that lessed Effect, or rise up against you to the Aggra^ation of your
Confusion, in that great and terrible Day.

II. HEAD of MOTIVES.
The next Head of Motives which I shall insist upon, for the in forcing of this
Duty of acquainting your selves with God, I shall take from the glorious Effect
of this Acquaintance with God. 1. The first Effect of this Acquaintance with
God is, it makes the Soul humble, and consequently fits the Soul for greater
Communications from God still, and to do God the greater Service; but of that
Particular afterward. Acquaintance with God it makes the Soul humble. When God
comes into the Soul, he brings such a glorious Light along with him, that he
makes the Soul to see, not only his Beauty, but its own Deformity, Psalm.
119.130. The Entrance of thy Word gives light: it gives Understanding to the
Simple. Before the Soul was acquainted with the Word of God, and by that had
some Discoveries of God made to it out of the Word, why it was in the dark, and
saw nothing at all of its own Vileness, it took no notice of that Sink, that
Hell that was within it, considered not its own Treason against the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and the dangerous Hazards that it did run, every moment upon
that account; but the Soul thought very well of its own State, it flattered it
self in its own Iniquity, the Man thinks he is rich and increased in Goods, and
has need of nothing; but when he comes to look into his Purse, to open his
Treasury, and to tell over all his Gold and Silver in the light, why then he
perceives a sad Mistake: All his Silver is Dross, and the best Riches that he
has is but Dung. When the Light comes in, he sees the Darkness of his
Understanding, the Perverseness of his Will, the Disorderliness of his
Affections, the Distemper of the whole Soul. He before took himself for a
beautiful Creature, but by this Light and this Glass he sees his Beauty is
great Deformity, he beholds heaps of Lusts crawling up and down, which before
lay undiscerned, and then that Man that reckoned himself so happy, cries out, O
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me? What shall I do to be saved? I am
undone, undone, how shall I live, where shall I dwell for ever? Time was that
the Man admired what the Ministers ailed to keep such a Stir about Sin, but now
he wonders that they are no more earnest in their preaching of it down. It was
a little while ago, that he thought himself whole, but now he feels himself
sick to the very Heart, wounded, fainting and ready to dye; he made full
account that he was pure, but now he cries out unclean, unclean; it was not
long since he said with Indignation, Am I blind also? But now he cries out, and
will not he silenced, have Mercy upon me, Jesus, thou Son of David, and grant
that I may receive my Sight. His Language is much altered; he can now say, was
ever such a Sinner as I pardoned? Will such a Prodigal ever be received? Shall
such foul Offenses as mine be forgiven? If God should look upon me, and give me
a Christ, and pity me, and cast his Skirts over me, while I lie in my Blood,
if the Lord should look upon me, it would be such a Wonder that all that ever
heard of it may justly admire. Now the Man which thought himself the best of
Saints, believes himself as bad as the worst of Sinners! When a Man begins to
be acquainted with God, he begins also to know himself; He that saw no need of
washing by Christ, would now have Hands, Feet, Head and Heart all washed. He
that thought himself sometimes far enough from Hell, now begins to admire that
he did not fall into it: And although there be a sweet Alteration in him for
the better, and Saints begin to delight very much in him, yet he wonders that
any one should see any thing in him, that should cause any Affection in them
toward him, much more to inflame their Hearts in such vehement Love to him; if
he hear of any Reproaches that are cast upon him, he is ready to say with that
wise Stoic, (Epict.) If he had known me better, he would have spoke much worse
of me. If any praise him, he judges that it proceeds from their Ignorance of
his Weakness, rather than from any Knowledge of his Worth; and if he hear any
such Language, he is ready to tremble for fear of his own Heart, and cries out,
not unto me, not unto me, but unto his Praise be given: yet not I, but Christ
which dwells in me. Thus it is with one that begins to have some saving
Knowledge of God; and the nearer he comes to God, the further he goes from
himself; the more he sees of him and his Righteousness, the less he sees of his
own; the more he is exalted, the more he debaseth himself; like those four and
twenty Elders, he lays his Crown at the Feet of God. Thus it was with Job, when
God, as I may so say, stood at a greater Distance from him, he is ready to
speak a little too highly he stands much upon his own Righteousness, he stiffly
justifies himself; but when the holy God comes a little nearer to him, when he
throws off that dark Cloud with which he had mantled himself, and when he
caused that glorious Brightness to break forth upon Job, and made him to see a
Glance of his Holiness, Wisdom and Justice, then how is he even ashamed and
confounded within himself, that he should ever stand so much upon his own
Justification, Job. 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear:
But now mine Eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and
Ashes. When he comes to be better acquainted with God, how strangely is his
Note changed; and I might say, when he was thus abased! How speedily does God
raise him to a wonder. A Man may hear of God twenty Years together, and yet
never abhor himself with Dust and Ashes, never see any Vileness that is in his
Nature, never be brought off from his own Righteousness, never admire that he
is kept out of Hell! O but when he comes to see God, and to be acquainted with
him, then how does he cry out of himself at God's Ear, as deserving nothing but
Wrath; then he has not a Word more to say for the Goodness of his own Heart;
now he can say with Astonishment! O infinite Patience! O unmeasurable Goodness!
O the Depths of God's Love! He must be merciful indeed that can pardon such
Sins! That must be Goodness indeed that can be so to me! That is Love with a
Witness, that can embrace such a^ loathsome Monster? What was it that made
Abraham call himself Dust and Ashes? What made David to say he was a Worm and
no Man? What made Isaiah speak so debasingly of himself? Why these were the
Friends of God, they had Visions (...) that holy One. When is it that the
People of G^^ are most ingenuous in their Confessions? When do they most freely
pour out their Souls before God? When is it that they most readily open their
Soars, and desire that they should be searched, but when this great Chyrurgion
comes to their Chamber? Those which before were whole, are now sick, full of
plague Soars, Head and Heart sick, dangerously sick, and no whole part in them;
they can say more against themselves now than ever the Minister could; they can
aggravate their Sins, and lay Loads upon themselves; and they see themselves
vile, and even are ready to wonder that the Earth did not open and swallow them
up before this, they admire that God should endure them so long, and think it
no small Miracle that they were not crushed in the Egg, that they were not cast
from the Darkness of the Womb, to the Darkness of Hell. Now they can cry out of
Original Sin, and the Indisposition of their Souls to any thing that is good,
and Inclination to that which is bad. They say as well as David, That they were
born in Sin, and in Iniquity did their Mother conceive them; they think every
thing too good for them, all Mercy on this side everlasting Misery. They count
every Bit they eat, and every Drop they drink more than they deserve. They
think themselves unworthy of the least of God's Mercies, Genesis 32.10. Others say
Thanksgivings, but he feels them; others say Confessions, but he feels them. It
is one thing for a Man to speak of his own Unworthiness, and another thing to
lie under the Sense of it. The Heart and Tongue are two distinct Members. The
Heart may speak that which the Tongue cannot utter, and the Tongue may utter
that which the Heart never felt. But a Man that is brought into Acquaintance
with God speaks what he experiences, or rather his Experience is greater than
he speaks, so that he does not dissemble with God, when he confesses his Sin
before him. They lay themselves as low as Hell; this is Humility, and this is
an Effect of Acquaintance with God. Hence it is that Paul says of himself,
Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace given,
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ; and
to make all Men se^ what is the Fellowship, etc. He wants Words to express
God's Greatness, and his own Smallness. Now what was it ^h^t made Paul speak
and think thus of himself? There was a time when Paul would have spit in any
one's Face that should have spoke as much against him, as he did against
himself. What is it that has wrought such a strange Alteration in this great
Rabbi, and made him so little? Why, this Acquaintance with God, the sight of
Christ was the thing that laid this proud Pharisee in the Dust, and made him
blind also. Mark this, always the more heavenly any Man is, the more humble.
See Ezod. 3.11.2 Sam. 7.18. If I should appeal to the Experiences of Saints,
and ask them, when they had the lowest Thoughts of themselves, would they not
say, when they were nearest God? Now would you walk humbly, you must walk with
your God; would you see more of your own Deformity? Why then you must labor to
see more of his Holiness, more of his Beauty. Contraries set near one another,
appear more visibly.

2. Another excellent Effect of Acquaintance with God, is, that it will make a
Man fall upon Sin in good earnest. When the Soul sees how infinitely good God
is, it cannot but see an unspeakable Evil in Sin, which is so directly contrary
to him. When the Soul has really entered into a League with God, it presently
bids Defiance to all his Enemies; when he begins to be at Peace with God, he
presently commenceth a War against his Adversaries. Friendship with God makes
Enmity against Satan. That which formerly the Man rolled under his Tongue as a
sweet Morsel, is now like Gall and Wormwood to him. He that sometimes did
commit Iniquity with Greediness, can now say, that it is the greatest Folly and
Madness in the World; he knows that it is an evil and a bitter thing, as sweet
as it tasted when his Palate was distempered; he that gloried in his
Wickedness, now accounts it the greatest Shame in the World, and hates the
Garments which are bespotted with the Flesh, which sometimes he took for
beautiful Raiments. The burnt Child dreads the Fire; Sin has cost his Friend
dear, and him dear too. The Child cannot love that Knife which stabbed his
Father. He knows how sweet God is, and how much he hates Sin, and that if he
would have God's Company, he must bid an everlasting Farewell to his dearest
beloved Sin; and therefore rather than he will offend so dear a Friend, he will
hew Agag in pieces before the Lord. He will as soon cut off one Hand with the
other, and be pulled Limb from Limb, as again draw his Sword against his
covenanted Friend, and again venture into the Field in the Cause that sometimes
he did so deeply engage Body and Soul in. He that thought before that it was no
great matter to damn, curse and tear, but a Trick of Youth to whore, and no
harm to do what one had a mind to, to eat and drink, and talk, and sleep as one
lists, to give one's Lust whatsoever it called for; he that could once make a
Mock of Sin, and sleep securely upon the Top of a Mast, and thought it a piece
of Gallantry to dare the Almighty, and was ready to laugh at them which durst
not be so prodigal of their Souls, as himself; the Case is now wonderfully
altered with him, he now sees the Harlot stripped naked, he beholds how loathsome
the Whore is now her Paint is washed of, Sin and Hell are alike to him; tempt
him to Folly, and he will soon answer in Joseph's Language, How shall I do this
great Wickedness, and sin against God? He that sometimes thought Sin the only
Pleasure, and looked upon the Devil and the World as the only Friends, now sees
his dangerous Mistake, and blesses God that his Eyes are opened before he
comes into another World; he knows now that Holiness is the only Pleasure, and
God is the only Friend; and Sin, and the World are as mortal Enemies as the
Devil himself, he believes that if he venture upon Sin, he must venture upon
the Displeasure of his Friend, whose Favor he set more Store by than all the
Delights under Heaven, and whose loving Kindness he judges to be better than
Life it self. When the Soul is once acquainted with God, how strangely are its
Apprehensions of things altered? Now he calls Things and Persons by their right
Name; Good he calls Good, and Evil, Evil; whereas before he called Evil good,
and Good evil, and put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light; he now
believes that the zealous Compassionate Ministers that spoke so much against
Sin, had reason enough to have said ten times as much as they did; he sees that
it was not for nothing that they were so earnest with him; he has tasted the
Gall, Wormwood, and Poison that is in Sin; he plainly sees what is the great
Makebate between God and Man, he has now the Wit to understand what it is
that has kept good things so long from him: Tell him now of a Revel, a Whore,
he had as live thou should persuade him to part with his Strength and Liberty
and grind in a Mill, he reckons you might as rationally desire him to leap into
a bottomless Pit, to take up his everlasting Lodging in a Bed of Flames, and to
make light of Damnation. Let Men and Devils use what Arguments they will to
prevail with him, now to close with Temptations, he is sure he has a stronger
against them; he has a sensible Argument within, which will answer all, if
they had ten thousand times as many more than they can produce: The Love of
Christ makes him abhor the Motion; God is my Friend, dashes all. Shall such a
one as I take up Arms against God? Shall I that have found him so infinitely
good? Shall I that have experienced the Faithfulness of this Friend to me, be
so infinitely ungrateful as to be thus abominably unfaithful to him? Shall I
that have forfeited my Life and Soul, and instead of Hell have received Heaven,
instead of Damnation, Salvation, shall I instead of Thankfulness again rebel?
Because the Grace of God abounds, shall sin abound? God forbid. To argue from
Mercy to Sin is the Devil's Logic: To argue from Mercy to Duty is true
Christianity. One that is acquainted with God can expostulate the Case with his
own Soul, and say! What meanest thou O my Soul to stand parlying with Satan?
Have thou known what that has cost thee already? Look back to Eden. Who was it
that dispossessed thy Grandfather of that brave Seat? What did Eve get by
discoursing with such a Cheater; have you not lost enough already, but you must
be venturing still? Was it nothing for God of a Friend to become a Stranger, an
Enemy? Was it a slight Matter to be divested of all that Glory that once thou
did shine in, but that now again after thou art brought into some Favor,
thou must be tampering with that Gamester, who had like to have robbed thee of
all? Art thou talking of returning again to Egypt? What have thou so soon
forgotten the Iron, and the Clay? Is this all the Thanks that you give the Lord
for his unspeakable Mercy? Does he that has done such things for you deserve
no better at your Hands? Is this your Kindness to your Friend? What was it, O
my Soul, that that undone Creature said unto thee? Did he say, it is a little
one and thy Soul shall live? What did he ask, a few merry Hours that I should
spare my self, that I should not be righteous overmuch? Did he so? A special
Friend? I thank you for nothing? And why did thou not answer the Tempter as
Solomon did Bathsheba, when she asked a small thing (as she thought) for
Adonijah? And why do thou not ask the Kingdom also? And why did not Satan ask
thee to part with Heaven, and thy Interest in Christ, and those Favors? As the
Lord lives, as small a Request as thou think his was, that Word was spoken
against thy Life, thy Soul. Avertuous Man, or as the Stoic calls him, (
Anton.) One that has God for his Friend, when Temptations are presented, he
remembers who he is, and how he stands related to God, and how little grateful
such an Action would be to his Friend. And thus he does resist the Temptation
with a great deal of Gallantry, when he remembers himself. Nay, sometimes
Temptations to sin do make Grace more to abound; the Water which was intended
to cool Divine Love, proves Oil, and makes that Noble Flame to burn more
vehemently, Cant. 8. 6, 7. He desires to exercise that Grace which is contrary
to the Vice which he is tempted to with more than ordinary Vigor. He stands
like a Rock in the midst of the Sea unshaken; he is steadfast and unmovable,
like a Pillar in the Temple of his God. He is much of the same mind, in that
Point, with that brave Heathen, who spoke thus to himself when Temptation was
strong: ( Ar. Epict. l. 2. c. 18.) Deliberate Man, yield not rashly, it is a
great Work that lies upon thy Hands, it is a divine Work, it is for a Kingdom,
the Kingdom of God. Now remember thy God, let us see what thy Love to thy God
is, remember his Presence, he beholds how thou stand deliberating whether
thou shouldesrt fight for him or against him; for shame show not thy self so
basely disingenious: Remember what thy God, thy Friend did for thee at such and
such a time: Remember how kindly you were entertained by him the last time you
were at his House. Whose Sword is that you wear by your side? who gave you it?
Did not God give it you to fight against his Enemies? And will you draw it
against himself? Remember from whence you had all that you do enjoy, and can
you find in you Heart to take God's Mercies, Gold, Silver, and Food, and bestow
them all upon that which he hates? Will you quarter and keep in pay with God's
Coin, his greatest Enemy? And if you feel your Heart still staggering, and
scarce able to keep its Ground, then remember God stands by, Christ looks on,
and sees how gallantly any Champion of his will demean themselves on his
Quarrel; and that there is not a more lovely Sight upon the Earth, than to
behold one of his Friends, rather venturing their Lives than they will bear
that the least Indignity or Affront should be put upon their God! O happy are
they that can always act as in the sight of God! And if the Soul can have but a
constant, fresh Sense of its relation to God, and his Eye, it is impossible but
that it should have Sin, which is so directly opposite to him: Happy are those
who by the Thoughts of God are enraged against Sin! Is it not enough, says
that heavenly Soul that is acquainted with God, that I have done such and such
things against God, when I knew him not, but that I should again engage against
him after I have been obliged by a thouland Mercies, after I have tasted and
seen how good the Lord is? Is it a light matter that I did so long fight
against him then? And shall I now renew my Rebellions, when I have had so much
Experience of the Folly and Madness of such a War, where I shall be as surely
conquered as I draw my Sword? And has God kept me by a Miracle of Mercy out of
Hell, and after I had run out so wretchedly, and undone my self, set me
upagain; after I had played the Prodigal, received me again into Favor, and
shall I after all deal thus basely by him: No, I Will a thousand Deaths before I
will willingly yield to any thing that may be in the least offensive to him,
whom my Soul has such an infinite Reason to love above the whole World. The
Knowledge of God's Service, and Satan's too, makes a Soul to distinguish; he
that knows what it is to be made free by Christ, abhors his old Master, he
remembers full well the great Hardship that he then underwent, when he had
nothing to live upon but Husks; he calls to mind the Clay and Mortar, he cannot
forget the cruel Vassalage that he served under; Garlic and Onions were his
Dainties, and truly he cannot desire to leave his Manna for such kind of Food;
he is not in Love with the Whip and Scourge, he does not dote upon the Fetters,
the Iron which went into his Soul, but he is glad with all his Heart to be free
from those Taskmasters which made him to serve with Rigor, he has no mind to
return to his old Work: My meaning in all this is, he that was a Servant and a
Drudge of Satan's, and a Slave to his Lust, when he once comes to taste the
Sweetness of Spiritual Liberty, to be made free by Christ, he has no Desire
again to be inslaved, but does with the greatest Detestation, reject all the
Proprosals and Promises that the Devil makes to bring this Business about; he
knows Satan too well to love his Service, he remembers that all his Pay was
Promises and no more, he remembers that he fed him with Poison, and made him do
that which had like to break his Bones, and undone him for ever; he sees what
Satan's Designs were, and what had become of him quickly if he had gone on in
his Service; he believes Chains to be Chains, though they be of Gold; he
believes that Poison will kill him, though it may be sweet in the Mouth; he
has now such a Sense of the Evil and Baseness of Sin, as being so infinitely
loathsome to God, as that he hates it with a perfect Hatred; he has a Will in
some measure conformed to the Will of God; and what his Friend, the Lord loves,
he cannot hate, and where his God hates he cannot love: Psalm. 139.22. Do not I
hate them O Lord which hate thee? And am I not grieved with them which rise up
against thee? I hate them with a perfect Hatred, I count them mine Enemies. Now
what is it that stirs the Psalmist's Choler so much? Why, he had been working
upon his own Heart, in the former part of the Psalm, the Doctrine of of God's
Omnisciency and Goodness, and by Meditation upon this Subject he was brought
under a lively Sense of the Greatness of Divine Kindness; and while his Heart
did thus muse, the Fire burnt, his Soul was in a flame against Sin, ver. 17.
How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God! O when the Soul has sweet
Thoughts of God, it will have sower Thoughts of Sin. When the Soul loves God
dearly, it cannot choose but hate Sin entirely. None behold such Deformity in
Sin, as those which behold most Beauty in God. Hence it is that some of the
People of God have (nay all of them which are really acquainted with God, are
of the same mind) counted it more desirable to leap into the Flames, than to
venture upon a known Sin. It was no Untruth in the absolute Position, though
falsely applied by Job's Friend, that it is a great Wickedness to choose the
least Sin before the greatest Suffering, Job 36.21. What was it that made Paul
so weary of himself? What Burden was it that made his Back to ache? What ^ains
caused those bitter Groans? Romans 7. Was ^t not Sin? And why did not Paul groan
before ^s well as then? Was it because he then had no Sin ^t all, or less Sin
than when he had made that bitter Complaint? No such matter, but because he had
then less Acquaintance with God. But now he ^s become acquainted with God, the
more he does abhor himself for Sin. He now knows better than he did, his Eyes
are opened, and he sees Sin in its Colors, and he looks upon it as so great an
Evil, that he does want Words to express the odious Nature of it; therefore
because he cannot find a worse Word, he calls Sin by its own Name, sinful Sin;
which he thought a more significant Epithet, then if he had called it Devilish
Sin. What makes the Children of God to be so weary of this World, and so
desirous to be upon the Wing? Why, it is because of better Acquaintance
elsewhere; they know that then they shall put off that Carrion that now they
carry about with them, Sin I mean, which, like a dead Carcass bound to a
living, does now stink so abominably in their Nostrils; they know that then
they shall have a sweeter Smell, and themselves also smell more savoury in the
Nostrils of God. They know that Poverty shall be swallowed up with Riches, Want
with Fullness, Sin with Holiness, Misery with Happiness, they have an
Inheritance, a City wherein dwells Righteousness, and nothing that is unclean
shall enter into it; and when they come thither, they know the Case will be
altered with them, and that though now they bare about with them a Body of
Death and Sin, yet ^hen they shall have a Body as pure, as bright and glorious
as the Sun, they shall be presented by Christ to the Father without Spot or
Wrinkle, or any such thing. He knows that as long as he is thus sullied by his
Sin, his great Friend will not take so much Pleasure in his Company. Isaac and
Ishmael, the Ark and Dagon, God and Sin, cannot dwell in the same Heart;
therefore he desires to have less of Sin's Company, that he may have more of
God's; none of Sin's Company, that he may have always God's Company. Observe
that constantly in your own Experience and others, those which walk most close
with God are most tender, as to the Matter of Sin: and those which are less in
Converse with God, are more bold in their venturing upon Sin, and after it is
committed they have less Regret. What is the reason that one can swallow any
thing almost, and another is afraid of the least Appearance of evil; he hates
the Garment spotted with the Flesh, he is as fearful of clothing himself with
Wickedness, as of putting on the Garments of one that has had the Leprosy or
Plague upon him; he hates vain Thoughts, because he loves God and his Laws,
Psalm. 119.104, 113.

3. Another glorious Effect of Acquaintance with God, is, that it makes one to
have very low and undervaluing Thoughts of the World. When the Saint has been
with Paul raised up to the third Heaven, when he has had some intimate
Converse with God, he can look the World into almost nothing; nay, if it stand
in Competition with Christ, he counts it but as Dung and Dross^^ comparison of
the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3.8. he can
then set a higher Value upon the Light of God's Countenance, than upon Corn,
and Wine, and Oil. It is because that poor Creatures know no better, that they
dote so much upon the World; did they but know what it is to have one Look of
Love from God, were they but acquainted with the Glory of another World, they
would soon disrelish every thing else; nothing will down with them which have
been feasted in God's House, but those royal Dainties. Taste the World who
will, says the Saint, give me but more Grace, more of Christ's Company, let me
but maintain an intimate Familiarity with God, let me be but better acquainted
with him, and be more frequently refreshed with his Smiles, this is all that I
desire upon Earth, this is all that I expect to make my Happiness complete in
Heaven. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I can
desire in comparison of thee. It was not without good Reason that the Psalmist
prizes the Commands of God above Gold and Silver: it was no Mistake in Solomon
to count Wisdom more excellent than the finest Gold, and more precious than
Rubies. That spiritual Merchant knew what he did when he sold all that he had
for that Pearl of great Price; he was sure he should be no Loser by such a
Bargain. Bring me a heavenly Creature that has had a View by Faith of the
Glory of God's Countenance, that has been in his Company, that has been
brought into his Banqueting House, such a one I am confident can easily spare
that which most keep such a fearful Stir about, he can spare the World for them
which are like to have no better a Portion. Give him but more of those
spiritual Pleasures which he has had in Communion with God, and he desires no
more. He can now speak it, and speak it in good Earnest, that there is no
Comparison between this World and another; he can now call this World a Shadow,
and the Glory of it Grass, and write Vanity, Emptiness, and Vexation upon its
beautiful Face, and contemn all its Smiles and Frowns, and look upon its
greatest Lovers, as Persons that deserve to be pitied rather than envied, whose
Portion is so small, whose Happiness so short, and whose Misery and Mistake is
so great and dismal. It is a common thing for Men to declaim against the World,
and to say, it is but a little muck; it is no unusual thing for its greatest
Lovers to speak against it, and say, that it is that which passes away; but
yet for all that they pursue it more than Heaven, and are more earnest for it,
than the Salvation of their Souls, and more troubled at the Thought of parting
with it, than at the Thought of their parting with God; and the Loss of it
troubles them more than if we tell them of the Loss of their Souls: Such as
these will not say but that God is infinitely more to be loved than the whole
World; but yet if the World and God stand in Competition, they stand not long
disputing which must give place, the World has the uppermost Room in the
Heart. But whence is this Mistake? how comes the Servant to ride, and the
Master to go on foot? why is the World preferred before God? Why, hence it is,
Men know not God, they are not acquainted with his Excellency; the World is
sensible, he sees it, he feels it, he tastes it, and so he does not the things
that are invisible: and no wonder then that Sense bears the Sway; the Man wants
Faith to realize Invisibles, he wants Senses spiritually exercised. But now he
that knows God, and is acquainted with spiritual things, he has quite another
Apprehension of the World, and that not only from Faith, but sometimes from a
spiritual Sense, and he can say that Divine Pleasures, Riches, and Enjoyments,
do as sensibly refresh him, yea, abundantly more than ever the World did. And
when he has been newly taking a Walk in that heavenly Paradise, he looks back
upon this World with Grief and Indignation, that he should ever love the World
with his Heart, when there was one that did infinitely more deserve his Love,
when there was a God, Christ and Holiness to be loved; that he should be such a
Child, such a Fool as to run after Butterflies, quarrel for a Feather, hunt for
a Shadow, while God, Christ, and Glory, those great Substances, lay by
unregarded. Now he grudges that any thing should have his Love but his God; his
dearest Relations, if they stand in God's way, must be run over, despised,
hated. That which the Men of the World fight, and kill, and spare not to damn
their Souls for, he sees now to be a pitiful worthless thing, which cannot defer
Death a Moment, nor stand him in any stead in another World. He Is all for that
Coin which will go current in another Country; and if he be but rich in
Promises, rich in spiritual Relations, rich in Grace, he takes himself for no
unhappy Man; let the World speak or think what they will of him, he does not
much pause upon it, he believes that he is but a Pilgrim and Stranger here, and
if he meet with no great Kindness, it is but that which he expected. The truth
of it is, he is almost afraid of the Smiles of the World, not being ignorant of
this, that whom it kisses, it intends to betray, he cannot be over-fond of that
which in all probability will keep God and him at a greater Distance, and make
his Passage to Glory next to impossible. He reckons that it is better being rich
in Grace than rich in Purse; and that he which lays up for his Body, and
provides not for his Soul, is the greatest Fool in the World. Tell such a one
as Moses of Riches, Honors and Preferments, he thinks them but poor sorry
things for a Man of Israel to be taken with, and he will rather see them in the
Dirt, than part Company with his suffering Brethren, much less with God. It is
storied of Anaxagoras, that he seemed to be very little concerned when his
Country was in a Flame, upon which being taxed by some, he made this Reply,
There is none of you all care more for your Country than I do for mine;
pointing with his Finger up to Heaven. Thus it is with the People of God; let
others talk of Riches and Honor, but there is none of them all that value true
Riches as they do; but here is the Difference, one thinks he has Riches, when
he has the Command of a great deal of Gold and Silver, the other knows he has
Riches when he has Christ and Grace, and can have good Returns out of that
other World. And which of these are the wisest will e're long be seen. One
looks upon Heaven and Glory as a Shadow, a Fable, and the Things of this World
as the only Realities; the other he looks upon Heaven, God and Eternity, as the
greatest Realities, and most worthy of his highest Valuation, and the Things of
this World as flying Shadows, which cannot fill the Arms of him that does
embrace them: And under this Apprehension and Sense of things, no marvel that
he does prefer the Substance before the Shadow. He believes with that Worthy,
he was born for other things than to eat and drink, and sleep, or to take his
Pleasure, or to get an Estate; he knows that the business in this. World is to
provide for another, to get his Peace made with God, to contemplate Heaven, and
to get thither; and therefore you must not count it strange that such a Person
as this is somewhat cold, and remiss in his carrying on of lower Designs; he
knows that the disproportion between finite and infinite, Time and Eternity, is
no such inconsiderable one as the most count upon. Again, he has more than
once experienced this, that the very Joys and Comforts that are to be had in
the enjoying of Communion with God, even in this World, are unspeakably more
intense and refreshing than the highest sensual Pleasures in the World. One
that is acquainted with God will take the Word of his Friend for true, which
Word tells him, that whatsoever is presented to his Sense, the World and all
that is therein, must e're long be burnt up; whereupon he thinks it no
Imprudence at all to hazard present Enjoyment for future Hopes; no Folly to
look after something that will bear the Flame. He thinks it scarce worth the
while to be born to possess, if it were a whole World, except he were sure of
having something after it that were better than what he met with here; he had
rather have one Smile from his Friend than thousands of Gold and Silver; he
would not for a World be to have his Portion here, though it be never so large a
one: he had rather by far be with Lazarus upon a Dunghill, than sit with Dives
in a Chair of State, before the richest Fare that the Sea, or Air, or Earth
could afford him: he would not change Conditions with those that enjoy the most
of the Things of this World; he can thankfully want that which most commonly
makes its Possessors miserable. O could you but talk with a Man that lives in
Heaven, while he is upon Earth, and could you but see and hear how much he
slights that which you adore! Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, but Food
convenient for me, is the highest that he dare pray for: he had rather live, in
a smoking Cottage, and have God for his Companion, than d well in the greatest
Palace, and have the Devil for his Neighbor, Counselor, or Master. When a
Man has been in Heaven by Contemplation, though his Body be upon the Earth,
yet the best part of him, his Affections, his Love, Joy and Heart, is still
there. Sen. Ep. 41. One that does converse with God here, he is indeed that
earthly Lump, his Body is below, but could you see his Thoughts, could you look
into his Heart, and see the inward Actings of his Soul, you should see the Man
out of the World discoursing with God, he sticks close to the Company of his
Friend; He is like the Sun beams, who though they touch the Earth, yet they
still abide there from whence they are sent, and are most intensly hot nearest
the Fountain, the Sun. So the Soul and Thoughts of a Child of God, they may,
nay, they cannot but glance upon the World; but it is most vigorous spriteful
Actings are toward God, and the Heat of its Affections are abundantly more
remiss and cool when they beat upon earthly Objects. He that knows what it is
to have the Company of God, is almost ready to wonder how any one can be
content with any thing below God; and as for himself, he takes himself for
little better than a Prisoner, while his Soul is pent up in a Body which is so
unweildly as to all spiritual Employments, ^ill it be refined by the Grave. He
would not be to dwell here for ever for a World, though he might enjoy more
Content than ever any since the Fall did. A Soul acquainted with God is a noble
Creature indeed, it scorns petty low things, it thinks no Estate big enough for
it, but that which is infinite; he looks upon himself as a Citizen of no mean
City, a Denizen of Zion, a Freeman of the New Jerusalem, one of the Royal
Society, over which Christ, that King of Glory, is the President, his
Inheritance is greater than that which the Sun compasses in its course. O when
(says such a one) shall I leave the Cities of Cabul, and dwell with the King
at Jerusalem! O when shall my Soul be safely ark'd! O when shall I be upon the
Wing for Heaven! O when shall I leave this Body there whence if first came!
When shall I go out of this Cell, this Cage! O that I were once safe in Heaven!
O that I were in the immediate Presence of God, and might stand for ever before
him, and have his blessed Society for ever and ever. Neither am I now quite
without him; but how little, O how little is it that I now enjoy! O when shall
I enter into the Possession of that better longer Life! I stay and long for
that separating, or rather uniting Hour, which will separate my Soul from my
Body, from my Dross, but perfectly unite me to God. Look then, O my Soul, upon
all that thou see below, but as so many Inns and resting Places for a Pilgrim
to take some little Refreshment in, and then to be gone. That Day, O my fearful
Soul, which thou sometimes fear as my last, is the Birthday of Eternity. O
what mean we to love our Prisons, Fetters, Burdens! What ail we to be so much
pleased with our Miseries, and afraid of our Happiness? O this Unbelief! O were
Christians but more in the Company of God by Faith and Meditation, they would
look upon God as great, and the World as a very small thing. He that knows God
to be great, sees every thing below him little. It is an infallible Argument of
a Divine and Excellent Soul, and one that has Acquaintance with God, when he
can judge all beneath God, as low, fordid, base, and utterly unworthy of the
respect of his Soul.

4. Another glorious Effect of Acquaintance with God is, that it will ease us
of all Sorrows, or cure all Sorrows. As soon as any one has but a saving
Knowledge of Christ, he is in such a Condition as that he need not trouble his
Head with Care, nor his Heart with Fear; no more than a rich Heir that has a
tenderhearted, loving, wise Father, need not trouble himself what he shall do
for Bread and Clothing; as long as the great Cause of Fear is taken away, so
long he is well enough. As for those that are unacquainted with God, they
either are always afraid, or have Cause always to be afraid: but as for a Child
of God, that Scripture buoys up his Soul under the mightiest Waves of Fear,
There is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. He that
is in Covenant with God, may in this World undergo some petty Injuries, some
Insurrections may be made against him; but this is his Comfort, he is sure
never to be quite overpowered, never to be finally conquered! O the
Disquietments and Fears that Strangers and Enemies are compassed with, or will
be! And O the Joys, the Security, the true Security that some have; at what a
rate do they live! and how bravely do they die! Mark the perfect, and behold
the upright Man: for the End of that Man is Peace. This was touched upon
before, when I opened the Nature and Qualifications of this Friend, and
therefore I need say the less here; yet it being the great Inquiry of the
wisest, how they may be sheltred from this Storm? What shall they do to be
cured of these Heart-qualms? how they may be freed from Fears? I shall not
altogether pass it over in this Place. I cannot but encourage poor Strangers, as
they value the truest Comforts, as they would be free from Fear and Trembling
when the Foundations of the Earth shall be shaken, when the Mountains shall
tremble, and melt at the Presence of God, the mighty God of Jacob, when the
Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scroll, and be all of a Flame: Make sure
of this Friend; it is impossible that one that has such a one for his Friend
should much be daunted, when he hears of Was and Rumors of Wars, when the
Pestilence rages, when there are dreadful Earthquakes in sundry Places, and
such Distress of Nations and Perplexities, that the stoutest Heart shall sink
that has not this to support it: Then a Child of God may lift up his Head with
Comfort, because his Redemption draws near. There is a vast Difference
between a godly Man and a wicked, as to their Affections, Fears, Joys, Desires,
Hopes. The godly thinks long for that which the wicked wishes with all his
Heart might never be; the Day of Judgment. The righteous Man is even delighted
with the fore-thoughts of that, the Thoughts of which does put a Damp upon all
the Comforts of the ungodly; he rejoiceth in that which makes his Neighbor to
tremble. As for Death, a gracious Heart that has kept his Watch, and
maintained a sweet and constant Correspondency with God, and has had his Heart
in Heaven, and can look upon the great Jehovah as his Friend, cannot be very
much affrighted at his Approach: He is not much appaled when he looks out at
the Window, and sees this Messenger making have to his House; and when he
knocks at his Door, he dares let him in, and can heartily bid him welcome; he
understands whence he comes and what his Errand is, and though he look somewhat
grimly, yet as long as he comes to conduct him to his Friend's House, he can
dispense with that; he has more reason to speak it than he which did.
(Plotinus) Let me make have away to my Country; there are my excellent
Ancestors, there dwell my noble Relations, there is the constant Residence of
my dearest Friends. (Tull.) O happy will that Day be when I shall come into
that glorious Assembly, when I shall have better Company than Homer, Orpheus,
Socrates, Cato, when I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
Palace of their Friend and mine! O happy Day when I shall come to my Father's
House, to that general Assembly, the Church, of the firstborn, to an
innumerable Company of Angels, to Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant, and
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect. A Man's Knowledge of other things may
add to his Fears, and make his Miseries greater; but the more Knowledge we have
of God, the less our Fears and Sorrows must needs be: and when our Knowledge of
God is perfect, all our Fears and Sorrows shall be for ever blown over. I cannot
omit a brave Speech of that noble Stoic which comes to my Mind, ( Ar. Epict.
l. 1. c. 7.) If the Acquaintance and Favor of Caesar can keep you (as you are
made to believe) from some Fears? how much rather to have God for your Father
and Friend? how little Cause have such to be afraid at any time of any thing.
Death it self is not evil to a Friend of God; he may say, come, let us go
quickly to our Father's House, our Father calls us. And does this seem a small
Matter to you? believe it, when you come to die you will be of another Mind
then; you will think that is a Cordial worth any Money, that will raise your
Spirits at such a Time, and make you with a smiling Countenance to pass into an
everlasting State. It is but a Folly to expect that any thing in the World
should do this for us, but the Knowledge of our Interest with God. It Is
possible indeed to get some stupifying intoxicating Stuff, that makes a Man to
die like a Beast, without any great Horror, the Devil's Shop will furnish poor
dying Creatures with enough of that: Nay, he is glad if he can keep Men asleep
till Death awaken them; but miserable is that Man who is beholding to the Devil
for his Cordials; miserable is he who has nothing to keep him from a Hell upon
Earth, but his own Ignorance and the Devil's Word. I promise you, it is none of
the joyfulest Spectacles to an enlightened Soul, to look upon one that lived
wickedly, and died peaceably. You would think that a poor Man, that is going to
Execution, had little Cause to smile, though he should ride to the Gallows upon
an easy going Horse, or in a Coach. The Swine is usually very still, when the
Butcher is scraping away the Hair of his Throat in order to the Sticking of
him: It Is no unusual thing for a vile unsanctified Sinner, to leap with a mad
Confidence into Eternity; but he alone has a solid Peace who has God for his
Friend. This is the only Man has just Cause to sing for Joy, when his Soul is
going into another World. It was none of the worst Counsel which he gave,
whosoever he was, who said, that it does highly concern us seriously to think
of terrible things which we must most certainly see e're long, and to lay in
such Provision as may make us fit to grapple with them when they come. O for
that which will keep us from crying out hereafter, What shall I do? Woe is me, I
am undone! Were it so that there were such rare Extraction to be made which
would certainly prolong our Lives as long as we would, and make us always
cheerful, what Striving would there be to get such a Receipt! O how would the
great ones bring out their Bags to purchase it at any rate! How willingly would
they mortgage all their Lands, part with their richest Jewels to buy it! and
yet how little will they expend for that, which if they had would prove far
more effectual! O would Men and Women but understand themselves, and mind their
Business, what sweet Lives might they lead, what a Calm might there be
constantly upon their Spirits! How cheerfully might they live! and how joyfully
might they die! Tully says that he and many others had been gathering the most
powerful Herbs that they could find to cure all Fears, but, says he, I know
not what is the matter, the disease is still stronger than the Remedy. And do
thou not know, O Tully, what is the matter? why, then I will tell thee, one
principal Ingredient was left out, viz. Faith in the Blood of Christ, and Union
with God by Virtue of that Blood. He that is by Christ brought acquainted with
God, need not much fear Griefs, Sorrows, and such things Christ was acquainted
with for him; he has unsting'd Death, and sweetened the Grave: All his Troubles
are now but as Physic, the Poison of them is corrected; though the Pill be
bitter, yet it is of his Friend's Composing, and therefore you may take it
without any turning away of your Head. Show me a Man (said old Epictetus) that
is happy, truly in his Life, and happy in his Death; happy in his Health, and
in his Sickness; happy when poor, scorned, tormented and banished, in a word,
happy in all Conditions. O that I could but talk with such a Man! O that I
could see such a Spectacle! such a one as my Eyes never yet beheld. Why, I will
tell thee the Reason of it, O Epictetus, It is because thou never saw a
Christian, one that was acquainted with God; for let me tell the World, Through
Grace I have seen such a Sight, and do believe it to be the most lovely Sight
on this side Heaven. I have seen one smiling when his Jaws have been falling,
and Eye-strings breaking, rejoicing, when most about him were weeping, and
accounting it a high Act of Patience to be willing to live; and how do you like
such a Condition? Is it better to lie quivering, shaking and groaning, or
rejoicing, and praising, and admiring of Free Grace, and setting forth the
Riches of God's Love and Goodness? Which of these would you choose? I can easily
believe that few are so bad, but that they could be contented as well as Balaam
to die the Death of the righteous, and to have their latter End like his? But
would you die joyfully? why then you must live holily; get acquainted with God,
and then this may be your State. I remember Seneca speaks of one Paecuvius, who
when he was drunk cried out (...) (I have been alive) very merrily. But had he
well understood himself, he would have thought he had had much better Reason to
have cried out, I am dead, I am dead. But however, what he said ungroundedly
and wickedly, a Child of God may easily and thankfully say, when he is going to
his last Sleep, he may with Joy and Cheerfulness say, I have lived, and through
Grace, I have kept a fair Correspondency with my God, my Friend, whom I am now
going to dwell with for ever. Do not think therefore that I come to take away
your Comforts and Joys, when I come to persuade you to get Acquaintance with
God, no such Matter. I would have you learn to rejoice, but yet I would that
that Joy should be born from above, that the Foundation of it should be the
Knowledge of your Interest in God's Love. Other Joys may make you have a
smiling Countenance, but they do not raise and fill the Soul; for I must tell
you, I am far from thinking that every one that laughs is joyful, and without
Fears. Give me a Man that knows that God is his Portion, and Heaven his
Inheritance; that knows with what Friend, and in what a happy State he shall
live in after Death, this, this is the cheerful Man; such a one as this is can
overlook momentary Sorrows, he understands full well that the Case will be
quickly altered with him; and the Thoughts of eternal Happiness do swallow up
his temporal Miseries: Tell one of God's Acquaintance, of Poverty, he values it
not, so long as he knows he has a brave Estate that cannot be confiscated,
Riches that none can take from him, a Treasure that Thieves cannot break through
to, and steal. As for all worldly things, he knows that before a few Years are
over he must part with them however; he is of that Man's Mind, who having a
considerable Sum of Money, and precious Jewels hid in his Saddle, and a little
odd Money in his Pocket, was set upon by Thieves; who readily went to his
Pocket, and took what was there, and looked no further: Now the Man scaping
clear with his main Treasure, is so joyful, that he takes no Notice of what was
stole from him. Thus a Child of God, if he loose his Estate, his Liberty, and
all his outward Enjoyments, he counts all these but inconsiderable, as long as
his Soul is safe, his great Treasure is out of their Reach. Tell him of
Torments, Racks, Flames, or what the Policy of Hell can invent, he is not
ignorant of this, that the more he suffers for Christ's Sake, the greater Cause
he has to rejoice, to be exceeding glad, for great shall be his Reward in
Heaven; and while they add to his Sufferings they add to his Glory: and though
against their Will while they would injure him, they do him the greatest
Kindness; this light Affection works for him a far more exceeding and eternal
Weight of Glory. As long as his Torments want that dreadful Epither, Eternal,
he does not much pause; the Thoughts of God's Love make Man's Hatred
inconsiderable? O how sweet are the Thoughts of his Friend, when his Enemies
are most bitter. Blessed be God, as for those intolerable Torments, he knows
its beyond Man's Power, and far from God's Will to inflict them upon him, and
so long he cares not much: All other Tortures are but a Flea-bite to the Pains
of Hell, and an enraged Conscience; he can almost dare the World and the Devil
to do their worst, as being Confident of this, that as long as he is dear to
God, his Soul is out of their Reach. Threaten him with Banishment, he remembers
that he has a Friend that will find him out, and bear him Company wheresoever
he is. Tell him of the barbarous Unkindness and Treachery of former Friends; he
reads that his Betters have been worse handled by their pretended Friends;
above all, this cheers him, to think that all his Friends will not serve him
so, he has one Friend that will never forsake him, never be unfaithful to him.
Now bring a wicked Man upon Earth, that is without his Sorrows, I know there is
none, no not one; there is none of them all, but if he were within the Sight of
those devouring Flames would tremble. Those that have Wickedness enough to dare
God, will not have Courage enough to look him in the Face, when he shall appear
in flaming Five, to execute Vengeance upon the ungodly; he that will not now be
troubled at the Doing of Wickedness, will be troubled hereafter at the
Suffering for it. Let Sinners say what they will, I am sure they cannot be long
without Fears, to behold Christ, and his dear Servants coming together in the
Clouds, with Millions of mighty Angels to judge the World; I am confident it
will be such an amazing Sight as cannot choose but cool their Courage, and make
the stoutest Heart of them all to ache; I am sure that as light as they make of
Damnation, and God's Displeasure, that the Day is coming, when they will
believe it was no such Cowardice to be afraid of an angry God, to fly from the
Wrath to come, and to run away from so formidable an Enemy as Sin. So that it is
clear, that a wicked Man will first or last be a fearful Man, a Magor missabib,
Fear on every Side, shall be his Name. But now he that does exceedingly fear to
offend God, need not exceedingly to fear any thing else; and he that fears not
God, has cause enough to fear every thing? O Sirs, it is a brave thing to be
able to take Death cheerfully by the Hand, and to walk with him joyfully into
another World; and this I say again, a Man acquainted with God may do: he has
this to comfort him, Death does more properly give him Life, than take it away
from him; and that as soon as he is dead his Sin shall die too, and his Grace
live and act without Control; then he shall live a Life of Joy, a Life of
perfect Holiness, such a Life as Saints and Angels live, such a Life as Christ
lives, the Life of God, a Life without Death, an everlasting Life; and why then
should he be afraid of Dying? As for his old Companion the Body, it is gone to
rest, and will e're long be awakened and rise from his Bed, more vigorous and
fit for those noble Employments which it must be engaged in for ever: and Soul
and Body shall meet with more Comfort, than now they part with Pain, when the
Body shall be in another kind of Dress than now it wears, and that also shall
in some Respects be like the Soul, agil, holy, immortal. This is such a Man
that I can call happy, and so e're long will those that now scorn and persecute
him call him too. Blessed is he that in his Life is holy, and cheerful, but
most cheerful and perfect at his Death. This is the happy Portion of God's
Acquaintance, this is the Heritage of the Friends of the Bridgroom. I have read
of a wise Man, that would commend, and be thankful for every thing, because he
was sure a Friend of his had the Management of every thing, whose Understanding
was infinite, and whose Wisdom was unsearchable, who could and would work his
own Honor, and his Friend's Comfort, out of every thing, yea, though seemingly
evil; for the greater the Evil seems to be, the greater will be the real
Kindness which makes so much good out of it. O but I have lately lost many of
my most near and precious Relations! If thou art one of God's Friends, let me
tell thee for thy Comfort, you will meet them at your Friend's House, when you
come thither. It was no unsuitable Advice that he gave no his Friend Lucilius,
to cheer him up after the Loss of a dear Friend, Let us consider, my dear
Lucilius, that we our selves should be glad to be in that Place, and to enjoy
that Company, which you are so sad that your Friend is gone to; and he that you
say is lost, is not so, but happy before you. We do not judge rightly of
things. Well then, would you know what a Man is? would you pass a true Estimate
of him, and understand his Worth and Value? Why then consider the Man without
his Riches, lay aside his Honors, take away all his Externals from him; nay
further, let us see the Man naked out of his Body, and how does the Soul look?
Is it now rich, beautiful, joyful? can it stand confidently before God? does it
appear cheerfully in the Presence of its Maker? Why, this is something. It
matters not much whether his Body were fed with Pulse or Dainties, clothed
with Rags or Scarlet, it matters not whether his Soul went out of his Mouth, or
at a Wound, whether he died in a Bed of Down, or in Flames. Methinks, by this
time you should be ready to think that Religion is an excellent thing, that
God's Acquaintance is desirable, and that no Life is like the Life of a
Christian, all whose Sorrows end in Joys, whose Miseries make him more happy,
whose Shame for Christ will make for his Glory; in a word, whose Death brings
him into Life. This is the Generation of them that seek thee, that seek thy
Face, O Jacob.

5. Another Effect of Acquaintance with God, is, That it will make us more
highly to honor him. Here Familiarity is far from breeding Contempt. Those
that are Strangers to God see not his Worth and Excellency, they honor him
not, but they have the most vile, low, contemptible Thoughts of the infinitely
glorious Majesty, and they think any thing will serve his Turn, they make more
bold with him than they would do with a Man like themselves, they put him off
with the Leavings of the World: When they have been feeding their Lusts, and
serving their Pleasures, and gratifying the Devil all the Day-long, then they
come between sleep and awake, and pretend a great deal of Love to him, and
Anger with themselves for their Sin; whereas God knows, they do but play the
Hypocrites in all they do, and mean nothing that they say: Lip-Devotion,
Knee-Religion God shall have, and but a little of that too; and that pitiful
Stuff that they present him with, they think God is very much beholding to them
for. As for the sanctifying the Lord God in their Hearts; as for inward ward
hearty Love, as for high Prizings and Admirings of God, as for a real honoring
of God, and worshipping of him in Spirit, and in Truth, it is that which they
understand not; and as for them which do, they laugh at them, as if they were
guilty of the greatest Folly in the World. But now he which converseth with
God, beholds such a Beauty, Excellency, Majesty, and Glory in him, that it is
ready quite to swallow up his Soul; he speaks much of God, but yet he thinks
more; he wonders that a God of such infinite Goodness should be no more loved;
that a God of such infinite Greatness, Justice and Holiness, should be no more
feared; that a God of such unspeakable Power should be no more obeyed; and
while he remembers his own Contempt of God in former times, and the too mean
Thoughts that he has at present of him, he does even stand astonished to think
that he should be on this side the State of the Damned. He that before thought
every thing too much for God, now thinks nothing enough for him. The Man is
strangely changed by his new Acquaintance, so that he may not improperly be
called a New Man, all things are new with him. In Honor to this new Guest he
has got on new Clothes, he is clad with Righteousness, as with a Garment; new
Food, it is his Meat and Drink to do the Will of his Father which is in Heaven;
new Drink, Wine on the Lees well refined, he draws all out of those Wells of
Consolation, the Promises: he has new Thoughts, Words and Actions; God,
Invisibles, and all the things of Faith are now Substances with him. Now the
Threats or Promises of a God are not counted small Matters; Heaven, Hell, and
Eternity go for he greatest Realities, because God says they are such. So he
that sometimes lived without God in the World, had no Respect at all to his
Glory, but valued himself and his most base Lust, and the Devil himself before
God, does now respect God's Glory in all that he does, he ventures upon nothing
deliberately, but what may please him; Religion runs through all he does; he
eats, he drinks, and sleeps, and clothes himself; he prays, he works, he
recreates himself with a Design for God. The grand Project he is still carrying
on, is the Honor of God. He will undertake nothing of Importance, before he
confult with, and has the Advice and Direction of his Friend. Whatsoever he
has that is worth any thing, he sends it to this Friend, he presents him with
his First Fruits, he sacrifices his Male, the best of his Flock; desires that
his Friend may be always at his House, and that he may have the best
Entertainment that he can possibly give; and he is ashamed at the best, that he
can make him no more welcome, who he so highly honors; he is grieved that his
Entertainment is no better; he would fain give God his first and last Thoughts,
his warmest Affections; he would gladly have the Strength and Vigor of Body
and Soul spent in his Service; he studies how to improve all Mercies and
Enjoyments for God, to take hold of all Opportunities that he can possible, and
to make the best of them for the promoting that grand Design which he has on
Foot, his Honor. He thinks not Wife and Children, Houses and Lands, Body,
Soul, and all that he can make in the World too good for him. Whatever
Temptations he conquers, whatsoever Sin he slays, whatsoever piece of Gallantry
or Prowess he has done in his Inroads upon Satan's Kingdom, he gives the
Honor of all to the Valor, Conduct, and Assistance of this his Noble Ally and
Friend. He sets the Grown of the King of Ammon, like Joab, upon the Head of
this King David. He has such a high Esteem for God, that he thinks nothing
well done, but when it is done exactly as he would have it; he thinks every
thing then best, when it is done according to God's Will: And he counts it no
small Weakness to be unwilling that infinite Wisdom rather than Folly should
have the managing of all the Affairs of the World. He desires to maintain a
quick and lively Sense of the Divine Majesty upon his Soul, and that he may
here and hereafter give him, as he has infinite Cause, all Honor, Glory, and
Praise.

6. Another Effect of this Acquaintance with God is this, it would put
abundance of Life and Vigor into the Soul; it would, as it were, oil the
Wheels, and set them a running. There are none in the World that act at so high
a rate as those do, which are most acquainted with God. O how undefatigable are
they in their Pains! With what Earnestness and Faith do they pray! As if they
saw the glorious God before them, and were talking with him; with what
Reverence, Seriousness and Delight do they read, meditate and hear the Word,
and do all that they do! They know in some measure what it is to present their
Bodies and Souls as a living Sacrifice to God through Christ; they understand
what it means to be fervent in Spirit serving the Lord; they will not serve God
with that which cost them nothing, kneeling down, and saying a few formal Words
before God in the Evening, repeating the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, and the
Ten Commandments between sleeping and waking, doing no body any wrong, and the
like, is not enough to serve his Turn, his Conscience will not be thus put off;
but he labors with all his Might to stir up his Soul to lay hold upon God, he
is not content to go off from his Knees without his Father's Blessing. This is
the Friend and Acquaintace of God, this is the brave Israelite, that Spiritual
Prince that will not let God go till he has prevailed with him. He does not go
to his Work, as if he cared not whether he worked or no; he is not sick of the
Service of God, but he rejoices and works Righteousness, his Work is his
Pleasure, and he goes on merrily with his Business. Those that are intimately
acquainted with God, are not so cold, faint, and dull in the Service of God, as
others be. Such a one as knows God very well, and has been often made welcome by
him, why, he comes with a great deal of Confidence, and knocks at God's Door,
and, for his part, he will not go away, though the Door be not presently
opened, but he continues knocking, because he is sure that his Friend is
within, he knows that he is never from home, and that he can never come
unseasonably to him. He comes to Prayer as if he were going to storm Heaven, he
gets Spiritual Things by Violence, he comes to Duty as to fight for a Crown, he
is shamed to offer the Lame and the Blind to God, but he chooses for the best
in his Flock; he de^es to improve his Interest in God to the Height; his
Favorite of Heaven comes frequently to the ^ing to beg some great thing or
other, and he is sure that his Friend will deny him nothing, that it is not a
greater Kindness to deny than give he knows that his King has a large Purse,
and as large a Heart, and he is not willing to lose such excellent things that
are to be had for the asking for; he is not ignorant that spiritual things are
worth the seeking for, and therefore he will seek, and seek earnestly; he has
tried more than once, and he remembers to his Joy, that wonderful things are to
be had, if we will but take Pains for them, and prefer our Petitions, or rather
get them preterr'd by that great Master of Requests, the Lord Jesus Christ, and
follow our Business close, that it cannot possibly miscarry let it be what it
will; the Comfort in enjoying will abundantly pay all the Charges we can be at
in seeking; therefore he lays about him as one that is in good earnest; the
Confidence that he has in the good Will of God, it puts Life into all his
Petitions. A poor Greature that very rarely injoys any Communion with God, that
is very little or not at all acquainted with him, is ready to take up with a
few formal complemental Performances, he is weary of his Work before he has
well begun it, he is quickly out of Breath; but now one that is very well
acquainted with God, is not so soon weary of his Company; it may be, he may be
somewhat cold when he sets out, but by that time he has gone a few Turns with
his Friend, his Blood grows warm, he is sometimes so taken up with God in Duty,
that he can scarce tell when to have done? O he thinks it is good being there? O
it was a sweet Season! These are the Actings and Experiences of some noble
Souls. I have heard some Christians say, that had not God made it their Duty to
^ollow their Callings, they could be glad with all their Hearts to do nothing
else, Day nor Night; ^ut hear the Mysteries of God's Love in Christ o^ened,
read, pray, meditate, and be immediately engaged in the Service of God. Sure
something is the matter with these Persons more than ordinary, that their
Palate should be so spiritualized, as that it is their Food, their Wine, their
Dainties, to be actually employed in the great Acts of Religion. The more any
one is acquainted with God, the more Delight he takes in the Ordinances of God;
as one of God's Children, he desires the sincere Mik of the Word: Before he was
acquainted with God, he found it far otherwise; then nothing almost would down
with him, the pure Word could not be relished, except it was adulterated with
Flourishes of human Wit. He had very little Appetite to good wholesome Food, his
Stomach was ready to turn at it, except it were so cooked and sawc'd, and set
out, that an understanding Man could scarce tell what to make of it! What do
you say to this, you that are so faint and cold, in what you do, in the Service
of God? Come a little nearer, get better acquainted with God, and you shall
sind such Entertainment from him, that you will scarce he able to keep long
from his House; get often into his Company, and you shall feel your Soul
strengthened with new Spirits, animated with a strange Life, Heat and Warmth.
You will not complain that the Sabbath is the longest Day in the Week; you will
not say, What a Weariness is it? When will the New Moons and Sabbaths be at ^n
end? But you would think long till the Sabbath Day come, and when it is come,
the Pleasure that you take in the Work of that Day would make you to think it
the shortest Day, and gone too soon; and when you have spent it in the most
diligent Attendance upon God, you would wish it were to begin again, or that
you were to begin such a Sabbath, that would never have an End. This is the
Condition of one that is very intimately acquainted with God; his nearness to
his Master makes him to follow his Work, and he knows he shall lose nothing by
it; something will be coming in e're and anon, which will more than quit his
Cost: So that when God calls, he is at hand, and readily answers, Speak, Lord,
for thy Servant hears. When God has any Message, any hot Service to do, he
accounts it his great Honor to be employed in it, and says, here I am, send
me. I believe he that spoke it ( Ar. Ep. l. c. 6.) might be a little Confident,
when he said, Lay what thou will upon me, O God, I have Power to bear it, it
shall not be my Burden, but my Ornament: Yet I am persuaded one that is
acquainted with God, can say it, and say it again in good Earnest; Lord, what
will thou have me to do? will thou have me to Preach for thee, to run through
Fire and Water for thee, to die for thee, to go or come? O Lord do but bare me
Company, and give me Strength, and it shall be done: I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me. This is one of God's Champions, he watches, he
keeps upon his guard, he fights stoutly, he stands his Ground, in every thing
he demeans himself gallantly, he quits himself like a Soldier of Christ; and
that which makes him thus valiant is because he is so near his Captain. Ask
Epictetus what made Socrates do as he did, and he will tell you, ( l. 3. c.
22.) It was because he was a Friend of God, his Servant, and Partaker of his
Kingdom. This is strange Language of a Heathen! but had he known what it was to
live under the most lively Sense of God's Love. To have had such intimate
Converse with him as some Christians have had, what would he have said? As for
the Saint that keeps close to God, he keeps close to Duty; his Work is to
serve, love, and praise God: this is his Business, both by himself, and with
others.

7. Another excellent Effect of this Acquaintance with God, is, it will make a
Man Patient under all the Dispensations of God's Providence, in all Conditions
to be content, in Quietness to possess his Spirit: Acquaintance with God will
make him be at Peace, not to open his Mouth against God, whatsoever he lays
upon him. What was it that kept such a Calm in Paul's Heart, when there was
such a constant Storm without him? was it not his Sense of his Interest in
God's Love? though all the World were his Enemies, yet as long as Christ was
his Friend he does not care; though Men and Devils be against him, yet if God
be for him, he pauseth not much upon it: though Men be never so unjust, yet God
will never be so, that is his Comfort. It Is a small Matter for him to be judged
with Man's Judgment, as long as he is sure that God will acquit him; he knows
that Justice it self will do him no Wrong, infinite Goodness could not be
unkind, and that Wisdom it self could work glorious Effects out of these
Things, which the World call evil; if he do receive Evil at the Hands of God,
he is consident he deserves more; if it be good, and but a little, he is
thankful, because he deserved none at all. Let the worst come to the worst, if
all the Devils in Hell, and all his Instruments upon Earth should combine
against him, as long as he is sure of the Love of God, and that none of them
all can pluck him out of the Arms of the Almighty, he is not very much
concerned; Heaven will make amends for all; whatsoever he suffers it is nothing
to the Displeasure of a God, it is nothing to everlasting Burnings. He believes
that if his Persecutors did know what he knows, they would as soon eat Fire, as
do as they do; therefore he rather pities them, than is angry with them, as
seeing that their Day is coming. How seldom have you either Paul or Silas
complaining of their Sufferings! How rarely bemoaning their Condition? And what
is it that makes them so patient? What have they to sweeten such bitter
Draughts? why, God loves them, and so long, they do not much care though others
hate them. Man's Frown cannot sink a Soul to Hell, nor his Favor make one happy
for ever. It is but a little while, and all Tears shall be wiped away from
their Eyes. The Kindness and Faithfulness of God is enough to make a Man
cheerfully to hold up his Head, when all the World is against him. When the
most Spiritual Christians do complain, it is more of themselves than of their
Persecutors! O my unbelieving Heart! O that I should love God no more! O that
my Heart should be no more taken up with the great Things of Eternity! This is
the Condition which those that are most Spiritual are in, Poverty,
Imprisonment, Banishment, and all those things which most call dreadful, when
they come to a Man that is much in Communion with God, they find him patient,
meek and calm, these are not the things which put him upon the Rack; God is his
Friend, and that answers all.

8. Another glorious Effect of Acquaintance with God, is, That it will make all
our Enjoyments doubly sweet. He has what he has in Love; he need not be
afraid of Poison in any of those Dainties which come from his dearest Friend's
Table; he may eat his Meat with a joyful Heart, and not tremble for Fear of the
Reckoning at last; what he enjoys is freely given him; all his Dishes have this
brave Sauce, they are seasoned with Love, and come out of the Hand of a Father.
He that is the great Proprietor, has given him Leave to use these things, and
has promised also to give him better things than these. He knows that this is
not his Portion, that this is nothing to what he shall possess; it is no small
Comfort to him to think that he shall never want any thing that is needful for
him, or that if he be brought into some Exigencies, he has a Friend that he
can go to when he will, and be heartily welcome; he has a Portion, an Estate
in another Country, that can never be spent, though he live at never so high a
Rate, and the more he spends upon it, the greater it is; he has a Key to that
Storehouse which can never be emptied; he has an Interest in him in whom all
Fullness does dwell: his Friend is noble, let him but ask and he shall have,
seek and he shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto him. God is so free,
that he takes Care of all his Creatures; yea, so great is his Royal Bounty,
that it does largely provide for his Enemies; and shall his Friends, his
Children starve? Has he not done so in ancient Days? When his People were in
the Wilderness he sent them their Diet from his own House, he fed them with
Angels Food. But if this should not be, if he kept them short, that may be done
with as great Kindness to them as the former: fasting may fatten the Soul more
than Feasting does the Body; and this makes all welcome. If he have a great
deal, he rejoiceth to think that he shall have more still one day; if he have
but a little, he is satisfied; and so his Condition is made more comfortable to
him, than the greatest Enjoyments of the wicked are to them.

9. Another Effect of this Acquaintance with God, is, That it will make a Man
wise. He that before he was acquainted with God had not the Wit to know his
Friends from his Foes, by his Converse with God is made more wise than the
great Sages and grand Politicians of the World. Upon his Acquaintance with God,
he is soon able to know Right from Wrong, to distinguish between Good and Evil.
He has now the Wisdom to look after the Salvation of his Soul, to seek the
Kingdom of Heaven in the first Place, and not to be laughed and jeered into
Hell. He is so wise, that he does outwit the Devil himself; he does get so much
Wisdom by his Acquaintance with God, that God will reveal many of his great
Secrets to him. I know one my self that was little different from those which
are commonly called Naturals, whom when the Lord had wonderfully wrought upon,
and brought near to himself, after his Converse and Acquaintance with God, his
very natural Understanding was exceedingly refined, and afterward he became
more discreet and it to manage worldly Affairs. But however this ^e, I am sure
the Knowledge of God gives Understanding to the simple. A good Understanding
have they which love the Lord: and the Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom. Converse with Men of Wisdom does not a little improve a Man; but
Converse with the wise God it makes a strange Alteration indeed, they are made
wise unto Salvation. Of such as these David thought it best to make his
Privy Council. These are the Persons that are the fittest to advise with in
Businesses of the greatest Importance in the World; they have learned the Art
of managing the Affairs of greatest Concernment with the greatest Care and
Prudence. I know the wise World usually look upon these Persons as the veriest
Fools living. To converse with God, to take all possible Care to make their
Calling and Election sure, to do what one can to be happy for ever, goes
amongst them for a ridiculous thing, and more than needs. But it is no great
Matter, they will not be beat from their Work thus; they should be Fools indeed
if such things as these should make them turn their Backs upon God; they will
not be jeered out of Heaven, they pass not upon Man's Censures. He is wise that
God calls so, and he will be found to be a Fool which God says is so. As for
the Man that is acquainted with God, all his Actions speak him a Man of
Prudence, one that has a deep Reach with him, he is a Man of an excellent Fore
sight, he sees the Clouds a gathering a great way off, the Storm before it
risech, and he hides himself; in him are hid the Treasures of Wisdom, he makes
no foolish Choice, he is a Child of Wisdom; he does in some Measure understand
himself, and knows where his Interest lies, and is faithful to it; he makes no
foolish Bargains, when he parts with Dung for Diamonds, Brass for Gold, Earth
for Heaven, Sin for Holiness, present short-lived Pleasures for sure and
everlasting Delights, the Devil for God. How say you, ye mad Gallants, that
look upon the Saint as a Fool, and Religion as a ridiculous thing? are these
such foolish Actings? Is it so undiscreet a Choice to prefer Heaven before
Hell? If this be to be a Fool, I wish I were more such a Fool; if this be so
contemptible a thing, O that I may yet be more vile! Let me say further, as
great a Folly as it is, there are none of you all, but e're long will wish you
had been such Fools. A few Years will make you all of another Mind, when you
see what those which you counted Fools have got, and what you with your Wisdom
have lost; then let us hear you calling them Fools for choosing Christ for their
Portion; and your self wise for despising him, and choosing of this present
World for your Portion. Now, it is their being acquainted with God, that has
made them thus wise; Time was, that they were as very Fools as any in the
World, till they fell into God's Company; and ever since that, they have acted
with a great deal more Prudence: their being much in God's Company has much
improved them. They may thank God for all that Skill that they have attained
to; for he it is that teaches them, he is always at their Elbow to direct
them; when they are about to be cheated, he whispers them in the Ear, lets them
understand the Fraud; and when God speaks, they lissen to his Counsel. It was
no Falsehood which Seneca spoke (though he understood not the Meaning of this
Doctrine of Reconciliation) in the Commendation of Wisdom. Wisdom (says he) is
a great spacious Thing, it instructs us both in Divine and Humane Things, it
teaches a Man how to demean himself in relation to things past, present, and
to come: It informs him about things that are fading, and things that are
lasting; and by it he knows how to put a true Estimate and Value on both: this
learns one the Difference between Time and Eternity. Thus far Seneca. But where
is this Wisdom to be found? not in Aristotle nor Plato's Writings. The grand
Maxims of this Wisdom were little understood in the Peripatetick or Stoic
Schools; Flesh and Blood, Humane Wisdom improved to the Height, reveal not
these things to us. Where then is this Wisdom to be found? and where is the
Place of Understanding? Man knows not the Price of it naturally: The Depth
faith, It is not in me, it cannot be got for Silver, etc. Destruction and Death
say, We have heard the Fame thereof with our Ears. There is talk of Wisdom in
Hell, there they can say what Reports were made to them of the Excellencies of
Christ, and how earnestly they were offered to be instructed in the Ways of
Wisdom. But in Hell there is no Wisdom, though the World of them which by their
wisdom knew not God be there. Where then is Wisdom? God understands the Way of
it, and he teaches Man Wisdom, and those that will come to him, submit to his
Instructions, may learn; the Lesson is short, yet learnt but by few: he tells
Man, that to fear and love his Maker, and to be brought into Union, Friendship,
and Acquaintance with God, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Iniquity, that is
Understanding, Job 28.12, 13, 14, etc.

10. Another Effect of this Acquaintance with God, is, It will make a Man rich.
As soon as any one is acquainted with God, he is set in a thriving Way. Man at
the first had his Estate in his own Hands, and he kept up his Trade for a
little time, and but for a little time; for though his Stock was great, yet
meeting with the Serpent, that great Cheater, he was miserably overreached, and
so sadly impaired in his Spiritual Estate, that he broke presently; and had not
Jesus Christ stepped in and bailed him, and been his Surety, he would soon have
had all his Creditors upon his Back, and have been laid up in that dismal
Prison, till he should have paid the utmost Farthing; but through the Kindness
of Christ, the grand Creditor had Patience, and offers to make up the Business,
and compound upon better Terms than the Sinner could possibly expect. Christ
undertakes to heal the infinite Breach, to bring God and Man acquainted, and to
set him up again, in case he will but accept of the gracious Terms of
Agreement; and thus undone Man, that was before in a beggarly Condition, upon
his return to God, is set in a better Way than ever; God, his Friend, now takes
such order for him, that he shall be sure never to break again: he will be his
Cash-keeper, he will have the Oversight of all, he will teach him such an Art,
that he shall be sure to get by every thing that he trades in, he shall gain by
his Losses, grow rich by his Poverty, and drive the best Trade, it may be, when
he is forced to shut his Shop-doors, I mean in a time of a violent Persecution.
Whatsoever Losses or Crosses come, he is sure he shall never be undone as long
as his Friend has so great a Bank; he has a Key, and he can go to an infinite
Treasury, when he pleases, and fetch out Supplies for any Exigencies or
Occasions; and when all those that made such a great Show in the World, and
that were taken for Merchants, that were exceeding well to pass, shall be
proclaimed Bankrupts, and be found not worth a Farthing, and be carried to
Prison for Debt; then he has Money in his Purse, Coin that will go current in
any Country. In the mean time, though he be thought to be worth nothing, to
drive but a pitiful poor Trade, yet when he comes to dye, and when an exact
Inventory is taken of all that he is worth, he is found worth thousands: And no
wonder when he has such a Partner, that will be sure to see that his Business
shall be managed to the best Advantage; and that he shall never be out of Purse
upon this account, the Man cannot choose but thrive; he will have something to
show for his Gains, when others have nothing. When the rich ones of the World
shall be begging a Drop of Water, he is at the Fountain. If we should take a
Surview of that Man's Estate, that is acquainted with God, you must lift up
your Eyes to those everlasting Hills, you must look East, West, North and
South, all this is his, things present, and things to come; mount up to the Top
of Carmel, your sight is too short, you see not the hundredth part of his
Inheritance, all this is nothing, he has a brave Estate in another Country, he
is rich in Bills and Bonds, when he comes to Age, he will have no Man knows
what fall to him; and whence has he all this Wealth; has he not got every
Penny of it since he was acquainted with God. But I shall be but brief upon
this Head, because I have handled, what might have fallen in here before; but
the World laughs when I speak at this rate, and think that I am much mistaken;
the godly Man rich! That Is strange! What rich with scarce Clothes to their
Backs, rich and fare so hardly, rich and possess nothing! This is strange
Wealth. I grant it, it is so, for their Estate is in Invisibles; it is not he
that possesses much, but he that wants little is rich: Will you call nothing
Riches, but Gold and Silver, and Houses and Lands? Is Virtue, Grace, Holiness
no Riches? And will you call these little, because he has not so much Trouble
and Vexation with his Estate as some have? Is Heaven, Glory, the everlasting
Enjoyment of God nothing? Is the possessing that which is more worth than a
thousand Worlds, no Riches; if to have all things that are good for them; if to
have more than their Hearts can conceive; if to be filled with all spiritual
Plenty, be counted Poverty; let me be thus poor, rather than enjoy the Revenue
of all the Princes, and great Ones of the World? And what do you think of this,
you that are worth never a Penny? Are you desirous to have a great Estate? You
that go backward, and get nothing, would be set in such a way, as that you may
be sure never to break? Why then, get acquainted with God, and you cannot but
grow rich.

11. Another glorious Effect of Acquaintance with God, is, that it makes a Man
like God, which is the Top of the Creature's Honor. Company is of an
assimulating Nature. He that before was unholy, and like the Devil; by
Conversion to God, and Converse with him, is made holy like God. He that before
was cruel, fiery, unmerciful, by his Acquaintance with God is made kind, meek,
and lovely. He that in his natural State was a Nonconformist to the Laws of
his Maker, when he is well studied in this Point, is the stiffest Conformist,
he sticks close to the righteous Cannons of the holy God, and will not by his
good Will turn to the right Hand, or to the left. He that was sometimes very
unlike God, when he is brought nigh unto him, his Countenance is changed, his
Features are altered, and the Lineaments of God's Image appear very lively in
his Face, and the more he is in God's Company, and the older he grows, the more
he grows like him. O how does such a one shine! What a Majesty, Glory, and
Beauty is there in his Face! The oftener he comes to God, the more he is taken
with his Excellency, the more he labors to intimate him. He studies what God
is, and as far as his Nature is capable of it in this Life, he desires to be
like him. If God be true and faithful, he dare not be false; but he will hate
the way of lying; if God be free and bountiful, he thinks it very ill becomes
one of his Children to hide his Face from his own Flesh, to shut up his Bowels,
to be void of natural Affection. If Purity be so eminent in God, he knows that
Impurity would not be commendable in himself. In a word, he desires in every
thing to carry himself, as one whose highest Ambition is to speak, act, and
think as one that would be like God. It was bravely spoken of him ( Sen. Ep.
73.) especially if we consider what the Man was, who told his Friend that
called him to Heaven, in compendium, To get as much Happiness as this Place,
this Soul, while in this Body is capable of, that is, to get God for his
Friend, to be like him. This is a short Cut to Glory, a Soul carried to Heaven,
or Heaven brought down to the Soul. A full and perfect Conformity and Likeness
to God is the very Glory of Glory; and a partial Conformity to him upon Earth,
is his unspeakable Honor in this Life. O were Men and Women better acquainted
with God, they would sparkle and shine in their Generation, so that their
Enemies should be forced to say, that a Saint is another kind of Creature than
a sensual Sinner. O why stand you then so far off from God! Come nearer him,
and the Rays of his glorious Image will reflect from your Lives; be acquainted
with him, and you shall be like him; keep much in his Company by Faith, secret
Prayer and Meditation, and you will be more holy, divine, spiritual.

12. The last Effect of this Acquaintance with God, which I shall name, is
this, it will make a Man better, far more excellent in all States and
Relations; all his Friends will have the better Life with him, the whole
Family, it may be, where he dwells will fare the better for him? If he be a
Child, he is more dutiful to his Parent than he was, while he was unacquainted
with God? If he be a Servant, he is more diligent and faithful than before, he
serves not with Eye-Service, but does what he does with Singleness of Heart, as
unto the Lord? If he be a Master, it makes him more exemplary, and makes him to
take care that his Household should serve the Lord; he had rather his Servants
should make bold with him than God, he is concerned for the Honor of God in
his Family, as much as his own; if he be a Father, he is careful to bring up
his Children for God, he is more spiritual in his Affections to them, and
desirous to leave them God for their Father, Friend, Portion; as he is a
Neighbor, he follows Peace with all Men, and Holiness, because he has seen
God? How sweet and amiable does Acquaintance with God make a Man! How ready to
heal Divisions! How full of Goodness and Charity! How ready to do good unto
all, but especially to those that be of the Household of Faith! How
compassionate, and tenderhearted! How ready to provoke others also to love,
and good Works; so that the whole Parish lives the quieter, all the Poor fare
the better, all the Neighborhood, some way or other is beholding to him; one
that knows God himself, does what he can to get others acquainted with God too?
How sweetly does he commend the way of Wisdom? With what Earnestness and Pity
does he plead with Sinners, and labor to teach Transgressors the Paths of God,
that Sinners may be converted unto him. How does he set before them the
Necessity of a Change, the Danger of their present State, and the excellent
Qualities of this Friend, that he would bring them acquainted with, telling
them, that time was, that he also was as they are, and thought his Condition as
safe as they do theirs; but that it pleased the Lord by his Word to open his
Eyes, and to reveal to him the Need that he had of Christ, and to enable him to
accept of him, and to prize him above the whole World. In all Conditions and
Relations he commends Religion, and shows that Godliness, where it is in the
Power and Life of it, is a brave thing, which makes so great an Alteration in a
Man for the better? If he be sick, he rejoices, and thinks cheerfully of
Death, the Grave and Eternity; and in this State demeans himself so, that
Standers by cannot but be convinced of the Reality of Invisibles, and to think,
sure there is something more than ordinary in Acquaintance with God, which
makes Men so undaunted, and with so much Gallantry to meet Death; sure their
Condition is better than ours, or else they could never be so joyful at such a
time as this is; then he tells of the Use of a Christ, the Benefit of a
Redeemer in a dying Hour, and how infinitely it is for there Interest, in time,
to provide for Eternity? If he be well, he desires to improve his Health for
God, and to serve his Maker with the Strength of Body and Soul. If he be poor,
he shows a Pattern of Patience, Meekness, Thankfulness, and lets the World
understand that Godliness with Content is great Gain? If he be rich, he desires
to be rich in good Works also, and to trade with such Trifles as Gold and
Silver, for rich Commodities, as Grace, Peace and Glory; with the things of
this World, for the things of another: To lay up for himself Treasure, which
neither Moth can corrupt, nor Thieves break through, and steal; and to make to
himself a Friend of the unrighteous Mammon; to be a faithful Steward of those
Talents that his great Lord and Master has committed to his Trust; he shows
how great a Good it is to be great and good too. This is the Man which does
adorn the Gospel; this is the Christian, which does credit his Profession; this
it is to be intimately acquainted with God! O how useful might Men and Women be
in their Generations, were they but more in God's Company? O what a Savor
would there be of their Graces in the place where they live? How would poor
Creatures that receive Good by their holy Counsels, and suitable Lives, bless
God for the Day, that ever they were born, and adore that Goodness, which
brought them near such and such a one, by whose Means God has brought them out
of the Vassalage and Captivity of Satan, and by whose Help they have got
acquainted with a Friend that is more worth to them than a World; for one that
has God for his Friend, cannot but desire that others also should have an
Interest in him; they know how ill it will go with them that know not God, and
this makes them to do what they can to bring God and Man acquainted; they would
make those that are good better, and them that are bad good? If those that he
converseth with, or stands related to, were Enemies, he lets them know that a
Christian can love him dearly, whose Sin he hates entirely, and that a Child of
God can pity them, that have no pity at all for him. I might add how often are a
great many wicked ones spared from temporal Judgments, for the sakes of the
Righteous that are amongst them.

III. HEAD of MOTIVES.
The next Head of Motives to enforce this Exhortation, might be taken from the
Danger of not being acquainted with God. If you could live securely without
God, and be in a safe Condition, though you still remained a Stranger to him,
the Business then were not so very considerable; if you could find any in
Heaven that could do as much for you as God can, I should not be so earnest
with you to get an Interest in his Favor; if you could by any means possible
be everlastingly happy any other way, if without this Friend get to Heaven, and
without his Alliance avoid utter Ruin, I should have had the less reason to use
so much Importunity; I might then possibly have spared my self the Trouble of
speaking these things, and you the Trouble of hearing them. But when I see and
know that it is as much as their Life and Soul is worth, to slight and
undervalue the Motions that I am now making to you in Christ's stead, how can I
with any Faithfulness and Love to your Souls hold my Peace? How can I stand
looking upon Men and Women that are about to murder their own Souls, and
forbear crying out? How can I endure to see poor Creatures running with all the
Speed they can to that dismal Place, from whence there is no Redemption, and
not endeavor to stop them? Would you have me so cruel to your Souls, as not to
tell that which does infinitely concern their Well-being? For, let me tell you,
God will not stand neuter, he will be either for you or against you; he is the
Lord of Hosts, and he will fight on one side or other. Now see to you Matters,
as the Nature of them does require What do you think of having a God against
you? If God be against you, who will be for you? That is no Peace, says my
God, to the Wicked. These fest Condition you can be in, while God is you Enemy,
is sadly hazardous; such a one hangs by a twined Thread over everlasting
Flames; h^^ stands upon the Brink of that bottomless Pit, and one Shove, one
Slip sends him going for ever he stands upon a Pinnacle, which one little Bl^may
blow him off, and then where is the Man to all Eternity? If he fall thence,
there is no rising again; if he once go into that other World, there is no
Recovery of him, if one would give a World to bring him back again. I say it
again, if God be not your Friend, he will be your Enemy; and what do you think
of such an Enemy? It is but a Word, a Look, and they fall. Let me tell you,
that except you speedily humble your selves, you shall find that we do not make
the Danger greater than it is: According to his Fear, so is his Wrath; you may
know soon enough to your Cost, what the Displeasure of a God is, how dreadful
his Arrows, how sharp his Sword. Not a Man of them shall 'scape that will not
accept of Peace upon his Terms, and that quickly too. O that will be a sad Day,
when God shall say, Bring them out and slay them before my Face. If God be your
Enemy, who do you think will be your Friend? To which of the Saints or Angels
will you fly? Where will you go for shelter against the Storm of that terrible
one? What Armor will defend you from the Dint of his Weapons? What in the
World can stand that Man in any stead that has such an Adversary? Especially
when he comes to give his Definitive Sentence against him for high Treason.
Dives may say, Father; and Abraham, Son; but what Comfort for all that had the
miserable Child from his holy Father? Does he not in stead of cooling his
Tongue with a Drop of Water, lay more burning Coals upon it; and, if it be
possible, make the Heat of it greater; Son, remember that thou in thy Life time
had thy good things. Thus Abraham, by putting him in mind what his Condition
was, makes him with the greater Sorrow to feel what it is. The Memory of former
Joys under present Sorrows, make them sting the more. Well then, if you would
not hereafter reflect with an aching Heart upon your lost Enjoyments, think with
a serious and thankful Heart of the present Offers, that you may in Eternity
reflect with Joy upon your short Sorrows in time. If you will not be acquainted
with God, you shall be acquainted with the Devil, and know whose Company is
best by woeful Experience. If you will not believe his Word, you shall feel his
Sword. If his Kindness and Goodness will not melt you, his Power and Justice
shall break you; for he that now is so patient, will e're long roar like a
Lion, and tear in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver; he will break his
stubborn Enemies with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potter's
Vessel. Those that will not know his Love, shall know something else; I will
not say what, for it is inexpressible. But only this remember, it is such a God
that you will have to deal with, before whom the Mountains quake, and the Hills
remove out of their Places, before whom the great Tyrants of the World have
fallen; and shall you stand? Where are all those Giants? Where are the
Inhabitants of the old World? What is become of Nimrod that mighty Hunter, and
all his Fellows? Where are all those daring Sinners, that scorned to accept of
a Pardon, Mercy and Peace, and which had the Courage to grapple with
Omnipotency it self? Who got the Day? Who had the worst of it at last? And art
thou stronger than they? Is thy Power greater, thy Understanding deeper, thy
Allies more considerable than theirs? A Fly may be too hard for Pharaoh, but
Pharaoh can never be too hard for God. Because Judgment is not speedily
executed against thee, thou think therefore it may be it is because God
cannot deal with thee, and upon this Account thy Heart is fully set in thee to
do wickedly; but know thou, for all this that God will bring thee to Judgment.
Consider this, that as fair as it seems to be now, the Winds may rise, the
Clouds may gather of a sudden, the Heavens may be overcast in a moment; and
what will you do then? When Heaven and Earth shall be in a flame, then you will
be scraping Acquaintance with God; then you would be glad to be owned by him,
then you would willingly Christ should take notice of you, and say, You Blessed
of my Father; then you would stand at the Door and knock, and cry, and pray,
and plead, and say, Lord, Lord, have I not been often at thy House? Have I not
eat at thy Table, and taught in thy Name in our Streets? And yet thou shall be
dismissed with this short and sharp Answer, Depart, I know you not. How do you
like such an Answer as this is? How will you take it when you stand begging at
the Door for one Crumb of Mercy, one Drop of Christ's Blood; to be sent away
with a bitter Scorn and Denial, or else to be answered with Silence? Whereas
you were invited to the Feast as well as those that went in, and you would not
hear, though God sent Messenger after Messenger to fetch you, you thought your
Oxen better Company than your God, you took more Pleasure in your Dogs, than in
the hunting after those nobler things. What do you think of such Expostulations
as these? What Replies can you make to these Accusations? E're long you will
find these things Realities; e're long all your Friends will be dead and gone,
and if they would help you they cannot; your Estate will be consumed, your
Houses will all be burnt, all your Attendants, except Care and Fear, will
shortly forsake you, your Gold and Silver will not e're long be worth a rush;
and what will you do then? Nay, the greatest Friends that you had will become
your Enemies. Little do you think, as kind as they seem to be, what your good
Fellows, the World, and the Devil, will do against you; little do you think how
false your Friends will prove when it comes to that, that they see that all is
going? then they also will help forward your Ruin. Those that you durst have
trusted your Life with, will accuse you and help to cast you. Those which
encouraged to sin, will witness against you for Sin. Your good Fellows, your
Confederates in Wickedness, your dear Friends, that you loved more than God,
that you did not spare to venture your Life and Soul for, O it will make your
Heart ache to see such come in against you, which you thought loved you so
dearly! O to have a Wife, a Child, a Husband, an old Friend to come before the
Judge, and to make known such things as you hoped had been buried for ever. It
will make your Ears to tingle, to hear one crying out, Lord if it had not been
for him, I had turned and repented; it is long of him that I am in this woeful
Condition; I was resolved many a time, and often to seek after another World, and
to provide for my Soul, but he would not let me alone when I began to be
serious, he laughed and jeered me, and would never be at quiet till he had made
me as bad as himself; he carried me from the Alehouse to the Tavern, from
thence to a Playhouse, from a Playhouse to a Whore-house, from thence to the
Highway, from thence to the Goal, from the Goal to the Gallows, and from
thence I came hither; and I may thank him for all this. O how will men look
when they see the best Friends that they had, come in thus against them! This
it is to trust to faithless Friends; this it is to make light of Acquaintance
with God. Your Gold and Silver will be Witness against you, and will eat your
Flesh as with a Canker; your Children, Relations good and bad, will speak
bitter things against you; your own Family will curse you, and say, Lord, we
never heard any thing of God, except in an Oath from his Mouth; we never heard
any thing of Religion, except it were in Derision of it in his Family; and
those of us that were a little serious, and began to think of our Souls, he
would snub and brow-beat, and never give us a kind Look till we did as he did;
nay, the Devil who now does so much flatter Sinners, and make them believe that
he is so much their Friend, will then show himself; he will then be as cruel as
he now seems kind; he that now tempts to sin so impetuously, will hereafter
accuse for Sin violently, and torment for Sin unmercifully. The People of God
which weep over Sinners, and pray for them, and wish them well with their
Souls, will then see Justice executed upon their nearest Relations, without the
least Sorrow; nay, they also will come in against them too, and say, Lord, I
told them of this woeful Day. O Lord thou know I forewarned them of that
which is now come to pass, I pleaded with them with all the Compassion that I
could, and they scorned my Pity, they would not pity themselves, but made light
of that glory which they are going from, and of that Hell that they are going
to; and now, O Lord, thou art just and righteous, that thou have thus judged
them. This will be the Language of those that are your best Friends; the People
of God they will be your Enemies one Day, if you will not now mind the making
of your Peace with God; they must and will be on God's side against all the
World, they must and will take part with their Friend, and clear him when he
judges, and justify him when he condemns you. O that you that are now Strangers
to God, would but consider of these things! O that you would but think what
this Battle may be, where the Combatants are so unequal. Stand still O Sun in
the Valley of Ajalon, till the Lord have avenged him of his Enemies: Muster
your selves, O ye Stars, and fight in your Courses against those miserable
Sinners, that have waged a War against their Maker; plant your mighty Cannons,
shoot down huge Hailstones, Arrows of Fire, and hot Thunderbolts? O how do the
wounded fall? How many are the Slain of the Lord, Multitudes, Multitudes in the
Valley of Decision, for the Day of the Lord is terrible. Behold God's Enemies
falling by thousands, behold the Garments rolling in Blood, hear the prancing
of his terrible ones, the Mountains are covered with Horses and Chariots of
Fire. God's Soldiers run from one Place to another with their flaming Swords
in their Hands, armed with the Justice of God's Jealousy, Power and
Indignation! O the dreadful Slaughter that is made. Millions, Millions fall,
they are not able to stand, not one of them can lift up his Hand, their Hearts
fail them, Paleness and trembling has seized upon the stoutest of them all.
The Bow of the Lord is strong: From the Blood of the Slain, from the Fat of the
mighty, the Bow of the Lord turns not back, the Sword of the Almighty returns
not empty? How do the mighty ones fall in the midst of this Battle! A hot
Battle indeed in which none 'scape? Who is he that comes from Edom with dyed
Garments from Bosrah? This, that is glorious in his Apparel, and traveling in
the Greatness of his Strength, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Wherefore art
thou red in thy Apparel, and thy Garments like him that treads the Wine-fat?
I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the People there was none with me:
For I will tread them in mine Anger, end trample them in my Fury, and their
Blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments, and I will stain all my Raiment, for
the Day of Vengeance is in my Heart, and the Year of my Redeemed is come. And I
will tread down the People in mine Anger, and make them drunk in my Fury, and I
will bring down their Strength to the Earth, the Hand of the Lord shall be
known, the Power of the mighty Jehovah shall be felt, and his Indignation
toward his Enemies; For behold he will come with Fire, and with Chariots like
a Whirlwind, to render his Anger with Fury, and his Rebuke with Flames of Fire:
For by Fire, and by his Sword will he plead with all Flesh: and the Slain of
the Lord shall be many, and the Saints shall go forth and look upon the
Carcases of the Men that have transgressed against me: for their Worm shall not
die, neither shall their Fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto
all Flesh. Upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and
horrible Tempest. This shall be the Portion of their Cup! This it is to fight
against God! This it is to defy the Lord of Host! This it is to refuse a Peace
that would have been so unspeakably advantageous! To speak a little plainer,
this is all that Sinners are like to get by their standing it out against the
Tenders of Grace and Mercy. And are you still defirous to engage in this
dreadful War? Will you still bid Defiance to the Almighty, and make nothing of
such things as you have heard of? Is the Loss of your Blood, the Loss of your
Soul, your utter undoing for ever, no great matter with you? Well then, go on,
bold Sinner, arm thy self Cap-a-pee, gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, get thy
Shield and Buckler ready, prepare to meet thy God: Go up, O thou valiant
Warrior, and let us see thy Valor, behold thy Enemy has taken the Field; go
up, and look thy God in the Face if thou dare, come show thy self a Mark for
God, and turn not thy Back like a Coward, venture upon the Mouth of the Cannon,
rush upon the thick Bosses of God's Buckler, if you long to perish
everlastingly. You have heard what the War will cost you, and as you like it
now, do. And what do you laugh at all this? well then, go on, but be it upon
your peril, your Blood be upon your own Soul: As for me, I could not have said
much more than I have, to dissuade you from this desperate Enterprise; I
foresee what a Case you will be in, when you are in the Heat of the Battle, and
I desire to weep in secret for thee, as one that will most certainly be undone,
if thou do not speedily alter thy Mind; wherefore my Loins are filled with
Pain, Pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a Woman that travelleth: I
am bowed down at the Thoughts of thy Misery, I am dismayed at the seeing of thy
Destruction. The Sinner ventures for all this! He is marched into the Field!
Set a Watchman, let him declare what he sees. Who meets that furious Wretch? A
Lion, a Lion roareth, he is torn in Pieces, and none can save him; he is gone,
he is gone, he is gone for ever! and who may the Madman thank for all this?
Who could help it? He would venture, though he was told as much. Well then, see
what is like to befall the Enemies of God: You hear what is like to be the
Condition of all them that will not be acquainted with God, first or last: You
likewise may behold what a Case you your self shall be in e're it be long,
except you do speedily repent of your Folly, and meet your Adversary in the
Way, and humble your self before the mighty Jehovah; Speak quickly; What will
you do? Turn, or burn? Repent or die? Yet you do but hear, you do not feel; but
thousands and millions feel what the Displeasure of God is, what the Breach of
his Covenant is, and what the Effects of a War with the Lord of Hosts is. O be
wise by their Falls; let their Destruction be your Instruction; take heed what
you do, lest you be the next that God shall deal with as an Enemy: As yet God
offers to be Friends with you; but whether God will do as much to morrow as he
does to day, I do not know. I tell you but so, it is hard putting it to the
venture. Remember you had large Proffers of Grace and Pardon made to you, God
has sent us to let you know his Will and Pleasure, and we demand of you from
him to give us your Answer speedily. And what cannot you yet resolve? Is it so
difficult a Business to determine what to fix upon? O foolish People and
unwise! O unspeakable Madness! How just must their Condemnation needs be, who
are offered Salvation so often, and refuse it? who are so often told of
Damnation, and yet run into it? in a word, who might have God for their Friend,
and had rather have him for their Enemy.

4. The next Head of Motives, by which I might enforce this Duty of
Acquaintance with God, may be taken from the Examples of them which made all
the Friends they could to get acquainted with God. Behold a Cloud of Witnesses,
which do all with one Consent speak high in the Commendation of this Friend,
that I am persuading you all that I can to be acquainted with Are you wiser
than all your Neighbors, is the ignorant Objection of some that would take it
very heinously, if we should call them Fool, when we put them upon a serious
Diligence in Pursuit of the best things? Why, let me retort this Objection upon
themselves, Are you wiser than Enoch and Noah? Have you more Understanding than
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? Have you more Wit than David? Are you wiser than
Heman, Daniel, and many others of those brave Worthies which were the Wonders
of the World, the Nonsuches of their Age, and a Pattern to future Generations?
This was the greatest Piece of their Wisdom to walk with God, this was the best
o^ their Policy to get so potent an Allie; this spoke them to be Men of a
deeper Reach, and a larger Understanding than others, because they made it
their Business to get acquainted with God, and thus to make their Interest as
large as Heaven, and their Peace and Prosperity as sure as the Oath of a God
could make it. Do you think that all these Men were mistaken? Did their Wisdom
lie only in a prudent Management of their worldly Affairs to their best
Advantage; what then, did they mean some of them to leave all that they had so
cheerfully upon the Command of God? dare you say that they prized the Favor of
God at too high a Rate? As for their parts, they thought they could never value
such a Friend as God too much. What else was the Meaning of their longing,
panting, and breathing after him? Why else are they so glad of his Company, his
Presence? How loath were they to do any thing that might be in the least
displeasing to him? What bitter Moans did they make, if he did but withdraw a
while, if he did but a little absent himself from them? how wonderful desirous
were they of enjoying Communion with him? How earnest to live in his House for
ever? Dare you say that they were all Fools and Madmen for refusing the
Embraces of this present World, for slighting its Smiles, and undervaluing its
greatest Kindnesses, and choosing the Favor of God, though with the Scorns and
Reproaches of the World, rather than to hazard his Anger, whose Wrath burns to
the Bottom of Hell. Behold what a glorious Company of these stand upon Mount
Zion, with Harps in their Hands, with those hundred and forty and four
thousand, and the Lamb with an innumerable Multitude of all Nations, People,
and Languages. Why, all these were of the Friends and Acquaintance of God, or
else they had never had those Crowns, Robes, and Palms in their Hands. Now, why
should not our Souls be as dear to us as theirs were to them? Will not Heaven
be as good for us as them? is it not as needful for us to get a Friend of God,
as them? Will not God do as much for us as them, if we will but do as they did,
walk with him. The Truth of it is, the number of them which are saved is but
few, in comparison of the Multitudes of them which know not God, and go the
broad Way; yet for all that take them absolutely, they are abundance; so many
that the Scripture says they are innumerable. Do but read over the History of
some of their Lives, turn over the holy Records, look sometimes into those
sacred Chronicles, and behold how cheerfully they served God, how actively they
followed the Lamb wheresoever he goes, through thick and thin. Hear what their
Language is now they are got home safe, now Christ has brought them to Glory,
and they are at their Friend's House. What do they talk of? What is their
Discourse about? Do they complain what a sad Journey they had of it through a
howling Wilderness, after they had passed the Red Sea through a thousand
Sorrows and Trials? Do they say that now they are at their Journey's End, they
are weary, and wish they had never taken so long and tedious a Journey? Do they
not rather speak the quite contrary, and that if it were to go again, they
would do it with far more Speed and Cheerfulness than they did? Listen, hark,
methinks I hear them from the Walls of the New Jerusalem crying out, Come away,
come away, fall on bravely, follow your Business gallantly but a little while
longer, and the City is your own; fetch your scaling Ladders, run up apace,
mount the Ramparts, fear nothing though the Devil play his Artillery upon them,
yet it is but Powder, he shall never give you a mortal Wound; resist him and he
will fly, and the Field is yours; the Spoil, the Crown, the Honor will pay for
your Pains, Blood, and Danger. Fall on brave Souls, fall on; the valianter you
be the more safe you are. Methinks I hear those noble Saints encouraging of you
to get Acquaintance with God, and saying to you that are yet afar off, Come
near, come away poor Souls, come away, what do you mean thus to delay? O little
do you think what a Friend we now find of God; it was but a little, a very
little that was told us of the Excellency of Christ, and the Glories of this
Place, to what we experience; It was no false Report that we heard when we were
upon Earth, of the Happiness of Heaven: O here is a Prize worth the running for;
a Kingdom, a Crown worth the fighting for, an Estate worth the looking after.
We have not now our stint, we are not dieted with those Spiritual Dainties, we
have not now and then a Sip, a Draught, a Bit in a Corner, but we are at the
Fountain, we are daily feasted with infinite Pleasures, our Hearts are full,
brim full, they run over, we swim in an Ocean of spiritual Enjoyments; these
things are beyond your Capacity now to understand. Were we to live upon Earth
again, and did we know what we do now know, we should ever pine with our
earnest Longing for God, the living God, to be in his immediate Presence, and
to be at that Angelical Work of praising, serving, and loving him for ever.
Wherefore, Brethren, let us encourage one another, Come let us go up to the
House of the Lord; his Dwelling is in Salem, his Palace is upon Mount Zion. Why
should not we go on as merrily in the Paths of Wisdom, as the wicked in the
Road of Hell? How do the Devil's Champions encourage and hearten one another
up? How do they laugh, sing, and roar, as if their Life were the only Life? for
shame, let us tell them they lie in their Teeth. Who has the best Company, they
or we? the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Apostles and thousands of Martyrs, are
gone Singing before; some of our dear Relations, Fathers, Brethren and Sisters
are newly welcomed by Christ to his Father's House, and they are blessing that
rich Mercy that has conducted them to such a Place, to such a Friend; we have
many thousands of Saints militant, that are going along with us as fast as they
can, and God himself will bear us Company, and why do we yet linger? O that we
were upon the Wing! O that our Souls were like the Chariots of Aminadab! O that
the Lord would strengthen poor short-winded Creatures! O that we could run and
not be weary, and walk and not faint! O that we might have now and then a
hearty Meal, and that in the Strength of them we could travel to the Mount of
God! O that that Acquaintance might now be happily begun, which may never have
an End! O that God would visit us often, and get into our Hearts! O that he that
gave those Worthies in former times so much Grace, would pour out of the same
Grace in Abundance upon our Souls! O that he would shed abroad his Love in our
Hearts! O that we could maintain a constant Intercourse with him here, till we
come to a perfect Enjoyment of him in Glory hereafter! O that we may see thy
Face, thy blessed Face by Faith! O that thou would cause thy Glory to pass
before us! O that thy marvelous loving Kindness might be made known to a
Company of poor Creatures of us, whose Desire is to fear thee, who would fain
love thee with the Strength of our Souls! O blessed are they that love thee,
that are beloved by thee!

5. I might also insist upon another Head of Mo^ives, which is named in the
Text, which is this, Acquaint now thy self with him and thou shall be at Peace.
Though there be nothing but War on every side, you shall have Peace. This Peace
of God, whatsoever you may think of it, is unspeakably advantageous; the
Benefits that would accrue to a Soul upon this Peace are infinite; it is a
Peace that passes all Understanding. When we have this Peace concluded, we may
drive a brave Trade, without Disturbance, for the richest Commodities. If we
were thus acquainted with God, we shall have such a Peace as that we may laugh
at the Shaking of the Spear, and not be much disturbed when we hear of dreadful
Things abroad in the World. He that is acquainted with God may safely venture
up and down, he has God's Pass, a strong Man of War for his Convoy, he has
such powerful Allies that he need not fear; as long as he is at Peace with God,
he is sure not to be quite overcome by Man. He is at Peace with himself, when
the Air echoes with Drums and Trumpets, and the roaring of Guns, a Music that
pleases the Devil's Ear: He may still rejoice, because he has a Bird within
that sings sweetly; there is a Harmony between his Will and God's, a Harmony
between his Heart and his Mouth. This is no such contemptible thing, and if you
knew what a wounded Spirit, a Fire in the Bosom is, you would say so. This
Peace that such a one has is a well-grounded Peace; not such a one as is built
upon Ignorance, and Hardness of Heart; but such a Peace as results from the
Sense of the Pardon of Sin, and Reconciliation with God, through the Blood of
Christ; That Blood of Christ has washed his Conscience from dead Works. Sins
he had, and has, but some of them he sees lying dead like the Egyptians upon
the Shore, others striving for Life with a Death's Wound upon them; and though
he have Enemies still living, yet they are such as shall never have the
absolute Dominion over him: as long as the great Quarrel between him and God is
at an end all is well enough, the Law has nothing against him, all his
Accusers are silenced; Christ has fulfilled and satisfied the Law for him; the
grea^^ Creator has given a full and general Acquittance^ all Debts are
discharged for him, and therefore the Man has little reason to trouble his
Head much with Cares and Fears; now he may go up and down any where, and not
fear the Sergeant his noble Surety has paid that vast Debt, he has laid down
the ten thousand Talents upon the Nail, so that the Man is at Peace with God,
h^ is also at Peace with all the Creatures in the World, from the glorious
Angels that are i^ Heaven, to the meanest Insect or Plant; they ar^ so far from
doing him any real Harm, that the^ all are Servants to the Friends of God, they
a^ stand ready to oppose their Enemies; and those of them that are mortal are
ready to lay down their Lives for one that stands thus related to God For when
any enters into Covenant with God, God also makes a Covenant for them with the
Beasts of the Field. Great Peace have they that love God's Law, and nothing
shall offend them; such a one is at Peace with Death and the Grave. We read of
some profane Monsters that made a Covenant with Death, and were at an Agreement
with Hell: but this Covenant will soon be broken, because he that has the Keys
of Death and Hell, the Power of Life and Death, never subscribed to the
Articles of their Agreement. But now the godly Man has a Friend that has made
a Covenant for him, a firm Covenant with Death and Hell, so that none of them
shall ever do him the least Wrong. As for Death, Christ has taken out its
Sting; as for the Grave, Christ has spiced and seasoned it, its Power is
mastered, its Terribleness is taken away; it is now no Prison, Christ has
opened the Doors of it, and now it is but a Chamber of Repose, a Bed to rest
in; and he that has already opened this Door, when it was bolted, barred and
double locked, can, and will, e're long, open it again, and awaken his from
their Sleep; and is this inconsiderable? Is not such a Peace as this desirable?
Who that is well in his Wits, would not be glad to be in so secure a Condition
as this Peace will put him in? And who are like to have the Benefit of this
Peace, but the Friends of God! O therefore if you value your own Peace, if you
would be undisturbed from Storms without, and Heart-quakes within; if you would
have all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth at Peace with you; if you would have
Death unstung, and the Grave a Chamber, and not a Prison, why then, get
acquainted with God, and you shall be at Peace.

6. The next Head of Motives I might take from these Words, Thereby good shall
come unto you. Acquaint your self with him, and be at Peace, and thereby good
shall come unto you. But I shall here be but brief. Think of what you will that
is good for you, and if you are acquainted with God, you shall have it for
asking for; or that which is far better than that which you desire: For the
Lord God is a Sun, and a Shield; he will give Grace and Glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them which walk uprightly; that is, from those
that are acquainted with him. All his Ways are Mercy and Truth, to such as be
in Covenant with him; and all shall work together for good to them that love
him. Enlarge thy Desires as wide as the Heavens, request what you will, ask
never so much and you shall have it; and what would you have more? If it be the
good of Profit that you desire; what greater Gain than Godliness? Who can give
such Rewards to his Servants as God? Who will give greater Portions to his
Children than this Father? Who is like to thrive better than he, who has such
a vast Stock, such a great Trade, such quick and great Returns, and above all
such a Partner? O that those that are all for Profit and Gain, that cry out,
What Advantage shall it be to me, if I serve God? and what Profit to me if I am
acquainted with him? O that such would but do that which will be most for their
Profit, I would desire no more of them than this: O that they would but try
what a gainful Trade Religion in its Power is! The greatest Merchants that ever
walked the Exchange, if they be not acquainted with God, and have not Christ
for their Factor, are but Pedlars to the Saint. One that is acquainted with
God, gets more in one Hour, in one Prayer, at one Sermon, in one Meditation,
than all the rich Men of the World are worth, put all their Estates together:
One receives his Peace, the other his Pounds; the one has by way of return, a
great deal of troublesome Lumber, the other his Box of precious Pearls, and a
Jewel of an infinite Value. O little does the laborious Worldling think what
poor and small Gains his are, when he gets most, to what this spiritual
Merchant gets! he would not sell what he gets sometimes in one Morning, for all
the Riches of both the Indies. He trades in such Commodities which will not
suffer Damage upon the Sea; his Vessel is light and strong, the Master of it
never made a loosing Voyage. All his Wares are unvaluable; and though his Ship
be in many a dreadful Storm, though sometimes she be becalmed, though it be
long before she return; yet as long as she has such Provisions within, such a
Pilot, such Anchors, she cannot miscarry; she will come into the Harbor richly
laden. The World will not believe this, but I am sure there is never a Man
breathing, but will sooner say that no Gain is like the Gain of Christ and
Glory. One Return from Heaven, one Answer of Prayer, one Smile from God, one
Look of Love, the Head of one Goliath, the Death of one Sin, one Soul brought
home to Christ, one drooping Soul comforted, is a greater Mercy (for all the
ignorant World make nothing of such things as these) than to be invested with
the greatest Honors, than to be possessed of all the Riches, than to enjoy all
the Pleasures that the whole World can afford. But O were Men's Eyes opened,
were Men within sight of those devouring Flames, then they would believe that a
Christ was worth the having, Grace a Pearl that cannot be over-valued, and that
no Trade was comparable to a spiritual Merchant, no Art like that by which one
may turn every thing into Gold. But if it be the good of Pleasure you look more
after; can there be greater Pleasures than those which are in the Presence of
God? Can there be any greater Pleasures than to rejoice in God, and to be made
welcome by him, than to drink Flagons of that excellent Liquor which is better
than Wine? Can there be better Music than to hear so many millions of sweet
Voices singing Hallelujahs! O, there is a Consort, there is Melody indeed! If you
desire that other Good, the Good of Honesty, a rare Accomplishment, Perfection
of Grace, Purity of Soul, wherewithal shall a young Man choose his Ways, but by
taking heed thereto according to his Word. Well then, lay all these Motives
together, and let us see whither they will any whit prevail. If the Nature of
the Person with whom I would fain have you acquainted, if all these admirable
Qualities that are in him (if I may so call them) may signisie any thing, if
all those glorious Effects of Acquaintance with God weigh any thing with you,
one would think by this time you should be well resolved. If the Danger of not
being acquainted with God, may make you afraid of standing it out; if good or
evil, if Peace or War, if Life or Death, if all this be as much as nothing,
what then is something? If the frequent pleading of Mercy, if the Blood of
Christ have any Voice, if the Expostulations of his Ambassadors may be heard,
why should you not then be persuaded? If all this will not move you, what can
we say more? if we could show you Heaven, and the Glories of another World,
could we let you see the Face of Christ, could we any way in the world reach
your Hearts, and persuade you by any Means to mind the Things of eternal Peace,
we would do it will all our Hearts. If we were sure to get you with us, and to
bring you acquainted with God, we could willingly come begging on our bare
Knees to you, and beseech you to be reconciled to God. We see that dismal Day a
coming, and are grieved to think what a sad taking you will be in then; we know
the Case will then be altered with them, which will not be persuaded to be
reconciled to God. O what a woeful Condition will they be in, which have heard
or read these Sermons, and yet for all that would not mind the looking after
Acquaintance with God; How will such wish that they had never been born, or
that they had their being in some of the dark savage Corners of the World,
where they might never have heard of the Doctrine of Reconciliation, being
acquainted with God, and Union with Christ, Peace with their offended Maker,
rather than having heard of these things to make light of them! O to hear of
such a Friend, and to have him for an Enemy; to hear of Peace, and to choose
War; to hear of Heaven, and go to Hell, this is sad indeed. It would have been
far better for such, that they had never known the Ways of God, than after they
have known them, to go in the Ways of Folly. O that Men and Women had but such
serious Thoughts of these Things as they will have e're long! O that they would
but believe Heaven, and Hell, and Eternity, to be such Realities as shortly
they will! O that Men's Hearts were but affected with things, as they will be
when their Souls are just a-going, or a little after they are in another World!
But O the miserable Condition of the World! O the lamentable State of
Professors, that make no more of the Favor or Displeasure of God! Nay, may I
not say, O the Folly of the Children of God themselves, that are no more in
God's Company, when they know they may be so welcome, when they have tasted so
often of his Kindness, when they were made so much of the last time that they
gave him a Visit. Are not Men in a deep Sleep, that they do not hear? are they
not blind that they do not see? are they not ignorant, foolish and mad, that
they do not understand their Interest any better? It is not without good Reason
that the Spirit of God does so often cry out upon Sinners, for their Folly; the
Scripture says not in vain, That there is none that has Understanding, no not
one. No wonder that they which have but half a Cure see Men like Trees, that
those which never had a through Work do not prize Christ. O but that those
which have been brought nigh by Grace, who were sometimes afar off, that such
should be so much Strangers; for those that have met with such kind
Entertainment at his House for these to keep off so, to come so seldom; so them
which have fed so high at the King's Table to fall to their Trash, their Husks,
this is a Shame indeed; as if the Devil kept a better House than God.
Christians, does God deserve this at your hands? How unkindly do you think he
takes this from you? what will the World say? look how his own Acquaintance
despise him? how will the Devil insult? O how do the Hearts of your
Fellow Christians ache to see how strange your Carriage is? how do they tremble
to think, what if that fine House be built upon the Sand? Christians, you which
seldom, or complementally visit God, bethink your selves well what you do when
you begin to be cold in your Affections to this Friend, remember from whence
you are fallen; and repent, and do your first Works; remember what
Entertainment you have sometimes had at God's House; forget not all his
Kindnesses; of all the Creatures in the World you have no cause to carry your
selves so toward God. I tell you again, the World stands by, and looks on to
see what there is in you more than in others; they mark your Lives more than
you are aware of, it may be; wherefore look to your selves, take heed how you
carry your selves before them. O why should they see your Faces pale, when you
may feed so highly? O show them by your Countenance, that you feed upon
wholesome Food! O let your Breath smell sweet, let your Discourse be more
savoury of the Things of God! Labor to maintain a sweet, constant,
unintermitted Intercourse with God, to walk with him. O little do you think
what you loose by your coming so seldom to this Friend. I appeal to your own
Experience, was not that Dish you eat last at his Table sweet? and what do you
think that God does not still keep as good a House as he did? do you believe
that he has spent all his best Wines? can that Fountain ever be emptied? is
there not Bread and good Cheer enough in your Father's House? Believe it, God
has other kind of Entertainment, richer Cheer, better Fare still to make you
welcome with, if you would not be so strange, if you would but come oftener to
him. As for Christians, methinks I need not use so many Words to persuade you,
methinks you that know how sweet his Company is, should desire to be never out
of it. Christians, I tell you plainly, if ever you expect true Peace in your
Life, and true Joy and Comfort at Death, it is your only Way to keep close to
God, visit him often by secret Prayer and other kind of Duties, and then you
shall ever and anon me^t with that which will sweeten your greatest Dilgence,
and abundantly make Amends for you Pains. Knock at his Door, ask for him, and
resolve to stay till he come; though he come not a the first, second, or third
Knocking, yet I am sure he is within, and will come at last, if you will but
wait; and when you have once again met with him, O let him not go, but tell him
seriously that you cannot bear his Absence, he shall be your God and Friend
living and dying, Death it self shall not part you. Go also and tell your
Friends you have found him whom your Soul loves, that you have met with Jesus,
and see if you can get them to come out and see him, bid them to taste and see
how good the Lord is; commend him all you can to your poor Christless Friends.
But you are not the Persons that I intended to speak to, only thus a little by
the by, that I may a little warm my own Heart and yours ^^^n this great Duty of
maintaining an intimate lose Converse and Acquaintance with God. But my
Business is to go out into the High Ways and Hedges, and to invite poor
wandering Strangers that have nothing to live upon themselves, and that do not
know what a noble open House God keeps, that never tasted of his Kindness in
Christ, to come to this Royal Feast, and to eat their Fill of such Food as they
can never eat too much of, never be surfeited with. Unto you O Men I call, and
my Voice is unto the Sons of Men. O ye simple ones, understand Wisdom, and ye
Fools, be ye of an understanding Heart, Prove. 8.4, 5. Hear O ye Deaf, and see O
Blind: Let the Dead hear the Voice of God, and live. Then hear what I have been
speaking of: I have almost done my Message, consider well of these things as
you tender the Displeasure of God, as you value your Souls, be serious;
remember what it is that I have been discoursing to you about, read it over
again, and study on it; read and pray, pray and read, and turn this Exhortation
into Prayer; take with you Words, and say! O that this might be the Sermon that
might bring me acquainted with God! O that this might be the Man that might
bring me to some Knowledge of Christ! O that this might be the happy Day
wherein a Match may be concluded between my Soul, and the precious Jesus! But
alas, alas, where are the Hearts that are thus smitten? Where are the Souls
that are any whit taken with this infinite Beauty? How few have any real Love
or good Will for Christ? O who has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm
of the Lord revealed? Though I and many hundreds more have been pleading thus
with Sinners; though some of the Ambassadors of Peace weep bitterly, that their
Message is no more kindly entertained, though their public Preaching be
followed with private Prayers and secret. Groans, though they expostulate the
Case with poor refractory Creatures with all the Earnestness that they can for
their Lives, though we use the most powerful Arguments that we can, and deliver
them with all the Vehemence, Seriousness and Compassion that we can for our
Souls; yet how are the greatest part of our Hearers unconcerned? Is not a great
part of our Auditory as stupid and senseless as the very Stones they tread on?
The more is our Sorrow; we fear as to the most of them that hear us, what we
speak is lost. It may be they may be a little affected just at the hearing, or
for an Hour or two; but O that these Truths might have a lively and abiding
Impression on Men's Hearts! I fear, O that they were causeless Fears! I fear
that most of you that have heard of these things will go away, and quickly
forget what weighty things you have heard; perhaps some of you may say, the Man
was very earnest, and some of his Expressions were piercing. O Friends, I hope
it is not your Commendation that I desire? O that I may with a single Heart
respect God's Glory! I say again, I would not be pleased with your Praise, nor
would I fear your Dispraise; it is your Souls (...) want, and may but I manage
my great Work in this successful, and see you acquainted wit^ God, before I
leave you for ever, I hope I should he contented to be trod in the Dirt. O that
m^^^ Heart may not deceive me! O that my Compassion to your Souls were greater,
a thousond times greater! O that I could never speak to you of such things as
these without Tears. I must again, and again, profess I am ashamed of my Heart,
that it is no more sensible of these weighty Affairs! But O mighty and glorious
God, if thou please, thou can our of the Mouth of a Babe and Suckling
ordain Strength! O that thou would make the Worm Jacob to thresh Mountains!
O that thou would make use of the most unworthy and weakest Instrument, in
that honorable Service of bringing home some Souls to thy Self. O if but any
one Soul, if but one Soul that was estranged from God, might by these Lines be
brought acquainted with him, if I might prevail with any other stubborn Enemy
to lay down his Weapons, and be Friends with him, I should think my Pains well
bestowed, though (if that will make you to regard it ever the more) this Work
has cost me many an Hour's study, and it has been interrupted with many
bodily Distempers, Groans and Sorrows, Fears and Sighs. Yet if after all my
Travel, I may hear of any Children born of God; if I may meet but one Soul the
better for it, by it brought to Glory, I shall have abundant Cause to bless my
God, and to rejoice that my Labor has not been in vain in the Lord. But if I
might have more, I should have more Cause to adore infinite Goodness, and Rich
Grace! O my dear Friends! O precious and immortal Souls! What shall I say to
you? What shall I do for you? O did you but know how hardly I fetch my Breath
at this time, did you but see what a crazy Creature he is that writes to you,
did you but know how faint he has been sometimes in speaking to you, you would
go nigh to pity him. O pity your selves! O pity your own Souls, that e're long
must be turned naked out of your Bodies, and hear the Expostulations of a dying
Man that would gladly live with you in everlasting Glory, and meet you all
among the Friends of the Bridegroom, that I may see you among the Sons of God,
in your great Meeting, when the Father shall send his Servants the Angels to
fetch all his Children home to his own House. O pity your Souls, and let not
all my Pains be lost, trample not under your Feet the Blood of the Covenant,
neither count it a common thing; remember that the slighting of Christ is a
dangerous thing; the Loss of his Favor, and the Loss of your Soul, must go
together? O how shall I leave you? How shall I part with you, shall I go before
my Work is done. What shall I say more? What Arguments shall I further make use
of? O that I knew what to say that I might prevail! And are you still resolved
to put me off with frivolous Excuses? Can you put off your Consciences thus?
Are you still contented to be Aliens and Strangers? If you are know this, that
I must leave these Lines to bear Witness against you; Remember this, that you
were told of these things again and again. Those that can forget Sermons here,
shall remember them hereafter; if you be not the better for this Discourse, you
will curse the Day that ever you heard it; it will be a cutting Reflection,
when another Day you shall say to your own Soul, at such a time, such a one did
beseech me in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, and I would not. Cursed
Man that I was! I made nothing of all he Offers of Grace and Mercy, I made
little account of these intolerable Torments which now nake me to gnash my
Teeth. Hear, O unhappy Creature that art yet alive, be not yet past Hope? O
that thou may see thy sad State before it be quite past Remedy! O let me
take up a Lamentation for thee, as one whose Condition is beyond Expression
deplorable! O that I could speak as affectionately to you as one did lately,
who spent his Strength and Life amongst you all, viz. That I can neither eat
nor drink, nor sleep quietly, whilst I think of the Danger that precious Souls
run every moment, while they are unacquainted with God! O that mine Eyes were
Waters, and my Head a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night for
poor Christless Creatures, that laugh and are as cheerful as if no Danger were
near them, whereas that dismal Day approaches apace, wherein they must bid an
everlasting Farewell to all their Pleasures, and ^ie down for ever under the
scalding Wrath of in angry God! O stand astonished, O Heavens, and wonder, O
Earth! Here Is a Man that had rather be a Beast than a Man, a Devil than a
^aint, that prefers Hell before Heaven, that ^oves Death and hates Life; here is
a Man that ^akes nothing of going to Hell, Damnation is a thing that he jests
with; it is but damning, he ^aith: But damning! Is that so light a thing, a
thing to be laughed at? Well, if that damning be nothing, never complain of it,
when you feel it; (...) it be nothing, never groan nor bite your ^ongue, nor
gnash your Teeth for it; if Heaven, and your Soul, the Favor of God, eternal
Happiness, be but such small Matters, never complain for the Loss of them. Well
then, belike you are pleased very well with your Choice, and you do choose
rather to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a moment, than the Pleasures of
Holiness, which last for ever. There stands a Sinner that hears all this, and
frets and foameth at the hearing of it; it is a Torture to his Soul to be within
the Sound of such Truths? Why, act like one in his Wits: If the hearing of Hell
and Damnation be so troublesome, what will the feeling of it be, think thou?
But that I may, if possible, prevail, I shall leave a few serious Questions
with you, which I charge you in the Presence of God seriously to consider of,
and to give a wise Answer to these following.

Quest. 1. Are those things which you have heard true, or are they not? Does
not the Scriptures speak the same things which I do? Dare you say that the Word
of Truth is false? Do but open the Bible, dip where you will, what is that you
read there? Is it not something that has a Tendency to what I have been
teaching of? O that you would but give your selves the trouble of searching the
Scriptures, to see whether these things are so. To what purpose do you think
should we spend our Breath? To wha^ purpose should we follow you with such
Exhortations, if we had not some Grounds for what w^ say? If there be no such
thing in the Word o^ God, why then do you not say so? Why do you not show us
it, if there be such a Place tha^ says, there is no need of Repentance, that
Man'^ Condition is safe enough already, and that he man do well enough, though
he be never reconciled to God? Do you think that we take Delight in vexing Men
and Women? Do you conceive that ^t pleases us to displease you, and to get
your Hatred? Do you not believe that a great many of us, if it might consist
with God's Honor, and yout Welfare, had not far rather be excused? Can any Man
imagine that so many thousands of Prophets, Apostles and Ministers, in such
distant Ages, and in such distant Places, should all agree in this, to impose a
Falsity upon the World? Would any Man be so mad as to invent such things as
these, which are so contrary to Men's Dispositions, if he had not abundant
Warrant from God himself? Is it possible that Men should make such Complaint,
and shed so many Tears, and be in such Agonies about these things, if there
were nothing at all in them? Are all the Experiences of so many thousands of
Saints, but mere Fancies? Speak Christian, speak, what do you say to this? Are
all thy Joys, thy Answers of Prayers, those sweet Dishes that thou have
sometimes fed upon, out Dreams? Does not thy very Blood stir in thee, at the
very putting such a Question to thee? Can thou not say that thou have seen,
that thou have felt, and that thou have known undoubtedly, that spiritual
things are Realities, the greatest Realities in the World, and that thou have
been as much affected with them as ever thou were with the things of Sense? Let
me, the meanest of ten thousand, tell the stiffest Atheist in the World, that I
have seen these things so realized, that I shall sooner believe that I am
turned to a ^tone, or am dead, than believe that Spirituals ^^e Nullities and
Fancies. I am confident if there (...) any credit to be given to both Eyes, and
Ears, then these things are true; and had you seen but what I have seen in
dying Saints, and heard what I have heard, you would easily have been convinced
that there is something in Communion with God, something in Spiritual Joys. I
am sure, if there be any Truth in the Scriptures, if the Word of God be true,
if Christ and the Apostles were not all mistaken, then these things are true.
If I should tell you a Business that did concern your House, or your Children,
or Body, or any worldly thing whatever, upon my own personal Knowledge, would
you not readily assent to what I say? I am persuaded you would be far from
suspecting the Truth of what I affirmed; I am ready to think that there is none
of you all that think that I dare tell you that which is false. O then, why
will you not believe me in a Business of far greater Consequence? And if you
ask me to what purpose do I spend so much time for nothing? What need I speak
at this rate? What will I make Infidels of you all? What do I think that you
are such Atheists as not to believe that the Word of God is true? Well then,
you your selves are Witnesses that the Word of God i^ true, and that you do
believe all that is contained in it, and by rational Inferences deduced from
it: I shall therefore take it for granted that you give your Assent to these
things, if you be Christians in Profession, your very Name speaks as much. Now
my next Question shall be this.

Quest. 2. Are these things of Weight and Importance, or are they not? You hear
that they are Matters that concern your eternal Life o^ Death, Soul-Affairs;
and are not these Matter of the greatest Consequence? If Acquaintance with God,
the Happiness or Misery of a Soul, your making or undoing for ever, be
inconsiderable things, what then are great things? Is it a Matter of greater
Importance, to loose the Sight of a lascivious Play? Is it an Affair of greater
Weight to have the Frowns of a wanton Mistress, or the Frowns of a God? You
said even now, that the Word of God was true, if you will stand to that, I
desire no more; how is it written? Read a Verse or two, turn to Matthew 5.20.
Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And John 3.3.
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And God will pour
his Wrath upon the Heathen, and upon the Families that call not upon his Name.
Does not the Scripture say, that is the one thing necessary? Are not these
things called by the Lord Christ, the weightier things? Mat. 13.23. I hope you
will not say, that God is mistaken, and that the Scripture speaks more of these
Matters than needs: What, are you gone from your Word so soon, did you not say
that the Word of God was true, and are you now of another mind, because you
find that it requires more Strictness than you are willing to submit to? But
are you ashamed of that, and are you convinced of this also, that the Doctrine
of Reconciliation, Acquaintance, and Peace with God, are Affairs of the highest
Importance in the World? And do you indeed believe this? And will you stand to
it? Well then, my next Question shall be this: Quest. 3. What do you mean then
to mind such things as you acknowledge to be most unquestionably true, and of
the greatest Consequence, with so much Indifferency and Coldness? What reason
have you then for your strange Neglect in your prosecuting of them? What say
they are the greatest things in the World, and will you say they are least to
be looked after? Is it any Prudence and Wisdom to be very serious about
Trifles, and to trifle about the most serious things? Are Heaven, the Love of
God, and the like, by your own Confession the most weighty, and will you make
light of them? O Folly and Hypocrisy! Out of thy own Mouth thou shall be
condemned. Do thou know that Heaven and Hell are before you? Do thou know
that the one is unspeakably glorious, and the other unspeakably dreadful? And
yet for all this do thou stand demurring which of these thou should
choose? and dare thou for all this venture on in a way which leads to the
Region of eternal Darkness? and though those that know the way better than you,
and see you ride on so hastily and merrily, call after you with Earnestness,
yet do thou still turn thy Back upon them? Consider whether you act in these
Affairs, like one that is well in his Wits. Is God the best Friend in the
World, and yet his Kindness least to be regarded? Man, what have thou to say
for thy self? O what Brutes, and how irrational are Men in their spiritual
Matters! How do they contradict themselves! How do they say one thing, and do
the quite contrary! O let me in a word or two renew my Expostulation with them
which are loath to be accounted Fools! What reason have thou to undervalue the
Favor of God so as you do? What reason have you thus foolishly to cast away
your selves, and to slight Acquaintance with your Maker? Let me plead with you
in the Language of a Reverend Divine (R. B.) of our own. Look up your best and
strongest Reasons; and if you see a Man put his Hand into the Fire till it burn
off, you will marvel at it: But this is a thing that a Man may have reason for,
as Bishop Cranmer had when he burnt off his Hand for subscribing to Popery. If
you see a Man cut off a Leg or an Arm, it is a sad Sight; but this is a thing
that a Man may have good Reason for, as many a Man does it to save his Life. If
you see a Man give his Body to be burnt to Ashes, and to be tormented with
Strapado's and Racks, and refuse Deliverance when it is offered: This is a hard
Case to Flesh and Blood, but this a Man may have good Reason for, as you see in
Heb. 11.33, 34, 35, 36. and as many hundred Martyrs have done. But for a Man to
forsake the Lord that made him, for a Man to run into the Fire of Hell when he
is told of it, and entreated to turn that he might be saved; this is a thing
that can have no reason in it, that is reason indeed, to justify or excuse it.
For Heaven will pay for the Loss of any thing that we can lose to get it, or
for any Labor that we bestow for it; but nothing can pay for the Loss of
Heaven. Read on in Mr. R. B's Call to the Unconverted, Page 169. Do you still
believe the Word of God to be true, and the things contained in it to be the
most weighty, and yet will you still pass them over, as if there were nothing
at all in them? Quest. 4. My next Question that I shall propound to you, and
desire your serious and speedy Answer to, is this, Do you believe that you can
find a better Friend-than God? Can you mend your self any where else? Is there
in Heaven or Earth any that can do as much for you as God can? Is there any one
that can take you off when you come to be accused for High Treason against the
King of Heaven, and to be arraigned before that just Judge? Have you got that
which will quit your Cost in getting of it, and countervail the Loss of a Soul?
What is it that still has an Interest in your Heart, that is thought to be an
equal Competitor with God for your dearest Love? If it be indeed that which
will shield you from the Arrests of Death, and the Wrath of the Almighty; if it
be that which can shelter you from the Storm of his Displeasure; if it be that
which will do you as much good as Heaven, and make you as happy as God can; why
then I have little to say; make your best of it. But consider well what you do
first, be sure that you be not mistaken, have not many thought as you think,
and have found their Mistake when it was too late?

Quest. 5. Do you think that this World will last always with you? Do you not
believe that e're long you must die, and your Soul appear before God, and by
him be sentenced to its everlasting State? Where is all the Glory of those
great Monarchs which despised God, and oppressed his People? What is become of
all their Pomp? Which of them that flourished three thousand Years ago stand
alive now in Glory? And are you better than they? Shall the Worms which have
made a Prey of them, spare you? Is Death more favorable now a Days, than he
was before? Is not the world still as it was, but Vanity? Is not all Flesh
still but Grass, and the Beauty of it as a Flower that is cut down and
withers suddenly? Well then, this being granted, that nothing is more certain
than Death, and that it is appointed for all Men once to die; would you not
then be glad of something that will stand you instead after Death, a Friend in
another World? Why then do you not speedily get acquainted with him, who alone
can befriend you in that dreadful Hour?

Quest. 6. What do you think will become of you, if after all this you go on in
your old Ways? What will become of you do you think if you should die without
the Knowledge of God? What Hopes have you of Life and Peace, if you bid
Defiance to the Lord of Life, and contemn the Prince of Peace? How shall you
escape if you neglect so great Salvation? What do you think that those which
did once as you do now, slight Christ, and never look after Reconciliation with
God, are now a doing in another World? What would you do in this Case? Should
one come to you either out of Heaven, or out of Hell, how wonderfully do you
think you should be affected with the Narration which they would give you of
the Affairs of the invisible World? Why then will you not now be affected with
what we say? For assure your selves, whatever you may think, our Testimony is
as true, and has a better Foundation of Credit, than if one should tell you he
came from the Dead, and speak to you of these things.

Quest. 7. Another Question I would propound to you, is this; Are you willing
to bear the Displeasure of God? Can you undergo the Weight of that Wrath which
made his Back to ache, who was mighty to do and suffer? Can you with any
Patience heart that dreadful Word pronounced by the Mouth of that Judge, which
will see to the Execution of his Sentence, Depart from me ye Cursed into
everlasting Torment; Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, for I know you not?
Can you endure without any Trouble that scalding hot Wrath, which is abundantly
more painful than Fire and Brimstone, more intolerable than to be shut up in a
burning Fiery-Furnace, or to be boiled in a Caldron of melted Lead, or
whatsoever Torments the Wit of Men and Devils can invent? Can you with any
Patience bear the Stone, Gout, Toothache, Cholick, or some such Distempers of
Body which last but for a while? O how long do you think the time when you are
in that Condition? How do you toss and tumble? What lamentable Moan do you
make? Do not you think you cannot be too much pitied in that Condition? How then
will you be able to lie down in those Torments, the least Drop of which is
abundantly more painful than the greatest Torment that ever you felt in your
Life? If these seem dreadful to you, why do you not go the way to avoid them?
Which is by getting an Interest in him, who has the Keys of Hell at his
Girdle; For there is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, to them
that are brought into a State of Reconciliation and Acquaintance with God by
his Son our Mediator.

Quest. 8. Are you contented to lose everlasting Happiness? Can you willingly
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and a great many from all the Quarter of the
World, to sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves cast out? How do
you like to have those which you scorned to look upon, to be set at the Table
at the Feast, and your self shut out with the Dogs? Would you not be glad to
have a Word of Comfort spoke to you, when your Soul is just taking its leave of
your Body? Would you not be glad then to be conveyed by the blessed Angels into
the Presence of God, and to be crowned with an immortal and glorious Crown?
Would it do you any harm to be perfect in Holiness and Happiness when you die?
Would you not be glad to be saved when others shall be damned? In a word, do
you not desire to be rejoicing and praising of God in endless Pleasures, when
others shall be weeping and cursing of God in endless Torments? Why then do not
you live the Lives of the Righteous, if you would die their Deaths, and have
your latter End like theirs? If you would be glorious and happy for ever, why
do you not endeavor to be holy and spiritual in time? If you would have God
your Friend in another World, what do you mean that you labor no more to be
acquainted with him in this World?

Quest. 9. How would you take it at any Man's Hands, to be served as you serve
God? Suppose you should take up a poor Child that came to your Door to beg,
that had scarce a Rag to cover his Nakedness, nor a Morsel of Bread to put into
his Mouth, and no where to hide his Head; suppose you should strip this poor
Beggar of his Rags, and clothe him in very good Apparel, and take him into your
own House, and take as much care of him, as if he were your own Child: Suppose
after this you should bid him do you some small piece of Service, and he
instead of it should say, Command your Man, and do your Work your self; and in
stead of answering your Kindness, should offer you the greatest Abuse in the
World, and afterward conspire with a Company of Rogues to rob and murder you;
how would you like this? Should you think that such a Fellow as this did not
deserve a Halter rather than your Favor? But now, if after this you should
send to this ungrateful Wretch, and tell him, that you are willing to forget
all that is past, and to receive him into the greatest Favor, and never to
cast his former Wickedness in his Teeth; how would you take it at his Hands, if
he should stand I know not how long disputing whether he should accept of your
Kindness or no, whether he should choose the Goal and Gallows, or your House?
but if after all this you should send Messenger after Messenger, and offer to
give him all that you have in the World, and to bestow your only Daughter upon
him, and to settle presently a great Estate upon him with her; how would you
take it if this vile ungrateful Beggar should put you off a great while
together with some poor Excuse or other? how would you like it if he should
make light of all your Offers, and tell you he thanks you for nothing, and
should undervalue your Kindness? Would you not soon resolve not to trouble your
self any longer with such an unthankful Monster? would you not let him take his
Course, and not much pity him, if he afterward see the Difference between a
Father's House and a Goal, between Liberty and a Prison, between Riches, Glory
and Pleasure, and Poverty, Dishonor and Sorrows? would you not bid him never
expect Kindness more at your hands; but seeing he would not be ruled, to take
what follows? What do you say, would you not do thus? I am persuaded you would.
But should I unriddle this Parable, who do you think would be condemned? your
own Mouth would accuse you, and you would be your own Judge. Thou art that Man
that have dealt thus disingenuously with God; thou art that Beggar to whom the
Lord has showed much Kindness, and offered more; he has sent Messenger after
Messenger, and at last he has sent his Son to invite thee to his own House,
and he offers to make you as happy as Heaven, Glory and Happiness it self can
make you; and you stand still demurring, and add one Delay to another, and are
far from that grateful and speedy Compliance which the Nature of the thing does
require; and instead of coming at God's Call, and a thankful Owning of this
mavelous Kindness, how basely do thou prefer thy Company, thy Lust before
him, and offer the most intolerable Affronts to his Majesty, and make nothing
of his unparalled Goodness, and continuest in open Rebellion against him?
What then have thou to say for thy self, why God should not with a just
Abhorrency cast thee off for ever? But now that God should still offer thee as
high as ever, and (instead of doing as I have said, and as you yourself would
have done in case of a less Contempt) still follow you with such a gracious
Proposal as this is, that I now make unto you: is it not a Miracle of Mercy, a
Prodigy of Kindness?

Quest. 10. And now what will you do? Will you still for all this go on in your
Contempt of God? Will you still refuse to know him, and never mind Acquaintance
with him? Will you still be indifferent whether you have God for your Friend,
or your Enemy? Now you have been tendered such a Match, will you make another
Choice, will you bestow your Heart somewhere else? And when you have done that,
dare yo^^ stand to your Choice, and say, that you have done very wisely in
refusing God, and in embracing this present World? Will you maintain it a^^ the
Day of Judgment, that you have done well to refuse Acquaintance with himself,
and to run the hazard of his Displeasure? But you will not, you say, trouble
your Head with such melancholy Fancies as these are, they are enough to put a
Man besides his Wits; you hope to do as well as others, and so long you care
not. Well then, it seems you are resolved; though let me tell you, if you are
contented to fare as most shall fare at last, you must be contented to be
damned; for the Scripture is exceeding clear in this, that the Number of those
that go to Heaven is a very small Number; and if you will not take my Word for
it (for indeed I would not that you should take my Word, nor any Man's
Breathing without Warrant from God's Word, in things of so high a Nature) look
into the Scripture, and at your Leisure, ponder a while upon these following
Texts, Luke 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that shall
be saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: for
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Mat. 20.16.
Many are called but few are chosen. And Luke 12.32. Christ says, his Flock is
a little Flock. And the Church complains of the Fewness of her Number in this
Language; Mic. 7.1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the
Summer-Fruits. I might heap up abundance of Scriptures of the same Nature, all
which speak this to us, that it is not so common a thing to go to Heaven, as
most People reckon upon. But yet, if thou be resolved, come what will come, not
to change your Mind; if after so many Warnings and Pleadings, you still
continue of this Judgment, I must speak a dreadful Word, Your Blood be upon
your own Soul. I have blown the Trumpet, I have done what in me lies to
convince thee of thy dangerous State, while thou art a Stranger to God, and to
bring thee to a speedy Acquaintance with him; but thou have after many and many
a Tender given in this Answer, that as for God thou do not desire to be
acquainted with him; as for your matching with his Son, it is that which thou
carest not for hearing of, except thou might have his Estate without his
Sovereignty; thou will not have him for thy Husband, except he will let thee do
as thou list, and run a whoring from him when thou please. Thou will not have
Heaven, except thou may have it without Holiness; and as for the Invitations
of God, thou still make light of them, neither Promises nor Threatenings
signify much with you. Well then, when you find by woeful Experience what you
have done, know whom you must lay all the blame on. I call Heaven and Earth to
record, and you your selves are Witnesses, that I have with all the Pity and
Earnestness that I could for my Soul, told you of these great things: but you
think the flattering Offers that the Devil makes to be more advantageous than
those which God makes, and his Service to be preferred before the Service of
Christ, and the Friendship of the World to be esteemed before the Friendship of
God; and the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season, you value before
those Rivers of Pleasures which are at the right Hand of God for evermore. Now,
if you continue in this Mind, blame not me if you miscarry for ever; you must
whether you will or no, stand to your Choice. Do not say but you were told of
these things! this is not the first time by many, but it may be the last that
you may ever hear for all that I know. Remember you were once well offered. Do
you think that God will always bare with such unworthy Abuses? Shall God's
Justice never be righted? yes, yes, be not deceived, slighted Kindnesses will
cost dear at last. What have you yet to say for your self? Do you think that I
mean you any Hurt by all this? except you count Salvation a Wrong, and Kindness
it self an Injury. But if all this will not do, go then and make the best thou
can of all thy Friends; let us see how well and how long they will entertain
thee: e're a few Days, it may be, shall be at an End, we shall hear how you
like your Choice: when they shall turn you out of Doors, and tell you plainly,
they can do nothing for you, you must shift as well as you can; as for them,
they cannot provide for themselves, much less for you. And then let us see who
has made the best Choice, he that is acquainted with God, and chosen him for
his Friend, or he that has taken the World for his Friend? Let Us see who will
do most for their Friends, when a Time of Trial comes. When Heaven and Earth
are all in a Flame, when the Trumpet is sounding, when the Judge and his
Attendants, Christ and all his holy Angels, are coming, when the Prisons, the
Graves, are opened, and the Prisoners are brought forth, then let us see who
will have the cheerfullest Countenance, he that holds up his hand at the Bar,
or they that sit upon the Bench with the Judge; for know you not that the
Saints, the Friends of the Judge, shall sit with him when he judges the World?
We shall know when the Storm rises whose House was best, that which was built
upon the Sand, or that which was built upon the Rock. O that People were now of
the same Mind that they will be of at the Day of Judgment! O that they would
consider, that if they will not now be at leisure to think of these things,
they shall be at leisure to repent of them hereafter. Do not talk of Scorns and
Reproaches, and Suffering, what do you think that Heaven will not make Amends
for all that? Which is most to be feared, the Scorns of God, or the Scorns of
Men? Which will do you most Hurt, Man's Contempt or God's? Where is the Man
that will be laughed out of a great Estate? because a Fool says, that a Jewel
is not worth the taking up, will you therefore never stoop to take it up? The
Truth of it is, if you intend to make any thing of your Profession, you must be
willing to be counted a Fool, and a Madman: but you must remember, it is by
those that are so themselves. O be not affrighted from your Duty by the Talk of
the Rabble. If the thing be evil, let the Vice of it scare you; but if it be
good, let not the Fear of them which are very incompetent Judges in such a
Case, divert you from it. Do you think that such poor Excuses will be taken at
the Day of Judgment? what do you intend to say to God then? Lord, I would have
labored to have known thee, I would have taken some Care of my Soul, and I
would have taken some Pains about the Things of Eternity, but that I saw that
almost every one that did with any Seriousness look after such Matters, were
scorned, laughed at and persecured. When I had got into the Company of those
that were godly, and I had half a Mind to go with them to Heaven, then my
Friend fell to jeering of me, and asked me whether (...) meant to be mad, to
undo my self to turn Puritan and Phanatick? Do you, I say, believe tha^ such a
Plea will stop the Mouth of the Judge, and keep him from pronouncing the
Sentence against you? will this hold the Hands of Justice? (...) the Thoughts
of this quench or cool these dreadful Flames? Be better advised, O be better
advised for your Soul's sake, and consider how such Creatures will befool
themselves. Who would upon such a Trifle, part with Heaven? that would be
laughed out of Glory, and jeered into Hell Is your Mind yet altered? Have you
any Thought or Resolutions to look after your Soul and Acquaintance with God?
Are there none of yo^ all that ask by this time, what shall I do to be
acquainted with God? Are there none of you th^^ begin to think that it is high
time to look out for a Friend in a time of Need? Have I all the while been
beating the Air, and labored in vain* Shall I leave you all as I found you?
God forbid* Methinks I hear some poor Souls crying out by the time, O that I
had but such a Friend as would bring me acquainted with God! O that I ha^ but a
saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ! O that I did but understand what it means to
have Communion with the father, and the Son, through the Spirit! I see my self
undone and lost for ever, except I have an Interest in this Friend. (...) who
will bring me to him? How shall I get acquainted with him? O that is a seet
Language; That Is a very good Question, What shall I do to be ^aved? but do you
speak in sober Sadness? do you speak in jest or in earnest? If any one would
give you Advice and Direction, would you follow it in spite of all the
Opposition of Hell? What do you say, will you labor to keep exactly to those
Directions that shall be given? If you will, I do not question but that you and
God will be acquainted before you die. But, O let me not ^ake a great deal of
Pains, and all to little purpose, ^s to you; do not now serve me as the Jews
did Jeremiah, come and ask Counsel of God, and take the Devil's. But in Hopes
that some poor Souls may in good earnest desire Directions with an In^ent to
follow them, I shall give them as follows.

I. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, labor to get a through Sense of your
great Estrangement from him, and of the Danger of such an Estrangement. This is
that which makes People ^o well contented with their Condition, because they
see no great Evil nor Danger in it. Men are ready to think very well of their
Condition, although they be Enemies to God, and no Friends to Christ. Enemies
to God, they scorn your Words, though all this while they express the greatest
Contempt of him conceivable; though they regard neither his Commands,
Threatenings nor ^romises, though they value the Company of a ^runkard, a Whore,
before the Company of God; though they do all that they can against God, ^^ve
nothing that he loves, though they fide with God's greatest Enemies, yet they
abhor to bethought thought to be any other than Well-wishers to Christ, and the
Friends and Servants of God; though they never come near God, yet they take it
very ill, if they be not reckoned amongst his Acquaintance and special Friends.
Where is the Professor almost living, that does not count it a high Piece of
Uncharitableness, if one do not canonize them among the Saints, though they
live more like Brutes! How hainously do they take it, if any one do but
question their State? They, ignorant of God! They, Enemies to the Cross of
Christ! They, blind! They, unconverted! Who is that Man which dare question
their Condition? They hope to fare as well as any precise Puritan of them all;
they will hope to be saved, say what you will then, you shall never beat them
out of their Trust in God. And though in Faithfulness to their Souls, we beg of
them to make a more diligent Enquiry into the State of their Souls, because we
know that the Heart is so deceitful, and we have very great cause to suspect
that they know not God; yet they will go on very cheerfully with this
Confidence, until Christ himself show them their Mistake, and tell them plainly
that he knows them not, and that he never accounted them any of his Friends.
But now did Men but thoroughly understand their natural Estrangement from God,
were they but indeed sensible of the Vileness of their Hearts, did they but
take Notice of the Rebellions and Treasons that are within, the Case would be
far otherwise with them than it is. O this, this is the reason why so many
millions of Professors miscarry everlastingly, and never come to desire the
Friendship of God, because they never believed that ^hey were any otherwise
than Friends; they do not suspect themselves at all, but think that they are
rich and increase in Goods, and have need of nothing, whereas the Lord knows,
and Christians know too, that they are poor and blind, and naked. But now when
Men begin to be thoroughly sensible of this Enmity that is in their Natures
against God; when they see what Mutinies and Rebellions there are in them
against their most gracious Lord and King; and when they are made to understand
the Consequences of this War, then how sensibly do they cry out, what shall
they do? was there ever any poor wretched Creatures in a worse Condition than
themselves? was ever any ones Heart worse than theirs? are there any out of
Hell that are such Monsters of Sin as they are? O what shall they do? they see
the Fire kindled, and themselves hanging over everlasting Burnings: now all the
World for a Christ; they believe now that God and Man are not Equals; that
there is no contending with the Almighty; who can stand before his Indignation?
and when they see God's Sword drawn, and the Point of it set against their
Heart, when they behold the Terrors of the Lord setting themselves in Array
against them, and themselves like to lose all, then how welcome would the News
of a Parley be? how glad would they be then to hear of a Pardon? then down go
their Weapons; they will sooner come before God with a Halter about their
Necks, than a Sword by their Sides; they will fight now with no other Weapons
but Tears and Prayers: as for their Armor they brake it pieces, and lay it at
the Feet of their offended Prince; and O if they might but have any Hopes of
Pardon, it would revive their Hearts; if they might have but a Look of Kindness
from God, it would be a greater Comfort to them than all the whole World
besides could afford them. To whom can a skilful Physician be more welcome than
to the sick? Christ came to seek the lost, and such as these we are sent to
encourage: but till the Soul comes to this pass, a Christ is not valued at all
by it: if Sinners be not made thus to understand themselves, why, though we
should plead with never so much Earnestness with them, we do but beat the Air,
all that we can say signifies very little. The Man thinks his great Work is
done, though his Hands have been all this while in his Bosom; he is far onwards
in his Journey to Heaven, though he never set one Step out of his own Doors; he
has an Interest in God, and is very well acquainted with him, and has an
assured Considence of his Condition, that he shall be happy, though he have not
one Dram of Grace. He is a good Churchman, he has sat at the Lord's Table,
and the like: But O how many are there which shall see and know that it is more
than possible, to come often before God, and to complement him much, and to sit
often at his Table, and yet not to be any of his peculiar Friends, and special
Acquaintance; now if ever you would make any thing of Religion, and be made
highly to prize God's Favor, and to be really acquainted with him; you must
labor to understand your Distance from him, and the unconceivable Hazard that
you run, while you are in a State of Separation from God; that there is but one
Step between you and the State of the Damned; for what would become of you, if
God should say to you, this Night thy Sold shall be required of you. How
easily can God in a Moment stop your Breath, and send your Soul and Body into
that Lake which burns for ever and ever? and is it not then time for you to
look about you? O this Ignorance of our selves, how does it expose us? ( Ar.
Epict. l. 1. c. 26.) He was not a whit mistaken, who said, That the not knowing
of our selves, was one of the chiefest Causes of our Sin and Misery, and that
the Consideration of the State of the Soul, and the through Understanding its
Depravedness, was the Beginning of Wisdom; for its Weakness being well known, a
Man will not afterward trust it in the Determination of the greatest things;
but Man will be desirous to consult that great Oracle, the Will of his Maker;
and finding his old Guide is blind, and has often misled him, thereupon he is
the readier to be acquainted with such a one, who may direct him in the Way to
true Happiness. If you would therefore be acquainted with God, you must get
well acquainted with your selves; you will upon the Knowledge of your self, be
afraid of your self. He was none of the weakest Men who said, That a true sense
of Folly is no small Sign of some Proficiency in Wisdom. Look into thy self, O
Man, search every corner, behold what abundance of Armor there is in such and
such a dark Cellar; but is this Armor strong enough to encounter a God withal?
Can thou with these Fig Leaves defend thy self against the Arrows of the
Almighty? behold what a Condition thou art in, if thou stirrest a Step further.
Yield speedily, and throw down thine Arms, or you are a dead Man. Do you know
this? Do you really believe this? Is it possible? What do you believe that your
Treason is found out, and that you are within a little of Execution, and yet
not tremble, and yet not seek nor desire a Pardon. When a Man thoroughly
understands how things stand between him and God, and how unable he is to carry
on a War against him, he will speedily cast about, how he may conclude a Peace
upon any Terms. As soon as Benhadad knew what a Condition his Army was in, when
he saw the Crowns of his thirty Kings shaken, and his Warlike Captains cut in
Pieces, or to tremble, and be like Women; when instead of a mighty Army of
gallant Warriors in martial Order, behaving themselves bravely in the Field,
he saw their Carkases upon Heaps, their Garments rolled in Blood, the Shields
of his mighty Ones cast away, and himself woefully deserted, how speedily does
he send away his Servants, with Ropes about their Necks, to beg Peace upon any
Terms? When the Gibeonites heard what dangerous Fighting it was against
Joshuah, they were not long before they found Means to make a Covenant with
him. So the Soul, when it does seriously consider what a sad Condition it is
in, while it continues in Rebellion against God; it is Impossibility to stand it
out long, and utter Inability to conquer him: when it perceives the Designs of
Satan, who first caused this Difference between the Soul and God, and has
still instigated and stirred it up to persecute with all the Violence that
might be; I say, when the Soul sees this before it be quite too late, O how
does it bewail its Condition, how does it cry out, O wretched Man that I am who
shall deliver me? O what will become of me, if I make War still against God?
And as for flying, whether shall I fly from his Presence, and where shall I
hide my self out of his Sight? And how shall I look him in the Face, whom I
have thus desperately and ungratefully opposed? Can such a Traitor as I
possibly expect any Mercy; if the Lord should look upon me, and not immediately
cast me into Hell, it would be a Miracle of Patience. And thus the Man that
begins a little to understand himself, speaks to himself; and after that, he
with Ephraim, smites upon his Thigh, and bemoans his Condition exceedingly! O
that he should ever take up Arms against his gracious Prince? O what shall
become of him? Well, I have heard that the God of Heaven is a merciful King, I
will go and cast my self at his Feet, if I perish, I perish. If I continue in
this Rebellion, there is no Hopes, if I fly there is no escaping! and if I
yield, I can but perish! O sad, sad is my Condition, woe and alas, what shall I
do in these dreadful Perplexities: But why do I stay here? the Avenger of Blood
follows after me apace; well, I will go to my God, through Christ, and I have
heard that this is the only Way, and that there is not the least Hope in the
World, any other Way, to get a Pardon, to escape the Wrath to come! O that the
precious and merciful Jesus would pity me, and stand my Friend now if ever! O
that he would speak a good Word for me, Have Mercy upon me, Jesus thou Son of
David have Mercy upon me! O make Peace for me, by thy Blood; if thou will, thou
can do more with a Words speaking, than all the Saints and Angels in the
World; if ever any poor Creature in the World had need of Mercy, then have I. O
Mercy, Mercy, Mercy for thy Blood's sake! But because I shall speak to this
under another Direction, I shall be the briefer. Now when a Man is at this
pass, he is in a fair Way for Peace; but now as long as a Man is ignorant of
all this, he is quite in another Note, he will never buckle, and therefore he
shall be broken. Therefore consider well your Condition; observe the Actings of
your own Soul; if you be one of the Friends and Acquaintance of God, what means
your breaking and hating of his spiritual Laws? what is the Reason, if you love
God, that you can take no Delight at all in his Company, no Pleasure in his
Sabbaths? if you are a Friend of God, how hap you come no oftener to his House,
when he dwells so near you? Why do you knock no oftener at his Door? why are you
so rare in your Visits? is this your Kindness? is this like a Friend? How comes
it to pass that there are so many Arms found ^id in your House? what are they
all for? what is the Meaning of all those Meetings that you give to God's
Enemies! what do all those Whisperings, Plots, and Projects signify? is this
Friendship? can you mean any good by all this? What do you say of your
Condition? do you ever complain, and that feelingly, of your Enmity against
God? did you ever observe what a desperate wicked Spirit you have against your
Maker; and were you ever made sensible of the Danger of such a State, and
ashamed and grieved to the very Soul that you should ever engage against so
good a God? Why then I am confident you cannot but cry out with all the Strength
and Earnestness of your Soul for a Peace, you cannot but desire to meet with
your Adversary quickly, while he is in the Way. But if you see nothing at all
of the Treachery and Baseness that is in your Heart, search, and search again,
it is your ignorance and Blindness, and not the Goodness of your State, that
makes you to know nothing by your self. What, are you better than David? he was
so jealous of his own Heart, that he dared not to trust to his own Examination
of it, but he desires the great Heart-searcher to help him in this Work. Are
you more excellent than Paul after his Conversion? had he more Reason to
complain of himself than you have? O be at leisure to look within, and get
David's Candle and Lanthorn to go into those dark Corners of your Soul with it,
and it may be you may see that within which may make your Heart to ache, and
your Joints to quiver, and your Spirits to faint within you. Paul was sometimes
as confident as you, he took no Notice of the Enmity that was within against
God, though he was as full of it as an Asp is of Poison; yet before he came
acquainted with God the Case was altered with him; he was of another mind when
that Light shined about him, and he cried out, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? he now thinks it is hard kicking against the Pricks, dangerous opposing of
God, and persecuting of Christ in any of his Members; and he desires nothing in
the World so much as to be reconciled to God, and to have him for his Friend,
whom before he fought against as an Enemy.

II. DIRECTION.
My next Direction to those which would be acquainted with God, shall be this:
Get an humble Heart, which is the consequent of the former. God will exalt none
to this high Honor of being his Friends, but such as have low Thoughts of
themselves. The humble are the Persons that he will raise, these are they that
he will converse most with, these are the great Favorites of Heaven which God
does delight to honor, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them which are of a
broken Heart, and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit. God is nigh to them,
(with Reverence be it spoken) God takes so much Complacency in the Company of
such, that he cannot endure to have them far from him, he must have them always
nigh to him, always under his Eye; as for these broken ones, he will to be sure
not leave them long, not go far from them, but will be ready at Hand to set
their Bones, to bind up their Wounds, to keep them from festering. It may be he
may put them to much Pain before he brings the Cure to Perfection, but it is to
prevent future Aches. He is a foolish cruel Chyrurgeon, who for fear of putting
his Patient to some Pain, never searches the Wound, but skins it over
presently: and a wise Man will not think him unmerciful that puts him to
exquisite Pain, so he make a thorough Cure of it. Thus God does by his Patients
sometimes, when the Nature of their Distemper calls for it. But however, he
will be sure not to be out of the Way when they want him most. It Is possible
they may look upon themselves as forgotten by God, they may not know their
Physician when he is by them, and they may take their Friend for an Enemy, they
may think God far off when he is near; but when their Eyes are opened, and
their Distemper is pretty well worn off, they will with Shame and Thankfulness
acknowledge their Error; nay, they do from their Souls confess that they do not
deserve the least Look of Kindness from God, but to be counted Strangers and
Enemies; but God will let them know that he loves to act like himself, that is
like a God of Love, Mercy and Goodness; and that they are the Persons that he
has set his Heart upon; he will have them in his Bosom, never leave them nor
forsake them; and though these contrite ones many times look upon themselves as
lost, yet God will save them, and they shall sing a Song of Thankfulness
amongst his delivered ones. Again, the Sacrifices of God are a broken Heart: A
broken and a contrite Spirit, O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. The
proud Sinner he may bring his stalled Oxen, Multitudes of Rams and Sheep, and
his Rivers of Oil, and yet all this while not he accepted. There is another
kind of Sacrifice that would be ten thousand times more acceptable to God. We
read that Sacrifices have been despised, Prayers, long Prayers, have been
rejected; Sabbaths, New Moons, and solemn Assemblies, the Lord has sometimes
abhorred; but we never read that he despised the Sacrifice of an humble Heart,
the Prayers of such always have an Answer one Way or other; their poor
Performances, their Chatterings, and Mournings, are sweet Melody, and powerful
Rhetoric in God's Ear. Who are the Men that have most of God's Company? who
are they which he does most frequently visit, are they not such as look upon
themselves as the chiefest of Sinners? These are they which are wrapped up into
the third Heaven. None have so much of Heaven upon Earth as those that wonder
that the Earth does not swallow them up, and that they are not in Hell. But O,
says the humble Soul, God is the high and mighty God, and infinite in his
Holiness and Justice; how then can such a Creature as I ever expect that he
should so much as cast his Eye upon me? yes, sweet Soul, such is the infinite
Condescension and Goodness of God* that he will sooner look upon thee than
another* And if you cannot credit my Words, hear what he speaks himself, Isa.
7.15. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is
Holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place, with him also that is of a contrite
and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart
of my contrite ones. The Thoughts o^ God's Majesty, Eternity, and Holiness may,
and with good Reason too, awe that Soul that has low Thoughts of it self.
Every Sinner has Cause enough to cry out with Astonishment, Will God look upon
such a vile sinful Wretch as I am Will he that is infinite in Holiness take any
Notice of me, except to show his Displeasure against me? What shall I do? sure
such a Creature as I cannot without a Miracle have a Smile from God. God may
indeed look upon me in his Wrath, and vex me in his sore Displeasure. God may
justly look me into Hell; but that he should look upon me in Kindness, or take
any special Notice of me in Love, that would be a Wonder indeed. What, God
dwell with me! Yes, with thee, if thou have but high Thoughts of him, and low
Thoughts of thy self; the meaner thou think of thy self, the greater Worth
he sees in thee. God will not only look upon thee, nor will he only knock at
thy Door, and call at your House, or give you a transitory Visit, but he will
come and dwell with thee. Now dwelling speaks a continued Abode with one, and
thus God will continue with the Humble; never remove from them, for any
considerable time, till Eternity has an end, till himself, and the Soul cease
to be, which will be never. God will not be a Stranger to humble Souls, but he
will come to them, and bring that along with him, that shall make him and them
welcome too. God never comes to his Friends, but he brings good cheer along
with him. When the Soul gives God the best Entertainment, it is all at his
Cost, his Bread, his Fatlings, his Wine, his Oil, his Cordials, his rich
Dainties. Where God comes, he will keep a noble House, and there shall be Mirth
and rich Cheer, good Store, Isa. 66.1, 2. Thus says the Lord, Heaven is my
Throne, and Earth is my Footstool: Where is that House ye will build me? And
where is the Place of my Rest? For all these things has my Hand made, and all
those things has been, says the Lord; but to this Man will I look, even to
him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. God seems
to have low Thoughts of Heaven it self in comparison of an humble Soul: This is
the Palace, where this great King will keep his Court; this is the Place of his
Rest. God is not so much delighted and pleased in any of his brave Seats, as in
this of an humble Heart; here he dwells most commonly; this was the great
Purchase of his own Son; this was the Masterpiece of his Power and Goodness;
this was the Project of infinite Wisdom and Counsel. What shall I do to be
saved? Is a Language that makes Hell in a Rage, and Heaven to rejoice. God is
never so well pleased as when he beholds the Beauty of his own Grace shining in
a poor los^ self debasing Creature. The Spouse is adorned with Humility, when
Christ gives her that Visit Cant. 1.4. God has far more Kindness for one that
lies under a Sense of his own Vileness, tha^ thinks himself unworthy to tread
upon God's Earth, or to breath in his Air, than for the most confident
righteous Pharisee in the World. Such an humble Soul will be much in admiring
of God, and will set a high Price upon his Kindness; a Look, a Smile, a Visit!
O how welcome are they to those poor trembling ones! Wherefore God does with
Frequency and Love visit them; he knows that he can never be unwelcome to such,
they will count it the highest Honor, that the most High should come into them
in their low Condition. Wherefore if you desire to have any intimate
Acquaintance with God, labor to be more and more sensible of your own
Unworthiness, study your Heart and Nature well, and be more curious in the
Observance of the Baseness and Treachery of your own Soul; endeavor to have as
mean Thoughts of your self as Paul had, who did not stick to call himself the
chiefest of Sinners: Humble your selves before the Lord, and he will exalt you;
he that is little in his own Eye, is great in God's. When was it that Jacob met
with God, but when he had been humbling of himself? As you may read at your
leisure, Genesis 23. There is many a Professor that holds out many a Year in a
Course of external Performances, and yet never knows what it is to have any
intimate Acquaintance or Converse with God: Whereas I am persuaded, if the
Business were thoroughly examined, it would be found that they were never made
deeply sensible of their un^^one State out of Christ; never understood the
^esperate Depravedness of their Hearts and Na^^re; that they never lay under
any lively Sense (...) their Separation from, and Enmity against God; and they
were never brought off from their ^^wn Righteousness, and saw themselves poor,
beg^arly, starved Creatures; and in this Condition ^ame to buy Wine and Milk
without Money, and without Price. But this Humility, it is an excellent Grace,
it makes the Soul fit for the richest ^njoyments of God, and to do God the
greatest ^ervice. Were it possible that God should con^erse much with a proud
Man, he would make strange use of it, he would steal God's Crown, and put it
upon his Head; but God would not ^ndure Proud Angels near him, and can it be
expected that he should take proud Men in their Places? The more any one grows
in Grace, and Acquaintance with God, the more he sees of his own Unworthiness,
the more he admires Free Grace. Why me, Lord! Why me! Will be the Language of
those which converse with God: And while they are thus admiring God, and laying
themselves low, he comes again with his Soul ravishing Kindnesses; and thus by
Humility they are more acquainted with God, and being more acquainted with God,
they are made more humble, and the one increases the other. Thus the humble
Soul is raised higher and higher, till he come to an eternal Possession of God
in the highest Heavens. When an humble Saint lives as it were in Heaven upon
Earth, he scarce thinks himself worthy to live upon the Earth. When any one
speaks well of him, and admireth the Grace of God in him, he looks upon himself
as an unprofitable Servant, and he durst not assume the least Glory to himself;
not unto me, not unto me^ but unto thee, Lord, be the Praise given. Wh^^ am I,
poor Wretch? O did you but know what (...) Heart I have, did you but see the
Workings o^ my Thoughts, could you but tell how things are indeed you would
rather admire at God's Pati^^ence, than Man's Excellency. This he speaks not
that he is worse than others, but because h^ has a more spiritual Sense of his
State than ^^thers have: Neither does he speak thus in pro^^ Policy, thinking
to make others to have a better Esteem of him for his Humility; but he does
really feel the Pressure of that Filthiness of Sin, which makes him thus to
groan out these Complaints The Reason why God does converse most wit^ the
Humble, is because they will be most thankful, and most fruitful, and make the
wisest Improvement of his Favors. Wherefore, if yo^ value the Comfort of a
Spiritual Life, if you desire Communion with God, if you would have a Heaven
upon Earth, endeavor to get an humable Heart: To walk humbly, and to walk wi^^
God, go together.

III. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, yo^ must visit him often, be much at his
House, kno^^ at his Door many times in a Day, and resolve^^ continue knocking
till he open; and if he do (...) come presently, wait for him; you would do
(...) much for your Prince, and it may be to a me^ner Person. We cannot expect
to be acquaint^^ with them that we will not come near. It is ^o purpose for
that Man to speak of Acquaintance ^ith God, who never speaks to him, comes at
^im, or enquires after him. Neither will a slight visit or two in a transitory
complemental manner serve the Turn; a Man may do this, and yet not be said to
be acquainted with God. A Stranger may come once to your. House that was never
there before, and never intend to come again; and I believe you will scarce
write such a one down amongst your special Friends and Intimate Acquaintance.
So in Spirituals; for Acquaintance and Converse with God are no such slight
things as the World commonly takes them to be. If you would make any thing of
this great Work of getting Acquaintance with God, you must not jest in it, you
must give God many solemn and set Visits, and carry your self with all the
Observance and Respect to him that you can for your Soul. This is that which
keeps many thousands of Strangers from the Life of Grace, and intimate
Acquaintance with God, because they know not what those more peculiar Visits of
God mean; they understand not what it is to draw nigh to God in secret; they
come not to him with those more spiritual Acts of Religion; they pray, it may
be, in their Families, and it may be that but seldom (but by the way, never let
such pretend to the Knowledge of God, who call not upon him in their Families)
but what they do, it is but in a poor formal perfunctory. manner between sleep
and awake; and will you call this Acquaintance with God? Will you call this an
Act of Adoration and spiritual Worship? Is it to ^ow down a while before God,
and to read or speak a few Words, and there is an end? Their Work is over, their
Task is done, and they are glad of it. But now such as these do not come into
God's Chambers; they come to his House, as I may so say, but they regard not
whether he be at home, whether they speak to God, and have an Answer from God
or no. They call indeed, but desire not much to be heard; they knock, but are
not very careful to stay till the Door be opened. But alas, alas, such as these
cannot tell what it is to enjoy Communion with God. They have got, it may be,
into some Course of external Performances, by reason of the Example of their
Superiors, Education, or by being under the Sound of the Gospel, and from some
Force that natural Conscience does put upon them, which will not be content
except something be done. But such as these may not be said to visit God in
that manner that I would persuade them to, which would be acquainted with God;
for all this they stand a great way off from God, and may be termed Strangers
and Foreigners. How seldom are they upon their Knees in secret? How rare a
thing is it for them with Isaac, to go into the Field to meditate? They visit
their Farms, they visit their Flocks, they visit their Swine, they go often to
visit their sottish drunken Companions, whilst God and Christ, their Bible,
their Closet, their Hearts are fogotten, and seldom or never visited. And is
this true Kindness to one's self? Is it any Wisdom to slight such a Friend as
God would be to us, and to make so much of such sorry Companions? O stupid and
dull Souls! O what do we mean so strangely to forget our selves! For who is
like to get by it, God or we, when we come and feed at his Table, and spend
upon his Cost? O little do People think what they might enjoy, would they
purposely set themselves to meet with God, and go to his House with a strong
Resolution, not to come away from him till they have seen him, or heard from
him. Now the great Duties in which the Soul may be said to visit God in, and in
which God does many times give out much of himself to the Soul, are these.

1. Solemn Meditation: 2. Secret Prayer. 3. Fasting. 4. Community of
Experiences, and Communion with the Saints.
1. Meditation. When the Soul does fix it self upon the Thoughts of some
Spiritual and Divine Object, such as the Love of God in Christ, the Glory of
another World, etc. This is, as it were, going out to meet the Lord, and to
take a Walk with our Beloved; this is the getting up to Mount Pisgah to take a
Survey of that goodly Land. When the Soul does, as it were, bathe it self in
the Contemplation of Christ's Beauty, and labors to enamour it self more and
more with his Love; and to throw it self, as I may so say, into that Ocean of
Divine Goodness; it will scarce leave ^ill it be wound up to the highest Pitch
of Admiration of that infinite boundless Love which should do such glorious
things for so vile and contemptible, for so rebellious and unthankful a Wretch
as that is, O what manner of Love is this! O that I were sick of Love! O that I
might die sick of Love! O that I were once in the Embraces of my dearest Lord
and Husband! O that I could do nothing else Day and Night but praise, love, and
admire this infinite boundless Love! And did Christ indeed offer up his Life
for my Sin? Did he not think his precious Heart-blood too dear for me? And
shall I think my Heart-love too dear for him? What, for me, Lord, which am the
chiefest of Sinners! Here, here is Kindness with a Witness. Stand still, O my
Soul, and admire, stand looking upon this lovely Sight till thou art all on
fire. These are the pure Flames, here thou need not to fear to exceed; widen
thy Soul, let thy Affections run without control. More Fire still, blow hard,
it does yet but smoke; O for some Coals from the Altar! O for more Fire, more
Fuel! O that my Heart were vehemently inflamed in the strongest Love to him,
who still deserves a thousand times more! Help me all ye Angels to bless and
adore his marvelous loving Kindness. Christ is a Friend to Publicans and
Sinners indeed, or such a one as I had never been on this side of Hell. O Love,
Love, Love! What shall I render unto the Lord? O that Men would bless the Lord
for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men! O what
meanest thou, O my Soul, that thou art yet so cold? Awake, awake Psaltery and
Harp, I my self will awake and praise, admire and love thee, O my God, whose
Love to my Soul is beyond Expression. And thus while the Soul is musing, the
Fire begins to burn; while the Spouse is thinking of her glorious Husband, he
knocks at the Door, she draws the Latch, and he comes in smelling of Mirrhe,
Aloes and Cassia; he comes and kisses the Soul with the Kisses of his Lips, his
Love is better than Wine, he comes and takes the Soul into his Arms. O the
sweet Pleasure of Divine Love, infinitely transcending all carnal Affections! O
the Joy that is at this Meeting, far surpassing humane Apprehension! O the
sweet Entertainment that God and the Soul gives each other at such a time! I
appeal to the Experience of those that have been much exercised in this great
Duty of Meditation, if they have been in good earnest in the Work, I am
confident they can say something to this Point. What say thou, O Christian,
which art used to imitate Isaac? Did thou never meet with another-guess
Companion than Rebeccah? As he met with a Wife, so thou have met with thy
Husband? When thou have been in the Field, or Closet, at this Work, has not
Christ then taken you by the Hand, and led you into his Garden, and made you to
taste of his pleasant Fruits? Has he not brought you into his banqueting
House, and brought out some of his choicest Dainties? Are not those Flaggons
more full of Spirit, more cordial and refreshing than Wine? O little do any but
those who have tried it think what a Life they might lead, if they would with
Seriousness engage in this Duty. Speak, O ye gracious ones, that make
Conscience of this Soul-ravishing Duty; speak I beseech you, and do not smother
the Kindnesses of God to you; speak, and let him have the Praise: It may be by
your venturing your Experience, hundreds may be encouraged to set upon the same
Work, and hundreds may also have the same Experiences. What do you say? Have
you not found the Benefit of this Duty? Did you never find Meditation a sweet
Work? Was it worth your while or ^o, to sequester your selves a while from the
World to talk with your Beloved? Did you ever repent of your Labor, and think
your time lost? Have you not been able to say that at such and such a time,
when you were in the Mount, that it was good being there? Could you not have
been almost content to have left the dearest Relation, and to have quitted your
Interest in all Creature-Comfort, so you might have had fuller Enjoyments of
God; could you not have been contented to pass from Contemplation to Vision and
Fruition? Why, speak then for the Lord's sake, and for the sake of precious
Souls, and keep not such a Thing as this is in; let your unexperienced
Neighbors know what a Soul-ravishing and Soul-raising Duty Meditation is. Let
me ask thee which read these Lines, did you ever try what there was in this
Duty of Meditation? I suppose, if you converse much with such Books as speak of
Communion with God, you cannot bu^ desire something of it, and I am persuaded
you have sometimes wept since you began to read this Book, to think how little
you experience; I believe you would be glad with all your Soul to know what it
is to be acquainted with God, and to have such a Friend as I have been speaking
of Why let me ask you again, did you ever try what Meditation is? (you may read
much of the Excellency of this Duty, and Directions about it (...) Mr. Baxter's
Saints Everlasting Rest) did you eve^ get out of the World, and intensely fix
you Hearts and Thoughts upon any of the glorious Attributes of God? Did you
ever set before your Eyes his Love in Christ? If not, O try and fall to this
Work seriously and speedily, and you shall soon find the Sweetness of it; you
will soon say that you lost many a good Meeting, many a dainty Bit for want of
going for it. A carnal worldly Heart I must confess may possibly spoil this
Du^^y, as all others, and grow formal in it, and be ^veary of it, and cast it
off (though, let me put in this, I believe it is marvelous rare for a Hypocrite
to have any thing to do in such a secret Duty as this is) but if they were true
to the Interest of their own Souls in the Management of this Work, I am
confident they would be every Day more and more in Love with this Duty: For I
am per^waded that when the Soul is in good earnest, nay, I can speak it
positively, there is no Duty does so much raise and warm the Soul; there is no
Duty wherein the People of God enjoy his sweet Company more than in this. This
opens the Treasures, of God's Kindness; this takes his Love Tokens and presents
them to the View of the Soul; this unlocks the Cabinets, and fetches out those
precious Jewels: By this the Soul does, as it were, talk with its Beloved; and
in this Christ does, as it were, take the Soul by the Hand, and lead it into
his Palace, and shows it all those glorious things, which it shall shortly have
in her Possession for ever. And how can this choose but engage the Soul to
express its Gratitude to the height in answer to such Love; and when the Soul
is in this Frame, Christ will not be behind hand with her, no Love shall be
lost between them; if the Spouse walk out to look for her Beloved, she shall
find him before she has done.

2. Another Duty by which the Soul does visit. God in a special manner, is
Secret Prayer; by this the Soul knocks, and God is quick of hearing, and none
of his Friends shall wait without Doors so long as to catch cold. By this the
Soul does as it were storm Heaven, by this it gets into the Presence Chamber,
and presents its Requests. In this Duty, a Christian does as it were turn the
Key of Heaven's Doors, and by this he unlocks the Door of his own Soul; and so
there is free Access on both sides, the Soul visits God, and God visits the
Soul, and this creates an Intimacy. The poor wounded Creature opens his Wounds,
and then the great Physician comes with the Balm of Gilead. When Jacob is thus
weeping and praying alone, he meets with God, he meets a Blessing, he wrestles,
he conquers. This Duty of Secret Prayer, and that other of Meditation are two
fatning Duties, by which the Souls of Believers come to God's Table, and eat,
and drink of strengthening Food, and for want of these many poor Souls are thin.
O why do Christians, why do Professors maintain no fairer Correspondency with
God in such Duties wherein he does manifest himself more than ordinarily to the
Soul? The Reason of this may be because God accounts himself more highly
honored, and more truly loved by them which are much in these, than by others.
By this a Man does as it were honor the Goodness of God, in that it shows it
is worth the while to steal out of the World, and to leave the best Company on
Earth to go to God: He honors the Truth of God, by being earnest for what God
has promised though it be unseen; he honors the Omnisciency of God, by
contenting himself with his Eye and his Ear alone; he sanctifies his
Omnipresence, by believing that his God can hear him and be with him in what
Corner soever he creeps into. I might be large in speaking of the Excellencies
of this Duty, but I refer it rather to another Place. But I would not be
mistaken in what I have delivered, as if I would by this exclude Family Prayer,
no, far be it from me; for God in these does many times exceedingly refresh
his. But because a Man cannot possibly judge so well of himself by public
Prayer, as he can by secret: And Hypocrisy and Pride do not usually so much
attend secret Duty, as more public. It Is possible in more public Duty that a
Man may be much raised and be very warm and high in his Expressions, and almost
ravish the Hearts of his Hearers, whereas he may be all that while acted only
by a proud Heart, and for all that I know the Devil himself may help a Man thus
to pray sometimes. This I am confident of, he is not afraid of such Prayers as
these, which tend so much to the hardening of a Sinner, and makes him believe
that his Heart is warmed with Communion with God, when as it is possible it is
nothing but a secret self-pleasing, that those that joined with him might think
very highly of him, as one that was spiritual in his Performances. O the Heart
of Man is deep, and desperately full of Deceit! But now, there is none of this
Temptation in secret Closet-Prayer, and there a Soul may be more particular in
its Complaints and Petitions, more earnest in pleading with God, and may use
such Expostulations, Postures, Gestures, such Intermissions, and Groanings, and
Pauses, as would be very unfit for more public Duty. Wherefore I lay somewhat
the more Stress upon this Duty of Secret Prayer. But this I say again, where
one of them is practiced conscientiously, the other will not be neglected: I
might add the Practice and Experience of God's Children to enforce this Duty.
David would never have been at it so often at Midnight, if he had got nothing at
all by it. Peter would scarce have forgot to eat, when he was an hungered,
except he had met with a Bit in a Corner to stay his Stomach.

3. Easting, especially private Fasting, is another Duty, wherein God meets the
Soul, and the Soul visits God. This is as it were Execution Day, the Day when
the Soul brings out all the Enemies of God to be crucified; this is the Day
wherein the Idols are searched for, brought out and buried or ground to Powder,
and these are things which God will come to see with much Delight. By this the
Soul is as it were adorned, her Deformities done away, and she is trimmed up to
meet her Beloved. When a Saint fasts from Sin, and abstains from sensual
Pleasures, then it is many times feasted by God, and refreshed with spiritual
Enjoyments.

4. Another season wherein God meets the Soul, and the Soul is visited by God,
is, when Christians are met together to communicate Experiences, or to
discourse together about the great things of God. What though most of the World
are ashamed to own Religion when it is out of fashion? What though but few dare
meet together to speak of God's Goodness, and to praise him, and call upon his
Name? Why, Christ says, Though there be but two or three of them, he will make
the number one the more, he will be in the midst of them: And though they dare
but whisper, it may be, and their Meetings to serve God, and do good to one
another, may be prohibited by the public Magistrate, and consequently what
they do in this Kind must be done with a great deal of Hazard, yet the People
of God stand not long disputing, they know what to do in this Case, yet they
would be wise in it too: not to dare the Magistrate, and to do what they do to
confront Authority, but in the Uprightness of their Souls they desire to meet
together to worship God according to his own Will. Yet for all this, though
they manage their Business with never so much Secrecy, God will take Notice of
them, he hearkens and hears, and a Book of Remembrance is written for them that
call often upon his Name, and God will make them up among his Jewels. But I shall
have Occasion to speak of something to this Purpose afterward, and therefore I
pass it over the more briefly.

IV. DIRECTION.
If you would get acquainted with God, get Christ along with you, when you go
to God. You are like to speed no way so soon as this way: nay, let me say, all
that I have said before signifies nothing at all without this. There is no Name
under Heaven, by which we can be saved, but by the Name of Christ! and
whosoever comes to the Father, by him, he will in no wise cast out. God cannot
deny his own Son any thing, he can never forget that great Undertaking of his,
by which he glorified his Father's infinite Justice, and infinite Love, and did
him more Honor than all the Saints and Angels in the World. His Son, the Lord
Christ, has such an Interest in his Father, that he can as soon despise his
own Honor as to refuse any Request that is presented to him, by his Son. If
Christ come to him and say, Father, here is a poor Sinner that I have
undertaken for, and that flew to me for Refuge. Look upon him for my sake; why,
the Father's Arms are presently open; he will not reject his Son's Petitions.
The Truth of it is, this is the greatest Cause of the Miscarriage of poor
Creatures, that go about to do that themselves, and by themselves, which they
can never do alone. They go to God all alone, and no wonder then they meet with
a Frown; for there is no Name under Heaven, by which a Man can be saved, but by
the Name of Christ; and out of Christ, God is a consuming Fire; and there is
but one Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. And there is but one Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. That which Joseph said of Benjamin, God
says of Christ, except you bring Benjamin along with you, you shall not see my
Face; except you bring Christ along with you, you shall not see my Face. There
is a notable Story, which is commonly by Divines applied to our present
Purpose, and that not without good Reason; it is concerning a Law among the
Molossians, where whosoever came to the King with his Son in his Arms should be
accepted into Favor, let his Fault be what it will. So let a Man be what he
will before, yet if he come to God in Christ, he cannot be thrust away. O
therefore if thou would have any Countenance from God, beg for a Christ to
bear thee Company into the Presence of God. I will tell you this for your
Comfort, Christ has a loving Design in his Heart to do such Offices of
Kindness for poor Malefactors that understand something of their Danger. If you
see your self lost for want of Reconciliation with God; Christ he stands ready
to lead you into his Father's House. O did you but know how willing he is to
bring undone lost Penitents to God, it would make your Heart leap within you
for Joy. Behold, how often he asks after you; what does that Sinner mean to ruin
himself? I would with all my Heart bring him out of all these Perplexities, and
undertake to make God and him Friends, if he would be but ruled by me; and upon
this Account he sends up and down many hundreds of his Ministers, to tell
Sinners as much, that they may not be undone everlastingly. Does not Wisdom
call? does not Christ plead the Cause, and expostulate with Sinners? and who
would not, that has any Understanding at all of his State out of Christ, with
all possible Thankfulness, be encouraged to accept of his Kindness? Christ has
done as much as this comes to already, for many Millions, and his Father never
said to him, Son, why do you trouble your self and me with so many of these
wretched Creatures, let them alone to take their Course. Where did God ever
express himself in this Manner? did he ever take it unkindly that his Son
should every Day bring such Guests to his House, and be continually begging one
Boon or other for them, or putting up some Petitions upon their Account, or
pleading with his Father for them when they do offend. Is God displeased at
such Work as this? is he not as willing to receive such, as his Son is to bring
them? and both Father and Son more willing to save the Sinner, than he is to be
saved? O Kindness! Christ loves the Sinner better than he loves himself! and as
I said before, so I say again, the Father does not grutch any thing that Christ
gives or does for poor Sinners. The Righteousness of Christ, it is that
Wedding Garment, in which we may sit at the King's Table, and are welcome;
these are the Robes of our elder Brother, in which we cannot miss of our
Father's Blessing. O how many poor Creatures have walked in the dark many
Years, because they have not been brought off from themselves, but have sought
that by themselves, which is to be sought only by Christ; because they have
looked for that in the Law, which is to be found only in the Gospel; and no
wonder their Business went on so slowly, when they went the quite contrary Way
to work. When any comes to God without Christ, they come like Simon Magus, with
their own Money in their Hand to buy a great Commodity, which is not to be
purchased with such kind of Coin. If you come to God through Christ, you may
come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace; but if you come without him, you do
but come with Madness upon the Point of the flaming Sword.

V. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, come much where he is wont to be,
frequent his House, lie always at the Doors of Wisdom, engage much in his
Ordinances. This was that course that David took when he wanted God's Company,
away he goes to the House of God; and, O what Earnestness does he use when the
Doors of the Lord's Tabernacle were shut, to get them open again? what Moan
does he make when he was for some time sequestered by his Enemies, from the
Enjoyment of God in his public Ordinances? As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so did his Soul pant after God, the living God. O when should he
appear before him? when should he again behold the Outgoings of God in his
Sanctuary, as sometimes he had done? How amiable are thy Tabernacles, says he,
O Lord God of Hosts! And one thing have I desired, and that will I seek after,
that I may dwell in thy House, and see thee, and inquire in thy Tabernacle,
Psalm. 42. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 27.4. He thought God was like to be found no where so
soon as at his own House; he was sure he was never from home. David can never
forget what Usage and Entertainment he was wont to have there, and that this
great Friend was used to have a standing Table, an open House, and that when
his Guests were set, he would come and bid them welcome: eat O Friends, drink,
yea, drink abundantly, O beloved. See therefore that you get into that part of
God's House where he does most frequently come, get under the most powerful
Ministry; O hear the Word with all the Reverence, Attention, and Affection that
you can for your Soul; miss not any Opportunities that God puts into your Hand,
least that should be the Time in which you might have met with God: Lie at the
Pool of Bethesda, and wait for the moving of the Waters; set your self as in
the House of God, and remember, though you see not God, that he is always
present in all Places, but he is there more especially present where his People
meet together to attend upon him in his own Ordinances? Wherefore when you come
to hear the Word, set your self as in the Presence of God, and hear as for your
Life and Soul, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your Hearts to all the Words that you shall
hear; for it is not a vain thing, it is your Life. Isa. 55.2, 3. Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it
self in Fatness. Incline your Ear, and come unto me; hear, and your Soul shall
live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies
of David. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear what the mighty Jehovah is
speaking to his Soul. Wherefore I say it again, set your self as in the very
immediate Presence of God; and when you hear a Word that you are very nearly
concerned in, put up such a short Ejaculation as this. Now Lord, strike this
hard Heart of mine; now Lord, come in I beseech thee; O that this Word might be
the Key which might open my Heart for the King of Glory to come in! O command
thy loving Kindness this Day to break into my Soul! O that this might be the
Day in which Salvation might come into my House! O that this might be the Man
that might be my Spiritual Father, that this might be the Messenger, one among
a thousand, that may bring me good Tidings! O that this might be the Sentence,
that this might be the Hour of Love! O that this might be the Day that I may
have in everlasting Remembrance! O that I might presently, without any more
Delay, set out for Canaan! Cry out with as much Earnestness as that poor Man
did, who brought his possessed Child before Christ; O Lord, I have brought my
unbelieving Heart before thee, to cure, it exposes me a thousand times to
unspeakable Hazards; but, Lord, if thou will but speak the Word, it shall be
dispossessed: I would believe, Lord help my Unbelief. I have brought my hard
Heart before thee, Lord soften it, and let me not go from time to time with
these dreadful Diseases hanging about me, to infect and undo my self and
others. O melt me, O Lord, melt me, and let me have such a Look from thee, as
Peter once had, which made him to go out and weep bitterly. But I shall speak a
little more of this Nature, under another Direction.

VI. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, you must get acquainted with some of his
Friends, and they will do all they can, and be glad of it too, to help you to
be acquainted with him, they will not spare to give you their utmost Assistance
in this great Business. And when they shall hear you asking, what you shall do
to know God, they are glad at their Heart, and will not be at quiet till they
have got thee home with them to their Father's House; they watch for your Soul,
and no greater Joy than to help forwards such a Work as this, than to be
employed any Way in the Service of your Souls. They are glad when they hear any
Saying, Let us go to the House of the Lord, and asking the Way to Zion, with
their Faces thither-ward. O! Christian Society, good Company is of exceeding
use: one good Servant in a House, the whole Family may fare the better for him.
Laban and Potiphar, though ignorant enough in Spirituals, could not but observe
this, that the Lord blessed their Families, for the Sake of one godly Servant.
I do not speak this only with respect to Temporals, because of that Diligence
and Faithfulness in their Places, that Religion will put them upon; but with
Respect to Spirituals, they will be dropping something that may tend to the
awakening, and convincing of their sleepy, unbelieving, ignorant Companions:
they have an inward Principle which puts them upon communicating what Grace
they have received; they know the more they impart to others, the more they
shall have themselves; they have a Compassion for Souls, and would fain have as
many as they can along with them to Heaven: they will be teaching little
Children to pray, and instilling something that the very Babes may set forth
God's Praises, and they will be pleading with God for them. But this only by
the by. Now if those that are gracious endeavor what they can to bring in
those that are open Enemies; how much more will they be ready to give all the
Help they can to you that earnestly desire it? Now when any one comes to this
pass, that he sees a Difference between the godly and the wicked, and to say
that the righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, and to have an earnest
Desire to associate themselves with them, it is a very great Sign that God has
an Intention to do such a Soul good. Wherefore if you would be brought to the
Knowledge of God, go speedily to them that know him well, and they will tell
you great things of him, and how they came first acquainted with him, and how
this Acquaintance has been kept up; they will tell you where they first met
him, they will give you to understand that at such and such a time, when they
little thought of God, they were strangely brought acquainted with him. When
they came (out of Fashion, or Curiosity, or to laugh at him that taught them,
or it may be to pick some Quarrel with him) to hear such a Man; they were made
to see what they never took any great Notice of before, that they were in an
undone Condition by Nature, and that except Christ would pity them, there was
no Remedy, but to Hell they must go; whereas before they thought themselves as
safe as could be: But then they saw it was no light Matter to be out of Christ,
and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. After this they were made to
understand something of Christ's Undertaking for poor lost Sinners, and they
heard of his exceeding willingness to receive the chiefest of Sinners, and that
then they began to see an Excellency in his Love, and Goodness, and to be
somewhat more taken with the Kindness of Christ than ever they were before, and
they felt some Longings after the precious Jesus, O that they had but a Christ
for their Souls! and that after this they were by the Spirit of God, in some
measure, enabled to cast themselves at the Feet of Christ for Mercy, and that
upon his own Terms, knowing that if Mercy came not that Way to them, they must
sink for ever; and that upon this Act of Recumbency after they had for some
time waited upon God in the Way of his Ordinances, they began to taste and
relish the Things of God, and at last they met him whom their Souls loved.
Inquire of them, I say, and they will talk thus to you, and tell you also, that
there was a time wherein they were foolish, disobedient, and unto every good
Work reprobate, and miserably neglectful of their Souls, that they did not at
all mind their eternal Welfare, but made light of Christ, made a Mock of Sin,
and made nothing of eternal Dammation. And they will direct and encourage you
also. Let me tell you, they have an Interest in God, and their Prayers for you
may be more advantageous than you are aware of. Yet I would not that you should
make Christ's of the Saints, nor forget what is the Work of the Mediator alone.
Saints are to be valued, but Christ is to be valued insinitely more. Get
acquainted with some warm rare experienced Christian, and make him your
Bosom-Friend, and observe him, and you shall see much of the Beauty of Religion
shining in him, and you shall see how cheerfully and comfortably he walks: now
ask him what his Practice is, and go you, and do likewise; have a Care of
harboring ill Thoughts of the People of God, or for the Sake of one Hypocrite,
of censuring a thousand sincere ones. Judge you whether this be just and equal
doing? How would you like it, if one that bares some Relation to you, should do
some vile abominable thing, and bring himself to an untimely End, and People
should say all the whole Family is like him? though it may be you are grieved
to the very Heart that such a thing should be done by any in the World, much
more by any that bears any kind of Relation to your self. I tell you, as
contemptibly as the World speak of the Godly, they are not such odious
Creatures as they are represented to be. The Saints they are not Troublers but
Peacemakers, they love to make Peace between Man and Man, and what in them
lies also between God and Man: your Converse with such as fear the Lord will
make you like them, at least they will endeavor as much. ( Ar. Epict. l. 3. c.
16.) He spoke no Untruth, who said, That Company is of an assimulating Nature.
Aliving Coal laid to a Heap of dead ones, may kindle them all; but they are
more like, except it be blown up, to put the live one quite out; therefore,
says the same Author, You must be very cautious of your Company. It is storied
of Socrates, that he had a rare Art of making his Familiar Friends of his Mind.
Some active Christians take as much Pains to make their Familiars of Christ's
Mind. Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the wise shall yet be wiser, but a
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed. Prove. 10.20, 21, 32. The Tongue of the
just is as choice Silver, but the Heart of the wicked is little worth. The Lips
of the Righteous feed many, but Fools die for want of Wisdom. The Lips of the
Righteous know what is acceptable, but the Mouth of the wicked speaks froward
things. Such as these will do what they can to make you out of Love with Sin,
and in Love with God. Such as these will from their own Experience be setting
forth the Goodness of God, and tell you that which may stand you in stead as
long as you live: it may be they may tell you, that when God began first to
work upon their Soul, he was pleased to make use of the particular Application,
and the spiritual Conversation of such a Christian Relation; and when God came
in with Comfort, and spoke Peace, such a one led them to such a Promise, which
was like a Cordial to their fainting Soul. When they were abroad, (they will
tell you) and were necessitated to the Company of them which were Strangers to
the Life of Religion; and were at such a time troubled with horrible
Temptations; that they were in a Wilderness Condition, and thought that never
any that walked Heavenward, could be in the like State; but now when they got
acquainted with the People of God, they found that as Face answers Face in a
Glass, so their Experience, and the Experience of many of the dear Children of
God was axactly alike; and that that which they thought none in the World could
parellel, they find that most of the Christians that they meet with, know as
well as themselves, and at the first Hearing, are able to go on with the Story
before them, so that they have sometimes wondered how any one living should know
their Hearts and Thoughts so well, to whom they did not communicate them. I
think it not altogether impertinent here to insert an Observation of my own. I
remember when I was once speaking concerning the Duty of Christians in relation
to their unconverted Friends, and urging them upon doing what they could for
God, and Souls, in the Places where God had set them: in speaking to this
Subject, I said, that there was not the meanest Christian, but might be an
Instrument of the Conversion of a Soul. Upon this I rehearsed a couple of
Experiences that I had of two Persons, Strangers one to the other, who gave
this Account of their Conversion; they were upon the Matter both alike, and
therefore I shall tell but one of them, which take as follows. There was a
poor, civil, yet very carnal Creature, a Servant in a religious Family, who did
from his Soul abhor the Spiritual Conversation of those in the Family, insomuch
that he was resolved to run away from his Service, he was so weary of such
Doings: But one Night, hearing a strange Sound somewhere, he rose out of his
Bed, and went to listen what was the Matter; upon which he heard one distinctly
praying on the other Side of the Wall, he still hearkening, heard one praying
very earnestly for him (who did not know but he might be asleep) and opening
the Condition of his Soul so particularly, and with so much Tenderness, that he
was wonderfully awakened, to think that one that he hated should so much love
him, and pity his Soul, and to consider how it was possible any one in the
World should know his Thoughts so well as that Person did who prayed for him;
upon this, he began to be very much startled to think of his Condition,
concluding thus, Surely I am in a lamentable State, and they see it, or else
they would never do as they do, they are praying for me when I am asleep, they
love me when I hate them; upon this the Man was very much troubled, and his
Trouble daily increased, till he was forced to open his Condition to the Person
who had been praying for him, which was a poor Maidservant; upon which the
Work of Regeneration was carried on very sweetly, and the Man became an
excellent Christian, whereas the Instrument that God used in this great Work
was but a poor Servant. Now when I rehearsed this thing, which was the
Condition of two, as I said before, a third Person stood by, (whom I never saw
in my Life before) who fell a Sweating for Trouble, that any of his Friends
should tell such a thing of him to me, and thought I had meant himself in all
the Particulars, though I heard not a Word of the Man before in my Life. This
by the by. I could not but hint this for the Encouragement of Parents to get
their Children into Families that are really religious, and to encourage all to
associate themselves to such as fear the Lord. You see by what has been
spoken, that Acquaintance with the People of God, may be of great Use for the
bringing the Soul acquainted with God.

VII. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, entertain all the Messengers that he
sends to you kindly. When God calls, answer; and when he sends any of his
Servants to you, bid them welcome; Let the Feet of those which bring glad
Tidings be beautiful in your Eye; Do not think much if they deal plainly and
roundly with you, know that it is out of Love to your Souls (God is their
witness) they see that your Condition requires it, and that a Man in your State
is not to be jested with. The Lord knows that they take little Pleasure in
grieving of People; they do it that you may rejoice for ever, they watch for
your Souls, and therefore you must account them worthy of double Honor. But of
all the Messengers that God sends, have the greatest Care of dealing unkindly
with, and grieving his Spirit; when you have any Motions upon your Soul by the
Spirit, labor to cherist them with all the Care and Tenderness that you can.
Turn not. Convictions away with, I am not at Leisure, or I will hear you of
these things when I have a more convenient Season: but as soon as you find your
Heart begin to relent, cry out unto the Lord, and say, O Lord, I beseech thee,
carry on thy Work effectually upon my Soul! O that I may have through Work! O
let not these Convictions wear off from my Soul till they end in a real
Conversion! O let me not prove but a half Christian! Any thing in the World,
Lord, so that I may but be made a Christian in good Earnest! O let me not
return with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the Sow that is washed, to her
Wallowing in the Mire! Deliver me, O God, from sinning away these things, and
getting into a cold World, and from shaking off all, least I prove worse than
ever, and my latter End be more miserable than my Beginning. Labor to be very
curious in the taking Notice of God's Absence or Presence; and when you find
your Soul raised in any Duty, and your Heart somewhat drawn out after God, then
be sure to own God's Goodness, and bless the Lord for it; Record his Kindness,
forget not his Mercy, pass not over such great Things in Silence. Little do Men
think what a Hazard they run, when they quench the Motions of God's Spirit. You
may read in Cant. 5. How dearly the Spouse had like to have paid for such an
Unkindness? What, shall God send his Spirit to visit you? Shall the infinite
Majesty so far condescend as to knock at your Door, and will not you open? why
then you may thank your selves, if he never knock more. But if you will now
open to him, he will come in to you, and sup with you, and you shall sup with
him.

VIII. DIRECTION.
Seek his Acquaintance most earnestly, if you would have it. O why do Men and
Women jest with Matters of the greatest Weight and Importance in the World?
What do People mean to play with their Souls, the Wrath of God, and Damnation?
O Sinners, have you nothing else to play with? no lower Matters to sport with?
Believe it, Sirs, Heaven and Glory are not got with sitting still with our
Hands in our Pockets. We think it worth the while to rise early, and to sit up
late, to get an earthly Estate; we count it no foolish thing for a Man to be
very diligent about his worldly Affairs. The poor Countryman plows and sows,
harrows, weeds, reaps, inns, thresheth, and a great deal more, before he can
eat his Bread; and shall we look for a rich Crop, and do nothing at all but eat
and drink, and sleep? Is this the Way to be rich? is this the Way to be happy
for ever? If you intend to do any thing in Religion to any purpose, you must
buckle to your Business at another guess Rate than most of the Professors of
the World do. We must take as much Pains about our Souls as Men do about their
Bodies or Estates. Is there any Comparison between the Soul and the Body;
between a worldly Estate, and an heavenly Inheritance? Has a Man more Reason
to look after tricking up his Body that must die, or look after the adorning of
his Soul, that must live somewhere for ever? Which are Matters of the greatest
Consequence, Eating and Drinking, and Pampering the Flesh, and taking our
Pleasure; or looking after Life, Salvation, and eternal Joy? Do you think that
the Scripture faith in vain, That we must strive to enter in at the strait
Gate? Is it a bare seeking that will serve the Turn? Will a, Lord have Mercy
upon me, and bowing the Knee, do as well as the greatest Seriousness and
Diligence in the Would? Do you think that God will be put off with the Skin and
Garbage instead of Sacrifice, with the Shell instead of the Kernel, with Chaff
instead of the Corn? Does not Christ say, That many shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able? O why do not lazy Professors read the Scriptures with
Trembling? Let all those that are angry with us for putting them upon making
Religion their Business, and using all Diligence to make their Calling and
Election sure, read that one Scripture over again, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter
in at the strait Gate: for many, I say unto you, mill seek to enter in, and
shall not be able, etc. It was Christ who spoke that Word. If we tell you of
the Danger of a formal Religion, you will soon fall upon us as Enemies to your
Peace, and those which impose too much Strictness upon you: We therefore do
here produce our Commission for what we say, or rather we desire you but to
read your selves what Christ spoke as touching this Matter. O it might justly
make a Christian's Heart to ache, to think how many thousands of Professors
willbe disowned by Christ in that Day, who will make many fair Pleas for
themselves, and pretend a great deal of Acquaintance with him. Consider, I
beseech you, here is no Fear of Excess; never any Man in the World that was too
sollicitous about his Salvation, never any Man took too much Pains for Heaven.
Awake, O Sleeper, what meanest thou? arise, and call upon thy God. If you make
any thing of the Loss of a Soul, look about you; if you think the Wrath to come
considerable, be serious; if you would not be burnt by the Fire of his
Indignation; you must take hold of his Strength, and make Peace with him, and
God will be at Peace with you, Isa. 27.5. It is not without Cause, that the
Prophet does complain, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. There is none that calls upon God's
Name! One would think that that were strange; What, none call upon his Name,
when so many of them made many Prayers, as you have it in the first of Isaiah?
What, did they nothing but look upon one another, when they had their solemn
Assemblies? Did they say nothing to God, when they came before him? Did they do
nothing at all in that 58. of Isaiah, when they are said to seek him daily,
when they seemed to delight in his way? Yet in God's Esteem, all this goes for
nothing at all, this Prayer is no Prayer, this is only wording of it with God.
But Prayer it is another kind of thing, it is the stirring up of the Soul, and
awakening all its Strength to wrestle with God, to lay hold upon God, and to
prevail with the Almighty; and where are such as these to be sound, who is this
that engages his Heart in the Service of God? It is one thing to engage the
Tongue, and another thing to engage the Heart. Men come to pray with a common
Spirit, and are many times weary of the Work before they have well begun it;
what they do, they do it lifelessly: They can follow their worldly Employments
with Life and Delight. They have a Male in their Flock, but that is too good for
God; a lame, blind, starved weak thing must serve his Turn: And is this the way
to have the Blessing? Are such as these like to have any Thanks for their
Kindness? Let them try how any of their Friends would take such a Present. Now
would you have the Blessing of Acquaintance with God, you must wrestle for it,
and not let God go without it: You must be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord;
You must fight the good Fight of Faith, and lay hold on eternal Life: You must
grasp about Christ as a Man that is a drowning would grasp any thing that were
thrown out to save him: You must use all Diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure: You must work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling: You
must seek for Wisdom as for Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasure.
Then shall you understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God.
What excellent thing is there, that is got without pains? Whoever came to be an
exquisite curious Artist in any Skill whatever, that never served an
Apprenticeship to it, nor at the least gave his Mind to it? Where is there a
famous Physician that never studied in his Life? Who gets a Victory by Sleeping
and Carlesness? Who expects to have Riches drop into his Mouth, when he goes
all the Ways that can be to make himself a Beggar? Does the Husbandman look for
a good Grop without plowing or sowing? Why then should we expect such great
things as Heaven, Eternal Happiness, and the Favor of God, without looking
after them. Whatsoever the lazy formal Professor may say, the Kingdom of Heaven
is not obtained thus: There must be running, watching, fighting, conquering,
holding fast, holding out, and all little enough; it requires all the Strength
of thy Soul to engage in this great Work; it requires some Resosution to do
such a Work, as every Christian must do, or else his Religion signifies little.
Further, it calls for some time too, it is not a thing to be minded now and
then by the by, between sleep and awake, when the Devil and the World have had
as much Service as they call for. Were it for your Bodies that I were now
pleading, were you like to get any great matter in the World by following of my
Directions; could you be showed a way how to get a great Estate, Honors, and
long Life, I am verily persuaded a few Words might prevail much. Why, if you
will believe the Word of God, I am telling you of other kind of things than
these be, greater Matters by far; and yet how little are Men and Women
affected? As if we spoke but in jest always, when we spoke about things that
did concern Souls! How little time do Men spend in their Inquiry into these
things? Ask Epictetus ( Ench. c. 63.) and he will tell you that it is a Sign of
a low Soul; to bestow much time upon thy Body, and the Thoughts of it, and
little upon the Soul; to be long eating, and long drinking, and long a
dressing, and short in Prayer, short in the Thoughts of the Soul, and short in
the Service of God; and that it is a Sign of a base degenerate Spirit to be
very curious about Toys, and inconsiderable Trifles, and to be negligent about
Matters of the greatest Importance, to slubber over the great Works of Religion
with the greatest Slightness. Remember, O Man, thy great Work, it is to take
care of thy Soul, to look after a Companion, a Friend for thy Soul, to get Food
and Clothing for thy Soul, that famish not with hunger and cold. To be
indifferent in all Externals is the greatest Prudence; but to be indifferent
about Spirituals and Eternals is the greatest Madness. We are all Soldiers,
and must fight in such a War wherein we must never lay down our Arms. The
Favor of God is worth the striving for, it is as much as Heaven and Glory is
worth. If your Estate or Life lay at Stake, would you not be willing to use all
the Interest you could to make the Judge your Friend? Would you go up and down
laughing as if you had nothing to do? Would you eat and drink as merrily as
ever, and say, it is but dying, it is but being a Beggar, it is but the undoing
of my Wife and Children? Would you not look upon a Man that should argue at
this rate to be little better than frantic? And I pray which is most
considerable, the Death of the Body, or the Death of the Soul; the Loss of a
temporal, or the Loss of an eternal Inheritance. Most Men's Diligence in
Temporals will condemn their Negligence in Spirituals. Christ said, Seek ye
first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; but most Men say, I
will seek first the Earth, and the Glory thereof; and if God will give me
Heaven and Happiness after I have served the Devil and the World as long as I
can, I shall be contented to have it. No such matter, never expect it, God must
sooner cease to be, than to gratify you in this. Wherefore do you think did
David follow his Work so close? Why did all those noble Worthies in the Church
of old take so much Pains? Why should they not much stick to venture Estates
and Lives too? Will you condemn them all as guilty of too much Curiosity, and
unnecessary Preciseness? Do you think that their Labor was in vain? Are all
those disappointed, who willingly parted with present things for future things?
I must tell you, if you expect to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven, you must do as they did. Heaven will not be obtained now
upon any lower Terms than then. Your Souls are as precious as theirs, and
Heaven will be as well worth your minding as theirs, and God will look upon you
as well as upon them, if you will value his Favor as they did. Never look to
have God give you that which you will not thank him for. What do you say after
all this? Will you sit down before your Work is done? Open thine Eyes, and
consider what thou have to do, and then tell me if it be not the greatest Folly
imaginable to be slight in these Affairs. O how can thou eat, drink, or
sleep, whilst thou have such a great Work to do which is undone! O give not
sleep to thine Eyes, nor slumber to thy Eyelids, but deliver thy self from the
Hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird from the Hand of the Fowler. Go to the Ant
thou Sluggard: Consider her Ways, and be wise; which having no Guide, Overseer,
or Ruler, provideth her Meat in the Summer, and gathers her Meat in the
Harvest. How long will thou sleep, O Sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy
sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the Hinds to
sleep, so shall thy Poverty come, as one that travelleth, and thy Want as an
armed Man. And will you now labor to get Acquaintance with God, as you would
to get Food for your Body? Will you endeavor as much to make sure of his Love,
as you would do to make sure of a Pardon, in case of the Forfeiture of your
Life? If so, we have some Hopes, the Work may have some considerable Issue.

IX. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, be much in expostulating the Case with
God, and in urging those Arguments which the Scripture does afford you in such
a Case. Take with you Words, and come unto the Lord, and spread your Requests
before him, and say,

O Lord, thou have sent thy Servants the Ministers, and have invited me to come
unto thee, and thou offerest Peace and Reconciliation, and to be acquainted
with me. O God I desire from my Soul, to come upon thy Call, and would fain be
acquainted with thee. I see my self in an undone State, while I am a Stranger
to thee: But, O Lord, I have a cursed base Heart that keeps me back from thee,
and I cannot tell what in the World to do. O Lord, I beseech thee help thy poor
Creature to come unto thee, lead me by the Hand, let thy Goodness and Love
constrain me, conquer me by thy Kindness; come Lord into my Soul, and let me
see thy Face, and look upon thee till I am in Love with thee. O why art thou a
Stranger to me? Will thou forsake me for ever? Shall I be one of those thine
Enemies which shall be slain before thy Face? Shall I be one of those that
shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? O Lord, pity, pity, pity, for Christ's
sake, a poor Creature that would fain love thee, and be acquainted with thee. I
am convinced that I must be damned without thee, and come to thee of my self I
cannot. O draw me! O carry me! O compel me! Constrain me, make me willing in
the Day of thy Power: I cannot get loose, my Heart is too hard for me, my Lusts
are too strong for me, my Temptations are too many for me to conquer of my
self. O Lord help me. Turn me, and I shall be turned. Pluck my Feet out of the
Snare, or I shall utterly be destroyed for ever. Forgive mine Iniquity, make me
a clean Heart, make me thy Servant. Tell God that thou have heard of his
Goodness and Mercy, and that the King of Israel is a merciful King; and that it
is his Nature to pity. Say to him, O I am a poor undone Creature, and will thou
send me away without Mercy? Will the God of Grace send me away without Grace?
Have thou not called me, O God? Thy Servants tell me so, O Lord speak and give
me Ears to hear; O Lord, I am come in upon thy merciful Proclamation, and I
desire to lay my self at thy Feet; Mercy Lord, Mercy upon what Terms thou
please. Did thou not say in thy Word, Ho! every one that thirsts, come
and buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without Price. Have not thy Servants
pleaded with me to come? And have thou not sent for me? O! a Blessing, a
Blessing for me, even for me, O my Father? Have thou not a Blessing for me?
Shall I be sent away as I came? O Lord, I come at thy Word! Do not say unto me,
Be gone out of my Sight. I cannot go, I will not go; whither shall I go from
thee? For thou have the Words of eternal Life. Though I cannot say, Be just to
me a Saint, yet I will say, Be merciful to me a Sinner. You may read more in R.
A. his first Part of his Vindiciae Pietatis, Page 232. the whole Treatise is
excellent. Plead the Blood of Christ; you may safely say, that if there be not
enough in Christ to save you, you do not desire Salvation, for in him there is
all Fullness. You may plead your own absolute Necessity. Tell God, that if ever
a poor Creature in the World had need of Mercy, you have; tell him that you are
resolved not to be content without his Love. You may plead his Promise, in
which he has said, That he will take away the Heart of Stone, and give a Heart
of Flesh; and that he will put his Fear in our Hearts, and write his Laws in
our inward Parts. You may plead also the Power of God, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself; and many such like Arguments you may find in
many Places in the Scripture. But because I have touched upon this before I
shall pass it by.

X. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, look after it speedily, defer not a
moment, your Enemy is marching on apace, you may be surprised, your Soul is
hasting upon its eternal State, your Glass is almost run, there are but a few
Sands behind; therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him
while he is near; e're long it will be too late; wherefore what thou do, do
quickly. What is the Voice both of Scripture and Providence? Does not the Word
of God say Now, and commend the present time above all. Acquaint now thy self
with him; Remember now thy Creator; Turn now unto the Lord. Let a poor Heathen
( Epict. En. c. 75.) shame you into greater speed in this necessary Work. I
shall translate his Words into English: How long, says he, will you defer the
looking after the best things? How long will you abuse your Reason? Have you
not heard such Precepts which you ought to agree to, and you seemed very well
to like of? What kind of Teacher is it that you stay for? For whose coming do
you defer before you will mend and turn? You are come now to Years of
Discretion (if I should say you were not, you would be angry) if you will
neglect and delay, and add one Delay to another, if you will add one put off to
another, and make one Resolution and Purpose after another, and set one Day
after another, in which you will think of these things; consider that all this
will do you no good, for all your Resolutions and Purposes, for all that I see,
you are like to die a common Man; therefore now live as a perfect growing Man,
and follow that which is most excellent unalterably. If any thing of Difficulty
intervene, remember that now is the time for you to show what Respect you have
for your God and your Soul. Remember the Goal is not far off, and that now you
must not falter; and that as you demean your self now, it may be, you may be
happy or miserable while you have a Being. This is the Language of that
excellent Moralist. I add, what is it, O Sinner, that thou stayest for? Is it
for the Day of Judgment? Would you be taught by Flames, the worth of time? You
may then indeed learn; but believe it, your Knowledge and Learning will do you
little good; you may then learn what it is to be miserable, but you cannot learn
how to get out of it; you will know what you have lost, but then you will never
know how to repair your Losses. How many thousands of them which have set a
Day, in which they would return and repent, have set, and set, and set it
again, and what with one thing or other they could not be at leisure to repent
till they came to Hell; and there indeed they have leisure enough to repent,
and they do repent too, if Hell-Repentance would do any thing: I believe that
all that come there do repent and believe too, more than they did while they
were alive; but then it is too late. They that are now in those dreadful Flames,
many of them thought, it may be, of repenting before they dyed as well as you,
and did just as you do. O that you would understand your selves before your
State be like theirs! How infinitely does it concern you to improve time, and
to comply with the present Tenders of Mercy that are made to you: For e're long
it may be too late for you too. O know this therefore, that now thy God makes
thee a gracious Offer of Pardon; and if you refuse now, this may be the last
time, this may be the very Cast for Eternity. God may say before to morrow,
This Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Go to therefore, you that talk
of trading for the great Things of Eternity, I do not know when, thirty or
forty Years hence, Do you not know that your Life is but a Blast? When your
Breath goes out of your Nostrils, you are not sure that you shall draw it in
again. What then do you mean to talk of Delay? Have you not staid long enough
already? Consider Man what thou do. He that says he will be good to morrow,
he says he will be wicked to Day. And what if God should say, thou shall have
the Pleasure of Sin to Day, and the Sorrow of Sin to morrow? Thou shall be
hardened to Day, and damned to morrow? If your House were on fire, you would
scarce say, I will go and sleep four or five Hours, and then I will rise and
call my Neighbors to help to quench it. If your Child were a drowning, you
would scarce say, I must needs stay till I have drunk a Flaggon or two more,
and about half an hour hence it may be I may go and see whether I can get a
Boat to help him out. If you were condemned to dye to morrow, you would scarce
say, I will have Music, and Sack, and good Company all Night, and then I will
send a Messenger if I can get one, to ride a hundred Mile to try whether he can
get a Pardon for me. Yet thus for all the World thou do do in the greatest
Affairs of thy immortal Soul. O the Folly of Man (says Seneca) who thinks to
begin to live, when a thousand to one but he will be dead and rotten! I may
say, O the Madness of Sinners, who make account to be looking after Heaven
then, when it is likely their Souls may be in Hell! Judge now whether this be
Wisdom. Now you think Time one of the poorest Commodities in the World, it is a
very Drug which lies upon your Hand, a Day or two, a Week, a Year is no great
matter with you: But believe it, the Case will be altered with a Witness e're
long. Seneca wondered when he heard some as king one of his Friends for to spend
two or three Weeks with them, when he saw how easily the Request was granted,
as if they asked as little as nothing, when they asked time of him; Thus (says
he) one of the precious things in the World is thrown away as little worth.
When you come to lie upon your Deathbed, we shall have you have other Thoughts
of Time: Then a World, if you had it, for one of those Hours, that you could
not tell how to spend. You now study how to rob your self of your precious
time, you invent Pastimes, not considering how swiftly time flies, and how much
you will prize it before long. O remember no Body can give you a moment of that
time when you want it, that you are now so prodigal of. When time is past, if
you would give a World to recall it, it could not be: If you would give
thousands for the renewing of this Lease, it would be refused. Therefore live
quickly. Man's time runs away first. Optima quaequae dies miseris mortalibus
aevi, prima fugit -- Seneca. And then my Author comments very bravely upon the
whole Verse.

I think that Proverb, though it be an Italian one, is worth our remembering, He
that will lodge well at Night, must set out betimes in the Morning. That which
keeps us from living to Day, is the Thoughts of living to morrow: So that we
lose this Day while we expect the next. Comenius speaking of the Tiger, says,
That when he hears the Sound of the Trumpet, he tears and bites himself. This
will be the Work of the merciless Tigers of the World; that spend their time
(in which they should be providing for Eternity) in hunting God's People, and
taking their Pleasures; and it may be think to be a little more mild before
they die; but of a sudden the Trumpet sounds, away, away, and O then what a
lamentable taking are they in! How do they wish for time again, or that they
had spent that which they had better? Wicked Men never know the Worth of Time,
till they come to a Deathbed, or a while after. O then, they that made nothing
of spending thirty or forty Years, would lay down all they are worth for one
Year, one Month, one Day, one Hour; but it is then too late. O how do they gnash
their Teeth! With what Horror do they think of past Mercies, and future
Miseries! Men fear generally that Death will come sooner then they would have
him; they bewail that their Lives are short at the longest; whereas if Men
would wisely husband that time that God has given them, it would be long
enough: O happy is that Man that has done his great Work before his Sun is
set! O foolish Men that complain of God for making their Lives so short, and
complain not at all of themselves for making them ten times shorter: For most
Men live not at all the Life of Religion, and may be called dead. Others have a
Name to live, and yet are little better than the former. Most that live
spiritually, begin their Life after they have been many Years dead: And though
we sit and condemn others as guilty of great Imprudence in these Affairs, yet
how do we at the same time justify them, by being as profusely expensive of
precious time as they? O where is the Man almost to be found, that does improve
Time to as good Advantage as he should? Among other Symptoms of a Fool, this is
none of the least, To be always beginning to live. What an unhandsome Sight is
it to see an old Man learning his Letters? O remember Man, thou have a great
Work to do! O remember thy precious Time runs away with an unspeakable
Swiftness! What do you mean, to sit with your Hands in your Bosoms? Look about
thee, O Sinner, it is not time a Day for you to be sleeping or playing; Methinks
a Man in your Condition should be up and doing with all the Diligence that you
could for your Soul, and laboring to make your Calling and Election sure;
methinks we should hear you asking, what you shall do to get a Pardon for your
Sins, to get God reconciled to you. Methinks you should be enquiring what you
should do to redeem your Time, and to spend every moment of it so to the best
Advantage as that you may appear cheerfully before your Master at Night. That I
may enforce this weighty Direction, I shall propound a few seriou^ Questions to
you.

Quest. 1. Do you think that these things are necessary, or are they not? If
they be necessary why do you not mind them speedily? If they b^ not necessary,
do not look after them at all.

Quest. 2. Do you expect to be in a better Capacity to look after these things
hereafter? Do yo^ hope for more Strength, when you are worn ou^with Sin and
Age, when your Back begins to bend, and your Joints to shake? Do you think you
shall be more at leisure, when your Work will be much increased? Know this,
that Sin grows upon you daily, it preys upon your Vitals: He that is not fit to
Day, will be less fit to morrow. As for Leisure, I must confess you may have
Leisure enough in another World, to think of these things. But I wish you well
to consider whether it be great Wisdom to repent in this World, or in another.
I would be loath to be repenting in another, it is sad weeping indeed there,
where Tears shall never be dried up. I have told you often that God says, To
Day, and it is both wickedly and foolishly done of Man to say, To morrow. I
must tell you but so, that it is a dreadful Hazard that every delaying Sinner
does run: It is a Question whether God may not deny his Grace, stop the
Preacher's Mouth, stop his Ears, and stop your Breath: And where are you then,
with your to morrow? Delays in these Affairs always cost dear; they have cost
many thousands dear already, and if you make no more have than you have done,
they will cost you dear too.

Quest. 3. When would you get acquainted with God? When he has shut up his
Door? When would you run this Race? When you have lost your Legs, or can but
creep with Crutches? Is that the best time to do your Work in, when it is next
to impossible to do it?

Quest. 4. Who deserves best at your Hands, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, or God? Resolve me this I pray? Whom do you call your Master? Whom have
you most Reason to make have for?

Quest. 5. How would you take it, if any of them which depend upon you, should
serve you as you serve God?

Quest. 6. Do you think you can make too much Have? Who is afraid of being rich
too soon? Although a Man may with Reason good enough be afraid of that which
may make his Happiness far more uncertain, and his Miseries more intolerable.
Who fears to make too much Have, when his Prince sends for him with Speed? O
that Men did but know who it is that calls them, and whether they are going,
and what they have to do, when they come to their Journey's End!

Quest. 7. Are you sure you shall live till you are an Hour older? You are
strong and healthful it may be, but did you never hear that such have had but a
very little Warning? Have you never known a Man well one Hour, and dead the
next? If you have not, I tell you of one now, that was very well one Moment,
and dead the next, my self being an Eyewitness of it. It Is possible there may
be but one small Moment between a strong working healthful Man, and a
breathless Corpse.

Quest. 8. What do you think will become of you, I ask again, if you put off
Repentance till it be too late?

Quest. 9. What would you do, if you were sure you should die, or the Day of
Judgment come before you were a Week older?

Quest. 10. Do you think to get acquainted with God in another World, when you
do not mind him here? Will God, think you, own them hereafter, that disown him
here? Will he know them in Heaven, who would not know him upon the Earth?

XI. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of those things, which keep God
and Man at a Distance, and make the Lord take no Pleasure in us. In general,
take heed of all Sin, Wash you, make you clean, put away the Evil of your
Doings from mine Eyes; cease to do Evil, learn to do good; seek Judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, and plead the Cause of the Widow.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, Isa. 1.17, 18. You must
wash your Hands in Innocence, if you intend to compass his Altar, to sit down
at his Table. In Psalm. 101. David is exceeding desirous of God's Company, and
he cries out, O when will thou come unto me! he thinks long to have a Visit
from his old Friend; he would gladly walk with him. Now what Course does he
take to get God's Company? Why, he goes the best Way to work in the World: He
will set no wicked thing before his Eyes. He knows it is to no purpose for him
to expect much of God's Company, while he does entertain his greatest Enemies;
therefore he turns them out of Doors: I hate, says he, the Works of them that
turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. And that God may dwell with him, and
make his House, as well as his Heart, a Temple for himself; he will not suffer
a wicked Person to live in it; he will have none in his Family, but such as
shall be ready to serve God, and bid this his great Friend welcome.

But more particular, if you would have much of God's Company, and be
intimately acquainted with him; take heed more especially of those particular
Sins, which make God most to estrange himself from Man; as,

First, Take heed of Pride: That was the Sin which made the first Breach
between the Creature and the Creator; the Sin that sunk the Angels, that made
God and them, who were very good Friends once, to be bitter Enemies; this has
made the Breach infinite, the Feud everlasting, the Wound incurable. And this
made the first Quarrel between God and Man. When Man thinks himself too good to
be but a Man, he must be a God; be quickly is too bad to be a Man, he is but
one Remove from the Devil. To be a Favorite of his Prince is not enough,
except he may step into the Throne; it is therefore high time for his Prince to
remove such from his Presence to a Prison, from the Court to the Dungeon. It
was Pride that cast Adam out of Paradise; and do you think that that Sin is
less hateful to God, and less dangerous to Man, than it was five thousand Years
ago? Did it then spend all its Poison? and can it now do no Harm? Do you
believe that God will take that into his Bosom now, that formerly he abhorred
to look upon? Now Sin has increased its Strength and Deformity, and heightened
its Enmity against the infinite Majesty of the holy Jehovah, shall his Hatred
against it decrease? Will he be more willing to accompany proud aspiring Rebels
now than then? No such matter, God is still as holy as ever, and hates all Sin,
especially Pride, as much as ever. Do you think that it is for nothing that the
Word of God speaks so much against this Sin? Can it be that the Holy Ghost
would say, Prove. 11. That every one that is proud is an Abomination to the
Lord, except God did indeed hate them? Why should God threaten such so much if
he took any Pleasure in their Society? Though Hand join in Hand, yet the proud
shall not go unpunished. Now we call the proud happy, but shall we call him so
when the Day of the Lord shall burn as Fire, and all the proud shall be as
Stubble: And the Day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord, and it
shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. When the Lord shall tread down the
wicked, and they shall be like Ashes under his Feet, Mal. 3.15. and 4.1, 3.
There is not one proud Man in Heaven, I am sure; nor a proud Man upon the Earth
that shall have much of God's Acquaintance. And let me say, he that sets
himself above God (for that is the Pride I mean) whilst he stands in that State,
must never expect that God should look upon him with any Kindness. Heaven and
Hell will as soon be agreed as God and such a one shall be united. The proud
now overlook others that are their Betters, and scorn their Maker; but shortly
they shall be paid in their own Coin; they shall be scorned too. If all the
proud Nimrods, Pharaohs, and Belshazzars in the World should enter into a
League, and combine against the Almighty, and say, they will cast away his
Cords from them, and that they will never debase their noble Spirits so low as
to stoop to his Commands; yet none of them all shall go unpunished: they shall
be like Stubble before the devouring Flames, and like Chaff before a mighty
Whirlwind: God is not afraid of their big Looks, Prove. 21.4. Prove. 6.17. Prove.
15. 25. Isa. 2.12. Luke 1.51. Jam. 4.6. God will clothe himself with Vengeance,
and the mighty Jehovah will gird his Weapon upon his Thigh, and march out in
Fury and Indignation, and draw his glittering Sword, and resist the proud, and
teach them what it is to bid Defiance to the Lord of Hosts. We shall soon see,
who shall be uppermost, God or they. And when the proud Sinner lies conquered
at his Feet, how does he, with infinite Scorn look upon him, and say, Behold,
the Man is become like one of us! This it is for a Man to attempt the Dethroning
of the Almighty! But it may be, most may think themselves little concerned in
that which I now speak; wherefore I must add this one Word. Be it known unto
thee, O Man, whosoever thou art, that think thou have no Pride; I am sure
thou art one of those that are in that black Roll which have proclaimed War
against Heaven; thou art the Man that shall never be acquainted with God
whilst thou art in that Mind. It may be thou may speak Peace to thy self
for all this, and flatter thy self as if God and you were Friends; but let me
tell thee, I come with heavy Tidings in my Mouth to thee: if thou turn not, he
will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and made it ready, he has prepared
for thee the Instruments of Death; the Day of thy Calamity is near: the
dreadful Jehovah is upon his March, and if you ask me whether there be not
Peace for thee, I answer as Jehu did to Jehoram, what Peace, O haughty Sinner,
so long as the Pride of thy Heart is so great, and thy Rebellions against thy
Maker so many; there is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked. Wherefore, as
your value your Soul, as you tender your everlasting Salvation, and desire to
be owned by the Lord in the Day of your Distress, take heed of Pride. Go
quickly, and humble your self, and make sure your Friend; labor to pull down
every high Thought, and every proud Imagination; and let your arrogant Spirit
bow before the mighty God; there is no Way will do but this, as ye have already
heard; you must set the Crown upon the Lord's Head, you must lay your selves at
his Feet, and lick the very Dust. Your Betters have done so before you, and
have thought it their Honor to lie at the Feet of Christ; this they looked
upon (with good Reason too) as the first Step to Preferment. If therefore you
would be acquainted with God, take heed of Pride.

Secondly, take heed of a worldly Mind. What Concord is there between Earth and
Heaven? what Agreement between God and the World? What Delight can his Holiness
take in him, who had rather be wallowing in the Mud, and treading of Clay, than
bathing himself in Divine Contemplation; that thinks it higher Preferment to
sit by his Bags of Gold, than to stand in the Presence of his God: a greater
Happiness to be rich, than to be Holy: that had much rather be in a Fair,
Market or Exchange, getting Money, than with his God, getting Pardon, Grace and
Heaven, How pregnant is the Scripture of Proofs for the evidencing of this
Truth? to name one or two of a hundred, Romans 8.7. To be carnally minded is
Enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
it be. What do you say to this Scripture? Those which walk with God, live in
the World, and yet they live above the World; they all look for a City that
has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. It was not for nothing that
the Apostle John lays so strict a Charge upon those which he wrote to, That
they should not love the World, nor the things of the World: for if any love
the World, the Love of the Father is not in them, 1 John 2.15. Whence is it
that so few great ones go to Heaven, and that it is next to impossible for such
to be saved? Is it not because they have chosen Mammon for their Friend, rather
than God? He has their Heart, their Love, their Time and Service, and they
have little to spare for God, and therefore God has but a little Happiness, a
little Heaven, a short Glory for them, they shall have but a little of his
sweet Company, little Acquaintance with him. Why does James speak so terribly
to the rich Men, and bid them go, and weep and howl? was it not because their
Riches were like to undo them? Did the wealthy Man in the Parable live ever the
longer for his Riches, or fare ever the better for his Greatness, when he came
into another World? there is no question but he might have more Flatterers;
there is no Doubt but he had more worldly Friends; but bring me a Man upon the
Earth, that lets his Heart without Control fly upon the World, cleaves to it,
and takes it to be his best Friend, that knows God, that is acquainted with his
Maker, that prizeth his Redeemer. It was a wise Man who said, That it is
absolutely impossible to mind Externals and Internals, this World and another,
with Earnestness, at the same time: but it was Wisdom it self who said, That no
Servant can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the
other, (...) else he will hold to the one, and despise the other; (...) cannot
serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 5.24.

3. Take heed of Hypocrisy. Who are the Persons that God does denounce his
dreadful Threatenings against? are they not such as honor him with their Lips,
when their Hearts are far from him? with what Abhorrency does he look upon
such, and all that they do? Isa. 1. They never bring their Heart to visit God
with, and therefore they have little Reason to expect that he should bring his
Dainties to entertain them with.

4. If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of being acquainted with
wicked Company. We read that many wicked Men have fared the better for the
Company of the godly; but we scarce ever heard that any godly Man ever fared
the better for being in the Company of the wicked, except they went on God's
Errand amongst them. This is clear in the Case of Lot, who first lost his
Goods, and was made a Captive by being in Sodom; and though they were restored
to him again for a while; (one would have thought that should have been a fair
Warning how he came again into such Company) yet because that would not do, a
while after you may read how dear Lot paid for dwelling in Sodom. Poor Man! he
lost all that he had, and was fain to fly away without either Flocks or Herds,
and little more than his Clothes on his Back; and that which was more sad, to
leave some of his own dear Relations behind him, roasting in those dismal
Flames. Whereas, had he never come to Sodom, or upon the Sight of their
Wickedness speedily left them, it had been much better with him in many
Respects. Jehosaphat fared never the better for joining in Affinity with his
wicked Neighbors, it had like to have cost him his Life. But were it only Loss
of Temporals that a Man hazarded by such Society, the Danger were not so
considerable, but the Peril is greater than so, for by it they make God stand
at a Distance; they must never look to have such Company and God's Company both
together; I mean, when they do unnecessarily or delightfully converse with
such. If therefore you intend to be acquainted with God, you must not have them
always in your Company whom he hates, and which hate him, and will labor all
they can to cool your Affections toward him. Wherefore, be ye not unequally
yoaked with Unbelievers: for what Fellowship has Unrighteousness with
Righteousness? and what Communion has Light with Darkness? and what Concord
has Christ with Belial? or what Part has he that believes with an Infidel?
and what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of
the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my People; wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.14. to the End. But I would
not here be mistaken, as if I would commend an ungodly proud* Separation from
all that are not just of our Mind; or as if a Man ought to have nothing at all
to do with wicked Men; no, no, every one ought to do what he can in his Place
for the good of Souls. O that Christians would thus converse more with their
poor, ignorant, carnal, Christless Neighbors! O that they would thus be more
acquainted with the Wicked, and then they should have never the less of God's
Company, but the more; but it is an unnecessary delightful associating of our
selves with them that I mean, especially such of them which will stifle every
spiritual Discourse, and divert you from any thing that tends to the promoting
of the Interest of Religion; and such as have frequently expressed their
Detestation of the way of Holiliness, and make but a Mock at your serious
Counsels, stop their Ears to wholesome Advice, or make some undecent Reflections
upon the strict Profession of Godliness; such as labor to make you believe
that all Religion, but that which will consist with their Wickedness, is but a
Fancy. As for such as those, abhor their Company, fly from them as those that
have the Plague, the Marks of Death are upon them, and you may write, Lord have
Mercy upon us upon their Doors, but go not in lest you be infected.

5. If you would be acquainted with God, take heed of Unbelief. Unbelief will
make your Soul depart from God, and God quite to depart from your Soul. This,
this is one of those dreadful and God-estranging Sins, which leads on whole
Legions against the Almighty. This is that bold daring Sin, which gives Truth
it self the Lie, and says, That the Word of God is false, his Promises airy,
his Threatenings but a Wind: But know this, O Sinner, such a Wind they be, that
will rise to a dreadful Storm, and turn your strong Confidences up by the
Roots, and blow them into Hell, if you make no more of them than you do.

6. If you would be acquainted with God, beware of Sensuality. To be sensual
and devilish are near akin. To be Lovers of Pleasures and Haters of God, are
usually Concomitants; in a world, to fare deliciously every Day, and to be
despised of God, are no strange things. But I wave the further Prosecution of
these things, because they are so largely and excellently handled already by so
many of our brave Worthies. See Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest, and R. A. his
Vindiciae Pietatis.

XII. DIRECTION.
If you would be acquainted with God, resolvedly and freely give up your self
to him, and enter into a most solemn Covenant with him. And here I shall make
bold with that Reverend Author which R. A. does mention in his Vindiciae
Pietatis, and present you again with that excellent Form with the Preparatories
to it, which I have lately met with in the forementioned Author. After your
most serious Addresses to God, and after a deliberate Consideration of the
Terms of this Covenant; and after a through search of your own Heart, whether
you either have already, or can now freely make such a Closure with God in
Christ, as you have been exhorted to: and when you have composed your Spirits
into the most serious Frame possible, suitable to a Transaction of so high a
Nature, lay hold upon the Covenant, and rely upon his Promise of giving Grace
and Strength, whereby you may be enabled to perform your Promise. Resolve in
the next Place to be faithful, having engaged your Hearts, and opened your
Mouths, and subscribed with your Hands to the Lord; resolve in his Strength
never to go back. And being thus prepared, and some convenient time being set
apart for the purpose, set upon the Work, and in the most solemn manner
possible, as if the Lord were visibly present before your Eyes; fall down on
your Knees, and spreading forth your Hands toward Heaven, open your Hearts to
the Lord in these or the like Words.

O most dreadful God; for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee to accept of
thy poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at thy Door; I have fallen from thee
by mine Iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell by my wicked Practice; but of thine infinite Grace thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will but turn to thee with all my Heart:
Therefore upon the Call of the Gospel I am now come in, and throwing down my
Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy. And because thou requirest, as the
Condition of my Peace with thee, that I should put away mine Idols, and be at
Defiance with all thine Enemies, which I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with
against thee; I do here from the Bottom of my Heart renounce them all, freely
covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known Sin, but
conscientiously to use all the Means that I know thou have prescribed for the
Death and utter Destruction of all my Corruptions; and whereas I have formerly
inordinately and idolatrously let out my Affections upon the World, I do here
resign my Heart to thee that made it; humbly protesting before thy glorious
Majesty, that it is the firm Resolution of my Heart, and that I do unfeignedly
desire Grace from thee, that when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice
this my Resolution, through thy Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me
in this World, rather than to turn from thee to the ways of Sin; and that I
will watch against all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or Adversity,
lest they should withdraw my Heart from thee; beseeching thee also to help me
against the Temptations of Satan, to whose Suggestions, I resolve, by thy
Grace, never to yield my self a Servant. And because mine own Righteousness is
but menstruous Rags, I renounce all Confidence therein, and acknowledge that I
am of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone Creature, without Righteousness or
Strength. And for as much as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most
graciously to me, wretched Sinner, to be again my God through Christ, if I
would accept of thee; I call Heaven and Earth to record this Day, that I do
here solemnly avouch thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible
Veneration, bowing the Neck of my Soul under the Feet of thy most Sacred
Majesty, I do here take thee the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for
my Portion, and chief Good, and do give up my self, Body and Soul, for thy
Servant; promising and vowing to serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all
the Days of my Life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Means of coming
unto thee, I do here upon the bended Knees of my Soul, accept of him as the
only new and living way, by which Sinners may have Access to thee; and do here
solemnly join my self in a Marriage-Covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor, and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked, a most loathsome polluted Wretch, a guilty
condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the Feet of the Servants of my
Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory; But since such is
thine unparalleled Love, I do here with all my Power accept thee for my Head
and Husband, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, for all Times and
Conditions, to love, and honor, and obey thee before all others, and this to
the Death. I embrace thee in all thy Offices, I renounce mine own Worthiness,
and do here avow thee to be the Lord my Righteousness; I renounce mine own
Wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only Guide; I renounce mine own Will,
and take thy Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
covenant with thee, to take my Lot as it falls with thee, and by thy Grace
assisting, to run all Hazards with thee, verily supposing, that neither Life
nor Death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy holy Law, as the Rule of my
Life, and the Way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom; I do here willingly
put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my Shoulders to thy Burden, and subscribing
to all thy Laws, as holy, just and good; I solemnly take them as the Rule of my
Words, Thoughts and Actions: promising, that though my Flesh contradict and
rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole Life according to thy
Direction, and will not allow my self in the Neglect of any thing that I know
to be my Duty.

Only because through the Frailty of my Flesh, I am subject to many Failings, I
am bold humbly to protest, that unallowed Miscarriages, contrary to the settled
Bent and Resolution of my Heart, shall not make void this Covenant, for so thou
have said.

Now Almighty God, Searcher of Hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this Day, without any known Guile or Reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any Flaw or Falsehood herein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now Glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this Day
forward, to look upon thee as my God and Father, That ever thou should find
out such a Way for the Recovery of undone Sinners. Glory be to thee, O God the
Son, who have loved me, and washed me from my Sins in thine own Blood, and art
now become my Savior and Redeemer. Glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who
by the Finger of thine Almighty Power have turned about my Heart from Sin to
God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou
art now become my Covenant-Friend, and I, through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-Servant. Amen. So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

The Conclusion.
AND now my Work is done, I must leave you; and whether I shall ever speak to
you, or see you, or write to you again while the World stands, I know not: My
Body is frail, and I am a poor dying Man, and before it be long, my Mouth will
be more stoped than it is, and yours too: And therefore it is high time for us
to look about us. As for my part, I have with all the Seriousness that I could
for my Soul spoke to you, about the great and weighty Affairs of your Souls and
Eternity. I again call Heaven and Earth to witness, that I have set Life and
Death before you; I have in the Name of my great Master been wooing of you to
accept of his Son for your Lord and Husband; himself for your God, Father and
Friend. I have told you what the Lord does require of them that would be in
Covenant with him. I have given you a rude Description of him whom I would have
you acquainted with. I have told you of some of the glorious Effects of
Acquaintance with God. I have told you of the Danger of being a Stranger to
God. I have told you how thankfully some have closed with these Offers, and how
well they like their Choice. I have further showed you what a peaceable State
you shall be in, immediately upon your Spiritual Alliance with this great and
noble Friend. I have told you also of some further Benefit and Good that will
come unto you upon your Acquaintance with God. I have given you to understand
how desirous the Lord is, notwithstanding all that is past, to forget and
forgive, and to receive you into Favor, if you will in good earnest return to
him with speed. I have again and again propounded this Match to you, and told
you as much as I could well do in so short a time, I have staid a great while
for an Answer. I have put the Business forward all that possibly I could;
because I see how foolishly and madly you make light of those advantageous
Offers, that are made to you, I have again and again pleaded with you, as if I
were ready to starve, and begging an Alms of you; nay, if it had been for my
very Life, I could not have spoke with more Earnestness. I have expostulated
the Case with you, and asked you several weighty Questions, and you have not,
you cannot answer any one of them, but you must condemn your self; and by your
own Confession, you have nothing in the World to say against the Excellency of
this Friend. And therefore you must either speedily come in, upon the
Invitation, and close with those gracious Overtures that are made to you, or
you must without any reason in the World (your self being Judge) cast your self
away. And in hopes that all that have heard me, will not be so mad as to make
light of these things, but be asking with some Seriousness, that great
Question? How shall I do to get acquainted with God, how shall I do to get a
Friend for my Soul? What shall I do to be saved? I have laid down some
Directions for those that are unfeignedly desirous to be reconciled to God, I
have told them that they must labor to be thoroughly acquainted with that
Strangeness, and Enmity that is in their Hearts against God; and of the
unspeakable Danger of their being Strangers to God. I have further directed
them that would be acquainted with God to labor to get humble Hearts. I have
advised that they visit him often, if they would be intimately acquainted with
him; and that not in a transitory way, but to make a solemn set Visit of it,
and to be sure that they do not forget to get Christ along with them. I
counseled them also to be much in those Places where he is wont to walk; and
to get intimately acquainted with some of them that know him very well, and
will do their best to get them to be acquainted with him. I have told you, that
if you would be acquainted with God, you must kindly entertain, and make much
of any Messengers that come from him to you; and if Men would make sure Work, I
desired them as they loved their Souls, that they would follow this great
Business with the greatest Earnestness and Seriousness in the World; and that,
what they do, they would do speedily. I informed you what Arguments the
Scripture puts into our Mouths, which we may urge at the Throne of Grace. I
entreated you for your Soul's sake to take heed of those things which kept God
and Man unacquainted; as namely, all Sin in general, but more particularly,
Pride, Worldly-mindedness, Hypocrisy, delight in wicked Company, Unbelief, and
Sensuality. Lastly, I direct all such as would be at Peace with God to give up
themselves to him resolvedly and freely, in a solemn Covenant.

And have I been beating the Air all this ^^^ile? What will you do after all
this? What ^^as^ become of all these Sermons? Dare any of you all still be
contented to be unacquainted with God? Can you be very well satisfied, after
you have heard of such a Friend, to be a Stranger to him? Can any of you look
upon your State as safe, while God is your Enemy? O how shall I leave you, with
Hearts full of Enmity against your Maker! Alas, alas, poor Hearts! You look
very merrily, as bad a Condition as you are in, but did you but know how near
you are to everlasting Burnings, I believe it would put a Damp upon your
Spirits, and spoil your Mirth. O how shall I leave that poor Sinner, that
stands as a Person altogether unconcerned! Whereas Death stands ready for his
Commission, to fetch him away before God; and where are you then? O where are
you then, if you come before God as a Stranger? O what shall I do for thee?
What shall I say to thee, to prevail with thee! O what Arguments will persuade
thee! O how shall we part! Brethren, my Heart's Desire is that you may all be
saved. O that you may all know in this your Day, the things of your Peace! O
that I could mingle all my Words with Tears! O pity, pity, for the Lord's sake,
pity your precious Souls! O come not here to ask Counsel of God, and then go
away, and take the Counsel of the Devil! And what will you yet make light of
all the Tenders of the Gospel? Is Peace, Pardon, Reconciliation, and
Acquaintance with God, still nothing with you? Will you for all this take up
with a lifeless Religion, and never mind a more spiritual intimate Converse
with God? As the Lord lives, thou speak that Word against the Life of thy
Soul. But if thou will go on, and despise God, who can help it? I have told
you, and told you again, what the End of these things will be. Well once more I
ask thee in the Name of God, will thou have God for thy Friend or no? That is,
will thou love him above all the World? Will thou accept him for thy Lord and
Husband? Will thou be ruled absolutely by him? Will thou lay down thy Weapons,
and turn on God's side, and fight under his Banner? Will thou have Holiness
here, and Happiness hereafter? One would think, this is a Question that one
need not be long a resolving. Come, come away, for the Lord's sake; for your
precious Soul's sake, as you would be owned at the Day of Judgment; as you
would rejoice when most of the World shall be filled with unspeakable Horror,
and Perplexity; as you would not hear that Heart-rending Word from the Mouth of
the Judge, Depart, I know you not, come away, I beseech you! Come away! O ye my
dear Friends, the Cloud hangs over the World, and e're long it will fall with a
Vengeance. O come out of Sodom, linger not for the Lord's sake, lest the Dint
of that Storm fall upon you. Fire! Fire! Fire! Awake! Awake! Awake! The Fire is
kindled. What meanest thou, O Sinner! If thou sleep a little longer in that
Bed of Security, thou art a dead Man, thou will be awakened with Horror, when
thou shall know thy Danger, but not know how to avoid it. And do you still
stay? Make have! O make have, your Glass is almost out, your time almost spent,
and Death is hastening apace upon you; I speak it again, make have, come away, I
cannot, I cannot hold my Peace. How can I endure to see the Ruin of thy Soul, and
say nothing! O follow those Directions which I have given thee out of the
Scripture! Seek the Lord while he may be found, and with all possible Speed,
Seriousness, and Gratitude, accept of his Kindness, while you may. Methinks
some of your Hearts seem to be affected; methinks your Countenances speak you
to have some Thoughts of returning; some of you look like Persons almost
resolved to set upon this great Work. O that it may not be almost, but
altogether! Speak in such Language as this to your own Souls. What meanest
thou, O my Soul, thus to stand disputing? Is this a time for thee to stand
still, as if thou had nothing to do? Hark, how the King of Glory calls! Hear
how his Messengers invite you! Consider how long they have stood waiting for
thee! And shall they go away without thee? O foolish Heart and unwise; will thou answer all these gracious Offers with a flat Denial? Or that which is
little better, will thou put off all God's Messengers with some sorry Excuses?
Awake, O my Soul, and look about thee! How can thou refuse when Mercy calls?
How can thou deny when Kindness it self asks, entreats, beseeches thee?
Awake for shame, up and put on thy wedding-Garments, O that this Mind might be
in you always! O that thou were up and ready! And then happy were the Day
wherein thou were born; then happy were the Day that ever you heard of a
Christ, of Acquaintance with God, and Reconciliation with your Maker. O then
how glorious should thou be for ever! I rejoice to see the Day of thy
Marriage a coming; when thy Lord and Husband shall bring thee home in the
greatest State, and in infinite Glory to his own House, where thou shall sit
like a Queen for ever and ever. Behold his Harbingers are coming! Behold how
many Messengers the Lord has sent to prepare his Way! Awake, O Zion, and put
on thy beautiful Garments! Rise up, O Royal Bride, and put on thy princely
Robes! Clothe thee with the Son, and put the Moon under thy Feet. Go out and
meet the King thy Husband. Behold, O Jacob, the Wagons of Joseph are coming!
Behold, O Daughter of Zion, the Chariots, the Chariots of thy King and Husband
are a coming! they are a coming! O why does not thy Heart leap within thee! O
why do not thy Spirits even faint for Gladness! Why do thou not say it is
enough, I will go out and meet my Lord before I die? When will the Sun be up!
When will the Day break! When, O when will the Shadows fly away! I will get me
up to the Mountains of Mirrhe, to the Hills of Frankincense. I am traveling
for Zion, my Face is toward Jerusalem; who will ascend the Holy Hill with me?
Who will bare me Company to my Husband's House? Let us go up to the Lord's
House; come away, the Sun is risen, the Shadows are flying away; thousands are
gone already. Let Barzillai and Chimham, old and young too, go along with the
King to Jerusalem. Come from the Highways and Hedges, come with your
wedding-Garments, come quickly and he will make you welcome. The King has sent
to invite us to a Feast, a Feast of fat things, of Wines on the Lees well
resined. Come, for the Table is spread, all things are ready, and his Servants
stay for us. And will God entertain such Creatures as we are! And will the Lord
open his Doors to such loathsome Beggars? Will the Father receive such
Prodigals! Return then unto thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord will deal
bountifully with thee. Who is that which I see coming in the Field? Who is this
that comes from the Wilderness? that comes to meet us? Hark! Methinks I hear
the Trumpet sounding: Hark! What Is the matter! How do the Mountains echo! How
does the Air ring again! What Noise is that which I hear! What glorious Train
is that which I see! Whence do they come, and whither do they go? It is my
Master's Son (dear Soul) thy Lord and Husband with his Royal Attendants. Behold
he comes! He comes apace! Leaping upon the Hills, skipping upon the Mountains.
He is coming! he is coming! he is even at the Door! E're long thou shall see
the Mountains covered with Chariots and Horses of Fire; the Earth will tremble
and shake; the Heavens and the Earth will be all on a flaming Fire; the King of
Glory will come, riding upon the Wings of the Wind, accompanied with Millions
of his Saints and Angels: He is coming, he is at the Door. Go vail thy Face;
alight and meet thy Husband. He will bring thee into his Father's Palace, and
thou shall be his Wife, and he will love thee for ever: and thou shall remember
thy Widowhood no more. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Eben Tracy, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
THE Works of William Smith, A.M. in three Parts. I. The History of the Life,
Death and Resurrection and Ascension of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; with the Lives and Deaths of the Holy Evangelists and Apostles. II. The
Lives, Acts, and Martyrdoms of those Blessed Christians, who were contemporary
with, or immediately succeeded the Apostles: As also, the most eminent Fathers
of the Primitive Church, who professed and suffered for the Christian Faith.
III. Pious Breathings: Or, The Souls Ascent to the Throne of Grace; containing
Forms of Devotion, both upon ordinary and extraordinary Occasions. With a
rational Account of all the Feasts and Fasts observed by the Church of England.
Adorned with forty curious Cuts,

The mute Christian under the smarting Rod; with sovereign Antidotes against
the most miserable Exigents: or, A Christian with an Olive-leaf in his Mouth,
when he is under the greatest Afflictions, the sharpest and sorest Trials and
Troubles, the saddest and darkest Providence and Changes; with Answers to
diverse Questions and Objections that are of greatest Importance; all tending to
win and work Souls to be still, quiet, calm and silent, under all Changes that
have, or may pass upon them in this World, etc. The Tenth Edition, corrected.
By Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Word at St. Margaret's New Fish-street,
London.

The Spiritual Pilgrim: Or, the Christian's Journey to New Jerusalem. In three
Parts. The first showing his Journey and Adventures in his Way from the City of
Sin to the Town of Morality. The second giving an Account of his Journey from
the Town of Morality to the City of Repentance. The Third treating of his
Journey and Adventures in his Way, into which he came at the City of
Repentance, till his safe Arrival at New Jerusalem. The whole being a lively
Prospect of the several Passages of a Christian's Life, from his first
Conviction to his through Conversion, and thenceforth till his Death and happy
Reception into Heaven. By Henry Wilson.

Several Practical Discourses concerning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.
By J. Mauditt, V.D.M.

The Present State of Great Britain, under the auspicious Government of her
most Sacred Majesty Queen Anne. Containing, I. A general Description of
England, Scotland, and Wales, through their several Cities, Counties,
Districts, Principalities, etc. II. Of the present Geniu, Language, Trade,
Laws, and Religion of the Britains, III. Of the several Ranks and Orders of
Men; the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty. With a particular Account of
Precedence, from the first Peer to the meanest Peasant. Taken from the
Authorities of the best Lawyers, both Common and Civil, as well as Antiquaries,
Heralds, etc. such as Cambden, Seldom, Segar, Fern, and many others. IV. Of
the present Monarchy of Great Britain, its Greatness and Power; the Sovereign's
Prerogative, Dignity, Title and Arms; Her Court, Forces, and Revenues of the
present Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal, and the Succession to the
Crown, as settled by Act of Parliament. V. Of the High Court of Parliament,
Privy Council, and all Courts of judicature. With the newest and most perfect
List of Her Majesty's Officers in Church and State, and of the present
Parliament and Convocation of Great Britain.

The Marrow of the Mathematics made plain and easy to the Understanding of
any ordinary Capacity; containing the Doctrines of Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astio^^my, Gauging, the Use of the Sector, Surveying, Dialling, and the Art of
Navigation, etc. illustrated with several Cuts for the better Explanation of
the whole Matter. After a new, compendious, easy Method, by W. Pichering,
Merchant-Adventurer. To which is added, Measuring Surfaces and Solids, such as
Plank, Timber, Stone, etc. Joiners, Carpenters, Bricklayers, Glasiers,
Painters, and Paviours Work: Each Proposition being wrought Vulgarly,
Decimally, Practically, and Instrumentally, with a small Tract of Gauging Wine,
Ale, or Malt, without Inches, or Division, by which any one may gauge ten
Backs, or Floors of Malt, in the same Time another shall gauge one, by the Way
now used: Altogether new, and submitted to the Censure of the Honorable
Commissioners of Excise. By J. L. P.M.


