AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES OF THE Frequent Executions at TYBURN, etc.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE CAUSES OF THE FREQUENT EXECUTIONS AT TYBURN: AND A
PROPOSAL for some REGULATIONS concerning FELONS in PRISON, and the good Effects
to be Expected from them.

To which is Added, A Discourse on TRANSPORTATION, and a Method to render that
Punishment more Effectual.

By B. MANDEVILLE, M. D.

Oderunt peccare Mali formidine Poenae.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by J. Roberts in Warwick Lane.

MDCCXXV.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of this small Treatise, is to lessen if not prevent the common
Practice of Thieving, and save many Lives of the loose and indigent Vulgar, of
which now such great Numbers are yearly lavished away for Trifles. In order to
this, I have endeavored to set in a true Light the destructive Consequences of
Theftbote, and the Damage the Public sustains from the Trade that is drove by
Thiefcatchers, and the various ways now in vogue of compounding Felonies, by
which the Safety as well as Maintenance of Thieves and Pilferers are
industriously taken care of, and the Laws that enforce Prosecution altogether
eluded.

To the same Purpose I have pointed at the Licentiousness and other Disorders
of Newgate, arising from the wrong Method we have of treating common Felons in
Prison. I have described the Transactions of Execution Day, with the Procession
to Tyburn, and demonstrated what small Advantage they are of, as well to the
condemned themselves, whose grand Affair it is to prepare themselves for
another World, as to their Companions who should be deterred, or the rest of
the Spectators, who should be struck with the Awfulness of the Solemnity. I
have likewise searched into the Origin of Courage, and the wrong Judgments that
are differently passed on the dying Behavior of Malefactors, showed the ill
Consequences as well as Absurdity of our mistaking Drunkenness for Intrepidity,
and a senseless Deportment for Undauntedness; and touched on the several
Neglects and Mismanagements that are accessory, and one way or other contribute
to the Increase and Support of Felons, and consequently, the Frequency of
Executions. Afterward I have in a Chapter by it self offered some Proposals
for a better Usage, and more proper Treatment of common Felons in Confinement,
and made a Pathetical Representation of the good Effects we might probably
expect from such wholesome Regulations. To these I have added a Discourse on
Transportation, and a Method of rendering that Punishment not only more
effectual on the Criminals, but likewise advantageous to the Public in the
most extraordinary manner.

I am not so vain as to place any Merit in the Performance, or promise my self
the Applause of many: on the contrary, I expect to be censured, and perhaps
deservedly, for the uncouth Decorations I have intermixed with my Subject. Men
of Taste and Politeness will think themselves very little obliged to me for
entertaining them with the meanest and most abject part of low Life, for almost
a whole Chapter together; and tell me that the Inside of Newgate, either on an
Execution Day, or any other, is not a Scene they ought to be troubled with; and
that the Exactness of a Picture among the Judicious is of little Worth where
the noble manner is wanting. To this I could answer that, if I have trespassed
against the Laws either of Elegance or Formality, I was forced to it by what is
superior to all Laws, Necessity. When a Man is to inspire his Readers with an
Aversion to what they are unacquainted with, he can never compass his End
without furnishing them first with a general Idea of the Thing against which he
would raise their Indignation: I could add that, when a Piece is lively and
tolerably finished, the good-natured Critic will pardon the Meaness of the
Design, for the sake of the Coloring and the Application of the Master. But if
neither of these Excuses are thought sufficient, I must plead guilty, and
confess that the Pleasure there is in imitating Nature in what Shape soever is
so bewitching, that it overrules the Dictates of Art, and often forces us to
offend against our own Judgment.

As there are in this City not a few Men of Business and good Understanding,
whose Leisure allows them not to read much beyond the Public News, and most of
them are concerned in the Contents of this Pamphlet, I caused the several
Chapters of it to be Printed in as many Papers of the British Journal;
imagining that its having been dispersed, and, as it were, advertised in that
manner, could give no Offense to the more Curious, who would choose to have it
entire by it self, and per use it in a Character less troublesome to the Eyes.

In the first Chapter I should have taken notice of a Clause in an Act of
Parliament that was made in the Fourth Year of His present Majesty, and is
called, An Act for the further Preventing Robbery, Burglary, and other
Felcnies, etc. The candid Reader I hope will pardon the Neglect, occasioned by
the small Acquaintance I have with the Law, and give me leave in this Place to
repair that Omission. The Words are these.

And whereas there are several Persons who have secret Acquaintance with
Felons, and who make it their Business to help Persons to their stolen Goods,
and by that Means gain Money from them, which is divided between them and the
Felons, whereby they greatly encourage such Offenders: Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That whenever any Person takes Money or Reward, directly
or indirectly, under Pretense, or upon account of helping any Person or Persons
to any stolen Goods or Chattels, every such Person so taking Money or (...) as
aforesaid (unless such Person (...), or cause to be apprehended (...) who stole
the same, and cause (...) to be brought to his Trial for the (...) give
Evidence against him) shall be guilty of Felony, and suffer the Pains and
Penalties of Felony, according to the Felony committed in stealing such Goods,
and in such and the same manner, as if such Offender had himself stole such
Goods and Chattels, in the manner and with such Circumstances as the same were
stolen.

Since the Printing of these Chapters, in the Paper aforesaid, I have likewise
been informed; that, as receiving Money for assisting others in the Recovery of
their stolen Goods, is by this Act made Felony; so by the known Rules of Law,
whoever is aiding and assisting thereto is of Course guilty as an Accessory,
and to incurr the same Punishment as the Principal: and it cannot be doubted;
but that he, who pays Money on such an Occasion, is accessory to the Receiving
of it: which well deserves the Reflection of those who make no Scruple of
redeeming the Goods that had been stolen from them; as likewise does another
Thing, which is, that if he who takes Money for stolen Goods is a principal
Felon, and that he who pays it is a Felon, as being accessory, then he who by
public Advertisements with Promises of Secrecy, and that no Questions shall be
asked, invites others to commit Felony, is guilty of a great Misdemeanour, though
it produce no Effect; but, if it do, the Person publishing such Advertisement
will be an Accessory likewise.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF THEFTBOTE; or, the Crime of Compounding of Felony. Page 1 CHAP.
II. Of the ill Consequences of THEFTBOTE, and the Licentiousness of Felons in
Newgate. 9 CHAP. III. Of Execution Day, the Journey to Tyburn, and a Word in
behalf of Anatomical Dissections. 18 CHAP. IV. Of the wrong Judgments that are
passed on the dying Behavior of Malefactors. 28 CHAP. V. Of Regulations
concerning FELONS in Prison, and the good Effects to be expected from them. p.
37 CHAP. VI. Of TRANSPORTATION: And a Method to render that Punishment more
effectual. 46


CHAP. I. Of THEFTBOTE; or, the Crime of Compounding of Felony.
THE Multitude of unhappy Wretches, that every Year are put to Death for
Trifles in our great Metropolis, has long been afflicting to Men of Pity and
Humanity; and continues to give great Uneasiness to every Person, who has a
Value for his Kind. Many good Projects have been thought of to cure this Evil,
by sapping the Foundation of it: A Society has been set up to reform our
Manners; and neither Workhouses, nor Discipline on small Crimes, have been
wanting: An Act has been made against profane Cursing and Swearing; and many
Charity Schools have been erected. But the Event has not answered hitherto the
good Design of those Endeavors. This City abounds as much with loose, lazy,
and dishonest Poor; there is as much Mischief done by ordinary Felons; and
Executions for Theft and Burglary are as frequent, at least, as ever: Nay, it
is believed, that London is more pestered with low Villainy than any other Place
whatever, the Proportion of Bigness between them not left unconsider'd. As
there is no Effect without a Cause, so something must be the Reason of this
Calamity. I have long and carefully examined into this Matter, and am forced to
ascribe the Mischief complained of to two palpable Evils, distinct from those
we have in common with other large overgrown Cities. One regards Prosecutions;
the other the Treatment that is given to Malefactors after they are taken. I
shall begin with the first: I mean the Neglect of them, occasioned by our
shameful Negotiations with Thieves, or their Agents, for the Recovery of stolen
Goods, by which, in Reality, we become Aiders and Abetters to them.

The Law of England is so tender of Men's Lives, that whoever justly prosecutes,
and convicts a Person of a Capital Crime, has nothing to answer for to his
Conscience, but, on the contrary, has done a Service to his Country, without
Offense to God, or the least Breach of Charity to his Neighbor. But as every
Body has not Strength of Mind and Resolution enough to perform Duties that are
repugnant to his Nature, so, making Allowances for Human Frailties, I could
excuse the Backwardness of a meek homebred Person, who should complain, That
to appear in open Court, and speak before a Judge, are terrible Things to him.
But I think it unpardonable, that a Man should knowingly act against the Law,
and by so doing powerfully contribute to the Increase, as well as Safety and
Maintenance, of Pilferers and Robbers, from no other Principle, than a criminal
Selfishness, accompanied with an utter Disregard to the Public: Yet nothing is
more common among us. This was wrote some Months before Jonathan Wild was
apprehended.
As soon as any Thing is missing, suspected to be stolen, the first Course we
steer is directly to the Office of Mr. Jonathan Wild. If what we want is a
Trinket, either enameled, or otherwise curiously wrought; if there is Painting
about it; if it be a particular Ring, the Gift of a Friend; or any Thing which
we esteem above the real Value, and offer more for it than Mr. Thief can make
of it, we are looked upon as good Chaps, and welcome to redeem it. But if it be
plain Gold or Silver, we shall hardly see it again, unless we pay the Worth of
it. Some Years ago, it is true, a Man might, for half a Piece, have fetched
back a Snuff Box that weighed twenty or thirty Shillings: But this was in the
Infancy of the Establishment. Now they are grown wiser, and calculate exactly
what such a Thing will melt down for: To offer less is thought unreasonable;
and unless Mr. Thief-catcher stands your Friend indeed, if you have it, you
will seldom save any Thing but the Fashion. If in this Place you can hear no
Tidings of your Goods, it is counted a Sign, that they are in the Hands of
irregular Practitioners, that steal without Permission of the Board. In this
Case we immediately put in an Advertisement in some News-Paper or other, with a
Promise, that such a Reward will be given, and no Questions asked. I own, that
in the Printing of these short Epistles there is no manner of Harm, if we
abstract the Act itself from the Concern the Public has in it. The Tenor of
them is rather benevolent than injurious: And a Panegyrist on the present Times
might justly say of them, That in no Performances the true Spirit of
Christianity was so conspicuous as in these: That they were not only free from
Calumny and ill Language, but likewise so void of Reproach, that speaking to a
Thief, we never called him so in those charitable Addresses: That in them the
very Catalogues of Injuries received, were penned with as little Heat, or
Resentment, as ever Tradesman showed in a Bill of Parcels directed to his best
Customer: That here we are so far from hating our Enemy, that we proffer him a
Recompense for his Trouble, if he will condescend to let us have our own again;
and leaving all Revenge to God, to show that we are willing to forgive and
forget, we consult, in the most effectual Manner, the Safety of a Person that
deserves Hanging for the Wrong he has done us. Yet, notwithstanding the kind
Constructions that may be put on these Civil Offers, they all tend to the
Compounding of Felony, and are the Occasion of a double Mischief: They invite
the Indigent and Lazy to pick Pockets, and render the Negligent more careless
than probably they would be, was this Practice abolished. A Pocketbook, or
Memorandum, may be stole from a Man that is of vast Concern to him, and yet of
no Use but to the Owner: If this be taken by a regular Thief, a listed
Pilferer, it is easily recovered for a small Reward. I don't suppose any one so
silly, that therefore he would go to Places, and into Companies, on Purpose to
have his Pocket picked; but I cannot help thinking, that if those Things were
never to be heard of again, and the Loss irretrievable, many young Rakes, and
other loose Reprobates, would be under greater Apprehensions, and more upon
their Guard, at least when they had such a Charge about them, than the
Generality of them now are. And again, if nothing could be made of Letters,
Papers, and Things of that Nature, such as have no known Worth, and are not
readily turned into Money, the numbers of Whores and Rogues, young and old,
that are employed in the Diving Trade, would decrease considerably; many of
them, from a Principle of Prudence, refusing to meddle with any Thing else. For
as on most of the Things now spoke of, no real Value can be set, the Punishment
would be inconsiderable, if any, should the Things be found upon them, or
themselves be taken in the Fact. Most Men will agree to all this, whilst
unconcerned; but when private Interest is touched, it soon stifles these
Considerations. I should be a Fool, says one, when a Thing of Value is stolen
from me, not to get it back, if I can, for a Trifle. If I lose a Sword, or a
Watch, I must have another; and to save the Fashion in these Things is
considerable: It is better to lose the Half than the Whole. I have nothing to
do with the Thief, says another, if I have my own again, it is all I want: What
Good would it do to me to have a poor Fellow hanged? A Third, more
compassionate, will tell us, that if he knew the Thief, he would not meddle
with him; and that he would lose ten times the Value of what has been taken
from him, rather than be the Occasion of a Man's Death. To these I reply, that
the Legislators seem to have known how the Generality of Men would argue, and
what Excuses they would make; they had an Eye on the Frailty of our Nature;
considered, that all Prosecutions are troublesome, and often very expensive;
that most Men preferred their own Interest, their Ease and Pleasure, to any
Regard of the Public; and therefore they provided against our Passions with so
much Severity. Compounding of Felony is not prohibited under a small Penalty,
or attoned for by a little Fine; it is next to Felony; and the most creditable
Citizen, that is convicted of it, ceases to be an honest Man.

The Offense in our Law is called THEFTBOTE; of which my Lord Chief Justice
Coke says, That it is an Offense beyond Misprision of Felony; for that is only
a bare Concealment of his bare Knowledge: But that it is THEFTBOTE when the
Owner not only knows of the Felony, but takes of the Thief his Goods again, or
Amends for the same to favor or maintain him, that is, not to prosecute him,
to the Intent he may escape. The Punishment of THEFTBOTE is Ransom and
Imprisonment. THEFTBOTE (as described by Act of Parliament) est emenda furti
capta absque consideratione curiae domini regis. Sir Matthew Hale, in his Pleas
of the Crown, says, That THEFTBOTE is more than a bare Misprision of Felony,
and is, where the Owner does not only know the Felony, but takes his Goods
again, or other Amends, not to prosecute.

This Rigor of the Legislature is a full Demonstration, that they thought it a
Crime of the most pernicious Consequence to the Society; yet it is become
familiar to us; and our Remissness in several Matters, relating to Felons, is
not to be paralleled in any other civilized Nation. That Rogues should be
industriously dispersed throughout the City and Suburbs; that different Hours
and Stations should be observed among them, and regular Books kept of stolen
Goods; that the Superintendent in this hopeful Economy should almost every
Sessions, for a Reward, betray, prosecute, and hang one or more of this his
Acquaintance, and at the same Time keep on his Correspondence amongst the
Survivors, whom, one after another, he sends all to their Triangular Home; that
Magistrates should not only know and see this, but likewise continue to make
use of such a Person for an Evidence, and in a manner own that they are
beholden to him in the Administration of Justice; That, I say, all these Things
should be Facts, is something very extraordinary, in the Principal City, and
the Home Management of a Kingdom, so formidable abroad, and of such Moment in
the Balance of Europe, as that of Great Britain.

The Mischief that one Man can do as a Thief, is a very Trifle to what he may
be the Occasion of, as an Agent or Concealer of Felons. The longer this
Practice continues, the more the Number of Rogues must hourly increase; and
therefore it is high Time that regular Book-keeping of stolen Goods should
cease, and that all Gangs and Knots of Thieves should be broke and destroyed as
much as is possible, at least, none of them suffered to form themselves into
Societies that are under Discipline, and act by Order of a Superior. It is
highly criminal in any Man, for Lucre, to connive at a Piece of Felony which he
could have hindered: But a professed Thief-Catcher, above all, ought to be
severely punished, if it can be proved that he has suffered a known Rogue to go
on in his Villainy, though but one Day, after it was in his Power to apprehend and
convict him, more especially if it appears that he was a Sharer in the Profit.

CHAP. II. Of the ill Consequences of THEFTBOTE, and the Licentiousness of
Felons in Newgate.
OFTEN, when I have spoke against Theftbote, after the same manner as now I
have been writing, I have heard Men of Worth and good Sense come into my
Sentiments, who yet, after all, would tell me, That if I had lost any Thing
myself, they believed that I would be glad to have it again with as little Cost
and Trouble as I could. This I never denied, and am still willing to own. We
are all partial and unfit Judges in our own Cause; but the most that can be
made of this, is, That in that Case neither I nor any Body else, that has had
any Thing stolen from him, ought to be consulted about the Matter: We are ill
qualified, and therefore incapable of determining any Thing rightly concerning
it. I have another Reason why this ought to be referred rather to those who
never lost any Thing by Thieves and Pilferers, than others who have been
Sufferers that Way: Rogues, it ^s true, have a thousand Stratagems, and a (...)
may be very careful, and yet have his Pocket picked, if ever he appears in the
Street, or a Crowd: Yet, if we divide Mankind into two Classes, that the one
will be more exempt from those Misfortunes than the other, is undeniable. A
Man, who is always upon his Guard in the Streets, and suspects all Crowds; that
is temperate in his Liquor; avoids, as much as is possible, unseasonable Hours;
never gives Ear to Night-walkers; a Man that abroad is always watchful over
himself, and every Thing about him, and at home takes Care of his Doors and
Bolts, his Shutters, Locks, and Bars; such a one, I say, is in less Danger than
others, who are unthinking, and never mind what Companies they thrust
themselves into; or such as will be drunk, go home late in the dark unattended,
and scruple not to talk and converse with lewd Women, as they meet them; or
that are careless of themselves as well as of the securing and fastening of
their Houses. It is evident then which Class would yield the most proper
Judges; whom if it was left to, I don't question but the sober, careful, and
wiser Part of the Nation would agree, that the Practice in vogue, and Method
made use of to recover stolen Goods, even though there was no express Law against
it, is, on many Accounts, mischievous to the Public, and visibly destructive
to the Interest of honest Property, and our Security in the Enjoyment of it.

There is no greater Encouragement for Men to follow any Labor or Handicraft,
than that they are paid as soon as they have done their Work, without any
further Trouble. It is from such a Consideration as this, that to increase the
public Security, the Law not only punishes Stealing, but likewise makes it
Felony, knowingly to buy stolen Goods; and moreover perpetuates honest
Property, and renders the Right of it inalienable from the injured Owner, who
seizes his Goods in what Hands soever he finds them. These two additional
Precautions are of admirable Use in hampering common Villains, and
strengthening the Law against Theft. From the first, a Rogue, after he has made
himself liable to be hanged, may be still disappointed, and miss his chief Aim;
for as Money is what he wants, if no Body will purchase what he offers, he is
never the nearer. The Second makes that he is never safe, though he is rid of the
Goods, and the Money in his Pocket; for though they are gone through half a Dozen
Hands, as soon as the Right Owner lays Claim to the Things stole, every one is
obliged to discover where he had them; and by this Means it is seldom difficult
to find out the Thief, or the Receiver of stolen Goods. To leap these two
Barriers, and free himself at once of the Trouble there is in finding a safe
Purchaser, and all Apprehensions of future Danger, a Rogue could not with or
imagine any Thing more effectual than that he might lodge what he has stole in
the Hands of the Owner himself, and so receive a Reward for his Pains, and, at
the same Time, a Pardon for his Crime, of him, whose Prosecution was the only
Thing he had to fear. It is evident then, that the friendly Commerce, and
amicable Negotiations, now in vogue, between Thieves and those that are robbed
by them, are the greatest Encouragement of low Villainy that can be invented,
and as sure a Way to keep up the Breed of Rogues, and promote the Interest of
them, as either our Fishery or the Coal Trade are constant Nurseries for
Sailors.

I am not ignorant, that in the present Conjuncture, as Cases might be stated,
it would be very harsh, and seem to be the Height of Injustice, if we should
hinder People from redeeming stolen Goods on all Emergencies whatever. A Man
may be vigilant and careful, and his Servants the same, and yet, their Eyes
being one Moment turned from the Counter, a Shop-Book may be snatched, and
carried off, perhaps, a Month before Christmas. This may put a Tradesman of
good Business in great Distress: Must he lose it? I say, Yes, if the Public is
to be preferred to a private Interest. In the mean time, I know very well what
every Body would do in that Case: But that the Whole suffers by the Redemption,
I prove thus: Let us say, that this Year twelve Shop-Books are stole, that are
all recovered for two or three Guineas apiece got for them, and no Body
punished. You may expect that next Year you will have forty or fifty stole, and
in a few Years nothing will be more common. And again, let us suppose that last
Year an hundred Shop-Books were stole; but, by virtue of some effectual Law for
that Purpose, not one redeemed. The Consequence, in all Probability, would be,
that the next Year you would hardly have ten Shop-Books stole; and if, through
the strict Observance of the Law, none of them likewise should be redeemed, you
would hear no more of that Practice.

Besides, when a Man steals what is of no Value but to me, and can have no
other View than that I should redeem it, and be his Play Master myself, the
Felony becomes, in a manner, a compound Action, in which, as soon as I comply,
I join with the Thief: And if we consider that the changing of Property from
one Man to another, is seldom of any Consequence to the Public, and that all
the Mischief that can befall it from Theft, that is, the Loss of Goods that Way
sustained by private Persons, consists in this, That those who committed it,
gain their Point, and come off with Impunity, let who will be the Thief, or the
Receiver; if, I say, we consider these two Things, it will appear, that in the
Case I have mentioned, myself, who for my own Ends assisted the Thief with
Money, and secured him from Prosecution, had the greatest Share in the
Transaction, and consequently was, of the two, the most injurious to the civil
Society. Without me the Rogue would not only have been disappointed, but
likewise, whilst he continued in Possession of the Thing stole, remained in the
perpetual Dread of being prosecuted for what he never had any Benefit from; and
it is not probable that a Man who had been twice so served, would ever make
such another Attempt.

These Things well deserve the Consideration of wise Men, and I desire the
compassionate Part of Mankind to reflect on what daily Experience teaches us of
common Felons, and they will easily find out, that unseasonable Pity may prove
the greatest Cruelty. The oftener a young Rogue steals with Impunity, the sooner
he will be a thorough-paced Villain, that will venture on more hazardous
Undertakings; and the more numerous the Examples of such are, the more loose
People will enter into the Fraternity, of which, whether it be great or small,
very few ever arrive to a middle Age. Some are cunning enough never to be taken
in a Fact; but no Subtlety can save them from the Impeachment of others. A
licensed Practitioner may be skreen'd and protected some Years, if he sticks to
Discipline, and pays the greatest Part of his Earnings for his Security; but if
he rides resty, and squabbles about the Contribution required of him, he is in
a dangerous Way. It is possible that a dextrous Youth may be esteemed, and be a
Favorite to the Superintendent a great while; but when he grows very
notorious, he is hunted like a Deer, and the Premium on his Head betrays him.
He may baffle his Prosecutor, find a Flaw in an Indictment, elude the Force of
an Evidence, come off once or twice, be reprieved, break Goal, or be pardoned,
the Gallows will be his Portion at last. The Wretch that is trained up to
stealing, is the Property of the Hangman: He can never entirely leave off his
Trade: Many, after Transportation, have, with great Hazard of their Lives,
found the Way back again to Newgate. A Thief bred must be hanged if he lives.

From all which appears, what I undertook to prove, That Remissness as to
Prosecutions, occasioned by the barefaced Compositions of Felony, is one of
the grand Causes of that lamentable Complaint, the Frequency of Executions; and
should we compare the Droves that are carried to Tyburn for Slaughter, with
those others that are sent to Smithfield for the same Purpose, we would find
the modern Thief-Catcher subservient to the Executioner in the same Manner, as
the wealthy Grazier is to the needy Butcher; and thatofthe Cattle in either
Sense, few are killed by the one that were never cherished by the other.

I am now come to the second Cause, which is the Treatment Felons receive after
they are taken, both in Newgate and their Journey from thence to the Gallows:
First, It is wrong to suffer such Numbers of them to be and converse together;
for nothing but the utmost Corruption can be expected from a Company of forty
or fifty People in a Prison, who, every one of them, singly considered, were
all the worst of Thousands before they met. Secondly, It is an Encouragement to
Vice, that the most dissolute of both Sexes, and generally young People too,
should live promiscuously in the same Place, and have Access to one another.
For the rest, the Licentiousness of the Place is abominable, and there are no
low Jests so filthy, no Maxims so destructive to good Manners, or Expressions
so vile and profane, but what are uttered there with Applause, and repeated
with Impunity. They eat and drink what they can purchase, every Body has
Admittance to them, and they are debarred from nothing but going out. Their
most serious Hours they spend in mock Trials, and instructing one another in
cross Questions, to confound Witnesses; and all the Stratagems and Evasions
that can be of Service, to elude the Charge that shall be made against them; or
else in reading Lectures on some Branch or other of their Profession, the
various Arts and Methods of Stealing, or the Glory, as well as Usefulness of
invincible Impudence on all offensive and defensive Emergencies. As villainous
Pawn-brokers, and all Receivers of stolen Goods, have good Reasons to be
liberal to those they have dealt with, when in this Distress, so no Felons are
here in Want, and reduced to the Allowance of the Prison, but Novices and silly
Creatures, that have the least deserved to be punished; whereas the Veteran
Rogues, and such as have been great Traders, are well provided for. This keeps
them up in Debauchery; and many, after Condemnation, persist in their riotous
Courses, and pampering their Bodies, whilst the Care that is taken of their
Souls is very mean. For such is the Noise and Confusion all around them, that
even the best disposed have not sufficient Opportunities to prepare themselves
for another World; and the Helps they receive in Spirituals are, all Things
considered, no better than the Accounts we have of them after every Session.

CHAP. III. Of Execution Day, the Journey to Tyburn, and a Word in behalf of
Anatomical Dissections.
WHEN the Day of Execution is come, among extraordinary Sinners, and Persons
condemned for their Crimes, who have but that Morning to live, one would expect
a deep Sense of Sorrow, with all the Signs of a thorough Contrition, and the
utmost Concern; that either Silence, or a sober Sadness, should prevail; and
that all, who had any Business there, should be grave and serious, and behave
themselves, at least, with common Decency, and a Deportment suitable to the
Occasion. But the very Reverse is true. The horrid Aspects of Turnkeys and
Gaolers, in Discontent and Hurry; the sharp and dreadful Looks of Rogues, that
beg in Irons, but would rob you with greater Satisfaction, if they could; the
Bellowings of half a dozen Names at a time, that are perpetually made in the
Enquiries after one another; the Variety of strong Voices, that are heard, of
howling in one Place, scolding and quarrelling in another, and loud Laughter in
a third; the substantial Breakfasts that are made in the midst of all this; the
Seas of Beer that are swill'd; the never-ceasing Outcries for more; and the
bawling Answers of the Tapsters as continual; the Quantity and Varieties of
more entoxicating Liquors, that are swallowed in every Part of Newgate; the
Impudence, and unseasonable Jests of those, who administer them; their black
Hands, and Nastiness all over; all these, joined together, are astonishing and
terrible, without mentioning the Oaths and Imprecations, that from every Corner
are echoed about, for Trifles; or the little, light, and general Squallor of
the Gaol itself, accompanied with the melancholy Noise of Fetters, differently
sounding, according to their Weight: But what is most shocking to a thinking
Man, is, the Behavior of the Condemned, whom (for the greatest Part) you will
find, either drinking madly, or uttering the vilest Ribaldry, and jeering
others, that are less impenitent; whilst the Ordinary bustles among them, and,
shifting from one to another, distributes Scraps of good Counsel to unattentive
Hearers; and near him, the Hangman, impatient to be gone, swears at their
Delays; and, as fast as he can, does his Part, in preparing them for their
Journey.

At last, out they set; and with them a Torrent of Mob bursts thorough the
Gate. Amongst the lower Rank, and working People, the idlest, and such as are
most fond of making Holidays, with Prentices and Journeymen to the meanest
Trades, are the most honorable Part of these floating Multitudes. All the rest
are worse. The Days being known beforehand, they are a Summons to all Thieves
and Pickpockets, of both Sexes, to meet. Great Mobs are a Safeguard to one
another, which makes these Days Jubilees, on which old Offenders, and all who
dare not show their Heads on any other, venture out of their Holes; and they
resemble Free Marts, where there is an Amnesty for all Outlaws. All the Way,
from Newgate to Tyburn, is one continued Fair, for Whores and Rogues of the
meaner Sort. Here the most abandoned Rakehells may light on Women as shameless:
Here Trollops, all in Rags, may pick up Sweethearts of the same Politeness: And
there are none so lewd, so vile, or so indigent, of either Sex, but at the Time
and Place aforesaid, they may find a Paramour. Where the Crowd is the least,
which, among the Itinerants, is no where very thin, the Mob is the rudest; and
here, jostling one another, and kicking Dirt about, are the most innocent
Pastimes. Now you see a Man, without Provocation, push his Companion in the
Kennel; and two Minutes after, the Sufferer trip up the other's Heels, and the
first Aggressor lies rolling in the more solid Mire: And he is the prettiest
Fellow among them, who is the least shocked at Nastiness, and the most
boisterous in his Sports. No modern Rabble can long subsist without their
darling Cordial, the grand Preservative of Sloth, Jeneva, that infallible
Antidote against Care and frugal Reflection; which, being repeated removes all
Pain of sober Thought, and in a little Time cures the tormenting Sense of the
most pressing Necessities. The Traders, who vent it among the Mob on these
Occasions, are commonly the worst of both Sexes, but most of them
weather-beaten Fellows, that have misspent their Youth. Here stands an old
Sloven, in a Wig actually putrified, squeezed up in a Corner, and recommends a
Dram of it to the Goers-by: There another in Rags, with several Bottles in a
Basket, stirs about with it, where the Throng is the thinnest, and tears his
Throat with crying his Commodity; and further off, you may see the Head of a
third, who has ventured in the Middle of the Current, and minds his Business,
as he is fluctuating in the irregular Stream: Whilst higher up, an old decrepit
Woman sits dreaming with it on a Bulk; and over against her, in a Soldier's
Coat, her termagant Daughter sells the Sots-Comfort with great Dispatch. The
intelligible Sounds, that are heard among them, are Oaths and vile Expressions,
with Wishes of Damnation at every other Word, pronounced promiscuously against
themselves, or those they speak to, without the least Alteration in the Meaning.

As these undisciplined Armies have no particular Enemies to encounter, but
Cleanliness and good Manners, so nothing is more entertaining to them, than the
dead Carcasses of Dogs and Cats, or, for want of them, Rags, and all Trompery
that is capable of imbibing Dirt. These, well trampled in Filth, and, if
possible, of the worst sort, are, by the Ringleaders, flung as high and as far
as a strong Arm can carry them, and commonly directed where the Throng is the
thickest: Whilst these ill-boding Meteors are shooting through the Air, the Joy
and Satisfaction of the Beholders is visible in every Countenance and Gesture;
and more audibly expressed by the great Shouts that accompany them in their
Course; and, as the Projectiles come nearer the Earth, are turned into loud
Laughter, which is more or less violent in Proportion to the Mischief promised
by the Fall. And to see a good Suit of Clothes spoiled by this Piece of
Gallantry, is the tip-top of their Diversion, which they seldom go home without
enjoying: For though no People in their Senses would venture among them on Foot,
in any tolerable Dress, yet there are young Rakes of Fortune, who care not what
they lavish, or destroy: Of these the maddest sort will often, after a Night's
Debauch, mix with Crowds, and thrust themselves in the midst of the most
abominable Rabble, where they seldom fail of meeting with such Adventures.

Though before setting out, the Prisoners took care to swallow what they could,
to be drunk, and stifle their Fear; yet the Courage that strong Liquors can
give, wears off, and the Way they have to go being considerable, they are in
Danger of recovering, and, without repeating the Dose, Sobriety would often
overtake them: For this Reason they must drink as they go; and the Cart stops
for that Purpose three or four, and sometimes half a dozen Times, or more,
before they come to their Journey's End. These Halts always increase the
Numbers about the Criminals; and more prodigiously, when they are very
notorious Rogues. The whole March, with every Incident of it, seems to be
contrived on Purpose, to take off and divert the Thoughts of the Condemned from
the only Thing that should employ them. Thousands are pressing to mind the
Looks of them. Their quondam Companions, more eager than others, break through
all Obstacles to take Leave: And here you may see young Villains, that are
proud of being so, (if they knew any of the Malefactors,) tear the Clothes off
their Backs, by squeezing and creeping through the Legs of Men and Horses, to
shake Hands with him; and not to lose, before so much Company, the Reputation
there is in having had such a valuable Acquaintance. It is ineredible what a
Scene of Confusion all this often makes, which yet grows worse near the
Gallows; and the violent Efforts of the most sturdy and resolute of the Mob on
one Side, and the potent Endeavors of rugged Goalers, and others, to beat them
off, on the other; the terrible Blows that are struck, the Heads that are
broke, the Pieces of swingeing Sticks, and Blood, that fly about, the Men that
are knocked down and trampled upon, are beyond Imagination; whilst the
Dissonance of Voices, and the Variety of Outcries, for different Reasons, that
are heard there, together with the Sound of more distant Noises, make up a
Discord not to be paralleled. If we consider, besides all this, the mean
Equipages of the Sheriffs Officers, and the scrubby Horses that compose the
Cavalcade, the Irregularity of the March, and the Want of Order among all the
Attendants, we shall be forced to confess, that these Processions are very void
of that decent Solemnity that would be required to make them awful. At the very
Place of Execution, the most remarkable Scene is a vast Multitude on Foot,
intermixed with many Horsemen and Hackney-Coaches, all very dirty, or else
covered with Dust, that are either abusing one another, or else staring at the
Prisoners, among whom there is commonly very little Devotion; and in that,
which is practiced and dispatched there, of Course, there is as little good
Sense as there is Melody. It is possible that a Man of extraordinary Holiness,
by anticipating the Joys of Heaven, might embrace a violent Death in such
Raptures, as would dispose him to the singing of Psalms: But to require this
Exercise, or expect it promiscuously of every Wretch that comes to be hanged,
is as wild and extravagant as the Performance of it is commonly frightful and
impertinent: Besides this, there is always at that Place, such a mixture of
Oddnesses and Hurry, that from what passes, the best disposed Spectator seldom
can pick out any thing that is edifying or moving.

Here I must observe, that the Possibility of Pardons and Reprieves, that often
come very late, and which, with or without Grounds, most Criminals continue to
hope for, 'till they are hanged, is another great Clog, that keeps attached to
the World those that are less abandoned, and more relenting than the Generality
of them; and who, without that Hindrance, would, in all Probability, prepare
themselves for certain Death, which overtakes many whilst they are still
doubting of it. The Ordinary and Executioner, having performed their different
Duties, with small Ceremony, and equal Concern, seem to be tired, and glad it
is over.

The Tragedy being ended, the next Entertainment is a Squabble between the
Surgeons and the Mob, about the dead Bodies of the Malefactors that are not to
be hanged in Chains. They have suffered the Law, (cries the Rabble,) and shall
have no other Barbarities put upon them: We know what you are, and will not
leave them before we see them buried. If the others are numerous, and resolute
enough to persist in their Enterprise, a Fray ensues: From whence I shall take
an Opportunity of saving something upon the Occasion of it. I have no Design
that savours of Cruelty, or even Indecency, toward a human Body; but shall
endeavor to demonstrate, that the superstitious Reverence of the Vulgar for a
Corpse, even of a Malefactor, and the strong Aversion they have against
dissecting them, are prejudicial to the Public: For as Health and sound Limbs
are the most desirable of all Temporal Blessings, so we ought to encourage the
Improvement of Physic and Surgery, wherever it is in our Power. The Knowledge
of Anatomy is inseparable from the Studies of either; and it is almost
impossible for a Man to understand the Inside of our Bodies, without having
seen several of them skilfully dissected. Kings and Princes are opened, and
have their Hearts and Bowels taken out, and embalmed. It is not then
Ignominious, much less offensive to the dead Body, which may be interred with
as much Decency, after Dissection, as if it never had been touched. But suppose
that many of our common Thieves were not to be buried at all, and some of them
made Skeletons; and that several Parts of others, variously prepared, should be
preserved for the Instruction of Students? What if it was a Disgrace to the
surviving Relations of those, who had Lectures read upon their Bodies, and were
made use of for Anatomical Preparations? The Dishonor would seldom reach
beyond the Scum of the People; and to be dissected, can never be a greater
Scandal than being hanged. The University of Leyden in Holland have a Power
given them by the Legislature to demand, for this Purpose, the Bodies of
ordinary Rogues executed within that Province; but, with us, it is the general
Complaint of all Professors of Anatomy, that they can get none to dissect:
Where then shall we find a readier Supply; and what Degree of People are fitter
for it than those I have named? When Persons of no Possessions of their own,
that have slipped no Opportunity of wronging whomever they could, die without
Restitution, indebted to the Public, ought not the injured Public to have a
Title to, and the Disposal of, what the others have left? And is any Thing more
reasonable, than that they should enjoy that Right, especially when they only
make use of it for commendable Purposes? What is done for the common Good,
every Member of the Society may, at one time or other, receive an Advantage
from; and therefore quarrelsome People, that love fighting, act very
preposterously and inconsistent with their Interest, when they venture to have
their Bones broke, for endeavoring to deprive Surgeons of the Means to
understand the Structure of them.

CHAP. IV. Of the wrong Judgments that are passed on the dying Behavior of
Malefactors.
HAVING finished the Picture I proposed to draw of modern Executions, and the
Crowds that usually attend them, I shall make some Remarks on the Judgments
that are commonly passed on the dying Behavior of our ordinary Felons. In a
rich and potent Kingdom, where worldly Glory is not in Contempt, and to think
meanly of our selves seldom taught by Example, whatever it may be by Precept,
nothing is counted more provoking, or less to be born with Patience, than to be
called a Coward. The vilest Rogues, and most despicable Villains, may own a
thousand Crimes, and often brag of the most abominable Actions; but there is
scarce one, who will confess that he has no Courage. Our general Esteem for
Valor, which is demonstrable from what I have said, as it is of great Use to a
warlike Nation, is very commendable; and Fortitude ought ever to keep its Place
amongst the Cardinal Virtues: But the Notions which the Vulgar have of Courage,
as well as Honor and Shame, are full of dangerous Errors. Compliments, as well
as Reproaches, when ill applied, are often the Causes of great Mischief; and I
am persuaded, that the Perverseness of Opinion now reigning amongst us, both in
applauding and discommending the Conduct of Criminals in their last Hours, is
an accessory Evil, that very much contributes to what is the Subject of our
grand Complaint, the Frequency of Executions. To explain my self on this Matter
in the clearest Manner I am able, I beg leave to begin with it from the Bottom.

In all living Creatures, that fall under our Senses, we perceive an Instinct
of Self-Preservation; and the more sensible they are, the greater Aversion they
discover to the Dissolution of their Being. Man, the most perfect of them, sets
an inestimable Value on Life, and knows no Fear equal to the Horror he has
against Death. This is to be understood only of Man, in the State of Nature,
before he has made Reflections on himself, and what he sees of the Creation;
but when, after that his Reason demonstrates to him that there must have been a
first Cause; that the World is governed by an intelligent Being; that himself,
a Compound of Soul and Body, is indebted to that Being for all he enjoys, and
that there is a strong Probability of a Life after this: When, moreover, he
considers himself as incorporated in a Community of vast Numbers, that all
together make one Body politic, the Welfare of which he finds universally
esteemed, as a Concern superior to all others: When, I say, he finds and
reflects on all this, he plainly sees, that the Fear of Death, must, on many
Accounts, be prejudicial to the public Good and common Security, in which he
has a Share. It is a Virtue then to conquer it; and if we inspect into the
early Economy of all Nations, we shall find, that the most powerful Motives
made use of to induce Man to lessen this Fear, and moderate the Fondness which
Nature has given us of Life, had their Origin from Religion, or a public
Spirit; that is, in other Words, from a Representation of his Duty either to
God or his Country. Thus holy Martyrs have suffered with Fortitude for their
Faith, and, in Confidence of eternal Happiness, hastened to Death with
Alacrity, and even rejoiced in the Midst of Flames. And thus there have been
valiant Men, in all Ages, that have exposed themselves to the greatest Hazards,
in Defense of their Laws and Liberties, and, animated by a zealous Love for
their Country, sacrificed their Lives to the public Welfare. As Men of this
Sort have every where deservedly gained the general Applause, and the Virtue
they are possessed of has been honored by the Name of Courage; so, on the
contrary, the Fearful and Pusillanimous, that ever prefer their own Safety to
all other Considerations, and are therefore never to be relied upon, are as
justly despised, and the ignominious Word, by which we reproach the Vice that
enslaves them, is Cowardice.

From what has been said it is evident, that the original Reason why Courage is
generally esteemed, is, because it is taken for granted, that both the
Principle we act from, and the End we labor for in conquering our Fears, are
praiseworthy, and have a visible Tendency, either to the Good of others, or
our own spiritual Felicity. Nothing, therefore, is more unjust, than that we
should continue our Esteem for Valor when it degenerates, and both the Motive
Men set out with, and the Scope they aim at, are palpably destructive. Anger,
Pride, Envy, and several other Passions, are capable of subduing Fear. But, as
these Principles are evil in themselves, so it is impossible that the End to be
obtained by them should be commendable. What perverse and miserable Judges are
we then, that applaud a Person's Intrepidity in fighting a Duel, when in the
Act itself, we see him wilfully violate the Laws of God and Man? But should
human Honor here break in upon me, and my Reasoning, how right soever, be
overpowered by the irresistible Clamor of the fashionable World, what can be
said for the senseless Intimidity of a vulgar Rogue, who not only professes an
utter Disregard to Honor and Conscience, but has likewise, at his first
Setting out, as a Preliminary to his Business, disclaimed all Pretenses to
common Honesty? Why should we delight in the Intrepidity, though it was real, of
a Villain in his Impiety? Why should Christians be pleased to see a great
Sinner give up his Ghost impenitent; or imagine that he dies bravely, because
he bids Defiance to Heaven, and boldly plunges himself into an Abyss of eternal
Misery? Yet nothing is more common amongst us: And the further a Man is removed
from Repentance, nay, the more void he seems to be of all Religion, and the
less Concern he discovers for Futurity, the more he is admired by our sprightly
People: Whereas, he who shows but the least Sorrow for his Sins, or, by his
Tears, or Dismality of Gestures, lets us know that he is under Apprehensions of
the divine Wrath, is a weak silly Creature, not worth looking at: And he only,
in the Opinion of many, dies like a Man, who, in reality, goes off most like a
Brute. But some of my Readers, perhaps, will have nothing to do with
Christianity. Suppose, then, we lay by that Consideration; I grant, that to
subdue the Terrors of Death is a manifest Token of Intrepidity, and promise to
pay Homage to true Courage wheresoever I can meet with it; only let us not be
imposed upon, but try the Valor of this undaunted Hero, whether it be genuine.
No Man can conquer the Fear of Death, but by something superior to it: What is
the Power that supports him in the Conflict, and what Principle does he act
from? It is not his Innocence, for his Guilt is public, and his Crimes are
proved upon him. It is not Zeal for Religion, nor the Love of his Country: He
pretends to neither. Yet it must be some mighty Principle of vast Force and
Efficacy; for if he acts consistently, he despises not only Death, but the
Wrath of Omnipotence, and a Punishment just at Hand, that shall be everlasting.
Will you say that he firmly believes that there is no God, nor Life after this,
and that Man is wholly mortal? Suppose it; that is no Support against Death
itself: But look narrowly into him, and you will alter your Opinion, even as to
that. The Enthusiasm of Atheists has other Symptoms; deplorable as it is, the
Appearance of it is more sedate, and they make some Pretenses to Reasoning: But
what Probability is there, that a poor Rascal, who was brought up in Ignorance,
and perhaps cannot read, one who never troubled his Head with thinking, much
less with thinking on abstruse Matters, and Metaphysics, should so far lose
himself in the Mazes of Philosophy, as to become a speculative Atheist.

Since, then, we can find no Principle from which it is possible a common
Villain should derive his Undauntedness, it is evident that what we see is
spurious, and the Bravery we admire only counterfeited, and false at Bottom.
The Terror of Death inwardly excruciates him; But his Fear of showing this, of
being called a Coward, and laughed at by his Companions, has some Command over
his outward Appearance; therefore, (not to be found out,) sometimes he swears
or scoffs at Religion; at others he mixes forced Laughter with the vilest
Language, and trys all the Strength of Brutality to keep down a struggling
Conscience, and appear more atheistical and obdurate than, to his Sorrow, he
feels himself to be. But his Impudence would soon fail him, and his
inexhaustible Stock be but a weak Match for the Agonies he suffers, if he took
not Refuge in strong Liquors. These are his only Support, and Drunkenness the
Cause of his Intrepidity. Should I be told, that in many of them no Signs are
seen either of Fear or Ebriety, it would be of no Force against my Assertion:
As great Fear sinks, so hard Drinking raises the Spirits: They are two Enemies,
that, when equally matched, may, by mutual Conflict, easily disarm and hinder
the Operations of each other. Let a curious Observer mind the continual Changes
of the Prisoner's unsettled Behavior, the wild Manner of his Actions, and,
above all, the greedy Haste, with which he throws down every Thing potable and
intoxicating, and he will soon perceive that our Sham-Hero drinks neither with
Comfort, nor for Pleasure, and seems to expect no other Benefit from it, than
that it may take away his Senses, and hinder him from thinking. Are not they
fine Judges, who are imposed upon by such pusillanimous Wretches, that are so
far from having conquered the Fear of Death, that they go out of the World
without having ever dared one Moment soberly to think of it; and of whom it can
only be said, that they died hard and unmoved, because they were senseless, and
with the Courage of a Stone suffered themselves, without Thought, to drop into
Eternity?

The Mischief that these Patterns of Impenitence, together with the Applause
that is given them, must produce in a vast and opulent City, will appear from
the following Consideration. It is necessary to the public Peace and Security,
that Burglary, Robbing in the Streets, or on the Highway, and all those Crimes
where Violence is mixed with Injustice, should be capitally punished: But
considering on the one hand, how much more prone Men are to Ease and Pleasure,
than they are to Industry and Labor; and, on the other, the Generality of
human Wants, and the unequal Distributions of Fortune to supply them, it must
be acknowledged, that where Men are without Shame and Education, and
consequently not affected with the Ties either of Honor or Religion, Poverty
itself is a strong Temptation to Thieving, when Opportunities offer. The
greatest Charity, therefore, and Compassion we can show to our
Fellow Creatures, is an extraordinary Severity, and never-ceasing Watchfulness
in a Government against the first Approaches of Dishonesty. It is with this
View that the Provision of the Legislature, that such Offenders should be
punished with Death, is to be vindicated; though the Punishment is greater than
the Laws, framed by God himself for the Jewish Commonwealth, inflicted; or what
natural Justice, proportioning the Punishment to the Crime, seems to require:
For it is not the Death of those poor Souls that is chiefly aimed at in
Executions, but the Terror we would have it strike in others of the same loose
Principles: And, for the same Reason, these Executions are little better than
Barbarity, and sporting away the Lives of the indigent Vulgar, if those
valuable Sacrifices we are obliged to make to the public Safety, are rendered
insignificant. If no Remedy can be found for these Evils, it would be better
that Malefactors should be put to Death in private; for our public Executions
are become Decoys, that draw in the Necessitous, and, in effect, as cruel as
frequent Pardons; instead of giving Warning, they are examplary the wrong Way,
and encourage where they should deter. The small Concern, and seeming Indolence
of the Condemned, harden the Profligates that behold them, and confirm to them,
by ocular Demonstration, what they encourage one another with in viler
Language, (low, as it is, permit me to mention it,) That there is nothing in
being hanged, but awry Neck, and a wet pair of Breeches.

CHAP. V. Of Regulations concerning FELONS in Prison, and the good Effects to
be expected from them.
WHAT has been said in the foregoing Chapters, in relation to common Felons,
has pointed at the evil Customs, Mismanagements, and perverse Opinions, that
prevail amongst us. I shall now conclude what I proposed to publish on this
Subject with offering some Proposals toward a better Usage of them in Prison;
and the good Effect such Alterations, in all Probability, would produce. All
which, without Arrogance or Presumption, I submit to better Judgment.

First, I would have every one of the Malefactors locked up by himself; and
they should never be suffered to converse together. It would not be a very
great Expense (where Chimneys, convenient Windows, Order, and Beauty would be
out of the Question:) to build an hundred small Rooms, perhaps, of twelve Foot
Square, that would be strong, beyond the Possibility of being forced by naked
Hands; and, to prevent all Hopes of breaking Goal, I would have it a Custom
made, to search, suspected or not, all Prisoners, and the Places they are in,
every Night before Bedtime. The Rooms I speak of, I would rather have obscure,
than otherwise; and the small Light they had, far beyond Reach. They should all
have such Conveniences, that those, who were shut up in them, should, during
their Stay, have no Occasion to stir out of them on any Account. Thus we might
secure Prisoners, without galling them with Irons, before we are sure that they
deserve to be punished at all.

Secondly, I would have a Law made, to fix a certain number of Days, after
which the Condemned should not have the Benefit of Pardons or Reprieves, though
they might be obtained. This Time elapsed, they should have one Day to bid
farewell to Friends and Relations: After which, they should have three times
four and twenty Hours allowed them, for no other Purpose, than to make their
Peace with Heaven, and prepare themselves for Death. During this time, they
should be inaccessible to all but a sober Keeper, to take Care of them, and a
Clergyman, to assist them in Spirituals. And here I beg leave to observe, that
Men of Reputation, who live in Credit, and by their Learning, or exemplary
Lives, have acquired the Public Esteem, are fitter for this Task, than others
of small Parts, and no Repute; that, laboring under narrow Circumstances, for
a poor Salary, and some miserable Perquisites, take upon them this weighty
Province, as a Livelihood and Business, to be constantly followed. The more
Respect and Reverence are paid to Divines, and the higher their Dignity is, the
greater Opportunity they have of making themselves serviceable in every Branch
of their Function, but more especially that Part of it now under Consideration.
In other Protestant Countries, beyond Sea, the Ministers of the National Church
perform this Office, either by Turns, or as the Criminal, and sometimes the
Magistrate, desire it. In most Employments Use makes Perfectness, but here it
incapacitates: and was a Man, even of the greatest Prudence and Watchfulness
over himself, always to converse with Rogues, and do nothing else but instruct
and attend Malefactors in their last Hours, the very Habit he would contract
from it, would spoil him for that Purpose: And it is impossible, but constant
Practice would, in a little Time, wear out, or at least take off the greatest
Part of that Earnestness and Concern, which ought to be inseparable from the
Charge I speak of.

The greater Provision we made for the Souls and future Happiness of these
shortliv'd Sinners, the less Indulgence we should have for their Bodies and
sensual Appetites: And I would have it strictly observed, that from the Moment
their Death was fixed, 'till their Execution, they should receive nothing for
Sustenance but Bread and Water; and of either what they would. I would,
moreover, have it enacted, That every Year a certain number of dead Bodies, not
under six, should be allowed to Physicians and Surgeons, for Anatomical Uses,
not to be made choice of till after Death, in such a Manner, that no Felon
could be sure this would not be his Lot.

If they should complain, that the miserable Diet they were confined to, was a
Severity that disturbed their Thoughts, and hindered their Devotion, it would
be a Sign, that their Minds were not yet turned the right Way: But this
Grievance, a short Time and Necessity will never fail to cure. The harsher that
Article may seem, the more Efficacy it would be of, in deterring Rogues from
Mischief: For I do not doubt but most of them would look upon the wholesome
Regulations in Prison here mentioned, as the most considerable Part of the
Punishment they were to suffer; though, I confess, that what I have in View
bythis low Diet, chiefly regards the eternal Welfare of those unhappy People,
as it would be instrumental to an early Repentance. When, free from Fumes of
Food, and all intoxicating Comforts, the serious Thoughts of a Criminal shall
be obliged to dwell upon his wretched Self, and behold the Prospect of a future
State so near, so certainly to come, the loosest and most abandoned will be
brought to Reason. Death being unavoidable, and nothing upon Earth to save him,
Self-defence will make him turn his Eyes elsewhere: His continued Abstinence
will help to clear his Understanding; then searching after Truth, he will be
soon convinced of the Folly and Weakness of those Arguments, by which he had
been used to harden his Conscience, keep out Remorse, and fortify his
Steadiness in Guilt.

When a Man thus weaned from the World, and all the Hopes of Life, should be
drawn forth from his dark and solitary Dungeon, once more enjoy the open Air,
and see himself exposed to gazing Multitudes, there met on purpose to feed
their Curiosity at his Expense; when the Paleness of his Countenance, and the
Shaking of every Limb, should, without Disguise, reveal the Motions of his
Heart; and his Spirits neither confounded, nor buoyed up by inebriating
Liquors, should discover their real Condition and Incapacity to uphold their
trembling Tenement; the Spectacle would be awful, and strike the Hearts of the
Beholders: When seated on the ignominious Cart, by his restless Posture, the
Distortion of his Features, and the continual wringing of his Hands, he should
disclose his Woe within, and the utmost depth of Sorrow: When we should hear
his shrill Cries and sad Complaints interrupted with bitter Sobs and anxious
Groans, and now and then, at sudden Starts, see Floods of Tears gushing from
his distracted Eyes, how thoroughly would the Concurrence of so many strong
Evidences convince us of the Pangs, the amazing Horror, and unspeakable Agonies
of his excruciated Soul!

Common Stubbornness and Stupidity could not be Proof against all this; and the
Licentious Rabble of both Sexes, that make now the most considerable part of
those dismal Processions, would not attend in such tumultuous Crowds. Few
Profligates would be able to stand the Shock of Sounds and Actions so really
tragical: Many would run away for fear of rouzing the Lion kept chained within,
and waking a guilty Conscience from the Lethargy they have thrown it in with so
much Labor. They would not follow long to behold a Scene so little to their
Purpose; and whatever Multitudes of them might set out with these Per^^ents,
they would drop off, and dwindle away by Degrees; even the most obdurate would
sicken at such a Sight, and turning from it to less displeasing Objects, seek
after more suitable Diversions. The Absence of so many Rake-hells, that only
take delight in Mischief, would render these Tragedies more solemn, and, at the
same Time, make room for Spectators of a better Sort, and lesser Sinners, on
whom, in all Probability, they would have a more desirable Effect. It is not to
be expressed, what lasting and useful Impressions such Shows would make: Many
that are conscious of their Frailty, and the small Power they have of
conquering their Passions, would take an Opportunity from them of adoring the
divine Mercy, for having preserved them hitherto from falling into such Crimes;
even the Voluptuous, that in the Enjoyment of Youth and Vigor, are enamored
with Life for the sake of Pleasure, would be startled at them, and thank God
that this was not their Case; and several by the Fear of Death only, become
more serious and reflecting.

Thus much we should gain, at least, in Behalf of Religion, from every
Execution, even of the most sorry Felons, who, void of Sense and Goodness, only
grieve because they are to die, and go they know not where: But it is more than
probable, that some of them would become good Christians, and make exemplary
Ends. When the Condemned should, in every Respect, receive the Treatment I have
required, and by this Means, undisturbed by earthly Cares, have Leisure, in
sober Sadness, to review their past Life, and examine into the Multitude, as
well as Enormity of their Offenses; then, after thorough Contrition, and an
open Confession in Behalf of Justice, animated by Faith, betake to constant
Prayer; we ought to believe that thus exerting themselves in the Work of
Salvation, by the good Guidance of able Divines, and their own unwearied
Endeavors, many of them would find Favor in the Sight of the Almighty; and
that several, even as they went to Death, would be regenerated, and comforted
from above with a strong Assurance of Forgiveness. What a visible Alteration
would it not make in them, when they should perceive their Spirits, that the
Moment before were overwhelmed with Grief, or filled with black Despair,
cherished and enlightened by the powerful Beams of heavenly Grace and Clemency:
Transported with the Prospect of approaching Bliss they then would wish to die,
and rejoice that they should be made Examples to frighten Evildoers from their
Ways.

But when they should consider, what Acts of Devotion and unfeigned Piety, what
Works of superlative Charity would be necessary, if they were to live, to atone
for the heinous Crimes and manifold Transgressions they had been guilty of
against God and their Neighbor, how would it rouse their Souls, and how eager
would it not render them, in the most profitable Manner, to spend the small
Remains of Life! Sometimes they would deter the wicked and in the same Breath
solicit Heaven for their Conversion: At others, reasoning from the Changes
they had experienced within, they would combat Impiety with Vehemence, and
conjure Unbelievers no longer to doubt of an everlasting Futurity: They would
paint to them, in the strongest Colors, the Horrors they had felt from an
accusing Conscience, and the Abyss of Misery they had been plunged in, whilst
yet laboring under the dire Reflection on eternal Vengeance; And thus, mixing
fervent Prayers with strenuous Exhortation, they would employ the few Moments,
that were left them, in Exercises entirely spiritual and holy.

How such Conversions would affect the Minds of all that saw or heard them,
cannot be better imagined than by examining our selves. When we had seen an
half-starv'd Wretch, that looked like Death, come shivering from his Prison,
and hardly able to speak or stand, get with Difficulty on the slow
uncomfortable Carriage; where, at the first Rumbling of it, he should begin to
weep, and as he went, dissolve in Tears, and lose himself in incoherent
Lamentations, it would move us to Compassion. But with what Astonishment would
it not fill us, to behold the same Creature, near the fatal Tree, become
lively, glow with Zeal, and, in Strength of Voice and Action, excel the most
vigorous Preachers! All this we might expect; and that those of Wit and Genius,
as certainly there are among them, would often light on new and convincing
Arguments to warn the Sinner: Nay, some of them prove stupendous Orators, that
would not only spread Amazement all around them, but likewise find uncommon
Ways to reach the Heart with Violence, and force Repentance on their Hearers.
It is Stupidity to doubt the vast Use such Executions would be of, to compass
Happiness both here and hereafter; and should we regard the first only, it
would be no Exaggeration to assert, that one of them would be more serviceable
to the Peace and Security of this immense City, than a thousand of those that
are now so frequent among us.

CHAP. VI. Of TRANSPORTATION: And a Method to render that Punishment more
effectual.
WHEN I concluded the last, I thought not to have tired the Reader any longer
with the Subject of Malefactors: But it has been remonstated to me since, that
what I had wrote, would seem very defective, and this Treatise be, in reality,
imperfect, if I said nothing of Transportation; which, for some Years last
past, on many Occasions, has been substituted, and inflicted in the room of
capital Punishment; and having, at the same Time, been furnished with a Hint
concerning this Affair, that may be of admirable Use, I cannot forbear
imparting it to the Public. There is no doubt but the Design of Transporting
Felons, instead of hanging them, when their Crimes were not very enormous, was
just and commendable, and it was reasonable to expect that it would have proved
a powerful Remedy against the grand Evil I have all along complained of, and
which has been so often repeated. But our subtle Criminals have found out Means
hitherto to render it ineffectual: Some have made their Escape in the Voyage
itself; others, condemned to this Punishment, never have been put on board;
several have reached the Plantations, but been returned again by the first
Shipping, and great Numbers have been come back before half their Time was
expired. Those that are forced to stay, do very little Service themselves, and
spoil the other Slaves, teaching the Africans more Villainy and Mischief than
ever they could have learned without the Examples and Instructions of such
Europeans. We have loud Complaints from all the Islands, that we send such
Numbers, and they know not what to do with them. As they come from England, and
are to serve English Men, their Color, as well as Country and Language, plead
for them; and the Masters that complain of them, are to blame themselves for
treating them with less Severity than they do the innocent, as well as
unfortunate Blacks, and more remisly than they ought, if they considered that
these Country Men of theirs are sent thither on purpose to work, and are
condemned to Hard Labor, as a Punishment for their Crimes. The mild Usage our
Felons receive beyond Sea, and the many Examples of such as come back before
their Time, with Impunity, have quite destroyed the End which Transportation
was designed for. The Criminals have no dread against it, remain as they were
themselves, and do no Service to others.

To redress this, there is an Expedient that may immediately be put into
practice, and is, to my thinking, every way unexceptionable; for it would
effectually prevent the returning of the Felons, make them serviceable in the
most extraordiary Manner, and, at the same Time, be terrible beyond Expression.
The Use I would put them to is, the Redemption of Slaves, that in Morocco, as
well as Tunis, Algiers, and other Places on the Coast of Barbary, groan under a
miserable Servitude. Should it be objected, that such abandoned People would
turn Mahometans, and our selves become accessory to their eternal Ruin, I would
ask what Surety we had for those that were there already. Amongst our Seafaring
Men, the Practice of Piety is very scarce: Abundance of them lead very bad
Lives, who yet, as to the Love of their Country, and the Meum and Tuum, are
very honest Fellows. There are not many that are well grounded in the
Principles of their Religion, or would be capable of maintaining it against an
Adversary of the least Ability; and we are not certain, that under great
Temptations, they would remain steadfast to the Christian Faith. The Danger then
of Apostasy being the same in both, we must be manifestly the Gainers, when we
change lazy cowardly Thieves, and incorrigible Rogues for brave, laborious, and
useful People. It would be no difficult Matter to enter into Negotiations with
the several Powers of Barbary for this Purpose; neither is it reasonable to
imagine, that they would scruple to take our Felons on account of the bad Lives
they had led, or refuse any for their Impudence, Wickedness, or Aversion to
Labor. They consider and manage their Slaves as we do our Cattle; and it is
their Age, their Health, the Soundness of their Limbs, and their Strength, they
examine into, with little Regard to their Temper or their Morals: They are ever
watchful over them, without trusting to their Honesty, or expecting any
voluntary Obedience from them. If bought Servants are able, Masters there have
sure Ways to make them work. They laugh at Stubborness and refractory Spirits,
and their steady Severity is a sovereign Remedy against Sloth, and all other
Failings of the Will: From all which it is highly probable, that a Barbarian
would be glad to change an elderly honest Man, pretty well worn, and above
Fifty, for a sturdy House-breaker of Five and twenty: And as to those that
might be pretty equal, as to Years and Abilities, what if we should give them
three for two, or two for one? I am sure we could be no Losers. Those likewise
that are known to be in Quality superior to common Sailors, might be redeemed
by still a greater Number of Felons; or, at the worst, they could be no
Sufferers by the Exchanges of the others.

What I am speaking of, I confess would be a very severe Punishment for Felony;
but I cannot imagine, how we can think on the Rigor of it, without reflecting,
at the same Time, on the Inhumanity we are guilty of in the small Concern we
often show, for many Years, for the Captivity of those who have deserved no
Punishment at all. The greater the Calamities are of that cruel Bondage, the
more reasonable it is, that the Guilty should suffer it rather than the
Innocent. It is unpardonable not to deliver from the Yoke of Infidels, when it
is in our Power, our Fellow Subjects, whom we have no Complaint against. When
sufficient Sums cannot be raised to redeem them with Money, what should hinder
us from doing it at the Expense of Miscreants, whom it is Injustice not to
punish, and who, out of Chains, cannot be otherwise than noxious to the
Public? If this be duly weighed, I doubt not, but what, at first, seems to be
the greatest Objection to this Proposal, would, on further Reflection, be found
an unanswerable Argument why we should embrace it. There would likewise be room
always, with fresh Supplies of Felons, to release those, who might be cured,
or, at least, thought to have been sufficiently punished; and, to prevent all
Tricks and Escapes, this Service might be performed by Men of War instead of
Merchant Men, or Transports. This effectual Manner of Transportation, as Felons
are treated, and Things are managed now, would be more dreadful than hanging,
whilst it was only talked of; but when it came to the Push, and Criminals came
near, and under the Gallows, there would be very few, if they were sober enough
to think at all, that, before the Cart drove away, would not change their
Minds, put off the evil Hour if they could, and choose Slavery, or any Thing
else, to avoid immediate Death. But then, if the Regulations I have offered in
the foregoing Chapter were likewise to be put in Practice, the forced
Abstinence, and unavoidable Sobriety in Prison, with the other Preparations
before Detah, and the Journey from Newgate to Tyburn, without Hopes of Pardon
or Reprieve, would strike great Terror even at a Distance; by which Means, the
Thoughts of either would be insupportable, and there would be no great Purchase
in the Choice. The Horror loose People would conceive against such Proceedings,
would be of inestimable Consequence to the Nation, and Thousands that are yet
unborn would, deterred by the Rigor of those Laws, turn their Hands to honest
Labor, and die in their Beds in their own Country, that without them, and
Things remaining as they are, will either be hanged, or transported long before
the End of this Century. But if what I propose should not lessen the Number of
Felons so much as ought to be expected, it would clear us at least from the
Blame of not having endeavored it; and from Transportation we should have the
Satisfaction, that the Kingdom would not lose so many Inhabitants by it as it
does now, though the same Numbers were sent abroad. But, what is infinitely
more valuable, that Punishment likewise would rid without Slaughter, or
Probability of Return, the Country of the Vermin of Society, that, perpetually
nibbling at our Property, destroy the Comforts of secure and undisturbed
Possession, at the same Time that it would furnish us with an Opportunity of
performing the most charitable Action in the World; for such I will not scruple
to call the redeeming and restoring to their Friends, without their Cost,
industrious Mariners, that lost their Liberties, and became Sufferers in an
honest Calling, and were led into dreadful Captivity by Infidels, whilst, in
promoting the Interest of Commerce and Navigation, they were laboring for the
Safety, the Wealth, and Glory of their Country.

I shall be told by some of my Readers, that they are ready to contribute to
the Redemption of unfortunate Captives with their Purses; but that among
Christians, freeborn Subjects ought never to be made Slaves for any Reason, or
at any Rate whatever. But this is a Singularity peculiar to Englishmen, more
built on an Excess of Goodnature, than any sound Reason. France and Spain make
use of Malefactors in their Galleys, and the Hugonots of the first would never
have complained of that Punishment, had it never been inflicted on any but
Thieves and Villains. But these are Roman Catholic Countries, and arbitrary
Kingdoms: Of Holland you can say neither, and yet the great Cities of it have
all Workhouses for Criminals, At Amsterdam there is one, where Felons are kept
constantly employed in rasping of Brasil Wood: To earn at this as much as they
spend is not to be done without excessive Labor, though they fare as hard as
they work; yet they are obliged to get more than their Maintenance costs
considerably. They have a Task set them, which if they do not perform, the
Neglect of their Hands is revenged on their Bellies; and they are stinted in
their Allowance in Proportion to the Deficiency. In this Place a very strict
Hand is kept over them; no Offenses are left unpunished, and they are often
drubb'd even for ill Language. The Periods of Time, for which Felons are
condemned to this Rasp-house, are vastly different, according as their great
Crimes, or slighter Trespasses deserve this Tuition, and themselves are young
or old Offenders, and judged to be more or less incorrigible, from six Weeks to
ninety nine Years. These are not called Slaves; but such is their Abode, their
Diet, and their Discipline, that of those who were to be confined there for any
considerable Number of Years, I don't believe there ever was one who would not
have thought it a glorious Preferment, if, instead of it, he might have taken
his Chance, and been sold for a Slave in Turkey.

We have, I own, no open Enemies in Africa more than any where else at present;
and our most gracious Sovereign has, by his Clemency and powerful Influence
over the Emperor of Morocco, procured Liberty to those of his Subjects that had
been taken in English Ships: But it is wrong from thence to infer, that there
are no Slaves in Turkey of the British Nation.

Among those that are brought up to the Sea, there are many, that, by several
Accidents, are left ashore in Foreign Parts, and are necessitated to enter
themselves on any Ships they can meet with. If this be done in Time of Peace,
and when they are not summoned to serve their own Country, they are guilty of
no Fault. But as all Mariners, as well as Soldiers, share the Fate of those on
whose Side they engage, so many of our Sailors are Slaves in Turkey, that were
taken in French, Dutch, and other Ships, and are consequently not reclaimable
by any Treaty made with Great Britain. Though these might not deserve the same
Regard altogether with those that were taken in Ships of the British Nation;
yet, as they are our Countrymen, and have committed no Crime, their Redemption
ought not to be deferred one Moment, if they might be had in Exchange for
others, whom we have judged not worthy to live amongst us. Besides, as we are
at Peace now with all those Rovers, so half a Year hence, some or other of them
may fall out with us; their Friendship is not much to be depended upon: Let the
Provision but be made, and Felons kept at hard Labor, and under strict
Discipline at home, till they are wanted abroad, and we shall find, that the
Institution it self, the very Name of it, will be of vast Use, before the Thing
itself is put into Practice.

FINIS.

