ON GENERATION.

AN ESSAY ON GENERATION.

BY J. F. BLUMENBACH, M. D.

Aulic Counselor to His Britannic Majesty, and Professor of Physic in the
University of Gottingen, etc.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, STRAND; FAULDER, BOND STREET; MURRAY, FLEET
STREET; AND CREECH, AT EDINBURGH.

THE Translator's Preface.
THE general curiosity, which has at times manifested itself among
Physiologists, to discover the nature of that process, by which the animal part
of the creation is formed, and the difficulties which oppose themselves to such
researches, might be considered as sufficient motives for translating any new
work, whose principal view consists in endeavoring to correct some prevailing
errors, or to enlarge our ideas in regard to the subject in question.

The following Essay claims our attention in both these respects. It may be
considered not only as an attempt at a refutation of one of the most favorite
hypotheses on the subject of Generation; I mean that of the Evolution of
pre-existing organic germs; but also, as an attempt to establish, upon the
basis of experiment, a better, and more consistent theory.

The great knowledge and extensive information, which my valuable and learned
Friend the Author possesses, not only in physiology, and comparative anatomy,
but in every branch of natural history, and, which he has sufficiently evinced
in his numerous writings; at the same time, that they prepossess us with the
idea, that he is well fitted for such an enquiry, serve also, as a further
justification, if a justification be necessary, of the part which I have taken
in it. Whether I have executed my task faithfully, I must leave to others to
decide.

That the conclusions of Spallanzani, whose works may be considered as the
chief support of the theory of pre-existing organic germs, require both some
degree of restriction, and a more accurate examination, than they have hitherto
met with, will appear evident from the Second Section of the following Essay,
where the doctrine of Evolution is particularly noticed.

If the admirers of Haller, Bonnet, and Spallanzani, be surprised at the manner
in which their doctrines are attacked, they are to consider, that controversy
never yet injured the cause of truth, and that by open and candid examination
alone, we are often able to remove the deceptions of prejudice and error. Never
did a well-founded theory suffer by the most severe, and critical
investigation; on the contrary, nothing is better calculated to discover its
value, and establish its reputation.

I have only to add, that in translating the compound word (Bildungstrieb), I
have been obliged to make use of a Latin expression. The word Nisus, which
conveys the full sense of the word Trieb, does not appear to have any synonyme
in the English language.

A. CRICHTON.
No. 10, Spring Garden, Nov. 23d, 1792.
CONTENTS.
SECTION I. Of the various Hypotheses, by which the Phenomena of Generation
have been attempted to be explained -- Page 1 SECTION II. Examination of the
principal Arguments in favor of the supposed Pre-existence of Organized Germs
in the Ovaria of Females, and Refutation of the Doctrine, Page 31 SECTION III.
Proofs of the Formative Nisus, and an Attempt to ascertain some of its Laws
Page -- 59
SECTION I. Of the various Hypotheses, by which the Phenomena of Generation
have been attempted to be explained.
WHAT is the nature of that change, which takes place within a female, when
after having experienced the most delightful of all sensual pleasures, and
being duly impregnated, form, and existence are about to be given to her
offspring?

Few questions hare ever awakened more general, and more ardent curiosity than
this; for however romantic it may appear to attempt to ascertain the
observations, and thoughts of our first parents, yet the supposition is
natural, that the wonderful effects, and as it were repeated creations produced
by the indulgence of this instinct, must first have excited their surprise, and
then led them to a train of reflections.

Considering the innumerable times the phenomena of generation have occurred
since the days of Adam, it becomes a humiliating reproach to the understanding
of his descendants, that during all that long succession of time, they have not
been able to give any satisfactory explanation of the matter; especially as it
appears to have soon become a very early subject of study with speculative men:
at least most of the physiological fragments of the ancient philosophers and
physicians, For instance, those of Orpheus, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, etc.
, which have been handed down to us, consist in general of inquiries into the
mysteries of generation; and indeed since that, there is hardly a period in
which the same kind of researches have not been more or less prosecuted.

Even in the darkest times of the middle ages, when the spirit of inquiry
seemed almost entirely lost in the lethargy of monastic barbarism, this subject
appears every now and then to have awakened a spark of curiosity, and to have
stimulated some of the holy fathers of those times to the composition of very
sensual and obscene works, some of which have reached our days Such as that of
Pope John XXth, or Bishop Abert to Great, or whatever holy father of the church
it was, who wrote that vile book de Secretis Mulierum. One may also add Mich.
Scotus, the scrutinizer of natural things.
, and serve to prove that their authors were at least interested in the
theoretical, if not in the practical part of generation.

We are not therefore to be surprised, that the attempt to solve this great
problem of nature increased rapidly, beyond the power of numbering, leaving no
passage untrod which afforded any hopes of leading to a solution of the
mystery; hence there hardly exists another spot in the whole region of natural
knowledge, surrounded by more intricate labyrinths, or false guides than this.

Drelingcourt, a teacher of Boerhaave's, collected no less than two hundred and
sixty-two vague hypotheses on generation, from the writings of earlier writers.

In spite of the astonishing variety, and number of paths, which seemed to lead
to the solution of this physiological problem, yet they are all of them but so
many branches of two principal roads; the one conducting to the doctrine of
Evolution, the other to that of Epigenists.

It is either supposed that the prepared, but at the same time unorganized
rudiments of the foetus, first begins to be gradually organized when it arrives
at its place of destination at a due time, and under the necessary
circumstances. This is the doctrine of Epigenisis;

Or, we deny every sort of generation, and believe that the germ of every
animal, and every plant that ever has lived and ever will live, were all
created at one and the same time, namely, at the beginning of the world; and
that all that is necessary is, that one generation should be developed after
the other. Such is the celebrated theory of Evolution.

But the manner in which this evolution happens, has been differently accounted
for.

Heraclitus, surnamed the gloomy, and Hippocrates, or whoever the author of
those books on regimen was, which appeared under his name, together with many
of their followers, were of opinion, that those germs were scattered up and
down the whole globe, where they wandered about, each in search of the genitals
of a ready made relation of their own kind, which having once found, they took
lodgement there, threw off their envelopement, and now became fit for being
themselves evolved.

If we except the imposing name of the authors to whom this theory is ascribed,
it has little else to recommend it to our attention. It is so completely built
on fanciful suppositions, that it would be difficult to say, what hypothesis
might not be credited were we to yield the smallest faith to such a doctrine.
The late professor Gesner, who wrote a commentary on this romance of
Hippocrates, apologizes for himself by adopting the bon mot of Queen Christina,
"that the chimeras of the ancients were just as good as those of the moderns."

More approbation has been given to two other theories of evolution, according
to each of which, the germs did not wander about, but those of the same kind
were all neatly wrapped up, and encased one within another, so that the first
parent of each animal, and plant was supposed to contain all the germs of every
succeeding generation; copulation only serving to awaken them to their state of
evolution. The only difference between the two theories was, that the one
supposed the germs to inhabit the testicles of their father, whilst the other
would have it, that they resided in the ovaria of their mother.

No sooner was the art of making magnifying glasses discovered, and by that
means an opening procured to a new world in the creation, than the novelty of
the discovery, and facility of its application, by affording an opportunity to
a number of microscopical experiments, naturally led to the most unexpected
sights.

Among the great amateurs of this kind of amusement, was one Ludwig von Hammon,
a young man born at Dantzig, who during the time of his studying medicine at
Leyden, and in the course of his microscopical pursuits, discovered in the
month of August 1677, in a drop of the semen of a cock recently dissected, a
kind of ocean, in which swam thousands of little lively active animals.

The same unexpected phenomenon was also observed in the ripe semen of other
male animals, and in these animalculae were immediately thought to be seen, the
germs of subsequent perfect, animals. By this discovery, a key was supposed to
be found, which would unlock the whole mystery of generation.

Now I cannot conceive how some professed philosophers, and natural historians
have been led to deny life and voluntary motion to those animalculae; but I am
still more at a loss to imagine, how another set of philosophers have been
induced to dignify these animalculae of a stagnant animal fluid, to the high
rank of the organized germs of successive generations.

Without entering into a long and tedious detail of all the doubts and
difficulties, which rise up in opposition to so singular a theory, I shall
content myself with adding a few reflections, which to the most uninformed
readers, will appear sufficient for calling in question this imaginary dignity
of the animalculae of the semen of animals.

How comes it that the animalculae of the semen of animals the most nearly
related, differ so much from each other, whilst scarce any two things resemble
one another so much as the animalculae of animals, the most opposite to each
other, both in nature and form? For instance, the animalculae in the semen of
frogs, as represented by Mr. von Gleichen, bear no kind of resemblance to those
of the common newt, as represented by Spallanzani; whereas on the other hand,
two drops of water cannot resemble each other more strongly, than the
animalculae of the semen of a man, and those of an ass, as represented by the
first of these accurate observers.

This same modern advocate for the dignity of these animalculae, has already
discovered two kinds of them in the same drop of semen of a frog, and yet both
of them are perfectly distinct from those which Roesel represents as
animalculae of the semen of the same animal; besides the former were not only
discovered in the vesiculae seminales, but also in the kidneys: mere
appearances, as evinced by the irregular and uncertain shape of the inhabitants
of the male semen, and which irregularity and uncertainty refutes their
pretended dignity so completely, that one might as well hope with Paracelsus On
the nature of things, addressed to John Winkclsteiner von Feyburg at Uchtland,
in the sixth volume of Huser's edition of his works, p. 263. Amatus Lusitanas
describes a similar production: Vide Curation, Medicinal Cent. VI. curat. 55,
scholi, p. 612. "Certo scimus chemico artificio puerum conflatum esse et omnia
sua membra perfecta contraxisse, ac motum habuisse, qui cum a vase ubi
continebatur esset extractus moveri desiit. Novit haec accuratius Julius
Camillus vir singularis doctrinae et rerum occultarum, et variarum hac nostra
aestate magnus scrutator et Hetrusca sua lingua scriptor diligentissimus et
accuratissimus."


, and the Painter Gautier Vide Generation de l'Homme et des Animaux, Paris
1750. 12. Also his Observations sur l'Hist. Not. 1 p. and the misshapen
representation of a foetus drawn by himself and colored after life. Tab. A.
fig. 3.
, to be able to produce a perfect human embryo from male semen, or expect to
see, as the famous academician Hartzoeker assures us he did, the little embryo
sitting in the body of each animalcule, in the same crooked and confined
posture as in the female womb Essai de Dioptrique, Paris 1694. 4. p. 230, where
the lynx-eyed man gives an accurate figure of a child, which he observed in the
body of one of the animalculae of the semen, and which appeared to him as if
anxiously expecting its deliverance.
.

Long before the animalculae of the semen were discovered, Joseph de
Aromatariis found out a third way to explain the mystery of generation, by
means of the theory of evolution; I mean that one which supposes the ovaria of
every female, even before impregnation, to contain a whole provision of
organized molecules or germs, perfectly ready for evolution.

Swammerdam also adopted this opinion, but owing to the great figure which the
animalculae of the semen soon afterward made in the world, it remained but
little known until two very distinguished authors, Haller, and Bonnet, at once
raised its reputation.

According to this theory we, and indeed all the children of Adam, were at one
time ipso facto, pent up in the two ovaria of our common mother Eve. There we
lay, as it were asleep, and although astonishing little creatures, yet
completely organized bodies, and perfect miniatures of the forms we have since
assumed; for says Haller, " All our viscera, and the bones themselves were then
already formed, although in a kind of fluid state." That which we call
impregnation, is nothing else than the action of awakening the germ from its
lethargic state by means of the male semen, which stimulates the little
creature's heart to the first pulsation; and so on.

The same kind of idea has lately induced a very celebrated naturalist of
Geneva, and a warm advocate of this theory, to plan out for us a history of
organized bodies previous to the state of impregnation, from which we learn,
first, that we are all much older than what we suppose ourselves to be,
secondly, that all mankind are exactly the same age, the great grandfather not
a second older than the youngest of his great grand children, thirdly, that
this respectable age, which we are all of, may be about six thousand years. The
same natural historian also agrees entirely in opinion with Bazin; that since
that charming long series of years, when we were all packed together along with
Cain and Abel, and the other two hundred thousand million of men, which
according to the best calculations, have since that period gone quo pius Aeneas
quo Tellus dives et Ancus; in a word, since the first creation, during which
time we have been in a kind of lethargic sleep, though not entirely without
motion; that during the whole fifty-seven centuries, I say, previous to our
being awakened by the abovementioned stimulus, we were according to Bazin's
opinion, always growing a little and little: for instance, we were most
probably rather a little bigger at the time we lay beside Cain's nieces, than
when all their uncles and aunts were of the party, as it is very natural to
suppose, that we must then have been considerably more pinched for room. In
this manner our apartment became gradually more easy, and commodious in
proportion as our forefathers were evolved, and we agreed with it, for we kept
continually stretching ourselves more and more, until the succession of
evolution came at last to our turn!!

However extravagant and romantic such conclusions must appear, yet they follow
as natural deductions from the premises of the theory, which gave rise to them.
In support of this theory, its most celebrated abettors, Haller, and
Spallanzani, adduced many experiments, and observations, which we shall examine
more particularly in the next Section. When we consider how conclusive and
striking these observations appear to be at first sight, we shall not wonder at
the general assent, which during these thirty years past, has been given to the
doctrine of the pre-existence of complete organized molecules in the ovaria of
females before impregnation. I myself not only believed in the truth of it, but
defended it in many of my writings; so that in fact the present little volume
contains a confession of my former errors, in regard to which, I wish that may
be true, which Mr. de Luc says some where or other, that, "An error once
detected, becomes a more material truth, than many positive ones, which we
immediately acknowledge to be such."

The unexpected success of a small experiment, which I made, however, with a
view of ascertaining the truth of the doctrine of evolution, first brought me
back to the point from which I ought to have set out, and opened a new road to
a very opposite doctrine. He who thus fights with nature, may from an
unexpected sight, often discover her most concealed treasures.

What gave occasion to the instituting the experiment was as follows: In one of
my walks during some holidays which I spent in the country, I discovered in a
stream, a sort of green armed polypus, which differed from the common green
kind by its long spiral body, and by having short and rather immovable
tentaculae. With the wonders of this little animal, I intended to amuse my
country friends. The delightful warm summer weather which then prevailed, and
the hardy constitution of the polypus itself, favored the experiments which we
made, to discover its power of reproduction so much, that the act of renewal of
the parts became almost perceptible. By the second and third day, the maimed
and divided animal was so many new ones, each with arms, body, tail, etc. But
we plainly remarked that the regenerated animals, although supplied with plenty
of proper food, were always much smaller than before, and a mutilated rump,
always diminished very evidently, both in length and diameter, in proportion as
the lost parts were renewed It is probable that this circumstance has been
either totally overlocked by such as were engaged in observing phenomena of
greater magnitude in the history of this animal, or if it has been observed by
any, it does not seem to have appeared to them, of sufficient importance to be
noticed. That attentive, and accurate observer Roesel, however, seems to have
noticed this fact. Vide Hist. der Polypen, in the third vol. of the
Insecten-belustigungen.
.

Soon after my return to town, I was called to a patient who had a caries. The
disease occupied the lower end of the femur immediately above the knee, and had
caused a pretty extensive and deep ulcer. It healed gradually, but in
proportion as the wound filled up, and the cicactrix formed, all the
surrounding parts sunk so, that the edge of the cicatrix being almost on an
equality with the neighboring parts, the whole formed a broad, though rather
superficial excavation An observation which has been also made by Messrs. Louis
and Fabre, vide their treatises Des Plays avec perte de substance in the Mem.
de l'Acad. de Chirzrg. vol. iv. p. 64 and 106.
. This was exactly the same thing mutatis mutandis, with what happened to the
polypus.

I have since that period, spent a great deal of my leisure moments in the
further investigation of this subject, both in experiment and reflection; the
consequence of which has been to convince me fully.

That there is no such thing in nature, as pre-existing organized germs: but
that the unorganized matter of generation, after being duly prepared, and
having arrived at its place of destination takes on a particular action, or
nisus, which nisus continues to act through the whole life of the animal, and
that by it the first form of the animal, or plant is not only determined, but
afterward preserved, and when deranged, is again restored. A nisus, which
seems therefore to depend on the powers of life, but which is as distinct from
the other qualities of living bodies, (sensibility, irritability, and
contractility) as from the common properties of dead matter: that it is the
chief principle of generation, growth, nutrition, and reproduction, and that to
distinguish it from all others, it may be denominated the Formative Nisus
(Bildungstrieb, or Nisus formativus).

It is to be hoped, that there is no necessity for reminding the reader, that
the expression Formative Nisus, like that of Attraction Vid. Newton at the end
of his Optics: "What I call ATTRACTION, may be performed by IMPULSE, or by some
other means unknown to me. I use that word here to signify only in general any
FORCE by which bodies tend toward one another, whatever be the CAUSE."
, serves only to denote a power, whose constant operation is known from
experience, but whose cause, like the causes of most of the qualities of
matter, is a qualitas occulta to us Qualitas occulta -- "Se l'on entend par ce
mot un principe reel don't on ne peut render raison tout l'univers est dans ce
cas." etc. says Voltaire, vid. his Elemeus de la Philosphie de Newton.

And in another place he further adds, "Il falloit respecter les qualites
occultes; car depuis le brin d'herbe que l'ambre attira, jusqu'a la route que
tant d'astres suiveut dans l'espace; depuis la formation d'une mite dans un
fromage jusqu'a la Galexie; soil que vous considerer, une pierre qui tomb,
soil que vous suiviez le course d'une comete traversant les deux tout est
qualite occulte."




We may say of this, as of all similar powers, what Ovid says: -- Causa latet,
vis est notissima. But the great merit in the study of these powers, is to
ascertain more accurately their effects, and to reduce them under general laws
One of the most learned, and ingenious English physicians of the present time,
Dr. G. Fordyce, has very lately said, in treating a physiological point
something similar to this, "Although the study of causes of original powers be
totally absurd and futile, yet the laws of their action are capable of
investigation by experiment, and applicanle to the evolving much useful
knowledge." Philosoph. Trans. V. LXXVIII. P. 1. p. 36.
.

D'Alembert's successor, Mr. de Condorcet, in his Eulogy on Haller, and when
speaking of Irritability, says, "The truth of this doctrine was, as usually is
the case, at first denied; but when it was discovered, and that could not be
done any longer with honor, they concluded with observing, that it had been
discovered long before!"

When it is considered that some people have been lately possessed of
sufficient penetration to discover the doctrine of irritability in the writings
of Homer, and the circulation of the blood described in the books of Solomon
the Preacher; it would be really astonishing if this doctrine of the Formative
Principle were allowed the merits of novelty, and that nothing of the kind were
to be discovered in all the works which have been written on the subject within
these two thousand years past No one has given such a clear proof of this as
Ad. Mich. Birkholz, Philos. et Med. Dr. et Facult. Med. Assess. in his Dissert.
de Respiratione ejusque fine summo atque ultimo, Lips. 1782. After informing
us, that the animal spirits (Spiritus vitales) which the blood derives from the
air, is nothing more than the principium vitale of the ancients, or the
irritability and sensibility of Haller, he adds, "Veteres philosophi hoc
principium agnorerint vicarium Dei ministrum et presidentiam superioris
agentis, et apud Graecos quidem sub persona Jovis colebatur: Jovis omnia plena!
A vetuslissimis philosophis, a Platone, et platonicis Arabibus, et le Cat,
appellatur anima, spiritus et idea mundi, vis et natura genetrix et plastica,
ideae operatrices: a Rayo flamma vitalis; ab eodem et postea imprimis a Newtono
principium trahens: a chemicis humidum radicale, et quintum elementum: a
Colonne invisibilia fermenta: a Blumenbachio nisus formativus. A philosophis
Hermeticis mercurius universalis et philosophorum: a Thouvenel Gas
Aeroelectricum, ab aliis aliter appellatur."
;especially as the Vis Plastica of the ancients, and more particularly of the
peripatetic schools, would seem as far as the concordance of name goes to
attempt one to such a qui pro quo.

I should be extremely happy, however, if any person would name one of the old
writers, who, in describing the Vis Plastica, has given such a distinct idea of
it, or such a one as corresponds so well with the phenomena of generation Of
all authors who have treated of this power, F. Bonamica, the well-known
disciple of Aristotle, explains himself perhaps the most correctly, de
formatiane faetus, p. 528. "Spiritus in aerea seminis substantia comprehensus,
aspersus autem a calore coelesti, et vi a patre accepta, et ea quam a caelo
participat in uterum faeminae conjectus, concoquet materias a faemena infusas,
et pro ratiom ipsarum variis modis afficiens efficit instrumenta. Dum vero ea
fab^icat appellatur. Facultas (...) seu (...). Sed ubi extructa fuerint
instrumenta, ut iis uti queat, quae prius erat vis formatrix, illis utens
degenerat in animam."
, as that which I have attempted to give (especially in the Third Section) of
this Essay.

Professor Wolff of Petersburg, a physiologist of great penetration, has
explained the growth of Animals, and Vegetables by another power, which he
calls Vis Essentialis, and which one on first hearing, might be apt to confound
with the Nisus Formativus.

Whoever takes the trouble, however, of perusing the sentiments which Professor
Wolff entertains of the Vis Essentialis, as given in his Theoria Generationis,
will soon discern the great difference there is between the two For example, p.
12. "Vis vegetabilium essentialis ea est wis, qua humores ex circumjacente
terra, vel aliis corparibus colliguntur subire radicem coguntur, per omnem
plantam distribuuntur, partem ad diversa loca deponuntur, partem for as
expelluntur."

P. 13. Quae cunque vero sit haec vis, sive attractrix, sive propulsiva, sive
aeri expanso debita sive composita ex omnibus hisce et pluribus; modo praestet
enarratos effectus, et ponatur, posita planta et humoribus nutriciis
applicatis, id quod experientia confirmatum est: sufficient ea praesenti scopo
et vocabitur a me Vis vegetabilium Essentialis:"

And in respect to the generation of animals, p. 73. "Embryonem hoc tempore
(ovo sc. 36. horas incubato) ex substantia ovi nutrire demonstrant illius
volumen auctum, perfectones acquisitae, absentia cujuscunque alius materae
consumtio alluminis et vitelli succedens, experimenta inferius recensenda;
consequenter: transire particular nurients ex ovo ad embryonem: et existere vin
qua id perficitur quae non est sustaltica cordis et arteriarum, neque hinc
facta pressio in venas vicinas neque harum compressio a motu musculorum,
dirigentem absque canalibus viam determinatibus, adeoque analogam illi (. 1.)
quam aeque vocabo essentialem."


.

According to him the Vis Essentialis is only that power, by which the
nourishment is distributed to the different parts of an animal, or vegetable.
This is, indeed, necessary to the Formative Principle; but it is quite distinct
from the principle itself. For this Vis Essentialis exerts itself with equal
force in the growth of even the most deformed, and unnatural excrescences of
plants, and trees, etc. where the Formative Principle does not seem to act at
all, or at least with no regularity.

On the other hand, the Vis Essentialis may be very weak, or deficient, as in
such organized bodies, which are badly nourished, whilst the Formative
Principle remains in full force, and so on.

However unpleasant it may be to me, yet I feel myself forced, before entering
more particularly on the nature of the Formative Principle, to premise a
refutation of the arguments which have been brought, and especially by Baron
von Haller, in favor of evolution of the female egg But in doing so, I shall
pass over all those arguments against the doctrine of evolution, which have
lately appeared in a most ingenious and witty publication, written expressly
for that purpose. Vide Doubts concerning the Theory of Evolution, in a letter
addressed to Mons. Sonebier, from L. P. (Patrin) translated form the original
French manuscript into German by G. Forster, Goettengen, 1788.
. What consoles me, however, in being thus obliged to dissent from the opinions
of a man, to whose works and writings I owe so much, is, partly the reflection,
that whatever useful may be contained in the present sheets, was occasioned by
examining into, and prosecuting his enquiries, and partly my doubts whether he
himself might not have altered his ideas, and have relinquished, in a great
degree, his old opinions on the subject, had he lived to have finished that
part of the last edition of his Physiology He himself wrote me a letter, dated
the 28th August 1776, in which he says "I thank Providence for having granted
me so long a life as has enabled me to give an improved and corrected edition
of my Physiology, without which, I must have left many errors to be detected
after my death."
, which treats of this matter.

Indeed, had Haller still persisted to support the doctrine of evolution, and
oppose that of gradual formation, his fame would have suffered as little from
it, as Harvey's from his denying the existence of the lacteal vessels, or
Newton's from his disbelief of the possibility of colorless tubes in the fern.

SECT. II. Examination of the principal Arguments in favor of the supposed
Pre-existence of Organized Germs in the Ovaria of Females, and Refutation of a
Doctrine.
ON the 13th of May 1758 was read before the Royal Society of Sciences at
Gottingen, the celebrated paper of Baron von Haller, (then president of the
society) on the formation of the heart in the embryo, in which it was believed
an argumentum crucis was offered in support of the doctrine of pre-existing
germs. The author says, That he found that not only the membrane of the yolk of
an incubated egg, but also its blood vessels, constituting what was called the
figura venosa, were a continuation of the membrane and blood vessels of the
chick. But the yolk of the egg existed in the hen previous to impregnation, and
therefore most probably the embryo also, although too small to be discovered by
our eyes. The prudent author however expressed himself at first very cautiously
and in an undecided manner on this syllogism "L'evolution commence a me
pariotre la plus probable."
.

Mons. Bonnet, however, who soon after published his work on organized bodies,
and, who was previously propossessed in favor of the doctrine of the evolution
of pre-existing organic germs, took hold of this observation of Haller's, and
pronounced it to be absolutely unanswerable, and considered the truth of the
hypothesis as fully established by it Vide his preface to the work alluded to.
Ed. 5th. "Enfin cette deconverte importante (que le germe appartenoit a la
femelle, qu'il preexistoit ainsi a la faecondation, et que l'evolution eloit la
loi naturelle des etres organizes) que j'attendois et que j'avois ose predire
me fut annoncee en 1757, par Mons. le Baron de Haller qui la tenoit de la
nature elle meme." La "decouverte de Mr. de Haller prouvoit d'une maniere
incontestable que le poulet appartenoit originairement a la poule et qu'il
pre-existoit a la CONCEPTION."

And in his letter to Mr. von Haller, dated 30th of October 1757, he says, "Vos
poulets m'enchantent: je n'avois pas espere que le secret de la generation
commonceroit sitot a se devoiler. C'est bien vous, Monsieur, qui avez scu
prendre la nature sur le fait."


.

Haller also allowed himself to be daily more and more convinced of the force
of his own observations, insomuch that in his latter writings he made little
scruple of declaring them equally decisive, as his friend Bonnet had done.

In acknowledging that I myself, as well as some hundred other physiologists,
and naturalists, looked on this celebrated observation as the foundation ston^
of the theory of evolution; I hink I need make the less ceremony in expressing
my astonishment how we could have allowed ourselves, as in the present case, to
attribute so much force to an assertion which absolutely proves nothing!

For, granting it to be fully proved that there existed a continuation between
the membrane and vessels of the chick and yolk, (granting it, I say; for, the
fact as the most accurate, and scrupulous investigation teaches, still remains
uncertain, as every one will readily acknowledge who has taken the pains of
examining fecundated eggs,) yet it does not follow that the membrane and
vessels, even if they really were a continuation of each other, co-existed from
the beginning. Do we not see many instances in organized bodies where this last
mentioned circumstance exists, and yet where it is impossible to grant the
supposition which has been drawn as a conclusion from it. For instance, all
those singular vegetable productions, which are caused by the puncture of
certain infects in many plants. Thus the Spongiae cynosbatae are produced
entirely in consequence of the puncture of the Cynips in the rose-bush. The
bark of this shrub is continued over this spongy and quite accidental
production; nay, if we take, and cut any fresh branch which has some of these
spongy bodies on it, we shall find that the wood of the branch appears to be an
evident continuation of the woody part of these substances. But shall we from
hence conclude, that this accidental production originally co-existed with the
shrub itself, and that in every trunk, and every branch of every rose-bush in
the world, the enveloped germs of innumerable spongiae cynosbatae should have
always lain there like so much hidden wealth, and would have always remained so
until the thousand thousandth part of them were by chance excited to evolution
by the benevolent puncture of a little cynips.

Again, in the animal kingdom, do we not often see after an accidental
inflammation of any of the viscera, a new membrane formed as it were by the
effusion of the lymphatic part of the blood; and in the course of a few days,
do we not observe many blood vessels produced in this membrane, which
anastomose with the blood vessels of the neighboring viscera; and yet it would
be ridiculous to suppose that these vessels co-existed from the first with the
old ones. And for fear that it be objected to us, that these are mere
preternatural appearances in the diseased state of animals, we beg them to
recall the late celebrated membrana decidua of Dr. Hunter, which after a
fruitful impregnation, lines the whole cavity of the uterus, and whose
blood vessels, especially where the umbilical chord is inserted in the
placenta, are most evidently connected and anastomose with the blood vessels of
the mother.

In all these cases, the new formed membranes, and their blood vessels are the
mere productions of the neighboring viscera, which renders it probable, that
the membrane and vessels of the embryo in a fecundated egg, are produced in
like manner from the membrane and vessels of the yolk.

Mr. Paul In the preface to the 8th vol. of the Collection Academique par
etrangere, p. 22. sqq.
, a natural historian of great penetration, has objected to Haller's
demonstration, that allowing the membranes of the yolk with its invisible
vessels to have pre-existed in the hen, yet it is possible that the embryo is
only formed during incubation, and that its blood vessels afterward unite with
the blood vessels of the membrane of the yolk, and thus form an anastomosis.

Baron von Haller immediately declared loudly against this objection, and
denied it altogether as a thing impossible, that the tender vessels of the
microscopic embryo should be capable of anastomosing with the large
blood vessels of the giant yolk "Nunquam fieri potest ut inter tubulum
millionesies minorem, et millionesies majorem continuitas oviatur." Elenent.
Physiol. T. VIII. P. 1. p. 94. compare with his first lines of Physiology, 883,
and with the Opera Minora, T. XI. p. 419.
.

But what is rather singular, is, that this same most ingenious and meritorious
author, who denies the possibility of such an anastomosis, supposes without any
hesitation, and in the same work Elem. Physiolog.
, when explaining human conception, that the very minute germ as soon as it has
arrived at the cavity of the uterus, forms an adhesion with it by means of its
placenta; -- And how? Just in the same way that he denies it to the embryo of
the hen; that is to say, by an anastomosis taking place between the microscopic
and tender branches of the umbilical vessels, and the giant ones of the
maternal uterus.

The modern advocates for the theory of evolution, have taken this observation
of the yolk of the egg, as the prop of their hypothesis.

Long before this however, the spawn of the frog had been employed for the same
service.

Near a century indeed before that period, Swammerdam announced the wonderful
discovery, that the black points in the spawn of a frog were so many perfectly
formed little frogs, and that they pre-existed in the ovariae, although not to
be discovered by the eye Miracl. Nature. p. 21. "Admiratione dignum est, nigrum
illud punctum, quod in ovis ranarum videre est, ipsum ranunculum omnibus suis
partibus absolutum; albicantem verum et circumfusum illum liquorem non nisi
alimentum ejus esse; quod ipsum sensim dilatatum ita attenuatur, ut exire cum
velet possit," etc.

"Magis mirum est hunc ipsum ranunculum in ovaris usque adeo exiguum ortus et
incrementi sui principium habere, ut fere visum effugiat, ut ipsum animal sub
hac tantula mole delitescat."

And a little way further on, he draws the general conclusion; "Nullus mihi in
rerum naturae generationi, sed soli propagatione vel incremento partium locus
esse videtur ubi casus omnis excludatur."


.

The good man seemed to have had a pre-sentiment of the uncertainty and
instability of all vain worldly honors, and he therefore, as is well known,
soon after betook himself to a more solid mysterious enjoyment, in which Mlle.
Bourignon bore a part. And, indeed, it happened as he appears to have foreseen;
for the ungrateful world now ascribe the merits of that discovery to the
celebrated Abbe Spallanzani, who has maintained it in several of his writings,
but more particularly in the second volume of his Essays Dissertazioni di
fisica animale e vegetabile, T. XI. in Modena, 1780, 8.
.

He calls the little black points of the fecundated spawn of frogs, Tadpoles,
or young frogs "A parlare filosofocamente l'uovo non e che il gerino in se
stesso concentrato, e ristretto, il quale mediante la fecondazione si sviluppa
ed acquista le fatezze di animale." p. 11. XVII.
; and as this little black point exactly resembles the same in the unfecundated
spawn "Questi globetti non fecondati non sono per verun conto distinguibili dai
fecondati." XVIII.
, he reasons agreeably to his logic, that the tadpoles must have existed in the
mother "Ma i globetti fecondati non sono che i feti ranini, XVII. Adunque i
globetti non fecondati lo saranno altresi; e consiguemente nella nostra rana il
feto esiste in lei pria che abbiasi la fecondazione del maschio." p. 12. XIX.
.

I do not know what would be thought of that chemist who assertes that the
Arbor Dianae pre-existed in a mass of Amalgam of silver, because when a weak
solution of silver was poured on it, a little tree seemed to spring out of it.

One ought to be ashamed of wasting much time in the refutation of an
assertion, the falsity of which any unprejudiced person who is not altogether
unaccustomed to observations of the kind may convince himself of every spring.

Whoever has taken the trouble, accurately, to examine the spawn of the frog
must confess, that the idea of demonstrating the little black points contained
in it to be so many complete formed tadpoles, partakes greatly of Brother
Peters's method of reasoning in the Tale of the Tub, where he demonstrates to
his brothers that the brown loaf is a piece of excellent roast mutton.

But the abettors of the theory of organized germs have gone a step further in
support of their opinions. They refer to cases where even young girls, in all
their maiden innocence, have become pregnant from the untimely, and premature
evolution of one of these organized germs.

The concurrence of facts is sometimes most wonderful. It happened that in the
very same year that Swammerdam announced his discovery in the spawn of the
frog, that a case was published in the Ephem. rerum. not. curios. delivered to
the society by a celebrated courtphysician of those times Dr. Claudius, which
exactly suited as a confirmation of Swammerdam's opinion. -- A miller's wife
was delivered of a little girl whose belly seemed of an unusual size. Eight
days afterward this little big-bellied child was seized with such violent
pains and restlessness, that every one who was present thought it could not
outlive the next instant. The sick infant however in the mean time actually
bore a well-formed, elegant, lively, little daughter about the size of one's
middle finger, which was regularly baptized. During the time, and after the
birth, the waters, placenta, and all other impurities were rightly discharged.
But both the little mother and daughter died early the following day I adopt
the very words of a contemporary physician, Dr. Otto, who was consulted by the
grandmother (the miller's wife) during her pregnancy. His nephew has vindicated
and illustrated the whole history in a most learned and subtle manner. D. C.
J. Aug. Ottonis Epistola de faetu puerpera sive de faetu in faetu. Weissenfels,
1748. 8vo. That this extraordinary history is also well calculated to interest
the casuist is evident, from the Disquisitionum filiola, quam act, dierum
enfans vivam enixa est babtismi capax.




Baron von Haller very judiciously classes this case with another from the
Transactions of the Academy of Sciences of Stockholm, where on dissecting a
young girl, bones, teeth, and hairs were found in a tumor of the mysentery.
These two cases he looks on as principal evidences for the truth of the
doctrine of germs pre-existing in the mother.

In Schmucker's Miscellaneous Surgical Essays an anonymus correspondent sends
the history of the dissection of a girl, in whom, instead of an uterus, there
was found a hard hairy body of the size of a large walnut, and which resembled
an ill-shaped head. It had two perfect teeth, and contained in its cavity
something like brain.

Now since the abettors of the theory of evolution so loudly remonstrate
against, and complain of the unfair method of proceeding by opposing mere
argument to the facts which they bring forward in support of their opinions, I
shall for the present totally abstain from all reasoning, and endeavor to
satisfy these gentlemen by adducing fact for fact, observation for observation,
and those of no less wonderful, and entertaining a nature than theirs; for they
will prove, that not only men but male animals have been equally in a thriving
way with young virgins; and I trust the testimonies of the truth of these
stories will be found equally respectable with those of the opposite party.

To the case extracted from the Memoirs of the Academy of Stockholm I oppose
one from the History of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Paris, where an Abbe
was interrupted very mal apropos whilst instituting some experiments on
generation. He was alarmed by an extraordinary increase of bulk in a certain
part, which another Abbe (the unfortunate Abelard) was deprived of in
consequence of a similar experiment.

The tumor increased so much that he was obliged to submit to an operation, and
his surgeon assured the academy that he cut an ossified child "On y distinguoit
la tete, les pieds, et les yeux."
from the part.

To the story of the miller's wife I beg leave to subjoin one from the
Philosophical Transactions of London, where an account is given of a male
greyhound that bore a living puppy per anum; and in the place of Drs. Otto an
Claudius, who witnessed the truth of the first fact, I shall mention two names
of which England ought to boast: Dr. Wallis, and Edmund Halley.

Lastly to the anonymous in Schmucker I oppose an anonymous in the works of the
respectable Fr. Ruysh, who was presented with a similar production. It was a
bony case, half as big as a common walnut, together with four perfect mollares,
and a knot of hair, which, he assured the doctor, he had cut from the stomach
of a male subject.

Thus I have adduced authority for authority; nor do I believe it possible for
any one to go more conscienteously to work than I have done; and so far
therefore I ust we are quits.

Were I allowed however to speak my mind freely on this matter, I should advise
all such auxiliary troops to be withdrawn. My only reason for bringing them on
the field was merely to oppose those of my antagonists.

These therefore are the principal arguments, which, I have to oppose to what
the advocates for the theory of evolution consider as the strongest, and most
decisive proofs of their theory.

But experience supplies me with another source of facts, which may be used as
arguments against this theory, and which, to unprejudiced, and judicious
readers, ought to be sufficient whereby to ascertain its true degree of
probability.

For instance, the well established, and universal truth; that the first
appearance of a newly conceived animal, or plant, is never to be discovered
immediately on impregnation, even by the most powerful armed eye; no such thing
is to be seen until a considerable time has elapsed.

It is not worth while to enter into a refutation of the fabulous assertion of
Hippocrates, and of so many others of his old and worthy followers, that
perfectly distinct, and well formed human embryos were to be seen in the very
first days of conception. Considering the few aids, and little opportunity they
had in those days of making such observations, great allowance is to be made;
and the more so, when we consider that even modern physicians of much more
extensive experience in these matters, have been guilty of similar assertions.
Mauriceau has amused us with representations of foetusses of one day, and of
three days and a half, etc. and Malpighi and Croune have assured us that they
had seen the embryo of the chick and its appendices in the egg of a trod hen
before the egg had been sat upon. The last author indeed observed it, he says,
in the addle egg of hens that never had been cocked.

It is impossible however to discover any thing before the third week after
conception, which any cautious and creditable observer would presume to
pronounce a human embryo, and in the fecundated egg nothing can be observed,
which has even the most distant resemblance to a chick in the first twelve
hours, nor indeed until the end of the second day. Previous to this period of
time peculiar to each animal, and vegetable, In the hare the first traces of
the young are not seen until the ninth day; in the sheep not before the
nineteenth; in the deer not before the seventh week.
it is quite impossible to distinguish the newly conceived offspring; which
circumstance, considering the perfection, and powers of our microscopes, is by
no means favorable to the theory of evolution.

Nor, is it at all easy to comprehend how the advocates for that theory make
the phenomena of the accidental origin and growth of certain preternatural
parts agree with their doctrine of pre-existing organic germs.

A few instances of this kind will serve instead of many.

A woman conceives, but the foetus instead of being in the uterus, is situated
in one of the Fallopean tubes. The tube at last bursts from the increase of
bulk of this strayed animal, and it falls into the cavity of the abdomen. What
does nature do? She pours out a quantity of plastic lymph, which forms itself
evidently into organized membranes, incrusting and inveloping the foetus like a
mummy, by which it is prevented from putrefaction; for were this allowed to
take place, it would occasion certain death to the mother, but who, preserved
by this contrivance, is enabled to carry the troublesome, though not dangerous
load, for a considerable number of years. On opening the body after death, we
evidently perceive this new, and, accidentally formed membrane, to be richly
supplied with blood vessels, In the eighth volume of the Commentaries of the
Royal Society of Goitingen I have given the description of a foetus of this
kind which had lain eight years within the mother. This specimen was presented
to the Museum of the Academy by my very worthy friend Mr. Buchner of Gotha.
which it would be rather difficult to prove, had pre-existed in the organic
germ.

A person breaks both bones of the forearm, but is so restless as to disturb
nature in her usual process of healing them, that is, by means of a new
ossification. In this case what does she do? She forms a new joint of the
broken ends of both bones; making as it were a second elbow which can be moved
at pleasure without any assistance from the other hand.

Another person dislocates his thigh bone from it is natural situation in the
Ilium, and nature endeavors to remedy the evil, by forming a new socket for it
In my Osteology I have given numerous examples of this, vid. page 43.
.

A child is born with a hydrocephalus, occasioned by mere accidental
circumstances; such for instance as the frequent, and too violent connection of
the father with the mother, during the time of her gestation. Owing to this
disease, the cranium becomes preternaturally distended, and immence spaces are
left between the very thin, and greatly distended bones. In order to remedy
this, nature forms detached osseous points in these interstices, which points,
at last become true ossa triquetra, filling up all the dangerous voids, and
uniting all the bones of the head together.

These ossa triquetra however do not belong to the natural structure of the
foetus, and are very seldom to be met with in the sculls of savages, or of
brute animals. It is hardly possible therefore that they should have preexisted
in the organic germ: and yet they are as perfect bones as any others of the
head, having true, and well formed sutures. The sutures of these bones are not
always locked in with the sutures of the other bones of the head; but it often
happens, that they are so numerous, and so thick together, that those in the
middle evidently construct their own ones. What is there however which exhibits
more art than the structure of a true suture; its double, nay treble row of
teeth, the corresponding depressions, and the astonishing manner in which they
are clasped together?

The conclusion which naturally follows, is, that if perfect bones, new and
preternatural joints, new organized and vascular membranes can be formed, where
there was no ground for supposing a pre-existing germ, what necessity is there
for this doctrine of envelopement?

But the phenomena which occur in the generation of mules, so completely resute
all our ideas of pre-existing organic germs, that one is at a loss to imagine,
how, after a due attention to this subject, such a theory should have found any
serious abettors. I should suppose that a single experiment, such as that of
Mr. Koelreuter, who by repeatedly producing prolific bastard plants,
transformed one species of tobacco ( nicotiana rustica) into another (
nicotiana paniculata) so completely, that it had not the smallest resemblance
to its maternal parent; that such an experiment, I say must cure the most
partial advocate for the theory of evolution, of his error. This excellent
observer, by artificially impregnating the first species of tobacco with the
farina of the last mentioned, obtained prolific bastard seeds from it, and with
the plants which sprung from these, he repeated the same experiment,
impregnating them with the farina of the Nicotiana paniculata. As the plants
which he procured from the seeds of this last combination, differed more from
the original maternal plant, he repeated the same process with it, and
proceeded to do so with every new offspring, until he obtained six plants,
which in every respect appeared perfectly similar to the paniculata; so that in
the classical work, in which he gives a narrative of this, he appears perfectly
justifiable in entitling it, A complete metamorphosis of one natural species of
plants into another.

I know perfectly well, that the favorers of the theory of evolution endeavor
to explain the production of bastards, or mules, by saying, that the male
semen, besides its stimulating power of awakening the female germs from their
state of stupor, and inactivity; also ascribe to it certain formative powers,
by which the germ may be altered in a certain degree, so as so resemble the
father a little. But what in the name of Heaven is such a subterfuge than the
silent acknowledgement of the insufficiency of the germ theory, and of the
necessity of having recourse to formative powers, in order to extricate it? If
these formative powers, however, are so strong as totally to change the
structure and appearance of the maternal germ, and that in the course of a few
generations, it is rather difficult to conceive the utility of such a theory.

SECT. III. Proofs of the Formative Nisus, and an Attempt to ascertain some of
its Laws.
IT is easier to overturn, than to establish a theory; and the reproach has
been often applied to old reformers, that they have succeeded better in
attempts of the first, than of the last kind. Yet what Mons. Bonnet excellently
remarks on this subject may be very true Demontrer une errcur, c'est plus que
decouvrir une ve^ite: car l'on peut ignorer beaucoup; mais le peut que l'on
scait, il faut au moins le savoir bien. Presace de l'Essai sur l'ame.
, that the detection of an error is often of greater consequence than the
discovery of a new fact. In this respect therefore, I trust the present sheets
will at least be allowed some merits, since they point out the defects of a
late beloved, and almost universally adopted theory. I hope, however, at the
same time, that the one which I give in its place will be found more agreeable
to what we observe in nature.

No one can be more fully persuaded of the immense gap which exists between the
organized, and unorganised, between the animated, and the inanimate world, than
I am; and although I have the greatest respect for the penetration of those who
discover a gradual scale of ascent and descent in the works of nature, yet I
confess I am at a loss to guess how they make it pass from organic to inorganic
bodies. Such a reflection, however, ought by no means, to deter us from
employing the phenomena of either of these classes of bodies for explaining the
phenomena of the other: and so far do I consider it as an argument, not of the
least importance, for proving the existence of the Formative Nisus in organic
bodies, that even in the inorganic ones there exists traces of a Formative
Power; not of a Formative Nisus however, at least, in the sense this word is
used in this work; for here it is considered as one of the properties of the
living principle, and consequently not to be imagined as belonging to dead
matter: but that this last Formative Power is demonstrated by the regularity
and invariable shape of certain bodies which we find to be formed of it.

For only to adduce one or two instances, we find nothing more elegant, than
certain metallic crystallizations, which as to their external aspect, bear so
striking a resemblance to certain organized bodies, that they become a very
good example for explaining to us the manner in which bodies are formed from
rude and unorganized matter. Such for instance, is that species of native
dendritical silver, imbeded in a matrix of quarz from Mexico, Farnkrautsilber,
and which resembles the foliage of the fern, or to name something more common,
that undescribable beautiful moss-looking texture of brass, which is observed
in breaking a piece of it, after the first fusion.

These as I have already said, are adduced as mere examples of the existence of
a Formative Principle in unorganized bodies.

And now for the true formative effort in the animated world.

I know no means so well calculated for rendering the existence, and activity
of this nisus evident to an impartial eye, as to observe the origin and
progress of such organized bodies, which increase so rapidly in bulk, that the
action of the growth becomes almost evident; and which are of so delicate and
semitransparent a texture, as to be capable of being evidently seen through
with the assistance of a microscope, and a due degree of light.

The vegetable kingdom supplies us with a very good example of this kind, in
the simple production of a most simple water plant, (conferva fontinalis) which
is commonly to be met with every spring, in wells, ponds, and springs, or in
the wooden pipes through which water flows.

The whole plant consists of a single uniform straight fine thread, of a bright
green color, and about half an inch in length, and whose under extremity is
generally inserted in a bed of slime. As these threads, however, are extremely
numerous, and grow very close together, they look like a very fine fur of the
most beautiful green color, with which considerable spaces of the places above
mentioned are sometimes covered.

I have attentively observed the propagation of this water plant in the
beginning of the spring, and to me it appeared to take place in the following
manner. The upper end of the fibrile began gradually to swell, and divide into
a number of small round points, which at last disengaged themselves from the
parental thread, and in the number of some thousands, attached themselves to
the sides of the glass in which I made the experiment. Soon afterward, these
round bodies began to shoot out a small point, which almost visibly lengthened
till they had acquired their due size. All this took place in the space of
twice twenty-four hours, counting from the first moment that the end of the old
thread began to swell.

Both the rapid growth of this plant, and its transparent texture, afforded me
means of discovering not only its structure, but also the slightest changes
that took place in it. This kind of moss is equally simple internally, as
externally; and under the strongest magnifying powers, and by the best light,
we can discover nothing else than a fine vesicular appearance, like a green
froth, surrounded by a very thin delicate membrane.

But in spite of the distinctness of texture of the little green points which
adhered to the sides of the vessel, there was nothing to be seen like the germ
of an enveloped filament in them, such as was soon to be produced from it: but
only when the little round body had attained a certain degree of perfection, a
small shoot seemed to spring out of it, in such a manner, that its act of
evolution seemed to be promoted merely by that part of the vesicular texture of
the round point, which was most contiguous to the filament, passing gradually
over to it. As the filament increased in length, the little round body
gradually decreased in magnitude, and became of a paler color, so that at
last, when the filament had arrived at its full growth, there remained just a
perceptible swelling at the inferior end, and which served as a root to the new
filament.

With an equal degree of distinctness with which the progress of the Formative
Nisus of this plant becomes conspicuous, we can also clearly discover it in
many animals; especially in such, as like this kind of moss, possess the
advantages of a rapid growth, and great transparency of texture. This is the
case with the armed polypi, which on account of the miracles they are capable
of performing, have within these last forty years been an object of general
surprise, and admiration. All the known species of this animal have a kind of
gelatinous body, which, whether it be of a green, yellow or brown color, etc.
is still sufficiently transparent to be capable of being distinctly seen
through, if a proper lens and light be employed. Its texture is uniform, and
simple, and so homogenous, consisting entirely of gelatinous points, which seem
to be kept together by a still thinner jelly, that nothing seems concealed from
or obscured to the eye of the observer. Now, when this animal is about to
produce its young, a swelling or tumefaction takes place on a single spot of
its body; and from this swelling there shoots out first the cylindrical body,
and then the tentaculae of the young polypus. These are all of so considerable
a size as to be observed with the naked eye: and when we consider this
circumstance, and all the others already mentioned, there does not appear the
smallest probable ground for supposing, that an organized germ had pre-existed
there, and was now evolving.

I refer it to the internal feelings of every one who has attentively observed
this kind of production in animals, and plants of so simple a texture as those
alluded to, and who at the same time have well attended to all the arguments
brought forward in the foregoing fection against the doctrine of the
pre-existence of the embryo of the chick in the yolk of the egg, whether in
passing in his own mind to the generation of the more perfect or warm-blooded
animals (as for instance by the most accurate investigation of the phenomena of
the beginning, progress, and form of the embryo in the fecundated egg, and also
of the many other parts Nidus pulli, bulla amnion, figura venosa, etc.
which are never to be found in the unfecunded one) whether, I say, his
conviction leads him to believe in the pre-existence of enveloped organic
germs; or, in the existence of a nisus, by which a new being is formed from the
unorganized materials of generation.

All the arguments which have hitherto been deduced from the phenomena of
generation in support of the existence of a Nisus Formativus, gains new, and
additional weight from the consideration of the phenomena of reproduction; this
so wonderful power of organized bodies by which lost, and mutilated parts are
again renewed.

Generation, and reproduction are both modifications of one, and the same
power; the last being nothing else than a partial repetition of the first.
Whatever tends to elucidate the one, must therefore throw light on the other.

I have frequently repeated the experiments alluded to in the First Section, by
which I endeavored to discover the power of reproduction in the green armed
polypus, and have constantly met with the same success. The little mutilated
animal was always diminished in bulk, in proportion as its new arms or new body
were pushed out. It became evident with what efforts nature hastened to renew
the determinate form of the maimed animal, and also, that from the short period
of time, and the improbability of the polypus having taken a sufficient
quantity of nourishment to supply materials for the new members (since all
wounded polypi eat less than usual); From these circumstances I say, it became
evident, that owing to the force of the Formative Nisus with which the parts
were endowed, the remaining portion of the mutilated animal, was in some
degree, converted into the new members, and thus the disturbed structure
renewed.

I am well aware, that the advocates for the theory of Evolution, will, in
order to help themselves out of this difficulty, have recou^se to an
hypothesis, which of all improbable ones, may be styled the most romantic, and
improbable; and according to which it is supposed, "That in every part of the
polypus, there exists innumerable germs enveloped, and torpid as it were, which
lie like a hidden store, until it shall please the fancy of a naturalist to
rouse them into action, and free them from their state of imprisonment, by the
enlivening cut of a pair of scissars."

Now, let any one compare this explanation with the naked appearances which
take place in the above, and many other experiments on the armed polypus, the
process of which are so easy to be discovered. -- I shall at present content
myself with relating two of these experiments. When we take the half of two
polypi of different kinds, for instance, the anterior half of a green one, and
the posterior half of a brown one, and bring them together at the bottom of a
proper glass, they join together, and form in this manner, one of these
monsters of mythology, representing a group composed of different parts of
different animals.

According to the theory of Evolution, however, very different phenomena must
have occurred. Instead of this junction between the two halves, each one ought
to have evolved from an organic germ that part of which it had been deprived
of; but this is not what we observe; it was more natural that the two parts
should join by the means of their formative powers, than that each of the
halves should of itself have been metamorphosed to a complete animal by the
manner described above.

There is a well known experiment however, which is admirably calculated to
demonstrate both the improbability of the supposed pre-existing germs, and at
the same time, the activity of the Formative Nisus. When we take the polypus,
and do not divide it in pieces, but merely slit open its belly longitudinally,
so as to destroy that cavity; and as it were, metamorphose the shape of the
animal from a cylindrical to a flat form; instead of a number of organic germs
being set free from the cut edges, and of their being each evolved, one of the
two following occurrences takes place; either the animal rolls itself together
in the usual form, so that the edges of the wound meet and coalesce, or if it
remains like a piece of flat tape, it begins soon after to swell in the middle,
as if it were blown up, and there is gradually formed within it a new belly.

In both these cases there is no occasion for new materials, all that is done
is a mere reparation of the disturbed structure.

In man and other warm-blooded animals the power of reproduction is much more
limited; mited not only on account of the great diversity of materials of which
they are composed, but also the different quantity of living principle peculiar
to each of these materials, and by the mutual dependence and action which they
exercise on each other. And yet we often observe in them evident marks of this
power of reproduction, tending to confirm all that has been said on this head,
concerning the polypus; nails have been observed to grow on the stump of a
finger, even although the first joint was completely lost Pecklin and Talp have
seen instances of this kind.
It would be rather a bold conjecture to suppose that nature had foreseen such
accidents, and had therefore sown all the fingers and toes with the organic
germs of nails, etc. And on the contrary, how agreeable to nature is it to
deduce the whole phenomenon from the activity of the formative powers, whose
efforts are sufficiently strong to reproduce nails on the extremities of the
fingers, nay even in unusual parts.

Another equally well known, and interesting fact of this kind, is, where
nature endeavors to supply the loss of an extremity, whose complicated
structure it would have been difficult for her to restore, by the production of
a more simple and uniform substance. Thus, that celebrated surgeon, Morand,
gives the description of a hare, which, a considerable time before its death,
had had one of its fore legs shot off, the place of which nature had
endeavored to supply with a kind of bony stump, which, although not like the
original, quoad materiem, yet resembled taliter qualiter quoad forman
"C'etoit," to use his own expression "une espece de jambe de bois, don't la
nature scule avoit faet le pais."
.

If, as I flatter myself, the few phenomena of generation, and reproduction
already taken notice of, are sufficient to prove the undeniable existence of
the Formative Nisus, there remain many others tending to explain its modus
operandi; and to ascertain some of the laws by which that mode seems to be
regulated. I look upon the following to be of this kind, that is, as the mere
result of undoubted observation.

I. The activity of the Nisus, is, in an inverse ratio, to the age of the
organized body.

For however certain it may be, as has been formerly remarked, that some time
is necessary before the first marks of the new conceived fruit becomes visible,
yet it is equally well ascertained, that after this interval, the formation
proceeds with astonishing celerity.

In general, the embryos of the earlier months are represented in a very
unshapely form, but this may be owing either to the person who gives the
representation; or to this, that such abortions generally suffer much by
external violence, are squeezed, compressed, or from putrefaction having
already begun, lose much of their uncommon elegance, which otherwise render
them objects of admiration. I possess some of these beautiful human foetusses
of the first months of pregnancy, especially those which I received from my
dear friend Mr. Buckner of Gotha, where in one of five weeks old, and of the
size of a common be, all the features of the face, every singer complete,
every toe, and the organs of generation were to be distinctly seen.

Now this early activity of the Formative Nisus, is by no means confined to the
external form of the embryo, but is still more remarkable in the internal
structure. I have often been astonished at the early perfection of the vicera,
which I have discovered in dissecting recent human embryos of the first months.
Thus, merely to mention one circumstance in its head, which was hardly larger
than a pea, the whole cartilaginous basis cranii, with all its depressions,
apertures, and processes, were marked in the most sharp and distinct manner,
although, indeed, there was not the smallest point of ossification, either in
the sphenoid bone, or the petrous part of the temporal one.

However difficult it may be on the supposition of pre-existing germs, to
explain what becomes of them for so long a time after they arrive at the place
of their destination, and are fecundated and stimulated to evolution; it is
equally difficult to imagine, why immediately after this interval, they should
so suddenly acquire so respectable a size. On the contrary, after it has been
fully understood, what was said concerning the time necessary for the
preparation of the fluids of generation, before the Formative Nisus takes
place; there remains nothing puzzling in this, that then the new awakened
action should so soon form the ground work of the new animal.

That the inverse ratio between the Formative Nisus, and the increase of age,
continues even after birth, is proved by the remarkable ease with which
reproduction takes place in very young animals, especially those of the lizard
kind, as in the common newt.

II. The Formative Nisus is much more active in the embryos of mamelia, than in
those of oviparous animals.

In the chick for instance, the first appearance of the ribs is observed one
hundred and twenty-nine hours after impregnation. This period is equal to the
nineteenth week of gestation in, the human species. But I have in my
possession, human foetusses, which are not more than six weeks old, and yet in
which, the cartilaginous rudiments of the ribs are to be distinctly discovered.
It would appear as if nature made greater haste with the formation of
viviparous animals, to secure them against deformity, from acccidental causes,
such as pressure, external violence, etc. from which causes all oviparous
animals are defended by their shell.

III. In the formation of some particular parts of any organized body, the
Formative Nisus is much more regular in its process, than in that of others.
Thus the brain, says old Conr. Vict. Schneider, a man much distinguished in
physiology, is seldom or never found to deviate from the usual structure "In
corpore humano," he says, "pars faciem suam rarius mutal quam cerebrum."
. On the contrary, how great and frequent are the variations in many other
parts, such as in the kidneys, and Thoracic Duct, etc.

Amongst the many deviations of the formative process from its usual course,
these are principally to be mentioned.

1st, Where one species of organic body takes on the action of that of another.

To this belong some of the most unaccountable phenomena in nature, which, as
far as I am able to judge, cannot be explained in any satisfactory manner by
the theory of pre-existing germs. It is a well-known fact, that women have in
general, and according to the strict laws of nature, only one uterus for the
reception of the new conceived foetus. But that most of the other females in
the class of mamalia, have a double one. Yet instances are not wanting, where a
real uterus bicornis has been found in women. This singularity, if I am not
mistaken, is accounted for by the previous reflection. In the same manner, I
would reckon all those hares, which have been so frequently observed with small
horns like those of deers, and also many of those strange deviations, which
take place now and then in the structure of the vegetable kingdom, such as the
alder-tree with oak leaves, described by Gleditch Betula alnus quercifolia vid.
Gleditch hinterlassene Abbandl. das practishe Fortwesen betreffend.


2dly, Where the organs of generation of one sex take on more or less the
structure of that of the other.

In our skeptical day, the possibility of human hermaphrodites, and that of
other warm-blooded animals, has been much doubted. And yet Baron Haller of this
university, and Mr. John Hunter of London, have instituted, and given relations
of the most careful dissections of such animals, especially in the cow, and
goat tribes, and which leave no room for further doubts in this matter. It is
true, that in none of the instances, the most essential parts of generation,
for instance, the male testicles, and female ovaria, were to be distinctly
discovered in the same individual. But though the chief form seemed to be
always that of one of the sexes, yet there was evidently to be discovered in
one part or another, the most unequivocal, though imperfect marks of the organs
of the other sex. In general, the male organs lay internally, whilst the
external ones had more the resemblance of the female.

3dly, When the formative process does not, as in the former instances, take an
action which is FOREIGN, but one that is completely PRETERNATURAL to the
individual. And yet from an attentive consideration of the astonishing
uniformity, which reigns amongst the different kinds of monsters, it would
appear as if the causes of the deviation in their formation, was regulated by
certain fixed laws. Whoever has seen any considerable number of monsters, or
only looked into the loose and wretched compilations of representations of
them, can hardly have escaped being struck by the resemblance which unites,
even to the most inconsiderable parts, certain species of them, so that the
individuals of that species, seem as if they had all been cast in the same
mould.

To conclude, there is still one other phenomenon, which the reader is at
liberty to explain, either on the principle of pre-existing organic germs, or
that of the Formative Nisus. Many animal monsters, such for instance, as those
with two bodies and a single head, are of that kind, according to the express
assertion of Baron Haller, and other evolutionists, that they cannot have
arisen from the accidental growth of two germs, but that the fault lies in the
original monstrosity of a single germ. Now it is singular, that such monsters
are only common in animal, which have been domesticated, and that they are
never, or at least seldom to be heard of in their wild state. Can the Author of
nature have ordained it, that from amongst the involved germs of any one
species of animals, for instance, swine, the monsters should arrive at
evolution, just when taken under the care of men, and that the monsters should
be produced only by the tame, and not by the wild also?

On the other hand, there is nothing unreasonable in supposing, that after the
subjection of these animals, their whole frame and economy suffer a very great
change; that then the Formative Nisus deviates in some degree from its original
laws, and therefore these animals as they degenerate into endless varieties,
are also more subjected to monstrosity.

Such, in my opinion, are the principal observations and experiments which
serve to prove the existence of the Formative Nisus, and to ascertain some of
its laws; observations which have drawn my conviction more and more from the
system of involved germs, and confirmed my belief in the very opposite
doctrine, which I have endeavored to establish.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page line for read 5 5 begins, begin. 29 4 of the Note, S^ncb^er, Sencbier. 38
4 of the Note, oriatur, oriatur. 42 4 assertes, asserted. 45 7 of the Note,
Disquisitionum, Disquisitionum. 71 13 de^e of.


