A Complete TREATISE OF URINES, Showing the right Method of Urinal
Prognostication, Far different From the Common Practice OF Quacks and
Mountebanks.

By T. H. Pharmacop, Rustican.

Pro Captu Lectoris habent sua fata libelli. LONDON: Printed for Henry
Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1703.

To My very Worthy good Friend, The Reverend Mr. Arthur Heron, Rector of
Morton, near Chipping-Ongar in Essex.
Reverend Sir,
KNowing your Ability in Physic, as well as your good and great Character in
Divinity, and presuming in the inter-change of your Studies, you had sometimes
met with the Subject, I here present you with, I submit it to your impartial
Judgment and Censure.

When I came first to reside in these Parts, nothing was more noised among the
Vulgar (in case of any Illness) than the wonderful Skill some Men had, above
others, in Water-judgment, by Vrinal Prognostication.

This put me upon the most diligent Search I could make, and having consulted
many Books on that Subject, I found no great Satisfaction in the matter; yet
sometime after, perusing a small Treatise, intitul'd Tractatus Epistolaris de
Vrinis, etc. (which proving multum in parvo, more ample, though brief, than any I
had yet read) I forthwith Translated it, and having added some Collections from
other Authors, I subjovn'd some late Observations in my own Practice, all which
was designed, for my own proper use only: but hearing very frequently, of the
many grand Impositions, on a better sort of People, than the mere Vulgar, by
some bold Quacking Medicasters, I resolved to Print the following Discourse,
hoping thereby, that passing through many Hands, it might, in some measure,
prevent the too much abused Credulity of some.

For indeed, too too many have been so long imposed upon, that their Faith of
the matter is grown so great, that they believe those bold Pretenders, by the
bare inspection of a little Piss, through a Glass, (Conjurer like) can discover
the greatest Secrets in Nature, and unfold the most difficult and most
intricate Cases of all Diseases; Nay, I suppose, by a bare shake of the Urinal,
they can, as well foretell, what number of Corns a Man has on his Toes, or
what number of Teeth, an Old Woman has in her Head.

Yet, I must confess indeed, some guess pretty well at the matter; for, it is
not long since a good Woman in out Neighborhood, carried her Daughter to a
famed Vrinal-Conquassator, for his advice; who after a demure View of the
Virgin-like Water, and a little handling of the tumefy'd Damsel, told the poor
Woman, her Daughter was Liver-grown, that her Liver was doubled, (had two
Livers) which was too true indeed; for, the poor Wench was big with Child, and
visible to almost every Eye, but the fond doting Mother's. How great a
Consternation the poor Woman was in, at so monstrous a Relation, I will not
here, trouble you with, to recite.

I shall now add no more, but that I may pre-suppose, that this Pis-pot
Discourse will not savor well, in the Nostrils of every busy Critic; but
whether it will, or will not, it is equal to me, if you please favorably to
accept and approve of it, which will further engage my Ambition of being,

Sir, Your most Humble, and most ready Servant in all Commands: T. H.

THE PREFACE.
THE Ancients in the very Infancy of Physic made strict Enquiries into the
Nature of Urines, fetching thence their practical directions; for hence 'twas
the great Hippocrates especially took the measures of his Foreknowledge and
Precepts, in passing Judgment on the Sick, and choosing the fittest seasons for
Physic. So that 'twas unlawful not to observe that famous, ancient and
established Maxim among Physicians, viz. to purge Concocteds, without a right
consultation of the Chamber Pot. And this indeed seems most agreeable to the
most common reason, that since we cannot thoroughly re-search the inmost
Retirement of a Sick Body, (which is like a Vessel close shut up,) we should
take the hints of Judging from the ingested Liquor, which in its passage washes
over every part, drawing from most a Tincture, and carrying off some loose
Particles with it. For Urines are as certain Indications of the Constitutions
and Ill-temperaments of our Bodies, (when a right Judgment is made) as Waters
betray the nature of that Mineral, through which they pass.

Wherefore the Contemplation of this, though the basest Excrement, is become the
Subject of a Science, and has exercised the Wits of the most Renowned
Physicians, both Ancient and Modern; concerning which are many Books extant,
compiled with the greatest diligence, in which are enumerated the various
differences of Urines, of their Colors and diversities of consistence. The
Contents are exactly described, and for every of these, distinct Precepts of
Water judgment are delivered, which by some are thought so certain, as if the
bare Inspection of Urine, gave intimation of every Disease or affected Part,
nay every minute Accident concerning the Sick. But in this the Vulgar are most
egregiously cheated, and yet are obstinately wilful to be imposed upon. For
they maintain, none can discover the Disease, nor foretell any thing of it,
except be consult the Chamber Pot; and unless the Doctor undertakes to Divine
by his Urinal, (as 'twere by a Magic Glass) they value him not a rush. But for
what in truth concerns the Precepts and Rules upon which the practice of
Water-inspection is bottomed, there are many things found out by diligent
Observation, and then confirmed by sound judgment. Yet because the intimation
of Urine is too largely stretched by some to particular Cases, very many
Uncertainties interwoven, and some thing's plainly false, besides what are
liable to error; whosoever therefore, by this Water guide only, confidently
descants on the Diseases of the Sick, desereves the name rather of a Juggler,
than a fair Practitioner. But this Doctrine of Urines is every where so full of
errors; because its Practical Observations are ill made, or not well
Methodiz'd. It may be justly suspected, that the Observations are not rightly
made, since from one or other particular Case, a general Rule is drawn.

For example: Because some Dropsical Persons make a thin Watery- Urine
therefore it is Canon'd, that such Urines are the undoubted Symptoms of a
Dropsy; when indeed, in some other Affects, the same kind of Urine is made: And
sometimes in Dropsies the Urine is thick and of a deep Red.

Again, what is vulgarly most received, is for the most part uncertain, viz.
That Urine upon which there swims a Scum (like that on Water wherein Tartar has
been boiled does signify a Consumption, when this sign is more proper and
familiar to Hypochondriacks, than Consumptive Persons, and also very many,
without this sign, die of a Consumption.

Besides, what is generally affirmed is altogether false, that the nature of
any Affect is discoverable by Urines; because, sometimes those that are
diseased make water like sound Men: and sometimes those who seem to be
sufficiently in health, by reason of some accident (perhaps the Food they have
eaten) make suspicious Urine, and such as are estranged from a natural state.
As to the Method or Doctrine of Urines delivered by most, it looks altogether
Empirick-like, and not at all rational. For the naked differences of Urines are
recited, as they are usually distinguished in their Color, Consistence and
Contents: Then to every of these kinds are opposed Pathological, i. e. Affect
describing significations, only collected from more unusual Observations; when
in the interim neither the Causes of Phaenomenons or preternatural alterations
(as ought to have been) are assigned, neither is the intimation of Urines
applied to the Causes of Diseases, but only to the Disease or its Symptom.

Therefore it is very often deceitful and uncertain, by reason the Morbifick
Cause and Intimation of the same Urine, may indifferently at the same time,
point at diverse Diseases and Symptoms medimely.

For Example: Thin and watrish- Urine very often unmediately signifies want of
Concoction in the Bowels: Yet by reason of the state of Crudity, oftentimes the
Green Sickness in Virgins, sometimes the Dropsy, or white and Phlegmatic
Swelling of the whole Body, sometimes the Headache and many other Affects also
arise.

The Heads of the Subsequent Discourse, Are
First, THE Anatomy of Urine, what Elements and Paris it consists of, as also
its Originals in our Bodies; to wit, by what Concoction and then Separation of
some Particles, from others, this Liquor is made.

Secondly, The Inspection of Urines is rightly explained, and what Certainty
and Rule there is of Urine Prognostication.

Thirdly, and Lastly, A general Description of the Color, Consistence and
Contents of the Urine in most Diseases, and what those Signs Prognosticate.

BOOKS Printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Church yard.
Collections of Acute Diseases: In Five Parts. 1. Of the Smallpox and Measels.
2. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers. 3. Of continual Fevers. 4. Of
Agues, a Plurisie, Peripenumonia, Quinsie and the Chole^a Morbus. 5. And
Lastly, of the Bl^^dy Flux, Miscarriage of Acute Diseases of Women with Child,
a R^eumatism, Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and ^everal other Diseases.
in 8o.

A Collection of Chronical Diseases, viz. the Cholick, the Bilious Cholick,
Hysteric Diseases, the Gout and the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys. in 8o.

The Storehouse of Physical Practice, being a general Treatise of the Causes
and Signs of all Diseases afflicting Humane Bodies: together with the shortest,
plainest, and safest way of curing them, by Method, Medicine and Diet; to which
is added for the benefit of Young Practicers, several choice Forms of Medicines
used by the London Physicians. 8o.

A general Treatise of the Diseases of Maids, Big-Bellied Women, Childbed
Women and Widows: together with the best Methods of preventing and curing the
same.

A plain Introduction to the Art of Physic, containing the Fundamentals, and
necessary Preliminaries to Practice, whereby the reading of Practical Authors
will be rendered easy and intelligible to the Young Student. To which is added
the Materia Medica contracted, etc. 8o.

Promptuarium Praxeos Medicae, seu Methodus medendi, praescriptis
celeberrimerum Medicorum Londinensium concinnata. Editio altera auction and
emendatior.

These Six by John Pechey, of the College of Physicians in London.

OF URINE.
CHAP. I. Of the Principles and chief Accidents of Urine.
URINE new made, or after putrefaction by long digestion, may be Chymically
resolved into these Principles. By Distillation, 1st, A small Spirit, like that
of Wine diluted with Water, ascends; but in so little a quantity, that it is not
easily tasted: This is succeeded by a watery Liquor considerable in quantity,
intermixed with some looser particles of Salt, and principally Sulphur: 3dly, A
very penetrative Water is exhaled, commonly called Spiritus Urinae, which has
but little of the Wine-like Spirit, being generally only a Phlegm very much
sharpened with Salt; wherefore, as in Vinegar distilled, it ascends last.

But because the Salt of Urine is volatile, and of Vinegar fluid, therefore the
distilled Liquor impregnated with the particles of this, is very Acid; but
what is incorporated with the saline particles of the other, is very sharp and
pungitive.

It Is hence evident, That the Spiritus Urine (commonly so called) owes its
sharpness especially to Salt; because though most subtle, it takes not flame;
but extinguisheth it, if presented to it.

After Distillation, and the remaining moisture being wholly evaporated,
another portion of Salt with a little Earth remains in the bottom of the
Mattress, out of which by a stronger heat, a Volatile Salt may be sublimed,
leaving the earthy Dregs behind.

This Anatomy of Urine, plainly shows, That the Principles whereof it consists,
are most Water and Salt, a little Sulphur and Earth, and very little Spirit. We
may discern the Saltness of Urines by Taste and Touch; in Taste it comes
nearest a Nitrous Salt, and proceeds from the salt Particles of what we eat,
which by Concoction in the Vessels, is for the most part elaborated into a
Volatile Salt, i. e. a Salt and certain Spirit, which by their long and mutual
combination are knit together in the closest tie: hence Salt it self otherwise
fixed, is volatiliz'd, and (as 'twere by the Wing of another) becomes not unfit
for motion.

From the different Dispositions of our Bodies, Urines contain more or less
Salt, and that (according to the Accidents) more volatile or fixed, and
therefore are different in Color and Consistence.

That there is Sulphur in Urines, their speedy putrefaction and stink
sufficiently prove; and it proceeds from the saline-sulphureous Particles of
Nourishment.

Of this Sulphur there is less than in Blood, the Horns of Animals, or Soot;
(and therefore in the Distillation of Urine, nothing almost Oily or Fat
ascends) for while the Blood circulates, the spirituous and sulphurous Bodies
which depart from it, for the most part evaporate: In the interim, the saline
and watery relics make up the Urine. Yet Urines always have some Sulphur, but
the quantities and proportion are diversely altered, according to the different
degrees of Concoction and Crudity; hence proceed the changes of heat and
consistence in Urines. That the wine-like Spirits of Urine are but few, it is
evident from the defect in the Liquor first Distilled, as also from the sudden
putrefaction of Urine; but the intestine motion of the Particles in Urine,
conclude some; viz. the separation of Thin from Thick, and the spontaneous
division of some parts from others, and the collection of that Hypostasis, or
thick substance which generally subsides, at the bottom of Urine; besides, the
saline Particles (inasmuch as they become volatile) are closely wedded to the
spirituous, and therefore become more brisk in motion and quick of energy. Yet
according to the different plenty and prevalency of Spirits in Urines, there
are diverse modes of those Nubeculae, or Urine-clouds, and also of the
Sediments, and the Urines themselves, have a more quick or slow putrefaction.
The watry-part in Urine, far exceeds the rest in quantity, as being almost six
times more than the other: And by Distillation it is not so clearly separated,
but that some volatile parts of Salt and Sulphur ascend together with it, which
tincture it with an ungrateful sent.

This has its original from a plentiful ingestion of Liquids with Food, which
yet of what kind soever they be, lose their proper Qualities, and acquire
others, before their change into Urine; for nothing almost sincere of that
Liquor we drink, besides moisture, barely remains in the Piss.

The distillation and evaporation of Urine, plainly demonstrate, that there is
some portion of Earth, as well as slimy-muddy Dreggs in it; for when all the
liquid parts are exhaled, the Earth, as a Caput mortuum, remains in the bottom
in a moderate quantity.

For in the Nutritive Juice, besides the active Principles of Salt, Sulphur and
Spirit, is required something solid, whence Bodies have their bulk and
magnitude. The Recrements and earthy Dreggs of this, are plentifully dissolved
in the serous part, making the contents of a more thick consistence; but this
is different according to the variable State of Concoction and Crudity.

These are the Principles which make up the Body of Urine, into which, by
Chemistry it is easily resolvable.

From the combinations and various admixtures of these, the other Accidents of
Urine, viz. Quantity, Color and Consistence, which are sensibly the most
observable in it, and from hence the especial Objects of Urine-judgment, do
arise; for when almost nothing besides is discernible in Urine, those make the
first Phaenomenons, in the right solution of which, the whole Hypothesis of
this Science consists.

Wherefore in the next place, I shall Treat of these; and first, concerning the
Urines of sound Men, what is their Quantity, Color, Consistence and Contents;
as also I shall endeavor to declare upon what mixture of Elements, what
Concoction of the Bowels and Vessels, every one of these depend,

In the next place it shall be showed, how far the Urines of sick Persons,
differ from the Rule and Standard of those who are sound. And I shall endeavor
to assign the proper Causes of their change to each of these Differences; and
what I have said hitherto, shall finish the first scope of my Discourse, to
wit, the Anatomy of Urine.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Quantity and Color in Sound Men's Urine.
THE quantity of Urine in Sound Men, ought to be a little less, than the
Liquids daily ingested; for what is potable and moist that is daily taken, is
the very matter of which Urines primarily consist. But these (when hunger and
thirst urge) are more plentifully required, that they may sufficiently dilute
the Mass of Chyle, for its right Fermentation in the Bowels; as also that it
may serve for a Vehicle, both to convey it into the Mass of Blood, that the
Blood it self may circulate in the Vessels without Stagnation, and to the
Nervous Juice, that it may actuate and moisten the Organs of sense and motion.
Thus the serous part having almost contributed whatever Spirit or Sulphur it
had, gives place to a new Nutritive Humor, and it self then, as unprofitable,
is carried off from the Blood, by the seclusive help of the Kidneys.

The Nourishing Liquor, which at last is changed unto Urine, is different in
its own nature; sometimes waterish, sometimes inpregnated with Spirits,
sometimes with Salt and Sulphur; and according to the different prevalency of
this or that Element in it, many Variations happen: but no liquids wholly and
unchanged pass our Bodies, but in diverse parts, undergo their mutations and
loose some portion of their quantities, before they be ultimated into Piss. For
the Liquor to be turned into Urine, being first received into the Stomach, and
staying there till Concocted, is also Impregnated with Salt and Sulphur of its
own or other dissolved particles, from some more solid nourishment; after this,
much of it, together with the Nutritive Juice is mixed with the Blood, with
which after long Circulation, and then according to the various temper of the
Blood, and its accension in the Heart, it receives a further tincture of Salt
and Sulphur; hence some portion of it, is derived into the Brain and Nerves,
and there being rendered weak and non-Nutritive it is finally again reduced into
the mass of Blood. After that, the more generous part of the Serum is spent
upon the Blood and the Nervous juice, a great part also by Sweat and other
Emunctories, the remainder, while the Blood continually passes the Reins, is
there separated from it, either by Percolation, or the Force of some
Fermentation, by way of precipitation, passing the Ureters, into the Bladder,
whence it is ejected.

From the Original and view of this serous part now discrib'd, it is evident and
that clearly, that the Urine ought to answer the quantity of Liquids ingested
in a proportion somewhat less, perhaps about a third, which plainly shows the
complextion and strength of the Bowels, whose Office is Concoction, and
likewise of the Blood it self, as also in some sort, the temper and
distribution of the Succus Nervosus: Moreover it carries with it the signs of
the affects of the urinary Passages.

The quantity of the Urine does not always hit this Rule, but sometimes
exceeds, sometimes comes short, and for a little time, may consist with a
State, not much out of tune; but the long continuance of such different
Accidents argues a sickly condition: Concerning these, I shall speak amongst
the Phaenomenons of Urine in a crasy Body.

In the next place, I consider the Color of a sound Urine.

The Urine that is made, after a perfect Concoction in the whole Body, is of a
Citron-colour like a Lixivium indifferently boiled, which without doubt
proceeds from the Salt and Sulphur of the Nutritive Juice and Blood, dissolved
by ebullition in the Serum.

This Color arises not from Salt only, (as some contend) for any Liquor that
is impregnated with Salt (except it be evaporated to a certain thikness) does
not at all grow Yellow: And truly the Salt of Tartar dissolved by liquation,
yet remains clear.

To what is objected concerning a lixivium of Ashes; I answer, the whole
quantity of Sulphur is not spent by burning, but the citron color arises from
some Salt and other adust Sulphurous particles cleaving to the ashes, infused
and incocted in the Liquor. Nor has sound Urine this tincture from Sulphur
only; for Sulphur in a Waterish Menstruum, cannot be dissolved without the
addition of Salt; neither parts with any of its tincture without such addition:
and therefore if you digest Salt of Tartar and common Sulphur together in
Water, or boil Antimony in a Salt Menstrum, both liquors, Urine like, grow
Yellow from thence; even so the Salt and Sulphurous particles of Nourishment,
by digestion in the Stomach and Intestines, and by circulation with the Blood
in the Arteries and Veins, being minutely divided and througly incocted with
the Serum, make the Urine of a Citron-colour.

The dissolution of Salt and Sulphur in manner aforementioned, by which Urines
become Citroncolour'd, is first begun in the Bowels, afterward perfected in
the other Vessels, much depending upon the Concoction of the Stomach and
Intestines.

For here by the help of Heat, and Fermentation, the Nourishments ingested are
especially fermented. The tie of mixture being loosed, the Sulphurous and
Saline particles minutely broken, are advanced into Chyle, and then the Serum,
which is the remainder from the concoction and distribution of that Milkie
Juice, becomes citron colored; as when Salt of Tartar and common Sulphur are
dissolved together in any Liquor, and some Acid poured upon it, it presently
turns milkie, and soon after, the contents being separated per Sabsidentiam,
the remainder of the Liquor grows yellow like a Lixivium.

But if the Nourishment, through some indisposition of the Stomach, be not
rightly digested in the first Concoction, as it often happens in a Pica,
Dropsy, and other Distemperatures of the Bowels, the Urine then becomes crude,
clear and almost insipid like Fountain Water.

But by reason of the too exalted, or otherwise depraved Ferments of the
Bowels; as in the Scurvy, Hypocondriack Melancholy, or in a Feverish
constitution, the particles of nourishment being too much dissolved in the
first Region, the Urines become red and thick.

The Serum, which in the first Concoction, as is said, had got a tincture like
Lie, being mixed with the Blood, as long as it circulates with it, is yet
further concocted and gets a deeper color; for though the thoroughly concocted
particles of Blood are generally separated into the Vesicula fellis, yet partly
their incoction in the Serum enhances 'its tincture. Hence Urine first made
after Concoction is most pale; the next made somewhat red; and after long
fasting, yet more deep.

Where the Blood is more cold, as in a Cachexia, the color of Urine is below
its just state; but where the Blood is accended and as 'twere boiled by a
Feverish Heat, it is of a high Red.

It Is worthy observation, that some Urines, and those sound, made after large
drinking, are not colored, but pale and waterish.

Concerning which, the enquiry is, how the Serum so suddenly passes the
Stomach, (contrary to common belief) and running through first the
Chylie-passages, then the Veins, Arteries, the Ventricles of the Heart, the
turnings and windings of the Reins and Ureters, in so short a space is sent out
of the Body; and besides, otherwise than in most other cases, borrows no color
in its passages, but loses its own.

It Is probable, besides the long circuit of the Nutritive juice, wherein after
some stay in the Stomach, it glides down the Intestines, and thence is carried
through the lacteal-Vessels into new passages, and thence into the Veins; (a
circuit not to be run in a trice, therefore) it is probable, I say, that there is
another more proper passage of the same Nutritive Juice, by which it is
presently conveyed to the Mass of Blood and perhaps to the Succus Nervosus.
Wherefore after long hunger, immediately upon Eating, but especially upon
Drinking, we find a sudden refreshment, which cannot be supposed to proceed but
from Spirits or Vapors; because immediately after such drinking follows
pissing, and that sooner than the Mass of Chyle can be thought to be sent out
of the Stomach. Therefore it seems not improbable, that forthwith a thinner
part of the Nourishing Liquor (that is received into the Stomach) consisting of
some Spirit and espeially Water, is imbibed by its Membranes, like a Sponge,
and thence instilled into the Mouths of the Veins, and is presently mixed with
the Blood in its return to the Heart. For many are of this opinion, that the
Chyle in some measure is immediately derived from the Stomach and Intestines,
through the branches of the Vena porta into the Mass of Blood. And as the
lacteal passages carry it about in a long Circuit, by which it is sent into the
descending Branch of the Vena cava, so by a nearer way, through these Vessels,
may it be carried into the ascending branch of the same Vein; for the Blood,
being in some measure impoverisht with its Circulation, returning both ways,
ought to be refreshed with a new Juice, before it enters the Heart, to enliven
the Ferment there.

Now since the far greater part of Blood is carried upward, it seems certainly
Reasonable, that some part of the Nutritive Juice should as 'twere fuel for a
new accension in the Heart) be conveyed into the Blood already spent and grown
feeble. Many arguments make for this, which to recite, were too large a
digression from my present scope; wherefore I think it is in some measure after
the manner aforesaid, that we piss such a pale waterish Urine, so soon after
drinking.

That Liquor, which from Nourishment is so speedily conveyed into the Mass of
Blood, not passing through so many windings, as the membranes of the Bowels,
(as if drawn by distillation, the grosser part rejected) in a manner, is only
Water and Spirit, whereby it may refresh the Vital Spirits and dilute the
Blood. In which task, the spirituous part being spent, the waterish part, being
weighty and troublesome by reason of its plenty, is continually sent out by the
Kidneys; and since it comes from the Stomach, not as yet embrewed with Salt and
Sulphur, nor is not so long circulated with the blood, as to acquire from
thence, a lixivious tincture, it is pissed out thin and clear.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Consistence and Contents of the Urine of the sound.
HItherto have we discoursed of the Quantity and Color of Urines in sound
Bodies; but as to the Contents, there ought to be nothing in sound Urines,
besides the Nubecula or Urine-sloud; and what this is, and how it is formed, in
the next place remains to be explained.

While the mass of Blood is commixt with serum and the Nutritive humor, it is
continually circulated in the Vessels; from hence a certain Nutritive Juice, by
perpetual digestion is elaborated, which becomes a Nutriment at last,
continually supplying the solid Parts. This at first is concocted into a
glutinous Humor, not much unlike the white of an Egg; after that, into slender
Filaments, which being interwoven in the pores and little spaces of the solid
Parts, supply them with an augmentation always of new Substance. And while the
Serum, that is mixed with the Blood, washes over all the regions of the Body, it
swallows up in it self a superfluous part of this last Nourishment, designed
for the Augmentation of the solid Parts, and carries out with it, that which
makes the Urine-cloud. When this appears (because it signifies Concoction and
Nutrition in some measure) it is accounted a laudable sign; but if no such
Phenomenon be visible, it is a sign of Crudity, as in a Cachexia and Dyscrasie
in Fevers.

It consists of slender Filaments (as aforesaid) and is dispersed through the
whole body of the Urine, and then is gathered together into one Cloud, Thus;
the Filaments are long and somewhat smooth, having some asperities,
bramble-like, so that being moved to and fro, they easily take hold one of
another, and are complicated in themselves; as if we should cast many Hairs
into a Vessel full of Water, and there by often shaking, and tossing the Vessel
about, the Hairs, which at first Swim on the top, here and there, shortly after
Mutually embrace, and knit in one knot. After the same manner, ('it is probable)
the Filaments which make up the Nubecula or Urine-cloud, being tossed too and fro
by the innate heat and Spirits of the Urine, do concur and knit together, till
by a mutual complex of each other they Concenter into one little Cloud; and
because those Filaments are more compact and firm, than the rest of the
Contents of the Urine, by reason of their Gravity, they fall to the bottom.
It Is highly probable, that such Filaments, in some Persons make up the
Urine-cloud; because the Blood in a good State, and consequently disposed for
Nourishment, is interwoven with many Fibers or white threads, which any body
may discover by phlebotomy, when the Blood is received into hot Water;
therefore it is probable that some divided slender parts of those threads, being
snatched along with the Serum, are the matter of that Wool-like Subsidence in
the Urine: Wherefore in a Cachexia, the blood being waterish through Crudities,
and unfit for Nourishment, is distitute of those Elaborated small fibrous
threads; as likewise in great Dyscrasies, when by an over ebullition of the
Blood, the Nutritive Juice is not rightly concocted into such like threads, the
Hypostasis or thick Sediment of the Urine is either utterly wanting, or very
much confused and troubled.

A good and laudable Urine-cloud is white, round and equal, falling toward the
bottom; and to this is required, first, that the Nourishment be rightly
elaborated, whereby the Filaments may become somewhat smooth, round and firm,
like slender threads.

2dly. That the Urine be sufficiently Impregnated with Spirits, which (as it is
evident in the Fermentation of new Wine) may drive and exagitate the parts to
and fro.

3dly. That the Liquor be not too thick, nor its pores prepossessed with other
little bodies, whereby it may happen, that the motion of the Contents may be
hindered; wherefore there ought to be an ample space left, to agitate and hurry
about such Particles. If the Urine-cloud be red, it is a Sign that the last
nourishment is rendered adust, and over concocted by too much Heat; therefore
such a Sediment for the most part, is in the beginning of Fevers, while the
Concoction of the Bowels and Vessels is not wholly preverted. If the
Hypostasis be broken and unequal, it is a sign, that the Nutriment designed for
the solid Parts, is not rightly and equally concocted, that its particles are
not altogether Congenerous, i. e. of the same kind, and of the same Nature, and
therefore the Filaments hang not together Uniformly, but as 'twere after a
Separate and confused manner of Implication; hence some that are more crass,
fall to the bottom; others more rare, hang higher. When the substance, of which
the Hypostasis is made, does not altogether fall, but wholly hangs either in
the top or middle Region, it happens thus, either because it is made of
Filaments not perfectly Elaborated, firm and compact, but more thin and Spungy,
or because the Liquor is more than ordinary Impregnated with Salt and Sulphur,
and therefore like a strong Lixivium, bears up that weighty matter, which
otherwise would fall to the bottom.

Some times the Nubecula or Urine-cloud is wholly wanting in sound Bodies,
after long Hunger, immoderate Labors or extraordinary Sweats, the matter being
either wholly spent in Nutriment; or evaporated by Sweat: And.

In Fevers, because the mixture of the Blood is greatly Depraved: in the
longing and depraved Appetites of Child bearing Women; in a Cachexia or an ill
habit of body, and other such like Affects, by reason of the Predominant
Crudity.

Concerning the Consistence of sound Urines, not many things worthy observation
occur. It Is commonly like Middle Ale well purified by Fermentation, or a
Lixivium indifferently boiled: viz. The aqueous part of the Urine, ought to
contain within its pores and spaces many particles of Salt and Sulphur broke
and disolv'd very small, as also a little Earth disjoined into the least
atoms, and dispersed throughout the whole body of the Urine. If the Consistence
be thinner, than it ought to be, as it is seen in clear and waterish. Urine,
it is a Sign of Indigestion and Crudity, that the aliment is not fully
concocted: but if the Urine be more crass and thick than it ought to be, it is a
Sign the body of the Liquor is clogged with Preternatural Contents; but of
these elsewhere, when we treat of the Urines of sick Persons. Hitherto have we
spoken of Urine in a sound Body, both as the Excrement and Sign of Concoction
rightly performed in the Bowels and other Vessels.

We must take the measures of its Quantity from what we drink; its
Citron-colour, from Salt and Sulphur dissolved and incocted in the Serum. The
Hypostasis or Contents depend upon the filaments elaborated in the mass of
Blood, for the nourishment of the solid parts. Its Consistance is from Salt and
Sulphur, together with some particles of Earth, filling up the pores and spaces
of the serous Part. It remains next, that we treat of the Urines of sick
Persons, in which likewise the Quantity, Color, Contents and Consistence, as
also some other accidents, offer themselves to our consideration.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Quantity and Color of the Urines of Sick Persons.
IN a desease or sickly State of Body, the Quantity of Urine frequently answers
not the necessary proportion of ingested Liquids; for sometimes there is a
Defect, (sometimes an Excess) in the just Measure, when the Urine is far less
than the ingested Liquors. The reason of the Defect is, because the serous part
Stagnates somewhere in the Body, or is diverted some other way, than that of
the Urinary excretion; For it is either 1st, lodged aabout the Bowels and their
cavities, and sometimes also stays longer, than it ought, in the Stomach, by
which means it is somewhat distended, causing troublesome Spitting: but more
frequently it is lodged in the hollow of the Paunch, sometimes in the cavity of
the Breast or Head, and there usually produces Dropsical Diseases: or 2dly. the
serum Stagnates in the Vessels, and thereby augmenting the Mass of Blood and
Nervous Liquor, greatly perverts their motion: or 3dly. that waterish Humor is
thrown upon the habit of the Body and so creates a swelling of the whole or
some parts: or 4thly and lastly it is obstructed in the Urinary passages, by a
Stone or some Viscous matter creating Pain and Convulsions in those parts, and
a Superfluity of serum in the whole Body.

But when the serum is diverted otherways, it often disposes the Sick to
frequent and troublesome Sweats, or almost a continual Flux. The Affects
therefore which the deficient Quantity of Urine indicates, are Swellings and
aqueous collections of some Bowels, also sometimes Rheumatick Pains, sometimes
an ill Disposition of the genus nervosum, sometimes an universal Dropsy and
phlegmatic Tumors, and sometimes the Stone in the Reins and Bladder;
sometimes also the penury of Urine is the effect and sign of some other
praeternatural Evacuation, to wit, of Sweat, a Diarrhaea, or some other
immoderate Excretion. To describe every cause and mode of the office of the
Serum, either as it is in the Body, or as it is excern'd thence, were in a
manner to bring over hither, the whole matter of all the Affects; for many and
diverse are the Occasions and Circumstances, by reason of which the serum is
lodged in this or that Part, and by staying in the Body, lessens the quantity
of Urine. Notwithstanding, the principal and most frequent cause of this, is
not so much the Vice of the Liver, Spleen or Reins, as that of the Blood it
self.

Free and plentiful Pissing, as likewise its tarrying in the Body and penurious
Excretion, depend especially upon the temper of the Blood and its Accension or
Fermentation in the Heart: For, if the Blood be impregnated with active
principles, ( viz. Spirit, Sulphur and Salt) rightly exalted, and have a lively
Ferment in the Vessels, so that the well loosened complex of the Liquor be
rightly accended by the Ferment of the Heart, it all in a manner
Spiritualizeth, and by its Heat and rapid Motion Transmits it self, without
obstruction, through every Part; whatsoever is superfluous and volatile
evaporates, and while the Blood that is rarified and as 'twere boiling with
Heat, passes the Reins, that which is the serous part, either by reason only,
the Kidneys, is as 'twere its Strainer, or having in them some Coagulated
matter, is easily separated and as 'twere Precipitated from the rest of the
Mass of Blood. It Is the same in a manner with the Mass of Blood, what we observe
in Milk; viz. while it grows Hot and almost Boiling, it easily Curds or
Coagulates, and its Serum or Whey soon separates by pouring in a little Runnet
or any sharp sour Liquor; but if it be Cold, though you pour in stronger
Ferments and a considerable quantity of any Acid, scarce any Precipitation
follows.

Therefore if the Blood become more Cold and Watery from an ill constitution of
Diet, so that being less impregnated with active Particles, its Ebullition is
more slow, it is accended as 'twere piecemeal in the Heart, and circulates very
slowly and with difficulty in the Vessels, and running the course of the pores
and passages in the Flesh and Bowels, sticks by degrees, leaving something of
it self behind it: whence Obstructions and Tumors every where accrue.

By this means also, the Blood being Feeble and Viscous, is consequently less
sit for Precipitation or Percolation, and does not so readily convey its serous
Excrements into the Kidneys, but leaves them every where dispersed in the whole
Body, by reason of the Settlement of some Humor and Difficulty of Circulation.
Wherefore in this State, those things which much exagitate the Blood, as
Exercise, swift and frequent Motion; or as those things which like Rennet
infused do precipitate, as Acids and Salt Preparations do, provoke Urine more
plentifully.

Sometimes sick Persons Piss very copiously, so that in the space of twenty
four hours, they evacuate twice or thrice as much Urine as they have taken
Liquids. The cause of which Effect is diverse, and the Signification much
different. If after the diminution' of its quantity, or suppression of Urine;
if in dropsical affects, Rheumatisms or other nervous Passions, or the crisis
of Fevers, plenty of Urine naturally, or by the use of Diuretics, freely
ensue, for the most part it presages the discontinuance of the Disease and
Preternatural Indisposition; or at least, its declension. But if (as I have
often observed, without these foregoing and premention'd effects) the Urine far
exceeds the ingested Liquids, and thence ensue a remarkable Debility, this
indeed portends an ill State, an inclination to an Atrophy or Consumption. I
have known some Women of a slender thin habit of Body, who sometimes being
indisposed for many days together, were wont to make in great plenty (above
what Liquids they took) a thin Watery Urine, without Contents or Urine-cloud,
at which time, they complained of their strength languishing, difficulty of
Breathing, and an inability to Motion.

I suppose in this case, the Blood and Succus Nervosus, by an exalted and fluid
Salt, became too acid, and consequently unapt to be in the least dissolved in
their mixture, and were too much disposed to Serosities; for it is observable,
that whatever Liquids, though thick and clammy, if kept till sour, they presently
become more thinn and waterish. Further, it is manifest, that those accidental
overflowings of Urine arise from such a disposition of the Blood and Humors;
for the Urine has a Vinegar Smack: and such affects (as aforementioned) are
ordinarily cured by Chalybeat Medicines, and not always by common Astringents
and Thickners.

Now as to the Color of the Urine of the Sick, that of sound Persons must be
the rule and Standard, by which all the rest ought to be tried and judged.

Since then the Color of theirs who are Sound, ought to be Citron; the Urine
of those that are sick, will either be more Pale than Citron, and so white like
common Water; or more deeply tinctured, and then generally 'twil be either of a
Flame or Saffron-colour, Red, Green or Black. In short, I Will endeavor to
appropriate the Causes, from which each of these Alterations proceed, and what
Affects or preparations of Diseases they usually indicate.

The Urine is clear like Water, when by reason of the indigestive faculty of
the Stomach, the Saline and Sulphurous particles of our Meat are not so well
concocted and minutely broke, that they can be volatiliz'd and dissolved in the
Serum to tincture it so deep, as that after all its windings and passages it
can bespeak its Originals.

For Liquids, that are to be changed into Urine, by reason they are pressed and
driven through secret and very narrow Passages, as 'twere by Distillation,
thereby loose their Color and Consistence which they had when ingested, and
imbibe nothing from the Chyle (whose vehicle they are) but what is volatile.
Wherefore if by reason of eminent Crudity, Salt and Sulphur and other Contents
be not first volatiliz'd in the Bowels, nor after, dissolved in the Vessels so
far, as to run the same course with the Serum, this at last, in a manner
divested of all, is sent out like clear Water. And that such Urines generally
want their active Principles, it is evident, because they are longest preserved
from Putrefaction.

Such Urine in Virgins generally signifies a Chlorosis or the Green Sickness,
in most an ill habit of Body or a Dropsy; in some it is a sign of great crudity
and the want of Concoction; and sometimes also, in those who are subject to the
Stone, it Preindicates an approaching Fit, viz. while the Serum in the Kidneys
is coagulated by an acid fermenting Juice, its Contents being condensed into a
Tartarous matter, a thin waterish part is only excern'd. They who for a time,
(let the Disease be what it will) Piss thin and waterish, have very often these
Symptoms; difficult and frequent Breathing after motion, Distension about the
region of the Stomach, and as 'twere a Swelling or Puffing up, after Meat. The
reason of which wholly depends upon want of Volatilization in the Blood: For,
because its Liquor is destitute of active particles rightly exalted, viz. (
Spirit, Sulphur and Salt) therefore it is not sufficiently accended by the
ferment of the Heart, whereby the whole should presently sally and as 'twere
break forth into a Flame; but fermenting with difficulty, and apt to Stagnate,
or for the most part to settle in the Heart, it is much oppressed by it;
wherefore, if the Blood thus disposed, be hastened through the Ventricles of the
Heart, by a motion more quick than ordinary, because it has not free
Rarefaction, it presently sallies out, in a manner all at once; therefore there
is need of a greater Endeavor, and more frequent Agitation of the Lungs to
pump it.

Waterish Urines therefore, foretell such like Crudities in the Blood; because
if they have received, in a manner, no tincture from the Salt and Sulphur, it is
a sign their particles are less dissolved, or less volatiliz'd, in the Mass of
Blood.

As to the Distention of the Stomach, of which clear Urines are both an effect
and sign; I say, for want of a due Fermentation, the Chyle is not all changed
into a volatile white Substance, but (like Bread not fermented) is altered and
transmuted into a heavy ponderous Mass, which is slowly, and not without a
Viscous Phlegm accompanying it, sent from the Stomach, whole relics being
fixed to the foldings and membranes of the Stomach, obstruct all its Pores and
Passages, so that nothing can evaporate, and what is more Thin and Spirituous,
cannot be carried to the Blood forthwith through secret Passages as it ought.
Hence plenty of Flatulencies or Windiness is engendered; which speedily
stretches the Stomach, blowing it up beyond its proportion. And since those
dreggs, by long residence in the Stomach, abound with a fixed Salt, they
sometimes degenerate into an Acid, sometimes into a Vitrioline or other base
Heterogeneous matter, whence Violent pains in the Stomach, depraved Appetite,
violent heat with frequent Thirst, sometimes violent Vomitings and other very
grievous Symptoms arise. Some of which, though they argue heat, and that in a
great degree, lurk and lie hid within: yet those who are thus affected for
want of Concoction, often make Crude and Waterish Urine. We have thus now
largely treated of clear Urine, because the reasons of the rest, may be had
hence, which are Pale and thin without Color or Consistence, in those who are
Sound. For the Phaenomenons of Pale straw-colour'd or other Colors below
Citron, arise, and may be explicated after the same manner we have already said
of the Water-like, clear Urine, from the greater or less Dissolution and
Concoction of Salt and Sulphur in the Serum.

Another kind of Urine, more Pale than Citron, yet remains, not at all Thin but
Thick, of a sullied whitish Color, which is commonly observed, Children make,
when their Bowels are much troubled with Worms; the reason of which seems to
be, because the matter of which Worms are ingender'd, is a viscous Phlegm
through indigestion of Chyle and want of Volatilization, heapt up in the
Bowels, which does not readily transmit any tincture to the Urine, because the
matter is fixed; after that, the same matter putridfying, is exalted and
volatiliz'd in a manner, and then partly by Heat and Spirit is formed into
Worms, and that phlegmatic matter, being unfit for nourishment, it is
separated from the Blood with the Serum and mixed with the Urine; hence that
white Color and whitish Sediment.

Sometimes in Fevers, especially the Urines of Children grow white; the reason
of which is, because the supply of Nutritive Juice coming from the Chyle to the
Mass of Blood, is not rightly assimilated, but degenerates into an
excrementitious Humor, a part of which being incocted in the Serum, gives it a
more thick Consistence and milkie-colour, otherwise than in Fevers of the
Adult, where when the Heat is more strong and vigorous, the mixture of such
Juice tinctures the Serum with a deep Red.

Sometimes also Urines appear white, from a Gonorrhaea, Flour albus, Ulcers of
the Kidneys, Ureters, or Urinary passage, by reason of the commixture of Matter
or corrupted Seed. However it be, the white color of the Urine, is produced by
its Contents, which falling to the bottom, the Liquor for the most part becomes
of a yelowish-pale Color, like as it is seen in the preparation of Lac
Sulphuris, where the Milkie substance falling to the bottom, the Liquor
swimming above, is commonly of a Citron color.

Urines whose Color is more Intense, than Citron, owe not their appearances
only to the more than ordinary dissolution of Salt and Sulphur, but in some
measure, to the more crass Contents in the Liquor.

The plentiful dissolution of Salt and Sulphur is performed in the Vessels
containing the very Mass of Blood, and thence is the Tincture derived upon the
Serum, and this for the most part, comes to pass two ways.

First, either by reason of a Feverish Heat, in as much as the Blood boiling
in the Vessels, and being more accended in the Heart, is much weakened in its
mixture; and therefore the particles of Salt and Sulphur, which are separated
by Ebullition, plentifully impregnate the Serum. Or Secondly, without a Fever,
when such like Sulphurous and Saline little Bodies, which were wont to be sent
out at other Emunctories, are detained; therefore being heapt up, by little and
little in the Blood, they are commixt with the Serum: Of which, there are two
particular Cases or Modes for either the Excrements of Blood, which especially
partake of an adust Sulphur, and ought to be sent forth by the Vesicula Fellis,
are retained and so mixing with the Serum, tincture it with a yellow: Or the
Effluviums which are especially of a Saline nature, and were wont to evaporate
by insensible Transpiration are retained, and by them is the Urine tinctured,
like a Lixivium or with a Lye-like color.

All Persons in the Jaundise have Urine of the frist sort; but that of the
latter, is familiar to the Scurvy; for in a Scorhutick Habit, the Saline
Particles of Blood fall short of Volatilization, and become fluid, wherefore by
reason of fixation, they evaporate less, and being plentifully heaped up in the
Mass of Blood, they greatly prevent its Mixture, and especially impregnate the
Serum with Salt.

The Contents which augment the color of Urine are of two sorts, viz. Either
the adust Recrements, which are the relics of the Blood's Inflammation: Or
the Particles of the Nutritive Juice, degenerated into an unknown Matter; of
which, in their proper place hereafter: Our present Task is, a particular
decyphering every Color, that is above Citron.

In the first place, The Flame-colour'd Urine appears like the yellowish red
Vapors in the Distillation of Spiritus Nitri, and this is very often found in
Intermitting Fevers, frequently in Tertians. This Color arises from a small
portion of thin yellow Choler, mixed with the Serum, while it is in motion; for
in this Fever there is a sharp and hot Distemperature of the Blood, which
burns and in a manner torrifies all the Humors, and therefore plentifully
produces Choler.

And though this for the most part, is sent out by the Ductus bilarius;
notwithstanding, since it abounds in the Vessels, part of it, or (what is
equivalent) the adust Particles of Blood and Humors being incocted in the
Serum, tincture it with a deep yellowish-red. This Urine is Thin and Shining,
because in this Disease, almost a continual Sweat forces out the Excrements of
the Nutritive Juice and the more gross part of the Serum, to the circumference
of the Body. The Saffron-colour'd Urine, which dies Linen Cloth with the same
color, is an undoubted Sign of the Jaundise; and it is thus tinctured from
yellow Choler, or Salt and Sulphur adust and plentifully mixed with the Serum,
For that Yellow is necessarily produced by the more than ordinary continual
motion and over-heat of the Blood: And Nature has designed the Vesicula Fellis
and its passages which are radicated in the Liver, for discharging the Choler
from the Mass of Blood. But if this Office of the Ductus Bilarius, in conveying
the Gall, be any ways hindered, that Humor stagnating in the Blood and
plentifully heap't up there, dies the Skin, Blood, and Urine especially, with a
yellow Tincture.

A Safftron-colour'd, differs from a Flame-colour'd Urine; because in the last,
only some part of the thinner, in the first, a more crass and plentiful part of
the Gall is incorporated with the Urine: Farther, in yellow Choler, Sulphur
being long circulated with an accompanying Salt, is fully dissolved by it, and
becomes like Paint, coloring any Subject with a Saffron tincture, like as when
common Sulphur and the Oil of Tartar are dissolved together.

But that Redness which is in Urine, without the stagnation of Choler, happens
after the same manner, as in a Lixivium or Lie of Ashes, where the Particles of
Sulphur without any predisposition, from those of Salt, together with them are
imbibed in the Liquor.

In the next place, we will Treat of Red Urines, which are of a different
Nature, depend upon different Causes, and many times signify differrent kinds
of Affects; the chief of which, and their proper significations we'll briefly
describe. First of all, the Liquor grows red of it self, remains in the same
Condition, neither is the Color of any part of it altered by Subsidence. Or,
2dly, the deep dye of Urine proceeds especially from what is contained in it;
and after its residence to the bottom, it becomes Yellowish, or less Red than
before. The Affects which such Urines are wont to signify, are especially,
Fevers, Scurvy, and a confirmed Consumption.

Let Us consider the Reasons of each. When the Urine which is made Red,
continues so. It Is either 1st, of an indifferent Consistence and Transparent,
and then it owes its Color to Salt and Sulphur more than ordinarily adust and
therefore plentifully incocted in the Serum.

Or, 2dly, Such an Urine is Red, as also Dark and Muddy and besides what
particles of Salt and Sulphur it has, some earthy Particles are emboyl'd in
it, which sticking in the Pores and Passages of the Urine, do not all
precipitate; because the Liquor of the Urine divested of its fit Spirits, which
would separate and precipitate all parts of a different disposition, as it
usually happens in Wine that has lost its Head, or been sower'd by Thunder; in
which Case, the Liquor is impregnated with thick and muddy Dreggs, and for want
of due Spirits cannot finally clarify and become limpid as before.

Hence such Urine is the worst of signs in Fevers; because it signifies such a
confusion of adust matter in the Blood, that ought to be separated, and yet the
Vital Spirits cannot bring it under and overcome it. The Urine is sometimes
made Red, because of its Contents, which falling to the bottom, the Liquor
becomes of another Color

Now this, as it is said above, is twofold, viz. sometimes thin, which is the
matter or remainder of the adust Recrements from the deflagration of the Blood:
Sometimes thick, viz. from the degenerate Particles of the Nutritive Juice;
both these being torrify'd by the Blood's Ebullition and being separated, are
partly sent out by Sweat, and partly mixed with the Serum, whose Consistence
they thicken, and enhance its Color, to wit, as long as those Contents are
held up, being enclosed in the Pores and Passages of the Liquor, the Color
appears more deep, and the Consistence more thick; but these being fallen to
the bottom, the Redness and Thickness of the Liquor are abated: The reason of
both which shall be assigned hereafter, when we assert the Causes of Clearness,
Darkness, and other Colors of Urines. Now let us enquire What Is the Reason of
the difference, that Red Urines are wont to be made (...) Fevers, the Scurvy,
Consumptions, and per^aps in other Affects.

1st. In Fevers the Liquor of Urines is of a ^eep Red, through the plentiful
dissolution of Salt and Sulphur, whose Particles are plentifully ^ncocted in
the Serum; for while the Blood and Humors are in Ebullition from a Febrifick
Cause, ^y reason of great Heat, highly inflamed, the little ^odies of Salt and
Sulphur being torrefy'd and ^dust are more dissolved, and by incoction in the
S^^um, tincture it more deeply; as a Lixivium, or Lie of Ashes boiled on the
Fire, becomes far more red, than if we only proceed by way of In^usion.

As likewise in Fevers, the Contents of Urine often advance its Color, that
is, by reason of the Intemperature and Deflagration of the Blood; for then both
the degenerate Particles of the Nutritive Juice, as also another matter (like
Ashes remaining from the Calcination of Blood) are burnt, as 'twere into a red
Calx, which being shut up in the Pores of the Urine, render its Color higher;
and afterward falling to the bottom, becomes a red Sediment, like Painter's
Oaker

2dly, In an inveterate Scurvy, the Urine is often so high colored, that it is
not exceeded in a violent burning Fever, which (if evaporated or distilled)
yields plenty of Salt with slimy Dreggs, wherefore it seems evident by this
Experiment. that this high Color, owes its original to Salt Principles, as was
hinted before; because in Scorbutic Cases, those Salt Particles, which ought
to be Volatiliz'd, and sent forth by a constant Transpiration, are fixed and
restrained from their usual Motion, and therefore are more plentifully heaped
up in the affected Body. This Salt (aforesaid) remaining within, with Sulphur
and Earth, is diversely coagulated, and then plentifully resolved. And from this
different Coagulation and Re-dissolution, follows wonderful Symptoms of this
Disease.

Likewise from these Saline Particles, plentifully dissolved with some
Tartarous Dreggs, and diluted with the Serum, Urines become tinctured with
adeep and high Red. Besides in this Affect, when inveterate, the course and
passages of the Liver and Vesicula Fellis being obstructed and depraved, they
perform their Office worse, in separating the adust Particles of Blood from the
rest of the Mass, which being plentifully loaded with it, and dissolved in the
Serum, do the more dye it with a Lie-like Tincure. And if those Particles of
adust Sulphur, overbalance those of a fixed and Scorbutic Salt, the Jaundise
is in complication with the Scurvy, and the Urine then dies Linen with a
Saffron-colour.

But if they be exceeded by the Saline Particles, only a Scorbutic Affect is
produced, in which the Urine is highly red; but yet will not make yellow
Linen. That it is thus, it is highly probable; for, in Dissecting many of
those, who had frequently made red Urine and died of the Scurvy, it has has
been observed, that their Liver or the Vesicu^^ Fellis was greatly in fault: In
some, the Liver has appeared wholly bloodless and dried like a Cow's Udder: In
others, the Vesicula Fellis was quite empty: In some obstructed with little
Stones: In others again, filled with Mothery Dreggs, nor at all bitter: but in
all those that were so affected, a separation of the Gall was hindered.

3dly, by reason of Salt so dissolved, the Urines are sometimes Red in Gouty
Diseases for besides the Arthritik Fits (in which such Urine is often made) I
have observed, in some very painsal Affects, imitating, in a manner, a Fever,
with a deep red Urine, wandering Pains, sometimes raging in this, sometimes in
that Part; so that the afficted Patient could scarce stand upon his Feet, or
move a Member; troubled also with Watchings and frequent Sweats, and likewise
with Thirst, great dryness of the Jaws, the Urine very red, with a plentiful
Sediment; yet in the interim, 'twas not evident, that there was any great
Ebullition in the Blood, that the Patient was under any great Languor of
Spirits, or Headache, whereupon I suspected this Affect was especially from the
genus Nervosum, chiefly depending upon the Exorbitances of a Saline, rather
than a Sulphurous Principle.

4ly, Likewise the Urine is Red in a confirmed Consumption, especially if a
Hectic (as it is generally) be joined with it. The reason of which is, if at
any time an Ulcer has seized the Lungs; from thence, a putrid Matter being
mixed with the Blood in it is Circulation, causes almost a continual Ebullition;
whereby the Sulphurous and Saline Particles, being more plentifully dissolved
and incocted in the Serum, render its Liquor Red: Besides, by reason the Blood
is thus contaminated, almost all the Nutritive Juice degenerates into
Putrefaction, and with those Recrements the Urine being impregnated, grows more
Red, and is plentifully stuss d with its Contents. An evidence of which is,
that Consumptive Persons are for the most part, hot after Meat, their whole
Body being put into a Feaverish-heat, which is succeeded by Nocturnal Sweats.
Moreover, there is in the Urines a thick and plentiful Sediment, viz.

The Nutritive Juice being mixed with the Blood, and not rightly assimilated,
causes an Ebullition in it, and degenerating into some strange Matter, is
partly driven through the Skin, partly transmitted by Urine, and partly
augments its Color and Consistence.

Hitherto have we Treated of Red Urines; and every kind of 'em now hinted at,
have many Degrees of intension and remission; for as the Causes change in them,
so in the Color and Consistence they are either weaker or stronger.

As for Green or Black Urine, I confess, I never saw any that was either
exactly green as Leeks, or black as Ink. But I think, from a very high yellow,
with a dark or somewhat Inky mixture, the appearances of greenish or blackish
Urine may arise, which Authors usually call green or black Urine.

But those Urines which are thus colored, do either constantly remain in the
same state for some time, and are signs of the Black-Jaundise, or the Blood
affected with some Virulency; or the Urines are occasionally diversely changed,
and are sometimes of that, and sometimes presently of another Color; so that I
have known Hypocondriacal Persons wont first to make such Urines, and then a
little after, like those of sound Persons.

As to the former, when the Jaundise grows very high, so that the adust portion
of Sulphur and Salt have a longer continuance in the Mass of Blood, these same
by long incoction, acquire a Color more deep than yellow; viz. at first
Greenish, and then afterward somewhat Black, with which the Serum is in like
manner tinctured. For if yellow Gall be taken out of the Vesicula Fellis, and
put into a Bolt-head, and exposed to the gentle heat of a warm Bath, it waxes
shortly green, and afterward by continuance will appear almost as black as
Ink. Wherefore in the Black-Jaundise, which is only the Yellow, by longer
continuance advanced into a greater degeneracy, there is nothing more usual than
an Inky- Urine.

Further, such Urines sometimes appear in a malignant Fever and the Plague, as
also frequently after the drinking of Poison, and in these Cases, are commonly
a deadly Sign; because they argue the Blood much corrupted, and as 'twere
mortified, the Spirits being vanquished, and the bond of mixture loosed, just
as when a part in our Bodies is Ulcerated, and afterward perverted into a
Gangrene or Mortification, presently the Piss, which before was waterish, white
or yellow, becomes black. Wherefore in the aforesaid Affects, when the Urine
grows black, the Serum and Blood being wholly vitiated, the outward Skin is
likewise darkened with such a Color.

Urines that are tinctured with a greenish, or especially a black Color, at
certain times which often happens to Hypocondriacks) very likely proceed from
the Dregs of the Bilis atra, or the black Choler entreasur'd in the Spleen; and
then through too plentiful congestion, overflowing at sometimes, mix with the
Mass of Blood: For such Matter being often effunded into the Stomachs of some
Men, produces greenish or inky Vomits: As likewise in others, the same Matter
being sucked up by the Blood, in its Circulation, may tincture the Urine with
such like Colors.

Hitherto have we spoken of the Colors of Urines: Those that are Pale, proceed
from too much Crudity; almost all those that are Highcolour'd, arise either
from Salt or Sulphur too plentifully dissolved, and sometimes, from the adust
Recrements thoroughly incocted in the Serum; or from the more crass Contents of
the Urine, whether they be the very Calx and remainder of the Aliment
degenerated in Concoction, or the Liquations and mouldrings of the Consumptive
Body, or some ill-affected Part thereof; which expressions will be better
understood, if we explain the manner, how suchlike Dissolutions and Contents
may diversely change the Color of Urine.

The Causes of different Appearances and changeable Colors, as also of
Darkness and Transparency in Urines (as in other Liquors) depend wholly on the
different immission and emmission of the Rays of Light.

For, if the body of the Liquor be thin, with open Pores and Passages, that the
Rays of Light may be easily transmitted, it is then Transparent and Clear, like
Fountain Water: But if the Pores of the Liquor be stuffed with Contents, or
little Bodies swimming in it, so that the illuminating Rays be refracted and
broken in the transmission, at last when they appear according to the different
Modes of Refraction and Reflection, in the (as yet) diaphanous Liquor, the
Color will appear either Citron, Saffron, or Red.

But if the spaces of the Pores, be yet more possessed, so that the Light be
not at all transmitted, from thence Darkness will proceed: But then if the Rays
once received, be but little or not at all reflected, the Liquor will appear of
a dusky or blackish Color. But if they be Reflected according to the different
modes of Reflection, the appearance will be White, Ashecolour'd, or of another
kind; upon this Supposition, that as the Liquor of the Urine is sometimes in a
manner, almost devoid of Salt, Sulphur, and other Dissolvables, it easily
transmits the Light. Sometimes being moderately, or much stuft'd with suchlike
Contents, it either distorts the incident Rays in their passage, or wholly
imbibes them, or lastly reflects them: So that from hence, it is easy to unfold
all the Phaenomenons of Colors and Consistence in Urines.

It happens frequently, that the Color of the same Urine is much changed; for
that which is made Red, being exposed to the Air, becomes White or of a
Darkish-colour, and then a little time after of a Citron color; the reason of
which appearance seems to be this:

This Urine when made is red, because the Pores of the Liquor are much
possessed with the Contents: Yet as long as those Pores are kept open by Heat,
they transmit the Rays of Light in such manner (though diversely distorted) that
they by way of Reflection, rebound again.

But this Urine, is no sooner exposed to the cold Air, but the Pores being shut
up, the position of Parts are changed in the Contents, and therefore the
transmission of the Rays of Light is hindered, wherefore the Liquor becomes
presently dark, and as those Rays are reflected this or that way, the Color
becomes white, dusky, or some other Color. But at last the Contents, by their
weight, falling to the bottom, the Pores being freed, easily transmit the Rays
of Light, and do less distort them; wherefore the Color appears not high, but
Citron.

From what has been said concerning the Color of Urines, it may appear what is
the Causes of the different Consistence of Urines: For as the Particles of
Salt, Sulphur, or adust Matter, or the Nutritive Juice deprived of a right
Assimilation, are more or less incocted in the Serum, the Urines become more or
less Thick or Thin in their Consistence.

In the next place it remains, we speak of the Preternatural Contents in Urine.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Contents in the Urines of the Sick.
WE acknowledge the Contents to be twofold, in the Urine of the Sick, viz.
Either Universal, which proceed from the Mass of Blood and succus Nervosus, and
respect the Habit of the whole Body: Or Particular, which are the Excrements
and refuse of some Bowel or Part ill-affected; concerning which, by and by.

These of the former kind, which proceed from the Habit of the whole Body, are
either Natural, to wit, the Filaments making up the Nubecula or Urine-cloud, as
in sound Persons: Or Preternatural, which especially are the Particles of the
Nutritive Juice degenerated in Assimilation, making up those more crass Bodies
of the Sediments in Urines.

And lastly (in a Fever) some adust Matter from the Inflammation of the Blood,
diluted with the Serum, is added, which augments the blackness of the Contents.

But these, as well Natural as Preternatural Contents of Urines, are very
different, as the Blood is more or less disorderly or unduly fermented.

And likewise, as the Aliment in the Bowels and Vessels is diversely concocted;
and either the superfluities or refuse of the Chyle, which is made thence, are
washed off with the Serum: And if the Nutritive Juice sent to the Blood, be not
wholly perverted, but a great part changed into Nourishment, for the
augmentation of the solid parts; then likewise a part of this being mixed with
the Serum, leaves some footsteps of an Urine-cloud. And if that Preternatural
Sediment, which is made up of a degenerate or adust Matter, be yet but little
and thin, it does not, as yet, wholly obliterate the appearance of this, which
is Natural.

Hence, in the beginning and declension of Fevers, and sometimes in a
Consumption, or in a Cachexia or an ill Habit of Body, the Nubecula, or
Urine-cloud is seen, though not so perfect. But if the greater part of the Chyle,
boiling with the Blood, through its immoderate heat, be perverted into an
heterogeneal Matter, which afterward, as hurtful and unprofitable, is sent out
with the Serum, the Urine-cloud forthwith becomes obscure and imperfect: Also
besides that, there are many Contents in the Urines which enhance their Color
and Consistence.

Such Urine which has in it a Urine-cloud, though imperfect, if it be kept in a
hot place, the Nubecula only is visible, and the rest of the Contents, being
kept in the Pores of the Urine, while enlarged by Heat, become utterly
invisible; notwithstanding the same Contents (the little spaces of the Pores
being straightened by Cold) are precipitated, and thereupon changing their place
and situation, rendet the Urine dark and troubled, obliterating the appearance
of the Urinecloud. Such Urines are commonly made in the better state of
Fevers, a Catarrh, Cough, want of Transpiration, a Caccchymia (or the
abundance of Ill-humours in the Blood) and in most of the higher sort of
Dyscrafies, i. e, evil Complexion or Temperature.

But if the Sickness be so far advanced, that the Concoction and Nutritive
Juice be wholly changed into Putrefaction, such like, are plainly visible in
the Urine, and that without the appearance of an Urine cloud, and do signify a
great diversity in Diseases, as they are precipitated diverse ways, and make a
Sediment of diverse kinds, as there is a sudden, slow, or no Separation at all
of Parts, and as the Matter falling is Little or Much; White, Red, or Dusky: I
shall briefly run through all the material or chief Observations concerning
this Matter.

First, Urine Impregnated with such Contents, sometimes is not precipitated at
all, (unless it be after a long time, the body of the Liquor dissolving by
Putrefaction) but remains a long time troubled and somewhat dark, the little
Bodies floating all over it. The reason of this is, either because these
Contents are too deeply incocted in the Serum, so that the Innate Spirits
cannot separate the Pure from the Impure, the Thick from the Thin; as is seen
in the Brewing of Beer, in which if too much of the Mealy-part of the Malt be
commixt, the Liquor will scarce ever after become Clear: Or likewise the Urine
remains troubled, because it is utterly destitute of Spirits which might ferment
the parts of the Liquor; as it is wont to happen in Beer that grows sour by
reason of Thunder, or immoderate Heat, and being loaded with muddy Dreggs, is
seldom or ever, rightly depurated again. Such like Urine in Fevers, is for the
most part, very dangerous: Sometimes also it denotes an irrecoverable Cachexia,
and always intimates a very ill Sign.

2dly, It sometimes happens that the Urine is so impregnated with Contents,
that they begin to precipitate while it is yet hot. I have often observed it
thus in a lingering Fever, where the Heat is more mild and remiss, in which,
the Particles of the Thick Nourishment are depraved, and being less conquered
by that Heat, or less incocted in the Serum, do more easily fall from its
Pores; like as when common Sulphur is boiled in a Lixivium, if it be removed
from the Fire before a perfect dissolution, the Liquor that is at first clear
and red, because of the sudden precapitation of the dissolved Contents,
forthwith becomes turbid, obscure, and of a whitish color.

3dly, What usually happens: The Urine being much impregnated with such like
Contents, as long as it is hot, and sometime after, appears clear and
transparent; but when it grows cold by degrees, it waxes turbid, and (as if
some infused Coagulum, or curdling Matter had mixed with all its parts) is
precipitated, which notwithstanding, if it be kept at the Fire, or in a hot
place, grows clear again. The reason of which, is sufficiently Explained
before, where we spoke of the Causes of Darkness and Transparency.

4thly, After the Urine exposed to cold is precipitated in manner aforesaid, it
may be observed how its Contents fall to the bottom. For sometimes they fall in
a short time, and if in the space of two or three Hours the Liquor grows clear,
it is a Sign the Urine is not stuffed, nor much impregnated with Salt and
Sulphur; hence in the beginning and declension of Fevers, when the Heat is
remiss, such Urine is often made. Sometimes, except in the space of many Days,
such a subsidence of Contents will not ensue; because the consistence of the
Urine is thicker than it ought to be; therefore it cannot let go its Contents
out of its embraces so easily, that by their gravity they may find the bottom.

Such Urines are generally made in the state of Fevers, and are the
forerunners of an ill Crisis.

5thly, The Sediments which fall to the bottom, are not less differing; in this
place, passing by Corruption and Blood, Sand and Gravel, and certain other
deposited parts.

For those that are the products of the whole Body, are for the most part
white, dusky or like red Oker.

If the Urine, after it has stood long, be filtered through Cap-paper, such
Contents are retained, and may be plainly examined. I have often seen white
Sediments like Chalk; sometimes red, like Armenian Bole, and without doubt, the
matter of all is the same; viz. the Recrements of the Blood after its
Inflammation, and the Nutritive Juice depraved in Assimilation, which as they
are concocted in our Bodies by Heat and diversely perverted, they appear
likewise in Urine, under a different Color and Form. As Antimony mixed with
Nitre, and more or less Calcined, produces a Calx sometimes red, sometimes
Saffron-colour'd, sometimes yellow and sometimes dusky.

The like Reason, as it seems, may be rendered concerning the Sediments of
Urines, which are, as 'twere the Calx of a Sulphurous and Terrestrial Matter
over-burnt by the heat of a Fever in the Bowels and Vessels.

6thly, Besides such usual Contents in the Urine of the Sick, I have often
observed, that after the Urine had stood sometime in a Chamberpot, some
Sand-like Matter cleav'd to the sides thereof, and that under a different
figure; For sometimes these little Bodies are like Sands with a rough and
unequal Surface.

Sometimes they grow together with ridge and furrow like the Chrystals of
Nitre, and are splendent and glistring like Ice; sometimes I have seen
suchlike Chrystals stick to the sides of the Pot, from those who had labored
under a Dysenteria or Bloody Flux. Sometimes in Urines, when they have stood a
while, there appears a Scumm swimming at top, just like Tartar, when boiled in
Water. That whitish Crust, coagulated in the surface of the Urine, is commonly
believed to be both Fat and Oily, and is accounted a Liquation or melting away
of the solid Parts; those therefore, who make this Urine, are presently
pronounced Consumptive and very deplorable.

But this Concretion is only Saline, and being exposed to the Fire, is not at
all dissolvable, but is condensed into a crusty Substance. Moreover, both these
and the rest of the Incrustations of Urines, are a kind of Tartar, produced in
them by a certain coagulation. Such a Concretion wholly depends on the
Particles of a fluid and acid Salt, combined with those of a fixed or Alkaliz'd
Salt.

For, in any Subject, where this commixture of Salts of both kinds does happen,
whether produced Naturally, or by Artificial Operation, there ensue diverse
kinds of Coagulations and Chrystallizations.

Wherefore such kind of Urine, on which there swims a Tartar-like Scum, or in
which, Crystals cleave to the side of the Pot or Urinal, show that the Blood is
degenerated from its Sweet Balsamic Nature (such as is the result of Salt
Volatiliz'd) into an Acid and Corrosive Temper, and the fludity and fixation of
a Saline Principle: Such Urine, if evaporated, leaves great store of Salt in
the bottom of the Vessel. The Affects of which, as it is often observable (as I
have experienced) are spitting of Blood, an Atrophy and an Hypocondriacal
Disposition. It Is worthy Observation, Whether the Vrines of Sick Persons, give
a Tincture to the Chamber Pot, or not; for sometimes in Fevers, the Urine is
no sooner put into a Glass, but presently it darkens its sides with a
whitish-cloud, yet, at another time, 'twill not happen so. I think, the reason
of that sullied dye on the Glass, is, because the Urine is more impregnated
with a dissolved Sulphur, than its Pores can contain in them. For every Liquor,
that is too much impregnated with Sulphur does the same. As it is seen in a
Lixivium, in which common Sulphur or Antimony has been boiled.

Likewise every Urine, if it stands in a Glass till it putrefies, it tinctures
its sides with a Cloudyness, or some crusty Matter, sometimes whitish or red,
or sometimes of another Color. For the Fabric of the Urine being loosed by
Putrefaction, the Particles being freed from the bond of mixture, are fastened
and adhere to the Glass.

Now further, in the Urines of Sick Persons, this happens forthwith, because
the Sul phar is more plentifully dissolved in the Serum, than can be contained
in the Pores.

Now as for the particular Contents of Urine, those indeed are manifold, and
may proceed from diverse Places and Parts: Yet very frequently, from Diseases
seated about the Kidneys, Bladder, and Urinary Passages; sometimes happening
from an Ulcer in the Liver, Spleen, Lungs or other Bowels; or because some
Preternatural Humors are heaped up in those Places and overflow, through
their Superabundancy; hence some extraneous or foreign Matter is transmitted
into the Mass of Blood and thence into the Serum; yet this happens but seldom:
For when ^n Impostume is broke within, for the most part, it sends its Matter
into the Cavity of the Bowels, from which there are no passages to the Urinary
Conduits.

Besides, the Mass of Blood being impregnated with Impurities, Nature does not
presently endeavor to send them out by Urine, but often by Swe^t,
Expectoration, throwing out of Pimples, Wheals or Tumors, and by other ways of
Excretion. It Is hence commonly observed, that other Contents of Urines (besides
what we have spoken of above) are especially sent from the Kidneys, or their
Appendages. The chief of which are Sand, Stones, Blood, purulent matter, little
pieces of Flesh, small Skins, or mealy Sediments; which for the most part
signify either some great Ulcer, or the Stone, or both together seated beyond
the Emulgent Vessels.

It Is usual with some, to piss little Grains of Sand of a red Color, in great
quantity: Some of those are troubled with the Stone in the Kidneys, and often
have those Nephritick Fits: Yet I have known others void Gravel a long time
without Pain, or any other grievous Symptom.

All Urines, if they stand long in an earthen glazed Vessel, sometimes leave
such a Gravel sticking to the sides or bottom, viz. the Volatile-salt of Urine,
is coagulated with the six'd-salt of the Metal. So when Sal Armoniacum, mixed
with the silings of Steel, Vitrioline or Sea Salt, is sublimed, the elevated
Flowers grow eminently red.

Wherefore it is probable, that suchlike Red grains of Sand, are produced in
the Kidneys; because, the Volatile Salt of Urine, is coagulated with the dregs
of some Tartarous matter, left about the Meanders or windings of the Reins, and
thereupon is that Sandy matter made, which forthwith, is washed away by the
Serum, in its passage; therefore those grains of Sand, which are so often made,
are not the piecemeal mouldrings of some greater Stones, (as it is Vulgarly
believed) but the extemporary products of the Blood and Serum, while they pass
the Channels of the Kidneys.

How Stones are produced in the Bladder and Reins, is not the enquiry of this
place, fully to discuss; yet beyond all peradventure, rather by Coagulation,
than Exsiccation or Calefaction.

I have observed some Men afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder, who after
they had made Water, were wont with much Labor and Grief to ^void a more than
ordinary Viscorus Juice, which was presently condensed into a Scaly matter; the
smell of it was like that of a Lixivium, and it was of the same consistence
too, as that evaporated to a Thickness; which Liquor, when it becomes more
crass, and is exposed to the cold, forthwith does concrete into a Saline
Crustiness.

Lesser stones pass the Urinary passages, and are ejected with little or no
difficulty; but it is better, that those, that are great, rest quietly in their
Dens.

The places in which they are usually produced, are the crooked Passages and
Winding Meanders of the Reins, from whence those that are less, fall into the
Bladder, and if they be not ejected from thence, grow very great.

I once saw many, somewhat large Stones, about the sides of the Bladder,
betwixt its membranes, shut closely up. These without doubt, while less, were
sent from the Reins and detained in the passages of the Ureters that creep
between the Tunicks of the Bladder, and there by degrees were augmented in
bulk. The poor Gentlewoman who was thus troubled, long before her Death,
avoided a Membrane thick and large, filled with a Sandy Matter, which (as it
after appeared, by Dissection of her Body) was a part of the inner Tunick of
her Bladder, fretted and broken asunder by the Stones, that had been shut up
there.

It Is ordinary with those who have the Stone, to emit both Blood and purulent
Matter frequently with their Urine; for the fleshy part of the Kidneys, being
fretted asunder with a Stone that is greater than ordinary, and being very
rough and unequal, the Mouths of the Veins and capillary Vessels are unlocked,
from which, the Blood issuing, tinctures the Urine.

By this means, a Solution of Continuity in the Reins is begun, and an Ulcer
very frequently follows, whereby Corruption and Matter are mixed with the Serum,
and make a plentiful and stinking Sediment in the Urine; after that, a
continued Pus proceeds from the Ulcer, and large effusions of Blood, very often
follow, and the very Flesh of the Kidneys being corroded and eaten away by
degrees, is cast out by Urine. I remember formerly, an ancient good Woman, who,
for a long time. voided Blood in her Urine, every Day, in great quantity:
Moreover she usually emitted, great plenty of pieces of Flesh, as 'twere little
Gobbets, and the fistulous ends of corroded Vessels, when she mad^ Water; so
that 'twas suspected, one of her Kidneys was quite destroyed, by this means.
Yet afterward, by a Decoction of Vulnerary Herbs, made acid with Spirit of
Vitriol, this emission of Blood by Urine was stopped, and the Woman grew sound
and lived many Years after.

I have heard of another Gentlewoman, who at first was wont to void both Blood
and corrupted Matter, with some little Membranes, for a long time; but after,
that Sanguinary Pissing ceasing, she made for many Years, a Waterish Urine,
with a plentiful Sediment, White and like purulent Matter, falling to the
bottom of the Chamber Pot. Afterward when that Sediment was wanting, a
Feverish Distemper, with wandering Pains here and there, a Deliquium and
Languor of Strength, and other Ill-natured Symptoms ensued; but when this
Patient, was brought into great danger of death, a Tumor rising in her side,
about the seat of the left Kidney, being brought to suppuration, a copious
eruption of Matter, freed her. Yet the hollow and sinuous Ulcer in that place,
sweating out a thin Matter, remained as long as she Lived; which sometimes
being healed, suddenly broke forth again; after that, in the space of less than
two Years, this Illustrious Lady, having labored under an Ischuria or a
suppression of Urine, for the space of fourteen days, died Apoplectick: her
Body being opened, the left Kidney was utterly gone, and in its place grew a
Membranous Substance, cleaving to the Loins, enfolding the extremities of the
Ureters and other Vessels; yet though some Footsteps of the Ureter did remain,
'twas without any Orifice into the cavity of its Passage.

Moreover, an Ichor or serous Matter sweating out of the Orifices of the
Emulgent Arteries, was carried into the outward and sinuous Ulcer.

The other Kidney was very much obstructed with a gravelly Matter and little
Stones. Besides also, about the top of the Ureter, a Stone was fastened, about
the bigness of a large Filbert-Nut, and its extremity was adapted for the
Passage or Cavity of the Ureter, and so firmly, as 'twere, ramm'd into it, that
it exactly shut up its Orifice (as in the Nature of a Stopple) and hindered all
the passages of the Urine.

A corrupted Matter, not only from the Reins, but also from the Bladder and
Urinary Passages, in those who are Ulcerated, is deposited in the Urine: As
also sometimes, from the genital Vessels, Glandulae prostatae, and from certain
little neighboring Tubes, corrupted Seed, or some other purulent Matter, is
voided with the Urine.

Sometimes also, the Albae Mulrieum fluxiones, and Menstruous Blood mixing with
the Urine, produce preternatural Sediments in it, which ought therefore to be
diligently examined, and accurately distinguished, from the Purulent and
Sanguinary Urines afore-mentioned.

In the Urines of sick Persons, white and plentiful Contents, made up of very
little bodies, which after Settlement, filling the Liquor, above half way,
making it white and darkish, while the rest, in the upper region of the
Chamber Pot, is thin and clear; such is called a mealy Sediment; because indeed
it resembles Water mixed with Meal; and of this, it is doubted, whether it
proceeds from the whole Mass of Blood, or from the Urinary Vessels.

It Is observable, that in the Stone of the Bladder, such Urines are for the
most part made, and sometimes also, because a greater Stone possesses the
Reins; for without some Affect in the Kidneys, such a Sediment in the Urine, is
never seen; wherefore this, is always accounted an undeniable sign of the
Stone; and it seems to depend wholly upon some sort of Juice or curdling Humor
heapt about the external parts of the Stone: For where a Stone is fixed in the
Reins or Bladder, there the nutritious Humor is perverted from Assimilation,
and degenerates into a more crass filthy Substance (like the Ichor in an Issue,
that, by reason of the Pea lodged therein, being changed into thick Matter, is
more plentifully excerned) and that filthy thick Substance being carried off
with the Scrum, makes up this Sediment of the Urine.

CHAP. VI. Of passing Judgment on the Urines of the Sick.
HItherto concerning the Anatomy of Urines, in which their Elementary and
Constitutive Principles, together with their chief Accidents: to wit, Color,
Consistence and Contents, as well those that might be in them Naturally and
Essentially, as those that are wont Preternaturally to happen to them, by
reason of the Body being ill-affected. Hence it is not very difficult for any to
bring this Hypothesis to Practice, and to pass Judgment upon Vrines, by a right
Examination of the Urinal; for by what has been said, it is manifest, of what
Parts the Diseases are discoverable by Inspection of Urine, and what the Urine
signifies in every Particular of them. Concerning this Subject, some Authors
have sufficiently Treated; wherefore I shall pass over this Matter more briefly.

Although the principal Matter of the Urine, viz. the Serum, does pass by every
Region of the Body, and Circulates together with the Blood through every part,
yet it discovers not the State and Diseases of them all, but of those only to
which it owes its natural Perfection and Original, or from which it receives
some Alteration; wherefore in some sort it discovers the Action and Temper of
those Bowels which serve for Concoction: And besides, it hints at the Motion
and Temper of the Blood and Humors in the Vessels. But that any should pretend
to guess, and pronounce a Pain in the Head, an Ulcer in the Throat, or any
other Affect, of another Part (from whence nothing is communicated to the
Serum) by the Urinal only, he will rather suggest to us, a Symptom of his
Ignorance, than one of the Disease.

The Urines that are brought from sick Persons, sometimes perfectly resemble
those of the Sound, and then they give no light to the Disease, or Part
affected. But upon inspection, something Negatively may be said, That the
Patient is free from a Fever, and that as to his Stomach and Concoction of
Nourishment, they are not very bad: Wherefore except he be inclinable to a
Consumption, or labor under an Ulcer, or some other Disease of Solution of
Continuity: the Affect whatever it be, is not very dangerous or difficult to
Cure. But yet, I would not have him say any thing rashly, nor proceed so far,
from whence he can have no commendable Retreat: For it has sometimes happened
in the most grievous Affects, to wit, in a Malignant Fever, when the Patient
lay very dangerously Sick, his strength greatly dejected, the Pulse weak and
unequal, an Eruption of Spots, and other very ill Symptoms accruing, that
notwithstanding all these Accidents, the Urine has been laudable, like that of
Sound Persons, as to the Color, Consistence and Hypostasis; so that in such a
Case the Physician having only a sight of the Urine, will err grossly, as to the
Prognostic: Wherefore except other Symptoms coindicate, Credit is scarcely to
be given to the single Testimony of the Urine. That sometimes it thus happens
in the Plague and Malignant Fevers, proceeds from this Reason, because the
Blood is corrupted in those Diseases, many times without any great Ebullition,
and as 'twere silently; so that although its Serum be affected with a certain
kind of Coagulation, yet because at the same time, the Blood does not produce
any heap of adust Matter, by its intense Inflammation, but is little, or not at
all altered from its wonted Crasis or Tenor; hence (I say) the Urine that
sometimes cannot carry with it any such adust Recrements, in the most dangerous
Affects, becomes a perfect Cheat. Besides, many times in such an Inflammation,
when the Ebullition of the Blood is very great, whatever Excrementitious Matter
is heaped together in its Mass, it is presently carried to the Brain, and genus
Nervosum; wherefore the Serum is usually freed from Preternatural Contents:
Therefore except in these Cases, when the Urines are high-colour'd, Turbid, and
without any Sediment, there is no reason why the Water-Prophet should much stick
in making his Prognostic

As often as the Vrines of Sick Persons, are not like those of Sound Men,
either something Natural is Deficient, or something Preternatural is
Superfluous, or both together may happen. First, Color, Consistence, Contents,
and Quantity may be defective; if the Color be more remiss, than what it ought
to be; if very Pale, it discovers Crudity and want of Spiritualization, viz.
because the Nutritive Juice is neither so rightly concocted or exalted in the
Bowels and Vessels, that the Salt and Sulphurous Particles in Sublimation
together, may follow the distribution of the Serum (as 'twere in Distillation)
so far as wholly to cleave to it, and tincture it. Wherefore upon the sight of
such an Urine, thou may (and that without folly) guess at the following
Symptoms; to wit, that there is an Oppression and Heaviness in the Stomach,
want of Appetite, hardness of Digestion, Drowsiness, a difficulty of Breathing,
frequent Palpitation of the Heart, (in any Exercise more than ordinary) a pale
Countenance, swelling of the Feet and Belly, and that there is danger of
falling into (if he is not already in) a Cachexia, or else a Dropsy; and if
the Person is one of the Fair Sex, that she is, or will be affected with a
depravity of Appetite or the Green Sickness. But if in a Fever, the Color of
Urines be abated without a Crisis, it is a sign that the fermentative Matter, or
the adust Recrements of the Blood are excluded from its reception, and fixed
somewhere else, which happens for the most part in the Brain; and then such
Urines commonly Prognosticate a Delirium; or sometimes, a Pleurisy: In
Nephritick Persons, a sudden alteration of the Urine into a pale-colour, and
waterish, fore-tells an approaching Fit of the Stone.

A pale and plentiful Urine, often declares a too great dissolution of Salts,
by which Serosities are sent from the whole Body, and especially from the
Nervous Parts, as 'twere in a certain Inundation. Such an Excretion is
sometimes wholesome, as 'twere Critical, when the Superfluities happen only to
be sent forth; Sometimes Symptomatical, and brings a great Weakness, because
then, the Nutritious Juice and other profitable Humors, are sent out together
with it.

If the Consistence be thin, and the Liquor pale, it argues Crudity and want of
Spiritualization; or a Disposition to a Nephritick Paroxsym, (as
afore-mentioned) or else, it proceeds from too large a potation of Drink. But
if the Color be flaming, it is a sign of an Intermitting, Tertian.

If there be no Contents and the Urine pale, it is a sign of Inconcoction and a
Cachectick Affect of the Body; but if the Color be Citron, and the Urine of an
indifferent Consistence without any Nubecula, or Urine-cloud, you may suspect
the sick Person to have accustomed himself to too much Exercise and
hard-labour; or is frequently troubled with Nocturnal Sweats; or paradventure
is in a Consumption or inclinable to it. But if the Urine be daily made in a
less quantity than is meet, unless there be a more than ordinary plentiful
Sweating, it is a sign the Blood is not sufficiently discharged of lis Serum,
and therefore of necessity it becomes more pale and waterish, and at last a
Cachectick Disposition, or else an Anasarca, or Dropsy of the whole Body
follows. But if it be stopped suddenly and voided with pain and difficulty, it is
a sign of some Affect belonging to the Kidneys or Bladder.

2dly, Something Superfluous is sometimes added to the Urine; viz. The Color
is sometimes augmented, when, in the mean time, the Consistence, and Contents
are in their due order, and then there is a suspicion of a disposition to a
Fever, or an Hectic begun: Perhaps some evident Cause fore-runneth, as great
Heat from Bathing, Drunkenness, or immoderate Exercise, which might over-heat
the Blood; or some great Cold was unwarily taken, whereupon ensued a closure of
the Pores, and consequently want of Transpiration. If the Urine be
Saffron-colour'd, and give that dye to Linen cloth, the Disease is undoubtedly
the Jaundise. But if it be of an intense Red without a Fever, for the most
part it argues a Scorbutic or Hypocondriack Affect. Although the Color and
Hypostasis be both as they ought, yet Preternatural Contents are often lodged
in the Urine; therefore, when it grows cold, it is turbid, and leaves a
Sediment, sometimes White, and then there is a suspicion that the Blood is
filled with many Impurities; as likewise the Stomach is loaded with an
Excrementitious Matter, or troubled with Worms. Sometimes the Sediment is Red,
which commonly happers by reason that Transpiration is hindered and o^structed;
to which a Fever, if not a Consumption, may owe its original. Although the
Urine be in a Natural State, yet sometimes more than ordinary thick Contents
are in it, which argues, that some Parts about the Urinary Passages, are either
Ulcerated, or suffer some other way; whence purulent Matter, Fluxus albus,
contaminated Seed, or such like, are mixed in the Urine. You may therefore
easily discover by asking the Patient, How he is in this or that Place, which
is the Place affected; and so you may be ascertained of the Nature of the
Affect, by recollecting what Disease the Sediment of such Urines will show.

When Urine has stood for some time, and a white and plentiful Sediment appears
in it, it is not easy at the first sight to discover whence it proceeds, whether
from the whole Mass of Blood, or from some particular Bowel appropriated to the
Preparation of the Serum or Sperma. For, the Impurities of the Blood succus
Nervosus, falling to the bottom of the Chamber Pot in a mealy appearance, are
often wont to make the Physician suspect a Fluor albus or a Gonorrhaea.
Likewise the Contents of the Urine, which proceed from the Urinary Parts, are
to slight in a manner the same with those which are emitted from the Spermatick
Vessels; among these Doubts, least the Water-Prophet from a rash Confidence,
not only tell Uncertainties for Realities, but Falsities for undeniable Truths,
thus may he search the difference of such like Vrines: If the Contents be
universal, and their intimations applicable to the whole Mass of Blood, for the
most part, presently after making of water (except sometimes by chance, in a
Critical evacuation of Urine) these (because they are of a more thin substance)
are utterly invisible: afterward, when the Urine proves cold and begins to
separate, the Contents descend slowly to the bottom, and after they have
settled in the Chamber Pot, being heated again, their appearance totally
re-vanish. But if those White Sediments owe their Originals to some particular
Spring, they Thicken and make the Urine very Turbid though newly made; and are
presently precipitated to the bottom, and do not at all disappear by Heat, if
warmed again. Now to find out, to what particular Vessel such Contents are to
be ascribed, it is easy to discover by other Circumstances.

3dly, The Urine is sometimes wholly altered from its natural State; the Color
and Contents which ought to be in it, are deficient, and other Accidents are
deposited in their room; and then it is a sign the whole Body is distempered,
and the Concoction is depraved in the Bowels and Vessels. Then may you say, the
sick Person is in a Fever; and also by asking Questions, you may learn, and
forthwith pronounce, That he is troubled with Thirst, great Heat, want of
Appetite, Watchings, and other Symptoms deducible from hence by consequence.

It sometimes happens, that the Urine falls short of its natural State, yet
does not at all indicate the Affect of which the Patient complains, and it
either shows the Causes of the Disease, or the consent of another Part with the
affected Part. As if any one should complain of a violent Headache, or Trembling
of the Heart, and should make a waterish Urine, this does not denote the very
Affects, but only the Crudity of the Stomach, as also an Obstruction of the
Spleen and neighboring Bowels, which may be the Cause of those Affects. I say
in this Case, the primary Indications in the Method of Cure, are to be taken
from the Urine; viz. We must use neither Cephalic not Cardiack Remedies, but
either Emetick, Cathartick, or De-oppilative Medicines, and especially
Chalybeats. Sometimes the Urine is vitiated, yet its Indication utterly
disagreeth with the Affects of which the sick Person complains. For Example, If
any in a Coma, or a Lethargy, make Red Urine filled with Preternatural
Contents, its Inspection excellently suggests Coindications; to wit, that we
use not Remedies too hot; but temperate. The principal use of Water-Judgment,
is, in observing the State and Progress of every Disease, as also the Critical
Alterations toward Health or Death. For in Chronical Affects, where the
Physician sees the Urine every Day, he may know, from hence, by what degrees
the Disease or Sickness is every Day augmented; what time Purgatives or
Alteratives will be most fit, and what other Medicaments will be most suitable:
Hence may he observe, Whether Nature prevails over the Disease; or no; and
hence may the most certain Prognostics be made, of the hope or danger of
Recovery; viz. how the Signs of Concoction or Crudity appear in Vrines: Hence
in Acute Diseases may the state and height of a Fever be best foreseen; at
what time the Crisis, and with what Success it may be hoped for; when
seasonable to Evacuate, and when to give Restoratives and Cordials.

Physicians ought to observe, with as much assurance, and diligence, the
Phaenomenons of Urines, for the fit Season and most proper Method of
administering Physic, as Mariners their Sea-compass, to steer their Course by.
Let this which is already delivered, concerning Urine-judgment suffice, which
is not a Collection from the empty Traditions of Mountebancks, but consonant to
right Reason and Truth. I know besides, that Quacks and other bold Pretenders,
almost every where scatter innumerable Rules and false Preceps of
Water-prophesy, insomuch that if they look but on the Urinal, they pretend, as
if they could divine whether it be a Man or Woman that is sick; how long the
Patient has been ill; what Disease, he is sick of; whether the Disease, will
end in Life or Death; whether the Party, be Amorous or Sad; whether a Woman, be
with Child or no; and if with Child, foretell whether Boy or Girl, and many
other ridiculous Stories. In which, by using these empty Conjectures, and by
their Confidence, they impose on Credulous Minds; or, what is more frequent with
them, make private and subtle Inquiry other ways, into the State of the matter;
and then falsely ascribe that Knowledge to the Inspection of Urine.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the examination of Urines and the different manner of
Trial.
THOUGH commonly the Trial and Inspection of Urine be but simple; viz. most
Quacks and Mountebanks, immediately after they have put the Water into a Glass,
shake it and then forthwith pass their Judgment: Yet the matter seems a little
more intricate, to those who heartily design the Welfare and Health of the
Sick. And concerning this Water-Inspection, there are some observable
Circumstances, which if omitted, nothing certain, or that may be indeed a
Directory in Practice, can be learnt from the Urinal. Moreover in some Affects,
besides Inspection of the Glass, there are other Methods of Trial, by which
what is hidden and in the dark in relation to Urines, is made manifest; whence
some, who endeavored a more accurate Water-judgement, have successfully
brought in fashion, the Evaporation and artificial Precipitation of Urines.

Wherefore we will briefly speak of the right manner of Urine-inspection, and
in some Cases, bow they may differently be resolved into their first Principles.

When the Urine of the Sick Person is offered to the Physician, if it has stood
sometime before in the Glass, and if the Liquor be Transparent, the Nubecula
formed, and if the rest of the Contents fall to the bottom, there is nothing
further wanting, but that forthwith the Prognostic be pronounced. But if the
Water be newly poured out into the Vrinal, or be before troubled by shaking
together, you must stay till the confused parts be again separated, and recover
their due places of Settlement. But if the Liquor being filled with Contents,
its Pores being shut up with cold, become Turbid and Muddy, let the Glass be
kept in a hot place till the Urine clear again, and afterward let it be placed
for some time near the Fire, so long till the preternatural Contents, to wit,
either the Thinner be re-imbib'd by the Pores, when enlarged by Heat, or the
more Thick fall to the bottom: And if the Filaments which make the Urine-cloud
(if there be any) be collected together in the Middle Region or a little
beneath, then from hence 'twill appear, what is the Nature of, and what kind of
predominancy the Disease has; and likewise in Fevers, the degree of Heat and
Effervency, the Concoction of the nutritive Juice, or its Depravation, as also
the heaping up of Adust Matter in the Blood, and its Separation begun or wholly
frustrated, will also be somewhat more manifest by intimation from the Urine:
Wherefore after this manner, must you proceed, when Urine is brought from far,
whole Particles being greatly troubled by such shaking, except they be kept
sometime in a hot Place, will not easily recover their right Position. But if
you Visit the Patient often at his own House, 'twill be convenient that the
Urine newly made be put into an Urinal and placed near some Heat, and while it
leisurely grows hot, every Part without any Perturbation will be disposed of,
after the best manner of Settlement.

After that Urine is thus nakedly, and as 'twere without its Vail presented to
the sight, the next Caution is, least that some of its Phaenomenons only
accidentally contracted, and not properly belonging to it, impose upon the
Physician, which is wont to happen sometimes through diverse Alterations,
proceeding from the Food that is eaten, of which this especially consists; and
then the Color and Scent are variously changed beyond Nature and the
Physician's expectation. For indeed, there is an Error sufficiently common, when
the Urine, by Ruburb, Saffron or the Seed of L^vender-Cotton and other things
of the like Tincture* ingested by the Mouth, growing yellow, and giving that
dye to Linen, is thence believed to be an undoubted sign of the Jaundice,
Sometimes we likewise suppose, though falsely, that the Urine shows a Feverish
Distemper when highly tinctured wirh a deep Red, by the broth of Pease, or a
decoction of Madder, or other Liquids of the like nature.

It often happens, that the high Color of Urine, by a thin small Liquor
copiously drank, is abated; and by a stronger Drink and more hot Nourishment,
is raised; which accidental Causes, except a Physician know, he is necessitated
to pass a false Judgment upon the bare sight of Urine.

When therefore, without any manifest Cause the Color of Vrines is changed,
the manner of Diet must be inquired into, so that when the Alteration proceeds
from what is ingested, it may not rashly be ascribed to the Disease. A Question
may be raised here, Why since most things taken in at the Mouth, before they be
transmuted into Urine, wholly lose their innate Colors; there are yet some
others, which being eaten, bequeath such a lasting Tincture to the Serum, that
they run through the Windings of all the passages without any alteration?

The reason of which, is solely this: Some mixed Bodies have Particles of
immutability of Color, which make up their composition so subtle and
exceeding volatile that these Bodies ingested, though in a 1ittle quantity,
color the whole mass of Chyle, and then the Nutritive Juice, that is conveyed
to the Blood, ascends colored, and its vehicle, to wit, the serous Part, is
sent out always Tinctured.

It Is obvious to every one, who sometimes smells his own, to know what Scent,
sound Urines have: viz. because when newly made, the Sulphurous, and Saline
Particles are closely bound together in the Liquor, and then it is not very
ingrate. But when it has stood sometime, so that from the solution of the
mixture, the Sulphur edged with Salt begins to exhale, it has a very noisome
stinking Scent. Besides we may observe, that Vrines new made sometimes smell
sweet like Violets; and sometimes smell very strong and stinkingly.

The first, depends neither upon a sound nor unsound State of the Body; but is
only produced by those things that are ingested. Turpentine, Nutmegs and some
other Aromaticks, though of a different Nature or Operation, taken inwardly give
a sweet scent equally alike to the Urine; whereof this seems to be the reason:
In such like Bodies, very many Particles of a purer Sulphur (that is, more
Spirituous) have the Predominancy in the mixture, and though blended with the
Serum, cannot be contained in it, but forthwith when the Urine is made, break
their bond of mixture, and those alone, not accompanied with other stinking
Particles of the Urine, sally forth, and thereupon diffuse a Scent sufficiently
grateful, which though it be the result of different Ingestibles yet always
smells Violet-like; because all those Sulphurous Particles are freed in
Digestion from other adjuncts of the same concrete Body, neither are they
infected with others from the Urine.

As for a very ingrate stinking Urine, that, sometimes proceeds from an Ulcer
about the Kidneys, Bladder, or Urinary Passages: Sometimes it likewise proceeds
from a more than ordinary hot Distemperature of the Reins, or the whole Body;
for when Sulphur is too deeply incocted in the Serum, its Particles being edged
with those of Salt (because less closely combined) do forthwith exhale, and
very offensively smite the Organs of Smelling. Besides, Urine sometimes has its
graveolent or stinking Scent, from what is eaten; for Garlicky Sparrowgrass, the
Balsom of Sulphur, Syder, Rhenish-Wine and many other Ingestibles cause a
stinking Urine. If the reason of these be required, I answer, Those things that
cause a stinking Scent in Urine, likewise provoke it in a more plentiful
manner; wherefore it appears and is hence demonstrable, that the Assumption or
taking of such things, precipitates the Blood, and abundantly hastens the
emission of the Serum, and when that, after this manner, is abruptly dis-united
from the Mass of Blood, the compage of the Liquor is rendered loose, neither
are the parts exactly mixed, wherefore the compage of the Urine before it is
sent out of the Body, being thus loosed and dissolved, as soon as it is made,
the more crass and Sulphurous Particles (which are linked together with Salt)
do presently exhale or breath forth, and so diffuse a very ill S^ent: For, the
Urine that is thus altered by what is taken inwardly, seems very like a
Lixivium, in which Antimony, or common Sulphur is boiled, and an Acid
afterward instilled; for in this Decoction, as also in such an Urine, the
compage of the Liquor being destroyed, the Sulphurous little Bodies break
forth and attaque the Organs of Sensation with a noisome Savor.

But if any curious Searcher of Urines, will go beyond the Trial of Sight and
Smell, he may readily by several Operations, resolve them into their several
Parts, and at 'twere Anatomize them to the Life; and thence deduce Physical
Directions of great Consequence.

For, in some Chronical Diseases, where the ill Contemperaments of the Blood
are exactly to be searched, that the Proportion and Temperature of the Salt and
Sulphur in it, may be rightly found out, 'twill be convenient sometimes to
evaporate or distill the Urine;, as also something may be learned by
precipitating or separating them by Putrefaction. I knew an honest Woman
grievously afflicted with a perfect Lepra or scaly Deformity of her Skin, who
usually every Day scraped off a great quantity of Bran-like or Scaly Matter;
her Urine being evaporated, left behind it a crusty Salt Sediment, very much
like that Excrement of the Skin, sticking to the sides of the Vessel. Formerly
I evaporated the Urine of a Gentlewoman, who was greatly afflicted with
Convulsive Motions, and distension of the Muscles; the quantity of the Saline
and Tartarous Matter that remained in the bottom, did exceed the half of all
the Liquor in weight. By these means it appears, we may easily find out the
proportion of a Saline Principle in the Blood and Humors. Now whether that
Salt is volatiliz'd or fixed above measure, the Distillation of the Urine, will
manifest. For if the Spirit (so called) be plentifully exhaled from the Urine,
and if the Salt also ascends in the Glass-Alembick, it is a visible sign of
Volatilization; but if the contrary, it argues the fixation of the Salt. As the
Evaporation and Distillation of Urine shows the power of a Saline Principle, so
the Precipitation and Putrefaction discover the Sulphur and more crass Contents
of Urines, as 'twere in Weight and Measure.

As to the First, though the Urine be a Salt Liquor, and full of Contents, yet
because its Saline Particles, are not (as it is usual in other Menstruums)
either wholly in a state of Fixation or Fluidity, but for the most part
Volatile, therefore it is not presently precipitated by the pouring in of any
thing that is Salt; the Spirit of Vitriol and other Acids do nothing; the Salt
of Tartar makes a little perturbation; but the Dissolution of Allom in it
(because it very much binds its spaces) presently and that very much troubles
the whole Liquor, forcing all the Contents of the Liquor or Urine out of their
places, and renders them visible; whereupon by this means, without the tedious
process of settling, you may know how much Sulphurous and terrene Matter the
Mass of Blood, as its Dregs, imparts to the Serum. The putrefaction of Vrines
is wont to exhibit every Particle of every kind, yet more distinct, and as
'twere separately ranged. For if the Urine stand in a Glass unmoved for many
Days, it is much altered in Color, Scent and Consistence; for the Color is
more intense and high, the Smell ingrate and very stinking, the Consistence
more thick, and very often it acquires in its surface a dark, and sometimes a
blackish-blew color; as also a thick and plentiful Sediment in the bottom of
the Vessel, and often a sandy Crust on the sides, or a whitish or Ash-colored
Tartar.

By such Phaenomenons, since Urines putrify sooner or later, and thereupon are
more or less altered from their former State, we may guess, what is the
proportion of Salt or Sulphur, and which predominates: Likewise a true Judgment
may hence be made, concerning the quantity of the Terrene or Earthy Matter.

CHAP. VIII. Urocritica, or the General Signs of Urines in most Diseases; and
what those Signs Prognosticate.
WHen Judgment is to be passed on Urine, it must not be shook together, (as
Quacks generally do) but if it be far brought, or much confused any other way,
let it forthwith be put into a thin clear Urinal, placed in the Sun, or the
clearest Light you can, and then permit it to subside for the space of one at
least, if not two or three Hours, that its Separation may be rightly made, and
then every part will distinctly appear to view. In the next place, you must
diligently examine the Color, Consistence, and Contents of the Urine; whence
you may fairly pronounce a true and perfect Vrocriterium, or Judgment upon the
Urine.

Wherefore that you may the more readily Descant upon this Matter, I shall now
describe the most general Colors, Consistence, and Contents of the Vrines in
most Diseases, according to the several Assertions of some Authors, hereafter
mentioned, and which for the most part, I have by my own Observation found very
true. And if any examine this Matter accurately and rightly, as it ought, he
will undoubtedly find great Satisfaction therein; but according to the common
Practice, from an immediate Coagitation or bare Inspection, very little or
nothing of the Disease can be discovered; and consequently, nothing certain can
be pronounced: Yet after a diligent Examination of every distinct part of the
Urine, it may then be well shook together, or warmed upon a Fire, if any desire
to know what Color it had when newly made.

And where the Patient is Visited every Day, it is necessary that the Physician
should consult the Chamber Pot, as soon as the Urine is first made (if
conveniently it may be) before any Separation is begun, that by observing the
Color and Consistence when new made, and well remembering the Experiments made
by the Urinal, he may (from frequent Practice) guess in a great measure, while
the Urine is hot, at some of the Contents, and what kind of Hypostasis or
Sediment will happen after a just separation of the Urine.

I shall now submit the following Observations, to the Impartial Judgment and
Censure of every Honest and Ingenious Practitioner.

Thin Urine like clear Water.
If the Urine appears Thin and White like clear Water, it shows the Defect of
the Digestive Faculty, Obstructions, a Cachexia, an oppression at Stomach, want
of Appetite, the Green Sickness, or else a Dropsy. Such Thin and Watery Urines
in an obstinate Disease, are very pernicious; because such Urines are Signs of
an extreme Crudity: For either these Urines do show the Choleric Matter to be
carried up into the Head, whence arises Phrensy and Madness; which is confirmed
by Hippocrates Aph. 72. Sect. 4. where he says, If the Urine appears White and
perspicuous, it is dangerous; especially if it come from such as are in a
Phrensy. Or they signify very great Crudities, which portend either Death or a
long Disease; for Nature requires a long time to expel that extreme Crudity.
That these Thin, White, Clear and Watery Vrines are always bad, is also
confirmed in Cap. XLIII Lib. 1. Petri Poterii de febribus. Page 665. De Urinis
-- Vrina quae alba funditur (inquit) atque pellucida, mali est Ominis, atque
potissimum in Phreneticis. Aquosae malae sunt Vrinae, ob debilitatem coctricis
facultatis. Tenues vero and albae, valde malae. In Intermitting Fevers, or
gentle and diuturnal, a Thin Urine denotes great Obstructions of the Spleen,
Liver, Mesentery, and other like Parts, through which the Urine being strained,
becomes so Thin and Watery.

That Urine which comes from the Body thick, muddy and troubled, but becomes
afterward of it self clear and limpid, is good: For it portends the Victory of
Nature, separating things heterogeneous, and expelling that which is injurious
to her; and that so much the more, if after the separation, the thicker part
settle in the bottom, white, smooth, and equal.

Thick Muddy Urine without separation.
A Thick Muddy Urine, which so remains, that being put to the Fire will not
clear up, is a very evil and bad Sign. For such Urine; says Galen, in Aph. 70.
Sect. 1. If the Strength of the Body be great, shows that the Disease will be
of long continuance; but if the Strength be much diminished, it portends the
Death of the Patient: For it is caused by a multitude of thick and crude
Humors, with which, much Wind being mixed, the Urine is thereby agitated and
troubled; so that if the Strength be much Wasted, there is great danger lest it
be Suffocated by the Super-abundance of such Humors; but if there be any
considerable Strength remaining, much time is required to discuss those
Humors. This thick and turbid Urine, continuing so without separation for some
Days, is a very dangerous Sign in a Fever.

When the Urine is highly tinctured with a deep and intense Red, Red Urine
it is a certain indication of a Feverish Distemperature: For it shows an
extraordinary heat and inflaming disposition in the Liver, or Stomach, or
Midriff, by which no Concoction, but rather an adustion or scorching of the
Humors is caused. It this high Colored Red- Urine be voided thin (as commonly
it is, from a great Scorching and adustion) and if it so continues for some
time, it is a very evil sign. For if the Body be weak, it portends Death; but if
the Body be in any reasonable strength, it signifies a prolongation of the
Disease or a diversion of the Humor into the lower parts.

Though Red Urine be the common sign of Fevers in general, yet it also indicates
a Consumption; for in a Phthisis pulmonalis, from the Hectic heat, it is very
frequently emitted Red. If the Urine be of a Reddish Brown without a Fever,
Redish Brown.
it shows a Scorbutic or Hypocondriack Affect; especially the latter, if it
has a Tartarous Scum swimming upon it; Scum like Tartar.
which is also sometimes seen in the Urine of Consumptive Persons, and of those
who are troubled with Spitting of Blood.

Flame-Colour.
As the Flame-colour'd, or Yellowish Red shining Urine is commonly made in
intermitting Fevers, especially Tertians; so likewise the Saffron colored
Urine which dies Linen Cloth of the same Color, Saffron Color.
is Vulgarly known to be an undoubted sign of the Yellow Jaundise, as is thus
confirmed in the Processus integri Dris. Sydenham page 57. de Jectero. Urina
crocea et pannum immersum eodem color inficiens, morbum (Icterum) indigitat.

Sometimes, but not common, in the black Jaundice, a very Black Urine is
voided; Black Urine
and if such appear in an acute Disease, it is very dangerous.

For it signifies an extraordinary Scorching up of the Humors, causing them to
degenerate into deep Melancholy, which produces deadly affections,

And if these Black Urines are also thin, they are so much the worse, because
they signify a greater crudity; hence Hipocr. in 1 Epid. says, that Thin Black
Urine, and made in a little quantity, which appeared at the beginning of
burning Fevers was one of the signs by which they were wont to portend certain
Death: but whether they come forth in a great or small quantity, these black
and thin Urines (in acute Diseases) are always mortal: as also those, which
appearing at first black, turn afterward into thin and watery, i. e. clear and
transparent.

Lastly, worst of all are the black Urines with a black-Sediment, of which
Galen. Black Sediment
1. de Cris. Cap. 12. Thus discourses; 'Worst of all is that Urine which is
totally black, so that I have seen no Man escape that ever made such Water: yet
it is less pernicious, if the sediment be only black; and still less dangerous,
if only that which is in the middle be black, and much less it is to be feared,
if the Cloud appears only of that color.' And thus another Author, Urinae
Nigrae, a calore adurente malae censentur. And again, Viris and Mulieribus,
Urinae nigrae, pessimae sunt; Pueris vero, aquosae.

White Gravel
If white Gravel does issue forthwith the Urine, it does signify that the
Patient has or shall have the Stone ingender'd in the Bladder, and there is
pain about those parts.

Mealy Urine. Red Sand or small Stones.
If the Urine appears mealy, or has large Red or Yellow Sand or small Stones at
the bottom, it is an undoubted sign of the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder; and
is attended (if in the Kidneys) with great pain in the small of the Back, a
certain obscure itching at the Kidneys, and the sense of a weight or heaviness
at the Loins, a sharp and pricking pain, in moving or bending the Body, a
Numbness of the Thigh of the same side, by reason of the compression (caused by
the Stone) of the Nerves, descending out of the Vertebrae of the Loins, into
the Thigh. But when the Stone is in the Bladder, the Fundament and whole
Perineum is pressed (as it were) with a heavy weight, especially if the Stone
be of any bigness, a troublesome and pricking pain runs to the very end of the
Yard, and there is a continual itching of that part, with a frequent and
needless desire to make Water, the Urine coming away drop by drop, with a most
grievous tormenting pain. The cause of so great torment is the frequent
striving of the Bladder to expel the Stone, wholly contrary to the Nature
thereof, whereto by Sympathy, the expulsive Faculty of the Guts, and all other
parts of the Belly, come as it were for supply.

Sediments like whites of Eggs.
The Sediment of the Urine is gross and Viscid, and sometimes like the whites of
Eggs.

Black Gravel.
Sometimes black Gravel subsides in the Urine, which is produced chiefly of a
Melancholy Humor superabounding.

Note, that if the Gravel (of what kind soever) come away, and the Patient find
no ease, it is a certain indication that the Stone is confirmed: But if the pain
goes off, after the Gravel is voided, it is a sign that the Stone is broken and
Mouldreth away.

Note also, if the Urine be very pale and waterish, (in the Stone) it shows an
approaching Fit. That the Urine is first clear, thin, and voided in a small
quantity, or sometimes Bloody, (in the Stone) is confirmed in the Praxis
Barbettiana page 201 Thus, Urina primum clara, tenuis and pauca, cruentavi;
postea vero aliquid fundum petit, and tandem arenulae aut lapilli excernuntur,
in dolor Nephritico: But it is said also in the same place, In Colicis vero,
Urinae ab initio crassiores excernuntur, fiuntque.

Those who labor under the Cholick make a very thick Water in the beginning
(by which a Cholick and a Nephritick pain are distinguished) and so continues
during the Paroxysm.

This Consistence of Urine (in the Cholick) when it is first made i. e. in the
beginning of the Cholick Fit, is also confirmed in the Processus integri Dris.
Sydenham page 49. In Colica (inquit) Urinae ab initio crassiores existunt.

Bloody Urine.
Bloody Pissing, is a voiding of Blood together with the Urine, arising from the
heaping up of the same in the Bladder, and when the Urine thus mixed is
expelled, it does not shine, but has the Color of Water, in which the Flesh
of Beasts new killed is washed. If the Blood proceeds from the Kidneys, it is
plentifully and exquisitely mixed with the whole Urine, that being as 'twere
diluted with it, it is Thin, Ruddy, Liquid and settles without clotting
together, It arises either from the Anastomosis (or opening of the Veins) of
some Vessel in them, and then it is plentifully made and high-colour'd: Or from
the Corrosion of a Vessel, and then the Blood is voided in a lesser quantity,
especially at the beginning: Or by a Diapedesis, ( i. e. an Eruption of the
Blood, from the thinness of the Vessels) and then the Urine is highly died with
a Red-colour; and is thus also sometimes, by a Wound of the Ureters from Stones
passing through them.

If any one Piss Blood on a sudden, it is a Sign there is some Vein of the
Kidneys broken: Namely, if mere and pure Blood, and without any External Cause.
This is intimated by Hippocrates, C^o^s of Blood.
Aph. 78. Sect. 4. And Aph. 80. of the same Sect. If any Piss Blood, or Clots
of Blood, and. make his Water by Drops, having Pain about the Hypogastrium,
Perinaeum or Pecten, then the places about the Bladder are Diseased: Namely,
all the parts belonging to the Bladder and not the Bladder only.

The Signs of an Ulcer of the Kidneys are purulent Matter, Pu^ulert Matter.
howsoever mixed with the Urine, never evacuated by it self, but always flowing
forth with the Urine and residing at the bottom of the Chamber Pot, with a
sanious and red Sediment, Small Fibers of Flesh.
fleshy and as it were bloody Fibers (which Fibers are part of the Reins, or
Kidneys, and are a manifest Sign of their being Ulcerated) swimming up and down
in the Urine, the smell of the Filth is not so great as that which flows from
the Ulcerated Bladder; because the Kidneys being of a fleshy substance, do far
better ripen and digest the purulent Matter, than the Bladder, which is Nervous
and Bloodless. This or the Ulcerated Kidneys; and the next, of the Ulceration
of the Bladder, you may Read in Parey's Surgery, page 407.

The Signs of an Ulcer in the Bladder are, a deep Pain in the Share-bones, the
great stench of the Matter flowing therefrom, White Skins.
white and thin Skins swimming up and down in the Water. But when the Ulcer
possesses the Neck (and not the bottom) of the Bladder, the Pain is more
gentle, neither does it trouble before the Patient come to make Water, but in
the very making thereof, and a little while after.

If bloody purulent Matter flow forth with the Urine, Bloody purulent Matter.
it may rather proceed from an Exulceration of the Glandulae prostatae, or some
other neighboring Vessels, than from the Bladder: because that purulent
Matter, is never seen mixed with the Urine, (in Ulcers of the Bladder) as is
usual in an Ulcer of the upper Parts, because it is poured forth not together
with Urine, but immediately after it.

Note, it has sometimes happened that a filthy Matter has been discharged with
the Urine, from an Ulcer in the Lungs, or from the Liver, (or it may proceed
from the breaking of an Impostume in some other parts) in as much as those
parts do Transmit matter through the Veins to the Bladder. But this is
dstinguish'd from the Situation of the pain; if from the Lungs, the pain is in
the Breast: If from the Liver the pain is only in the right side.

And if it be from an Ulcer in the Kidneys, there is great Pain in the Loins
and small of the Back: But if from the Bladder a very intense pain is about the
Share, as is aforementioned.

If filthy Matter be voided with the Urine, of a very stinking or strong smell,
that purulent Matter and stink are almost infallible signs of an Exulceration
of the Bladder: Ex Vrinis magis exitio saesunt faetidae, quod magnam putredinem
denotent. And where a thick Urine comes forth with certain branny Scales,
^cales ^ike Bra^
the Bladder of such Persons is Scabby. By thick ( Urine, is here meant, well
concocted, which is a peculiar Symptom that the things then contained in the
Urine, proceed from the Reins or Bladder.

Tr^c^iasts (...) P^^fi^g (...) H^^^^
Trichiasis or Pissing of Hairs is, when with the Urine, a mucous Matter is
voided like to Hairs, which sometimes seem to equal the length of one or two
Hands breadth. The cause of them, is a thick and viscous Phlegm, dried and knit
together in the Veins by heat, which in its long passage through the narrow
Veins of the Kidneys and Ureters, is extended to so great a length. See
concerning this, The Idea of Practical Physic: Book 10. page 61. Also Horstius
his fifth Section. Epistol. Medic. And Hippocrates in his Aph. 76. Sect. 4.
says, That Water which has in it small fleshy Fibers, as it were certain
Hairs, proceeds from the Reins.

Bubbles.
When Bubbles do swim on the top of Urine, they proceed from windy Matter
included in some viscous Humidity, and signify great Crudity and Indigestion
in many Parts of the Body, where the Humors are chiefly multiplied and heaped
together.

Resident Bubbles do signify great Flatulencies in the Body, or do indicate
some Indisposition of long continuance: But Bubbles not resident, which break
quickly, signify a present Debility or great weakness of Body.

And it Bubbles cleave to the Urinal, it is a Sign of a Cacochymia or the
abundance of Ill-humours in the Blood.

If a green Circle appears in Urine, Green and Black Circles.
it intimates a burning Heat in the Stomach. And this Color (in a Fever) does
indicate some disorder in the Head, proceeding from Choler. If a black Circle
be visible in the Urine, it is a Sign that Death is approaching.

If a Woman with Child, Lead-colour.
void her Urine of a Lead-colour, it is an undoubted Sign that the Child is Dead
within her. This Leaden-colour'd Urine, as also that which has as 'twere, a
dark Sky fleeting above; also Urine black and thick, and little in quantity,
are generally mortal Signs, in whatsoever Diseases they appear.

Urines that are Oily, O^ly-^rine.
wherein do swim little fat things like Cobwebs, are extremely bad; forasmuch
as they show a mighty Heat that melts the Fat about the Kidneys, and in the
whole Body. Now how you may know, whether this Colliquation proceeds from the
Reins or from the whole Body, Hippocrates teaches, Aph. 35. Sect. 7. in these
Words; Those who have a close Fat or Oilyness swimming en the top of their
Urine, have an acute Evil in their Reins. By an acute Evil, he means a hot
Distemper, which causes (from its Colliquative Force) as it were little heaps
of Fat in the Urine; for as there is a great quantity of Fat heaped up about
the Reins, and as from thence, there is a short and quick way for the emission
of the Urine, therefore that which is melted, sticks not much by the way. And
if the Fat be voided in little Lumps, Little Lumps of Fat, or sometime^ ^^ke
Cobwebs.
it proceeds from an acute Evil in the Reins; but if not in Lumps, but like
Cobwebs, it shows a Consumption of the Fat through the whole Body. These Oily
Fat Urines (says Hippocrates) are commonly Signs that Death is near at hand.
That these fat Urines, in which there is an appearance like Cobwebs swimming at
top, are always very evil and dangerous, is also confirmed by another Author,
in these Words; Pingues Urinae, telis aranearum similes, valde periculosae and
sunt damnandae.

If the Urine has no brackish, but a sweetish-taste, Urite of an Honey-taste.
like Water dulcified with Honey, it is acknowledged an undoubted Sign of a
Diabetes, a Disease, wherein immediately after one has drank, the Urine is
presently made in great plenty, by the dissolution of the retentive Faculty of
the Reins, and the depravation or immoderation of the attractive Faculty,
proceeding ordinarily from a too much exalted, or too acid Ferment of the
Reins, and from an Inflammation of the Liver and other Parts, but especially of
the Kidneys and Bladder. The Loins in this Disease are molested with a pricking
and biting Pain, and there is a continual and unquenchable Thirst: And although
this Disease proceeds from a hot Distemper, yet the Urine is not colored Red,
Troubled or Thick; but thin and like Water, by reason the Matter thereof makes
very small stay in the Stomach, Liver and Vena cava, being presently drawn away
by the heat of the Kidneys or Bladder.

Those Sediments in Urines that appear like course Meal are evil, Sediments
like course Meal.
those that appear like Scales are worse, but those that seem like Bran are
worst of all. Hip, 2. Prog.

These kind of Settlements, according to Galen, 1 of Crit. Chap. 12. are caused
by an immense Heat, melting and burning the Fat, and the very substance of the
Flesh. But when this burning Heat preys upon the solid Parts, first it assails
the more soft and newly substantiated Fat, afterward the more solid; and when
all the Fat is melted and consumed, then it falls upon the more tender and
newly compacted Flesh; after that, upon the more solid Flesh; and lastly, upon
the most solid Parts themselves, By the new Fat thus melted by the extreme heat
of the Fever, are caused (as is already mentioned) Oily Urines. Sediments like
course Meal
But the more solid Fat being melted, as also from the Flesh raggedly
dissolved, and likewise from thick Blood parched, are caused those Sediments
resembling course Meal.

From the solid Parts unequally dissolved, proceed those Sediments, Sediments
like Scales of Fish, or like Bran.
which are like Scales of Fish, as also those resembling Bran, when the heat is
more intense; whence it plainly appears, that the Scaly Sediments are worse
than the Mealy ones, and the Branny Sediments worse than the Scaly, as is
testified by Galen.

And thus confirmed by another Author; Subsidentiae in Urinis, speciem
crassioris farinae referentes, malae sunt; iis vero pejores sunt squamosae; at
omnum pessimae sunt furfuraceae.

How pernicious those Sediments are, will appear by the judgment of Galen, of
that resembling course Meal, Sediments like course Meal.
which, as is already declared, is not so bad as the rest. in Com. in Aph. 31.
Sect. 7. he thus writes; such Urines are sometimes mortal, as also is said in
the Prognost. And many dye in a short time of Sickness, but whoever of them
escape* they have a long illness, the Disposition requiring a great Concoction,
where such Water ^s m^de. Hippocrates confirms this, in the following Aphorism;
Sediments in Urines, made in the time of Agues, like unto course Wheatmeal, do
signify, that the Sickness shall continue long. For, they show a kind of gross
thick humor, which cannot be dissolved or voided in a short space.

It is therefore manifest by these examples, that whoever they be, that void
Urine like to a thicker sort of Meal, if they may be saved, yet it is long,
before they escape: But whoever they are, that are thus mortally affected, they
perish immediately.

Thin Sediment.
A Thin Sediment, in the beginning of a Disease, which in the progress of the
Malady, thickens daily by Degrees, is good. For, it shows that Nature
endeavored a Concoction at the beginning, and does daily labor to bring its
work to perfection.

Thick Sediment.
A Thick Sediment, caused by thick and crude humors is very bad; for, as those
thick and crude humors are very hard to be overcome by Nature, therefore they
do threaten much danger, especially if the strength of the Body be decayed; but
if there be any strength of Nature, they do only signify a prolongation of the
Disease.

These crude and thick humors settling at the bottom of the Chamber Pot, may
deceive a young Practitioner, who may perhaps think them to be a good and true
Settlement; and therefore they are to be exactly distinguished.

And First, those crude and thick humors usually appear at the beginning of a
Disease, but the good and true Settlement never till the declination thereof.
And it happens, that after the beginning of the Disease, that thick and crude
Humor being attenuated, there appears no more settlement in the bottom, but
only in the place thereof, a Cloud or Matter hanging in the middle or the
Urine, which as the Concoction proceeds falls down daily from the upper part of
the Chamber Pot, to the lower part; which is the true sign of Concoction, when
the Cloud changes into that Matter, (which hangs in the middle of the Pot)
called Enaeorema, and that Eraeorema into the Sediment: but on the contrary,
when the Sediment changes into the Enaeorema or Cloud, that Settlement is not
laudable, but a crude and thick humor which was afterward attenuated by
Concoction.

Secondly, This crude Humor does not stick close together, neither is it
altogether smooth and equal: but the laudable Sediment is smooth, equal and
moderately thick. Lastly, This crude Humor is heavier and resides altogether
to the bottom of the Chamber Pot; but a good Sediment does not close, but
rather rests in the bottom, being a little raised from it, and as it were
gathered into a kind of Globe, which the crude Humor does not do, but remains
a little more diffused and scattered.

Urines in malignant and Pestilent Fevers in Substance, Color and Contents
like the Urine of found People, are pernicious. For Hippocrates says, Urines
concocted suddenly and without reason for it, are evil; and whatever appears
contained in the Urine, not Concocted according to Nature, is worse.

I will close all in the Words of the ever honored and never to be forgotten
Prince of Physicians, the great Hippocrates:

Coctio ex superioribus securitatem Salutis, and celeritatem Criseos demonstrat.

Si vero intermiserit, atque interdum mingatur sine Sedimento, and aliqando
habeat Sedimentum album, laeve and aequale, morbum diuturnum, and minus securum
ostendit.

Iterum idem in Coacis praenotionibus scribit. Urina bonum Sedimentum habens,
quod derepente evanescit, laborem, mutationemque significat. Item: Si Urina
fuerit subrubra, and Sedimentum subrubrum, ac laeve, diuturnior haec quidem
est, quam prior, valde tamen salubris.

Qui in Vrinis celeriter Sedimentum habent, celeriter judicantur. Ex iisdem
Coacis praenot.

Celeriter, id est, intra paucos dies; nam Urina derepente cocta, mala judicata
fuit.

From hence it appears, That Urine is best which has its Sediment White,
Smooth, and Even, and does also continue so all the while, till perfect
Judgment be made of the Disease. This well concocted Matter, is a sign of a
speedy Crisis and perfect Recovery:

But if it do intermit, and that sometimes the Water be made without any
Sediment, it portends that the Disease will be longer and less safe. Again,
that Urine which has a good Sediment, if it suddenly disappear, it fore-tells
a great change, and that the Distemper will prove dangerous. Also if the Urine
be somewhat Red with a Sediment of the same Color and Smooth, such indeed, is
more continual than the former, yet greatly profitable and very healthful; i.
e. it shows the Disease will be of long continuance, but free from danger.
Those which have a Sediment in their Urines, within a few Days after their
Illness, have Judgment soon made on the Diseases; for Vrines concocted suddenly
are judged very had.

In a Word, as a good sound Urine ought to be of a middling Substance, that is,
neither too Thick nor too Thin, of a Citron-colour, or a little inclining to
Red; and those other differences that come nearest to this, are to be accounted
best: So likewise those Vrines, which in any degree, appear contrary, either in
Substance or Color, are to be adjudg'd naught; of both which, a right
Prognostication may be made, by an Accurate Uroscopia or diligent Inspection of
the Urine.

Finis.

