REASONS Why the Practice of INOCULATION Ought to be introduced into the Town
of BVRY AT PRESENT.

BURY St. EDMUNDS: Printed in the Year, M.DCC.XXXIII.

SOME REASONS, etc.
1. THE Number of People who have not had the Small Pox is so great, that in
the Way of accidental Propagation it will probably remain in the Town a very
long Time still, to the vast Detriment of all Trade and Business, and perhaps
the Loss of the Assizes, Sessions, Fair and other public Meetings: Whereas if
Inoculation was generally practiced, it might be got through the Town in a very
short Time. In the first Case we may have it two Years; in the Last, we need
not have it six Months.

2 As the utmost Hazard of dying of the inoculated Small Pox, appears by the
last authentic Accounts, to be no more than that of 1 in 50, and by the same
Accounts that of dying of the Natural is shown to be that of One in Six; it
would be the Means of saving great Numbers of Lives. For Instance, let us
suppose that there are Three-thousand Persons in Bury who have not had the
Small Pox: The 50th Part of Three-thousand, or the Number of Persons which may
be supposed to die of Inoculation, is Sixty; but the 6th Part of
Three-thousand, or the Number of Persons that are to be supposed to die of the
natural Smallpox, is 500. Deduct Sixty from Five-hundred, and there will
remain Four-hundred and Forty for the Number of Lives which may be clearly
saved by Inoculation upon this Supposition.

UNDER this Article it is to be observed, that the inoculated Small Pox has
been found to be as favorable to grown People, as to Children; but all the
World knows the Contrary is True of the Natural in a high Degree. So that if we
consider the Value of the Lives as well as the Number, we shall have still
farther reason for the Practice: For I suppose every One thinks the Life of a
grown Person (especially of the Head of a Family) to be of more Consequence
than that of a Child.

IT is also probable that the Hazard of dying of the inoculated Small Pox is
less than that of One in Fifty. An impartial Judge who reads the Accounts of
those who died after Inoculation will see, that the Death of several cannot in
Reason and Justice be imputed to that, and it is much to be questioned whether
the Preparation before Inoculation, the Pustules from whence the Matter was
taken, and the Management of the Patient during the Distemper have been in most
Cases, such as they ought to have been, and such as they may be for the future.
Dr. Nettleton out of a Hundred and Nineteen, which he inoculated, had only one
that miscarried. He is a Physician in Yorkshire, whose Skill and Integrity no
Man that knew him ever yet called in Question; and in a Letter to Me, dated
February 27, 1729-30. when the Small Pox was much at Newark, he says where due
Care is taken of the Choice of the infectious Matter, Inoculation will very
rarely fail of Success.

IT is also to be observed that all those, who have not had the Small Pox, and
resolve to continue in the Town must almost certainly have it now; at least
Children and those who go much about. So that to these under the present
Circumstances of the Town, it is only necessary to determine whether they will
have the Chance of 50, perhaps 60, 80, or 100, or even more for their Lives, or
that of 6 to 1 for 'em. One they must have.

3. As this Distemper is infectious, and produces it self, so the several Sorts
of it produce themselves: A favorable Sort produces a favorable One; a
malignant Sort a malignant One. This is certain in Inoculation, and very highly
probable in the natural Way. As it advances, therefore the Kind will grow worse
and worse, for where the Infection is taken from different Persons (and as it
advances this will be more and more the Case) the Good cannot correct the Bad,
but the Bad will prevail over the Good. And here Experience confirms our
Reasoning, for it is observeable, that agreeably to that, the Small Pox is for
the most Part favorable at its first coming into a Town, but as it spreads,
grows more malignant. Now in the Case of Inoculation, not above 1 in 50 has a
bad Sort, perhaps not above 1 in 60, 80, or 100 as was hinted before.
Inoculation therefore would be a great means to preserve the sort good; so that
even those who have it not by Inoculation will have a fairer Chance, but in the
natural Way where at a Medium 1 in 6 die, at the Time of the Town's being most
infected 1 in 5, 4, or 3 may die: Nay perhaps more among grown Persons. At
Uxbridge near London 51 died out of 140, which is something more than 1 in 3.

4. THE last Reason is the general Good of Mankind. Dr. Jurin has shown that at
least a 14th part of Mankind die of the natural Small Pox, and within the Bills
of Mortality it destroys at a middle Reckoning considerably more than 2000
Persons Yearly as appears from them: But it is very probable that if
Inoculation was generally practiced, we should arrive at such Perfection in it,
that few or none would die. We have then a most happy Opportunity of serving
Mankind at the same Time that we serve our selves. Indeed it is much to be
feared, that Inoculation will never prevail, but by being introduced in such
Cases, as ours is at present, where People are almost under a necessity of
having it, and are only to choose whether they will have it in a more or less
dangerous Way. If besides the Loss of so many Lives we consider the Fears and
Uneasinesses of People for themselves, of Parents, Children, Relations and
Friends for them, their own Uneasiness at not being able to visit their Friends
under this Distemper, the Unfitness for Business which it lays many under, etc.
one has still greater Reason to wish that this was the general Practice in
Children, from the Age of 2 or 3, to that of 7 or thereabouts. And when we call
to mind the Indignation and Gontempt which we have for the Opposers of Bark,
Opium, and Mercury in Physic, Reformations in Religion, the wisest Laws in
Government, or of any Thing else, which is Great and Good (and Opposition has
generally been the Fate of every such Thing, either out of Interest and
Dishonesty, or Ignorance, Folly, and Superstition) it should make us seriously
reflect what Censures Posterity may justly pass upon us in the present Point.

THE Objections that are made to this Practice are generally these.

I. WE are not certain that Inoculation is a Security from having the Distemper
again.

THIS Objection may be answered thus. 1. Several Persons who have been
inoculated, have been made to converse with, to handle, nurse, lie in the same
Bed with others sick of the natural Small Pox, and no one ever had it again, as
far as they that have enquired can learn. 2. Several Stories, that have been
invented to persuade the World of the Contrary have been detected, and shown to
be Forgeries. 3. As the inoculated Small Pox is in every minute Circumstance,
exactly like the natural One, of the same Kind and Degree, it would be very
extraordinary, and contrary to the whole Course of Nature's proceedings in such
Things, if it should not be like in this. Whatever be the Reason why the
natural Small Pox preserves us from future Infection, it is inconceiveable that
the Inoculated should not do the same, for the same Reason. Indeed if the
natural Small Pox, especially of a favorable Sort, be not an absolute
Security, which is the Opinion of some, neither can the Inoculated be supposed
to be: But this if True, yet is so rare as not to deserve Notice. I suppose no
one would desire a bad Sort, rather than a good One, for that reason.

II. ANOTHER Objection to the Practice of Inoculation is, that the inoculated
Small Pox often leaves bad Consequences, as Consumptions, Boils, and Blotches,
weak Eyes, etc.

THAT the natural Small Pox is apt to leave the same Sort of ill Consequences
is known to every one; and yet there are Methods, which will for the most Part
entirely prevent or remedy them, and always do it in some degree. The Objection
therefore to have its proper Force must suppose, that Inoculation leaves more
or worse Disorders, than the natural Small Pox, and in order to know whether
this be so or no, it will not be improper to enquire first, what is the Reason
of these Disorders at all. In the Declension of the Small Pox, a Quantity of
corrupted Matter returns into the Body, and mixes with the Blood; as is evident
from the falling of the Face, Hands, and Feet which were before much swelled
and inflamed: And though such be the excellent Contrivance of a human Body, that
it converts Things of most different Natures into Blood, proper for its
Nourishment and Uses, as we daily see in the vast variety of Things which all
make healthful Food for Mankind, yet it cannot entirely overcome this corrupted
Matter returning into the Vessels, so as to make that in all Things fit for the
purposes of Life and Health, but suffers from thence the secondary Fever first,
then what Physicians call Obstructions and Acrimonies, in which last consist
the Disorders abovementioned. One would haturally think therefore, that where
the most corrupted Matter, and of the worst Kind returned into the Blood, there
the Disorders succeeding the Small Pox should be most and worst, and so we
generally find it; but then there are a great many Accidents happening in the
Conclusion of the Distemper, which concurring with the different Age,
Constitution, manner of living, different Methods used by different Physicians,
etc. make sometimes a malignant Small Pox, leave sew ill consequences, and a
favorable one leave many: And particularly I think it is true that many who
have the distinct Kind and soon recover their usual Health to appearance, and
often more than their usual Appetite, are so defective in the Rules of
Abstirence, and proper Physic, as to fall into an ill Habit of Body some time
after. Now that something like this has been the Case with several that have
been inoculated, is not at all improbable, since it is remarkable that in
London great pains have been taken to persuade People, that Inoculation neither
wants Preparation before, the Attendance of a Physician during the Distemper,
nor Care afterward: but this affects not those who will take Care afterward.
As was said in the 3d Answer to the foregoing Objection, it is inconceivable
how the inoculated Small Pox should be like the Natural in the whole Progress
of the Distemper, and yet differ in this: And to be more particular, it is
inconceivable how a Quantity of corrupted Matter falling into the Body should
be the occasion of the Disorders succeeding the Small Pox (a thing which all
Physicians allow) and yet the inoculated Small Pox, where there is less of that
Matter, and that of a more kindly Nature, be attended with worse Consequences.
Now when any Matter of Fact is said to contradict such plain Reasoning as this
is, one may be allowed to examine strictly into the Evidence for that Fact. Let
us examine then. And first it is altogether impracticable to make any Estimate
of the ill Consequences that attend the natural Small Pox, and therefore in
like manner impracticable to compare the Natural and Inoculated together in
that Respect. Then if any happen to suffer after the Inoculated, it is
immediately in every once Mouth and that with many Aggrav^tions. In the Natural
we hear nothing of those who though they escape with Life are yet severely
afflicted with the i^ ^^^sequences of it. In the Inoculated e^cept the Patient
go through the whole St^^^ of the Distemper without any ill Symptom, and
continue free from any afterward, perhaps without due Care to make him so as
was said, we are sure to have the most made of it against the Practice. Nay
there have been Cases, where Stories to discredit it have been entirely
invented. One would wonder that there should be any, who though they may have
Baseness enough to affirm what they know is false, can yet be so stupid as to
do it, when they are sure they may and must be detected and exposed. But I
believe every ones own Experience will furnish some Instance of it. There are
Men in the World who love to triumph, be it only for a Week or a Day, even when
they cannot but be convinced, all will then end in their own Confusion; and it
is notorious that Inoculation has met with some such Opposers, as may be seen
in Dr. Jurin's Accounts of it.

THE Answer to this Objection then in short is this. It compares the ill
Effects of the natural and moculated Small Pox together, affirming that those
of the last, are worse than those of the first, but fails in the Estimate of
both sides of the Comparison. The Estimate of the first can never be had, and
that of the last is grossly misrepresented. This Evidence therefore will never
support a Position so contrary to all common Sense as this, viz. that where the
Quantity of corrupted Matter returning into the Blood is less, and also less
corrupted; there the ill Effects of it should be more severe. I will here add
what I had from Dr. Jurin last April. He collected the Accounts of all (in
Number 724) that were inoculated in Great Britain for some Years, during which
he was Secretary to the ROYAL SOCIETY: And it must be acknowledged he has done
it with the utmost Impartiality. Upon my asking him what his real Opinion about
the Practice was, and particularly whether the ill Consequences that attend the
inoculated Small Pox were worse than those of the Natural; he answered, that as
far as he knew they were not, and that his real Opinion of Inoculation might
easily be known, because he had just inoculated one of his own Children.

III. A third Objection is that by Inoculation we may communicate other
Distempers.

MOST chronical Distempers (that is such as are not Fevers) are chiefly owing
to the irregular Make of the Vessels through which the Blood and Juices pass, and
as Children often resemble their Parents in the Features of the Face, so they
may resemble them in the make of these Vessels, and by that means may have many
Distempers hereditarily. Now if this was the Case of all, it would be as just
to affirm that Inoculation could communicate the Features of another Man's
Face, as communicate other Distempers. But it must be acknowledged that there
are several which may be communicated by methods, no ways consistent with this
Account: It cannot therefore be universally True. For instance, a Child
receives its whole Sustenance from the Milk which has circulated through the Body
of a Nurse, afflicted with scrophelous Complaints, and has them from her. Nay
some are of Opinion, that lying much in the same Bed with People of distempered
Constitutions is of bad Consequence but no one is afraid of such Infection in
the ordinary Intercourses of Life, and yet in them we continually receive by
means of the Air which we breath, (perhaps by other means) such Particles as
fly from the Bodies of those we converse with. This is the Method in which the
Small Pox is Infectious, and he that will affirm that Inoculation gives other
Distempers, will find it hard to prove that accidental Propagation will not do
the same, for the same Reason; and that the common Intercourses of Life should
not much rather do the same, since there we often receive into our own Bodies
greater Quantities from those of others, than the Matter of Inoculation amounts
to. There has been no Instance of this Kind produced that ever I heard of. The
infectious Matter according to Experience, appears to communicate nothing but
what it was intended to communicate, the Small Pox. It was never pretended to
have left an hereditary Complaint, such as the Person from whence it was taken
was afflicted with. And if all that has hitherto been advanced upon this Head
should be set aside, yet there are enough of the laborious Part of Mankind
where we have moral Certainty, that they have sound and healthy Constitutions.
I am sure no Parent would put put a Child out to a Nurse but upon such a
Supposition.

IV. I come now to another Objection which is foreign to me as a Physician, but
belongs to us all as Men. In this Capacity I have a strict Obligation not to
mistake my Duty, and therefore a sufficient Right to enquire: This then is my
Apology for doing so here. The Objection is that the Practice is sinful: That
is, that a Practice which would restore Trade and Business, and the Means of
living to many, who now want it, which would save great numbers of Lives, and
which might be of fingular Service to all Mankind, by either promoting or
discouraging its farther Progress, is a thing forbidden us by infinite
Goodness, who sent us here to imitate his own Perfections, and that most
especially in doing good. At first sight this seems to be a very inconsistent
and unamiable Representation of the Parent and Governor of the World, such a
one as would be unworthy of an earthly Father, or a wise and beneficent
Magistrate. At first sight it seems, that if all, or the principal Part of what
is here offered be true, this Objection must fall to the Ground of Course. But
perhaps in another View of things it may appear otherwise. The Objectors say
then that it is sinful to endanger our Lives voluntarily. Be it so. Consider
now 50 Persons in this Town who have not had the Small Pox, and let us suppose
that 2 escape and 48 have it, or that 8 escape and 42 have it, or that 14
escape and 36 have it, or that 20 escape and 50 have it, or lastly that 26
escape and 24 have it.

IN the first Case according to the Hazard above given of the natural Small Pox
(that of 1 in 6) 8 will die, in the 2d 7, in the 3d 6, in the 4th 5, and in the
last 4; for the 6th Parts of the Numbers 48, 42, 36, 30, 24 are 8, 7, 6, 5, 4
respectively.

HE therefore who waits for the natural Small Pox runs the Hazard of 4 in 50,
even supposing the Hopes that he has to escape to be more than an equal Chance,
which can never be true. He that tries Inoculation has only the Hazard of 1 in
50. If therefore to incur the Danger of Life voluntarily be a Sin, it is a
greater Sin to incur a greater Danger, a less Sin to do incur a less Danger,
that is, it is a Sin to do the First, and our Doty to do the Last. But say they
again, the natural and inoculated Small Pox are not equally voluntarily; God
brings one upon us, the other is our own doing. What does God confine Men and
their Families in the Town? No; but their Affairs and Fortunes do. Shall then a
Man for that reason stand the Hazard of 4 in 50, and not take the less Hazard
of 1 in 50, to avoid the greater of 4 in 50? And as Men endanger their Lives
voluntarily in the present Situation of the Town by staying in it, so they do,
and must and ought to do it, by the Voyages and Journeys they daily make, the
Physic they sometimes take, and the many Handicraft Trades pernicious to Health
which are practiced.

IF it be said that we are to trust in Providence, the Answer is, that
Providence has given us Heads and Hands to contrive and execute what is most
for our Advantage: And to neglect to use them for that Purpose, is not to trust
in Providence, but to be presumptuous and ungrateful. To trust in Providence is
to do all we can for our selves, and then to believe we shall be taken care of.
But to believe so, till we have first done that, is Presumption. It is
affirming that all Business must stop, Mankind sit still and e^pect that
Providence should build for 'em, cloth 'em, and rain down their daily Bread.

A tender Parent says, I shall never forgive my self, if my Child should die of
the inoculated Small Pox, that I did not stand the Hazard of the Natural. But
for the same Reason, supposing the Hazards equal, a tender Parent ought to say,
I shall never forgive my self if my Child should die of the natural Small Pox,
that I did not try Inoculation. And if the Hazards be unequal, what is a tender
Parent to say then? If particularly the Hazard of the Natural be more than that
of 1 in 6, that of the Inoculated less than that of 1 in 50, the Hopes of
escaping the Distemper in Children not 1 in 100, and the ill Consequences of
the Inoculated considerably milder than that of the Natural; all which
Suppositions in my Opinion are very probable. What would a tender Parent give
to have a Child alive again, to try the Chance of Inoculation?

IT is often said that many of the Clergy are against the Practice. If they are
it is upon a Supposition that the Practice does not promote our Lives, Healths
and Happiness: At least all the Gentlemen of that Order that I have had the
Honor to converse with upon the Subject have put it upon that Issue. And it is
the Business of this Paper to show that at least in our present Situation it
would; and whether it is made out to be probable that it would, is submitted to
them, and the rest of the Gentlemen and Tradesmen of the Town and Country. I
have no other View, that I know of, but to serve Mankind in general, the Place
where I live in particular, and most particularly in the way of my Profession,
and by doing this to make my self regarded.

January 12. 1732-33. D. HARTLEY.

FINIS.

