OF THE TORMENTS OF HELL: THE FOUNDATION and PILLARS thereof Discovered,
Searched, Shaken, and Removed. WITH Many Infallible Proofs, that there is not
to be a Punishment after this Life, for any to endure, that shall never End. To
the Glory of GOD, and Comfort of those in fear of the Torments of HELL, and for
the furtherance of a Holy Life.

The Second Edition.

Is not the arrow beyond thee? 1 Samuel 20.37. If ye will enquire, enquire ye:
Return, come, Isa. 21.11,12. If thou have any thing to say, answer me; if not,
hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom, Job 37.32,33. LONDON, Printed,
and Sold by W. BOREHAM at the Angel in Paternoster Row. 1720.

(...) Of Christ's Descending into HELL.
SOme of the Learned say, Christ Descended into Hell, and for Proof allege,
Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.27. Dr. Willet says, that those Words of Christ (
Descended into Hell) is not found in the most ancient Creeds; Dr. William
Whitaker says, I could produce fifty of the most ancient Creeds that have not
these Words ( He Descended into Hell,) in his Answer to Campion, page 215. Mr.
William Perkins on the Creed, says, It seems likely that these Words ( He
Descended into Hell) were not placed in the Creed at first, and that it crept
in by Negligence; for above threescore Creeds of the most ancient Councils and
Fathers want this Clause ( He Descended into Hell,) among the rest, not found
in the Nicene Creed, nor found in the Romish Church, nor used in the Church of
the East.

Also some of the Learned say, Christ descended not into Hell, yet it is an
Article of their Faith; but if you say he did not descend into Hell, they will
say you deny the Faith, and are a Heretic, and a Blasphemer, and you may be
glad if ye can escape so; themselves interpret Hell otherwise than for a Place
of Torments never to end: Mr. Bucer says, Christ descending into Hell, is to
be understood of his Burial; Mr. Calvin says, Hell is the Sorrow of Mind
Christ was in before his Death: Why have thou forsaken me? Is God's hiding his
Face when he was upon the Cross? (says Dr. Whitaker against Campion, page
221.) for upon the Cross he said, It is finished, John 9.30. therefore his
Suffering was at an End. Some of the Papists confess Christ suffered not after
his Death, Luke 12.44,45. Vrsinus Catechis. page 350. Mr. Perkins says, Hell
is the inward Sufferings of Christ on the Cross: Bernard makes the Grief of
Christ's Soul his Hell.

Doctor Ames, in his Marrow of Divinity, page, 65. says, That of the Place of
Hell, and manner of Torture there, the Scripture has not pronounced any thing
distinctly: If so, then the Word of God says not any thing at all of them; for
that which the Scripture speaks, it speaks distinctly, else it could not have
been read distinctly, Neh. 3.8. That which is spoken expressly, is spoken
distinctly; the Spirit speaks expressly, 1 Timothy 4.1. The Word of the Lord came
expressly, Ezekiel. 1.3. That which is not spoken distinctly, cannot be understood,
as appears 1 Cor. 14.2, to 17.

Dr. Fulk says plainly, That neither in the Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, there is
no Word proper for Hell (as we take Hell) for the Place of Punishment of the
Ungodly, Fulk's Defense Translation, page 13, 87, 89. Is not this a full
Testimony against their Opinion of the Torments of Hell? For if it be not to be
read in the Word of God, what have we to do with it? We are not to believe any
thing in Religion, unless it be written. How read thou? says Christ:
Revealed things belong to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. As it is written, I believed, 2 Cor.
4.13. They confess it is not written; then, sure I am, it is not to be by any
affirmed nor believed; meddle not with Things not revealed, they are but
groundless Conceits, Fables, and Traditions of Men.

That the word Hell is not in the Hebrew and Greek Bible; for the word in the
Hebrew, for which the English word Hell is put, is Sheol; the proper
Signification of Sheol is the Grave, as all that be learned in the Hebrew do
know. Sheol has its signification of Shaal, to crave or require; therefore it
is one of the four that is never satisfied, Prove. 30.15. We learn the Propriety
of the Hebrew word from the learned Rabbis, says Dr. Fulk, Def. Trans. Bib.
p. 90. The Hebrew Doctors and Jewish Rabbis are, for signification of Words,
faithful Interpreters; they say, Sheol is the Grave; Rabbi Levi, according to
the Opinion of the Learned, expounds Sheol to be the lowest Region of the World
opposite to Heaven; If I descend into Sheol, thou art present. So Rabbi Abraham
on Jonah 2. And David Chimchi and R. Solomon; read Psalm. 19.16,17. Let the
wicked be turned into Sheol; that is, Death's Estate or deadly Bed: Jonah calls
the Belly of the Whale Sheol, Jon. 2.2,3. Rabbi Solomon Jarchi on Genesis 37.35.
says, That the true and proper Interpretation of Sheol, is Keber, which is the
Grave; the hoar Head is said to go down Sheol, Genesis 42.31. In Numb. 16. it is
said, They, their Substance, and Cattle went alive to Shelach; that is, the Pit
or Grave; Our Bones are scattered at the very brink or mouth of Sheol, Psalm.
141.7. Jacob said, I will go down to my son Joseph to Sheol, Genesis 37.35. The
Protestant Writers say, Sheol properly signifies the Grave. Dr. Fulk's Answer
to the Preface Remist. p. 22. so also in his Defense, p. 91. Mr. Beza says,
That Sheol properly signifies nothing but the Grave or Pit. Fulk says, The
best of the Hebrews that either interpreted Scripture, or made Dictionaries,
Jews or Christians, say Sheol properly signifies the Grave, page 89. and that
Deliverance from the lowest Hell, is Deliverance from the greatest Danger of
Death; so Fulk Answ. Remist. page 14.39.135. and so the late Annotation of the
Bible interprets it; and Augustine on Psalm. 16.13. for lowest Hell read lowest
Grave; and so Dr. Willet Synop. p. 1049.

The Chaldee Paraphrast retains the word Sheol, and translates it the House
of the Grave, page 11.15. they interpret Sheol, Keburata, the Grave, Job
21.5,13,14. be in the Keburata, the House of the Grave, p. 17.12. Rabbi Abraham
Reristsol joins Sheol and Keber together, both signifying the Grave; and so
does Dr. Fulk in his Defense, page 91. and so Mr. Cartwright on Acts 2.27. Mr.
Gradock says, Hell is not mentioned in the Old Testament, but as it is taken
for the Grave, in his Good News, page 43.

Sheol enforces not any Place of Punishment, because it signified not any Place
of Punishment; so says Dr. Willet Synops. page 1055. also he says, the word
Sheol cannot be translated but for the Grave. There are four Words in the
Psalms expressing the same thing in effect that Sheol does, yet none of them
applicable to signify any Place of Torment; the first is Shacath, fovea, the
Pit, Psalm. 36.9. the second is Bhor, the Lake; the third is Cheber, the Grave;
both these Words used for the same Thing, Psalm. 88.3. the word is Sheol, v. 45.
the other Word used as expressing the former; and all these three do contain a
Description of Death and the Grave; the fourth is Tehemoth, Abyssus Terrae,
Thou will take me from the depth of the earth, Psalm. 71.20. in all which there
is no mention of a Place of Torment, Willet Synop. p. 1050.

The Greek translates Sheol into Haiden or Haides of Adam, because Adam tasted
Death and went to the Grave, Genesis 3.19. The Gates of Sheol is Death; Sheol and
Haides are said to have Gates, Isa. 38.10. Psalm. 9.14. Mat. 16.8.

The Septuagint express a Place generally to receive the Dead; the Word used in
the Greek instead of the Hebrew word Sheol, signifies a dark Place, such as the
Grave or Pit in which the Dead are laid. Dr. Fulk says, Some take the Greek
word for Hell, but it signifies the Grave; Hell it cannot signify in their
Speech that believe no Hell; the Greeks say plainly, that their Souls shall
vanish like light Smoke or light Air, Fulk Def. p. 92. also he says, If the
Greek and Latin Interpreters had before us translated amiss, which gave
occasion to diverse Errors, must we (knowing the true signification of the Word)
follow them?

The word Hell is not in the Greek; the Greek word for which they put the
English word Hell, is Gehenna; Ge in Greek is the Earth, or Ground; and Henna
is borrowed from the Hebrew, from the Valley of Hinnom. Dr. Lightfoot, in his
Epistle of his Harmony, says, It is well known the judgment of Gehinna is
taken from the Valley of Gehinna: Tophet, or Gehinnom, are names of the Places
of Idolatry, there was the Idol Moloch.

Of Hellfire, Matthew. 5.22. and the everlasting fire, and unquenchable fire,
Matthew. 25.41.46. Fear him that has power to cast into Hell, Luke 12.5. The
damnation of Hell, Matt. 23.33.
Matthew. 5.22. The Fire of Gehinna, and the everlasting Fire, etc. how the Jews
understood them, it is evidently to be seen in their Writings, that they
understood them of the Fire of the Valley of Hinnom; so says Dr. Lightfoot to
the Reader in his Harmony, Because of the Law, thou art delivered from the
judgment of Gehenna and Baal-tur, Genesis 1.1.

The Protestant Writers confess, that Matt. 5.22. Matt. 25.41,46. Luke 12.5. is
to be understood of the Fire of the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, which is
Tophet. So Mr. Cartwright, Dr, Fulk, Mr. Trap, and the late Annotations of the
Bible, and others, in danger of Hellfire, etc. read in danger to burn in the
Valley of Hinnom, or Tophet, the damnation of Hell, of Hell Gehinnah, they
interpret these Places of the Valley of Hinnom or Tophet; which Place was near
to Jerusalem, where they offered their Children to Moloch, Josh. 5.8. King
Josiah defiled Tophet, the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, that no Man might make
his Son or Daughter to pass through the fire to Moloch, 2 Kings, 23.10. Josiah
commanded all the Carrion of the City of Jerusalem to be carried to that Valley
and burnt there, that the Carrion might not annoy the City: Thither (said David
Chimchy) was carried all the Filth and unburied Carcasses to be burned: The
Synedrian of the Jews, for some Offenses, sentenced the Bodies of the Offenders
to lie unburied in that Valley to burn with the Carrion cast there, which,
among the Jews, was counted a great Disgrace; and for Offenses most criminal
they burned alive in that Valley; they set the Malefactor in a Dunghill up to
the Knees, and put a Towel about his Neck, and one pulled it one way, and
another another way, till strangling him, forced him to open his Mouth, then
they poured scalding Lead into his Mouth, which went down into his Body, and so
burnt his Bowels, Talmud in Sanhedr. Per. 7. Mr. Cartwright says, the Jews
sent thither their Guilty to be burned in that Valley, and those they buried
there, they dealt with as Guilty, 2 Chr. 29.3.

It is confessed by all, that Christ speaks and alludeth to the Jewish
Practice in their Judicature; therefore the Places abovesaid concern them.
Secondly, The Speech of Christ was to the Jews by Birth and Education, they
wrote the New Testament; and though it be penned in Greek, it speaks the
Phrase of the Jewish Nation: The Apostle speaking to the Jews, used the word
Gehenna, Jam. 3.6. Christ and his Disciples used known Terms, that they might
the better be understood. Thirdly, Because the Jews had not Power to send them
to the Hell they speak of. 4thly. Because the last of the three Sins is said to
be judged to the Fire of Gehenna; which if it were to be understood as some
would have it, it will follow, that some Sins deserve not Hell, and shall not
be punished there, which is contrary to themselves, who teach, the least Sin
deserves Hell. 5thly. Matt. 5.22. showing the Ignorance and Severity of the
Jews and Pharisees, that Anger without a Cause: And Racha, a word of disgrace,
which signifies an empty Fellow, or wicked Wretch, as great Faults as to say
Fool, if not greater, yet punished less; rash Anger in danger of the Judgment;
Racha in danger of the Council; if say Fool, in danger of Hellfire, to burn in
the Valley of the Son of Hinnom.

Of the word Everlasting.
First, The Fire of the Valley of Tophet, is so called, in that it did burn
Night and Day, and went not out.

Secondly, The word ( Ever) and ( Everlasting) the Greeks understand it for an
Age: Ever and Everlasting, are of a like Signification, and is used for a
limited Time, a time during Life, He shall serve his master for ever, Ex. 21.6.
Luke 24.46. that is, until his own or Master's Death; longer he could not serve
him. The everlasting Priesthood, ( Exodus 50.15.) was but until Christ came,
then it was to cease, as appears Heb. 11.12,13,14. It is said they shall
inherit the Land for Ever, Isa 61.21. That Ever was but a little while, as
appears Isa. 63.18.

Thirdly, In that Fire is durable, and goes not out until the combustible
Matter is consumed, may be called Everlasting and unquenchable; for the Fire
that destroyed the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, is called eternal Fire, and
(...) (a word of a large signification) in that it consumed those Cities, for
where no Wood is, the Fire goes out, Proverbs 26.26.

Fourthly, If Fire were Everlasting, it will not follow that which is cast into
it is Everlasting: The Wicked are compared to Chaff and Stubble, Fire is not
long consuming them; burn the Chaff, Isa. 5.24. If any say Chaff will be ever
burning, and never consumed, we know the contrary.

Fifthly, Consider that the Scriptures sometimes use Words that exceed their
Signification, and are not strictly to be understood according to their letter
and signification of those Words; as John 21.25. The things that Jesus did, if
they should be written, I suppose the world it self would not contain the
things that should be written. A large Expression: What! will not the whole
World contain a Record of the Actions of one Man? The meaning is, they would be
too great: So Sin and the strength of the Ethiopian Army, are said to be
Infinite, Job. 22.5. Neh. 3.9. that is very great; for the World, and all in
it, is Finite, Isa. 40.17. These Considerations show how such Words are to be
understood, and it may satisfy us herein.

Is it not a very strange thing, that themselves should confess, that the
English word Hell is in the Hebrew Sheol, and in the Greek Haides and Gehennah,
and that they are to be understood as aforesaid, that they should, for the said
Words, translate it in English Hell, and then expound Hell for a terrible and
dreadful Place of Torment never to end! O horrible Abuse and Blasphemy against
God and his Word! and even all Men are deluded and deceived thereby: Verily,
verily, they deserve the Name they give to others, of denying the Word of God.

The Story of Dives, Luke 16.30.
Is not any Proof of any Torments in Hell, because it is a Parable, not a
History; of a Parable we are not to ground a Doctrine. The Story of Dives is no
more a Proof of a Punishment after this Life, than Judge. 9.8. is a Proof that
Trees did walk and speak, though it is said, The Trees went forth, and said,
etc. The Story of Dives is not to be understood according to the letter, for
these Reasons: It says, There was a rich Man in Hell, yet all confess the Body
is in the Grave:

2. How could Dives see so far as Abraham's Bosom is from Hell? Mr. Leigh
says, the great Chaos between Abraham and Dives, signify an infinite distance;
which overthrows their seeing and speaking to each other. 3. It says, he saw
Abraham; yet they say, Hell is a Place of utter Darkness: How can any thing be
seen in a Place of utter Darkness? 4. By what means can Dives know Abraham from
another, seeing, as all confess, his Body is in the Grave until the
Resurrection?

Fifthly, How could Dives speak to Abraham, his Body being in the Grave? Can
any speak without the Organs of the Body?

Sixthly, How shall Dives hear Abraham at so great a gulf and distance as
Heaven is from Hell?

Seventhly, How comes Dives to have such Charity in Hell to his five Brethren,
seeing he had none to them when on Earth?

Eighthly, Dives would have Abraham to send to them, which cannot be, because
Abraham knows us not, Isa. 63.16.

Ninthly, How shall Abraham send, seeing he has no communion with us, nor
passage to us?

Tenthly, To what purpose will it be to send? If they will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rise from the Dead, ver.
31. It is therefore a Parable, and the scope of it is, as Dr. Fulk says, that
those that will not hear Moses and the Prophets, are not to expect to be called
neither by Vision nor Apparition, ver. 26,30. This Parable is not done, but
represented, says Mr. Cartwright, on Luke 16.30. The story of Dives in Hell,
is one of their main Pillars of Hell Torments, and by that which is said, it is
shaken and removed.

Of Tophet, Isa. 30.33.
This Place is no proof of Hell Torments, themselves being Judges. They say
Hell is deep under Ground, and Tophet is a Place above Ground, as has been
showed. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that this place shall no more be
called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of
slaughter; for in this place will I cause to fall by the sword before their
enemies, by the hand of those that seek their lives, and their carcases will I
give for meat for the fowls of Heaven, and they shall bury in Tophet till there
be no place to bury in, Jer. 9.6, to 35. Jer. 7.33. They confess Tophet is the
Valley of the Son of Hinnom; Tophet, Hebrew, toph, tympanum; that is to say,
Gehinnom, Greek, Gehinna signifies a Tabret, or Drumhead, or any thing that
makes a Noise, ver. 32 Tophet is ordained of old, Hebrew, yesterday, prepared,
fitted for the King, and those with him, whom the Lord will there slay for
their Sins, by their Enemies: It is deep and large, fit for great Armies to
meet and fight in; Fire and much Wood, to consume the Carcases slain there; the
Breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone, does kindle it, not a stream of
Fire and Brimstone, but like it; the destruction being from God, was great and
terrible; or Fire and Brimstone shall be sent from Heaven to destroy them
there, as Ezekiel 38.11.22. Dan. 7.10. Genesis 19.24. Tophet is another of their
chief Proofs of the Torments of Hell, and with that which is said, it is shaken
and removed.

Of Isa. 66.24. They shall go forth and look upon the Men that have
transgressed against me, for their Worm shall not die, neither shall their Fire
be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all Flesh.

This Place is not to be understood of any Punishment after this Life, because
it says their Carcases shall lie to be seen, and others shall look upon them:
In Hell they will confess the Carcases of the Wicked are not now, nor hereafter
shall be, for a Carcass is without Life, therefore not capable of Suffering: If
they say, at the End of the World Soul and Body shall be united to suffer, how
is it then a Carcass after the End of the World? How shall they be an abhorring
to all Flesh? For then there will be no Flesh to go forth to look upon them.
The late Annotation of the Bible on Isa. 66.24. say, the Carcases are the
Forces of Gog and Magog, which shall be slain near Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 29.4, to
10. and 37.36. contains, is apparent; for after the slaughter is made of
them, they shall lie a long time unburied, and seven Months shall the Children
of Israel be a burying them, that they may cleanse the Land, Ezekiel. 39.11,12.
Also the Judgment inflicted upon them, show it to be in this Life, as
Pestilence, overflowing Rain, great Hailstones, Fire and Brimstone, Ezekiel.
38.11. And the End why God punished them, show it to be in this Life; which
was, that God might be magnified and sanctified in the Eyes of many Nations
after the end of the World: He cannot be sanctified in the Eyes of any, much
less many Nations: The Worm has reference to those that are bred and fed upon
dead Bodies, as Acts 11.29, especially such as lie long upon the Ground until
they Rot, and become as Dung and Carrion, John, 21.26. Jer. 4.11,14,20. The
Fire to the burning those Bodies, not fit to be stirred and removed, but to be
consumed by Fire in the place where they lay, Isa. 9.5. Ezekiel. 39.6. that lie
rotting upon the face of the Earth until they crawl all over with Worms and
Maggots; the sight of such is a loathsome Spectacle; therefore it is said they
shall be abhorring to all Flesh: The Greek renders it a Sight or Spectacle; it
has relation to Tophet abovesaid: And the Hebrew Doctors say the same on this
Place; they shall go forth out of Jerusalem into the Valley of Hinnom, and
there they shall see the Carcases of those that rebelled against Me. So Dr.
Kimchi, and Abi-ezr. in loc.

The Worm that shall not die, and the Fire that shall not be quenched, is in
this Life, and not as they say, in Hell, Mark 6.43,44. Rev. 14.10,11. Ezekiel. 3.
etc. Ezekiel. 38.24. concerning the Destruction of Gog and Magog; as has been
showed.

Concerning Luke 5.2. They shall not come out thence till they have paid the
utmost Farthing.

This Place Mr. Leigh does allege to prove Hell Torments, and the Papists
allege it to prove their Purgatory, and to as much purpose; for ver. 25,26. is
Christ's Counsel to avoid Differences, and to compose them that fall out
between Man and Man in this Life, to prevent Suits in Law, and Imprisonment; so
the Text shows, and Chrysostom expounds it so: The word in the Greek is an
Adversary of the Law, Pro. 6.3. Luke 12.38. mention is made of the Magistrate
and Jailer, which are Terms and Offices properly fitting the Business of this
Life: A like Place is Matt. 18.34. To understand Luke 5. of their Hell, does
imply Free Will, and falling from Grace, and that suffering in Hell is a
satisfaction and payment of the Debt. They will confess in Hell there is no
Jail-delivery, nor any Redemption, therefore it suits not to their purpose. It
is conceived that Hell is deep within the Earth; Reason concludes it must needs
be dark; the Grave is called the Land of Darkness, Job 10.21,22. the Cruelty of
the Enemy is called thick Darkness, Joel 2.1. to 14. The Greek Poets say it is
dark; they compare the darkness thereof to a certain Territory that lies
between Baiae and Cumae, where the Cimeria inhhabit, so environed with Hills,
that the Sun never came to it; whereupon the Proverb comes, Darker than the
darkness of Cimeria: But the chief Cause is, because they are in darkness
without the light of the Word; for Darkness is in this Life: We cannot order
our speech by reason of darkness, Job 38.19. Where no Light is, there is utter
Darkness. When the eye is evil, the whole body is full of darkness, Matt. 6.23.
The dark Places of the Earth full of Cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. Ignorant Men are in
the Dark, and full of Works of Darkness, Romans 13.12. that would have others
tormented with cruel Tortures and Death, because not of their Opinion in
Religion: All unconverted Men are in Darkness; they are of the Night, 2 Cor.
6.14. Genesis 5. Christ is the Light, and Saints are the Children of the Light:
What communion has Light with Darkness? 2 Cor. 4.14. Darkness covered the
Earth, till Christ the Light came, to give Light to them that sat in Darkness,
Isa. 61.12. Luke 1.79. who has delivered us from the Power of Darkness, Col.
1.13. Who has called us out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 29.
The People that sat in a Darkness saw a great Light; and to them that sat in
the Region and Shadow of Death, Light is sprung up, Matt. 4.16. Ye were
sometimes Darkness, but now ye are Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. The Chains of
Darkness are not material Chains, but so called, because they are fast in
Darkness, and cannot get out: The Law works Wrath; when that comes into a
dark and ignorant Soul, it causes weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Luke 13.28.
being sad and comfortless.

Of burning the Tares, Matt. 13.30.
Is at the End of the World, ver. 39. The Tares are the Wicked, the Harvest is
the World. By which it appears, the Wicked, with the Earth, shall be consumed
by Fire, 40,42. 2 Pet. 3.7. Is any so weak as to imagine that Earth will ever
burn, and never be consumed? I have seen some burnt to Ashes in an Hour in a
Coal Fire: They say, our Fire is but painted Fire to that in Hell; if so, then
it will of necessity follow, that so much as that Fire is hotter than our Fire,
so much sooner shall the Body be burnt and consumed in that more fierce and
terrible Fire.

The Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. and 35.9.
The late Annotations of the Bible say, They were to fill up a full Measure of
their own and Father's Sins, because God intended to sweep them away by the
hand of the Romans, to cut them off by a Temporal Death, which was the Wrath to
come, to fill up their Sins; for the Wrath is (not shall) come upon them to the
uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. We are by Nature the Children of Wraih? that is,
liable to Wrath; inward and outwatd, Thy wrath lies har^ on me, Ps. 88.7. The
Wrath of God is the hiding of hi^ Face, Isa. 54.8. Outward Wrath is temporal
Destruction; he cast upon them the Fierceness of his Wrath, Ps. 78.49.
Destroyed them, Deuteronomy. 7.10. Lev. 10.6. Jos. 9.20. and 22.20. Numb. 19.40. Ezekiel.
3.7. 2 Chr. 19.10. Psalm. 90.6.

Of the word Cursed.
It is to be barren; so the Earth and Fig Tree were cursed, Mat. 11.2. It is to
be a Servant of Servants, Genesis 9.25. Josh. 9.23. to want Prosperity, Deuteronomy.
28.16,17,18,19. Mal. 22. to die a violent and disgraceful Death, 2 Kings 2.24.
Deuteronomy. 21.23. to be a Fugitive, a Wanderer, Ps. 59.12, to eat in Sorrow, Genesis
3.17. to endure Pain and Hardship, 14. Lev. 11.42.

Of Eternal Damnation.
The word Damned, Mar. 16.16. 2 These. 22. Romans 14.23. in Greek, is Judged;
Damnation is Judgment, Eternal Damnation is Eternal Judgment; a Judgment is a
Sentence, the Sentence is to a second Death, called Eternal, because it is not
to be reversed.

The word Reprobate
Is in the Greek of no Judgment; a reprobate Mind is a Mind void of Judgment;
see Romans 1.28. 2 Timothy 3.8. Tit. 1.16. See the Notes in the Margin.

Of the word Fire.
Fire is put for fiery Trials, 1 Pet. 4.12. inward Troubles, Fire in my Bones,
Lam. 1.13. and 2.4. the Tongue is a Fire, 2 Samuel 3.6. and 5.2. his Word is a
Fire, Jer. 23.29. God's Spirit Fire, Mat. 3.11. Baptized with Fire, 1 Cor.
10.2. God is a consuming Fire, Heb. 13. last.

Bellarmin and Bullinger, and others say, the Fire of Hell is material Fire,
kindled with Wood, and allege for it, Isa. 30.33. Isa. 66.24. The Fire of Hell
is true and substantial Fire kept under the Earth to punish withal, says
Tertullian.

The Fire of Hell cannot be Corporal Fire, for these Reasons.
Our Fire is corporal; they say our Fire is but painted Fire, a Shadow to that,
therefore it is not corporal Fire.

2. Corporal Elementary Fire is Light, and enlightneth the Place where it is:
in Hell they say is utter Darkness; if so, the Fire of Hell is not corporal
Fire.

3. Corporal Fire consumes speedily all combustible Matter cast into it; they
say, the Fire of Hell ever burns, and never consumes that cast into it,
therefore it is not corporal Fire.

4. They say the Fire of Hell is invisible, then it is not corporal, for that
which is corporal may be seen.

5. Corporal Fire may be quenched, the Fire of Hell they say is unquenchable,
therefore it is not corporal.

6. Corporal Fire goes out without Wood, theirs not; therefore not corporal.

7. They say the Fire of Hell is Eternal; if so, it is not corporal: Corporal
Fire is seen, Things seen are not Eternal.

8. They say the Absence of God is the greatest Torment in Hell; Corporal Fire
is a greater Torment to the Body than the Absence of God.

Lastly, Corporal Fire cannot work upon a Spirit; the Devils are Spirits,
therefore cannot be tormented with corporal Fire. Says Willet, Synop. page
1023. To say God is able to make corporal Work upon a Spirit, and able to make
to live without Food or Refreshment to Eternity, and to make Fire burn without
Wood, is no Proof that he will do so, and is as silly a kind of Reasoning, as
to say, God is able to do all Things, with God all Things are possible,
therefore he will do all Things; Men should not build their vain Conceits upon
God's Power without his Word.

2. Others say, the Fire of Hell is not Corporal but Spiritual Fire: But that
it cannot be neither, for there is no spiritual Fire; if it ceases to be
natural Fire, it cease to be true Fire; it cannot be spiritual, because they
say it is natural; it cannot be natural, because they say it is spiritual; it
cannot be neither of them, because they say it is partly corporal and partly
spiritual, the one to burn the Body, the other to burn the Soul; Hell Flames
are material, yet not all material, says Willet, Synop. page 1010. if so,
there are two Fires in Hell; Bernard says, Fire shall burn thy Flesh and a
Worm thy Spirit, Conscience accusing, Isidore says, their Minds burn with
Sorrow, and their Bodies with the Flame.

3. Others say, Hellfire is neither material nor spiritual, nor mixed, but
metaphorical, figurative; so Austin and some of the modern Preachers say;
Calvin thinks that there is no true Fire in Hell, for, says he, the Wood and
Worm is to be taken metaphorically; but, says another, that the Fire is so to
be taken, I utterly deny.

Ten Opinions of the Learned, of the Places of Hell.
1. Mr. Edw. Leith, Hugo, and others say, Hell is a Bottomless Pit; but there
is no Place without a Bottom which is the Earth.

2. It is generally agreed, That Hell is in the lower Parts of the Earth, but
where these lower Parts should be, Mr. Perkins on the Creed, says, No Man is
able to define; the lower Parts of the Earth is great Abasement, says Dr. Fulk
on Phil. 2.7. The lowest Degree of Christ's Humiliation, Ephesians. 4.10. one part of
the Earth is not put in Opposition to another Part thereof, but to Heaven,
Psalm. 103.13. David says, Thou had fashioned me in the lowest Parts of the
Earth, Psalm. 139.15. Was David born in Hell?

3. Bishop Bilson, Mr. Wheatly, and others, say, Hell is below, but how many
Miles it is to Hell they do not say, nor cannot tell.

4. Bellarmin, Lyria, and others, say, Hell is in the Earth near the Center
hereof; if so, ye may know how far it is to Hell, the Earth being round, the
Circumference thereof being Twenty one thousand and six hundred Miles: The
whole consisting of 360 Degrees, at 60 Miles a Degree, the Diametet of the
Terrestrial Globe is Six thousand seven hundred and eighty two Miles, and one
Eleventh; so there to the Center or middle Point, is Three thousand three
hundred and ninety Miles and half at Length deep into the Earth to Hell; but in
the Day of Judgment, when the Earth shall be consumed with Fire, as 1 Pet. 3.7.
where shall Hell be? Then it cannot be in the Center of the Earth when there is
no Earth.

5. Mr. Leigh and others, say, Hell is a Lake; the Lake is a Sea, as appears
Luke 5.1,2. where the Swine were choked, Luke 8.33. whose common Death is not
half a Mile; Men seek Hell in the Bottom of the Sea, because they know not
where to find it. Hell cannot be the Lake, because Hell was cast into the Lake,
Rev. 20.14.

6. Others say, Hell is in the Air, the Devil is the Prince that rules in the
Air, Ephesians. 2.6. the Air then is the Devil's Hell, says Willet Synops. page
1018. if so, then all we that are alive are in Hell; we do find it not a Place
of so great Torment, for almost all Men like it well, for there they desire to
dwell.

7. Others say, Hell is Above, near the Third Heavens, within the View of the
glorious Saints, and allege for it, Isa. 66.42. Rev. 14.10. if so, it is very
far to Hell: Astronomers say, that there are three Heavens above the Firmament,
where the Fixed Stars are, is a Hundred and sixteen Millions of Miles above the
Earth, which is so high, that if a Stone or Weight should fall from thence, and
continue falling an hundred and fifty Miles an Hour, it would be Eighty-eight
Years, two Weeks, four Days, five Hours, and twenty Minutes a falling down to
the Earth.

8. Some say, the Absence of God's Face is Hell, but that is not called Hell,
but Wrath, Isa. 54.8. This was Cain's Punishment, from thy face shall I be hid:
my punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4.13,15. The hiding of God's
Face causes Sadness, and the breaking of the Bones of Comfort, Psalm. 5.81.
Behold his eyelids try the children of men, Psalm. 11.4. if shut they are
troubled, if open they are comforted.

9. Some say, Hell is in this Life, and is a guilty accusing Conscience: Dr.
Willet says, A guilty troubled Conscience is a Hell and Prison of the Soul;
what may rather be called Hell than Anguish of Soul: The Judges Tribunal is in
the Soul, God sits there as Judge, the Conscience is the Accuser, Fear is
the Tormentor, Guilt in the Soul wounds the Spirit, A wounded spirit who can
bear? Prove. 18.14. they the spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3.1,9. this is the wrath
of God that abides upon him that believes not in the Son, John 3.16. Heaven
is God's Face and Presence, and our greatest Joy in this Life, Exodus 33.15,16.
and so will be the next, Psalm. 17.5. Thou will fill me with the joy of thy
face, in thy presence is fullness of joy, Acts 2.18. Pleasures or Pleasantness,
that is, pleasant Joys at thy right Hand, in the full Enjoyment of thee, are
sweet Delights eternal.

Some say Hell is a local Place, Augustine says, it is not a Place; Doctor
Willet says the Place of Hell makes not the Torments; it is a Question, says
he, whether the Place make Hell, or the Absence of the Presence of God, Synops.
Page 1056.

10. Another says, it is in the other Side of the blue Cloud that appears to
us in the Air; others say, where the Place of Hell is, they cannot tell;
whether it be in the Earth or in the Water, or in the Air, it is not revealed,
says Greenwood; they that have taken Pains to find it out are as far from it
as ever; some of the Ministers of France affirm, that Father Cotton, the Jesuit
did enquire of the Devil for a plain Place of Scripture to prove Purgatory, so
they are at as great Loss to prove Hell by a plain Place of Scripture truly
translated, their Hell of Torments never to end. Also the learned agree not
upon which Scripture to ground their Hell Torments upon; for that Place one of
them allege to prove it, another of themselves deny it, that it is so to be
understood. Mr. Ainsw. on Psalm. 10.16. says, that Place through Custom is
taken for the Place of the Damned, but is not so to be understood, the Word
being Sheol: Marolat on Apoc. Page 282. says, the Fire of Gehenna is the Place
of the Damned, others of them deny it; M. Leigh says Dives proves it, Dr. Fulk
and others deny it.

See ye not the great Doubting and Uncertainty they are at among themselves?
They grope in the Dark without Light, Job. 22.5. by their reeling, staggering,
and stumbling, that they are so drunk they can find no Ground to stand upon;
they understand not whereof they affirm, yet each of them hugs his own
Apprehension. It is very strange, that in a thing so signal, of which they say
they see it in the Word of God, that they can no Way agree concerning it. O ye
learned in the seven liberal Sciences, tell us how to reconcile these things in
Point of Truth; or tell us in as much as ye speak Contraries, as yea and nay,
which of you we are to believe. Have we not all cause to say herein, Where is
the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 1.20. he frustrateth the tokens of liars, and
makes diviners mad, and turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
Foolishness, Isaiah 44.25.

Mr. Edward Leigh, Esquire and Master of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, presents his
Reasons to prove Hell Torments or Punishment after this Life for some to
endure, never to End; let them be considered, Prove. 18.17. Mr. Leigh says, the
Conscience of Man has a Fear of some Punishment after this Life, proves it.

Answ. If they have, that does not prove it; because the Conscience of Men are
as they are instructed, according to the Proverb, Such Docter, such Scholar;
hence it is, that the Conscience of a Papist tells him it is not lawful to eat
Flesh in Lent, not of a Friday. And whosoever kills you will think he does God
good service, Joh. 16.2. that is his Conscience, the Consciences of some Men
are almost, if not altogether, for some Evil; therefore that proves it not.

Mr. Leigh, the Heathen, held there was a Hell, a Being and Place for wicked
Men after this Life.

Answ. Why did ye not say and prove, that they hold that they shall be in
Torment never to an end.

The Heathens do not believe, that there is to be such a Punishment after this
Life, for they deny the Resurrection of the Body, therefore they burn the Body
and save the Ashes in an Urn for a Memorial; they believe as Pythagoras the
Philosopher taught, that the Soui goes from one Body into another Man or
Beast; that some of the Philosohers grew so tender, that they would not kill
any Beast nor Fowl, for they said, it may be, it is my Brother or my Sister.
These Heathen Greek Poets were long before the coming of Christ; in their
treble Division of the World they fain three Gods. Jupiter the God of Heaven,
Neptune the God of the Sea, and Pluto the God of the Earth, in which they say
he keeps his Court and Palace, (no word of Torment, that would make it a poor
Court and Palace) so Homer and Noninus, Greek Poets; Homer wrote of the
Destruction of Troy, which was near a thousand Years before the Birth of
Christ; Homer is one of the most ancient Records extant; it seems in his time
there was no mention of a Hell of Torments never to end, the said Poets call
Pluto Summanus, as being Chief of the Maunes or Spirits below: To pacify these
ill Spirits, a feast was kept in Febuary with Wax Candles burning to Pluto,
called Candlemas-Day, so Mr. Jes. in his Almanac, The Cretians are always
liers, Titus 1.12. the greatst liars in the World that will fancy, fain, and
say any thing; is it a thing possible that Wax Candles above the Earth should
give Light thousand of Miles into the Earth, to pacify those ill Spirits
there? it seems they are not in any great Torment if a little Light will pacify
them. The Poets say, Hell is twice as deep as Heaven is high; the Astronomers
say, Jupiter the second Planet is 72 Millions of Miles above the Earth; if Hell
be twice as deep, it is a hundred and fifty four Millions of Miles to Hell,
which is fabulous; so there Cerberus three Heads, and Charus Boat to row Men to
Pluto; so the Fancy of Purgatory did spring first from the Heathen Poets, long
before the coming of Christ, as appears by Plato and Virgil, who have described
at large the whole Commonwealth, and all the Orders and Degrees of Purgatory:
These with their Elysian Fields, and many other of their Barbarisms by long Use
became venerable.

Your Opinion is fitter for Heathens than for Christians: If the Heathens do
hold as you do, are we to believe in Religion as the Heathen? I pass not what
they nor any else say, unless they can read it me in the Word of God; we cry,
to the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. Mr. Leigh says clear Reason
proves it, God is just; many abominable Sinners enjoy more Prosperity in this
Life, than those that live far more innocently, must be punished hereafter
according to the Multitude and Hainousness of their Sins, Psalm. 73.17.

Answ. I see you are more bold to affirm, than able to prove; does Reason deny
the Punishment to be just, except it never End? The Scriptures you allege, say
they have an end, and you say, they shall never have an end, that is, your
clear Reason, to say some are worse than others, therefore they are to suffer a
Punishment never to end, so you exclude Mary Magdalen and the poor Prodigal,
but it is but your bare Affirmation without Proof; your Reason is that God
should show Mercy to little Sinners, but none to the great Sinners, they must
not be saved; but this your clear Reason is clear against the Will and Wisdom
of God, who is pleased to save of the worst of Sinners, as appears, St. Luke
7.47. 1 Timothy 1.19. Asts 9.13. If some enjoy more Prosperity than others, must
they therefore suffer a Punishment never to end? Outward Prosperity is a great
Blessing, and you make it a great Curse; if that you say were true, there is no
Cause in the Day of Prosperity to rejoice, Eccl. 7.24. nor to say, O Lord I
beseech thee send me now Prosperity, Psalm 115.25. in saying greater Sinners,
you judge according to outward Appearances both for Sin and Punishment, and may
be mistaken in both what they are in the inner Man; for Sin and Punishment you
know not, the Heart of Unbelief and Rebellion of Spirit in others, nor how God
punishes them in their Spirits; Sin is punished in this Life.

Mr. Leigh says, it is just they should suffer for ever, who if they had lived,
would have sinned for ever, Cast them out of my sight, Jer. 5.1.

Answ. If it be just we should suffer for ever, it is just our Surety should
suffer for ever.

Do you consider, that the Creature was made subject to vanity not willingly,
but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope, Romans 8.20.

Cast them out of my sight, is no Proof that they shall suffer for ever, but
rather that they shall be utterly destroyed, for if they have any Being,
wherever they be they cannot be out of Sight of God.

Your Justice is not God's his is a Death; yours is not a Death, but another
thing.

Mr. Leigh, says, God's intentions from everlasting, was to glorify his
Justice as well as his Mercy, Romans 9.21.23. fitted to Destruction.

Answ. Know you any of the Intentions of God that is not revealed in his Word,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. or does the Word say that God not glorify his Justice, unless he
inflict so great a Punishment without end; you give neither Scripture nor
Reason to prove that you say is just; the Justice of God was revealed and made
known, in causing the Earth to swallow up Corah and his Company; they were
Vessels of Wrath prepared, fitted to Destruction, (your Opinion denies the Word
of God that says they are fitted to Destruction) you say they are never to be
destroyed, die nor end. Mr. Leigh says, the Covenant under which ungenerate
Men stand, and by which they are bound over to this Wrath is everlasting.

Answ. There is but two Covenants, Gal. 4.24. the old and new, Heb. 8.13. and
12.24. the old is no more everlasting than the Priesthood of it: The Breach of
the Covenant of Works is Death, therefore not eternal Life in Misery. Mr. Leigh
says, in that Torment they curse and accuse one another.

Answ. When you write again, I pray tell us how you know that in Hell they do
so; for the Word of God says not so, nor have you been there to hear it, nor
they that told you so. To affirm things in Religion, not revealed in the World
of God, is to presume above that which is written, and contrary to 2 Cor. 4.8.
Rom 15.4. Socrates an Heathen, was more wise and modest in not affirming things
he knew not, being asked what was done in Hell, said, he never went thither,
nor communed with any that came from thence: Yet you and others affirm, with
great Boldness and Confidence, things you know not; some say in Hell the Eye is
afflicted with Darkness, whereas Darkness is no Affliction to the Eye; also
they say their Ears are afflicted with horrible and hideous Outcries, their
Noses with Poisons and stinking Smells, (of what I pray?) their Tongues with
gaully Bitterness, the whole Body with intolerable Fire; the Damned shall
prize a Drop of Water worth ten thousand Worlds; cursing shall be their Tunes,
Blasphemies their Ditties, Lamentation their Songs, and Screeking their
Strains; they shall lie screeking and screaming continually. Ye see how Men set
their Brains to work to invent Lies; for all they say is without Warrant from
the Word of God. One says their Torments in Hell is so great, that they cannot
forbear roaring; and you say they curse and accuse one another; so that one of
their vain Imaginations contradict another, and all of them the Word of God;
they will not deny that those in Hell are in the greatest Trouble, and they in
less Trouble cannot speak, I am so troubled I cannot speak, Ps. 17.4. therefore
they cannot curse and accuse one another, as you affirm.

Mr. Leigh says, Divines unanimously concur, etc.

Ans. If they do, it is not binding to us, for we are satisfied they are not
infallible, There must be Errors, 1 Cor. 11.9. they have the greatest Share:
The Priests, Popish and Mohammedan Priests, Baals Priests, and all other Sorts
of Priests concur, common Consent sooner believed than naked Truth, it is high
time to Cease from Men, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.22. Truth,
and not Number of Men, is to be followed, Every one must give an Account of
himself to God, Romans 14.3.11.12. Luther said, he esteemed not the Worth of a
Rush a Thousand Agustines and Cyprians against himself; all Churches err.
Parnormitan said, more Credit is to be given to one speaking Truth, than to all
Men in all Ages speaking the contrary.

They are like to concur and agree if they take the Counsel they give, as not
to question Principles: It seems we must take all upon Trust, and Hearsay,
without Trial, they all say it, therefore it is true; but the Bereans wo^ld,
and did search the Scriptures, to see if Things were so as the Apostles
preached, see 1 John 4.1.

Let it be certainly made to appear, that God has said in any thing contrary
to any thing that I have said, I desire with all my Heart, to submit to it;
without that I cannot yield the Sovereignty of my Judgment, and Conscience, to
the concurring Consent of blind Guides, ignorant and erroneous Men, though in
Sheeps Clothing; and covered all over with the Title of Godly, learned and
holy Saints or Presbyters, or Ministers of Christ; the Papists call their
Church Holy Church, and their Priest Holy Priest, and their Order, Holy Order,
and all Holy, if you will believe them.

Some say, the Jews report, that in Tophet, the Valley of the Son of Hinnon,
there was a great Ditch which could never be filled, which they called the
Mouth of Hell; and that the Chaldeans, when they slew the Israelites, threw
them in there: If this Report be true which has been brought to prove Hell,
then it will follow, that the Mouth of Hell is near Jerusalem; and that God
does give to the Wicked, Power to cast his People into Hell.

How much Weight there is in your Reasons to prove a Punishment after this Life
never to end, let who will Judge; I, for my Part, profess I do not see how they
serve to your Purpose; your Nakedness appears, and that your Opinion has
neither Scripture nor Reason to support it and therefore it must needs fall, 2 Timothy 3.9. You have done all you can, and can come to no surer Bottom to rest
upon, than Supposals and Imaginations, wresting Scriptures, and Consent of
others; your Glory is that all are of your Mind, though without good Ground or
Reason, as is showed. Also in that you allege Reasons to prove Hell Torments;
it gives me Occasion to believe, in your own Judgment the Scriptures you
allege to prove it, prove it not; for if you believe the Scriptures prove it,
to what Purpose serve your Reasons? Or do you think, that those that doubt of
the Sufficiency of our Proof of it by Scripture, will be satisfied with your
Reasons as a full Proof of it; if there be any such, they may be to them of
some use.

The learned contradict themselves; Mr. Bolton says, Thou must live in endless
Woe, in Brimsbone and Fire, which thou might so often and easily escape,
which overthrows the Doctrine of Election; also they say, the Sense of Loss in
Hell is greater than the Sense of Pain. So they make the sensible want of the
Presence of God the greatest Torment in Hell, and that is in this life, I am
cast out of thy Sight, Psalm. 31.2. it follows by their Doctrine, that the
greatest Torment of Hell is in this Life.

Mr. Leigh says in his Body of Divinity, the Sense of God's Wrath, Rage of
Conscience, Guilt, Fear, Despair, the Soul cannot melt with greater Torment; if
so, then this is not a worse Torment in Hell than is in this Life.

Water is so scarce in Hell, that Greenhood says, the Damned prize a Drop of
Water above ten thousand Worlds; and yet they affirm those in Hell shall
continually weep, etc. therefore their own Sayings agree not.

The first Author of the Opinion of the Torments of Hell never to end, was
Marcion the Heretic, that held, that Christ was not a Man but in Semblance;
and that there was two Beginnings, two Gods, one good, one bad; that there was
Torments for some in Hell, was first invented by him; he determined the Reward
of the Creature, either in Torment or Refreshment, to be laid up for them in
Hell; he was the first Author thereof, by Tertulian's Confession, as says Dr.
Fulk in his Defense, Page 83, 84. see and behold the Original of your Opinion
of the Torments of Hell, An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
brings forth that which is evil, Luke 6.45.

The seven Pillars of Hell shaken and removed.
The Greek Fathers were the first Pillars of Hell Torments; this came to pass
by reason of the Ignorance of the Fathers in the Hebrew Tongue, their not
understanding the Word Sheol deceived them; so says Dr. Fulk in his Defense,
Page 77.

The second Pillar of Hell Torments were the Writers of the Hebrew and Greek
Copies of the Bible; their Defect has put us to a great Loss; the original
Copy the Apostles wrote, is not only unknown to us, but to the Learned; we do
not hear of any alive in England, that can produce the New Testament the
Apostle wrote; it is not enough that they say, that we have Books in Hebrew and
Greek, unless we could certainly know that these Copies, as they call them,
agree Word for Word with those that were wrote by the Prophets and Apostles.
Many boast of God's preserving the Hebrew and Greek Bible amidst so many
Enemies; as God has been pleased to deliver up Christ and his People, so also
the Scriptures into the Hands of Sinners, to be used at their Pleasure: It is
wonderful to consider, what adding and altering the Scriptues have been subject
unto; one Pope publishes what he pleases for Scriptures, as Pope Urban V. and
within two Years after Pope Clement that succeeded him, calls them in and
burns them, and puts out what he pleases, and calls it the holy Scriptures,
if ye will believe the Testimony of the learned and godly Protestant Writers,
who have not been esteemed Blasphemers nor Heretics, as Dr. Fulk, M. Beza, M.
William Perkins, Dr. Amiss, and others. Dr. Fulk says, that some Greek Copies
are altered; it is not unlikely in his Answer to the Remist to the Reader, page
43. And which is more, he says, Corruption has happened to all Copies, this
Day extant in his Answer to Preface, page 11, 15, 16. whole Verses omitted in
some Copies, as 1 Job 5.7. is not in some Copies, nor in the Syriack, which is
ancient as Apostles, read not this Verse at all, but is extant in others; and
that there is at least sixteen various Greek Copies of the New Testament, Jus
Divinum, page 66. Dr. Lightfoot says, Mr. Beza was a Man that always
questioned the Text, to see so many differing Copies would put any one to a
stand which to believe. Mr. Perkin says, it must not seem strange, that Words
in the Margin have crept into the Text. Dr. Amiss says, Helps Governments in
the first of the Corinthians 12.8. are not in the Original; he supposes it to
be done by the Prelates in Favor of their Government. The Preachers, who call
themselves Divines, have assumed and challenged Divine Authority to frame all
Copies and Translations, and to expound all T^xts according to their own Minds;
to maintain their own Doctrine and Practices; to uphold their Power and
Standing: Hence it is that each differing Party's Translation agree not; that
Party that would have the Magistrate punish idolatry, etc. have made a Text for
it, Job 31*28. to be punished by the Judges: But these Words are not in the
Hebrew, but are an Addition of their own, as appears by the Bible printed in
London by the Assigns of John Bill, in the Year 1640. And the Geneva Bible
differs from this, and from the Translation printed by the Stationers, London.
The English Transl^tion has Variety of Differences, not without evident
Contradi^^ion among diverse Places that might be instanced, see Verse 9.18. of
the seventh of Daniel in the Geneva Traslation, Verse 9. is. I beheld till the
Thrones were set up: And in the King's Translation, printed by the Company of
Stationers, London, the same Verse is, I behold till the Thrones were cast
down, and Verse 18. it is [But Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom.]
And in the Geneva Translation the same Verse is, [And they shall take the
Kingdom of the Saints] both cannot be true, which of these is an Englishman to
believe? Some say, Luther added the Word only to the Text, being asked why he
did it, said, he did it to make the Apostle say more plainly, Faith only
justifies, Dr. Fulk's Defense English Translation, page 80. says, we follow
in our Translation as near as we can, the holy Scripture in such Sense, if any
thing be doubtful as the proper Circumstance of the Place will lead us unto,
that we may attain to the meaning of the holy Ghost. So then it seems, if the
Translator do think the holy Ghost means this or that he may translate it so.
Is not this a large Liberty? The Jews take on such Liberty.

The Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, in the Abridgment of their Grievances
delivered to King James. page 11.13.14. say, that the English Translation of
the Bible, is a Translation that takes away from the Text, and adds to the
Text, and that sometimes to the changing and obscuring of the holy Ghost; and
Mr. Broughton the great Linguist in his Advertisement of Corruption, tells the
Bishops, that the public Translation of the Scriptures in the English, is
such, as that it perverts the Text of the old Testament in eight hundred forty
and eight Places, and that it causes Millions to reject the old Testament; and
Dr. Featly Dr. of Divinity, in his Dipper Dipped, page 1. says, no Translation
is simply authentical, or the undoubted Word of God. In the undoubted Word of
God there can be no Error, but in the Translation, there are and may be Errors;
the Bible translated therefore is not the undoubted Word of God, but so far
only as it agrees with the Original, the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles; and in as much as our English Translation, as he says, is not the
undoubted Word of God, what is that Preaching worth that is proved by it? The
false Glosses and Interpretations which are put upon the Scriptures by Men
learned in the Languages, who have made inconsiderate and bold Assertions
without Proof, in not keeping the true and proper Signification of the Words
thereof, has caused many Errors, and great Trouble and Confusion; they put the
Word Lucifer for the Day Star, Isa. 14.12. They have forsaken the Fountain, and
dug to themselves Cisterns, as Jer. 2. And we see the People are willing to
give up themselves to a Ministry of Fables, 2 Kings 4.4. 2 Pet. 1.16. that
makes the Scriptures say and unsay, which being interpreted is to make them say
just nothing; the Force of Education and the Custom the Countrymen live in, is
such as ordinarily ingageth them to a Prejudice and evil Opinion against all
Principles contrary thereunto, though of divine Inspiration. Hence the Papists,
Turks and several Sorts of Protestants, cry down and censure each others
Judgment and Opinion as abominable Error, Heresy and Blasphemy.

The third Pillar that upholds Hells Torments are fond Expositors that
interpret Sheol for Hell Torments, so Dr. Fulk calls them in his Defense, page
90. I would know why Interpreters understand and translate a Hell of Torments
from the Hebrew and Greek as is not in them, as themselves confess, as has
been showed: They will take Sheol figuratively, and say by Tophet Hell is
figured, which is a Fancy, a Fable and Delusion that is strong in many that
expound Scripture without Sense or Reason; it is as improper to interpret Sheol
for a Place of Torment, as to interpret the Word House to signify a Horse. The
Scripture is not of private Interpretation; a Sense arising out of the Brain of
an Interpreter is a private Interpretation, and as the Scriptures are not of
Man but of the holy Spirit; so the Interpretation of them is not to be of Man
but of the holy Spirit: Oracles signify the Answer of God. Romans 3.2. see Job
12. and how read thou, Luke 10.26. to interpret Words figuratively that are
to be understood literally, and Words literally that are to be understood
figuratively, is licencious and destructive to the Faith of the Gospel; we are
not to interpret any Place figuratively, unless that figurative Sense be
expressed in a plainer Place of Scripture; if a Man will have an erroneous
Persuasion whatsoever the Scripture says to the contrary, he will have it to
be a figurative Sense, they will be left in the Clouds of their own Persuasion;
so instead of proving their Hell of Torments never to end by the Scriptures,
Ruffinus and others say, they that will not believe it shall seal it; which is
no Proof, but a mere Shift, as very a lie as Nurses use to still Children by
telling them of a great Bulbegger, and that a Man will come down the Chimney
and carry him away; but not any but Children and Fools will be scared with such
Bulbeggers.

The Fourth Pillar that upholds their Hell Torment, is the Consent of their
Preachers, their learned and godly Men agree herein, but their weak, and
various, and uncertain Grounds, declare, that they have not studied the Point;
but when Teachers and Hearers are ignorant, any thing will serve and pass for
Truth; the simple believe every Word; All sorts of Priests agree and abuse the
People; the Mohammedan Priests blow a Powder into their Eyes that comes to see
Mahomet hang, that makes them quite blind, that for ever after they are led,
and the Priests say that the Glory of the Sight of Mahomet is so great, that it
takes away their sight for ever after; and about Easter time, for ten Days
there is great Joy about a great fire for their Priest Mahomet, and those that
cast themselves into the Fire and are burnt to Death are counted Martyrs; and
once a Year the Tomb of Mahomet is carried a broad upon a cart, and his Priests
say, that those that put themselves under the Wheel of that Cart and are
crushed to Death, they say to dye Martyrs, and some are so Simple to do so,
that so they may dye Martyrs, so the Antichristian-Priests and all sorts of
Priests have greatly deluded and deceived the People, blowing something into
their Ears that for ever after they are not able to here and receive the Truth.
But as M. Beza did detest the Papists Limbus and Purgatory, so do I their
Dreams of Hell, it being a device of Man without Scripture, with all their
uncertain Brain sick Fancies, for the Imaginations of Men have no end.

The 5th Pillar of Hell is their wresting the Scripture to uphold their Hell of
Torments; this cozeneth and deceives many under Color of Divine Authority,
when it is but Humane, though they are not pleased publicly to say so; because
it streams not to their Purpose, the Scriptures they allege to prove, is about
considered; if any say I wrest Scripture, I appeal to the Learned in the
Languages, for to them concerns the Decision of the Signification of Words,
who (as I have showed) testify with me.

The sixth Pillar of Hell is their Arguments and Reasons they bring to prove
Hell Torments; which have been considered.

The seventh Pillar of Hell is a strong Persuasion that is in Men, that the
believing Hell Torments is a great Means to leave Sin and to live a holy Life;
and the not believing Hell Torments is a Means to commit all Sin with
Greediness, and to live as they list; for, they say, Men live as though there
were no Hell.

Carnal Hearts of Men taken Offense of every thing, except the Law of Works,
doing to be saved, the Doctrine of Election, God's free Grace and Salvation
only and alone by Christ, without Works, Romans 4.6. is changed to be one of the
greatest Doctrines of Liberty to sin that ever was, and is by the Ignorant made
a Stumbling Block and Rock of Offense; and a Cause of Carelessness in many.
Ludovick said, if I be saved, I be saved, If I be damned, I be damned; the
Papists say, if good Works save us not, to what Purpose shall we do them? Then
we may live as we list, if we be appointed to Life we shall be saved, though we
Sin never so much, if we sin we have an Advocate, 1 John 2.1. not any thing can
separate us from the love of God, Romans 8. If we be not appointed to Life, we
cannot be saved, though we should do never so much good, yea see how this truth
is turned to Wantonness, the Apostles exhort not to turn this grace of God into
Wantonness, Romans 6.1*15. The corrupt Heart of Man is ready to do it; there are
many things in Paul's Epistle, which the Ignorant Unlearned (that know not God
in Christ) wrest to their own Destruction; will any therefore say, that the
Doctrine of Election and Salvation by Christ alone is not a Doctrine fit to be
taught not come abroad? if so, the Scriptutes must not come abroad.

Moreover, the Doctrine of the Protestant Ministers is charged, not only to be
a Doctrine of Liberty to Sin, but a blasphemous Doctrine, to teach that the
Fall and Sin of Man was decreed, they say is to make God the Author of Evil;
the Protestant Writers say, that the Sin of Man was determined of God; Dr.
Willet, Synop. page 760. He also says, the Protestants hold, that the fall of
Adam was both foreseen of God and decreed to be, not permitted only, they
allege, Genesis 45.5.8.2. Sam. 24.1. Acts 2. and Acts 4.22.28. should ungodly
lusts, Judge. 18. for the Creature was made subject to Vanity, not willingly,
but by Reason of him that had subjected the same in Hope, Rom 8.20. Dr. William
Whitaker against Campion the Jesuit says, now answer me Campion, do you think
that which any one does, how wicked soever, is done whether God will or no? If
you hold that any thing is done against God's Will, what Providence or
Omnipotency do you leave him? For he that permits that to be done which he
would by no Means have to be done, it is certain, that he is not endued with so
great Power, as that he can forbid that which he would not have done, wherefore
you must needs confess, that all Things that are done are done by the Will of
God; and Page 196. all confess, God could have hindered Sin to be if he had so
pleased, but he would not hinder it, therefore it was his will it should be,
the Will of God, and not Sin, is the Cause of God's Decree, and the being of
all things; the Will and Pleasure of God is the Womb from whence springs
every Work of the Creature, Romans 4.11. God must first will his Creature to
stand or fall before he can do either, Acts 21.14. Phil. 2.13. Prove. 21.4. the
evil Actions of Men are not only foreseen of God, but decreed, says Mr. Par in
hie Grounds of Divinity; we are not saved from sin, except we have committed
Sin; therefore Salvation from Sin is not without committing Sin, says Fulk,
page 121. God willed and decreed his Glory and Man's Happiness; therefore he
willed and decreed the Means to it: The end and moving Cause of his willing Sin
to be, is for his Glory, which Cause it was necessary for Sin to be; if Sin had
not been, how should the Goodness of God in giving Man Eternal Life in Glory
appeared, his Love in sending Christ to die? If there had not been Sin, there
had been no need of Christ's coming, nor of his Death and Righteousness; most
of the great Works of God in this World and that to come, have Dependence or
Reference to Sin; how should we have lived by Faith, exercised the Fruits of
the Spirit, or have any Happiness or Glory in the World to come, if it had not
been for Christ? And Christ had not been, if there had been no Sin: He that
wills the End, wills those things that are necessarily referred to that
End, Taking away Sin was decreed before the World, therefore the Being of Sin
was decreed; Christ's Death was determined before the World; for the End of
Christ was to restore Adam's Fall. If Adam had not fallen, there had been no
need of a Christ to restore him: The Saints were chosen to Life before the
World; Choice has Reference to the Fall, therefore the fall of Adam was
decreed: If the Will of Man had been the first and chief Cause of the being of
Sin, then the Will of Man should be the Cause of God's Will, and so Men should
be the original Cause of the Salvation of himself, and so much the Cause of it,
that without his will it could not have been: and so the Determination of God
what to do, shall not be from himself, but from the Will of Man, which is
contrary to Ephesians. 1.11. if Men should will Sin before God willed it, then shall
the Will of God depend and wait upon the Will of Man: as if God should say, If
Man will Sin, then I will his Salvation: And if God should first will to send
Christ to save Man, and leave it to Man's Will and Power whether he shall fall
or no, then it was possible for Man to stand, and so to frustrate the Decree of
God: For if Man had not sinned, God's Decree of sending Christ had been void
and of none Effect: Mr Perkins says, God Decree the fall of Adam; if the fall
was decreed, if Man had Power to Stand, then he had Power to frustrate God's
Decree, which no wise Man will affirm; and then that saying that Adam had Power
to keep the Law, is without truth; if he had, consider Ezekiel. 18.2,3,4. Je.
3.29,36. God wills all things well, he sins not, nor can Sin, because he
is under no Law, God commands Men to keep the Law, that no Man can do; he
commands Men to think no vain Thoughts, and not to sin; we cannot but think
some vain Thoughts, and in many Things we Sin all Christ says, No man can come
to me except the Father draw him, John 6.44.37. if they be drawn they come;
draw us and we will run after thee, Cant. 1.4. if I put sufficient Strength to
move the Earth, Motion must needs follow; when Men sin they are beguiled,
enticed, deceived, drawn away, they like men have transgressed, Hos. 6.7.

We are to distinguish between that which follows a Doctrine in its own
Nature, and that which follows by Accident, or rather that a corrupt Heart
draws from it, and is not from the Nature and Working of the Doctrine it
self; it is strange to consider Men are to set upon the Popish Principle to be
saved for their Works, that they count all Profaneness that crosses their Way;
some have burned the Bible; and Doctor Crisp's Book of Salvation by Christ
alone, Mr. Archers late of Allhallowes London, his Treatise of Comfort to
beleivers, against their Sins and Sorrow, was burnt by the Hangman; the same
Spirit is alive to burn this also. I expect no better from such as are not
taught of God; they condemn those Things they know not, and think they do God
Service, when they persecute the Truth and Professors of it.

Take for Instance, that the Fear of the Torments of Hell is no such Preserver
against Sin, is evident; for those that sin with the greatest Greediness, the
greatest Sinners, they do believe there are Hell Torments? For though they be
never so wicked, they hope it does not belong to them; or they hope to repent
and lead new Lives, before they die; though they sin for the present, they hope
to make God amends for all, as an Arminian being drunk, says, that he was now
in the State of Damnation, but he said he would be in the State of Grace to
morrow, so he comforted himself. The Lives of many Heathens that have denied
the Resurrection of the Body, and therefore did not hold a Hell of Torment
after, have been better than many that seek to escape Hell, and get Heaven by
their Works.

2. If Fear of Hell were a Preserver against Sin, then those that are delivered
from the Fear of Hell, that believe they shall be saved, they should Sin more
than others; but we find the contrary, that none more free from Sin than these.

3. Experience teaches, that the Fear of Hell, though at first it startleth
and frighteth Men, yet that is soon over, and is no Preserver against Sin. I
knew one set before him the Torments of Hell to keep him from Sin, and finding
that would not do, he added Vows and Curses to keep him from Sin. I knew
another wished the Devil to take him Soul and Body, if he did not do the thing
he spoke of, and I knew he did it not: Another wished he might sink into Hell
presently if he did the thing he spoke of, yet did do it before he went from
the Place; the Reason is, because the Lusts of Men are stronger than the Fear
of Hell, Resolutions and Curses.

Because Men are given up to their own Hearts Lusts; it may be that they may
find that Liberty to Sin is the greatest Misery and Bondage in the World, it
has all misery in it, whether they Sin with more or less Fear, and could enjoy
all the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, they will find they have made a bad
Bargain of it. What fruit had ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
Romans 6.21. If I sin thou markest me, Job. 10.14. Be sure your sin will find you
out, Numbers 32.23. In keeping thy commands there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11.
In breaking them a great Punishment, loss of inward Peace and Comfort, a guilty
accusing Conscience, Disgrace, Affliction, Losses, Crosses and Death; the
bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his Days, Psalm. 53.23. I will
curse your blessings, Mal. 2.2. see Deuteronomy. 28.

Men Sin because they are led Captive by the Devil at his will, 2 Timothy 3.6. and
2.26. also Men Sin because they are under the Law; so long as a Man is under
the Law, Sin will have Dominion over a Man, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over them that are under grace.

4. Men Sin, because they have not received Power from on high against Sin;
until they receive that Power they cannot but Sin, Thou have led Captivity
Captive, and given Gifts for Men, Psalm. 68.18. until Christ by his Spirit set
the Soul at Liberty, it is in Bondage, and enthralled to base Lusts; But if the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, John 1.36. but not till then;
see Eccles. 8.11. The Punishment of the Magistrates keeps Men from abusing
others, more than Fear of Hell; Men would be exceeding dissolute if under no
Discipline of Superiors.

5. Men go to Sin for Comfort, Sweetness and Satisfaction; but when satisfied,
they go not to Sin; to act for Life is no Love to God, nor Self-denial, nor any
Spiritualness, nor will it do them good, it is not accepted of God, nor will it
continue, such so restrained, oft-times do exceed all other in Sin, the
spiritual Soul that lives in the Enjoyments of the Love of God, needs no such
Weights to procure its Motion; he acts from a new Life and Principle to the
Glory of God, and good of others; and in this Work and Labor of Love is more
Sweetness than is in all the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season.

It is great Ignorance for any to think, that it is in the Power of any Man to
Sin as much as he will; if this be proved, all Objections are answered; and
this the Scripture proves, that without the Will of God, Men cannot do any
thing, not so much as go to a City, unless God will, Jam. 4.13.15. God works,
governs, and disposes all Things after the Counsel of his own will,
Ephesians 1.11. 1 Job he 1. Act 18.21. Romans 9.11. Who has resisted his will?
Gods will is done, Luke 11.2. Hebr. 2.4. Ephesians. 1.9. Acts 13.20. The Measure of
Men's Sins are set; Men cannot do more nor less than their Measure, they fill
up their Measure always, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. it was determined how often Peter
should deny Christ, Luke 22.31,34. with verse 61,64. God says if you will
believe him, The wicked shall do wickedly, Daniel 12*10. they cannot cease from
sin, 2 Pet. 2.24. That which is determined shall be done, Dan. 11.26. he that
restrains the Clouds that they dropped not down Rain, He made a decree for the
Rain, John 28.26. and the Earth, that it bring not forth Grass, Deuteronomy. 2.23. He
that stilleth the Winds and the Tempest, Psalm. 107.29,3^. that says to the
Waves of the Sea. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy
proud Waves be stayed, Job 38.11. he restrains Men from doing their Wills
when he pleases; they would go further, but he restrains them, Job 18. that
they cannot do the things they had appointed them to do, Genesis 20.6. and 31,24.
and 35,5. and 30.10. Revelat. 20.3, ^^. O Lord, I know the way of man is not in
himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jerem. 10.2^. Psalm
^^. Prove. ^.12. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps,, Prove. 16.9. The preparation of the heart and the answer of the tongue
is from the Lord, Prove. 16.1. The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord,
as the rivers of waters, he turns it whithersoever he will, Prove. 12.1. Man
his days are determined, Jo 7.1.14,5,14. and the bounds of his habitation, Acts
17.26. so are his Works and Sins; surely the wrath of man shall praise thee,
and the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Ps. 76.10.

Setting aside the Opinions and Conjectures of Men's devised Fables, I am fully
satisfied with the Testimony of the Word of God (besides their own Testimony,
which is sufficient against themselves) with which I see through the thick
Darkness of the Inventions and Traditions of Men.

Several Considerations that there is not to be a Punishment after this Life,
that shall never end.
1. We do not find the Place of Hell mentioned in any of the six Days Work of
God; if it be a Place, it is a created Place, and so a Part of the Creation of
God, the Whale is mentioned in Scripture; if there be a Place of Hell, it is a
greater thing, and in that it is not found in the Creation of God, it is a
Ground to judge that it is of the Creation of Man, a vain Imagination of Man;
for their Reasons prove it not, nor do they agree amongst themselves of the
Proof of it, neither where it is, nor what it is.

2. Solomon [was wiser than all Men] 1 King. 4.36. yet he spoke not any thing
of the Torments of Hell, nor of any Punishment never to end [he spoke from the
Cedar to the Hysop, he spoke also of Beasts and Fouls, of creeping things, and
of Fishes] v. 33. if he had known of any Hell and Torments there, he would have
spoken of that also.

3. The Jews, [unto whom were committed the Oracles of God] Romans 3.2. to give
unto us, they have delivered no such thing to us, nor do they believe any such
thing; for the Hebrew Doctors understand the seventh Day of seven thousand
Years which is in the World to come he blessed, because in the seven thousand
Years all Souls shall be bound up in the Bundle of Life in the World to come;
Aisnworth on Genesis 2. a Day with the Lord is as a thousand years, 2 Pet. 3.8.
the Jews say, as the World was made in six Days, so it should continue six
thousand Years, and no more; and that the seventh Day in the seven thousand
Years in the World to come, in which all Souls shall be blessed: Also they say
a good Man and a bad Man died afterward: One in a Vision saw the good Man
walking in Gardens among pleasant Fountains of Water, but the bad Man near a
River, and his Tongue reaching after Water, but could not reach it. Talm.
Jerus. in Chag. fol. 77. Col. 4. in that these things are received among them
for Truth, though they be but Jewish Fables, yet by them we see evidently that
they do not believe the Opinion of a Torment after this Life never to end. The
Jews and Hebrew Doctors were great Searchers of every Tittle of Scriptures; and
if it had been there to be seen, they or their Prophets should have seen it.

4. The Saints recorded in Scripture did not believe that there was to be a
Punishment for any to endure never to end; this appears, because when they
made a Confession of Sin, and the Punishment due to them for the same, they do
not confess to have deserved any such Punishment; they confess [to us belongs
confusion of Face] Dan. 9.8.11. [it's the Lord's Mercy we are not consumed]
Lam. 2.22. [thou have delivered me from Death,] Psalm. 116.8. 2 Chronicles. 8.1,10.

Nor do we find that they did ever give Thanks for any such Deliverance, if
they had known of any such Deliverance, it could not but appear the greatest
Deliverance any could enjoy, and that it did require the greatest
Acknowledgment and Thankfulness; nor does it appear that ever they did pray
for, or express any Desire of any such Deliverance; in that they express
neither, it is a Ground to judge that they knew of no such Punishment; and if
there had been any such Deliverance, they should have known it, I should not
have been hid from them; they admired the Deliverance of saving their Lives
from Death, as the greatest Deliverance, Ezekiel. 9.13,14. [the Kindness of the
Lord not to Die] 1 Samuel 20.14.

Do you believe that if Moses and Paul had believed that there was so great and
exceeding Torment without end, that in the least they would have wished or
desired [to be raced out of the Book of Life] Exodus 32.33. and [to be separated
from Christ] Romans 9.3. to endure the said Torment without end? I do not believe
that they were willing so to suffer.

5. Christ when on Earth, spoke of the Destruction of Jerusalem which was to
come, and wept because they were to suffer that, Luke 19.42,44. he would much
more have spoken of a Punishment never to end, and wept for them that should
suffer that, if there had been any Punishment for any to endure.

6. Because when God does warn any from Sin, from the Consideration of
Punishment, there is no mention of any Punishments but of those in this Life.
See 1 Cor. 10.1. to 11. [they shall die of grievous Deaths] Jer. 6.4,2. Chro.
19.10. 1 Cor. 4.14. Death threatened, Ezekiel. 3.18,19. and 33,3. to 14. Titus
3.10,11. [confounded that serve graven Images] Psalm. 98. a Punishment in this
Life, Jerem. 9.19. Death for Idolatry, Jer. 44.7. the punishment of Idolatry
set for an Example, 2 Pet. 2.6. [be instructed, lest my Soul depart from thee,
and I make thee desolate, because of thy Sin*] Mich. 6.13. see Jer. 9.11.
[Abomination that makes desolate] Dan. 3.20. [he turned the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah into Ashes, condemned them with an Overthrow, making them an Example]
2 Pet. 2.5,6,7. he that threatened Death, would have threatened a Punishment
never to end if there had been such a Punishment to be inflicted upon any.

7. Because God's Punishment of Sin is not of so large an extent as his Mercy,
for his punishing of Sin is but [to the third and fourth Generation] Deuteronomy. 7.9.
[thy Mercy is great above the Heavens, and thy Truth unto the Skies] Psalm.
108.4. by Truth in this Place understand the Punishing of Sin, because the Word
Mercy is put in Opposition, which lies in forgiving Sin; the Heavens are far
above the Skies. Astronomers say, the Clouds and Skies are not above fifty
Miles above the Earth; but the Heavens are above a hundred and sixteen Millions
of Miles above the Skies, but the Mercy-seat above] Exodus 25.21. his Nam^ is
his Glory [his Glory above the Heavens] Psalm. 8.1. Why, is it said he punishes
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth
Generation, and not to (...) tenth and twentieth Generation, but to declare
(...) is satisfied therewith, and requires not a further Punishment? God does
punish Sin in the Sinner and upon his Children, to the third and fourth
Generation, but because there is not to be a Punishment after this Life never
to end. 8. Because Death and the fear of it is called the [Terror of God] Genesis
35.3. the King of Terrors, Job. 8.11,14. therefore Death is the greatest
Punishment and more terrible; but if there were to be a Punishment never to
end, nor Death, but that were the King of Terrors; for is not terrible at all
in Comparison of that. 9. Because Sin is punished in this Life to the full; if
you will believe God, he says, according to their Works and Doings I punished
them, Ezekiel. 36*18. Hos. 12.2. and 13.12. Jer. 50.28. and 56.18. Jer. 9.9,11.
Job 20.28. [every Transgression received a just Recompense of Reward] Heb. 2.2.
Would ye have it to be punished to the full in this Life, and after in the
World to come with a Punishment never to end? That Sin is punished in this
Life, see Isa. 65.3, to 16. Deuteronomy. 10.17,18. Mich. 6.10. Hag. 1.6. Lamen. 4.6.
I Will punish the World for their Iniquity, they shall fall by the Sword, Isa.
13.11,15. to 22. outward Calamity and Death, the Punishment of Sin, Lam. 3.39.
1 Pet. 2.24. [recompence their Sin to the full, Jer. 16.18. for the Violence of
the Sin of Man when all Flesh had corrupted his Way, God says, I will destroy
them with the Earth? a Flood of Water to destroy all Flesh] Genesis 6.11,12,17. to
punish Sin twice, is as disagreeable to Justice, as to receive the Payment of
one Debt twice.

10. Because there is not a worse thing then the Dregs of God's Fury, Anger,
and Wrath; and these are poured out in this Life; God does not only begin to
punish Sin in this Life; but also finish it in this Life; for it is said, He
poured out all his fierce Anger, he cast upon them the fierceness of his anger,
wrath and indignation, Psalm. 78.49. (Death) so it was poured out, Esa. 42.8.
Ezekiel. 19.22. Accomplished my fury, Ezekiel. 7.8. it consumed them, Ezekiel. 43.18.
for yet a very little while, and mine indignation and anger shall cease in
their destruction, Jer. 10.25. Wrath past, Job 14.13. taken away all, Psalm.
85.3. he has poured out all his Anger, Lam. 4.10.11. Zeph. 3.3. the punishment
of their iniquity is accomplished, Lam. 4.22. Ezekiel. 5.13. and 7,8. and 29,21.
the dregs of the Cup of my Fury accomplished, Ezekiel. 13.14,15. therefore there
is no Continuance of it after this Life; for when Achan was dead, it is said
the Lord turned from the Fierceness of his Anger, Jos. 6.26. but if that they
say were true, his Death was but the Beginning of the Lord's fierce Anger.

Many infallible Proofs that there is not to be a Punishment after this Life
never to end.
Proof I. Because the Scriptures hold forth no such thing, as has been showed;
we ought not to presume above that which is written; revealed things belong to
us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

Pooof II. Their Opinion of a Punishment never to end, is contrary to the Word
of God, in that it does maintain that the Wicked shall have Eternal Life. If
Man was to live for ever, why was the flaming Sword set to keep the Way of the
Tree of Life? Genesis 3.24. Left he put forth his Hand and take of the Tree of
Life, and live for ever: No Eternal Life came by the first Adam; Eternal Life
came by Jesus Christ, who is the Tree of Life, Eternal Life promised and given
by Jesus Christ, Eternal Life by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.21. and [he that eats
of this Bread shall live for ever.] John 6.58. [Because I live ye shall live
also] John 14.9. God sent his Son that we might live through him, 1 John 4.9.
only Believers have Eternal Life, he that believes on the Son has eternal
iife, he that believes not the Son shall not see life, John. 3.36. whosoever
believes shall not perish, but have everlasting life, 1 Jo. 3.14,15. I give
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, Jo. 10.28. the wicked
abide not for ever, 1 John 2.17. [if ye Live after the Flesh ye shall die]
Romans 8.13. [him will God destroy] in the Greek it is corrupt, 1 Cor. 3.7. the
[preaching of the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness. 2 These. 2.10.
utterly perish, 2 Pet. 2.14. Luke 11.3. [to their own Destruction] 2 Pet. 3.16.
[abideth in Death] Romans 6.21,23. [they shall be destroyed for ever] Psalm. 99.7.
John 4.20. If they perish and have not eternal Life, then they cannot live for
ever: God said, Genesis 2.17. [if thou eatest thou shall surely die] but the
Serpent said, Genesis 3.4. [ye shall not die;] so the Serpent; which is the Devil,
has taught Men to say as the Serpent said, Now they have eaten they shall not
die, but shall live for ever, and never die, which is to say, God is the Liar,
and that which the Devil said is Truth. The Word says, Him will God destroy,
Matthew. 21.41. 1 Cor. 3.17. and 6.13. they shall be destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12.
Swift destruction, their end is destruction, Phil. 3.13. their Opinion says
they shall never be destroyed, die, nor end, which is no Destruction: The Word
says, (the last Enemy is Death) 1 Cor. 15.26. Their Opinions says, that is
not the last, there is an after that is much worse, never to end: It says,
God's Anger is for ever, he will never turn from it; contrary to Jer. 3.12.
Psalm. 5^.5. and 89.5. and 78.18. Mr. Bolton says, they shall suffer so long as
God is God, if so, then they have eternal Life (though in Misery) whereas the
Scripture does not declare eternal Life to be for all Men, John 6.45,47.
Promised us eternal life, 1 John 2.17.25. I give unto them eternal life to as
many as thou have given him, John 17.2,3. in hope of eternal life, John 3.15.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 13.48. they that have
done good unto the resurrection of life, John 5.29. If it be granted that the
Wicked have not eternal Life, as has been proved, it will follow, that they
cannot suffer for ever so long as God is God; and therefore all their building
of a Punishment never to end fails, grant the first and the later must needs
follow.

If Adam had not sinned, he should have died; this is proved first, because
Adam in his Creation had a natural Body, 1 Cor. 15.44. that which is natural is
not eternal, v. 46. (he was of the Earth earthly) 57,48. therefore mortal and
corruptible, 53,54.

Secondly, Man in his first being was corporal and visible to be seen; things
seen are not eternal. Mr. Bolton says, If Adam had stood, he could not have
conveyed to us a Body immortal, or not dying, in his Treatise of Heaven, Page
131. Basil says, if God had given Adam an immutable and unchangeable Nature,
he had created a God and not a Man. Augustine, in his Book of Confessions
says, because the Lord created a Man of nothing, therefore he left in Man a
Possibility to return into nothing, if he obeyed not the Will of his Maker.

Thirdly, Man in Innocence needed Food, etc. that which depends upon mutable
and earthly Things, is earthly and mutable; we see it in all other Creatures
that live upon perishing things, at last perish; and herein Man by the first
Adam has no Preeminence above a Beast: Heaven and Earth were created,
therefore had a Beginning; and although they have a much longer Life than Man,
are to have an end, (Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved) 2 Pet. 3.12.

If Adam had not died, Romans 5.12. he should have continued in this World, he
should not have gone to the World to come; therefore by his Fall he lost no
Happiness nor eternal Life in that World; for he could not by that Fall lose
more than he had, and was to have. Death is according to Nature, but to attain
Immortality is above Nature. Adam being Earth and from the Earth, his
Enjoyment, Life, and Loss, and Punishment, must, of necessity, be earthly; how
comes he then by his Fall to be capable of a Punishment never to end, unless
by his Fall he could purchase eternal Life, which none will affirm? Eternal
Life cannot be by the first Man, much less by Sin.

I deny not but the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. There is difference to be
put between a natural Death and a judicial Death; the first is from nature, the
second is from Sin, if the common Death that all die, Heb. 9.27. were the
Punishment of Sin, as most Men think, then Christ, by freeing his from the
Punishment of Sin, by bearing Death for them, of Necessity he must free them
from dying a natural Death, but Christ freeth not his from a natural Death, yet
freeth them from the Punishment of Sin; therefore to die the common Death is no
Part of the Punishment of Sin: For where Sin is satisfied, or pardoned, or
forgiven, the Punishment is not inflicted; if it be, how is it forgiven? Even
Men when they pardon inflict not the Punishment; all confess, some Men's Sins
are pardoned, how then comes it to pass that they die for Sin, whose Sin is
pardoned? (He that keeps my saying shall not see Death) John 15.21. is not to
be referred to a natural Death, but to perish, a judicial Death, John 3.16. the
Scripture declares, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, the Just
and Unjust, Acts 24.15. the Unjust would enter into Life, but shall not, John
5.20. (Unto whom I swore in my Wrath, that they should not enter into my Rest)
Psalm. 94.11. Heb. 4.7. (and your selves thrust out) Luke 13.28. when they rise
to Judgment at the last Day, they shall be consumed with the Earth by Fire,
that is their End; so that not to enter, to be thrust out, the second Death, and
to perish, is one thing, if they live for ever, and have eternal Life, how do
they perish? and how is the End of those things Death) Romans 6.21. if there be
no End, to be carnally minded is Death, Romans 8.6. How is this true if they live
^orever, and not die?

Sin being a Transgression of the Law is a legal Sin, and so i^ to have a legal
Punishment For some Sins is Death, Romans 6.23. inflicted by God, as Genesis
38.9,10. and by Man. A legal Death is not from Nature, but from Sin, and is a
Second Death; if a Man for Murder be put to Death, in dying he dies the first
and second Death; for in dying he dies a natural Death, and a judicial Death:
This later is a second Death, in that it is no^ from Nature, but from Sin.

Men put the Stress of the Punishment of Sin upon the second Death, but what
that second Death is, they cannot agree among themselves; the Ministers in
their late Annotations on the Bible on Revel. 20.9. (on such the second Death
has no Power) interpret it not to be destroyed by Antichrist, nor by the Turk,
v. 9. so then according to their Inte^pretation it is not a Punishment never to
end. Mr. Perkins says the second Death is a total Separation from God; if so
it is not a Punishment without End, and in that God is every where, Psalm.
139.7,8. if they be any where, how are they absent from God?

If the second Death be a Death, it is not a Life of Misery never to end; that
is not a Death, unless eternal Life be a Death; they confess eternal Life in
Misery is worse than Death; if so, then it is not a Death but another thing.

The first Death is the Destruction of the Body, a Separation of Soul and Body;
the second Death must be like it; the second Death is an Image of the first,
else how is it a Death, and a second Death? the second Adam being Man, was an
Image of the first; the Scriptures says, the second death is like the first,
Luke 6.1. the second is like to it, Matthew. 22.39. Therefore as the first Death,
so the second is a separation of Soul and Body, else how is it a Death, or a
second Death?

Reuben, by going into his Father's Bed, deserved a judicial legal Death, but
did not die for it, Genesis 49.3,4, and 35.22. 1 Chronicles. 5.1. (let Reuben live, and
not die) Deuteronomy. 33.6. a judicial or second Death: The Jews Onkelos, read Deuteronomy.
33.6. let Reuben live, and not die the second Death, and Jonathan on Isa. 65.6.
(I will deliver their Carcasses to the second Death) verse. 17. (the Lord will
slay them with the second Death) by which it appears, the Jews count the second
Death) is to be slain; and, if so, it is not a Life of Misery never to end, as
some say, the Book of the Revelation speaks of the second Death. Dr. Featly,
and Dr. Lightfoot, and others say, that Book treats of the Church and things
done in this World; and if so, then the second Death is a Punishment of this
Life; they also interpret Heaven in that Book to be the Church, and the late
Annotations on the Bible, and Mr. Brightman and others on Apoc. 20.10. say,
that the Devil in that Place is the great Turk.

It is their Opinion that say, the Wages of Sin is not Death; they say it is a
Life of Misery never to end, which is worse and more than Death; therefore
their Opinion is contrary to the Word that says, it is Death, filled with all
Unrighteousness, haters of God, despiteful, proud, Inventers of evil things,
they that commit such things are worthy of Death, Romans 1.31,32. these are great
Sinners, yet the Word says, not that they are worthy of more then Death; and
therefore why should any say they are worth of more then Death; And if the End
of these things are Death, Romans 6.21. therefore there is not any thing to come
after Death, 2 Kings 7.4. the Soul that Sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18.14,26. that
is all that Sin does bring forth. God in giving his Law, did express the
Punishment of the Breach of it, saying, in the Day that thou eatest of that
Tree, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. dying thou shall do, that is, naturally
and judiciously, not touch it left ye die, Genesis 3.3. to bear Iniquity is to dye
for it, Levit. 22.9. Numb. 18.22. that one Man die for the People, John 18.14.
the Body is dead because of Sin, Romans 8.10. he that is dead is freed from Sin,
Romans 6.7. neither Sin nor Punishment has any thing to do with a dead Man. This
Iniquity shall not be purged from ye till ye die, then it is purged from them;
if this Iniquity be purged from you till ye die, we learn that Death
acquitteth, Talm. Jerus, Sanched, Fol. 27. Col. 3.

After Man had sinned, God expounded the Punishment of the Breach of his Law,
Genesis 3.14. to v. 20. It is evident, that the Punishment of the old Serpent the
Devil, and of the Woman, and of the Man for their Sin, are only Punishments of
this Life; there is not the least Word of any punishment after this Life, much
less of a Punishment never to end; so that by that which is said we may judge
of that Mr. Bolton, and others say, of being everlastingly in a red-hot
scorching Fire, deprived of all Possibility of dying, or of being ever consumed
in Torment eternally; they say the Fire of Hell burns far hotter than ten
thousand Rivers of Brimstone; how know they it, seeing they never felt it, nor
they that told you so? Three drops of Brimstone will make one so full of
Torment that one cannot forbear roaring out for Pain, yet it must be born so
long as God is God. O Eternity, Eternity, Eternity! If so, they shall have
Eternal Life, which is contrary to the Scripture, as has been showed, and is
therefore to be rejected; also they say that the Soul of the Wicked goes
immediately at Death to Hell, to the Devil, contrary to Eccles. 3.21. and 12.7.
Genesis 2.7. Heb. 12.9 Ezekiel. 43.13,14,15. Zach. 12.9. if the Devils are in Hell in
Torment, as they commonly and vainly imagine: Hell is in the Wicked; the
Devil's evil Spirits are there, and rule there in the Children of Disobedience,
Ephesians. 2.2. 1 Pet. 5.2. Matthew. 8.28. Jud. 14. Matthew. 25.29,30,31.

Adam in Innocence being a natural Man, he had the Law of Nature written in his
Heart; the Breach of that natural Law caused a temporal Curse and Punishment,
and not any Eternal; they that think eternal Life is to be had for our Works,
our well doing, are prone to think eternal Life may be lost for our not well
doing; but the Way of the Gospel places not eternal Life and eternal Death in
Misery upon our doing, Romans 4.2,3,4,5. Also the Scripture speaks not of an
eternal Death, and therefore there is no such thing.

Proof III. Their Opinion of a Punishment after this Life never to end, makes
not Sin, but Christ to be the Cause of their so suffering: This is evident;
because if Christ had not come, there had been no Resurrection, and if no
Resurrection there could be no suffering of any Torment after this Life: For if
no Resurrection they should have perished, in the Grave their had been their
End. If Christ be not risen, they which are fallen asleep are perished] 1 Cor.
15.17,18. that the Resurrection came by Jesus Christ is also evident; for
Christ says, I am the Resurrection, John 11.75. By Man, that is, Christ, came
the Resurrection, ver. 21. [Therefore it is called the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ] 1 Pet. 3.21. [His Resurrection] Romans 6.5. Philippians 3.16. 1 Pet.
1.21. Christ is called the First Fruits, because he first rose from the Dead,
after him others; if Christ had not risen, no Man should ever have risen from
the Dead, therefore it is said, [They came out of his Graves after their
Resurrection] Mat. 27.5. and in that Christ is the Resurrection and the Cause
of it, in that it came by him, sure none will deny, that if there had been no
Resurrection from the Dead, there could be no Suffering after Death, so long as
God is God, therefore it follows, if any Man shall so suffer, Christ is the
Cause of it: for without him they could not have lived for ever, and therefore
not suffer for ever; and is it not very hard and unreasonable, and contrary to
the Word, to charge Christ to be the Cause of their so Suffering? seeing Christ
came [in love to the World] John 16.36. [to save, not to destroy] Luke 9.59.
and 9.10. not to make any miserable, [he came to save Sinners] 1 Timothy 1.15.
Luke 4.18. [he rose again for our satisfaction; therefore, if none can so
suffer unless Christ be the Cause of it, there is no such Punishment for any to
endure never to end.

Proof IV. The Scriptures declare what Christ came to do, namely, to deliver us
from the hand of our Enemies, Luke 1.74. [to taste Death for every Man] Heb.
2.9. See Luke 4.18. [the last Enemy is Death] he abolished Death] 2 Timothy 1.10.
he has promised Deliverance from Death and Grave; I will redeem thee from
Death, Hosea 13.14. that keeps my Sayings shall not see Death, John 8.51,52. O
Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15.55. I will
ransom thee from the Power of the Grave; he says not from the Torments of
Hell, nor from the Punishment never to end: O Death I will be thy Plagues, O
Grave I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13.4. so that if there be a Punishment
after Death and Grave, there is no mention of Christ's delivering us from that;
and in that the Scripture s^ith, [He is able to save from Death] Heb. 5.7. is
as much as to say, Salvation from Death is sufficient, and that there is no
farther thing to be delivered from than Death and Grave, if there were
deliverance from them had not been satisfactory, because not sufficient; for if
there is to be a Punishment after Death, who shall deliver us from that? Christ
delivers from Death and Grave; no further Deliverance from any thing is
mentioned; therefore he has not delivered his from more, and therefore there
is no further thing to be delivered from; so that ye may see that their Opinion
makes void Christ's Suffering, and the Saints Comfort! for if a Punishment for
ever be due to Man for Sin, Christ must for ever suffer that Torment to free us
from it, or we must suffer it. The Protestant Writers confess, that the Way and
Means that Christ freeth us from the Punishment of Sin, is by his Suffering
that Punishment we were to suffer: To this the Scriptures agree, Gal. 3.13.
Isa. 53.4,5,6,7. so that if Christ, our Surety, has not suffered the said
Torments for ever, then has not Christ suffered enough; namely, that which we
were to suffer, and so not delivered us from the said Punishment. That Jesus
Christ has not so suffered is evident, and confessed by the Protestant
Writers; some of the Protestants say, the Rep^obates in Hell suffer the want of
the Vision or Sight of God for ever, fina^ Rejection. 2. They shall be
perplexed with the Horror of a guilty Conscience. 3. Deprived of the Gifts of
the Holy Spirit. 4. Instead of Virtues, they are defiled with Wickedness,
Indignation, Desperation; Christ suffered none of these, says Willets
Synopsis, page 1010. far it be from us so to conceive. Page 1014. also they say
in Hell is inward and outward Darkness. 2. A Lake of Fire and Brimstone. 3.
Fire unquenchable. 4. Worm and prick of Conscience. 5. Malediction. 6.
Desperation, second Death; Christ suffered none of these, therefore Christ
suffered not the Torments of Hell to be ever, in the^e in that Place, they will
not say Christ is now in; if Christ had suffered the Pains of the Damned, yet
unless he suffer them without end, Christ suffered not the Punishment of the
Damned in Hell, which they say we were to suffer; also they say, they suffer
not those Torments without Sin and Desperation? Will any say Christ so suffered
also? They say, in Hell they shall see the Story of their Sins before their
Eyes, the Wrath of God lying upon them for their Sins, cruel Indignation,
horrible Outcries, Blasphemies, fretting for horrible Torments, endless Pains,
without all Hope or Comfort; Who dare say Christ suffered any of these? Some
that are for the Torments of Hell, confess that it stands not with the Dignity
and Worthiness of Christ's Person, nor with the Holiness of his Nature, nor the
Dignity of his Office to suffer in that local Place eternally: final Rejection
with Desperation, with the Worm of Conscience, agrees not to the Holiness of
his Person; final Rejection Christ suffered not, nor eternal Flames, nor the
second Death: For Christ to suffer these, were to destroy the Work of our
Redemption: Christ could not be subject to Destruction. Willet Synops. Page
1009. Christ suffered none of these Punishments, therefore, he suffered not the
Torments of Hell. Christ was heard in that he feared. Christ did not fear the
Torments of Hell, therefore he did not partake with us, nor deliver us from
them. Christ not deliver us from any thing which he suffered not, eternal Fire
in Hell: He suffered not; nor are the Pains of this Life the Pains of Hell;
therefore if there be any such Hell or Punishment, Christ suffered it not, and
therefore we must suffer it; see ye not whither this their Doctrine tends? To
overthrow the sufficiency of Christ's Suffering and our Comfort, in leaving us
to suffer the said Torments ourselves. Christ leaving his suffering an example,
if we suffer with him, etc. Romans 8.17. Must we suffer the Torments of Hell? I
believe Christ has born the whole Punishment of Sin; in it I am satisfied, and
desire no more; but how Christ suffered the Torments of Hell, I, nor themselves
see not: They say, Christ being God, made an infinite Satisfaction, paying at
once upon the Cross, that which we should have been ever a paying: I grant
Christ is God; but the Godhead did not, nor could not suffer; if the Godhead of
Christ was to make satisfaction to God, is to say, God satisfies God; and if
Christ as God was to make satisfaction, to what purpose was Christ to be made
Man and die? If ye say Christ was to make satisfaction in both, his Godhead and
Manhood, does the Godhead need the help of the Manhood to make satisfaction? It
is not proper to say, God was to be satisfied, for God was never unsatisfied;
God is perfect, infinite, happy, unchangeable; How is he so, if he were ever
unsatisfied? To say God is, or ever was unsatisfied, is in effect to deny the
Being of God, to say, he is not happy; for Satisfaction and Content belong to
Happiness; where there is no Satisfaction, there is no Content, because no
Perfection; God is one to us, there is but one God; God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.21. That is, Father, Word and
Spirit, God is one; not one Divine Nature in Christ satisfying, and another in
the Father satisfied, but the Father in the Son, God in Christ: the Essence of
God is one and the same, reconciling the World to himself: God was never
unreconciled to the World: it is only Man that is at enmity and unreconciled,
therefore it is said, He reconciled them to him; the Change is in the Creature,
not in God) Mal. 3.6. If the Manhood of Christ was to make satisfaction to God,
how can Man that is finite, sati^fie that which is infinite, unless you will
affirm the Godhead of Christ did suffer, there was not any thing to suffer but
the Manhood of Christ; Can the suffering of Man satisfy God? Man is finite, so
is all he does, Sin is a transgression of the Law, Sin is a Disorder of the
Creatures first and chief Being, which stands in Righteousness, and is an
Eclipse of the Glory of Man. Sin is a Defect and Discovery of the Weakness and
Mutability of the reasonable Creature; Sin cannot impeach God; If thou sinnest,
what do thou against him? Or if thy righteousness be multiplied, what do
thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou unto him, or what
receives he at thy hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a Man as thou art, and thy
righteousness profit the Son of Man, Job 34.6,7,8. God has all Satisfaction in
and from himself, not from any thing without or besides himself; God gave not a
Law to himself to satisfy, but to Man, the Law belongs only to the humane
Nature, therefore Christ was a Man: He took on him the form of a servant, and
became obedient to death, the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7,8. a body, Heb.
10.10. Obedience belongs to the humane Will; The man Christ made a curse for
us; he was bruised for our iniquities, and with his stripes we are healed, Isa.
53.5,10. it was Blood that washed away our Sins, Rev. 1.5. Therefore it is
said, By the obedience of one [man] we are made righteous, Romans 5.10. the Word
says, not by the Obedience of God, nor of God Man, God is satisfied; but by
the obedience of one man we are made righteous, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
2.5. the Worthiness of Christ's Person did not abolish the Equity of the Law of
God, and exempt him from suffering that he ought to suffer, Luke 24.25. Some
say, the suffering of Christ was infinite, but the Word says not so; the
Punishment of Sin is Death, he tasted death, he died for us; it is no infinite
thing to die. They reply, the Sin of Man is infinite, because against an
infinite God; to say Sin is infinite, in a strict Sense, is to attribute too
much to Sin, and too little to God, to give that to Sin which is proper to God;
to equal Sin with God, is in effect to deny the Being of God, because there can
be but one infinite; also to say Sin is infinite, is to make all Sin alike
equal, for there is no Degrees in that which is infinite; Sin not being
infinite, needs not an infinite Satisfaction: They say infinite Majesty
offended, infinite Punishment opposed: but it is but their say so, because it is
without and besides the Word of God: The Punishment of Sin is not to be taken
from the infiniteness of God, but from the Penalty expressed in his Law for the
Breach of it, which is Death, Genesis. 3.3.

Proof. V. The Word says, God's fury is like fire; in the fire of his
jealousy he shall make a speedy riddance of all them in the day of the Lords
wrath, Ezekiel. 1.18. but to continue in Torment for ever, is no speedy Riddance:
therefore there is no such Punishment to be: The pouring out of the fiery Anger
of the Lord, is a day, Zeph. 1.15.18. Romans 6.17. Ezekiel. 13.14. and 22.22. James
2.21. Isa. 13.9.13. the day of the Lord is at hand. Deuteronomy. 32.34,35. Job 20.28,
a Punishment never to end, no ways agrees to a day: Therefore there is no such
punishment to be.

Proof VI. The Opinion of the Torments of Hell never to end, has and does
daily cause much Sin: For,

First, It causes Fear: Fear has punishment, 1 John 4.8. He that fears is
not perfect in love, 1 John 4.18. a servile and a slavish Fear is Sin.

2. It causes many evil and hard Thoughts of God.

3. Fear troubles the Hearts of many of the Lord's People, and makes them sad
with their Lies; this God complains of, Ezekiel. 13.22. their lies cause them to
err, after which their Fathers walked, Amos 2.4. Christ says, Let not your
Hearts be troubled, John 14.1. the fear of Hell does greatly trouble the
Hearts of many; it is Gods Will to comfort the sad, to release those that are
bound, Isa. 61.1,2.3,4. and 40.5,9. a word fitly spoken, is like apples of Gold
in pictures in Silver, Prove. 25.11.

4. Fear distracts, and greatly discourageth the Soul, hinders Faith; that
which freeth the Soul from Fear, fits the Soul to serve God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74.

5. Fear unfits and disableth the Soul to every good Work to God or Man: Fear
unfits for any outward occasion: Fear is a weight that depresses the Soul, and
makes it weak, it straitneth the Heart; but Hope comfort and enlarges it.

The Opinion of Hell Torments, provokes the Soul to envy and Unbelief, and
hinders Subjection to God; if the Soul apprehends it self liable to so great
and everlasting Punishment, it cannot submit to God (nor be quiet.) This caused
Francis Spira to wish he were above God; The Light of this Truth causes the
Soul less to sin, and less to be troubled, to have less hard Thoughts of God,
and less to fret against the Lord.

7. Their Opinion causes an exceeding and unreasonable trouble of Mind and
melancholy; such Trouble is Sin, John 13.1. [a merry heart does good, Prove.
17.22,] the Knowledge of the Truth herein eases the fearful Mind, and causes,
as it were, a Heaven upon Earth.

8. Their Opinion has caused many to murder themselves in taking away their
own Lives by Poison, Stabbing, Drowning, Hanging, Strangling and Shooting
themselves, casting themselves out of Windows, and from high Places to break
their Necks, and by other Deaths, that they might not live to increase their
Sin, and increase their Torments in Hell.

9. Their Opinion provokes to the greatest Sins, as Despair: Also to the
Wickedness that the World lies in, namely, working for Life, to do Duties to
escape Hell and get Heaven, which is to tread under foot the blood of Christ as
an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. in seeking to be justified by the Law of Works,
and not alone by the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.5. Jer.
23.6. Heb. 10.10,14.

10. Freedom from Fear causes Love; Love causes Service; the love of Christ
constrains; it tends to the Comfort of many that through Weakness of Faith
give way to Satan's Temptations; to fear the Torments of Hell causes a feeble
Mind; comfort the feeble mind, 1 These. 5.14. Its a comfort to many whose
Children and Friends die and leave no Testimony of their Conversion, the Fear
that they are to suffer so great and endless Torment has greatly sadded and
troubled the Heart of many a Parent and Friend.

Proof VII. The Reason that God gives, that he will not contend for ever, nor
be always wroth: for the spirit would fail before me, and the souls I have
made, Isa. 57.16. Man is not able to dwell with everlasting burning, Isa.
33.14. to be in so great a Torment as they speak of without End, Ease, and
Refreshment, the Spirit must needs fail (a small thing will make the Spirit
fail) if so, then the Reason is the same against the being of a Punishment
never to end.

Proof VIII. It is not agreeable to the God of Nature, to go contrary to the
Law of Nature, that he has written in Mankind; there is planted in Man an
universal Love to Man, especially to their Offspring, be they obedient or
disobedient; what Bowels of Love is there in Parents to their Offspring, when
in Misery, and to others in Misery and Want? Sure no Man does desire any Man
nor Creature to endure the Torment they speak of one Year, much less their own
Offspring; how then may I, or can I, think so of God, to be less pitiful, less
merciful then cruel Man, ( Jer. 50.24. and Hos. 4.1.) to his Offspring? we are
all his Offspring, Acts 17.28. sure God exceeds Man in Goodness; if ye which
are evil know how to give good things to your Children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give good Things to them that ask him? Matthew. 7.8,9,10,11.
Thou Lord art good and do good, Psalm. 119.68. Matthew. 5.45. though they were
evil, and did evil, God did good and gave Rain, Acts 14.17. They say the Fire,
Dan. 3.21. is nothing to Hell, and that the greatest Torment Man can devise, is
scarce a Shadow to that in Hell, by which they declare God to be more cruel
than Man.

Proof IX. If Man had deserved so great punishment, why may not God show that
mercy as not to inflict it, as well as to let his Sun to shine, and his Rain to
fall on them that no way deserve it, seeing he could (if he so pleased) hinder
it? we do see Men show more kindness to a rebellious and disobedient Child then
he deserves; may not God do the same, so much as God is greater than Man, so
much greater is his Mercy, Love, and Goodness, than that in Man, yea than that
that is or ever was in all Men; all that came from him, and all is but the
least drop to that great Sea and Ocean of Mercy and Love that is in him; how
little a portion is heard of him? Job. 24.14. All Nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, Vanity, Isaiah
40.12,15,17, 22. O how great is he that hangs the Earth upon nothing! Job
24.7. he can and will do for the worst Creature far above that which it is able
to ask or think.

Proof X. Because God's general Goodness in the Creation of the World is to all
his Creatures, and also in his ordinary dispensation is toward, and for the
whole Universe of Mankind; he has provided room enough for all Men and
Creatures, and all good things for all; the profit of the Earth is for all,
Eccles. 5.9. God has commanded us to do good to all, he that has two Coats is
to impart to him that has none, and he that has Meat must do so likewise,
Luke 3.11. all which does hold forth God's good Will and Care to Mankind, he
that would not have them suffer the Torment of Misery and Want, that takes
care to prevent that little and short Misery, will not impose a far greater
never to end.

Proof XI. Their Opinion lesseneth the Goodness of God, and limiteth to a few,
whereas the Scripture declares it to be to all, Romans 5. The Creature it self
shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. The whole Creation and every Creature is Angels and
Men, Jews and Gentiles, verse 20. Mark 16.15. in Bondage to Corruption, subject
to Vanity, Idolatry, and Delusion of the Devil, that know not, nor partake of
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, shall be delivered from this Bondage
into the said Liberty; for God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself,
2 Cor. 5.19. This is spoken to persuade them to be reconciled to God, verse 20.
which shows it to concern Mankind; the Protestants in Poland understand by
every Creature, Angels and Men; they say there will-come a time when the Angels
and wickedest Men shall be freed. Origin, one of the Fathers, held, that at
last all should be saved, Men and Devils, the generality of the Fathers held,
that all Souls shall be purged by Fire of the last Judgment, and so pass to
Salvation, Moulin, page 135. see Romans 11.22,23,27. [All Flesh shall see the
Salvation of God] Romans 8.19. see 1 Timothy 2.3,4,5. Isaiah 47.17. [The Glory of
the Lord shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall see it] Isa. 40.5. the times of
the restitution of all things God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets
since the World began, Acts 3.21. they shall in time be delivered from their
Bondage, for which deliverance they groan: are not all Angels and Men, obedient
or disobedient, the Creation of God? if so, the worst shall partake of the
liberty of the Sons of God: as the whole Creation came from God, or rather is
in God, for in him we live, it shall be taken up into the same Glory, a good
the larger it is the better, if it be good to show Mercy to some, is it not
more good to have mercy on all? Romans 5.18. Plato could say, God being a supreme
Good, there was no Envy in him to any of his Creatures, but rather a desire
that all might be made like him: This is so great and glorious a discovery of
God, and that all Men are in God; for in him we live, and move, and have our
being, as certain also of your own Poets have said, for we are all his
offspring, Acts 17.28. I have wondered how the Heathen Poets came to know this
Truth, sure God did manifest it to them: If all Men are in God, all Men are in
Christ; for Christ says, [I and my Father are one] John 10.30 Also if all Men
are in God, for in him we live and move, etc. if so, then all Men are in
Christ; for God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5.9. All
confess that all that are in Christ shall be saved [as in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive] 1 Cor. 15.22. I see God is good, and does good,
and that it is suitable to the Being of God to do good to all, and that no such
torment of such continuance any way agrees to the Mind and Will of God.

Romans 5. Puts the second Adam in opposition to the first in saving to his
sinning; if all Nations be blessed, as Genesis 22.18. every particular is
comprehended in the general word All; it is a great lessening of the Greatness,
and Glory of the Fullness and Riches of God's Grace, to say that God has made
this World for all who are many, and the best World to come but for a very few;
shall the Fruit of Christ the Son of Righteousness be more narrow and confined
than the Sun in the Firmament, whose excellency is, that its bright Rays and
beams are dispersed into every corner of the Universe?

Proof XII. It does no way agree to the Spirit of a Saint; we may know the mind
of a Saint, [we have the mind of Christ] 1 Cor. 2.16. He that is turned to the
Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.17. God is in them of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. Christ
in us, Col. 1.27. Stephen when stoned, cried [Lord lay not this sin to their
charge] Acts 7.58. [Saints they are ever merciful] Psalm 36.17. [The desire of
the righteous is only good] Prove. 11.22. Such Torment, of such continuance, in
the last agree not to the gracious mind and merciful heart of a Saint; he
desires not any Man nor Creature to be in such Torment an Hour: therefore it
does no way agree to the Mind of God: we find the more the Lord manifests
himself in any, the more their Minds and Spirit are humb^ed, the more living
and merciful they are, even to their Enemies, and can do them Good for Evil.

Proof XIII. Such Torments do not in the least agree to the Mind and Will of
Christ; Christ is full of Love and Mercy to the worst Men; it was truly said of
Christ [He was a friend to Publicans and Sinners] He, the best friend to them
that ever was; when they crucified him, he said [Father forgive them] Luke
23.34. When the Disciples would have had Fire to come down from Heaven to
consume Christ's Enemies, he rebuked them, Luke 9.54. He that will by no means
suffer his Enemies to suffer a short Death by Fire, will not inflict upon them
a more terrible Fire never to end; ye may know the mind of God by the mind of
Christ, for Christ is God, alike equal, Acts 28. Heb. 1.3. and as one [I and my
Father are one] John 10.30.

Proof XIV. Such Punishments agree not to the Fruits of the holy and blessed
God; [the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Goodness, etc.] Gal.
5.22,23. the fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness, Ephesians. 5.9. [The words of
the Lord are pure words] Psalm. 12.6. [The words of the pure are pleasant words]
Prove. 15.25. good words, comfortable words; the holy Spirit is called a
Comforter, not a Tormenter, the pure Spirit of Love sends forth only Love and
Sweetness.

Proof XV. No such torment no way agrees to the nature of God; God is Love, 1
John 4.16. it is his nature, there is no anger nor fury in love; fury is not in
me, Isa. 27.4. God wills us to love enemies that abuse, wrong and hate us; God
will do so much more, love his enemies, Luke 6.35. If God should only love them
that love him, do not the Publicans the same? Mat. 5.46. All that is in God is
God, as infinite; God is love, love is infinite without bounds and limits;
though we in our shallowness and narrowness, have often set bounds and limits
to infiniteness; there was never any beginning in God, therefore no beginning
of his love; the infinite blessed God is one and ever the same; I am the Lord,
I change not, Mich. 3.6. This love delights in mercy and love, and not in
punishing of Sin: That is his strange act, Isa. 28.21. Christ died to answer
the Law we broke.

Christ did not purchase the love of God; he loved us before the World began,
and ever will, John 13.1. God was never without his love, nor is ever out of
that love; Christ says, thou have loved them as thou have loved me, John
17.23. at what shall God be angry or unsatisfied? for God was never angry with
Christ nor his People, nor at the being of Sin, nor at Christ taking our Sins
upon him; for he laid them on him, the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6.

Proof XVI. It is not suitable to the mercifulness of a Father to his Child, of
a Creator to his Creature, the work of his hands, to impose so great a
punishment without end, upon any of them; that were worse then to forsake the
works of his hands, and is contrary to Psalm. 148.8. Your heavenly Father is
merciful, Luke 6.36. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.7. the Lord is gracious, of great
m^rcy, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies over all his works; all
thy works shall praise thee, and thy Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 145.8,9,10.
he is good to all, he despises not any, Job 36,5. no respecter of persons,
Acts 10.34.

Proof XVII. Sin cannot overcome his love; where Sin has abounded, grace
abounds muth more, Romans 5.20. this declares the mercy of God to be greater then
sin: if so, the grace of God is to all, to the worst; for Sin ab^urds in them
most, and where Sin abounds, Grace abou^s much more; if so, then all their Sins
shall be forgiven; and if any were so to suffer, how has Grace abounded to
them much more, where Sin has abounded? answer this if ye can: with the Lord
there is mercy. Psalm. 130.7. the Lord is good to all; therefore to the worst of
Men, his tender Mercy are over all his Works; therefore to the worst of Men
also, for they are the Work of his Hands, Job 34.14. Isa. 64.8. therefore there
is no punishment for any to endure never to end: he that bids us not to be
overcome with evil, but to overcome evil with good, he will not be overcome
with evil, but will overcome all evil with his infinite Goodness: that which is
finite, cannot possibly overcome that which is infinite.

Proof XVIII. God he is just, therefore he will not do any thing but that which
is just and right: the greatest Punishment of the breach of his law is death;
he will not inflict another, much less a worser punishment then he has
expressed in his Law: Justice is in number, weight and measure, God requires
things equal; ye may see the mind of God in his command in forbidding any thing
to be done but that which is equal and suitable to the fact, as eye for eye,
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, stripe for stripe, Exodus
21.24,25,26. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her, Rev. 18.7. What measure you mete to others
shall be measured to you again: Murder, an horrible and grievous Sin, yet it is
punished with an equal Punishment in this Life, Life for Life; he that sheddeth
Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. Life for Life is equal,
but to lose Life for Life, and also to suffer so great torment never to end, is
not equal.

Proof XIX. It is no profit nor pleasure to God for any to suffer such endless
torment [he has no pleasure in the death of any] Ezekiel. 18.31,32. much less can
it be any pleasure to him for any so to suffer, [he desires Mercy, and not
Sacrifice, Mich. 6.6. if so, he desires not any should be so sacrificed in a
Torment never to end. God abhors cruelty, Anos 1.3,6,13. and casting off Pity.

Proof XX. It is not for the glory of God to impose such a punishment upon any;
glory lies not in imposing great and terrible punishments, that belongs to
cruelty, is abhored by the light of nature; Glory lies in great mercy and
forgivene's, Exodus 34.6,7. the greater mercy and forgiveness, the greater is
the grace, and the more is it to the glory of God; love covers all sins,
Prove. 10.12. he that covers transgression seeks love, Pro. 17.9. if man his
glory is to pass over transgression, Prove. 19.11. it is for the glory of God to
do so much more: God made all things, and does all things for his glory; he
seeks his glory in his exceeding greatness and riches of his grace, Ephesians.
2.7. it is more for his glory to save all, then to save a few; the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, Romans 5.18. sin could not hinder Manasses, Mary Magdalen, persecutors and
wicked prodigals to find mercy: I cannot admit to think any thing that is cruel
to be in God in love, whose goodness is unsearchable, past finding out, far
above all we can ask or think: there is such a confused noise among men of the
grace and love of God, so many several voices that we are in confusion, and
know not what to make of it: look above and hearken to the sweet voice above in
the Region of love, what is the voice in Heaven, they agree in one, there is no
voice comes from Heaven but love, peace, and good will to man; let men say what
they will, I rest satisfied in the voice above, that is only a voice of love
and good will; its enough to satisfy any in this doubt: and suddenly there was
with the Angel a multitude of Heavenly Hosts praising God, and saying, glory be
to the highest, on earth peace, and good will to men, Luke 2.13,14. not only to
some men, but to all people, v. 10. this is glad tidings indeed, good news from
Heaven, the best news that ever was, that God has good will to men; there is
no ill will, all is good will to men; this causes peace and praise, glory be
to the highest for his sweet peace and good will to men, to all people.

Conclusion; in reading the Scriptures we are not to understand any text in
such sense as is not plain in Scriptures, or contrary to Scriptures, or
contrary to the Law of nature, or against the general Goodness of God to
Mankind, or to lessen the Goodness of God, or contrary to the gracious Spirit
and mercifulness of a Saint, or contrary to the mind of Christ which he
declared when on Earth, or contrary to the fruits of the blessed Spirit, the
nature of the Love, Goodness, and Mercy of God; or that shall tend to
contradict or lessen the glory of God, or lessen the greatness and riches of
his grace; for it is not to be imagined that God who is only wise should do and
teach contrary things.

Sure I am, from hence arise no inconveniency to the Gospel, nor is it any
dishonor to God, nor any grief, nor hinders faith and love in any good man,
nor any discouragement to any in serving of God, that there is not to be a
punishment for any to endure that shall never end. There is not any thing more
plain than that which has been said to him that will agree to truth; some will
not agree to any thing, though never so plain and certain, if contrary to the
tradition of their Fathers; this, their way is their folly, and their posterity
approve their sayings, Psalm. 49.13. [who has believed our report, and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed?] Isa. 53.1.

Some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not, Acts 28.29.
they make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate, and turn away the just for a thing of naught, Isa. 29.21.
O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my head in the
day of battle, Psalm. 140.7.


So be it.

