REASONS For not Replying to Mr. WALTON's FULL ANSWER IN A LETTER to P. T. P.

By the Author of the MINUTE PHILOSOPHER.

Ex Fumo Lucem. DUBLIN: Printed by M. RHAMES, for R. GUNNE, Bookseller in
Capel-street, M.DCC.XXXV.

REASONS For not Replying to Mr. WALTON's FULL ANSWER, etc.
I. THERE are some Men that can neither give nor take an Answer, but writing
merely for the sake of writing multiply words to no purpose. There are also
certain careless Writers, that in defiance of common sense publish such things
as, though they are not ashamed to utter, yet, other men may well be ashamed to
answer. Whether there be any thing in Mr. Walton's method of vindicating
Fluxions, that might justify my taking no further notice of him on the
abovementioned considerations, I leave you and every other Reader to judge. But
those, Sir, are not the reasons I shall assign for not replying to Mr. Walton's
full Answer. The true reason is, that he seems at bottom a facetious man, who
under the color of an opponent writes on my side of the Question, and really
believes no more than I do of Sir Isaac Newton's Doctrine about Fluxions, which
he exposes, contradicts, and confutes with great skill and humor, under the
masque of a grave vindication.

II. AT first I considered him in another light, as one who had good reason for
keeping to the beaten Track, who had been used to dictate, who had terms of art
at will, but was indeed, at small trouble about putting them together, and
perfectly easy about his Reader's understanding them. It must be owned, in an
Age of so much ludicrous humor, it is not every one can at first sight discern
a Writer's real design. But, be a man's Assertions ever so strong in favor of
a Doctrine, yet if his Reasonings are directly levelled against it, whatever
Question there may be about the matter in Dispute, there can be none about the
Intention of the Writer. Should a Person, so knowing and discreet as Mr.
Walton, thwart and contradict Sir Isaac Newton under pretense of defending his
Fluxions, and should he at every turn say such uncouth things of these same
Fluxions, and place them in such odd lights, as must set all men in their Wits
against them, could I hope for a better second in this Cause? or could there
remain any doubt of his being a disguised Freethinker in Mathematics, who
defended Fluxions just as a certain Freethinker in Religion did the Rights of
the Christian Church.

III. MR. Walton indeed after his free manner calls my Analyst a Libel.
Vindication, p. 1.
But this ingenious Gentleman well knows a bad Vindication is the bitterest
Libel. Had you a mind, Sir, to betray and ridicule any Cause under the Notion
of vindicating it, would you not think it the right way to be very strong and
dogmatical in the Affirmative, and very weak and puzzled in the argumentative
Parts of your Performance? To utter Contradictions and Paradoxes without
Remorse, and to be at no pains about reconciling or explaining them? And with
great good humor to be at perpetual variance with yourself and the Author you
pretend to vindicate? How successfully Mr. Walton has practiced these Arts,
and how much to the honor of the great Client he would seem to take under his
protection, I shall particularly examine throughout every Article of his full
Answer.

IV. FIRST then, says Mr. Walton, I am to be asked, whether I can conceive
Velocity without Motion, or Motion without Extension, or Extension without
Magnitude? To which he answers in positive Terms, that he can conceive
Velocity and Motion in a Point ( P. 7). And to make out this, he undertakes to
demonstrate, that if a thing be moved by an Agent operating continually with
the same force, the Velocity will not be the same in any two different Points
of the described Space. But that it must vary upon the least change of Space.
Now admitting thus much to be demonstrated, yet I am still at a loss to
perceive, how Mr. Walton's Conclusion will follow, to wit, that I am greatly
mistaken in imagining there can be no Motion, no Velocity in a Point of Space (
P. 10). Pray, Sir, consider his Reasoning. The same Velocity cannot be in two
Points of Space; therefore Velocity can be in a Point of Space. Would it not be
just as good Reasoning to say, the same man cannot be in two Nutshels;
therefore a Man can be in a Nutshel? Again, Velocity must vary upon the least
change of Space; therefore there may be Velocity without Space. Make Sense of
this if you can. What have these Consequences to do with their Premises? Who
but Mr. Walton could have inferred them? Or how could even he have inferred
them, had it not been in jest.

V. SUPPOSE the Center of a falling Body to describe a Line, divide the time of
its Fall into equal Parts, for instance into minutes. The Spaces described in
those equal parts of Time will be unequal. That is, from whatsoever Points of
the described Line you measure a minute's descent, you will still find it a
different Space. This is true. But how or why from this plain truth a Man
should infer, that Motion can be conceived in a Point, is to me as obscure as
any the most obscure mysteries that occur in this profound Author. Let the
Reader make the best of it. For my Part, I can as easily conceive Mr. Walton
should walk without stirring, as I can his Idea of Motion without Space. After
all, the Question was not whether Motion could be proved to exist in a Point,
but only whether it could be conceived in a Point. For, as to the proof of
things impossible, some men have a way of proving that may equally prove any
thing. But I much question whether any Reader of common Sense will undertake to
conceive what this pleasant Man at Inference undertakes to prove.

VI. IF Mr. Walton really meant to defend the Author of the Fluxionary Method,
would he not have done it in a Way consistent with this illustrious Author's
own Principles? Let us now see what may be Sir Isaac's Notion, about this
matter. He distinguishes two sorts of motion, absolute and relative. The
former he defines to be a Translation from absolute place to absolute place,
the latter from one relative place to another. See Schol. def. viii. Philos.
Not. Princip. Math.
Mr. Walton's is plainly neither of these sorts of Motion, but some third kind,
which what it is, I am at a loss to comprehend. But I can clearly comprehend
that, if we admit Motion without Space, then Sir Isaac Newton's Account of it
must be wrong: For place by which he defines Motion is, according to him, a
part of Space. And if so, then this notable Defender has cut out new Work for
himself to defend and explain. But about this, if I mistake not, he will be
very easy. For, as I said before, he seems at bottom a back Friend to that
great Man; which Opinion you will see further confirmed in the Sequel.

VII. I SHALL no more ask Mr. Walton to explain any thing. For I can honestly
say, the more he explains, the more I am puzzled. But I will ask his Readers to
explain, by what Art a Man may conceive Motion without Space. And supposing
this to be done, in the second place to explain, how it consists with Sir Isaac
Newton's Account of Motion. Is it not evident, that Mr. Walton has deserted
from his old Master, and been at some pains to expose him, while he defends one
Part of his Principles by overturning another? Let any Reader tell me, what Mr.
Walton means by Motion, or if he can guess, what this third kind is, which is
neither absolute nor relative, which exists in a Point, which may be conceived
without Space. This learned Professor says, I have no clear Conception of the
Principles of Motion ( P. 24). And in another place ( P. 7.) he says, I might
have conceived Velocity in a Point, if I had understood and considered the
nature of Motion. I believe I am not alone in not understanding his Principles.
For myself, I freely confess the Case to be desperate. I neither understand
them, nor have any hopes of being ever able to understand them.

VIII. BEING now satisfied, that Mr. Walton's aim is not to clear up or defend
Sir Isaac's Principles, but rather to contradict and expose them, you will not,
I suppose, think it strange, if instead of putting Questions to this intrepid
Answerer, who is never at a loss, how often soever his Readers may, I entreat
you, or any other Man of plain Sense, to read the following Passage cited from
the thirty first Section of the Analyst, and then try to apply Mr. Walton's
Answer to it: Whereby you will clearly perceive what a vein of Raillery that
Gentleman is Master of. Velocity necessarily implies both Time and Space, and
cannot be conceived without them. And if the Velocities of nascent and
evanescent Quantities, i. e. abstracted from time and space, may not be
comprehended, how can we comprehend and demonstrate their Proportions? or
consider their rations primae and ultimae. For to consider the Proportion or
Ratio of Things implies that such Things have Magnitude: That such their
Magnitudes may be measured, and their Relations to each other known. But, as
there is no measure of Velocity except Time and Space, the proportion of
Velocities being only compounded of the direct proportion of the Spaces and the
reciprocal Proportion of the Times; does it not follow, that to talk of
investigating, obtaining, and considering the proportions of Velocities,
exclusively of Time and Space, is to talk unintelligibly? Apply now, as I said,
Mr. Walton's full Answer and you will soon find how fully you are enlightened
about the Nature of Fluxions.

IX. IN the following Article of Mr. Walton's full Answer, he says diverse
curious things, which, being derived from this same Principle, that motion may
be conceived in a point, are altogether as incomprehensible as the Origin from
whence they flow. It is obvious and natural to suppose Ab and Ba See Not. Phil.
Princip. Math. l. 2. lem. 2.
to be Rectangles produced from finite lines multiplied by Increments. Mr.
Walton indeed supposes that when the Increments vanish or become nothing, the
Velocities remain, which being multiplied by finite lines produce those
Rectangles ( P. 13.) But admitting the Velocities to remain, yet how can any
one conceive a Rectangular Surface to be produced from a line multiplied by
Velocity, otherwise than by supposing such line multiplied by a line or
Increment, which shall be exponent of or proportional to such Velocity? You may
try to conceive it otherwise. I must own I cannot. Is not the Increment of a
Rectangle it self a Rectangle? must not then Ab and Ba be Rectangles? and must
not the Coefficients or Sides of Rectangles be lines? consequently are not b
and a lines or (which is the same thing) Increments of lines? these Increments
may indeed be considered as proportional to and exponents of Velocity. But
exclusive of such exponents to talk of Rectangles under lines and velocities
is, I conceive, to talk unintelligibly. And yet this is what Mr. Walton does,
when he makes b and a in the Rectangles Ab and Ba to denote mere Velocities.

X. As to the Question, whether nothing be not the Product of nothing
multiplied by something, Mr. Walton is pleased to answer in the affirmative.
And nevertheless when ab is nothing, that is, when a and b are nothing, he
denies that Ab + Ba is nothing. This is one of these many Inconsistencies which
I leave the Reader to reconcile. But, says Mr. Walton, the Sides of the given
Rectangle still remain, which two Sides according to him must form the
Increment of the flowing Rectangle. But in this he directly contradicts Sir
Isaac Newton, who asserts that Ab + Ba and not A + B is the Increment of the
Rectangle AB. And, indeed, how is it possible, a line should be the Increment
of a Surface? Laterum Incrementis totis a et b generatur Rectanguli incrementum
Ab + Ba are the Words of Sir Isaac See Not. Phil. Princip. Math. l. 2. lem. 2.
. which words seem utterly inconsistent with Mr. Walton's Doctrine. But, no
wonder that Gentleman should not agree with Sir Isaac, since he cannot agree
even with himself; but contradicts what he says elsewhere as the Reader may
see, even before he gets to the End of that same Section, wherein he has told
us that the Gnomon and the Sum of the two Rectangles are turned into those two
Sides by a retroverted Motion ( P. 11 and 12). which proposition if you or any
other Person shall try to make Sense of, you may possibly be convinced, that
this profound Author is as much at variance with common Sense, as he is with
himself and Sir Isaac Newton.

XI. MR. Walton in the ninth Page of his Vindication, in order to explain the
Nature of Fluxions, says that to obtain the last ratio of synchronal
Increments, the magnitude of those Increments must be infinitely diminished.
Notwithstanding which, in the twenty third Page of his full Answer he charge
me as greatly mistaken, in supposing that he explained the Doctrine of Fluxions
by the ratio of Magnitudes infinitely diminished. It is an easy matter, for any
Author to write so, as to betray his Readers into Mistakes about his meaning.
But then it is not easy to conceive, what right he has to upbraid them with
such their Mistakes. If I have mistaken his Sense, let any one judge if he did
not fairly lead me into the Mistake. When a Man puzzleth his Reader, says and
unsaith, uses ambiguous Terms and obscure Terms, and puts them together in
so perverse a Manner, that it is odds you can make out no sense at all, or if
any, a wrong sense, pray who is in fault but the Writer himself? let any one
consider Mr. Walton's own words, and then say whether I am not justified in
making this Remark.

XII. IN the twentieth Page of his full Answer Mr. Walton tells us, that
Fluxions are measured by the first or last proportions of isochronal Increments
generated or destroyed by motion. A little after he says these Ratios subsist
when isochronal Increments have no Magnitude. Now, I would fain know whether
the isochronal Increments themselves subsist when they have no Magnitude?
whether by isochronal Increments we are not to understand Increments generated
in equal times? whether there can be an Increment where there is no increase,
or increase where there is no Magnitude? whether if Magnitudes are not
generated in those equal times, what else is generated therein, or what else is
it that Mr. Walton calls isochronal? I ask the Reader these Questions. I dare
not ask Mr. Walton. For, as I hinted before, the Subject grows still more
obscure in proportion as this able Writer attempts to illustrate it.

XIII. We are told ( P. 22.) that the first or last ratio of the isochronal
Spaces has a real existence, forasmuch as it is equal to the ratio of the two
motions of two points; which motions, subsisting when the isochronal Spaces are
nothing; preserve the existence of the first or last ratio of these Spaces, or
keep it from being a ratio of nothings. In order to assist your understanding,
it must not be omitted that the said two points are supposed to exist at the
same time in one point, and to be moved different ways without stirring from
that point. Mr. Walton has the Conscience to call this Riddle a full and clear
Answer: to make sense of which you must suppose it one of his Ironies. In the
next and last Article of his performance, you still find him proceed in the
same Vein of Raillery upon Fluxions.

XIV. It will be allowed, that who ever seriously undertook to explain the
second, third, and fourth Fluxions of Sir Isaac Newton, would have done it in a
way agreeable to that great Man's own Doctrine. What Sir Isaac's precise notion
is I will not petend to say. And yet I will venture to say, it is something
that cannot be explained by the three dimensions of a Cube I frankly own, I do
not understand Sir Isaac's Doctrine so far as to frame a positive Idea of his
Fluxions. I have, nevertheless, a negative conception thereof, so far as to see
that Mr. Walton is in jest, or (if in earnest) that he understands it no more
than I do.

XV. Sir Isaac tells us that he considers indeterminate quantities as flowing,
or in other words, as increasing or decreasing by a perpetual motion. Which
quantities he denotes by the latter Letters of the Alphabet, and their Fluxions
or Celerities of increasing by the same Letters pointed over head, and the
Fluxions of Fluxions or second Fluxions, i. e. the Mutations more or less swift
of the first Celerities by the same Letters pointed with double points; and the
Mutations of those Mutations of the first Mutations or Fluxions or Celerities
of increasing, which he calls Fluxions of Fluxions of Fluxions or third
Fluxions, by three points; the fourth Fluxions by four points; the fifth by
five; and so on See his Treatise de quadratura curvarum.
. Sir Isaac, you see, speaks of quantity in general. And in the Analyst the
Doctrine is exemplified and the Case is put in lines. Now in lines, where there
is only one Dimension, how are we enabled to conceive second, third or fourth
Fluxions by conceiving the generation of three dimensions in a Cube? Let any
one but read what Sir Isaac Newton or what I have said, and then apply what Mr.
Walton has written about the three dimensions of a Cube, and see whether the
difficulties are solved or the Doctrine made one whit the clearer by this
Explication.

XVI. That you may the better judge of the merit of this Part of Mr. Walton's
performance, I shall beg leave to set down a Passage or two from the Analyst.
As it is impossible to conceive Velocity without time or space, without either
finite length or finite duration, it must seem above the Power of Man to
comprehend even the first Fluxions. And if the first are incomprehensible, what
shall we say of the second and third Fluxions, etc. He who can conceive the
beginning of a beginning or the end of an end, somewhat before the first or
after the last, may perhaps be sharpsighted enough to conceive these things.
But most Men, I believe, will find it impossible to understand them in any
sense whatsoever. One would think that Men could not speak too exactly on so
nice a subject. And yet we may often observe, that the exponents of Fluxions or
notes representing Fluxions are confounded with the Fluxions themselves. Is not
this the Case, when just after the Fluxions of flowing quantities, were said to
be celerities of their increasing and the second Fluxions to be the Mutations
of the first Fluxions or celerities, we are told that ^ represents a series of
quantities whereof each subsequent quantity is the Fluxion of the preceding;
and each foregoing is a fluent quantity having the following one for it is
Fluxion. Diverse series of quantities and expressions Geometrical and
Algebraical may be easily conceived in lines, in surfaces, in species, to be
continued without end or limit. But it will not be found so easy to conceive a
series, either of mere Velocities or of mere nascent Increments, distinct
therefrom and corresponding thereunto. Analyst Sect. 44, 45, 46.
Compare what is here said with Mr. Walton's Genesis of a Cube, and you will
then clearly see how far this answerer is from explaining the nature of second,
third and fourth Fluxions: And how justly I might repay that Gentleman in kind,
and tell him in his own language, that all his Skill is vain and impertinent,
(vind. p. 36).

XVII. BUT it does not become me to find fault with this learned Professor, who
at bottom militates on my Side, and in this very Section, makes it his business
directly to overthrow Sir Isaac Newton's Doctrine. For he says in plain Terms,
that there can be no fourth Fluxion of a Cube ( P. 25.) that is, there can be
no second Fluxion of a line, and a fortiori, no third, fourth, fifth, etc.
Insomuch that with one single dash of his Pen Mr. Walton destroys, to the great
relief of the learned World, an indefinite rank of Fluxions of different Orders
that might have reached from Pole to Pole. I had distinctly pointed out the
difficulties in several Parts both of my Analyst and Defense, and I leave you
to judge whether he explains or even attempts to explain one of them. Instead
thereof he tells us of the true Dimension of a Cube generated by Motion: Whence
he takes occasion, as has been observed, to explode Sir Isaac's own Doctrine,
which is utterly inconsistent with Mr. Walton's And can you now doubt the real
design of this egregious Vindicator.

XVIII. BEFORE ever Sir Isaac Newton thought of his Fluxions, every body knew
there were three Dimensions in a Cube, and that a Solid might be generated by
the motion of a Surface, a Surface by the motion of a Line, and a Line by the
motion of a Point. And this in effect is all we know from Mr. Walton's
Explication. As for his dwelling so minutely on the Genesis of the solid Parts
of a Cube, a thing so foreign from the Purpose, the only rational Account I can
give of it is, that Mr. Walton, by puzzling the Imagination of his vulgar
Readers, hoped the better to disguise his betraying the Doctrine of his great
Client, which to a discerning eye he manifestly gives up; and instead thereof
humourously substitutes, what all the World knew before Sir Isaac was born, to
wit, the three Dimensions of a Cube and the genesis thereof by Motion.

XIX. UPON the whole I appeal to you and every intelligent Reader, whether this
thing, which Walton is pleased ironically to call a full Answer, does not carry
throughout a fly Insinuation, that the profound Science of Fluxions cannot be
maintained but by the help of most unintelligible Paradoxes and
Inconsistencies. So far, indeed, as Affirmations go he shows himself an able
Support of Sir Isaac Newton. But then in his Reasonings he drops that great man
upon the most important Points, to wit, his Doctrine of Motion and his Doctrine
of Fluxions, not regarding how far the demonstration of his famous Principia is
interested therein. To convince you still more and more of the Truth hereof, do
but reflect a little on Mr. Walton's Conduct. Can you think it probable, that
so learned and clear-headed a Writer would have laid down such a direct
repugnancy to common Sense, as his Idea of Motion in a Point, for the ground
work of his Explanation, had it been his real Intention to explain? Or can you
suppose, he would have been absolutely silent, on so many Points urged home,
both in the Analyst and Defense, which it concerned a Vindicator of Sir Isaac
not to have overlooked? Can you imagine, that if he meant seriously to defend
the Doctrine of Fluxions, he would have contented himself with barely asserting
that Sir Isaac Newton in the Introduction to his Quadrature of Curves, in the
second Lemma of the second Book, and in the Scholium to the first Section of
the first Book of his Principles of Philosophy, has delivered his Doctrine of
Fluxions in so clear and distinct a manner, without the least Inconsistency in
terms or Arguments, that one would have thought it impossible for any Person
not to have understood him ( P. 30).

XX. IS it possible, I say, that Mr. Walton could in earnest hope we should
take his bare Word, as so much more credible that Sir Isaac's, and not rather
have endeavored to answer the Questions and reconcile the Difficulties set
forth in my Defense of Free-thinking, for instance, in Sect xxxvi. Wherein I
entreat my Antagonist to explain whether Sir Isaac's Momentum be a finite
Quantity or an Infinitesimal or a mere Limit, adding, if you say a finite
Quantity, be pleased to reconcile this with what he says in the Scholium of
the second Lemma of the first Section of the first Book of his Principles: Cave
intelligas quantitates magnitudine determinatas, sed cogita semper diminuendas
sine limite. If you say an Infinitesimal: Reconcile this with what is said in
the Introduction to his Quadratures: Volui ostendere quod in methodo Fluxionum
non opus sit figuras infinite parvas in Geometriam introducere. If you should
say it is a mere Limit, be pleased to reconcile this with what we find in the
first Case of the second Lemma in the second Book of his Principles: Ubi de
lateribus A and B deerant momentorum dimidia, etc. where the Moments are
supposed to be divided. I shall scarce think it worth my while to bestow a
serious thought on any Writer who shall pretend to maintain Sir Isaac's
Doctrine, and yet leave this Passage without a Reply. And the Reader, I
believe, will think with me that, in answer to difficulties distinctly proposed
and insisted on, to offer nothing but a magisterial Assertion is a mere grimace
of one who made merry with Fluxions, under the Notion of defending them. And he
will be further confirmed in this way of thinking, when he observes that Mr.
Walton has not said one Syllable, in Reply to those several Sections of my
Defense, which I had particularly referred to, as containing a full answer to
his Vindication. But it is no wonder if, with Sir Isaac's Doctrine, he should
drop also his own Arguments in favor thereof.

XXI. I HAVE been at the Pains once for all to write this short Comment on Mr.
Walton, as the only way I could think of for making him intelligible, which
will also serve as a Key to his future Writings on this Subject. And I was the
rather inclined to take this trouble, because it seems to me, there is no
part of Learning that wants to be cleared up more than this same Doctrine of
Fluxions, which has hitherto walked about in a mist to the Stupefaction of the
Literati of the present Age. To conclude, I accept this Professor's
Recantation, nor am at all displeased at the ingenious method he takes to
disguise it. Some zealous Fluxionist may perhaps answer him.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Gunne, Bookseller in Capel-street.
l. s. d. LEtters from a Persian in England to his Friend at Ispahan. Price 0 2
2 Practice of Farming and Husbandry, recommended by the Dublin Society. 0 3 3
Parnell's Poems, with Additions. 0 2 6 Practical Farmer, Part 1 st. 0 1 1
Ditto, Part 2 d. 0 0 7 Miller's Gardener's Dictionary, Folio. 1 5 0 Lawrence's
Agriculture, Folio. 0 14 0 Fides's Body of Divinity, Folio, 2 Parts. 1 0 0
Burnet's History of the Reformation, 3 Vol. in Folio. 2 16 0 Ditto -- History
of his own Times, 2 Vol. Folio 1 13 0 Ditto -- Pastoral Care, 8 vo. 0 2 6
Bolton's Irish Statutes to the end of King Charles the second. 1 3 0 Tull's
Horse-Hoeing Husbandry, recommended by the Dublin-Society. 0 5 5 Treatise on
Hops, by the Dublin-Society. 0 0 7 Treatise on Bees, by Ditto. 0 0 7 Treatise
on Flax, by Ditto. 0 0 3 Treatise on Saffron, by Ditto. 0 0 3 Switzer's Method
of burning Clay. 0 0 7 Gordon's Translation of Tacitus, 4 Vol. 0 18 0 Rapin's
History of England, 15 Vol. 3 9 0 La Belle Assemblee, 4 Vol. 0 10 0 Telemachus.
0 3 3 Devil on two Sticks. 0 2 2 Dunclad Variorum. 0 2 9 Memoirs of Eutopia. 0
2 9 Echard's History of the Revolution. 0 3 6 Temple's Irish Rebellion, 4 to. 0
3 6 Validity of English Ordination. 0 4 6 Moss's Collection of Poems, 2
Volumes. 0 3 3 Bible Large, 8 vo. with Common Prayer, Apocripha and Singing
Psalms. 0 6 6 Bible, Large 12 o. 0 3 6 Common Prayer, 8 vo Gilt. 0 5 0 Common
Prayer, 12 o Gilt. 0 3 3 Ditto, 24 o Gilt. 0 2 6 Nelson's Festivals and Fasts.
0 5 0 Hudibrass. 0 3 3 Dutton's Justice of Peace. 0 6 0 List of the Absentees
of Ireland. 0 0 10 Original Draught of the Primitive Church. 0 3 3 Halifax's
Advice to a Daugher. 0 0 6 Wake's Catechism. 0 2 2 Irish Historical Library. 0
2 6 Patrick's Witnesses. 0 5 0 Great Importance of a Religious Life. 0 0 10
Irish and English Common Prayer. 0 2 9 Syng's Catechism. 0 0 3 Lewis's
Catechism. 0 0 3 Addison's Manual. 0 1 2 Laws of the Church of Rome against
Heretics. 0 1 0 Whitenhall's Greek Grammar. 0 0 8 Ditto Latin Grammar. 0 0 8
Cambden's Greek Grammar. 0 0 10 Meditations on Mortality. 0 0 6 Soldier's
Monitor. 0 0 8 Companion to the Communion. 0 0 8 Guide to Juries. 0 0 7 Allan's
Alarm. 0 0 10 Baxter's Call. 0 0 8 Erasmus 0 1 8 Testament. 0 0 10 Swift's
Poems. 0 2 2 Hool's Purilis Confabula. 0 0 6 Answer to all Excuses. 0 0 3
Gardeners Calendar. 0 1 1 Davis's Examples. 0 0 8 Tillotson's Sermon against
Popery. 0 0 2 Abridgments of 2 Acts of Parliament for keeping Churches in
Repair. 0 0 2 Psalter, large Print. 0 1 0 Thoughts on the Woollen Manufacture
of Ireland. 0 0 2

PLAYS.
TRAGEDIES. HUmpry Duke of Gloucester. Richard the Third. Lucius Brutus. Julius
Caesar. Conscious Lovers. Fall of Saguntum. Virgin Queen. Orphan. Mariamne.
Revenge. Jane Shore Twin Rivals.
COMEDIES. DIssembled Wanton or my Son get Money. Ignoramus or the English
Lawyer. Don Quixot, 2 Parts, Double Gallant. Mistake. She would and She would
not.


