A SERMON PREACHED in the CHAPEL OF THE ASYLUM FOR FEMALE ORPHANS, AT THE
ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE GUARDIANS, On MONDAY the Sixteenth of MAY, 1768.

PUBLISHED at Their REQUEST.

By the Revd. THOMAS FRANCKLIN, VICAR OF WARE, IN HERTFORDSHIRE, And CHAPLAIN
IN ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed for W. BUNCE, Russel Street, Covent Garden; R. BALDWIN,
Paternoster Row; T. DAVIES, Russel Street; J. WILKIE, St. PAUL'S Churchyard;
and J. WALTER, Charing Cross. 1768.

PRICE SIXPENCE.

TO THE QUEEN,
MADAM,
WHILST your MAJESTY is perpetually employed in the relief of private distress,
spreading your bounty on every side, and endeavoring to conceal the generous
hand that bestows it, permit me, in the name of a Public Charity, to pay the
due tribute of public thanks for the kind favor and protection with which you
were pleased to honor the ASYLUM; a protection which we with pleasure consider
as the foundation of our present success, and the earnest of future prosperity.
The following pages have no pretentions to any merit, but that of producing to
general view, those peculiar and distinguishing circumstances which recommended
this institution to your MAJESTY's attention, and which may serve, amongst many
other instances, to convince the reader that the sure and only method to obtain
the ROYAL favor is to deserve it.

That a life so essential as your MAJESTY's to the welfare and happiness of
thousands may be long continued to us in uninterrupted health, peace, and
felicity, is the sincere wish of every English heart, and the constant prayer
of,

MADAM, YOUR MAJESTY's Most faithful Subject, And Servant, Thomas Francklin.
Great Queen -- Street, June 12th, 1768.
HOSEA. c. xiv. v. 3.
In thee the Fatherless finds Mercy.
AMONGST all those virtues and perfections which contribute to the luster and
dignity of human nature, Charity has ever held the first and most exalted
station; as the best and truest representative of the most high God, his
Vicegerent upon earth, commissioned, as it were, by him to remove the wants,
soften the calamities, and mitigate the sorrows of mankind.

The age we live in can not* I fear, with any propriety be styled the age of
wit or wisdom, of learning, piety or virtue: but it may perhaps not
undeservedly be called the age of charity; never was there a time wherein so
many hospitals, schools and foundations have been raised and supported amongst
us: it is indeed astonishing, when we consider the variety of channels through
which our bounty has flowed, to reflect how full the current is in every one
of them; but what can not the gracious providence of God maintain and preserve!
the same divine power which so marvellously filled the widow's cruise of oil
has from time to time supplied and replenished this perennial fountain; this
copious stream still glideth through our fertile soil, blesses the earth with
her increase, and waters the furrows thereof.

In obedience to the commands of our great Lord and master, who so frequently
recommends the poor and deserted to our care and protection, Charity-schools,
for the maintenance and protection of indigent children, have been erected, and
liberally supported in every part of this kingdom, and the good effects of them
are universally felt and acknowledged: but in every human institution, there
must be some human, weakness, some mark of the imperfection of our nature; in a
nation like ours, and more especially in the great center of it, there must
always be a perpetual vicissitude of manners; new accidents, new vices and
follies will produce new wants and calamities, which will consequently require
new resources to guard against, or remove them: large, numerous and extensive,
therefore, as our charity-schools were, they have been found in some measure
inadequate to the purposes for which they were designed, and objects have of
late years presented themselves which even this wide circle of benevolence
could not comprehend: they did not (could not indeed from the nature of their
constitution) comprehend a set of helpless and miserable beings, excluded by
their peculiarly unhappy circumstances from the benefit of every public
institution, barren and leafless branches, cut off, as it were, from the tree
of life, which, deprived of all moisture and nourishment, must inevitably
wither and decay: these principally consisted of ORPHAN and DESERTED GIRLS,
who, after wandering about for a time in the utmost misery and distress, soon
perished with hunger, or, which was still more to be lamented, fell an early
sacrifice to vice, infamy, and prostitution.

An evil so dreadful and so alarming called for a speedy and effectual remedy,
as the effects of it were becoming every day and every hour more fatal to
society: when it pleased the gracious providence of God to inspire the breasts
of a few searchers after Good with the design of erecting an ASYLUM for these
wretched outcasts, a haven of rest and safety from the cruel storms of this
world which beat so hard upon them; this truly noble and benevolent purpose was
immediately put in execution, and has, by the prudent economy of its
directors, and the liberal bounty of the subscribers to it, been enabled to
banish all those evils which it was meant to remove, and to answer every good
end which it was intended to promote.

To bring good out of evil, to render the miseries and disstresses of mankind,
productive of virtue and happiness, is doubtless one of the noblest acts which
human wisdom can contrive, or human power can execute, as it is the nearest and
most exact imitation we can aspire to of the Divine Being. That this is most
evidently the design and endeavor of that amiable charity which I am here
called upon to recommend, will appear indisputable to every impartial mind,
that shall but for a moment reflect on the few following particulars.

And first then,

The principal and peculiar recommendation of this excellent charity is, that
here the fatherless finds mercy. All these unfortunate little ones whom you
now see before you, are ORPHANS; and surely a more melancholy or distressful
circumstance cannot be conceived; left in their tender infancy to the mercy of
a cruel multitude, and the bad examples of a licentious age; without a parent
to guide or instruct them, without a shepherd to feed them in green pastures,
or lead them beside the waters of comfort; this, my brethren, is a voice crying
in the wilderness which we must all hear; this is a call on our humanity, which
we can never resist; those to whom God has graciously continued the life of
their parents, sensible of so inestimable a blessing, must feel for, and
compassionate the wretched beings who are deprived of it; and, on the other
hand, if there are now before me, as I doubt not but there are, some who still
lament a father's care, or bewail a lost mother's tenderness, they, I am
satisfied, will anticipate every thing that could be urged in their favor,
they will reflect and consider, what a miserable, what a deplorable condition
those must be in, who are deprived of this, and withal, of every other
consolation.

Parents, we know, there have been, and to this day are, so totally void of all
feeling and humanity, as even to destroy their own offspring: can we wonder
then to hear of others, who, in opposition to the dictates of nature, totally
desert and forsake them? such was the wretched and truly pitiable condition of
many, whom this ASYLUM has relieved: it has indeed sometimes happened, that
these miserable ORPHANS were left in their tender infancy, by parents who could
not possibly avoid it: their fathers have been hurried from them by cruel
necessity, or perhaps perished abroad in the service of their country, whilst
their unhappy mothers have fallen a sacrifice to disease and penury at home;
thus does this useful charity, whilst it relieves private distress, promote
public happiness, and discharge the debt of gratitude, which society owes to
the industrious parent, by that support and protection which it affords to his
afflicted Child.

But the children educated in the ASYLUM are not only ORPHANS, but what will
render them still more proper objects of our compassion, Female ORPHANS. The
most powerful argument in favor of this excellent institution is doubtless its
amiable partiality to that sex which ever lays so warm, so irresistible a claim
to our support and protection: a sex by nature left more weak and defenseless
than our own, liable to more dangers and temptations, less able to struggle
with difficulties, or to oppose the malice and subtlety of a corrupt and
designing world. The female mind is formed in a soft and tender mold,
peculiarly susceptible of impressions, and as remarkably tenacious of them: how
much then does it import their future happiness, that the first which they
receive should be fair and good, and that to keep the waters from corruption,
they should be sweet and untainted at the fountain!

Beauty, we know, is an universal light, it shines, like the sun, with equal
luster on the palace and the cottage: it is the free gift, the patrimony, as it
were, of beneficent nature, who dispenses her bounties to all her children
without regard to rank or condition: but beauty, as experience teaches us, is
sometimes a dangerous and fatal pre-eminence; all the advantages of birth and
education, have proved insufficient to save the distinguished possessors of it
from ruin and destruction: even where parents have been near to guard, and
friends to admonish, too often has it fallen a sacrifice to the impulse of
passion, or the arts of the betrayer; but if affluence and knowledge are
ensnared, how shall poverty and ignorance escape? it is ever a maxim with the
wicked that guilt like sorrow is lightened by participation, and that a
companion in our crimes will palliate and diminish the iniquity of them; hence
it arises that the prostitute and abandoned part of the sex, are ever active
and vigilant to seduce the young and innocent, and lead them into the paths of
vice and folly; to what certain, what unavoidable misery then must be exposed
those unhappy females who are left in their tender years to all the snares and
temptations, all the arts and seductions of the profligate and designing! the
arrows of misfortune are in their sides, they are marked out as it were from
the herd, for immediate destruction, and fly like stricken deer to the ASYLUM's
friendly covert, to hide themselves from their cruel pursuers, vice, infamy,
and ruin. In behalf of objects like these, I need not, I am satisfied, address
myself to those who are of the same sex with themselves: your sympathetic
hearts, untaught and uninstructed, will dictate all that can be said, and all
that can be done: as women you will pity them, as mothers you will feel for
them, as Christians you will, I doubt not, contribute to relieve and support
them.

But, that we may view this noble structure in every light that can best
display its beauty, symmetry and proportion, let us consider what benefits and
advantages may arise to the Community from this excellent institution: let us
consider that the ASYLUM, in grateful return for that support and protection
which it receives from us, may, and already has produced a number of
industrious, conscientious and faithful servants: a circumstance in which our
domestic ease and happiness is nearly and intimately concerned; never perhaps
was there a time when they were more wanting than at present, owing, no doubt,
to that universal spirit of dissipation, that reigning love of pleasure, that
impatience of labor and restraint which has of late spread itself through all
ranks and degrees: whilst those accept the office of servants who are either
unable or unwilling to perform it, the evil I fear must continue; how valuable
therefore, and how truly laudable is an institution which tends to remove so
general a calamity, which teaches the children entrusted to its care (and that
at an age when they are most capable of learning) every useful branch of
household economy, instructs them in every thing that they ought to know, and,
which is perhaps peculiar to this charity, in nothing which they ought not!

Many of our charities, it must be acknowledged, have erred greatly in this
important particular: with parental affection they have adopted parental
weakness also; have counteracted their own designs, and by excessive tenderness
and indulgence ruined those unfortunate beings whom they meant to preserve; too
much care has frequently been taken of their intellects and too little of
their morality; and their education been thus rendered too extensive and
exalted for that rank and situation in life which they were designed for: an
error which our ASYLUM has most industriously endeavored to avoid; we imitate
not the boasted seminaries of the Romish church, where the moment their recluse
votaries are set apart for the service of God, they become useless to society:
whilst ours, on the other hand, are taken from the world, only that they may be
of the greater service to it; removed from the vices and temptations, and at
the same time reaping all the advantages, participating the improvements, and
practicing the duties and relations of public life.

It is with the greatest pleasure and satisfaction I have heard, that many of
the children here educated, have by their extraordinary industry and
application, by sobriety, decency, and every method in their power, endeavored
to repay the goodness of their benefactors; a circumstance very proper to be
mentioned on this occasion, as it reflects honor on the mistress who instructs
them, on the governors who preside over this charity, and indeed on every
person who contributes toward the maintenance and support of it.

When these, thus happily, thus seasonably, protected ORPHANS, shall leave
their retreat, and come out into the world, when experience shall have taught
them, what snares they have avoided, what dangers they have been protected
from; when they shall see how many of their unhappy fellowcreatures, perhaps
the companions of their infancy, for want of this kind shelter, have fallen an
easy prey to vice, and sunk into the loathsome abyss of sin and misery; how
will their hearts overflow with gratitude to their generous patrons, with what
eyes of tender acknowledgement, and heartfelt satisfaction will they look back
on these delightful seats of innocence and peace!

Here they are sheltered from the world, before they can possibly have received
any fatal infection from it; before the soft wax can have taken any bad
impression: their duty toward God, toward their benefactors, toward the
community to which they belong, are here the first things they learn, and
consequently stand the fairest chance of being the last things which they will
forget; those can never be bad servants who are good women, and pious
Christians: such, (and such only we endeavor to send out) will be industrious
from habit, sober from example, virtuous from principle, honest and faithful
from conscience, and from Religion.

To Religion indeed, that noblest foundation of every good, we doubtless owe
our great, and, I may perhaps add almost unparalleled success; except the Lord
build the house, their labor is but lost that build it; except the Lord
keeps the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. Charity, we know, is the
natural offspring of devotion, and love of man springs from the love of God.
To the erection and enlargement of The Chapel.
this structure we are, I am satisfied, indebted in a great measure for the
increase and enlargement of those frequent and liberal contributions which have
enabled us to support it; from this fountain of living waters have flowed all
those refreshing streams of benevolence, that from time to time have watered
our fertile garden; and whilst the word of God is here preached, as it has
hitherto been, in purity, truth, and simplicity, without ornament, pomp or
parade, untinctur'd by modern ostentation, and unleavened by modern enthusiasm,
the objects of our care and attention, will I doubt not, continue to reap the
blessed fruits of it.

The Lord, we read in Scripture, was with Joseph, and all that he did prospered
in his hand: the Lord we trust, my brethren, is with us also: thanks be to the
great giver of every good gift, our success has exceeded even our fondest
hopes, and our most sanguine wishes could scarce have formed a more delightful
prospect than that which is now before us: the duty therefore, of this day,
arises from the united principles of gratitude and benevolence; we assemble in
this place to return our unfeigned thanks for past mercies, and to implore the
continuance of divine favor; the heat and labor of the war is over, and we
meet in joy to celebrate our victory, the noblest of all victories, a victory
over the human heart, over the selfish cruel passions of avarice and
inhumanity: may the triumphs we already boast be the harbingers of more
extensive conquests still behind, and our past success prove the auspicious
omen of future prosperity!

Let us then with an eye of pleasure and complacency contemplate the beautiful
picture that is now before us: let us behold Benevolence surrounded by her
attendant virtues, administering to the necessities, and cultivating the minds
of these happy children: temperance presides over their meals, humility
clothes, industry instructs, and modesty adorns them: these are the matrons
that superintend, these are the guardians that watch over and protect them:
these will plead strongly for the precious charge entrusted to them; these, we
trust, will intercede for their beloved care, will soften the hearts of the
obdurate, open the hand of the tenacious, and melt even the most unfeeling into
tenderness and commiseration.

True charity, my brethren, like true beauty, wants not the paint of art to set
off, or the gorgeous robes of flattery to adorn her; to be distinguished she
need but to be seen, to be admired, she need but to be known: I have only
endeavored to point her out unto you, and may venture to leave the rest to
your own generous hearts: many perhaps there may be, many I doubt not but there
are now before me, whom a larger share of the good things of this world has
rendered more able, many whom the grace of God, joined to their own serious
reflections, has made more willing than ever they were before, to distribute;
many there are who wait but to know to whom they should do good, before they do
it; such, I am satisfied, the little imperfect sketch, which I have drawn of
this institution, will induce to contribute toward its maintenance and
support.

Amongst all the fair daughters of charity, those polished corners of our
christian temple, the ASYLUM, seems to boast superior charms, and to shine
forth with distinguished luster: like that innocence which she preserves, and
that virtue which she protects; she may be betrayed, suspected, or traduced,
but like them, she will still be cherished by the good, and received by the
worthy: whether we consider the distresses which she relieves, or the miseries
which she prevents, the blessings which she bestows on the present age, or the
felicity which she insures for the future, she must appear in every light most
amiable and praise worthy; her form is pleasing, her manners plain and
unaffected, her religion pure and undefiled: in a word, she attracts by her
simplicity, engages by her behavior, encourages by her tenderness, animates by
her example; as if it were her ambition, and a nobler she cannot have, to
imitate in all things that gracious and benignant QUEEN who has condescended
to patronize and protect her.

To conclude then;

Whatever may be our state or condition in this life, we are all of us, like
those whom I have been here endeavoring to recommend to you, subject to
dangers, temptations, and distress: no rank or station, how exalted soever, can
totally exempt us from those sorrows or misfortunes which are the common lot
and portion of mortality: who is there amongst us, that may not sometimes wish
for an ASYLUM? shall we not then, whilst we have it in our power, bestow that
shelter and relief on others which we ourselves may one day stand in need of?
let us show mercy to the fatherless, if we expect it from the father of mercy;
so shall we preserve to our minds that peace and tranquillity, which alone can
render us easy and contented in this life, so shall we find rest to our souls,
in that blessed ASYLUM of peace and happiness, which God has prepared for the
virtuous, the charitable, and the benevolent, in that which is to come.

FINIS.

