SOME PAPERS Relating to the General Draining OF MARSH-LAND IN THE County of
Norfolk.

WITH Mr. Berners's OBJECTIONS and PROPOSALS.

As also, An Answer to those OBJECTIONS and PROPOSALS, etc.

By PETER BATESON.

Favete, adeste aequo animo, and Rem cognoscite,
Vt pernoscatis, ecquid spei sit reliquum.
Ter. Prol. Andr. Printed in the Year 1710.

A Map of MARSH-LAND in NORFOLK. By S.r W.m Dugdale. with Additions and
Amendments.


Some REMARKS Concerning the Outfals of the Country of Marsh-land, Presented to
the Court of Sewers held at Lyn, October 13, 1708.
To the Worshipful Commissioners of SEWERS.
Gentlemen,
ON Monday last I humbly offered some Remarks to the Consideration of those
Gentlemen, who, in pursuance of your Order, met to view Knight's-Gool:
Accordingly my Paper was Read and laid upon the Table. But some there present,
Privately conveyed it away, and so suppressed it; I shall therefore beg leave
to Contract those Remarks and Proofs into a narrower Compass, seeing my
Occasions would not permit me to transcribe the Whole.

The Remarks, with all Submission, were these;

1st, That our Ancestors intended Knight's-Gool for an Outlet to carry off the
Waters which annoyed Marsh-land.

2dly, That the said Gool did in former Days actually answer those their
Intentions.

3dly, But that now it is impossible for a Gool in that Situation or String to
be so Serviceable as formerly.

4thly, That nevertheless there is yet a Way left to drain the Country, and
consequently restore it to its ancient Prosperity.

The Proof of the First, I there intimated, depended upon the Proof of the
Second: And for this Reason, because, if the Country was absolutely drained by
Means of Knight's-Gool, then no doubt our Ancestors intended it should do so.

The Second I proved from what Mr. Camden observed in his Britannia, viz. That
the Smeth fed thirty thousand Sheep, which was impossible to be done, if both
the Fenn and Smeth had not been then as Good and as Dry as our best Pastures
are now. I offered also to prove it by credible Witnesses, who have seen both
Fenn and Smeth fed with all Sorts of young Cattle, as well as Sheep: But this
was before the Sluices were erected.

The Third I proved from the River's being Silted up, which plainly appeared, a
little before the Lyn-Case was heard in Parliament, by plumming it on both
sides of Denver-Sluces, at which time it was found (if I mistake not) to be
deeper by Ten Foot on the other Side, than on This. I proved it also by an
Experiment of my own: In May I plumm'd Marsh-land-Fenn in diverse Places, some
were six Foot, but the ordinary Level was between four and five Foot Deep. I
took the Fall also of the Sewer-Waters into the River, and it was but one and
twenty Inches. So that this Gool, in this Situation and during these
Obstructions, can never, it is plain, carry off near six, five, or four Foot.

The last Remark I made good from the following Observations: Tuesday the 11th
of May last, the height of the Flood was taken both at Lyn and at Knight's-Gool
the same Morning. It then Flowed at Lyn fourteen Foot nine Inches, and at
Knight's-Gool eight Foot five Inches: The 25th the same* was repeated at the
same Places, and then it Flowed at Lyn thirteen Foot four Inches, and at
Knight's-Gool seven Foot. The Difference, you may perceive, is six Foot four
Inches, which is the Fall from Knight's-Gool to Lyn. From these Observations I
inferred, that a new Cut to Lyn would effectually drain the whole Country. I
also mentioned some Advantages attending a new Cut.

Which are These,

1st, Several Thousands of Acres would become as good Lands for Pasture and
Tillage as ever.

2dly, Upon a Breach in the Sea-Banks, the Waters would be conveyed to Sea more
speedily.

3dly, A great part of the Inhabitants would have the Convenience of
Water-Carriage in Winter.

4thly, And the Country, by evacuating the stagnated Waters, would be rendered
much more Healthful.

Here I urged the fatal Consequences of another Breach without a better Outfal;
and then answered two Objections against a new Cut, which were These,

1st, That the Charge would be very great. And,

2dly, That over and above the Charge, an Act of Parliament must be obtained
for the doing it.

In Answer to the first, I opposed the Advantages, which will abundantly
recompense the Costs: And not only so, but, if Things be equally adjusted,
there will be above Forty Thousand Acres to bear the Burden. And lastly, The
Work, when finished, will be effectual for Ages.

To the Second I Answered, That a little more than an halfpenny Acre-shot
would procure it, and that the Money so laid out would be to much better
Purpose, than to lay out several hundreds of Pounds upon the Repair of this
Gool, as was lately done, without reaping any Benefit thereby.

This, Gentlemen, was the Sum and Substance of the Paper, which I presented on
Monday, the Day of the View. I have nothing more to add, but only to desire,
That this Court, if it sees fit, would please to appoint a Surveyor to try
these Experiments after me; and then perhaps you would be more fully Informed
and Satisfied of the Insufficiency of the present Outfal, and, if carried into
Lyn-Haven, of its future Goodness and Sufficiency to Drain the Country of
Marsh-land entirely.

The CASE of the HIGH-LANDS and LOW-LANDS of Marsh-Land, as to their Common
Defense and Preservation by Drains and Banks.
THE Cuts and Drains belonging to the Level of Marsh-land, were at first made
and designed to carry off the Fresh and Salt Waters, which might at any time
chance to annoy or surround the same.

And for the voiding such Nuisance, both High and Low-Lands were formerly and
are (...) ^^arg'd to some Drain or other.

For the same purpose the greatest Part of the said High and Low-Lands do
maintain one common Sewer leading to its Outlet into the River of Owse.

So that when the Outfal was Good, all those Lands which paid to the same, were
laid Dry: And consequently they were then (not only all equally Charged but)
all equally benefited.

But that now by the River's being silted up, the said Outfal is, and has been
for several Years past very much impaired and obstructed.

From whence arise these Inequalities:

The High-lands are charged to these Sewers and Gools, and reap the sole
Benefit of 'em.

The Low-lands are charged to the said Sewers and Gools in Proportion to the
High-lands, and receive no manner of Benefit thereby.

The High-lands, when surcharged with sudden Down-falls, let go their Stops and
Dams, and so pour their Waters upon the Low-lands.

The Low-lands do naturally and must of Necessity lodge all those Waters, which
the Outfal cannot carry off.

It is plain therefore, that the Low-lands, instead of being equally profited
with the High-lands by these common Sewers and Gools, are most grievously
oppressed by the High-lands themselves.

As to the Banks incompassing Marsh-land, they are the old and new Podikes,
together with the River and Sea-banks erected at first to defend and preserve
the said Country from Fresh and Salt Waters.

To this End, all the High and Low-lands within the said Level are adjoysted,
as equally as may be, in all the said Banks.

The High-lands, it is notorious, receive great Advantages by these Banks.

The Low-lands, it is as notorious, receive none at all.

To set this Matter in a clearer Light.

Some thousands of Acres of Land (most of which, when Drained, may vye with the
richest natural Soils in the Queen's Dominions) have been for sundry Years
past, and now are continually overflown with Waters; some one, some two, some
three, and so on gradually to six Foot deep.

In this Case it is evident, if all the Sea-banks and Po-dike-Banks were thrown
down, that these Low-lands could not be in a worse Condition than now they are;
But surely under these miserable Circumstances the High-lands would suffer
extremely.

From the Premises may be inferred.

That either the Surface of the Low-lands should be raised to an equal Level
with the High-lands, that so all the Lands may share alike in the Advantages
and Charges of the Public Drains and Banks.

Or else that the Low-lands should be quite discharged of all Banks and Drains;
seeing they have no Benefit by 'em.

Or lastly, that there should be a new Cut to Lyn, which will certainly carry
off all the annoying Waters: And then all the Lands both High and Low will be
(not only equally Charged, but) equally benefitted.

The 1st of these Disjunctives may be looked upon as impracticable; seeing
these latter Ages have not produced any Pretenders to the old Way of removing
Mountains.

The 2d, though reasonable, will hardly ever be complied with; because the Owners
of those Lands, which alone receive Safeguard, Preservation, and Profit from
those Banks and Drains, must in that Case uphold them at their sole Expense.

The 3d, and last, therefore being a Method not only the most Feasible and
Equitable, but also the least liable to Exceptions of any other, seeing it is
the very same, that our Ancestors took to preserve the Country, seems to have
the best Pretensions to the Consideration of the Commissioners of Sewers; but
if they think it be not in their Power to make a Law for a new Sewer and Gool,
where never any were Cut or Erected before (though several great In the 43 and 44
Eliz. The then two Chief Justices, Popham and Anderson delivered their
Opinions, That new Works might be erected by Virtue of the Stat. 23. Hen. 8.
See the second Edit. of Callis his Reading upon the Stat. P. 97. And the same
Point happened to be controverted in King J. 1. Reign, whereupon his Attorney
General, Sir Hen. Hobert plainly proved this Power of the Commissioners from an
express Clause in the Commission it self. See Dugdale's Hist. of Imb. and
Drain, Page 372.
Lawyers are of Opinion, nay one of our In the 12 Jac. upon an Appeal to the
King and Council (the same Controversy still depending) the Order of Council
runs thus: Their Lordships finding in their Wisdoms, that it can neither stand
with Law nor with common Sense or Reason, that in a Cause of so great
Consequence the Law can be so void of Providence, as to restrain the
Commissioners of Sewers from making new Works, (...) restrain (...) fury of the
Waters, did Order, etc. See Callis, Page 98, 99, 100, 101, and 102.
Kings and his Privy Council, have in a Solemn and Judicial Manner declared,
their Commission warrants their so doing, when the Necessities and Good of the
Country require such Works;) I say, if after all that has been said, those
Worthy Patriots still scruple their own Authority in these Matters: Yet it is
hoped they will, to the best of their Knowledge and Power, endeavor the
Redress, Reformation, and Amendment of the Grievances complained of, by a due
and impartial Representation of 'em to the Queen and Her Council.

Note, The Court, immediately after the reading of these Papers abovementioned,
Voted, nomine contradicente, the Order following, which you may perceive is
grounded upon a Presentment of the Jury to that Purpose, as also upon diverse
Petitions of numerous Land-Owners.
Norf. ss.
At a General Session of SEWERS, Holden at KINGS LYN for the said County, on
Wednesday the 11th Day of May, in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lady ANNE, over Great Britain, France and Ireland, Queen Defender of the Faith,
etc. Ann. Dom. 1709. By and before Henry Chennery Esquire Mayor of Kings Lynn, Sir
John Turner Knt. Hatton Berners, James Host, William Cony, Samuel Tailor,
Charles Turner, Henry Bell, Robert Awborne, William Stafford, and William
Pierson, Esquires, and Henry Towers Gent. Commissioners of Sewers, amongst
others assigned.
WHEREAS it was presented by the Jury of Freebridge citra Lynn cum partibus
Marsh-land, in manner following, viz. We present the extreme bad Condition of
the Country of Marsh-land, whose ancient Outfal at Knights Gool, after vast
Sums of Money expended upon it, is at this time, and has been for a succession
of Years, insufficient for the carrying off to Sea the Waters which infest the
same, by Means of which Waters, so surrounding a large Tract of Land, Noted and
highly Esteemed by our Predecessors, and some now alive, for their exceeding
Fruitfulness and Goodness; a great Part of the said Country is miserably
wasted, the Common of the Fen, and some part of the Smeth almost ruined:
Private Owners of particular Levels excessively burdened by endeavoring, in
Vain, to keep up Banks about them, and by Raising and Maintaining New invented
and artificial Machines for their Security. And lastly, The Roads for heavy
Carriages are become Unpassable; We therefore humbly Pray, that this Court will
Order some Person or Persons of Probity and Skill, to find out a sufficient
Outfal, if such an one may be had, for the said Country, seeing the Old one has
been found, by woeful Experience, to be insufficient for sundry Years past, to
attain the Ends which our Ancestors, when they chose that Situation, had in
View, and actually afterward attained, viz. The Draining the Country of
Marsh-land, if this Honorable Court shall think fit. And whereas several
Petitions of numerous Land-Owners of the Country of Marsh-land were this Day
exhibited into this Court to the same or the like Effect, humbly praying that a
suitable Remedy may be had, to and for the deplorable Condition of that
Country, which has been of thirty seven Years Continuance. This Court taking
the Matters in the said Presentment and Petition contained into their
Consideration; and being well satisfied that the same are of the greatest
Weight and Importance to the said Land-Owners: And that there is a Necessity
for some speedy Course and Remedy to be taken for Relief of the many Sufferers
under the great Mischiefs and Calamities therein complained of, have thought
fit to Order and Resolve. And it is this Day Ordered, by this Court, that it be
referred to all the Commissioners at this Session Present, or any Five or more
of them, to enquire into the Premises, and to consider such Ways and Means as
may be most proper for the Ease and Relief of the said Country in this behalf;
And for that purpose they are desired to meet from time to time, as they shall
appoint, and to take to their Assistance such able and experienced Surveyors
and other Persons Skilful in Draining and other Works of Sewers, as they shall
think fit, and to inform themselves of the Necessity and Reasonableness of the
Matters in the said Presentment and Petitions prayed and proposed, and to make
an Estimate of the Charge and Expense of such, or any other Works that shall be
thought Necessary for those Ends, and to continue such their Meetings from time
to time, as Occasion may require. And that the Clerk of this Court, together
with the Expenditors of Marsh-land do attend the said Commissioners at such
their Meetings. And that timely Notice be given by the Expenditors to all the
Commissioners of Sewers to whom it is so referred, and to the Dikereeves of
each Town-ship of the Time and Place of the first Meeting, to the end, that
such as shall think (...), may be present and Attend the same.

Note, This Order was never duly Executed in any Part of it; But on the
contrary, Mr. Berners, the eldest Commissioner (I suppose) had prepared the
following Objections and Proposals, which were Read in open Court the Sessions
following.

Some Objections against Mr. BATESON's Paper, presented to the Court of Sewers
held at LYN, Com. Norff.
October 1^th, 170^. Concerning the Outfals of Marsh-land. And some Proposals
for a much more speedy and effectual Way to Drain the Country.
Humbly offered to the said Court, October. 12, 1709.
THAT a great quantity of Marsh-land, instead of being Profitable to the
Owners, has for diverse Years last been very Chargeable to them, because their
two great Outfals, upon foul Weather at Sea, and at other times, are choked up
with the Silt, dropping all along in its Course to the Sluices at Salter's Load,
and settling there, for want of the Length of the return of the Tide to grind
it off, as formerly, is a Truth too well known, not to seek a Remedy. But since
Art may be the help of this Misfortune, as well as it is of Nature, the Dropsy
in the common Fen, now affecting the Vitals, I mean, drowning the adjacent
Lands of several Persons; I thought it worth the while of one, whose Interest
is complicated with his Duty, to prescribe Ways and Means for its Revovery.

BUT, that a new Cut of eight Miles long, cross the Hundred to Lyn-Haven,
should in the least conduce thereunto will be judged most uncertain (I believe)
and improbable, when it is Considered.

1st, Upon digging this new and long Tract, how various the Sorts of Earth will
be; here a stuborn Clay, there a spewing Silt, at another Place a black Moore
and the Red Earth, then Reed-roots and Hassocks, which will often founder and
slip into the Work.

2dly, In so long a Drain, the Sewer must have many Elbows and crooked Turns in
it, running much flower for its length, and the Obstacles of so many Bridges,
which must necessarily be made over it, for the intercourse of the Inhabitants
of the several Towns of this Country, which is to be cut into halves, (since
it is eight Miles long and broad,) not to mention the Difficulties of making the
Brink stand, (...) so well Sess'd off.

3dly, The time it will take to perfect this Work, with the 8000 l. it will
Cost, (as Mr. Bateson says) and an Act of Parliament to satisfy all Interests
upon cutting away their Lands, etc. and making Droves to their Grounds; not
that I think the Country would regret any reasonable Charge, upon the Prospect
of its doing Service. But, grant it possible to Level Hills with Valleys, (for
so it is in many Places) that almost an insupportable Charge will be entailed
upon this Age and Posterity, by this new Channel eight Miles long; since lately
the Dyking out but a Part of an old Sewer, cost eight Shillings a Rod, besides
the Charge of throwing off the Earth.

4thly, The Gauging at Sea, and the Inland Waters, seems most doubtful, since
the height of the Freshes is often succeeded by Droughts, and the Outfals even
at Old Lyn are deep or shallow, according to the set of Ebb and Tide, agitated
by the Winds; besides the Marshes where this new Cut is Designed, as I am told,
and is visible, are above three Feet higher than the Level, so that the digging
there, must be nearer the Antipodes than in other Places, or force the Waters
up Hill.

NOT to think of these Difficulties; and by a speedy, much less Chargeable,
(and according to humane Conjecture) more certain way to restore this Spot of
Earth to that flourishing Condition it enjoyed most part of the last Century,
and some Ages before; I would with all Submission PROPOSE.

1st, That it be the Care of the Officers of the Country, and that they be
enjoined, and encouraged by their Winter Circuits, to keep out all Foreign
Waters, which run, without any Law, into Marsh-land, which was constantly given
in Charge by our Ancestors, and to reinforce the Law of this Court of the 20th
of King James, for erecting two Houses at Distances upon the Old Podike, for
Laborers to live in, to prevent the cutting of it, by which the downfall of
5000 Acres run into the Fen continually, when as we can run out but four Hours
in twelve at the River.

2dly, That Lords Bridge be lengthened by those who have the Privilege to set
one Net there, being the first Bridge through which the Freshes in a strait
Line descend to the Ouze, and that the great Letts, Stops, and Annoyances, by
laying Gregs, and Fish Trunks cross the great Drain be removed, and the Netts,
with the diverse sorts of Impediments, upon Islington-Common be taken away.

3dly, That two substantial Engines or Mills be placed upon the great Load
which is very strait, and but a Mile and half from the neck of Marsh-land Fen,
to the two Goats or Gools, which by the Experience of our next Neighbors, and
our Friends Abroad, has been very Successful to ride the Waters at Sea, by
raising and hastening the Freshes thither, for which a Law of this Court was to
have been provided.

4thly, That the Sole of the old Gool, be sunk two Foot, being its old
Foundation; and that the new Jetty at Islington Shore be forthwith Rooted up,
being set down for the particular Interest of one Town only, and that by an
Order only; it having been exclaimed against, as the chief Cause of silting the
String, and choking the Mouth of the old Gool, and has made the new Gool very
Sickly and Chargeable; at which Passengers Smile, as well as the Engineer from
Portsmouth, when Complaint was made to him of the Outfals, asking what it did
there.

THESE Things being accomplished, since by natural Situation we have so good a
Current, the South and South-west Winds being the frequentest in the Year,
blowing upon it, and by the great Prudence of our Fore Fathers, the chief Sewer
being very strait, less than two Miles to Sea, and consequently more quick and
rapid: It Is more than probable, that for the Expense of fewer hundred Pounds,
than Mr. Bateson says Thousands, for the new Cut of eight Miles long, cross the
Country. This Angle may become (as formerly) the Envy of some other Places, and
by the soundness of their Commons, the Profits of their Severals, the
healthfulness of their Climate, the goodness of their Highways, and their ease
of Acre-shots, may attain to its former Credit and Prosperity.

This is gratefully presented to the Members of this Court, who have always
received and Countenanced Overtures of this kind, and never spared their Pains
upon Views, for the Welfare of these Parts, which has encouraged me to show the
impossibility of this eight Mile Project, and to demonstrate, (in opposition to
the Proverb) that in this Case, the farthest Way about, is not the nearest Way
Home.

AN ANSWER TO SOME OBJECIONS OF HATTON BERNERS, Esquire Against a PAPER Intit'led,
Some REMARKS Concerning the OUTFALS of the Country OF MARSH-LAND, etc.

As also, An ANSWER to his PROPOSALS For a much more speedy and effectual Way
to Drain the Country, than by a New CUT and Natural FALL.

By PETER BATESON.

Printed in the Year 1710.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Berners's OBJECTIONS and PROPOSALS.
Object. 1. UPON digging this New and long Tract, how various the Sorts of
Earth will be; here a stuborn Clay, there a spewing Silt, at another Place a
black Moore and the Red Earth, then Reed-roots and Hassocks, which will often
Founder and slip into the Work.

Answ. To which I Answer: If variety of Earths be an O^bection of any force now
a Days, then it was an Objection of force in those Days, when our Ancestors cut
the old Sewer out of the whole Ground: But, it is plain, that our Ancestors
either looked upon this Objection as altogether trifling and frivolous, or else
it was never urged to 'em; because the old Sewer (for all the Objector knows)
was cut through all these several Sorts of Earth without foundring or slipping
into the Work. In short, the Objection will equally hold against all
Undertakings of this Nature, and therefore cannot affect this in particular.

2d Object. In so long a Drain the Sewer must have many Elbows and crooked
Turns in it, running much slower for its length, and the Obstacles of so many
Bridges, which must necessarily be made over it for the intercourse of the
Inhabitants of the several Towns of this Country, which is to be cut into
halves, (since it is eight Miles long and broad) not to mention the Difficulties
of making the Brink stand, though never so well Sess'd off.

Answ. This is also an Objection in Generals only against all Works of Sewers
of this kind; yet because it seems to consist of several Articles which may be
thought to have some Weight in them, when altogether, if not particularly
Answered, I will therefore beg leave to consider them distinctly.

And first it is Objected, This new Cut must have many Elbows and crooked Turns
in it. To which I Answer; It may be made very near as strait as the Old one, as
may be seen in the Map of Marsh-land hereunto annexed.

The second Particular contained in this Article is, that the length of this
new Cut (it being designed to be eight Miles long) will make the Waters in the
Sewer run much slower. Or (as another Gentleman has put this Objection to me)
when the new Cut has run off five Foot, or five Foot and an half of Water, then
it can carry off no more, because there ought to be six Inches Fall in every
Mile to make the Water Draw. I desire your Patience whilst I Answer both these
Objections as they are put: For a full and clear Answer to both, will convince
Men how false their Notion is, who think, that the longer the Cut is, the more
prejudicial it is to Draining, whereas the quite contrary is really True.

Now the Consideration of the Nature and Properties of Water, in reference to
Draining, to express my self to every Capacity, will very much contribute to
the true understanding of this Matter: And the Properties of it in this
respect, are these two:

First, It naturally Descends when it has Vent and any Fall, though never so
small, insomuch that the least Inclination, though in a Course of many Miles,
will always bring the Waters to the Vent or Outfal.

Secondly, When penned in by stopping the Vent, it naturally comes to a Level.

That the first is true, is plain both from Experience and the natural Reason
of the Thing. For Gool-Keepers, and those that live near to Gools and Sewers
will inform you, that nothing is more common than for the Gools to run and vent
Water, when there is but barely one Inch Fall. Nay, I can prove, that when the
Water in a Drain has had no more than two Inches Fall into the River of Owse;
yet that small Draught was discernible to the Eye near upon a Mile from the
Outfal. And in this Case the Reason of the Thing is exactly agreeable to
Experience and Observation; for when the River gives way, that is, when the
Water in it is lower, than the Water in the Sewer, the Gool-Doors (not
otherwise hindered) must of necessity fly open, because there is a bigger
weight of Water on the Land-side than on the Riverside. And when the Doors are
thus opened, the Waters next those Doors must necessarily descend to Sea,
because it is the Nature and Property of Water so to do: And can any Man
imagine but that those Waters, next to these that marched off first, must
follow after, and so the next to those last till the whole Body of 'em be
moved. And this natural Course of Water is so Constant and Regular, that it was
never known to alter but by a Miracle. I am extremely desirous to make every
Thing plain, Gentlemen, and therefore, I hope, it will not be taken amiss, if,
to illustrate in some Measure what I have already said (though perhaps the
Parallel, in strict Criticism will not hold) I repeat four Lines out of
Hudibras, which are these, For Hudibras wore but one Spur,
As wisely knowing could he stir,
To active Trot one side of's Horse,
The other would not hang an --


The second Thing we were to Consider was, That Water pent up does naturally
come to a Level.

Though they (as I said before) who live near Sewers and Gools, see this
Proposition verified almost every Day; yet for the sake of those, and only
those, who are really ignorant of taking the Fall of Waters, I shall describe
it to 'em, because it will give 'em a true Insight into this Affair. At
Low-water-Mark therefore we take a Pole of sufficient length for our Purpose,
and drive it down into the Sewer on the Land-side of the Gool, but yet so as
there shall be three or four Foot of it above the Superficies of the Water,
then exactly Level with the Superficies we make a Notch upon the Pole:
Immediately upon the shutting of the Sea-Doors, you shall perceive the
Fen-Waters flow above the said Notch, and so they shall rise gradually, till
such time as they come to a perfect Level in the Sewer: And so much as the
Waters rise above the Notch in the Pole, so much is their Fall. It is
observable too, that at Knight's-Gool, the Waters are above three quarters of
an Hour before they come to a Level after the shutting of the Sea-Doors: So
that it is plain, though they have no Vent all that while; yet they are moving
toward their Outfal, till they come to a perfect Level. Be pleased to take
Notice, That the Drain leading to Knight's-Gool, is not much above a Mile
before the Waters are expanded, and yet they move three quarters of an Hour,
and above, to the very Outfal after their stoppage there: So that by parity of
Reason, the Waters in a Drain of eight Miles long between the expanded Waters
and the Outfal, must be moving forwards near upon six Hours after the closing
of the Sea-Doors. I conclude therefore, that the great length of this intended
Cut will rather be Advantageous than Hurtful to us, as to the business of
Draining; because, by that Means the Waters will be almost in continual Motion
to Seaward in one part or other of it, and so be more ready to discharge
themselves as soon as the Sea gives way

The third Particular is, The Obstacles of so many Bridges which must
necessarily be made over this new Cut for the intercourse of the Inhabitants of
the several Towns of this Country.

To which I Answer, Bridges may be made over the Drain so as to have as much
Water-way under them as in any other part of the Drain, and therefore they can
be no Obstacles in Draining. And as for Intercourse, if I mistake not, they
always have been, now are, and hereafter will be built for that very End and
Purpose, which is the Reason we always praise the Bridge we go over.

The fourth Particular is, an Insinuation of some Injury from the Country's
being cut into halves: But this has nothing of Argument in it. It Is certain we
have already lost near one half of it, and by cutting it into halves, we shall
certainly regain what is lost. But if we do not cut it into halves, then we are
in danger of losing the Whole. And supposing the Country should be thus halv'd,
where is the harm of it? Are not two Six pences as good as a Shilling? This
therefore can be no Grievance to any Man, provided Bridges be made in proper
Places, and the Land cut through paid for.

In the fifth Particular is insinuated, the Difficulties of making the Brinks
stand, which, I humbly conceive, may be made to stand by leaving Shelves after
the digging of three or four Foot Perpendicular. The Cut leading to
Wigen-Hall-New-Gool does plainly Demonstrate, that the Brinks will stand (if
well sess'd off, and a Table or Shelf left, as there is) though the Drain be cut
through the highest silty Lands.

3d. Object. The Time it will take to perfect this Work with the 8000 l. it
will Cost, (as Mr. Bateson says) and an Act of Parliament to satisfy all
Interests upon cutting away their Lands. etc. and making Droves to their
Grounds; not that I think the Country would regret any reasonable Charge, upon
the prospect of its doing Service. But grant it possible to Level Hills with
Valleys, (for so it is in many Places) that almost an insupportable Charge will
be entailed upon this Age and Posterity by this new Channel eight Miles long;
since lately the diking out but a part of an old Sewer cost 8 s. per Rod,
besides the Charge of throwing off the Earth.

As did the second, so does this third Objection contain a great many
Particulars drawn together. I crave leave therefore to Examine them separately.

First, It is intimated, (if I rightly understand this Particular) that it will
take a long time to perfect this Work. To which I Answer, If it be once set
about in good Earnest, and with the Objector's Approbation, it may be finished
in twelve Months, which is no great Time, considering the greatness of the
Undertaking.

Secondly, It is intimated the Charge will be very great, seeing I have said,
it will cost 8000 l. In Answer to this, I have already said in my Paper of
Remarks, That the Advantages will abundantly recompense the Costs, the truth of
which will appear by giving you an Estimate of the Losses, which the seven
Towns of Marsh-land have sustained as to their Commons only, computing from
that unfortunate Era, the last great irruption of the Sea to this Time. It is
thought there may be about six thousand Acres drowned in the Fen and Smeth,
which if Drained would, I reckon, be worth a Noble an Acre yearly; this comes
to 2000 l. per Ann. which, multiplied by 38, the number of Years from the Date
abovementioned, would amount to 76000 l. And if I was to set the Price, as a
great many Commoners and Farmers affirm they give for worse Lands than most of
the Fen and Smeth has been, and may be again, viz. a Mark an Acre, the Sum
would amount in the whole to 152000 l. too great a Sum for the Commoners of
Marsh-land to lose without doing the Public any Service. And besides these
immense Sums, the Losses of private Owners of Lands are to be considered, which
it is impossible for me to recount in Particular, though it cannot be denied,
that there are several such, who have been great Sufferers during this
Calamity. To my Knowledge some Persons have lost as much as would have
purchased their Estates, were they now at this Time to be as good as ever they
were known to be. These Things considered, Gentlemen, you will give me leave to
say, it is high time to look out for such Means as may effectually put this
Country in Statu quo. Shall we grudge to lay out 8000 l. Prime Cost, when the
Commons alone, at a Mark an Acre, as some reckon, will bring us in 4000 l. per
Ann. and the private Estates, now lost, near upon as much.

Thirdly, It is objected again, that an Act of Parliament must be had to
satisfy all Interests upon cutting away their Lands, and making Droves to
their Grounds. As to the Charge of an Act of Parliament, I have already
answered that in my Paper of Remarks; and as to private Owners Lands, there
will be but few of them to Purchase, either for the Drain or Droves, because if
my Design be put in Practice, the Cut is to run through Tilney-Drove, which is
a Common that extends it self above half Way, and is also sufficiently wide for
the Purposes abovementioned. I am entirely of the Objector's Opinion, if he
means, that the generality of the Country will not regret any reasonable Charge
upon the Prospect of its doing Service; for I am very well assured from the
great Numbers that have already Petitioned this Court, (and are still ready
with an addition to their Numbers to Petition again, when and where relief may
be had) That the Country in general will heartily fall in with this Project,
having long enough tried the old Way to their great Costs, without answering
their Expectations; though at the same time, I am very sensible there are, and
ever will be in Cases of this Nature, some few, who do regret a reasonable
Charge without any manner of Reason, Equity or Goodness on their sides. As to
the Insinuation, that Hills must be levelled with Valleys, there is no manner of
Occasion for it, only the Drain must be dug to a level Bottom both through
Hills and Valleys, if the Objector will have those words applicable to one of
the most level Countries in the World.

Fourthly, This new Channel of eight Miles long, is Charged with almost an
insupportable Charge to be entailed upon this Age and Posterity, since lately
the Dikeing out of an old Sewer cost eight Shillings per Rod, besides the
Charge of throwing off the Earth. I suppose by this old Sewer is meant the Here
Mr. Berners stood up and said, he did not mean the Smeth-Load; but be it any
other Load or Drain, I conceive the Objection will not mightily affect the Case.
Smeth-Load, which every one knows, had not been Dik'd for a great many Years
past, till that dry Summer in which it was Scower'd: But who knows not that the
long neglect of it was the Occasion it was filled full of Slough and Dirt?
Which proved worse by far to clear, than if a new Sewer of the same Breadth and
Depth had been made out of the whole Ground. But when our new Sewer is
finished, it will never come to that pass, unless the whole Country be
swallowed up (as now near half of it is) with Waters. And I am really persuaded
it will be a very easy Charge to keep it in good Order, provided every Town
have its particular Allotment in it, to be done by their own proper Officers. I
presume also to say, that whenever this Design shall be accomplished (as I am
in hopes it shortly will) notwithstanding the unreasonable Opposition of its
Adversaries, our Posterity (if grateful) will bless their Fathers Memories.

4th Object. The gauging at Sea, and the Inland-Waters seems most doubtful,
since the height of the Freshes is often succeeded by Droughts, and the Outfals
even at old Lyn are deep or shallow, according to the set of Ebb and Tide
agitated by the Winds; besides the Marshes where this new Cut is Designed, as I
am told, and is visible, are above three Feet higher than the Level. So that
the digging there, must be nearer the Antipodes than in other Places, or force
the Waters up Hill.

Answ. To the first part of this Objection, That my Method of making the
Experiments by gauging the Tides and the Fenn-Waters, seems to be most
doubtful; I Answer, It seems to be certain; because I have tried it several
times since I first offered my Remarks to this Court, and, both in the dry and
wet Seasons, I found it to answer our Purpose. However, since I first informed
this Court of my Experiments, this worthy Gentlman has had sufficient time to
disprove 'em (if he could have done it) by some of his own Experiments. I leave
it to your Judgments, Gentlemen, whether this be a fair Way of confuting
Experiments, by objecting, Magisterially, it seems most doubtful. For at this
rate a Man may avoid the force of the strongest Arguments, and most glaring
Truths in the World.

To the Second; That the Outfal of old Lyn is deeper or shallower, according to
the Wind's agitating the Waters. I Answer; Let the Winds agitate the Waters
never so much, yet ever since Captain Wilshaw and my Self made these Trials at
Lyn and Knight's-Gool, they always answered Expectation: And besides, where I
have designed the Outfal to be (but always with submission to this Court) the
Ebb and Tide both set continually, which will be a very great Advantage to the
Outfal, by reason the Gool-Doors will always open, as Occasion serves, without
any Trouble or Charge Extraordinary.

To the last part of this Objection, which shows the Objector's Tenderness
toward our Antipodes. I Answer; The Cut is designed to be carried with a level
Bottom all the way through, and I have already shown how the Brinks may be made
to stand through the highest parts of Marsh-land; and if so, then I see no
reason why we should be afraid of digging nearer the Antipodes: Surely they
will not hurt us, and sure I am we shall not harm them, and so pass we on to
consider his Proposals.

1st Propos. That it be the Care of the Officers of the Country, and that they
be enjoined and encouraged by their Winter Circuits, to keep out all Foreign
Waters, which run without any Law into Marsh-land, which was constantly given
in Charge by our Ancestors, and to reinforce the Law of this Court of the 20th
of King James, for erecting two Houses at distances upon the old Po-dike for
Laborers to live in, to prevent the cutting of it, by which the downfall of
five thousand Acres run into the Fen continually, when as we can run out but
four Hours in twelve at the River.

Answ. This Proposal is consistent with my Design, only I must needs say, that
the Dike-reeves of the several Towns of Marsh-land have ruined the old Po-dike
by digging up the Skirts of it, to heighten it in the middle: So that indeed,
it can no longer be called the old Po-dike-Bank, but the Stinting or Cradgen
belonging to the old Po-dike. To remedy which Abuse, I humbly offer this Method
of repairing it, viz. That Wigenhall be first obliged to make Good that part of
the old Po-dike belonging to it (if it be not already good enough) for Carts to
carry Silt from the River at Slow-Bridge to the next Charge, which I think is
Tilney, and so on to the other Adjoystments in Course. This Silt mixed with the
Moor, has been experienced to make a better Bank than any Earth whatever; nay
it will be found to bind almost as hard as Gravel it self. Then the two Houses
(as here proposed) may be Built, but till then sufficient Foundations will
hardly be found for 'em at due Distances.

2d. Propos. That Lords-Bridge be lengthened by those who have Privilege to set
one Net there, being the first Bridge through which the Freshes in a strait
Line descend to the Owze, and that the great Letts, Stops, and Annoyances, by
laying Gregs and Fish-Trunks cross the great Drain be removed, and the Nets
with the diverse sorts of Impediments upon Islington-Common be taken away.

Answ. The former part of this Proposal is not well grounded; because it puts
the Lady, the Owner of the Bridge, upon an unnecessary Charge, seeing there is
twenty Foot Water-way there, and five Foot Water-way at Waterlesue-Tunnel,
which is five and twenty Foot of Water-way in breadth at the very place
complained of, when at the very same time, both the Gools themselves do carry
off no more than fifteen Foot in breadth. As to the removing the other Letts,
Stops, Annoyances, Gregs, Fish-Trunks, and Nets, the Laws already in being are
of force Sufficient.

3d Propos. That two substantial Engines or Mills be placed upon the great
Load, which is very strait, and but a Mile and half from the Neck of
Marsh-land-Fen to the two Goats or Gools, which by the Experience of our next
Neighbors, and our Friends Abroad, has been very successful to ride the Waters
at Sea, by raising and hastening the Freshes thither, for which a Law of this
Court was to have been provided.

Answ. To which I Answer, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur; But I shall make
it appear, that 32 Engines of 450 l. a piece cannot by far vent so much Water
as a Cut of thirty Foot wide at the Bottom, with a natural Fall of eight Foot.
An Engine of 450 l. price, shall have a Water-wheel of sixteen Foot Diameter,
it shall dip four Foot, and raise four Foot, but will scarce carry off three
Foot of Water from the Grounds surrounded. And it is known, that according to
the Rules of Art, the Skuppets of such an Engine dipping so deep, ought to be a
Foot and an half broad. Place then sixteen of these Engines upon the same
Height or Level, and then reckon what they will carry off, and you will find 24
Foot in Breadth; after this, count what height they can raise the Water, which
I told you was barely four Foot. Now it must always be remembered, that upon
placing your Engines to gain an artificial Fall, you put by your Natural one,
by making your Engines do the work of Nature. So that these sixteen Engines
will have but four Foot Fall, and can carry off no more than three Foot of
Water from the Level to be Drained, because the Skuppets, when they have but
one Foot to dip in, can throw no Water at all. What then must be done with the
remaining three Foot of Water in the lowest parts of Marsh-land? Why, you must
clap down sixteen Engines more of the same bigness, to raise it to the first
Sixteen: But still you must consider the Fall will be no more than you had
before, viz. four Foot. It Is true, by this Means you may carry off six Foot of
Water: But then let us compare this Artificial and my natural Fall together.
The Artificial one will carry off a Body of Water of four Foot in depth and 24
Foot in breadth continually whilst the Engines Work, and no longer: But the
Natural One, as proposed, will carry off a Body of 30 Foot in breadth, (and
more by reason of the sloping of the Drain) and 8 Foot in depth till such time
as the Water shrinks in the low Grounds, and then the Fall, it is true, must
decrease as the Water shrinks; yet still, for all that, this Natural Fall shall
be better than your forced One; because the first will vent your Waters
sleeping and waking, as they say, whilst the last must sometimes wait a
Fortnight, perhaps a Month for a brisk Gale of Wind, during which intermission,
the Waters in a wet Season must of necessity increase: And here I woul'd
observe to you, that all these Engines thus disposed, cannot possibly Here Mr.
Berners said, he did not mean the Engines should ride the Tide, though it is plain
he said the Waters at Sea.
ride the Tide; for sometimes the Spring Tides shall rise at Knight's-Gool 13
or 14 Foot, and how will the Engines be able to Work against such a vast Head
of Water: No, at such a time your Engines cannot run the Water out to Sea above
6 Hours, supposing a Wind, and it is confessed, even by this Gentleman himself,
that the Natural Fall we already have, runs four. Again, when the Gool Doors
are shut, and there happens (as it often will happen) to be a Wind sufficient
for your Engines, you have not a Receptacle sufficient for your Waters, so that
the Engines must be gentle Spectators till the Sea gives Way, and then perhaps
there is a Calm. And we have but too much reason to fear the Winds will not be
commanded when we stand in the greatest need of 'em. The Sum of what I have
said about Engines, Gentlemen, is this, That two and thirty of 'em, of 450 l. a
piece, cannot possibly utter so much Water as a Cut of 30 Foot wide at the
Bottom: And I am sure so many Engines will be much more chargeable than the Cut
as Designed: For the Prime Cost of these Whirligiggs will amount to 14400 l.
whereas the Prime Cost of a natural Drain, will not much exceed half the said
Sum. I shall not need to tell you, that such a number of Machines will require
a great many Mill-wrights to repair 'em, a great many Millers to tend 'em, a
whole Forest of Wood to supply their daily Wants, abundance of Iron, Sails
without Number: All which Clutter will cost the Country above 1600 l. a Year to
maintain 'em, and may be avoided by a natural Drain. Before I dismiss this
Argument, I cannot (no more than the Learned Objector could) pass by the
Experience of our next Neighbors and our Friends abroad, which I think ought
rather to induce us to accept of a Natural Fall, and to look upon it as a
peculiar Happiness that we can have one to do our business Effectually. Amongst
our Neighbors, consider the Engine at Tidd St. Giles, which cost 450 l. has a
vast Receptacle for its Waters, and but 2400 Acres to Drain, and yet cannot do
it Effectually, the Land-Owners having since erected another for the same
Purpose. What a wild Fancy is it then, think you, to propose two Engines to
cope with 40000 Acres. Be pleased to take notice further, That both these
Engines are not to cost above 400 l. according to the Proposal: For the sinking
of the Gool will swallow up the other 400 l. I stand amazed to think, that an
ingenious Gentleman, and one who understands the Affairs of Marsh-land, as
well, if not better than his Neighbors, should publish these following Words
in Print to the World, viz. These Things being accomplished, i. e. The four
Proposals, assisted by the South and South-West Winds, it is more than probable,
that for the Expense of fewer hundred Pounds, than Mr. Bateson says Thousands,
for a new Cut of 8 Miles cross the Country; this Angle may become (as formerly)
the Envy of some other Places, and by the soundness of their Commons, the
Profits of their Severals, the Healthfulness of their Climate, the goodness of
their Highways, and their ease of Acre-shots may attain to its former Credit
and Prosperity. These are fine specious and amusing Things spoken, yet such as
may effectually be brought to pass by a Natural Drain; but I think I have
proved, that the Winds, and two Wind-mills, etc. can never accomplish 'em.

Now let us consider our Friends abroad, by whom, as I take it, are meant the
Dutch: And can any Man think, that those industrious and thrifty People would
have recourse to Art, if their Country could be Drained Naturally? Dugdale
says, That within the space of these last fifty Years (reckoning to the time he
writ in) they had Drained sundry Lakes, whereof 16 were most Considerable, by
certain Wind-mills devised and erected for that Purpose. The chiefest of which
Lakes called the Beemster, (containing above 1800 Acres) is made dry by the
help of threescore and ten Engines; which Expense we may be sure they would
never have been at for 1800 Acres, if they could have had a Natural Fall, as we
may have for the whole Country.

4th Propos. That the Sole of the old Gool be sunk 2 Foot, being its old
Foundation; and that the new Jetty at Islington-shore be forthwith Rooted up,
being set down for the particular Interest of one Town only, and that by an
Order only; it having been exclaimed against as the chief Cause of silting the
String, and choking the Mouth of the old Gool, and has made the new Gool very
sickly and chargeable, at which Passengers Smile, as well as the Engineer from
Portsmouth, when Complaint was made to him of the Outfals; asking what it did
there.

To this I Answer. The sinking of the Gool to the old Foundation, can be of no
Service to the Country, unless the ingenious Proposer could find a way to
scour the River to the old Bottom: I say, it will be time enough in this Case
to undo what others upon due Deliberation have done, when the River has
actually regained its ancient Channel, which it is impossible ever to do, so
long as Denver-Sluces are in being, and Jetties are wanting on each side of the
River to straiten some Parts of it between German's-Bridge and Lyn-Haven.
Surely the Country will never yield to this part of the Proposal, whilst the
River continues thus, when, it is plain, not one single Rood of Land in the
whole compass of Marsh-land will be the better for so doing.

The second part of this Objection is, That the new Jetty at Islington-shore be
forthwith rooted up* By all Means; let us lose no time, let us make all the have
we can to our own Destruction. For this new Jetty (as the Proposer is pleased
to call a piece of the old Sea-Bank repaired) is the Safeguard of the whole
Country of Marsh-land, and it would be much more for the Security of it, if
there were Jetties all along that Shore where the Bank anciently stood. Any one
that knows this present Inbank, must own the Country to be but slenderly
Guarded, seeing there is no Back to the Bank, but all a very low Country behind
it. In short, this Jetty seems to stand upon the same Foundation with part of
the old Sea-Bank, and if the Owners of the Jetty insist upon it as such, and it
really proves to be so, I can see no manner of Reason we have forthwith to root
it up. But granting it to be no other than a new Jetty, I will demonstrate to
this Court (with your leave, Gentlemen) That long before the setting of it
down, Knight's-Gool was liable to be often silted up an hundred Years ago, nay
probably ever since it was a Gool. These are Dugdale's Words transcribed
verbatim. After this (says he) at another Session of Sewers, held on the 17th
day of April, in the Year of our Lord 1610, (8 Jac.) It being considered that
this Country of Marsh-land was subject to surrounding, as well by downfals of
Rain, as by the overflowing of the Sea and Fresh Waters; and was therefore kept
drained by Sewers, descending to Knights-Gool (the common Outfall of the great
River of Owse) and that the said Gool, by the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea,
was then so silted up with Sand at diverse times, especially in Summer, that it
obstructed the Waters in the said Sewers, to the utter surrounding of all the
Fens and low Grounds in the said Country: And moreover, that the said Gool in
former Time had been kept and perfected, as also the Fleet from the same, unto
the before specified River, by a certain ancient pair of Clows, placed up
higher in the Sewer thereby: One appointed for the taking in of the Tides, and
so holding up the Water between a pair of Clows, until the River of Owse was
run Low; and then forcibly let go for the scouring of Sand out of the said
Gool. So that, Gentlemen, you perceive 'twas said at that time, which was in
1610, that the Sewer, the Gool, and the Fleet were kept and perfected, and
scowr'd from the Sand by forcibly letting go the Waters contained between a
certain Ancient pair of Clows. It is more than probable therefore, that this
Misfortune of silting up has attended Knight's-Gool ever since it was a Gool or
Goat. And therefore this Jetty may stand, seeing the pulling of it up will
endanger the whole Country of Marsh-land; and besides, when it is rooted up (as
the term of Art is) the String of the Gool will still be silted up, as is
evident from my Author's Words, and the Situation of that Gool placed at too
great a distance from the Channel of the Owse. I hope no one can say, that the
Jetty is the Occasion of silting up the bottom of the River, nay, I dare say,
this Gentleman, himself, will not give that as a Reason for the rooting of it
up forthwith. Consider therefore, I beseech you, what small Grounds and Reasons
they had, who have so long exclaimed against this Jetty. As for those smiling
Passengers, and that smiling Engineer from Portsmouth, I shall only say, that
if they laughed at the Jetty, they laughed at what they did not Understand: If
they laughed at the poor old Gool for being Choked, or the new Gool for being
very sickly, they were not only very hard-hearted, but very uncivil, seeing
they have neither given us a Receipt for their Cure; nor shown us some more
effectual easy Way for the Draining of Marsh-land, which, I humbly conceive, I
have since done.

These following CERTIFICATES sufficiently Demonstrate, that Two substantial
Engines can be of no Service for the Effectual Draining of the Country of
MARSH-LAND.
The Certificate of Edward Dampson of Tidd St. Giles.
I Do hereby Certify, that the first Engine at Tidd St. Giles cost to old
Colton 450 l. and has been Built about 13 or 14 Years. Since the Building of
this Engine, it has cost the Land-Owners, which paid to it, and the Drains
belonging to it, seven and twenty Shillings and ten Pence halfpenny an Acre.
There are about 2150 Acres which pay to it, both in Tidd St. Giles and Newton;
but notwithstanding this great Charge, this Mill was found to be insufficient
for Draining these Lands, and for keeping the Outfal to Sea open, which every
Year was so silted up, that though it raised 4* Foot of Water; yet was
insufficient to keep the said Outfal open at all times, though Leverington old
Mill at the same time threw the same quantity of Water with it into the same
Drain and Outfal; so that about 5 Years ago the Land-Owners of Tidd St. Giles
and Newton, were necessitated to erect another Engine, which has cost them near
upon 500 l. from that time, and still the Outfal to Sea is often stopped up with
Silt, as before; so that they are obliged notwithstanding this extraordinary
Charge, to make use of Scaven-Men and Spade-Men to cleanse the String to
Seawards at certain times; and upon the erecting of this last Mill, Leverington
also did last Year build another Engine to fling the Water into the same Drain.

I reckon both these Engines for Tidd and Newton Low-lands, being 2150 Acres,
or thereabouts, will cost one Year with another, one Shilling an Acre, which is
107 l. 10 s. a Year. Witness my Hand,

December 6, 1709. Edward Dampson.

December 6, 1709. The Certificate of Thomas Gunthorp, who has for many Years
lived near the Goats or Gools of Buckworth's-Drain and Shire-Drain.
The Waters of the Low-lands of Leverington, Newton, and Tidd St. Giles are
flung by 4 large Engines into a Drain called Buckworth's-Drain, which has its
Sluice near to Shire-Drain-Sluce. The String of Buckworth's-Drain to Seaward, is
about 300 Foot in length, after which it joins with the String of Shire-Drain,
and so the united Stream of both Strings runs into Wisbeech-River. Now I do
certify, That three of these Engines have been set up for some Years past (the
fourth being but lately erected) and yet for all that a great Number of
Spade-men, sometimes near 30, have been frequently employed to clear the String
even of the united Stream. And I do further certify, that the said sstring of
^00 Foot belonging to Buckwort^s-Drain has been often silted up, since the
Erection of the 3 abovementioned Engines; so that several Workmen with their
Spades and Scavens have actually several times thrown the Silt out of the said
300 Foot of String before the Engines could run the least drop of Water to Sea.
Witness my Hand,

Thomas Gunthorp.



Dampson was imployd by Mr. Trafford for 9 or 10 Years together, in gathering
the Rates for the Mill, and Gunthorp has lived for a great many Years near
Shire-Drain-Sluce, and Buckworth's-Drain-Sluce.

1. It is observable from Dampsons Certificate, That one Engine alone has in 13
Years time, cost very near 3000 l. and that what belongs to both of them, as
Repairs and Tendance, etc. will be a yearly Charge of 107 l. 10 s.

2. It is observable from Dampson's and Gunthorp's Certificates, that
notwithstanding the great Height which three of these Engines raise the Waters
in the same Drain: Yet they are forced to employ great numbers of Men to open
the String of the Drain to Seawards.

3. It is observable from Dampson's Certificate, That there are no more than
2150 Acres which pay to these Mills: and he told me that there might be about
200 Acres of Common Droves, etc. which did not pay; so that the whole Extent of
Grounds to be Drained by two of the Engines is scare 2400 Acres.

Quaere, Whether (these Things considered) it be worth the while for the
Country of Marsh-land to lay out 900 or 1000 l. upon two Engines, and 4 or 500
l. upon sinking the Gool, and to be at a yearly Charge of 107 l. 10 s. besides
sinking the Interest of 14 or 1500 l. And all this Expense to keep the said
Country in the same Condition it is now in.

Quaere, Or whether it be better to lay out 8000 l. to Drain the Country
Effectually, as the following Certificate of the Surveyors will make it appear
a new Cut will, viz.

November. 4, 1709. I Levelled from Knight's-Gool down about half a Mile below
Old-Lyn, and there was better than 9 Foot Fall at Low-Water-Mark, and the
People there did affirm, That the Low-Water-Mark, at a Springtide, is deeper
by 2 Foot: And I do also Certify, that the Water in Marsh-land-Fen was but 5
Foot deep in the deepest part of it. Wit. my Hand, Will. Newling.

To conclude all, I do Affirm, and will Demonstrate it to any Man of common
Sense, that the Design of raising the Water, and so running to Sea at the same
time, that the Water shall naturally run to Sea in the same Drain, is
impracticable. My meaning is, That the Water through the designed penned Doors
cannot Naturally run to Sea at the same time that the Engines do run, if the
Engines do raise the Water above the Level of the Fen.

FINIS.

