THE EXPERIMENT: OR, THE Shortest Way with the Dissenters EXEMPLIFIED. Being
the CASE of Mr. Abraham Gill, a Dissenting Minister in the Isle of Ely, AND A
Full Account of his being sent for a SOLDIER, by Mr. Fern (an Ecclesiastical
Justice of Peace) and other CONSPIRATORS.

To the Eternal Honor of the Temper and Moderation of High Church Principles.

Humbly Dedicated to the QUEEN

London, Printed: And Sold by B. Bragg, at the Blue-Ball in Ave-Mary-Lane.
MDCCV.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THis Dedication is not so much a Compliment to your Person, as an Appeal to
your Justice.

Your Protestant Dissenting Subjects have your Sacred Promise of Protection,
they behaving themselves Dutifully and Peaceably to your Government, and
Obedient to the Laws: And, Madam, as they cannot be so ignorant of their own
Happiness under your gentle Government, or so blind to their own Interest as to
forfeit your Favor by any breach of their Duty; so they cannot doubt of the
full Performance on your Majesty's part, of all that your Majesty has been
graciously pleased to assure them of under the Sanction of your Royal Word.

The Toleration of their religious Liberty has been secured to them by Law; and
your Majesty has been pleased to add to the Force of that Law your Royal Word,
that it shall be inviolably preserved.

Your Majesty's Protestant Dissenting Subjects lay at your Feet the following
Relation, with all Humility appealing to your Royal Judgment, whether both
their Toleration is not herein violently invaded, and your Majesty's Honor and
sacred Promise at least attempted to be violated in the illegal arbitrary
Methods made use of to oppress one of their Ministers, and suppress an Assembly
of several Hundreds of your Loyal and Peaceable Dissenting Subjects.

They remonstrate, and in the humblest manner Complain to your Majesty of the
Violence and horrid Practices made use of to Defame, Persecute, Imprison and
Ruin a Man, whose principal visible Crime is Serving God according to his
Conscience, and Teaching the same to others. They humbly present themselves at
your Royal Feet, as wounded through the sides of this injured Person, and are
your Majesty's humble Petitioners, that you will be graciously pleased to
testify your Dislike of the Oppressions and Injustice of their Enemies, in
such manner as to your great Wisdom shall seem meet.

In your Majesty's Favor and Justice they hope for exemplar Animadversions on
these unchristian Practices, and have a full Confidence in your Royal Promise,
that they shall not be abridg'd of nor ill treated for that Liberty, which
being settled first by the Laws of God and Nature, and since that by the Laws
of this Land, is their legal Right, and which your Majesty's just Sense of its
Reasonableness has moved you to resolve to maintain.

They humbly commit themselves and their Cause to your Majesty's Protection,
imploring your Royal Regard so far and no farther as every Article advanced in
their behalf in this Book is positively and exactly conformable to Truth and
direct Meaning, being at all times ready to come forth and confront, even in
your Royal Presence, all the Allegations to the contrary.

Having thus publicly appealed to God and your Majesty, they can no longer
Doubt either of the Blessing from above, or the Protection and Assistance of
your Majesty below: and as your Throne has been a famous Refuge to apprest
Innocence and Virtue in all Nations, so they doubt not but your own Subjects
shall yet have the Honor and Happiness of your powerful Protection as far as
Justice and Law is on their side.

Nor are they the less confident of your Majesty's Protection for their
differing in Judgment from some few Points professed and practiced by the
Church of England of which your Majesty is the glorious Head, since the Evils
they complain of are suffered not from the Church of England as such, whom they
honor, and with whom they covet to live in Charity, Union, and Peace, but by
ill Men, who making the Church, Religion, and the Honor of God their Pretense,
have broken all the Laws of God, Nature, Humanity, and their Native Country, in
a most unheard of and unaccountable manner, to the Reproach of the Protestant
Religion in general, and to the Scandal of the Church they pretend themselves
Members of.

Neither your Majesty nor the Church of England will be offended at us for
endeavoring to bring our Actions to the Test of the Law, and for seeking the
Protection of your Royal Justice.

Your Majesty oppresses none of your Subjects, the Doctrine of the Church of
England has been declared to be inconsistent with Persecution; the Actions of
these Men therefore, however sheltered under your Authority and the Wings of
the Church, will appear to your Majesty affrontive of your Goodness, and highly
derogating from the Christian Spirit the Church of England professes: the Truth
of which, we humbly submit to Your Majesty's. Wisdom to Discover, and to your
Justice to Resent, as you shall find Cause,

And are, etc.

Lately Published,
THE Double Welcome: A Poem to the Duke of Marlborough. By the Author of The
True-born Englishman. Sold by B. Bragg, at the Blue-Ball in Ave-Mary-Lane.

INTRODUCTION.
IN the unhappy Differences between the High-Church Party and the Dissenters,
it has happened, as it generally does in all Heats and Animosities of Parties,
that both Sides pretend to be in the right, and both pretend to be abused by
the other.

The warm Men of the Church have charged the Dissenters with Associating to
Destroy and Undermine the Church. How they have made good their Charge, is not
the business of this Paper, and has been examined elsewhere.

The Dissenters charge the other with Insulting them, Persecuting them, and
Invading their Toleration.

Great Endeavors have been used to defend the Occasional Bills from a Charge
of Persecution: and whether they have done that or no, we need not dispute, but
refer to the Conferences on that Head between the Houses, and which are
published in Print.

But to leave all doubtful Cases to stand and fall by the Force of their own
Truth, I cannot think the World ought to be ignorant of the following Story;
that all unbiased People may see, by this Specimen, what these Gentlemen would
do with the Dissenters if it lay in their power, and how justly they have been
charged with designs to Hang, Banish, and Destroy the Dissenters, and reward
their Ministers with the Gallows and the Galleys.

And because I am going to present the World with a new Devil of Loudon, with a
Story so black in all its Parts, so much the Picture of Hell, and so aggravated
with inhumane and unchristian Circumstances, that all that read it must blush
for their Native Country, to think such unheard of Villainies could be acted in
it, Crimes so abhorred by Mankind, that though they call themselves of the
Church, we shall find all the true Members of the Church, whether Judges,
Justices, Bishops, yea even Jaylors themselves, abhorring it: while, I say, I
have such a Scene before me, and knowing what sort of People I have to do with,
I shall take such an exact care to have every thing that is here advanced so
attested with undeniable Evidence, that Impudence it self, not the hellish
Actors, not the blindest Advocates, not the Devil himself, shall dare to Reply
to it.

Slander and Lies fly befoe Truth as Mist before the Sun; and this hellish
Association, formed against an innocent Man, though laid as deep as Hell, and
prosecuted through all the barbarous Extremes of Forgery, Perjury, Violence,
Subornation, Insults, and Revenge, yet at last all dwindles away before Truth:
Innocence breaks out like the Sun through a dark Cloud, the Light of Truth is so
clear, that Devils shun it, Monsters fly from it, and Men of Guilt and Blood
hide their Heads at its appearance.

And as I should not have attempted this Relation, had I not had good and
undoubted Testimony of the Truth of every Article, so I write with the greater
Assurance, since I can frankly defy the most hardened Advocate of such a
wretched Cause to confront the least or minutest Circumstance.

Such direct Testimony, such just Authorities, such authentic Proofs of every
Article, are before me, that no Man could ever desire to have his Reputation
vindicated with more. Clearness in the Face of the Sun.

As for the Treatment this poor injured Man has met with, I would be glad the
worst Enemy in the Nation would give it a Name, and tell us, wiht some little
Reason at the same time, what to call it.

I would have them rummage Fox's History of the Popish Persecutions, and tell
us where they can match the Usage this Man has met with; and let us know where
ever Bishop Gardener, or bloody Bonner, acted like These Men.

Let them show us such an Ecclesiastical Magistrate as Parson Eern, and where
ever Englishmen have been thus treated.

Well might the Parliament pass a Bill to qualify Justices of the Peace. If
this be the fruit of putting Church Parsons into Commissions of the Peace,
never let Hudibras tell us of the Cobbler of New England, who Served his Country
in a double
Capacity, to Preach and Cobble.


To let the Reader gradually into this black Story, it is necessary to inform
him, that in several public Printed Books, as well as in common Discourse, the
Town has been possessed with a Story of a Dissenting Minister in the Isle of
Ely, who first forged Episcopal Orders, and preached in the Church; but being
detected in that, pretended Classical Ordination, and set up a Conventicle; but
being prosecuted as a scandalous Fellow, having two or three Wives, four or
five Bastards, having once broke out of Derby Jayl, played a great many
villainous Pranks, and being a common Drunkard and Swearer, the Justices took
him up as a Vagabond, listed him for a Soldier, and sent him away to Cambridge,
where having been Arrested for Debt, and thereby got out of the Officer's
hands: some Complaints being made by the Dissenters at the Injustice of this --
The Party greet them, by way of Answer, with prodigious Calumnies, and insolent
Reproaches of the Man himself, to vindicate the most villainous unheard of
Proceedings that ever this Nation knew.

And as the abominable Insolence of their Actions happened to receive a due
Censure from the best Lord Chief Justice, and of the most unspotted Character
this Age has known; let us see how this Person, as well as the poor Sufferer,
is treated on this account by that Man of Fury and Satyr, Mr. D^ in the Preface
to his Lampoon, called, Moderation Displayed.

Inveighing against our Men of Moderation in the Church, he says, "Nay, so
tender are they of their Dissenting Brethren, that I am told it has lately been
delivered as Law by a great Man in W^hall, That a notorious perjured Vagabond,
with two Wives at once, being possessed of a separate Congregation, though without
any License or legal Qualification to preach to them, shall, for that reason
only, be exempt from the late Act for Listing Vagrants."

Now if, upon reading these Sheets, it should so fall out, that after all that
has been done or said to or of this poor injured Man, it should appear too
plain for the most hardened Lampooner or most impudent Church-Justice to deny,
that this is all Malice, Forgery, and Injustice, and, as all the Judges of the
Queen's-Bench expressed it, the deepest Track of Villainy that ever came before
them; What will these Men say for themselves, and how will they make
Satisfaction to God or Man, to the affronted Dissenters, to their own exposed
Party, and to the poor injured Man that has been inhumanely treated?

If, after all their Clamor and barbarous Orders, I make it appear, that this
Man never broke out of Derby or any other Jayl, never forged any Orders, but
was fairly ordained by a Church of England Bishop, ws never Perjured, or a
Vagabond, had never two Wives at once, nor any Bastards, was never seen to be
Drunk, or known to Swear; but that, on the contrary, has been always a sober,
virtuous, and peaceable Liver, a constant Resident at his Cure for eleven or
twelve Years together, a Man of Charity and good Conversation, and, in short,
not in the least guilty of one of the Crimes charged on him, but that it has
been all Forgery, Malice, and Conspiracy to ruin him, merely for his quitting
the Church, and turning to the Dissenters.

If this should happen to be made out, as I fairly undertake it shall, I crave
Leave to draw these two Inferences;

1. Those Dissenters who too hastily believed, and too readily handed on the
Clamours and Slanders against an innoceut Man, through whose Sides they were
all wounded and aimed it, ought to acknowledge their want of Consideration and
Caution. It Is true, it may be said, in their Excuse, they could not have
imagined the Earth had borne such Monsters, and that such a Cloud of Clamours
could never be all forged; and therefore, in Charity to the Churchmen, they
were drawn in to Censure an Innocent Man, for which they ought to ask his
Pardon; and restoring him to their just Opinion, more diligently guard, for the
future, his injured Reputation.

2. As to the Forgers of all this, and the Authors of a Treatment too foul to
relate, and blacker than the Ink I write it with, I leave their Character to
season the Palate of the Reader, after he has been filled with Horror at some
of the most villainous Actions the World ever heard of. The Matter of Fact is
as follows.

The CASE of Mr. ABRAHAM GILL, etc.
ABraham Gill, the Subject of the ensuing Tragedy, was a Minister of the Church
of England; He was born in Rivington in the County of Lancaster, had his
Education partly among the Dissenters, but last of all in the University of
Oxford, where he commenced Bachelor of Arts of Brazen-Nose College.

From whence Conforming to the Church of England, he entered into Holy Orders,
and was admitted by the present Right. Reverend the Bishop of Chester.

And because his Enemies have had the face to Charge him with forging the
Bishop's Orders, We think it necessary, that we may clear every thing as we go
along, having abundance of dark things to expose and Hellish Conduct to lay
open, to draw this Scene before we proceed, and to tell them, that the very
Original Orders, Signed by the Bishop of Chester's own Hand, and Sealed with
his Seal, is left with the rest of the Vouchers of this horrid Transaction, at
Mr. John Skey's Tobacconist, at the Black-boy and Three Tobacco-pipes at
Queenhithe, where all the World, Friends or Enemies, are promised a free and
uninterrupted Opportunity to see them, and detect the Forgeries if they are to
be found.

And that it may not be alleged, this Freedom of offering a sight of the
Originals is but a presumptive Proof, supposing no Man will trouble himself to
examine them, ( though the Willingness of some Gentlemen to expose the Dissenters
in this honest Man's Cause suggests otherwise) yet eternally to stop the Mouth
of the most prepossessed Malice, a Reverend Clergyman of their own Church is
to be found, honest enough to do Justice to an injured Man, and give a Sanction
to the Truth.

This Gentleman is one who entered into Orders with Mr. Gill, and five Ministers
more at the same time, and has honestly sworn it: which Affidavit is left also
with the rest of the Vouchers at the Place aforesaid. And now if these Orders
are Counterfeit or Forged, it may fairly be seen, and Mr. Gill be exposed; but
if not, let the World match the villainous Usage this poor Man has met with, if
they can.

After this Demonstration of the Certainty and undoubted Truth of his Orders,
it is humbly desired of all those Gentlemen that shall for the future charge him
with forging Episcopal Orders, that they would be pleased to show their Faces,
that we may see if they do not blush; and that they would tell us their Names,
that after some few Examples of this sort made for Satisfaction to Justice and
the Law out of the great Number of those that are already detected, they may be
recorded, as they deserve, among those that bear false Witness against their
Neighbors.

To proceed to the History of Mr. Gill: After he had thus entered into Orders,
he preached as Curate at Maney in the Isle of Ely, about 12 Miles from Wisbich.

While he Officiated in this Place, he was well received and beloved of his
Congregation; and we never find any Complaint made of him, save that he set an
ill Example to his Neighbors of the Clergy, by invading the Custom of the
Country, and Preaching twice a day to the People.

Having been two Years in Maney, he received an Invitation from the Inhabitants
of Welney, or Welneth, a Hamlet in the Parish of Upwell in the same County, to
preach in a certain Privileged Independent Chapel in this Parish; the Right of
the Place empowering the Inhabitants to choose their own Minister.

After long and earnest Solicitations from the Inhabitants of Wilney, and with
the Consent of his former Hearers, he agreed to go to Wilney, and accordingly
went and settled with his Family in the Parsonage-house or Tenement belonging
to the said Chapel.

The Freedom with which the Inhabitants of Wilney invited Mr. Gill to be their
Curate, appeared in their cheerful assisting him in his Removal thither, and
preparing a Feast for his Reception; all the Neighbors in general meeting him
to bid him Welcome.

About a Fortnight or Three-weeks after his Settlement at Wilney, the Reverend
Dr. Gregg, Rector of Upwell, came to pay him a Visit, thanked him for coming to
the said Chapel, and declared that he was glad his Parishioners were like to be
so well served.

In this Chapel Mr. Gill continued about seven Years, viz. from the Year 1695
to the Year 1702, Preaching twice a day, and Conforming in all things to the
Usage of the Church of England. But in process of Time being dissatisfied in
his Conscience at the Use of the Liturgy, he began at several times to omit
such part of the Service as he disliked; till at last his Scruples increasing,
he wholly omitted the Common Prayer, applying himself only to the Pulpit, and
conceiving he was not under equal Obligation as if Preaching in a
Parish Church, the Chapel he preached in being wholly Independent, a Privileged
Place, and in the Power of the People.

As this was the Original of all the subsequent Malice of the Church-Clergy,
and of the barbarous Proceedings of which we are to give an Account; so they
are hereby fairly challenged to produce one Shadow of a Crime in his Behavior,
which, Humane Frailty excepted, appears wholly blameless, and which we shall
produce such Testimonials to justify, as few of the Clergy of the Church can
produce more, and such as indeed no honest Man need desire better.

If this Offense were as great as they would suppose it to be, it yet admits of
much to be said in Extenuation; as, I. His Scruples of Conscience, which would
not permit him to continue the Exercise of the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, at
least not in all parts; 2. His officiating in a private Independent Chapel, in
which, as before, he thought himself not obliged to an exact and complete
Conformity.

But, to oblige our Adversary, we'll suppose it as heinous a Crime as they can
pretend to, yet they will have enough to do to make it out that their
Proceedings with him have been legal, rational, just, or humane: And for the
Truth of this Suggestion, we refer to the Particulars, and freely make all
unprejudiced Members of their own Church the Judges: this Independency of the
Chapel of Wilney will in some measure appear as follows.

Dr. Gregg, the Rector of Upwell, understanding that Mr. Gill omitted the
Common Prayer, came to him, and told him, he was sorry he (Mr. Gill) did not
hold to his Principles, etc. and that he must therefore dispossess him, and put
in another Curate.

But Mr. Gill replied, He was not, nor ever had been, his Curate, and that it
was not in his (Dr. Gregg's) Power to dispossess him; and therewith Mr. Gill
showed the Doctor his Authority for holding the Place, which satisfied Dr.
Gregg, so that he never offered him the least Disturbance afterward.

After some time Dr. Gregg died, and the Rectory of Upwell was given to one Mr.
Hubbart; but he being a weakly Man, and in a deep Consumption, he put in a
Curate to Officiate; viz. one Mr. Hugh James.

This Mr. James finding his Parishioners flocking after Mr. Gill, and but few
caring to hear him, he expressed his Displeasure frequently in threatening and
malicious Speeches against Mr. Gill; but the Incumbent Mr. Hubbart being a
pious and peaceable Man, would not permit him to molest Mr. Gill during his
Life: but this was not long; for, in about a Year and a half the said Mr.
Hubbart, the Rector of Upwell, died, and the Living was then given to the said
Curate, Mr. Hugh James.

As this Mr. James was a Man both of a different Temper and Character from his
two honest Predecessors, he resolved to strain his Authority to the utmost, in
order to dispossess Mr. Gill.

The first Step he took in this Undertaking, was that about the (...) He comes
to Wilney on a Lord's Day, and demands the Pulpit for the morning: Mr. Gill
quietly permitted him to Preach; which he did, or rather Rail, at an uncommon
rate, against Mr. Gill, bending his whole Discourse to set out the heinous Sin
of Omitting the holy Ceremonies, and telling Mr. Gill, from the Pulpit, that he
ought to lie at the Chapel-door for three or four Months in Sackcloth, not
daring to tread upon that Consecrated Ground, begging the People to pray to God
for him to forgive him that Sin: and to prove this, quoted, as we are told,
several Popish Writers, but not one Text of Scripture as can be remembered;
running on in such a virulent Style and unsuitable manner, that many of the
Inhabitants could not bear to hear him, but went out of the Chapel.

In the Afternoon there was no Sermon; for the said Mr. James, Rector of
Upwell, gave notice to the People to meet him after Dinner at an Alehouse,
where he Treated them with Liquor, and, as a place more proper for the Subject,
preached the Second Part to his Morning Sermon, and bestowed another plentiful
storm of ill Language on Mr. Gill, desiring the Inhabitants to set their Hands
to a Letter, Petition, or Paper written to the Bishop, in order to get Mr. Gill
turned out: But they all unanimously refused him.

Being disappointed in his Expectations, and having spent his Breath, as well
as Ale, to no purpose, he went, as is reported, that very Night to Ely, and the
next Week to London, to complain against Mr. Gill to the Bishop of Norwich.

The Inhabitants of Wilney having discovered the Design, and being very loath to
part with their Minister, importuned Mr. Gill to draw up a Petition to the Lord
Bishop of Norwich, in order to prevent Mr. James from obtaining his malicious
Design.

Mr. Gill, at the Desire of his Congregation, did draw up the said Petition,
which was Signed by near 80 Hands of the Inhabitants of Wilney, and sent up to
the Lord Bishop of Norwich (by the Post) who received it, as is supposed,
before the said Mr. James got thither.

Soon after the Arrival of the Petition, the Rector Mr. James came up to the
Bishop, and makes his Complaint against Mr. Gill, desiring he might be dismissed:
but his Lordship (as Mr. James himself has reported) answered, That he had
heard a very good Report of the said Mr. Gill from his Neighborhood, That by
the Right of the Place the Choice of a Minister was in the Inhabitants, and
they testifying to his Behavior, he could not dismiss him, or credit the
Accusation of one Man against the unanimous Voice of the whole Town, or Words
to that effect. But, in short, he rejected the Request of Mr. James, and
refused to Censure or Dispossess Mr. Gill.

Mr. James finding himself disappointed here, applies himself to the Spiritual
Court at Norwich, and about May 1702 procures a Citation against Mr. Gill, to
appear at Norwich. Mr. Gill obeyed the Citation very readily, appeared at
Norwich, and retained one Mr. Batchelour as his Proctor to manage his Defense.

Mr. James finding himself still defeated, and not venturing to proceed in the
Bishop's Court at Norwich, let drop his Citation, and ceased his Prosecution
till about August 1702, when he served Mr. Gill with another Citation.

While this was depending, Mr. Gill going to Cambridge to Vote in the Election
of Knights of the Shire, being possessed of a Glebe to the Chapel as a Freehold,
came into the Company of Sir R^ Jen^gs Knight, who pretending Friendship to Mr.
Gill, and his Neighbors who were there present, began to persuade them to part
quietly and lovingly; and to avoid continual Fewds, persuaded Mr. Gill to quit
the Chapel of Wilney, as a Place not worth so much Fewd and Contest; and upon
his doing so, he promised he would engage on the behalf of Mr. James, the Suit
in the Spiritual Court should go no farther.

Mr. Gill consented, and though much against the minds of the Inhabitants, agreed
to leave Wilney, and depending on the Promise of Sir R. Jen^gs, omitted any
regard of the Suit at Norwich; where, for want of his appearing, and that
worthy Knight breaking his word with him, they proceeded to Excommunication
against him.

Mr. Gill having thus quitted his Charge, had a Call from Lincolnshire to a
Dissenting Congregation; which Call, after some time, he accepted, and
accordingly removed to go thither. And here it is necessary to advertise the
Reader; that Mr. Gill was so far from a hasty Flight, or any precipitance in
his Remove, that he was near ten Weeks resolving, removing, and settling his
Family in Lincolnshire.

In this Interval, and when it is plain these Gentlemen themselves knew every
day where to find Mr. Gill, and that he was frequently in the Town of Wilney,
and never concealed himself or absconded from any body, yet even then one of
the most impudent Forgeries that can be paralelled in this Age, was practiced
upon him; viz. To publish in the Gazette that the said Mr. Gill was fled from
Justice, having been detected of Forgery, etc.

And because the barefaced piece of Villainy shall admit no Misconstruction,
we have here transmitted it to the World Word for Word as it stands in the
Gazette, and as Care will speedily be taken to make the proper Persons account
for it -- as follows: Gazette, Thursday Nov. 22. 1702. Advert.
WHereas Abraham Gill, aged upward of 30 Years, middle-statur'd, having some
gray Hairs, sometimes wearing a light Wig, of a sanguine Complexion, bold and
confident in Conversation, of a strong Voice, and a North-country
Pronunciation, writing a tolerable Clerks hand (as having been sometime
employed under an Attorney) but lately officiating as Curate at Welney in the
Isle of Ely, belonging to the Rectory of Upwell in Norfolk, has been detected
of Forging Letters of Orders under the Hand and Episcopal Seal of the Right
Reverend Father in God Nicholas Lord Bishop of Chester, and being for that and
other wicked and scandalous Practices prosecuted in the Lord Bishop of
Norwich's Consistory Court, is fled from Justice; all Clergymen are to take
notice not to entertain the said Gill as a Curate, or suffer him to perfom any
holy Office. And whoever gives notice of him, so as he may be Prosecuted,
either to Mr. Hugh James Rector of Upwell, or to Mr. Robert Clark at the
Consistory Court aforesaid in Norwich, shall have a good Reward for the same.

Gazette, Monday, March 22. 1702.
ABraham Gill, (aged upwards of 30 Years, middle-statur'd, some gray Hairs,
wearing sometimes a light Wig, sometimes a darker, sanguine Complexion, bold
and confident in Conversation, strong Voice, a North-Country Pronunciation,
writing a Clerk-like Hand, as having been sometime employed under an Attorney,
traveling the Country with a Woman and three or four Children) some time since
forged Letters of Orders under the Hand and Episcopal Seal of the Lord Bishop
of Chester, and for some time Officiated as Curate at Welney in the Isle of
Ely, belonging to the Rectory of Upwell in Norfolk, until the Forgery was
detected: for which, and other wicked and scandalous Practices, being
Prosecuted in the Consistory Court at Norwich, he fled from Justice: Since
which time he has forged other Letters of Orders under the Bishop of Ely's
Hand and Episcopal Seal, which were discovered to be Counterfeit upon his
producing them at Bollingbrook in Lincolnshire, where he offered himself to be
Curate; upon which, being again taken into Custody, he has again made his
Escape. All Clergymen are therefore desired not to entertain the said Gill as
a Curate, or suffer him to perform any Holy Office. And whoever gives notice of
him (so as he may be secured) to Mr. Hugh James, Rector of Upwell, or to Mr.
Robert Clark, Proctor in Norwich, shall have a good Reward for the same.



Mr. Gill has been informed, this black piece of Malice had its birth in Jesus
College in Cambridge, concerted there between Dr. Cook, Dr. James, Mr.
Lateward, and their Confederates; but as he is not positive in that, he shall
be glad of an Occasion to ask their Pardon for the Suggestion when they shall
have purged themselves honorably from the Suspicion; and till then, thinks the
Grounds he has for his Opinion are sufficient to clear him of any breach of
Charity in believing it.

Mr. Gill was with his Family upon the Road from Wilney into Lincolnshire, when
this Publication was first made; and coming to Boston on a Thanksgiving-Day, he
rested, and went to the Dissenting Meeting to hear the Sermon; when, after
Sermon, Mr. Keeling the Minister took him home to his House, and showed him the
Gazette with the aforesaid Advertisement in it.

Mr. Gill, surpised at the Reading of this Gazette, as he well might,
immediately took Horse, leaving his Family in Boston, and resolved to go to
Cambridge, where he expected to find out the bottom of the matter.

In this place it will be necessary to leave Mr. Gill a while, and the Reader
may suppose him Traveling to Cambridge, with a Heart full of Trouble to see
himself persecuted with so much Malice, and in hopes to find out his Enemies
and their Design. And while he is on the Road, let us enquire upon what sorry
and sandy Foundation all this Fabric of Malice and Folly was erected, which
will at last tend to lessen the Wonder at the Authors being confounded in their
own Devices.

There had been a Man in Derby Jayl whose Name was Gill ( but, to avoid all
possible Cavil, it is noted his Name was not ABRAHAM GILL, but Stephen Clifford
alias Gill. This Man having been Committed for Forging Holy Orders, and
Counterfeiting the Coins, and Convicted of both, had broke out of the County
Jayl at Derby, and was fled from Justice.

Mr. James, the Rector of Upwell, having been informed of this by his Attorney,
immediately fixes it upon Mr. Gill, and he must be the Man: And to bring this
Plot to a Head, takes the pains, about June 1702, to send to Derby, and
informing the Jailer there that his Prisoner was found, procures two Men to be
sent from Derby to seize him, and so sure was he of his Game, that he openly
gave it out that Mr. Gill had broke out of Jayl, and he should be hanged.

Accordingly, the two Men sent by the Jailer came over to Wilney, and
pretending extraordinary Business with Mr. Gill, sent for him to an Alehouse
in Wilney. Mr. Gill went boldly, as innocently, to them; and as they were
Strangers, and had pretended Business, he wondered they discoursed with him of
several Things, treated him courteously, paid the Reckoning, but never spoke a
a word of any Business to him, only frequently whispered together, and left him.

The Truth of this after came out, and Mr. Brookhouse Jailer of Derby
discovered the whole Affair to Mr. Gill, how and on what Pretense the two Men
were procured to be sent from Derby, whose Business with him was to have
apprehended him; but the reason of their leaving him as they did, was, because
they found he was not that Man.

By this Discovery Mr. Gill came to know that Mr. James's Assistant in this new
Plot was one Thomas Johnson an Attorney of Outwell, a Man of ill Fame and foul
Practice, who positively affirmed to the two Men that came from Derby, that Mr.
Gill was the same Man that broke out of Derby Jayl.

This Delusion might in some measure have pleaded in Excuse of Mr. James, if
his next Scene had not put him out of the reach of any rational Shelter or
Defense; for, not content with this Defeat, he joined with this infamous
Attorney and one Tho. Beart, who since died in a most horrible manner, rotting
away above ground. These three went to one John Marriot of Upwell, and offered
to give him 10 Pounds, or to Guineas, if he would swear that Mr. Gill was the
same Man that had broke out of Derby Jayl for Forgery and Counterfeiting.

But here they were defeated again, and Heaven, the only Protector of
Innocence, so blinded their Understanding, that they always made an ill Choice
of their Instruments. Honest John Marriot told them plainly, he knew Mr. Gill
was not the same Man; and asked them with what face they could desire him to
burden his Conscience with a false Oath, or fell his Soul for 10 Guinea's?

By this time the Reader is to suppose Mr. Gill arrived at Cambridge, where
having been above 14 Days, and all that while walking publicly about the
Streets, and openly enquiring about the Notice in the Gazette, he received a
Message from the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge to come to him to Jesus College;
whither, confirmed and assured of his own Innocence, he freely went.

Coming to the College, Dr. Cook demanded his Name, which Mr. Gill readily told
him, and the Place of his last Residence and Preaching; viz. at Wilney. Dr.
Cook told him that he was described in the Gazette, and upon the Advertisement
therein he must send him to Jayl; which he accordingly did on the 24th of March
to the Tolhooth in Cambridge, by a Mittimus in the following Words, or to that
effect: To the Keeper of the Tolbooth Goal at Cambridge, these.
I Send you herewith the Body of Abraham Gill, whom I charge you to keep till
discharged by due Course of Law.

Signed Will. Cook.



Thus, without any Proof that he was the Man mentioned in the Gazette, without
any Oath, or any Crime alleged, Mr. Gill was Committed to Prison by the worthy
Dr. Cook; of which it is presumed he may hear again in a different manner than
this.

Nor was the sending him to Prison the End of their Malice, but as soon as he
came thither he had heavy Irons laid upon him, and was fettered like a Fellon
or a Highway-man.

At the General Quarter Sessions Mr. Gill being called, and Dr. Cook sitting on
the Bench, the Dr. told him, Mr. Gill, they had nothing to charge him with: He
told them, Then they had done him a great deal of Wrong to keep him in Custody
so long, and treat him so hardly, and loading him with Irons: And as they had
now nothing against him, he hoped they never would; and therefore prayed they
would Discharge him.

Notwithstanding all this, they remanded him to Prison. Dr. Cook alleged he
had a Letter from Mr. James, Rector of Upwell, full of Crimes against Mr. Gill;
in which Letter, it seems, he desired Mr. Gill might be kept close Prisoner
till the next Quarter Sessions.

In Obedience to this Command of Mr. James, Dr. Cook endeavored to keep Mr.
Gill in Prison: but the Barbarity of this Treatment appearing so exceeding
great, and the Action so foul that the Country began to talk of it, some
Gentlemen of the Country having spoken of it to Dr. Cook's Disadvantage, which
coming to his Ears, he was at last prevailed upon to accept of Bail for Mr.
Gill, two eminent Freeholders of that Conuty of 80 l. per ann. each offering to
be his Bail.

The Bail being such as could not be objected against, The Dr. let him go,
binding his Bail in 60 l. each, and himself in 120 l. to appear at the
Quarter Sessions.

This Usage of Mr. Gill, with the Fury and Barbarity of their Curate and
Rector, had so wrought upon the Inhabitants of Upwell, together with the known
Innocence of their Minister, that it filled them with just Prejudices, and they
unanimously invited Mr. Gill to come and Preach to them as a Congregation
Dissenting from the Church; which he did, duly Licencing the Place in the
Archdeacon's Court at Norwich, and duly Qualifying himself according to Law.

From whence the Author of these Sheets humbly observes, and recommends it to
the Consideration of the Clergy of the Church of England, Whether such unjust
and cruel Treatment of their Fellow Christians, Neighbors and Brethren, is the
Way to confirm the People in their Adherence to the Church of England; or
whether they do not rather Wound the Church, drive their Parishioners from her,
fill them with Prejudices, and increase the Number of the Dissenters in this
Nation.

Mr. Gill being thus settled among his old People, and knowing that he was to
appear at the Quarter Sessions, where he had good reason to expect all the foul
Usage his Enemies were capable of, and where he saw their Power was but too
great, was advised to remove it by Certiorari to the Queens-bench; which he did
accordingly, the Certiorari being allowed in Court, and the Fees of it paid by
Mr. Gill.

But Mr. James, and Mr. Lateward the Curate hearing of this Certiorari, they,
or one of them, went to Cambridge at the Assize; and applying themselves to my
Lord Chief Justice Holt by the means of Dr. Cook and Dr. James, they procured a
Habeas Corpus to remove Mr. Gill to Norwich Jayl, pretending they could prove
Matter of Fact against him there.

Accordingly he was Committed to Norwich Jayl for Felony, Forgery, Trespass,
Contempt, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.

Here the said Mr. Gill lay till the Assizes; and still his Enemies being able
to bring nothing against him, he moved, by his Conncil, to be Discharged, and
was Discharged accordingly, by Order of the Court; which Order is there to be
seen upon Record.

Here he was credibly informed Mr. James and Mr. Lateward striving by some
other Machinations and Conspiracies to have continued Mr. Gill in Jayl to the
next Assizes, received a severe Reprimand from the Lord Bishop of Norwich for
their unjust and inhumane Treatment of Mr. Gill; and that his Lordship
threatened them with Suspension upon that account.

Also that Mr. Clark, the Register of the Spiritual Court at Norwich, being
inquired of concerning his Name being put into the Advertisement in the
Gazette, as, that he would give a Reward for the Apprehending Mr. Gill;
declared it was done without his Privity or Consent, and that it was a mere
genuine Forgery; that he knew nothing of it, but that it was as strange and
surprising to find his Name there, as it could be to Mr. Gill to see his there.

Thus being returned to his People, Mr. James and Mr. Lateward whom
henceforward, in Charity to them, I shall conceal under the Title of the
Conspirators, theratned him, that if he presumed yet to Preach there, he should
be sent to Prison again: But he continuing to do his Duty, it remains to
examine how punctual they were to their Words with him.

About the 13th of April 1704, one Thomas Pitchford, Constable of Wilney,
served a Warrant on Mr. Gill, under the Hand of Tho. Edwards Esquire a Justice of
the Peace for the Isle of Ely; the Warrant requiring the said Constable to
bring Mr. Gill before him etc. the 20th of the same Month at Wisbich.

The Constable having served his Warrant, took Mr. Gill's Word for his
Appearing; but Mr. Lateward, one of the Conspirators, came in a great Passion,
and railing at the Constable, told him he must keep Mr. Gill close Prisoner
till his Appearnce, for that then he should certainly go to Jayl; and if he
went away from him, he the Constable should go to Jayl in his room, and more
ill Language to the like effect: however, the Constable still took Mr. Gill's
Word for his Appearance.

On the 20th of April, being a Sessions, the said Mr. Gill appeared, according
to his Promise, at Wisbich, where was present 7 or 8 Justices, several
Gentlemen, some Clergy men, and the Conspirators.

Mr. L^ one of the Conspirators, called the Constable to bring up Gill his
Prisoner: upon which Mr. Gill readily appeared. The Conspirators immediately
told their Tale, and giving Mr. Gill base and scurrilous Language, according to
their particular Talent, which abounds that way, they informed the Justices
that Mr. Gill bred great Disturbances in the Parish by a Conventicle, as
Conventicles did all England over. Which, by the way, might be the only Truth
they spoke: for it seems by these very Words he bred no more Disturbance with
his Conventicle than other Ministers did with theirs; ergo, they should be all
served so. Shortest Way for that.

Mr. Edwards, one of the Justices, taking up the Cause, told Mr. Gill he was
informed he kept an unlawful Assembly or Conventicle at Upwell, and gave him a
great deal of rough and threatening Language.

Mr. Gill, with Calmness and Respect replied, He owned he kept a Meeting for
Religious Worship at Upwell in the County of Norfolk, but, that it was no
unlawful Assembly; for the Place was Licensed according to Law, and he had
qualified himself as the Law Directs: and therefore hoped he did not deserve to
receive such Abuse in that place.

The Justice then Demanded to see the License by which the said Mr. Gill held
the Meeting; which he producing, both the Conspirators said in open Court it
was Forged: and whether the Court believed them or no, is uncertain, or what
other reason they had for it will be inquired in another place, but they
immediately made a Mittimus and Committed Mr. Gill to the Jayl in Wisbich --
for Forging a License, and Preaching in a Conventicle. And taking the License
from him, they refused to restore it him.

They demanded indeed Bail, but gave him no leave to find it, refusing to let
him stir out of the place: But Mr. Gill may, without Detriment to his Cause
allow all their Pretensions of Bail for his Behavior, since the Treatment he
had received from them was such, as he might be sure whoever he had brought to
be his Bail should be brought into equal Trouble; and for that Reason he
resolved to embroil none of his Friends.

And being sensible of no Crime for which he ought by the Law to be bound to
his Behavior, he was advised not to offer any Bail, and refer it to the Law
still to decide whether -- it could be justly demanded.

The Wisdom as well as Justice of these Magistrates is very remarkable also
here, that they should know no better than to Commit a Man in the Isle of Ely
for a Fact pretended to be committed in the County of Norfolk; all which will
help to their Consolation when they shall come to answer for it before a Court
and Judges that understand the Law.

And as I undertook at first to prove every thing as I went along, the
following Affidavit is an undoubted Testimony of the Truth of this last part of
the Tragedy; viz. of the Conspirators charging him with Forgery, which they
could not pretend to prove, and their treating him with base scurrilous
Language, though all of them are pleased to deny it upon Oath. Mr. Cole's
Affidavit.
JOseph Cole of Upwell, in the County of Norfolk, Gent, makes Oath, That
Abraham Gill of Welney in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, is a
Preacher to a Congregation of her Majesty's Protestant Dissenting Subjects in
Upwell aforesaid, having been a Preacher in the said Parish of Welney for
several Years last past, and that he is now, and has all the time, been well
approved of his Congregation. And this Deponent farther says, That on or about
the 20th day of April last past, he saw the said Mr. Gill brought before Her
Majesty's Justices of the Peace at Wisbich in the said Isle of Ely, by virtue
of a Warrant to answer the Complaint of Mr. Hugh James Rector of Upwell
aforesaid; and that at that time there was one Mr. Lateward, Curate to the said
Mr. James, and Mr. James in presence; and that the said Mr. Lateward commanded
the Constable (who then had the said Mr. Gill in Custody) to bring up Gill his
Prisoner, which the Constable did; when and where Mr. James and Mr. Lateward
alleged, That the said Mr. Gill kept an unlawful Conventicle. And Mr. Gill, to
justify the keeping of a lawful Meeting for Worship of God, produced his
License; whereupon the said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward affirmed, That the said
Mr. Gill had forged the License, and they gave the said Mr. Gill very base,
unbecoming, and scurrilous Language, which Mr. Gill, to my Knowledge, did not
deserve, nor did it become them to utter; and afterward, upon this way of
Complaint, Mr. Gill was committed to the Jayt in Wisbich aforesaid. And this
Deponent verily believes, That the said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward have
maliciously designed to ruin and undo the said Mr. Gill and his Family,
consisting of a Wife and four small Children; for they have, by several
barbarous ways of Prosecution, utterly reduced the said Mr. Gill and his Family
to Poverty. And this Deponent verily believes, that the said Mr. Gill never
gave either Mr. James or Mr. Lateward any cause of Offense, nor did they, or
ever could they, prove any cause of their malicious Prosecution. But this
Deponent verily believes, that the cause of this Malice of Mr. James and Mr.
Lateward against Mr. Gill, was because Mr. Gill Preached twice every
Lord's Day, and they but once; and Mr. Gill was more diligent in his Ministry,
and more charitable to the Poor, and better approved of in his Place than they
the said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward are. And this Deponent farther says, That
Mr. Gill has been a Freeholder in the said Parish for several Years till about
the 29th of September 1702, and that James Holms of Welney (since deceased)
held in Farm under Mr. Gill for several Years, a parcel of Land of Mr. Gill's
Freehold of the yearly Rent of 4 l. 10 s. or thereabouts; and that Mr. Gill had
other Lands besides, and lived in good Fame and Plenty amongst his Neighbors;
and he the said Mr. Gill is greatly beloved in the whole Parish by all but a
few that dare not displease the said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward.

Joseph Cole.



In this Condition Mr. Gill remained a close Prisoner without Bail till the
General Quarter Sessions, which was about five Days; when, he expected to be
called and lawfully charged with some matter of Misdemeanour, or else to be
discharged.

But now the Plot was ripe for Execution, and at the Quarter Sessions he was
omitted, and never called at all.

The Assizes followed in two Days more, viz. April 26. 1704. when he designed
to move for his Discharge, not doubting but he should find Justice there, as he
had before at Norwich.

But the Design was calculated to disappoint him here too, and now the black
Scene opened; for on the said 26th of April, being the first Day of the
Assizes, the Conspirators had procured two Justices, in Concert with
themselves, to come to Wisbich, though above 20 Miles out of their own Division.

The Names of these worthy Gentlemen are, ( for they deserve to be recorded)
David Rowland Esquire and Francis Fern Esquire and Clerk; for this Gentleman is both
Clergyman and Magistrate, of whom we shall say no more, till Justice thinks fit
to take Cognizance of them, and treat them as they deserve.

These Gentlemen, who now made up the number of the Conspirators to be four,
brought with them one Captain Marshal, an Officer in Colonel Lutteril's
Regiment of Marines, in order to Impress, List, and Carry away this innocent
Man as a Soldier, by Virtue of the Law for Listing Vagabonds.

There were several Officers in the Town who would have been very willing to
have raised Men, and who stayed there for that purpose; but the Country had
rung too loud of the Injury done this poor Man, so that no Officer that knew
the Circumstance, could be imagined Villain enough to confederate; but this
Gentleman having the Word of a Justice of Peace, and a Man of God made a
Magistrate, might the more easily be imposed upon.

Upon the Arrival of these Gentlemen, Mr. Gill was sent for out of Prison to
the Sign of the Bell in Wisbich. All the Conspirators being present, the Church
Justice began with him in base and villainous Language, as unbecoming his
Commission as his Gown, calling him Disturber of the Country, and Saucy Fellow
for answering for himself; told him he was a Drunkard, a Swearer, and a great
deal to the same purpose; that he raised a Conventicle in Mr. James's Parish,
Impaired the Congregation at the Church, which was a thing of bad Consequence,
and ought to be suppressed; and that he was not fit to live in the Country, but
to Serve Her Majesty, and that therefore he should go for a Soldier.

This Justice Fern, being justly ashamed of this Treatment, is pleased upon his
Oath to deny giving any ill Language: and therefore, to make out that
Particular as we go, take the following Affidavit of an honest Inhabitant of
Upwell, who heard it. Cornelius Neale's Affidavit.
Cornelius Neale of Upwell, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge,
Carpenter, makes Oath, That he, at the time of Abraham Gill's being Impressed
for a Soldier, to wit, on or about the 25th day of April, A. D. 1704, did see
the said Abraham Gill in Custody in a Room at the Sign of the Bell at Wisbich,
where was John Bellamy Esquire and Francis Fern, Clerk, Justice of Peace for the
said Isle, and another Gentleman, who, as this Deponent was informed, was David
Rowland Esquire another Justice of Peace for the said Isle, who, after some base,
scurrilous, and hasty Words by them given to the said Abraham Gill, then right
or wrong ordered that he should go into Her Majesty's Service for a Soldier;
and then caused the Officer to tender him Listing-money; after which, they
ordered the said Officer to read the Articles of War to him: and this Deponent
did see the said Abraham Gill some time after with the rest of the Impressed Men.

Cornelius Neale.



There was present another Justice of the Peace, one John Bellamy Esquire who at
first vigorously opposed these Gentlemen; told them he found Mr. Gill had a
License, and he verily believed it was a good one; that if he (Mr. Gill) was
guilty of any Crimes, he ought to be Tried for them; and, that now was a good
time to do it in, the Judges being in Town, and the Assizes begun, and advised
them to consider if their Authority extended to Pressing him for a Soldier.

This wholesome Advice ( which they may have leisure to repent they did not
accept of) they overruled: They flew into some Heat at Mr. Bellamy's arguing
for him, and told him, though they were not in their own Division, yet they were
Justices there as well as he, and expected that they had a Power to act all
over the Isle; and if they had any Power they would try it, for the said Gill
should be Impressed, and sent for a Soldier, and they would answer it -- At
which Mr. Bellamy was overruled, and joined with them.

Mr. Gill told them, That besides his Profession, which he supposed exempted
him from such an Insult as that, he had two Qualifications expressly excepted in
the Act, and which legally forbid them what they now purposed to do -- First,
That he was a Freeholder of England; and Secondly, That he was a Freeman of a
Corporation; both which were expressly named in the Act of Parliament, as
Qualifications excepted.

Justice Bellamy urged again, That these were material Objections, and asked
him, Where he was a Freeholder, and for How much? He told them he was a
Freeholder to the Value of 10 l. per Ann. Land of Inheritance in the County of
Lancaster, where he was born, and a Freeman of the Corporation of Wigan.

Mr. Bellamy urged again, that he should be remanded to Prison till they could
send to the Place to be informed --. But the Plot was otherwise laid, and they
resolved he should go; so they called Captain Marshal, and ordered him to give
him 20 S. which Mr. Gill refused: then they ordered his Name to be entered in a
Certificate for Impressed Men, and the Justices Signed it, and Delivered him over
to the Capt. and Mr. Fern in particular called to the Soldiers, and bid them
tear his Band off, and take him along with them, and use him Severely, ( in so
many Words.) Which Command the Soldiers took care to execute; for they carried
him into a large Room crowded with Pressed Men, where he had nothing but Straw to
lie on. And in this Posture and Place he remained, sitting up in his Clothes
and Boots for six or seven days, and then was obliged to march on foot in his
Boots, Riding-Coat, andC. to Downham 12 Miles, and from thence to Ely 16, and
thence to Cambridge 10 or 12.

For the Proof of this Matter, and how cunningly and industriously these Men
acted, some to get out of the Room, and avoid signing the Certificate of his
Impressing, and others to sink and conceal the Certificate it self, in order to
smother an Action they were justly ashamed of, the following Affidavits are
necessary to be examined.

CApt. Henry Marshal, of Col. Alexander Lutterel's Regiment of Marines, makes
Oath, That in pursuance of a late Act of Parliament, John Brown, Thomas
Gibson, and Abraham Gill, on the twenty sixth day of April last past, were
brought before Mr. Rowland, Mr. Pearson, Mr. Bellamy, and Mr. Fern, four of Her
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Isle of Ely, in the County of
Cambridge, who thought them, the said Brown, Gibson, and Gill, to be proper
Persons to serve as Soldiers under Her Majesty Queen Ann: Thereupon (as the
said Act directs) a Tender was made by this Deponent to them, the said Brown,
Gibson, and Gill, of twenty Shillings each, in the Presence of the aforesaid
Justices, which the former accepted, and the last refused: And this Deponent
farther says, That the Certificate for the said three Soldiers, was lodged in
the Hands of one of the Clerks, belonging to one of the aforesaid Justices, in
order to be registered, but is since lost or mislaid. And the said Clerk, in
whose Hands it was so lodged, alleges, That he left it with the said Mr.
Bellamy, who owned to this Deponent that he had a Copy of the said Certificate,
but denied that he had the Original.

H. Marshal.

This Affidavit charging some of the Clerks the Certificate, we shall trace it
thither; and first Justice Bellamy owns he had a Copy, but denies that he had
the Original.

In the next place, the Clerk to Justice Colvill swears, That in his Presence
all the Justices agreed Mr. Gill should be listed, and that he should be
delivered to Capt. Marshal; and ordered him to draw up the Certificate. which
he did, but did not see it signed: the Copy of which is as below,

JOHN Rawlett of Thorney, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, Clerk to
Ralph Peirson, Esquire one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the- said
Isle, makes Oath, That at a Meeting of several Justices of the Peace for the
said Isle, and in particular of this Deponent's Master, Josiah Colvill, David
Rowland, Esquires, Francis Fern, Clerk, and John Bellamy, Esquires; on or about
the seven and twentieth Day of April last, it was agreed by the said Justices,
That Abraham Gill of Welneth, in the said Isle of Ely, who was then examined
before the said Justices, should be lifted for a Soldier, as being a Person
(according to their Opinion) liable thereto, according to the late Act of
Parliament for raising Recruits for the Land Forces and Marines; and that the
said Gill should be delivered accordingly to Capt. Henry Marshal, of the
Honorable Col. Lutterel's Regiment of Marines, who was then present, and
tend'red the said Abraham Gill twenty Shillings for Listing Money, in this
Deponent's Presence: And this Deponent says, That the said Justices ordered
this Deponent to draw up a Certificate of the same, according to the Directions
of the said Act of Parliament: The Articles of War against Mutiny and Desertion
being also then read by the said Capt. Marshal to the said Abraham Gill. And
this Deponent did accordingly draw up a Certificate; as also of the listing of
Thomas Gibson, and John Brown, both of Well, in the same Isle; which at the
Desire of the said Capt. Marshal was not sealed that Night, because he expected
more Soldiers, and designed to put them all into one and the same Certificate
the Day following. And this Deponent says, that the Paper hereunto annexed is
the Draught of the said Certificate; but this Deponent going away in the
Morning following is not acquainted with what was farther done on the Premises,
only that he left a Copy of the said Certificate behind him with the said Mr.
Bellamy.

John Rawlet.

IN Pursuance of an Act of Parliament made in the Second and Third Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lady Anne, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. for raising Recruits of
the Land Forces, Marines, etc.

We, whose Hands and Seals are hereto set, three of Her Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the said Isle, do hereby certify, That the following Persons we
listed according to the said Act by Captain Henry Marshal, in the Honorable
Colonel Lutterel's Regiment of Marines; who did make Tender of twenty Shillings
to the Persons hereafter mentioned, which they accepted of; and that the said
Captain did read the Articles of War against Mutiny and Dissertion to them in
our Presence.

Tho. Gibson of Well in the said Isle. John Brown de eadem. Abraham Gill late
de eadem.

These three Men above written were listed before us.
To return to Mr. Gill. The Fateagne of this violent March reduced him to a
very miserable Condition; his Feet and Legs galled and swelled with his Boots,
and his Blood, as may be supposed, surfeited and heated with unusual Force
beyond his Strength.

Thus you have the History of his Delivery over to the Soldiers; with whom, and
in the Condition as above, he came to Cambridge; where he was arrested for
Debt, and so by one Misfortune delivered from another.

They used some Attempts to clear him from this Arrest; but the Debt appearing
to be real, and too much for them to discharge, being 27 l. 9 s. 6 d. they were
forced to leave him in the Tollbooth Prison at Cambridge.

The Conspirators, who concluded their Work was done, and Mr. Gill carried
clear off, were under no small Disappointment when they heard he was gotten out
of their Hands: and though they could not but know where he was, yet, in pursuit
of their old Design, they issued Hue and Cry to apprehend him as a Deserter
from the Queen's Service, and Mr. Fern the Church-Justice signed the Hue and
Cry. This failing, they issued a special private Warrant to Constables at
Upwell, Wilney, and Maney, to make search for him, and still the reverend Mr.
Fern' s Hand was to this also, as by the Warrant now secured and remaining with
the Constables of Wilney will appear.

It was now high time for Mr. Gill to take Sanctuary in the Law; and going to
Counsel in the Case, he was advised to move in the Queen's Bench for a Habeas
Corpus, to discharge him from enrolling or listing in the Army: which he did,
and obtained it accordingly; and also a Rule of Court for all the Conspirators
to show Cause, etc.

And now these Gentlemen having run their Length, the Tables were turned, and
the Time began to come when they must render an Acount to her Majesty and the
Law for all this Oppression of her Subjects, Contempt of her Authority, and
Abuse of the Power put into their Hands by the Laws.

The Conspirators appeared at the Queen's Bench Court in Westminster, and moved
for Time, and several Motions being made alternately, in order to bring in
Affidavits; at last they found themselves so pressed by the Course of the Law,
that they were obliged to have Recourse to their old stock of Villainy they had
worked upon before, and formed a second Conspiracy to bring Mr. Gill into
Contempt of the Court; the detecting whereof will conclude this part of our
History: and the future Rewards Justice will bestow upon them for these things,
are reserved to their proper Season; and may serve for a Second Part of this
Account.

After seven Weeks Imprisonment at Cambridge, Mr. Gill having made up matters
with his Creditor was released, and went home to his Family at Welney, showing
himself publicly, and Preaching every Week to his Congregation as usual; for
now the Conspirators saw he was out of their power, and whatever they did they
must expect to account for.

At last they moved the Court that Mr. Gill might appear in Person to accuse
them, which was granted, and appointed to be on the 4th of July last.

Mr. Gill's Attorney sent him Notice of this Order, and he immediately went for
London; and setting out on the 3d of July, in order to his appearing in the
Court, with one Mr. Tokelove in his Company, he was arrested on the Road about
6 Miles from his own House, by one Betts a Bailiff, in an Island Warrant, at
the Suit of one John Smith of Downham.

Betts the Bailiff holding him to Bail, carried Mr. Gill to Maypole, a little
Village, 10 Miles from his own House, Mr. Gill being exceedingly surpised at
this Arrest, knowing the Consequence of his Disappointment, persuaded the
Bailiff to go back with him, 5 Miles to Maney, where he got some Friends to be
his Bail.

This ended the Trifle of the Arrest; but the Conspirators End was answered by
it; for by that time Bail was given it was Afternoon, and there was no
possibility of Mr. Gill's being in Court at the time appointed, which was the
next Morning, being not able to ride all night, nor to ride so hard as to reach
to London time enough, (sending Mr. Tokelove, who was then with him, forward to
Cambridge, to make Oath of what had passed, which he did accordingly, as will
appear by his Affidavit) being above 60 Miles, so he went back to his own House.

The Court resented his Default, and the Conspirators took Care to have it
improved to his Disadvantage: But before we come to relate the Consequences of
the Contempt in Court, it is proper to examine the Contrivances of this Arrest,
and some subsequent Management of the Conspirators.

When Betts the Bailiff first arrested Mr. Gill, he told him, That this was a
Choke Pare for him, and was procured by Mr. Lateward, one of the Conspirators,
to prevent his appearing at London.

This was spoken in the hearing of Mr. Tokelove, who was then with Mr. Gill, as
appears by the following Affidavit. RIchard Tokelove, of Upwell, in the County
of Norfolk, Yeoman, makes Oath, That he, this Deponent, came to Mr. Abraham
Gill's House at Wellney, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, on the
third Day of July, Ann. Dom. One Thousand Seven Hundred and Four, very early
that Morning, and found him at home; and that the said Mr. Gill, nor this
Deponent, did not that Day Morning see nor speak with John Betts the Bailiff,
till he overtook and arrested the said Mr. Gill on the Bank Road, six Miles
from home, or thereabonts, he this Deponent, and the said Mr. Gill being going
for London: And this Deponent does farther say, That the said John Betts did
then declare, That the said Mr. Gill was arrested by the Procurement of one Mr.
Lateward, intending for to stay his Journey from attending the Court.

Richard Tokelove.



Betts the Officer, a Man capable of being molded for the purpose of the
Conspirators, not remembering what he had said at the time of the Arrest,
changed his Note quickly after.

For the Conspirators finding the Plot had taken Effect, and that they had
effectually prevented Mr. Gill from appearing at the Court; the next Step was
to make the World believe this was a Contrivance of his own, and so throw their
own Villainy upon Mr. Gill.

Accordingly they report, That Mr. Gill had caused himself to be arrested, in
order to get an excuse for his not going to London, not daring to appear at the
Queen's Bench Bar.

And now that their Engine may appear as black as themselves, this Mr. Betts
the Bailiff is made to swear. 1. That he Betts had a Letter from Mr. Smith the
Plaintiff at Downham, to him with Orders to arrest Mr. Gill; and that this
Letter was of Mr. Gill's own writing, but signed by Mr. Smith. 2. He swears,
That he received two several Letters from Mr. Gill, directed to himself,
desiring him to arrest him that Monday Morning that he was to go to London, in
order to stop his Journey. 3. He swears, Mr. Gill called him up that Morning,
in order to be arrested by him; and that he brought him a blank Warrant, etc.


Though this Comi-Tragedy will be best related after this Wretch has been brought
to Justice, with his Procurers, the Conspirators; yet to finish this Relation,
it is necessary to acquaint the World how this hard-mouthed Swearer is
confronted.

Mr. Tokelove swears as before, That he Betts voluntarily declared at the time
of the Arrest, That it was procured by Mr. Lateward; but this, it is supposed,
was before he was made privy to the Conspiracy; and being afterward let into
the Secret, forgetting what he had said, confirmed the World in his own known
Character; and verified the Truth of that old Saying, Opportet Mendacem esse
Memoriam.

2. Mr. Smith of Downham the Plaintiff owns, He gave leave to Mr. Lateward to
order Mr. Gill to be arrested; but swears, He was desired so to do by an
importunate Letter from Mr. Lateward as per his Affidavit appears, and being
threatened in Case of Refusal. JOHN Smith of Downham, in the County of Norfolk,
Yeoman, makes Oath, That he this Deponent received a Letter by a Messenger
from Mr. Lateward, Curate-at Welney; to the best of this Deponent's Remembrance
the Letter bares Date about the latter end of June last: The Purport and
Meaning of the Letter was to desire, and indeed strongly to urge, him this
Deponent to give the said Mr. Lateward Orders to arrest Mr. Abraham Gill,
Minister to a Dissenting Congregation at Upwell; and the Letter urged, That Mr.
Gill must be arrested Monday Morning next after the Date thereof, by one or two
a Clock in the Morning, to prevent Mr. Gill's attending at London, at a Hearing
between Mr. Hugh James, Rector of Upwell, and Mr. Gill, and then Mr. James
could have an Advantage against Mr. Gill: The Letter promised, That his this
Deponent's Kindness should be well gratified if this Deponent answered the
Request, else Mr. Lateward and his Interest would take it unkindly, and this
Deponent should loose their Respect; upon which this Deponent gave order in
writing by Mr. Lateward's Messenger to arrest Mr. Gill, and use their Pleasure
according to Law; and this Deponent is well satisfied they did order Mr. Gill
to be arrested, and kept in Custody about ten Miles from home, in his Journey
toward London. And this Deponent is credibly informed, That the Bailiff, one
Betts, has been often feasted, and well fed by Mr. Lateward; and has
constantly kept Mr. Lateward Company, and rode about with him ever since. And
this Deponent farther says, That he saw Mr. Gill upon the six and twentieth of
this instant October, who is very sick, and has been so for a long time, and
is very weak, unfit for going abroad, and liker for Death than Life.

John Smith.



3. Mr. Tokelove swears, He was with Mr. Gill early in the Morning the same Day
he was arrested, and found him at Home, and never parted with him till he was
arrested; and that therefore it was impossible he should call at Bett's House,
as Betts swears he did, to have him arrest him: And because Mr. Tokelove's
Affidavit is very full, and a Confirmation of several things already advanced
here, we refer to the Copy of it duly attested, as follows. RIchard Tokelove of
Upwell, in the County of Norfolk, Yeoman, makes Oath, That Mr. Abraham Gill of
Welney, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, did never serve at Welney
Chapel as Curate to Dr. Gragge, or to any one else, to his this Deponent's
Knowledge; but was a Preacher elected and chose by the Congregation and
Feoffees, in a time when the Chapel was vacant; and this Deponent's Opinion
is, That it was in the said Feoffees and Congregation's Power to elect their
Minister. And this Deponent farther says, That the said Mr. Gill was a
Freeholder for several Years in Welney, and lived in good Fame and Plenty all
the time of two pious and sober Rectors of the said Parish; and was well
approved of both for Doctrine, Charity, and Behavior. And this Deponent
farther says, That since Mr. James and Mr. Lateward have been so malicious
against Mr. Gill, he is elected and chosen a Preacher to a Dissenting
Congregation of Protestants in Upwell aforesaid; and is able in Doctrine
religious, and of sober Life and Conversation, and highly approved of with his
Congregation, and most of his Neighbors, and with most his Acquaintance; but
Mr. James our present Rector at Upwell, and Mr. Lateward his Curate (as this
Deponent very believes) envying the said Mr. Gill, and maliciously designing to
ruin him and his Family has scandalously, maliciously, and without Cause,
spread abroad evil, unjust, and undeserving Characters of the said Mr. Gill,
which, by Strangers and Persons remote and Ill-wishers to the Dissenting Party,
may perhaps be believed as coming from such Authors; and this Deponent farther
says, That it is his Opinion that by insinuating Speeches and Threatenings the
said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward have caused the Clerk, one Thomas Fewlis (who
is a loose, idle, and wicked Person) to swear contrary to his Knowledge, and to
the Truth, and that only for fear of losing his Clerk's Place and their Favor;
and this Deponent the rather believes this, because he has heard the said
Fewlis commend the said Mr. Gill, and set forth a quite contrary-Character of
him. And this Deponent farther says, That the said Mr. James and Mr. Lateward
have given Mr. Gill very unjust Prosecution which has reduced him to Poverty,
Mr. Gill having been imprisoned at their Complaint in several Goals, ( viz.) at
Cambridge, in March 1702, and April, May, June, and July 1704, and removed to
Norwich Goal, and kept Prisoner all the Assize Week, till discharged the last
Day according to Law; and believes that he was entered in the Goaler's Calender
July 1703: And after their Threatening to imprison him again if he presumed to
serve and preach to our Congregation any more, they have this last April
persecuted and imprisoned the said Mr. Gill, and (without showing Cause of the
Imprisonment, or giving any Prosecution at Sessions or Assizes, which was at
the same time of his Imprisonment at Wisbech) they caused him to be Impressed out
of Goal for a Soldier, without Liberty to make any Defense, when at the same
time he was our Minister, and well approved of, and highly beloved, having (as
he may have still) a very plentiful Allowance for his Maintenance, that way of
Preaching (as this Deponent does apprehend) being a lawful Employment for a
Maintenance; and his Congregation is large, consisting of Gentlemen, and very
substantial Freeholders, as well as Farmers: So that by the way of Prosecution,
not only Mr. Gill, but also this Deponent, and all the said Congregntion are
Sufferers; and in truth Mr. James did not only threaten and prosecute Mr. Gill,
and procured him sent to Goal, and impressed for a Soldier, as aforesaid, but
positively sent to the Meeting Place (though qualified according to Law) and
threatened some of the Congregation, and especicially him this Deponent; and
apprehended five several Men by a Warrant from Mr. Upwood, a Justice of the
Peace, and carried them like Felons before the said Mr. Upwood; which Persons
(although Mr. James is pleased to swear they were idle Persons) yet some were
very substantial Freeholders, and the rest substantial Farmers, and very honest
Men: And although Mr. James and Mr. Lateward pretend no Malice in their
Prosecution, yet it is a real Truth they have highly abused both Mr. Gill and
his Congregation, and constantly preach railing Sermons, as this Deponent has
heard and believes; and they are reputed very malicious and troublesome Men in
the Parish, having excommunicated several Men, and totally ruined one Mr.
Whitworth, our Schoolmaster; and in carrying on that malicious Design against
him, both Mr. James and his Curate did swear falsely against him at Swaffam
Sessions, as one of the Grand Jury has declared and affirmed; and prosecuted
the said Mr. Whitworth, till they banished him the Town, causing him to be
impressed for a Soldier, as they did Mr. Gill. And this Deponent says, That it
is credibly affirmed by one John Marriot, that they would have had him to have
sworn, That our Minister Mr. Gill was one Mr. Gill a Minister who escaped out
of Darby Goal about six Years since, being convict for forging of Holy Orders,
and counterfeiting the King's Coin; (although Mr. Gill had been in this Country
about us nine or ten Years) but the said John Marriot refused to go contrary to
his Conscience. And this Deponent farther says, That Mr. Gill was never
reported to be a Swearer or Drunkard, as is alleged in their Affidavits; and
he verily believes he was never once seen to be drunk, nor heard to swear one
Oath since he came into our Country: And this Deponent is very positive that
neither Mr. James nor any that made Affidavits at present against Mr. Gill,
have any intimate Acquaintance or personal Knowledge of the said Mr. Gill,
excepting Nicholas Scott, Tho. Beart, and Tho. Fewlis; which said Thomas Fewlis
is overawed to swear to carry on and vindicate their unjust Prosecution, as
this Deponent believes; and this Deponent verily believes he would for a Reward
swear twice as much on Mr. Gill's Behalf, if requested. And this Deponent
farther says, That Mr. Gill was coming the Morning toward London, being the
third Day of July, about three a Clock in the Morning, and was arrested upon
the Road in an Action of Debt at the Suit of one John Smith, and is now in
Custody, and held to Bail; and that the Bailiff says, the Plaintiff was urged
to arrest Mr. Gill to prevent his attending the Court, that so Mr. James and
Mr. Lateward might obtain an Advantage against him: he is in Custody at
Maypole, ten Miles from home.

Richard Tokelove.



4. Mrs. Gill, Mr. Gill's Wife, swears, That her Husband came home from the
Meeting on the Evening before, and did not stir out of his House till about two
a Clock Monday Morning, when Mr. Tokelove and he took Horse together to go to
London the same Day he was arrested. Elizabeth Gill's Affidavit.
ELizabeth Gill, the Wife of Abraham Gill, of Welney in the Isle of Ely, and
County of Cambridge, makes Oath, That upon Sunday the second Day of July, A.
D. 1704, last past, this Deponent's Husband came home at Evening from his
Congregation at Upwell; and after his coming home was never out of his House
all that Night, till about one or two of the Clock the next Morning; at which
time Richard Tokelove of Upwell came to call him, in order to go on a Journey
with him toward London. And this Deponent says, That her said Husband did not
see nor speak with John Betts a Bailiff at that time, nor with any other: And
that this Deponent's Husband, and the said Richard Tokelove took Horse
together, and went on their Journey, intending for London.

Elizabeth Gill.



5. Mr. Gill himself who in this Case is Evidence for the Queen swears, That he
neither wrote any Letters to Betts, or called him up, or ordered him to arrest
him, or procured any one else to order him, or knew any thing directly or
indirectly of this Arrest, till he was surprised by him on the Road. Mr. Gill's
two Affidavits.
ABraham Gill of Welney in the Isle of Ely, in the County of Cambridge, makes
Oath, That he this Deponent has seen two Letters, one dated the first, and the
other the second day of July 1704, signed Abra. Gill; and also a Letter dated
July the 3d 1704, signed John Smith; as also a Writing purporting to be a
Warrant for arresting this Defendant; and which said Letters and Warrant, when
this Deponent saw the same, were annexed to the Affidavit of one John Betts, a
Bailiff, produced in this Honorable Court. And this Deponent says, That the
said Letters or Warrant, or any or either of them, or any part of any or either
of them, or the Name Abra. Gill so signed to the two first of the said Letters
is not nor are of this Deponent's own Handwriting; nor were the said Letters
or Warrant, or either of them, or any part of them, or either of them writ by
or with the Order, Knowledge, Privity, or Procurement of this Deponent. And
this Deponent says, That he was not in Company with or did see or speak to or
with the said John Betts upon the said second Day of July: Nor did this
Deponent call upon the said John Betts next Morning, or see him till he
overtook and arrested this Deponent, as this Deponent was upon his Journey
toward London, to attend this Court. And farther this Depenent says, That the
said Betts upon such Arrest held this Deponent to Bail, and this Deponent and
one Thomas Harrison (as this Deponent's Bail) did seal and execute a Bail Bond
accordingly, in the Presence of the said Betts, about one of the Clock that Day.

Abra. Gill.

ABraham Gill of Welney, within the Isle of Ely, in the County of Cambridge,
makes Oath, That he was no way directly nor indirectly privy to nor concerned
in procuring John Betts to arrest him this Deponent; neither did he this
Deponent write any Letter or Letters to order it to be done (as the said Betts
in his Affidavit does falsely depose) but this Deponent was upon the Road coming
to London, in Obedience to a Rule made in this Honorable Court to appear in
the said Court; and was arrested by the said John Betts, who then affirmed to
this Deponent, and one Richard Tokelove (who then was with this Deponent) that
the said Arrest was by the Procurement of Mr. John Lateward, on purpose to
prevent this Deponent's Journey; or Words to the like Effect. And this Deponent
farther makes Oath, That he has Freehold Lands in Rivington in Lancashire, of
the Yearly Value of eight or ten Pounds; and has had the same ever since the
time of this Deponent's Marriage, being about fifteen or sixteen Years last
past.

Abra. Gill.



Now these four Persons must all be forsworn, or else this Fellow has both
perjured himself, forged the Letters, and Mr. Lateward one of the Conspirators
was the Procurer and Contriver of this Arrest; and Mr. Gill is very willing to
wait the Conclusion the Law will give to this Affair, when the World shall not
fail of an impartial Account of the Particulars, and Indictment of Perjury
being ordered to be brought against the said Betts for this matter.

To confront this indeed, Mr. Lateward swears to the following Affidavit, full
of Negatives, Neithers, and Don't knows, and all for himself too: but that they
may not complain of Partiality, his Affidavit must not be omitted, as follows,
JOHN Lateward of Welney, in the Isle of Ely, and County of Cambridge, Clerk,
aged twenty five Years and upward, makes Oath, That he this Deponent never saw
knew or had Acquaintance with any such Person as John Smith of Downham in
Norfolk, Yeoman; nor did at any time ever write any Letter, or send any
Messenger to any such Person as the said John Smith, concerning Mr. Abraham
Gill, either about arresting him, or any wise else however; nor did this
Deponent ever consent, order, or procure any Person so to do in his this
Deponent's Name: Neither did this Deponent ever hear of any such Person as the
said Smith, until after the said Gill was arrested, or pretended to be
arrested, and at Liberty again: Nor did this Deponent ever order the said Gill
to be arrested, nor knew that he was arrested, nor knew Betts the Bailiff which
arrested the said Gill, till after such Arrest, if any was made, and the said
Gill was again at Liberty. Nor can this Deponent any wise imagine how any
Letter should be wrote to the said Smith, or any Messenger sent to him in this
Deponent's Name about arresting the said Gill, unless the same was done by the
said Gill, or by some other in his Behalf, or by his Procurement; which he this
Deponent has good Reason to believe and suspect has been done, because as the
said Betts the Bailiff who arrested the said Gill has informed this Deponent,
and also this Deponent does believe has deposed that the said Gill sent him a
Note to arrest him the said Gill.

John Lateward.



To corroborate this Affidavit, and being we suppose ashamed of what he had
done, Mr. L...... d took some pains to make Mr. Smith of Downham to say back
again what he had sworn for Proof of this Matter upon Lateward; which Attempt
appears by the Oaths of three credible Persons of Downham, as follows. GEorge
Holt, late of Downham, Gent. William Pincher of the same Town and County
Tailor, and Mary Smith the Wife of John Smith of the same Town and County, do
severally make Oath, That one who called himself Hugh James Rector of Upwell in
the County of Norfolk, but, as we are informed, was Mr. Lateward, came to the
said John Smith's House in Downham aforesaid, upon the 13th day of November now
last past, and brought along with him one Johnson an Attorney of Her Majesty's
Court of Queen's-bench, a Man of Tricks, and an unjust Practitioner; who
together did entreat John Smith, the Husband of Mary Smith one of these
Deponents, to own and swear that the Affidavit he had made in the Queen's-bench
this Term was unjust and untrue: but he affirmed what he had done was just, and
that he would stand by it; upon which they urged him to unsay it; and then said
it would prove his Ruin if the said John Smith did not revoke the former
Affidavit.

Geo. Holt. William Pincher. Mary Smith.




And against that part of Mr. Lateward's Oath and Betts's Oath, that it was
wrote by Mr. Gill, besides the Affidavit of Mr. Gill already mentioned, we
conclude this black Story with the following Affidavit. THomas Wilson, now of
Downham Market in the County of Norfolk, Gent. makes Oath, That he being at
the House of John Smith in Downham aforesaid, saw and read a Letter there that
was sent from Mr. John Lateward to urge him to give Orders to Arrest Mr. Gill;
and having seen, and well knowing the Handwriting of Mr. Gill, does verily
believe and affirm, that the said Letter was not Mr. Gill's Handwriting.

Tho. Wilson.



Only as the Conspirators have taken a great deal of pains to blacken Mr. Gill,
and load him with Crimes, of all which we shall fairly and honorably clear
him; we cannot but present the World with two Evidences to the Character of
this Knight of the Post, Mr. Betts: and it is humbly recommended to the Reverend
Mr. James and Mr. Lateward, to clear their worthy Agent of the Charge, lest the
World should blame their Understanding for hugging such a Wretch, and caressing
a Man of whom they ought to have been ashiam'd to have been seen in his Company.

1. Mr. Martin, Postmaster of Epping, where this Betts it seems lived till he
could stay there no longer, swears, That he ( Betts) having given Mr. Martin
Possession of some Goods for a just Debt, he broke open the Door in the Night,
and carried them away; and that being carried before a Justice, he saved
himself from being sent to Jayl by restoring the Goods again. THomas Martin, of
Epping in the County of Essex Innholder, makes Oath, That he this Deponent
know John Betts late of Epping aforesaid Innkeeper, but now of Chatteris in the
Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge as this Deponent is informed and believes,
and says, that the said John Betts being indebted to this Deponent, this
Deponent about six Years since caused him to be Arrested; and thereupon the
said Betts, to procure his Liberty, delivered certain Goods into Custody of
anoter Person in trust for this Deponent: But the said Betts caused the Door of
the Room where such Goods were, to be broke open in the night time, and
conveyed the same away, and would not let this Deponent have the same again
till this Deponent took him before a Justice of the Peace, who forced the said
Betts to re-deliver the said Goods, or else said he would send the said Betts
to Jayl.

Thomas Martin.



2. Mr. Earl of Epping swears, Betts is a Person of a scandalous Character,
esteemed a Highway-man, so that few of his Neighbors care to be seen in his
Company, believing him a Man that cares not what he says or swears. RIchard
Earl, of Epping in the County of Essex, Yeoman, aged sixty Years or
thereabouts, makes Oath, that he knows John Betts late of Epping aforesaid,
but now of Chatteris in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, a Bailiff, and
says, that the said Betts is a Person of a very bad and scandalous Life and
Reputation, and is esteemed no better than a Highway-man, insomuch that few of
his Neighbors care to keep him Company; and this Deponent verily believes he
cares not what he either says or swears. And this Deponent farther says, That
the said Betts, when he lived at Epping, caused a Room, wherein he had put
certain Goods in trust for one Mr. Martin a Creditor of the said Betts, to be
broke open in the Nightime, and was taken before Justice Wroth on that
account, who forced the said Betts to deliver back the said Goods, or said he
would send him to Jayl, or used Words to that or the like effect.

Richard Earl.



All these Affidavits were, in behalf of Mr. Gill, produced in Court; and Mr.
Gill being examined on several Interrogatories upon Oath, and under
Recognizance, and having given the Court full Satisfaction, was disharg'd of
the Contempt; and the rest of this black Story lies now before the Judges of
Her Majesty's Court of Queen's-bench, where Mr. Gill doubts not to have Justice.

The Conclusion.
IT is enough, and the Matter of Fact, as here truly related, is Mr. Gill's
Satisfaction; he covets no Victories, and scorns to Insult them on the Conquest
his Innocence and the Power of Truth made upon their procured Perjuries, he
recommends it to them to consider of what they have done, and at least show so
much Penitence as becomes them to make their Appearance in their Cloth
tolerable.

It remains only, to finish the Vindication of Mr. Gill, to reckon up a little
the numerous Slanders and Reproaches which they have raised upon his
Reputation, and by undoubted Testimony and positive Evidence confront their
Calumnies, and clear up his Character to the Satisfaction of his Friends, who
have been too much imposed upon, ( and the Author asks their Pardon if he says,
have been something too apt to believe) and to the Conviction of his Enemies,
who have Triumphed in a bad Cause, and cried Victoria before they put their
Armor off.

In order to this, it is necessary to set down, in their own Language and the
blackest Terms they could invent, all the Calumnies and Abuses they have raised
upon this poor Man in order to justify their ill Practices, and make their
Designs tolerable to the World.

And first, The Publication in the Gazette speaks for it self, and needs no
Comment --

And here it is very observable, that it yet remains a Mystery who Conveyed this
Advertisement to the Printer of the Gazette, no body having yet thought fit to
own it, and the (...) at Norwich disowning it. And this, we presume, must be
referred to the Second Part of this History; by which time Mr. Jones, no doubt,
in his own Vindication, will produce his Voucher, and the Courts of Justice so
come at the Author.

When the Justices, Clergymen, and the rest of the Conspirators came to be
called upon to show Cause of all this Usage, after frequent Motions for Time,
they bring up numerous Affidavits, partly in their own Justification, and
partly Defaming the Man.

Of these Affidavits, some of them being too long to insert in the Compass of
this Book, We have taken a faithful Abstract, and to show our Impartiality in
this Account, and that the World may see whether We have done them Justice or
no, the Affidavits are all left at the Place aforesaid, for any Person that
desires Satisfaction, to peruse.

"First, Thurgood Upton Esquire and Justice of Peace, swears, That Mr. Hugh James
and Thomas Beart, both frequently mentioned in this Book, made Complaint of Mr.
Gill, That he was a Person of a scandalous and debauched Life, a Frequenter of
Alehouses and Houses of ill Fame, and did for several Months cohabit with a
certain Woman as his Wife, whom he called Elizabeth, and by whom he had two
Children; and that some time after the Birth of the first Child by the said
Elizabeth, another Woman followed the said Gill, and pretended to be his Wife;
that he did for several Weeks cohabit with both the said Women, and had also a
Child by the second Woman, who some short time after dying, he continued to
cohabit with the first Woman as his Wife -- But this Gentleman being a Justice
for the County of Norfolk, and the said Gill living in the Isle of Ely, he
refused to grant his Warrant, having no Authority to act there -- Mr. Upton
also swears, that there was a farther Complaint against Mr. Gill by the said
Mr. Hugh James, for keeping a Meeting in the Barn of one Richard Tokelove, and
several others that were present at the said Meeting, who appearing and
affirming that the said Gill had qualified himself, and the Place was duly
Licensed according to Law, he dismissed them. Mr. Upon adds his Belief that there
is no Malice in Mr. James's Prosecution, giving him the Character of a sober
Man, and of good Reputation, but Mr. Gill of a notorious ill Life and
Conversation, and a Disgrace to Religion." THurgood Upwood of Terrington in the
County of Norfolk Esquire one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
County, makes Oath, That in or about the Month of January 1701, Complaint was
made to this Deponent by Hugh James Clerk, Rector of Upwell in the said County,
and also by Thomas Beart of the said Parish of Upwell, That one Abraham Gill,
who had for some time past resided within the said Parish of Upwell, and had
officiated at Welney a Hamlet of the said Parish of Upwell as Curate to Dr.
Grigg since deceased, and afterward to Talbot Hibart likewise deceased, who
were respectively Rectors of the said Parish, That the said Gill was a Person
of a very scandalous and debauched Life, being a great Frequenter of Alehouses
and other Houses of evil Fame, and did also for several Months cohabit with a
certain Woman as his Wife, whom he called Elizabeth, by whom he had two
Children during his abode there, and that some short time after the Birth of
the first Child by the said Elizabeth, another Woman followed the said Gill to
the said Parish of Upwell, who likewise pretended to be his Wife, and that he
did for several Weeks cohabit with both the said Women, and had also a Child by
the second Woman, who some short time afterward dying, he did continue with
the first Woman called Elizabeth, who has ever since cohabited with him, as
they informed this Deponent. But it appearing to this Deponent, that the said
Gill was then an Inhabitant in that part of the said Parish that lies within
the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, did refuse to grant a Warrant against
him, he having no Authority to act there. And this Deponent says, That there
being farther Complaint made by the said Hugh James against the said Gill, and
several others, in or about the Month of March last past, for that the said
Gill had kept a Meeting in the Barn of one Richard Tooklove at Upwell in the
said County of Norfolk, not having qualified himself, or given notice of the
said House according to Law. This Deponent did grant a Warrant against the said
Tooklove, and several others that were present at the said Meeting, whose Names
this Deponent does not remember. And the said Tooklove and the rest of them
affirming that the said Gill had a License to Teach in the said Barn, and that
the same was duly Licensed; thereupon this Deponent forbore any farther
Prosecution until he should receive farther Information of the matter charged
against them: and farther deposes, That he does not know or believe that there
was any Malice in the Prosecution made by the said Hugh James against the said
Gill, the said James being a Person of sober Life and good Reputation: and, on
the contrary, That the said Gill is very notorious in his ill Life and bad
Conversation, and a great disgrace to the Christian Religion.

Th. Upwood.



Mr. James himself makes Oath at large. Hugh James, Rector of Upwell in the
County of Norfolk, Clerk, makes Oath, That at the time of his Institution and
Induction to the Rectory of Upwell, he found Abraham Gill officiating as Curate
in the Chapel of Welney, according to the Rites of the Church of England. And
this Deponent being informed that the said Abraham Gill was a Person of
notorious ill Life and Conversation, this Deponent went to the Hamlet of Welney
to reprove the said Abraham Gill for his scandalous Practices, and to examine
by what Authority and License he there officiated as Minister and Curate: But
the said Abraham Gill denying to show this Deponent his Orders and License;
upon this, and for several other reasons, this Deponent made Complaint of the
said Gill, and his wicked Practices, to the Lord Bishop of Norwich his
Diocesan, and delivered in to his Lordship an Information against him, made by
Thomas Beart before Thurgood Upton Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Norfolk. Upon which, and several other Informations, he
was prosecuted in the Consistory Court of Norwich, where he was detected of
Forging Holy Orders under the Hand and Seal of the present Lord Bishop of
Chester: for which, and several other enormous Crimes, he had Excommunication
read against him in Welney, from which he is not yet absolved. But some time
after, as this Deponent is credibly informed, endeavored to impose upon one
Mr. Cooper, Minister of Bollingbrook in Lincolnshire, by forged Orders under
the Hand and Seal of the present Lord Bishop of Ely, desiring to be his Curate:
but being detected there of this Forgery, the said Gill returned to Welney
aforesaid, whither his Family had been sent from Bollingbrook aforesaid by
Order of the Justices of Lincolnshire. And the said Gill still continuing in
his scandalous Life, set up a set up a separate Conventicle in the Parish of
Upwell, in the Barn of Richard Tokelove of the same Parish; and did in that
Barn, on the Sabbath Day, preach to some Persons of no great Credit: Upon which
this Deponent thinking it his Duty to take notice of such Disorders and
unlawful Practices, especially by such an infamous Person, procured a Warrant
from the said Mr. Upton, to bring before him Richard Tokelove, and four other
idle Persons, who absented themselves from the Church to follow and encourage
this Gill that they might show legal Authority for his Conventicle, having no
malicious Intent in the Prosecution. And these Persons affirming that their
Teacher, Abraham Gill, had the License for their Conventicle, the said Mr.
Upton returned the Warrant by the Constable to bring them back if they did not
produce or send the License to him; and they not obeying this Order, he granted
another Warrant for the said Gill and Tokelove: but Abraham Gill withdrawing
himself into the Isle of Ely; this Deponent made Complaint to Tho. Edwards sen.
Esquire one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the Isle of Ely in the
County of Cambridge; which said Thomas Edwards granted a Warrant to Apprehend
the said Gill for his disorderly living, and preaching in a Conventicle, not
being qualified for the same: By virtue of which Warrant he was brought before
several of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace in Wisbich, who for several
Reasons Committed him to Jayl. And this Deponent farther says, That he did not
speak to the said Abraham Gill before he came into the Room where the said
Justices were; and that there he gave him no scurrilous Language, but only
spoke what was necessary to inform the Justices concerning his ill Life and
illegal Practices. And this Deponent farther says, That he did not move to
have him sent to Goal, nor did he affirm that his License was forged, but only
that there was great Suspicion of the same, it being only a blank Certificate
of a License without date, and that it was not Mr. Brown's Hand, as other
Gentlemen there likewise affirmed, who knew Mr. Brown's Hand. And this Deponent
farther makes Oath, That he believes that the Certificate under the Name of
John Arrowsmith to be his proper Hand, and that other Certificate under the
Name of Nich. Brown not to be his proper Hand, having seen both their Hands
upon other Occasions. Neither Mr. Nich. Brown nor John Jeffery Clerk, having
any Jurisdiction in that part of Norfolk where Richard Tokelove's Barn stands.

Hugh James.



THomas Edwards of Wisbech in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge Esquire one
of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Isle of Ely, makes Oath,
That upon the Complaint of Mr. Hugh James, Rector of Upwell, against Abraham
Gill of Welney, for diverse ill Crimes and Misdemeanors, He this Deponent, on
or about the latter end of March last, to the best of this Deponent's
Remembrance, granted a Warrant to bring the said Abraham Gill before this
Deponent or some other of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
Isle, to answer the said Complaint, with Directions to bring Sureties for his
Good Behavior along with him: and that on or about the 20th day of April
following, the said Abraham Gill was brought before this Deponent and Josiah
Colvile Esquire and several other Justices of the Peace of the said Isle, where
were also present the said Mr. James, and Mr. Lateward his Curate, and several
others. And the said Mr. James, amongst other Crimes, accused the said Gill of
living very lewdly and wickedly with a Woman whom he kept when his former Wife
was living, and had Children by the said Woman when his former Wife was living,
and that it was highly probable he was not then married to her; as also of his
setting up a Conventicle at Welney without any lawful Authority that the said
Mr. James could find out or hear of; with his being accustomed to Swearing and
other Immoralities. And the said Abraham Gill offering little or nothing in his
own Defense as to his bad Life and Conversation, and being a Person obscure,
and unknown from whence he came, and of a very infamous Character and
Reputation on diverse accounts; this Deponent, with the other Justices then
present, required him the said Abraham Gill to give Sureties for his good
Behavior, as the least thing they would demand of him; which he not being able
to do, although most of his substantial Neighbors were present, the said Mr.
Colvile and this Deponent Sealed his Mittimus, and sent him to God till he
should find Sureties accordingly. And this Deponent farther says, That he did
not hear of any scurrilous or ill Language which was given to the said Abraham
Gill by any Person then present: but says, That he the said Abraham Gill did
then produce the Paper hereunto annexed, purporting a License from the
Archdeacon of the Archdeaconry of Norwich, for holding Meetings in the House or
Barn of one Richard Tokelove in Upwell aforesaid: which being without Date, and
this Deponent and the other Justices present being well informed that Upwell
was not within the Jurisdiction of the Archdeacon therein named, and although
it had been so, yet that the said Abraham Gill was not duly qualified to preach
or teach in the said Meeting House, as being an Excommunicate Person as was
then credibly affirmed, nor could he make it appear in the least that he had
qualified himself by Law to be a Teacher in such a Meeting, at any Sessions of
the Peace either in Norfolk or the Isle of Ely; and several Persons then
present affirming also that the Name Nicho. Brown thereunto Subscribed was not
the proper Handwriting of Mr. Nicholas Brown; this Deponent and the other
Justices did not look upon the same to be authentic, and had reason to suspect
it to be forged, and therefore detained it till farther Enquiry might be made
concerning it.

Tho. Edwards.

The following Oath is most remarkable, because the Person has been frequently
heard to acknowledge his Ignorance of what he swore, and it being made upon
public Faith. THomas Fewlis, of the Hamlct of Welney, Clerk to the Chapel of
Welney aforesaid, being in the Parish of Upwell in the County of Norfolk,
makes Oath, That he officiated as Clerk of the said Chapel during some part of
the time that Abraham Gill served as Curate thereof; and has received the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper at his hands as a Priest of the Church of
England; who several times administered the same to other Persons in the said
Chapel in this Deponent's presence. And says also, that the said Abraham Gill,
for some part of the time he officiated in the said Cure, did in a scandalous
manner cohabit with two Women at one and the same time, one whereof, whom he
more particularly owned as his Wife when alive, is now dead, and the other is
still alive, and lives with him now as his Wife. And says, that his said
former Wife has not been dead above four Years, to the best of this Deponent's
Remembrance; and that by this present Wife the said Abraham Gill has three
Children which he owns, and one by the other Wife now at Welneth aforesaid; and
that the eldest of the said three Children by this present Wife is about eight
years old, and older than the other Child at Welney aforesaid which he had by
his said deceased Wife.

Thomas Fewlis.



Mr. Lateward the other Conspirator's Oath is at large as follows. JOhn
Lateward Clerk, and Curate of Welney in the Isle of Ely and County of
Cambridge, makes Oath, That one Abraham Gill, who some time past resided
within the Parish of Upwell in the County of Cambridge, and had officiated at
Welney aforesaid (a Hamlet of the said Parish of Upwell) as Curate to Doctor
Grigg since deceased, and afterward to Talbot Hobart likewise deceased, who
were respectively Rectors of the said Parish, That the said Gill is a Person of
a notorious ill Character, and that this Deponent upon the Lord's Day being the
22d day of November 1702, did read in the Chapel of Welney aforesaid an
Excommunication against the said Gill, wherein he was charged with several
heinous Crimes, as Forgery, and the like. And this Deponent farther says, That
the said Gill has and does own a Child which he had by the Woman he now
cohabiteth with, called Abraham Gill, which is older than a Child that he had
by another Woman whom he pretended to be his first Wife. And whereas the said
Gill, by his Affidavit in Writing made by him the 20th day of May last before
Richard Penson Gent. one of Her Majesty's Commissioners to take Affidavits in
the Court of Queen's-bench at Westminster, amongst other matters and things in
the same Affidavit mentioned, charged this Deponent of speaking these Words
following ( viz.) wishing his Body might rot in Goal, and his Soul perish
eternally; This Deponent says he did not speak the Words before recited, nor
any Words to the same effect, nor ever made any Prosecution in his own Name, or
upon his own Account, against the said Gill, and had no other end or design,
than (in the due Performance of his Duty) to bring the said Gill to condign
Punishment, he having highly dishonored God and the Christian Religion by his
vicious Life and Conversation. And this Deponent farther deposes, That for the
space of one Year last past, or thereabouts, the said Gill and his Family have
been and are still a Charge to the Inhabitants living within the said Hamlet of
Welney, they being frequently relieved by the Overseers of the Poor there.

John Lateward.



The following Affidavits are of the Justices who listed this Mr. Gill; though it
appears both of them are glad to put in, that they did not set their Hands to
the Order or Certificate. DAvid Rowlands of Haddenham in the Isle of Ely and
County of Cambridge Esquire one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
Isle, makes Oath, That he this Deponent being at Wisbech in the said Isle at
the last Assize, one Abraham Gill and some other Persons were there brought
before this Deponent and four other Justices of the Peace for the said Isle, as
Persons fit to be Listed to serve Her Majesty as Soldiers according to a late
Act of Parliament for Raising Recruits for the Land Forces and Marines. And
this Deponent assisted the said Justices in the Examination of the said
Persons, and by all that was said on both sides, this Deponent does upon his
Oath declare, That he adjudged it agreeable to the said Act of Parliament, that
the said Abraham Gill should be Listed as a Soldier, which also was the Opinion
of the other Justices then present. And farther this Deponent does declare,
that he this Deponent going into another Room after the aforesaid Examination
of the said Abraham Gill, did not Sign or Seal any Order or Certificate for the
Listing the said Abraham Gill as a Soldier. And this Deponent farther says,
That neither he, nor any other Justices of Peace then present, to the best of
the Deponent's Remembrance and Belief, did say or so much as mention that a
Conventicle was of bad consequence, or the Fanatics ought not to be
countenanced, or that the generality of the Parish of Upwell flocked after the
said Gill, or that the Conventicle which the said Gill had in Upwell ought to
be suppressed, or any words to that or the like effect. And this Deponent
farther says, That the said Gill did not then pretend (as this Deponent verily
believes) to be a Freeman of any Corporation that sent Burgesses to Parliament;
but this Deponent does remember, that the said Gill did pretend to be a
Freeholder in Lancashire, which neither this Deponent, nor the rest of the
Justices then present, did believe, for that they had been credibly informed of
several Forgeries and ill Practices of the said Gill. And this Deponent farther
says, That a Warrant of Hue and Cry, some days after, coming to the Parish
where this Deponent lived, against the said Gill and others, this Deponent,
according to his Duty, caused the same to be sent forward.

David Rowlands.

FRancis Fern, Prebendary of Ely, and one of Her Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the Isle of Ely, makes Oath, That Abraham Gill of Welney was brought
before him and four other Justices of the Peace for the said Isle, and upon the
hearing of what was said concerning the said Abraham Gill, and what the said
Abraham Gill said for himself, this Deponent was of Opinion (as also the four
other Justices of the Peace) that the said Abraham Gill might and ought
(according to the late Act of Parliament for Raising Recruits for her Majesty's
Forces) be Listed in Her Majesty's Service: But notwithstanding this his
Opinion, this Deponent says, That being called into another Room in the Inn
about other business, He this Deponent did not Sign or Seal any Certificate,
Order, or Warrant, to adjudge the said Abraham Gill to be a Soldier Listed
according to the said Act. And whereas the said Abraham Gill, in his Affidavit,
affirms that he is a Preacher to a Congregation of Protestant Dissenters,
Licensed according to Law, this Deponent says, That the said Abraham Gill did
not, in the Hearing of this Deponent, make any Proof, or so much as offer to
make any Proof, that he had qualified himself as the Law directs to be a
Preacher or Teacher in any Congregation of Protestants Dissenting from the
Church of England. And whereas the said Abraham Gill did allege in his
Affidavit, that this Deponent did say, that a Conventicle was of bad
Consequence, and that they ought not to be countenanced, and that the
generality of the Parish flocked after Abraham Gill, which would breed great
Disturbances in Upwell, as it did all over England; this Deponent says, that
he this Deponent did never speak those Words, or any Words to that effect.

Fran. Fern.

JOhn Bellamy of Wisbech in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge Esquire one of
Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Isle, makes Oath, That
Abraham Gill of Welney in the said Isle of Ely, is, and has been all along, a
Person of a very infamous Reputation by the Accounts this Deponent has received
of him, being under the Character of cohabiting with two Wives or Women at the
same time, and having Children by them both; and of being a drunken and
debauched Man: and says, that He the said Gill, amongst others, was brought
before this Deponent, as a Person fit to be Impressed into Her Majesty's Service,
according to the late Act of Parliament made for that purpose, where were
present at the same time Josia Colvile, Ralph Peirson, and David Rowlands
Esquires, and Francis Fern Clerk, all of them Justices of the Peace for the
said Isle of Ely, when this Deponent made no Objection to the said Gill's being
Inlisted according to the said Act, any more than the said other Justices,
saving that the said Gill alleged that he had a Freehold at Wigan in
Lincolnshire of 12 l. per Ann. to the best of this Deponent's Remembrance. He
this Deponent believes he might desire some time might be given him to make
that appear, if it could be done. But this Deponent does deny that he ever had
any account from Norwich that the said Gill's License was good, or that he knew
any thing certain of that matter. And says, that to the best of his
remembrance, the said Gill was at the said Meeting ordered to be Impressed by all
the said Justices (excepting the said Mr. Colvile, who, as this Deponent
remembers, went home before the matter was ended) and that the Articles of War
were read, and the Listing money tendered to him as he does believe; but withal
the said Gill was told, that if he could make it appear he had a Freehold of
forty Shillings a Year, or a Right of Voting in the Election of Members of
Parliament, or to that effect, he should be forthwith discharged. And this
Deponent says, that he knows of no Freehold the said Gill has at Welney
aforesaid, or any where else, or had at that time.

J. Bellamy.



These are the principal Affidavits, and indeed, all that pretend either to
excuse their Crimes or to prove his.

In which the Reader is deir'd to observe, That here is abundance of Recourse
to -- Evil-fame, being Credibly informed, Complaint having been made, and the
like, referring to the Morals and Conversation of this Man: and who that has
Enemies of like Qualifications may not come under all that? But it is humbly
recommended to all impartial Enquirers that are willing to be truly informed of
this matter, and who would rather hear the Truth of a Case than be Imposed
upon, to consider, Here is not one positive Oath, no not among all his Enemies,
to any of these Facts. No Man makes Oath that he ever saw him Drunk. Or, That
he ever Heard him swear. [ It Is strange they should not, if it was so Common.]
Or, That he Broke out of Jayl. Or, That he Forged his Orders. Or, That his
License was Forged.


Nay, The very Particulars in the Gazette are not so much as attempted to be
Proved in any of these Affidavits: That he was ever Employed under an Attorney.
Forging a second time Orders under the Hand and Seal of the Bishop of Ely. This
Forgery being Detected at Bullingbrook in Lincolnshire. His being taken into
Custody upon the same. His making his Escape, and flying from Justice.


And it is fairly offered to Mr. Jones, who we believe has been unwarily drawn
into this Snare, That if but any one of the abovesaid Articles can be proved by
him, Mr. Gill will cease giving him any Trouble on account of all the rest.

It Is very hard Mr. Jones on the bare Recommendation of any Man, though never so
great, should allege such black Things as these upon an innocent Man, and
neither he nor his Authors be able to make out one Clause of it: from which we
wish him a good Deliverance, and leave that part to the Issue of the Law.

Indeed we have two hard-mouthed Fellows that swear heartily; but these
discover so little Wit with their Good Will, that the easiness of proving them
Perjured will be as much a Scandal upon their Senses as their Honesty; we mean
Mr. Lateward and Mr. Fowlis Mr. Gill's Clark.

Wherefore we shall begin with this swearing Curate, whose Oath is, That Mr.
Gill owns a Child by the Name of Abraham Gill which is elder than a Child he
had by his first Wife.

No Man but Mr. Lateward would have been caught in such a Fool-Trap, and have
sworn what is so exceeding easy to be detected, the Children being to be
produced, and their Ages proved.

Now it is plain and known to all the Neighborhood, and a thing in which it is
impossible the Truth can be concealed, that Mr. Gill's first Wife has been dead
upwards of seven Years, and the eldest Child he has by his present Wife is but
five Years and half old, or thereabout.

The necessary Proof of this is omitted here, not that it is not the most easy
of all this Affair to make out, but because it being to come before a Court of
Justice as matter of Evidence, it is referred to the genuine Proof of fact, and
the Issue on a Trial, when Mr. Lateward will do well to produce this little
Abraham in nubibus, and prove his Age, and the Time of the Death of the first
Wife, and Marriage of the second, and see how he can make these things out.

As to the Clerk's Affidavit, he has frequently owned in Mr. Gill's hearing
since, that he was drunk when he made it, and that he knew not what was in it,
and that if he had known there had been any such thing in it, he would not have
offered to have sworn it.

It Is a most unaccountable thing, that Mr. Lateward should so far expose
himself in his Affidavit, when the Children are all alive, born in the same
Place, their Age registered in the Parish-book, and so many living Witnesses of
the Time of their Birth; and we blush for him to think, if he is not hardened
beyond the very Father of Lies himself, what Confusion he must be in, when he
shall be asked to produce this Child of Mr. Gill that must be above nine Years
old, or to name where it was Born, when Registered, or any Circumstances of the
matter.

So much is Malice frequently forsaken of its Sense, that the just regard
Providence always shows to Injured Innocence, is the Safety of all honest Men,
causing the Subtilty of wicked false Accusers to abandon them, and their Folly
as well as Wickedness to go hand in hand, that Sin and Shame might come
together, and their false Accusation carry its Detection in it self.

If these Gentlemen have any farther Defense to make, any more Affidavits to
bring into Court, the Editor of this promises them to give them their full and
free place in the second part of this History; but humbly desires them, whether
Clergymen or Magistrates, that, for the Honor and Dignity of their Offices
and Character, and the Justification of their Understandings, that they would
either more nicely adhere to the Matter of Fact, or more politickly conceal the
vicious part, that they may not expose themselves, and force their humble
Servants to detect them, to avoid the Scandal of Blindness and Stupidity: that
they would leave Trifling, Circling, and going Round-about Mr. Gill's Character
with Supposes, we have Heard, and we are Informed, and Says that he is
informed, and the like; but, that they would rather tell us plainly, and make
it out, When he was Drunk, or Swore, or Broke Jayl, or Forged Orders, or Lived
Scandalously; for certainly, Gentlemen, these things ought to be made out, or
else to suggest them is a most barbarous Treatment, and a Slander that redounds
to the Infamy of the Contrivers.

AND now we come to present the World with the Account Mr. Gill gives of
himself, not from his own Mouth, but from the Mouth of numerous Throngs of
Neighbors, Inhabitants, and Persons both knowing his Character and willing to
do Justice.

And first, to obviate the Scandal of his having Forged the Hand and Seal of
the Bishop of Chester, and only pretended to have entered into Holy Orders,
besides the Original Orders left as aforesaid, take the Testimony of a Minister
of the Church of England who was Ordained at the same time, as follows: RIchard
Tod of Bonwick in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, Clerk, makes Oath,
That Abraham Gill of Welney in the said Isle and County, Clerk, now a Preacher
to a Dissenting Congregation at Upwell in Norfolk, was Ordained by Nicholas
Lord Bishop of Chester, upon the same Day that this Deponent and five other
Young Men was Ordained; that is to say, at Trinity, in the Year of our Lord
1692: and received his Letters of Orders, as we all did, under the Episcopal
Seal of the Lord Bishop of Chester aforesaid.

Rich. Tod.



This honest Gentleman is unhappily dead since the making this Affidavit, or
else we had received a larger Account of the Particulars of Mr. Gill's
Ordination, and the Names of the five other young Ministers Ordained at the
same time: but the Authentic Affidavit, together with the Original Orders
under the Episcopal Seal, left as before with Mr. Skey, is Testimony sufficient
to clear Mr. Gill; and all that cavil at it, are challenged to do their utmost
to detect any Forgery, Collusion, or Crime whatsoever.

From clearing up this Point, we come to his Character, as well in Lancashire
from whence he came, where he was born, and lived several Years, as in Norfolk
where all this Tragedy has been acted. And first, from Rivington where he was
born, and where his Father yet lives, the following Certificate has been sent
up Signed by the Reverend Mr. Bradly and the principal Inhabitants, the
Original whereof is left as before, with the rest of the Papers relating to
this Story. THis is to Certify all Persons whom it may concern, That Abraham
Gill, Son of Robert Gill of Rivington in the County of Lancaster, lived many
Years in our Neighborhood, both before and after he was married; and that in
all that time he lived soberly, free from any Aspersion of Drunkenness or
profane Swearing, that ever we knew or heard of; and that he married a Woman of
good Reputation, for Modesty, Sobriety, and Chastity, as far as ever we know,
by whom he had a Daughter in these Parts, yet living, and some other Children
departed this life some Years ago. We never knew, nor credibly heard, that he
had any other Wife, either in Lancashire or any other place, during all the
time of her life; who, as we have heard and do believe, lived with him at the
time of her Death. This We, sometimes his Neighbors and Acquaintance, do
hereby Attest, witness our Hands the 18th Day of November 1704.

Schoolmasters at Rivington. John Bradley Edm. Sweetlove
James Heart. Adam Turner. Henry Ainsworth. Thomas Whalley. John Horrobin. James
Worsley. Thomas Entusles. Rich. Foster. Thomas Balshaw. Robert Foster. Tho.
Mother. George Lee. John Shaw. John Alatt. Tho. Nightingall. William Breres.
Rich. Brownlow.




It seems while Mr. Gill was in Lancashire, and before he was entered into
Orders, he served my Lord Will^by of Parham as his Chaplain, Steward, or
Attendant.

The Enemies of Mr. Gill have been, as he is informed, so diligent to attack
this noble Lord, in order to obtain a Complaint against Mr. Gill, there having
been some Difference, as they said, between them at parting: but being not able
to obtain any Certificate from his Lordship against Mr. Gill, they became
Petitioners to his Lordship, that as he would give them nothing under his Hand
against Mr. Gill, so he would refuse to grant Mr. Gill any thing under his hand
in his Justification. We shall not examine into the Justice of this Proceeding;
his Lordship, no doubt, had his Reasons for it: but the Attempt, either way, is
a manifest Proof the Enemies of Mr. Gill have rummaged the Nation for his
Character, and left no Stone unturned in order to fix the Scandals they have
endeavored to raise on his Reputation.

But though this noble Lord declined meddling on one hand or other, Mr. Gill has
obtained more Justice from his Brother-in-law; who, at second hand from my
Lord's own mouth, has given an honorable Testimony of Mr. Gill to Mr. Gill's
own Father, and sent up under his Hand, as follows.

Mr. Gill's Father's Letter is thus: Rivington, Nov. 30. 1704. Loving Son,
I Am sorry to hear that you are in trouble. I sent to my Lord Willoughby for
his Certificate, but I heard that your Adversaries had prevented him; but I did
not hear it from my Lord: But I thought that Mr. Grenehalgh's Certificate would
not be much inferior, because he married my Lord Willoughby's Sister, and that
you were both Boarded at his House. And if you will have any Certificate from
the Neighborhood, I question not but they will all Certify for you. So hoping
you are in good health, as we are all at present, praised be God, I remain

Your ever Loving Father whilst ROBERT GILL.



The Certificate thus: Adlington, Nov. 30. 1704.
THese may Certify whom it may concern, That my Lord Willoughby and Mr.
Abraham Gill were Boarded at my House together for two Years and upwards; and
since Mr. Gill left my Lord's Service, I have heard my Lord commend Mr. Gill,
saying he was the best Servant he ever had; and I have known Mr. Gill from a
Child, and he being in my Family as aforesaid, was faithful and just all the
time, and was a Man of sober Life and Conversation. As witness my Hand,

Sa. Grenehalgh.



Next to this, and besides Mr. Gill's Affidavit already mentioned of his being
a Freeholder in Lancashire, which the Justices will find they ought to have
considered, here follows an Affidavit of the same, and of his being a Freeman
or Burgess of a Corporation; and by both these he had a Right of Voting in the
Election of Members of Parliament, and consequently was exempted by the very
Act of Parliament by which they pretended to send him for a Soldier. OLiver
Greenhalgh of Horwich in the County of Lancaster, makes Oath, That he this
Deponent very well knows Abraham Gill the Son of Robert Gill of Rivington in
this County. And this Deponent farther says, That the said Abraham Gill is now
legally entitled for the term of his natural Life of and in several Closes or
Parcels of Land lying in Rivington aforesaid, of the clear yearly value of
forty Shillings per Ann. and upwards. And moreover this Deponent says, That
Mr. Ralph Banks, Town Clerk for the Borough of Wigan in this County, showed him
this Deponent his Record or Roll kept for the said Borough, wherein was
mentioned, that on the 18th Day of September 1688, (to this Deponent's best
remembrance) the said Abraham Gill was Sworn a Burgess within the said Borough
of Wigan.

Oliver Greenhalgh.



From Lancashire we are to trace him into the Isle of Ely, whither he came with
his Family, and settled, as has been already noted, in the Parish of Maney,
where he Preached two years: Of which and his Behavior there, take the
following Certificate, Sworn to by Ten of the Inhabitants of that little Town.
THomas Harrison of Maney in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge Yeoman,
Richard Bellamy, William Cross, Thomas Benn, William Curtis, William Hales,
William Page, and Thomas Neale, all of Maney aforesaid, Richard Finch and
Edward Newborn of the same, makes Oath, That they have known Mr. Abraham
Gill, now Minister of a Dissenting Congregation at Upwell, this ten or twelve
Years, or thereabouts. He was our Minister for about two Years, and well
settled in our Parish with his Wife, who lived together very conformable and
peaceably. He was Able and Diligent in his Teaching, he was no Drunkard nor
Swearer, but lived a pious Life and Conversation amongst us. And these
Deponents do farther say, that, to their knowledge, the said Mr. Gill never had
two Wives living at one time, but that he married his now Wife after his former
Wife's Decease.

Tho. Harrison. Rich. Bellamy. Will. Cross. Tho. Benn. Will. Corties. Will.
Hales. Will. Page. Tho. Neale. Rich. Finch. Edw. Newborn.




For his Behavior in Upwell, where he has since resided, and which has been
the Scene of this Tragedy, take the two following Affidavits. Edward Birch of
Wimblington in the Isle of Ely and County of Cambridge, Gent. makes Oath, That
Abraham Gill of Welney in the Isle and County aforesaid, is a Preacher to a
Congregation of Protestant Dissenting Subjects in Upwell in the County of
Norfolk, and that the said Mr. Gill has been a Preacher in and about Welney
aforesaid for several Years last past, and that he is now, and all the time
has been, well approved of for a Teacher, and very charitable to the Poor, and
has lived well in Fame and Plenty amongst his Neighbors. But this Deponent
farther says, That he believes Mr. James Rector of Upwell, and Mr. Lateward
Curate at Welney, have maliciously designed to ruin the said Mr. Gill and his
Family, consisting of a Wife and four small Children, for they have been very
troublesome to the said Mr. Gill for near two Years, having caused him to spend
very much Money in defending himself from their unjust and malicious
Prosecution; so that they have now reduced him to Poverty, and at last would
force him away for a Soldier from his Congregation, where he is beloved, and
may have very good Maintenance. And this Deponent farther says, He was with
Mr. Gill at Cambridge in the Months of March, April, and May, in 1703, where
Mr. Gill was a long time kept Prisoner at the Complaint of Mr. James, without
any Cause showed at all: and at the Request of Mr. Gill and several of his good
Friends, he this Deponent and one Mr. Thomas Neale Bailed Mr. Gill out of Jayl,
Mr. Gill being bound in 120l. and this Deponent and Mr. Neale in 60l. each of
them: and Mr. Gill appeared the next Sessions then after; and as there had been
no Cause of his Imprisonment before, so nothing appeared against him still, as
the Court declared; but they removed him to Norwich Assizes from thence, where
this Deponent has heard and believes, that upon Mr. Gill's staying all the
time of Assizes July last, and nothing could be brought against him, he was
discharged by my Lord Chief Justice Holt and my Lord Baron Smith, or one of
them. And this Deponent believes, that Mr. Gill never gave any Cause of Offense
to Mr. James and Mr. Lateward, except it was by being more charitable to the
Poor, and more diligent, and better beloved and approved in his Place than they
are.

Edward Birch.

JOhn Johnson of Upwell in the County of Norfolk Yeoman, makes Oath, That
Abraham Gill of Welney in the Isle of Ely in the County of Cambridge, is a
Preacher to a Congregation of Her Majesty's Protestant Dissenting Subjects in
Upwell aforesaid, and that the said Abraham Gill has been a Preacher in the
said Parish of Welney for several Years last past, and that he is now, and all
the time has been, well approved of by his Congregation. And this Deponent
farther says, That about the latter end of April last past, it was reported at
Upwell aforesaid, That Mr. Gill was Impressed and sent away for a Soldier, to
the great sorrow and grief of the greatest part of the Parish; and that he this
Deponent about that time going to Wisbech aforesaid to see Mr. Gill, found him
an Impressed Man, and guarded amongst others that were Impressed Men, and kept
as Prisoners in a Room in an Inn in Wisbech aforesaid. And this Deponent verily
believes, That Mr. Hugh James Rector of Upwell, and Mr. Lateward Curate at
Welney, have maliciously designed to ruin and undo Mr. Gill and his Family,
consisting of a Wife and four small Children; for they have by several
barbarous ways of Prosecution brought the said Mr. Gill and his Family to
Poverty, notwithstanding Mr. Gill has been a Freeholder in the said Parish,
and lived in Plenty amongst his Neighbors, and is now generally beloved,
except with a few that dare not displease Mr. James and Mr. Lateward. And this
Deponent verily believes all the Cause of Mr. James and Mr. Lateward's Malice
against Mr. Gill, is because Mr. Gill Preached oftener and better, was more
diligent in his Ministry, and more charitable to the Poor, and better approved
of in the Parish than they are. John Johnson.



From hence let us follow him in his Afflictions; and in the very Prison we
find the Jailer ( who was a Woman) testifying to his Sobriety, his Piety, and
his Charity. ELizabeth Heylock, Keeper of the Tolbooth in the Town of
Cambridge, Widow, makes Oath, That Abraham Gill of Welney in the Isle of Ely
and County of Cambridge, Gent. has been in her Custody, as a Prisoner, for
some time: and during all the time of his Imprisonment, he lived Soberly,
Honestly, and Religiously; insomuch that by his Christian-like Behavior and
Conversation, from his coming into Prison till the time he was released, he so
prevailed upon the other Prisoners, that there was a Reformation amongst them.
And this Deponent farther says, That when any Money was given to the Prisoners
to Drink, he the said Mr. Gill shunned Drinking to Excess, and constantly
advised others against Drinking more than was necessary to refresh Nature, and
carried himself soberly and honestly toward all the People in Custody, and
others also.

Elizabeth Heylock.



We next bring you a Tradesman of Cambridge, one of his Creditors, and a Person
that has reason to know him, both while he was a Prisoner there, and before;
who Testifies, both from personal Knowledge and public Enquiry; and by him you
have even the Voice of Common Fame: So that this Affidavit seems to contradict
those Gentlemen who say he was a Man of ill Fame amongst his Neighbors,
turbulent and disorderly, or bred a Disturbance in the Parish, as in Mr.
Justice Upwood's and other Affidavits. RIchard Jardine of Cambridge in the
County of Cambridge, Linnen-Draper, makes Oath, That for this six Years last
past he has been intimately acquainted with Abraham Gill of Welney in the Isle
of Ely and County of Cambridge, Gent. And that during all this Deponent's
Acquaintance with him, he has had the Character of an honest, sober, peaceable
Man. And farther says, That he this Deponent has had frequent occasion, by
means of his Trade and other Business, to be in the Country where the said
Abraham Gill did formerly live, and does now live, and has been oftentimes in
the said Mr. Gill's Company, and never at any time found him disorderly,
irreligious, or any ways vicious in his Conversation. And this Deponent has
heard among the Neighborhood where the said Mr. Gill lived, That if any
Controversies, Quarrels, or Suits of Law did happen in his Neighborhood among
the Neighbors, he always offered his Mediation, and recommended Peace amongst
them, and has by that means ended several Differences and Disputes between his
Neighbors. And farther says, That the said Mr. Gill is very well beloved by
the Parishioners of Welney and the neighboring Parishes, and gives good
Content and Satisfaction amongst them, and has been charitable to the Poor,
and obedient to the Late as well as this Present Government. And says, That
within this twenty Days his this Deponent's Business called him to Welney,
where he made a Visit to the said Mr. Gill, and found him in a very weak and
poor Condition, having been afflicted with Sickness for a considerable time, as
he and the Neighborhood told this Deponent.

Richard Jardine.



And yet more effectually to settle this matter of Character and Reputation
among Neighbors, we conclude it with the Affidavit of fourteen more of the
Inhabitants of his Parish and Neighbors; and when all is done, let any of his
Antagonists produce better Vouchers for their Reputation, if they can. WIlliam
Gibson of Upwell in the County of Norfolk Yeoman, James Seaman of the same Town
and County, (...), Robert Macum, Robert Gill, Richard Tokelove, George
Slacksbe, Joseph Sampson, Thomas Watson, Peter Sumers, John Marriott, Benjamin
Silk, Valentine Smith, William Mann, Robert Macum jun. do severally make Oath,
That Mr. Abraham Gill, a Preacher to a Congregation in Upwell, has for seven
or eight Years last past been a Preacher in the said Parish, and was never, to
our Knowledge, a common Drunkard nor Swearer, nor had two Wives at once, but
had one Wife, and after her Decease married another. And that the said Mr. Gill
has been and is a Man of very sober pious Life and Conversation, and such a
one as we desire may still be our Minister.

William Gibson. James Seaman. Robert Macum sen. Robert Gill. Richard Tokelove.
George Slacksbe. Joseph Sampson. Thomas Watson. Peter Sumers. John Marriott.
Benjamin Silk. Valentine Smith. William Mann. Robert Macum.




And to finish these Vouchers, here is the License for the Meeting affixed;
which they have never attempted to prove Forged, any more than they have Mr.
Gill's Orders. By virtue and in pursuance of a certain Clause or Proviso in
this behalf mentioned and contained in an Act of Parliament or Statute made in
the first Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, entitled, An Act
for exempting Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of
England from the Penalty of certain Laws; These are humbly to Certify, and it
is hereby Certified unto the Worshipful John Jeffery Clerk, Master of Arts,
Archdeacon of the Archdeaconry of Norwich, That the Dwelling House or Barn of
Upwell in the County of Norfolk, is a Place used, and to be used, for holding
and keeping Meetings and Assemblies of diverse Persons of Her Majesty's
Protestant Dissenting Subjects Dissenting from the Church of England, for the
Exercise of Religious Worship. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand
this 24th Day of March Ann. Dom. 1703.

Richard Tokelove.



And (...), Gentlemen, to go farther with our Adversaries than they can expect
we should -- what if we should suppose for once that this Abraham Gill was this
immoral Man they speak of, if he was such a refined Cheat as to have Deluded
all the Many, many honest People who have Sworn to his Character, for who knows
how far the Wit and Subtilty of Man, under the Agency of a hardened Mind, may
furnish a Man; and what Mists the Devil may have laid before the Eyes of
Mankind, that this Man should be a Common Drunkard and Swearer, and Cohabiter
with two Women at once, and a Congregation of several Hundreds of his Hearers
where he lived all the time know nothing of it, nor his Enemies be able to
produce one Affidavit of any Man that ever saw him Drunk, or heard him Swear.

But suppose these strange things come to pass, for the World is full of
strange things, what can be Inferred from hence to justify the Treatment he
has received, and all the Dissenters through his Interest?

But on this premised Supposition I crave leave to draw a few Inferences, which
shall serve to the Close of this Work.

1. All the Forgeries, all the Swearings, Drunkennesses, and Lewdness they
pretend to charge upon him, are antecedent to his being a Dissenter; and we do
not find he received the least Disturbance in the Execution of his Function on
account of these known Immoralities, and might to this day have kept his two
Women and his Cure of Souls both together, as too many of his Brethren have
done before him, and are like to do after him, for any great Care we see taken
to prevent it, had he but continued to read the Common Prayer.

I forbear to discant upon this unhappy Truth; and of the many known Instances
of an immoral Clergy, shall repeat none, but rather cover the Infirmities of
our Guides, that the Obligation, if possible, may move them both to reform, and
to hide those of their Neighbors.

2. Were all the Immoralities he is charged with True, they are not comparable
to those committed in his Prosecution: the Perjuries, Subornations, Cruelties,
Injustice, and illegal Proceedings, are intolerable. This is Casting out Devils
by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: This is the Devil turned Reformer.

3. What Is all this to going for a Soldier? If every Clergyman must be Listed
that will be Drunk, if Swearing an Oath will pull a Man's Band off and send him
to the Army, if every Clergyman that keeps a Woman more than he should do must
go into the Army, Lord have mercy and a Cross ought to be set upon the Doors of
a great many Church-Tenements, and perhaps we need not have so many severe Acts
of Parliament for raising Recruits.

Wherefore, upon the whole matter, we are not so concerned to Vindicate Mr.
Gill's Character, since were he all they could allege, it does not in the
least palliate or excuse their Dealings with him, nor will it be any
Extenuation of their illegal Practices when it comes to be Examined before a
Court of Justice.

It Is therefore enough: Let them rummage Mr. Gill's Character to the bottom,
let them confute the many Affidavits we have produced, persuade the World to
believe him an ill Man, a Drunkard, a Swearer, a Whoremaster, or any thing, we
humbly conceive it is all against them still; for they do not Persecute him as
an Immoral Man, if they had, why did they not do it long before? for it must
have been known then: but they Persecute him as a Dissenter, a Disturber of the
Neighbors with a Conventicle, Preaching in Welney Chapel without Reading the
Common Prayer: these were the Crimes. All his Vices, if they were true, ( which
nevertheless we do not grant) were committed while he was Mr. Gill the Curate,
not since he was Mr. Gill the Dissenter. He was Their Mr. Gill when they say he
kept an ill Woman: he is unaccus'd of the least Immorality since he was Our Mr.
Gill. What will they say to this part of it? This makes it a peculiar Pique at
a Party, a Push made at the Dissenters, a Sally of the Method called The
shortest way, sending our Ministers a Colonelling, Voting them a sort of People
that do not live by a lawful Calling, and can give no good Account of
themselves; and therefore, in the Eye of the Law, are Vagabonds, and may all be
Listed for Soldiers, etc.

We have therefore nothing more to say for Mr. Gill; we need not undertake the
Vindication of his Morals, we have the Inhabitants where he was Born, and
Married his first Wife; we have the Inhabitants of Maney, and of Upwell; All
these Sign to his Morals, and the People Swear that he is such a Man as they
desire to be their Minister. If his Morals are bad, the Morals of the People
should be questioned that desire a Common Drunkard and Swearer to be their
Minister. We leave the rest of the Case therefore upon them: if he is an ill
Man, they will, no doubt, make the Discovery, and dismiss him, in Vindication
of their own Character; if not, but he continues to be their Minister, and they
desire he should be so, it is a better Testimony of his Character than some
Hundreds of the Vicious Clergy of the Church of England can produce, whose
Hearers and Parishioners would turn them out for their Debaucheries, if they
knew how: And of this I do not desire to be forced to enter into the
Particulars.

FINIS.

