A TOUR Through the Whole ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. Divided into CIRCUITS or
JOURNEYS. GIVING A Particular and Entertaining ACCOUNT of whatever is Curious,
and worth Observation; VIZ. I. A DESCRIPTION of the Principal Cities and Towns,
their Situation, Government, and Commerce. II. The Customs, Manners, Exercises,
Diversions, and Employment of the People. III. The Produce and Improvement of
the Lands, the Trade, and Manufactures. IV. The Sea Ports and Fortifications,
the Course of Rivers, and the Inland Navigation. V. The Public Edifices,
Seats, and Palaces of the NOBILITY and GENTRY. VI. The Isles of Wight,
Portland, Jersey, Guernsey, and the other English and Scottish Isles of most
Note.
Interspersed with Useful OBSERVATIONS. Particularly fitted for the Perusal of
such as desire to Travel over the ISLAND.

By a GENTLEMAN.

The THIRD EDITION. With very great Additions, Improvements, and Corrections;
which bring it down to the Year 1742. And a Copious INDEX to each Volume.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for J. OSBORN, S. BIRT, D. BROWN, J. HODGES, A. MILLAR, J.
WHISTON, and J. ROBINSON. M.DCC..XLII.

A TOUR Through the ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. VOL. II.
LETTER I. Containing a DESCRIPTION of the North Shores of the Counties of
Cornwall and Devon, and some Parts of Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Dorsetshire,
Gloucestershire, Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire.
SIR,
I NOW turned about to the East; and as, when I went West, I kept to the
Southern Coast of this long County of Cornwall, and of Devonshire also, so in
going East, I shall keep the North Shore. The first Place of any Note, we came
to, was St. Ive's, a pretty good Town, and grown rich by the Fishing Trade; it
is situated on the West Side of a deep Bay, called St. Ives-bay, from the Town.
This Bay is opposite, on the Landside, to Mount's- bay, which I spoke of in my
last; but it is filled up with Sands, and here is but very little Trade in any
thing else but Cornish Slate.

It is a very pleasant View we have at Madern-hills, and the Plain by them, in
the Way from the Land's-end to St. Ives; where we have a Prospect of the Ocean
at the Land's-end, West; of the British Chanel at Mount's-bay, South; and the
Bristol Chanel, or Severn Sea, North. At St. Ives the Land between the Two
Bays, being not above Four or Five Miles over, is so situated, that upon the
Hill neither of the Two Seas are above Three Miles off, and very plain to be
seen; and so likewise, in a clear Day, are the Islands of Scilly, though above 30
Miles off.

The Country from hence to Padstow is both fruitful and pleasant, and several
Houses of Gentlemen are seen as we pass; the Sands also are very agreeable to
the Eye, and to travel upon: among the Gentlemen's Houses is Lanhidrock, the
Seat of the Earls of Radnor, who are Barons of Truro, and were so, long before
they obtained the Title of Radnor; also a good House belonging to the ancient
Family of Trefusis.

The Hills are fruitful of Tin, Copper and Lead, all the Way on our Right Hand;
the Product of which is carried all to the other Shore; so that we shall have
little to say of it here. The chief Business on this Shore is the Herring
Fishing; the Herrings about October come driving up the Severn Sea, and from
the Coast of Ireland, in prodigious Shoals, and beat all upon this Coast as
high as Bidiford and Barnstable in Devonshire, and are caught in great
Quantities by the Fishermen, chiefly on Account of the Merchants of Falmouth,
Foy, Plymouth, and other Ports on the South.

St. Michael's, or Modishole, a mean Portreeve Borough, is not now remarkable,
but was of great Note in the Saxon Time, and has still a Market weekly, and a
yearly Fair.

We then came to St. Columb's, a little Market Town, a Lordship belonging to
the Arundels of Wardour; so called, to distinguish them from the Arundels of
Trerice in this County; which Family, espousing the King's Side in the Civil
Wars, suffered much, and was innobled in Charles II.'s Time. The Wardour Family
was likewise loyal, and suffered in the same Cause.

Near this Place is a Hill, which has a Rampire on the Summit of it, and a
Causeway leading to it. It Is an old Danish Camp, and called Castellum Danis.

Padstow is a large Town, and stands on a very good Harbor for such Shipping
as use the Irish Trade. The Harbor is the Mouth of the River Camel, or Camal,
which rising at Camelford, runs down by Bodmyn to Wadbridge, a little Town,
where a large Stone Bridge of about Eight Arches is built by the Contributions
of the Country Gentlemen, at the Motion, and under the Direction, of one
Nicolas Lovibond, Vicar of Wadbridge, the Passage over the River before being
very dangerous, and having occasioned the Loss of some Lives, as well as Goods.

The Passage from this Town of Padstow to Ireland is said, by Writers, to be no
more than Twenty-four Hours; but this, if ever done, hat been so seldom, that
it ought not to be mentioned as generally the Case; for I believe not one in
Twenty-four Ships makes its Voyage in so few Hours; and that they are oftener
Five or Six Days in the Passage. Here is a very ancient Seat, like a Castle, of
a Family of the Name of Prideaux, the Chief of which, in Queen Elizabeth's
Time, built this noble Seat there.

Higher within the Land lies the Market and Borough Town of Bodmyn, formerly
one of the Coining Towns of Tin, till it lost that Privilege to Lestwithyel:
However it still injoys several Advantages, some of which are Tokens of its
Antiquity. It is pretty large, and stands between two Hills in a good Air. It
had anciently several Churches, of which now only one remains, which belonged
to the Priory, and is at present the Parish Church. A kind of Carnival is kept
here yearly, in July, whither great Numbers of People resort.

The Coinage Towns were, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, Four; namely, Leskard,
Lestwithyel, Truro, Helston.


Since that, in King James's Time, was added Pensance.

Camelford is a mean, but ancient Borough-town. Here the River Camel rises,
which takes its Name from the British Word Came, i. e. crooked. It has not
either Church or Chapel in it, nor ever had. It is only remarkable for two
great Battles which were fought here, one between King Arthur and his Nephew
Mordred, and the other between the Britons and Saxons.

The Borough of Bossiney, otherwise called Trevena, is but a small Village. It
is famous only for the splendid Ruins of an impregnable Castle, built on the
Rock, which stood partly on the Continent, and partly on an Island, joined
together by a Drawbridge. The Castle was the Seat of the British Princes, and
since, of the Dukes of Cornwall. And, it is said, Arthur was born here, and died
in one of the abovementioned Battles near Camelford.

Launceston, which is a Corruption of the British Word Lanstuphadon, i. e. St.
Stephen's Church; is a Market and Borough-town, pretty neat, and is situate on
a rising Ground, at the Extremity of the County, on the Borders of Devonshire:
great Part of it is very old, ragged and decayed.

When Richard Earl of Cornwall had the Government of this County, this was a
Frontier Town, well walled about, and fortified, and had also a noble Castle,
which, from its Strength, was called Castle Terrible. The Inhabitants, for the
Defense and Repair of it, held formerly the Lands here by Castle-guard.

Here the Lord Hopton's good Fortune failed him, and he was forced by Fairfax
to disband his Army.

Not far from hence is Hengeston-hill, which produces a great Plenty of Cornish
Diamonds. The Cornish Britons joined the Danes here, to drive out the Saxons
from Devonshire; but were totally defeated by Egbert in 831, which, it is
conjectured, gives the Name of Hengist to this Hill, in Commemoration of their
first Leader.

Newport is a little Village adjoining, and was formerly Part of Launceston;
and yet sends Two Members to Parliament. And indeed there are no less than
Forty-four, and the Number of Electors are so few in many of the Places, that
an Administration, of which Side soever it be, as to Party, has usually a great
Reliance on the Elections in this County every new Parliament, in order to
obtain a Majority in the House of Commons: For Forty-four Members from hence,
and Forty-five from another Part of the Island, who generally go one way, make
no small Figure in a Question: And in this Case it may not be improperly
observed, that the two Extremities of the Island, let the other Parts go as
they will, are generally united in the same way of Thinking, or at least of
Acting, in all Political Debates, and are likely to be so in all Times to come.

There is a fine Image or Figure of Mary Magdalen, upon the Tower of the Church
at Launceston, to which the Papists fail not to pay Reverence, as they pass by.
There is no Tin, Copper or Lead found hereabouts, as I could hear, nor any
Manufacture in the Place. There are a pretty many Attorneys here, who manage
Business for the rest of their Fraternity at the Assizes: As to Trade, it has
not much to boast of, and yet there are People enough in it to excuse those who
call it a populous Place. There is a long Nook of the County runs North from
this Place, called the Hundred of Stratton, in which there is one Market Town,
named Stratton; but it has nothing in or about it worth remarking, except only
Stow-house, built by the Earl of Bath, in the Reign of King Charles II. and as
to its Finishings within, not inferior to any in England. The Carvings,
especially those of the Chapel; the grand Alcove, and some of the best Rooms,
were done by the Hand of Michael Chuke, and are not excelled by Gibbon himself.
The Landschape, and Sea-pieces, of which there were a great Number,
(particularly in the great Stairs, a Prospect of Plymouth, containing 22 Feet
by 12) were the Work of Vandeist. The Situation of this stately Palace renders
it a disagreeable Habitation; for which Reason the Owners have disposed of the
Materials, and it is now ( Nov. 1739) pulling to Pieces. Near this Town, Sir
Ralph Hopton defeated the Parliament Forces under the Command of Major General
Chudleigh, and took him Prisoner; for which he was made Baron Stratton. It Is
said, the Place where this Battle was fought, produced a prodigious Crop of
Barley of 10 or 12 Ears on a Stalk, the next Year.

Not far from Bodmyn, is to be seen the Set of monumental Stones, called The
Hurlers; which Dr. Stukeley says, are, out of Doubt, Remains of an ancient
Druid Temple. Probably they are called by this Name, from the Game of Hurling,
practiced in these Parts; the Country People giving them that for want of a
better; and indeed, it is said, that they have a superstitious Notion, that
they were once Men, who were transformed into Stones, for playing at this Sport
on a Sunday. They are oblong, rude, unhewn Stones, pitched on one End upon the
Ground. They stand on a Down in Three Circles, the Centres whereof are in a
right Line, the middle-most Circle the greatest.

Now I have mentioned the Hurlers, I must take the Opportunity to describe the
Hurling Match; for which the Cornish Men are so particularly famous, and which
is one of their principal Recreations, though barbarous enough. A Silver Ball is
generally the Prize on these Occasions. The Match is made in different Manners:
for sometimes the Challenge is by Twenty or Thirty Men on a Side, and no others
are to interfere; at other times, when a great Number of People are assembled
at a Wake or Church-Ale, the Word is given out, That John's, Wills, and Toms,
will oppose all other Names: or, at other times, That Eldest or Seconds are
against all Younger Sons. And so the Ball is thrown up, and becomes the
Property of that Party which carries it away to the Goal set for that Purpose.

But another kind of Hurling is, when an Out-ball, as they call it, is thrown
up; and these Matches are generally made by Two or more neighboring Gentlemen,
who, at a Day agreed on, bring each of them the Men of Two, Three, or more
Parishes; and the Goals are then set, perhaps, Four or Five Miles distant, at
some Gentlemen's Houses, Towns, or the like: and here nothing is said about
Matching in Number, or otherwise; but the Ball is thrown up, and a bloody
Skirmish generally ensues: no Bushes, Briers, Bogs, Mud-pools, Rivers, or any
other Impediments, hinder their Course, nor any Friendship, Relation, or former
Obligation, in the least, abates their Fury. The Party prevailing generally
present the Ball to the Gentlemen who brought them on, as a Trophy; and he, in
Return, sets open his Cellar-doors, where they wash away the Blood from their
Noses, and apply a Balsam to their Bruises.

The Wrestling in Cornwall is, indeed, a much more manly and generous Exercise;
and that Closure, which they call the Cornish Hug, has made them eminent in the
Wrestling Rings all over England; as the Norfolk and Suffolk Men are, for their
Dexterity at the Hand and Foot, and throwing up the Heels of their Adversary,
without taking hold of him.

Passing the River Tamar, about Two Miles from Launceston, we enter the great
County of Devon; and as it is in the most wild and barren Part of it, and where
formerly Tin Mines were found, though now they are either quite exhausted, or not
to be worked without more Charge than Profit; so we must expect it a little to
resemble its neighbor County.

The River Tamar here abounds with fresh Salmon, which are so exceeding fat and
good, that they are esteemed in both Counties above the Fish of the same Kind
found in other Places; and the Quantity is so great, as supplies the Country in
abundance. This is occasioned by the Mouth of the River being so very large,
and the Water so deep for Two Leagues before it opens into Plymouth Sound, that
the Fish have a secure Retreat in the salt Water for their Harbor and Shelter,
and from thence they shoot up into the fresh Water, in vast Numbers, to cast
their Spawn.

We ride but a few Miles in Devonshire, before we find a different Face in
several respects: As, 1. More People than in Cornwall: 2. Larger Towns: 3. The
People all busy, and in full Employ upon their Manufactures.

At the uppermost and extreme Part of the County North-west, runs a large
Promontory into the Sea beyond all the Land on either Side, whether of
Devonshire, or of Cornwall. This they would fain have called Hercules's
Promontory; but the honest Sailors, and, after them, the plain Country People,
call it Hartland Point, or Hearty Point, from the Town of Hartland, which
stands just within the Shore, and is situated on the utmost Edge of the County
of Devon: It is a Market Town of good Resort, the People coming constantly to
it out of Cornwall, the Fisher-boats of Barnstable, Bidiford, and the other
Towns on the Coasts, lying often under the Lee, as they call it, of these
Rocks, for Shelter from the South-west, or South-east Winds; at which time the
Seamen go on Shore here, and supply themselves with Provisions: nor is the Town
unconcerned in that gainful Fishing-trade, which is carried on for the Herrings
on this Coast.

From this Point or Promontory, the Land falling away for some Miles, makes a
Gulf or Bay, which reaching to the Head-land, or Point of Barnstable Haven, is
called from thence Barnstable Bay. Into this Bay, or at the West End of it, the
Rivers Taw and Towridge empty themselves at one Mouth; and it is very
particular, that as Two Rivers join in One Chanel, so here are Two great
trading Towns in One Port, a thing, which, as it is not usual, so I cannot say
is an Advantage to any of them; for it naturally follows, that they rival one
another, and lessen both; whereas, had they been joined together in one Town,
or were it possible to join them, they would make the most considerable Town,
or City rather, in all this Part of England.

These are the Towns of Barnstable and Bidiford, the first, the most ancient;
the last, the most flourishing; the Harbor or River is, in its Entrance, the
same to both; and when they part, the Towridge turns to the Right, or
South-west, and the Taw to the South-east; yet they seem to be both so safe, so
easy in the Chanel, so equally good with respect to Shipping, and so
equidistant from the Sea, that neither Town complains of the Bounty of the Sea
to them, or their Situation by Land; and yet of late Years the Town of Bidiford
has flourished, and the Town of Barnstable rather declined.

Bidiford is a clean, well built Town; the more ancient Street, which lies next
the River, is very pleasant, where is the Bridge, a very noble Quay, and the
Custom-house; it is also very well built and populous, and fronts the River for
above three Quarters of a Mile: But besides this, there is a new spacious
Street, which runs North and South, or rather North-west, and South-east, a
great Length, broad as the High Street of Exeter, well built, and inhabited
with considerable and wealthy Merchants, who traffic to most Parts of the
World.

Here, as is to be seen in almost all the Market Towns of Devonshire, is a very
large and well-finished Meeting House, and, by the Multitude of People which I
saw come out of it, I thought all the Town had gone thither, and began to
inquire for the Church: but I found that also large, spacious, and filled with
People of the best Fashion.

The Trade of this Town, as well as of all the Towns on this Coast, being very
much in Fish, I observed that several Ships were employed to go to Liverpool,
and up the River Mersey to Warrington, to fetch the Rock Salt, which is found
in that County, (and of which I shall say more in my Remarks on those Parts) to
Bidiford and Barnstable, and there dissolve it into Brine in the Seawater,
joining the Strength of two Bodies in one, and then boil it up again into a new
Salt, as the Dutch do by that of the French and Portuguese. This is justly
called Salt upon Salt, and with this they cure their Herrings. As this is a
Trade which can be but of few Years standing, because the Rock Salt itself has
not been discovered in England many Years; so the Difference in curing the Fish
has been such, that the Demand for them has considerably increased in foreign
Markets.

Here is a very fine Stone Bridge over the River, built in the 14th Century, on
24 Gothic Arches, all uniform and regular, and very good Workmanship of the
kind. These Arches are indeed beautiful and stately; but what a late Author
says, that one of them is so big, that a Ship of 60 Tons may sail under it, is
a Mistake, no such thing being practicable, either at London Bridge, Rochester
Bridge, or even at York, where the largest Arch in England is supposed to be.

As Bidiford has a fine Bridge over the Towridge, so Barnstable has a very
noble one over the Taw, and though not longer, is counted larger and stronger
than the other. These two rival Towns are really very considerable; both of
them have a large Share in the Trade to Ireland, and in the Herring-fishery,
and in a Trade to the British Colonies in America; if Bidiford cures more Fish,
Barnstable imports more Wine, and other Merchandises; they are both established
Ports for landing Wool from Ireland; of which by itself.

If Bidiford has a greater Number of Merchants, Barnstable has a greater
Commerce within Land, by its great Market for Irish Wool and Yarn, etc. with
the Serge-markets of Tiverton and Exeter, who come up hither to buy. So that,
in a word, Barnstable, though it has lost Ground to Bidiford, yet, take it in all
its Trade completely, is full as considerable as Bidiford; only, that perhaps
it was formerly far superior to it, and the other has risen up to be its Match.

Barnstable is a large, well built Town, seated among the Hills. It is more
populous than Bidiford, but not better built, and stands lower; insomuch, that
at High Water in Spring-tides it is, in a manner, surrounded with Water. The
Bridge was built by the generous Benefaction of one Stamford, a Citizen and
Merchant of London, who, it seems, was not a Native of the Place; but by
trading here to his Gain, had Kindness enough for the Town, to confer that
valuable Benefit upon them. It was formerly walled in, and had a Castle and a
Priory. It Is governed by a Mayor and Twenty-four Burgesses, whereof Two are
Aldermen. It has also an High-Steward, and Recorder.

The Bridge at Bidiford, as above, was likewise a Gift; but was, as they say,
done by Collections among the Clergy, by Grant of Indulgences, and the like
Church Management: However, both the Towns are infinitely obliged to the
Benefactors; and we wish no worse Use had ever been made of Superstition.

Behind Bidiford, as we come from Launceston, are several good Towns, though I
observed, that the Country was wild and barren; as Tavistock, Torrington, etc.

Tavistock is situate on the Tavy, among Springs, and is a large Town pretty
well built. The Abbot of this Place sat in Parliament, built a Church of 126
Yards long, spacious Cloisters, and a Chapter House, with 36 Stalls, which are
all now destroyed.

The Town of Torrington is situated on the same River that Bidiford stands
upon. It has a large spacious Church, with a Library in it; and was for some
time the Residence of Margaret, the Mother of Henry VII.

Another Town in this Part of the Country is Okehampton, vulgarly Okington, a
good Market and Borough-town, governed by Eight principal Burgesses, and as
many Assistants: it is a manufacturing Town, as all the Towns this way now are,
and pretty rich; but in the Records of Antiquity it appears to have been much
more considerable than it is now, having 92 Knights Fees belonging to it.

A little above Barnstable, N. E. upon the Coast, stands a noted Market and
Port-town, called Ilfordcomb, a Place of good Trade, populous and rich; which
is owing to its having a very good Harbor and Road for Ships, which affords a
safe Shelter for Vessels from Ireland, when in bad Weather they cannot, without
the extremest Hazard, run into the Mouth of the Taw, which they call Barnstable
Water; and this is one Reason, that the Merchants at Barnstable do much of
their Business at this Port of Ilfordcomb.

The Harbor of this Town was maintained formerly at the private Expense of the
Ancestors of Sir Bourchier Wrey, Bart. Lord of the Manor; and the Quay or Pier
of it contains in Length upwards of 850 Feet, and in Height upwards of Forty;
and the Warp-house, Light-house, Pilot-boats, and Taw-boats belonging to the
Port, were at first founded and built, and constantly repaired and maintained,
by that worthy Family, without any Assistance, but some small Acknowledgments
paid to them as Lords of the Manor. But by Length of Time, and Violence of the
Sea, the Quay was very much sunk and impaired, the Warp and Warp-house, by long
Usage, was gone to Decay, and the Boats for Piloting and Towing were much out
of Repair, and the small Duties and Acknowlegements to Sir Bourchier sinking,
and being frequently unpaid; to remedy all these Evils, an Act passed Anno
1731, George II. for repairing, and keeping in Repair, and enlarging the Piers
and Harbor, and for the Support of the Light and Light-house, the Warp and
Warp-house, and the Pilot, and Towing-boats, as abovementioned: so that by
this means the Harbor of Ilfordcomb is likely to continue the useful and
convenient Port it has been for so many Years past, to the End of Time.

Antiquity tells us long Stories of the Danes landing on this Coast; of Hubba
the Danish King being slain at Kennith Castle, between this Place and the Mouth
of the Taw and Towridge; and that the Place was called Hubbestow from his being
buried there: but I could not hear either of this Castle, or Burial-place, or
so much as the Ruins of them.

The Seacoast in this Country runs a little farther East by North; but nothing
of Moment is to be seen there, except Fishing-towns, and little Creeks, on
which are Two Market Towns, viz. Combemerton and Porlock, till we came to
Minehead.

Leaving the Coast in our Journey Southward, we came to the great River Ex or
Isca, which rises in the Hills on the North Side of the County, and, like the
Tamar, begins within Four or Five Miles of the Severn Sea. The Country it rises
in is called Exmore: Camden says it is a filthy, barren Ground; and indeed so
it is: but as soon as the Ex comes off from the Moors and hilly Country, and
descends into the lower Grounds, we found an Alteration; for then we saw
Devonshire in its other Countenance, cultivated, populous and fruitful, and
continuing so till we came to Tiverton.

Next to Exeter, this is the greatest manufactureing Town in the County, and,
of all the inland Towns, is likewise next to it in Wealth, and Number of
People; it stands on the River Ex, and has over it an old Stone Bridge, with
another over the little River Loman, which immediately after falls into the Ex
just below the Town. Antiquity says, before those Bridges were built, there
were two Fords here, one through each River; and that the Town was from thence
called Twyfordton, that is, the Town upon the two Fords; and so, by
abbreviating the Sounds, Twy-for-ton, then Tiverton.

This Town has been a remarkable Sufferer by Fire; for in the Year 1598. April
3. it was consumed on a sudden; Aug. 5. 1612, it was again burnt down; and July
5. 1731, another dreadful Fire destroyed there 200 of the best Houses.

An Act passed on this sad Occasion, Anno 1732, for the more easy rebuilding of
the Town, and determining Differences on that Account; and it injoins, that the
new-built Houses shall be covered with Lead, Slate, or Tile, and not Thatch;
that perilous Trades shall not be exercised in public Streets; that no Stacks
of Hay, Straw, Corn, etc. shall be erected at or near the public Parts of the
Town; that Fire-Engines may be bought by the Guardians of the Poor; that Houses
may be demolished to stop any future Fire: that the Streets and Passages of the
Town may be enlarged, and particular Houses pulled down for that Purpose, with
other useful Provisions.

An Act also passed Anno 1733, for making a Chapel, built by the Subscription
of the Inhabitants of Tiverton, a perpetual Cure; and for providing a
Maintenance for the Ministers who shall officiate in it; for, as the Preamble
to the Act observes, the Parish Church was not near capacious enough to receive
the Inhabitants of the Parish. The late Sir William Wyndham was a great
Encourager and Promoter of this new Chapel at its first Erection.

But the Beauty of Tiverton is the Free School, at the East Entrance into the
Town, a noble Building, but a much nobler Foundation; it was erected by one
Peter Blundel, a Clothier, and a Lover of Learning, who used the Saying of
William of Wickham to the King, when he founded the Royal School at Winchester,
viz. "That if he was not himself a Scholar, he would be the Occasion of making
more Scholars than any Scholar in England;" to which End he founded this
School. He has endowed it so liberally, that, I was told, the Schoolmaster has
at least Sixty Pounds per Annum, besides a very good House to live in, and the
Advantage of Scholars not on the Foundation; and that the Usher has in
Proportion. To this the generous Founder added Two Fellowships, and Two
Scholarships, which he gave the Maintenance for to Sydney College in Cambridge;
and One Fellowship, and Two Scholarships, to Baliol College in Oxford; all
which are appointed for the Scholars bred up in this School.

As this is the chief Nursery of almost all the young Gentry of these Western
Parts, the Profit arising to the Master from Boarders, and the liberal
Benefactions of the Parents, added to the Salary beforementioned, render it a
Preferment suitable to a Man of the best Parts and Learning; and as the
Trustees are Gentlemen of great Honor, it is generally disposed of to the most
worthy Candidate. Mr. Rayner presided in it for many Years, with very great
Applause, and died about This was written Anno 1740.
Twelve Years ago. To him succeeded Mr. Smith; after him Mr. Jones; next Mr.
Wesley, once Usher of Westminster School, as noted for his poetical
Performances, as his Brothers John and Charles are for their being at the Head
of the new Sectarists, who are called Methodists; and he dying Nov. 1739, is
succeeded by Mr. Daddo. Thus has it, in Twelve Years time, undergone Five
different Regimens; and if it be considered, that every Change introduces some
Difference in the Method of Teaching and Discipline, it will be no Surprise,
that the School is something sunk in its former Reputation. The present Master
is Fellow of Baliol College, Oxford, had his Education here, and from his great
Abilities, and good Economy, (in which last respect a great Complaint lay
against his Predecessor) the School is like to retrieve its former flourishing
Condition.

The great Number of Gentlemen's Sons sent hither for their Education, as I have
hinted, is no small Advantage to the Town likewise; and this, joined with the
brisk Trade carried on here, renders it so flourishing, that notwithstanding
the dreadful Calamity it underwent by the Fire in 1731, which almost totally
consumed it, it is already very elegantly rebuilt; and carries very few other
Marks of this Devastation, than the Magnificence and Beauty of the new
Structures.

As this is a manufacturing Country, we found the People here all fully
employed, and very few, if any, out of Work.

From this Town there is little belonging to Devonshire but what has been
spoken of, except what lies in the Road to Taunton, which we took next, where
we meet with the River Columb, which rises also in the utmost Limits of the
County toward Somersetshire, and gives Name to so many Towns on its Banks,
that it leaves no room to doubt of its own Name being right; such are
Columb-David's, Ufcolumb, Columbstock, and Columbton; the last is a
Market Town, and they are all full of Manufacturers depending much on the
Master-manufacturers of Tiverton.

Before we leave Devonshire, it will not be amiss to take Notice of Lundy
Island, which, though 50 Miles from Devonshire, North-westward, is much mote
remote from any other Continent. It Is but Five Miles long, and Two broad; but
so surrounded with inaccessible Rocks, that there is but one small Entrance
into it, where Two Men can scarce go abreast. Though this Island lies so far in
the Sea, it has the Advantage of several Springs of fresh Water.

With the Town of Tiverton we leave the County of Devon, and entering
Somersetshire, have really a View of a different Country from Devonshire; for
at Wellington, the first Town we came to in Somersetshire, though partly employed
in Manufactureing too, we were immediately surrounded with Beggars, to such a
Degree, that we had some Difficulty to keep them from under our Horses Heels. I
was astonished at such a Sight, in a Country where the People were so generally
full of Work; for in Cornwall, where there are hardly any Manufacturers, and
abundance of Poor, we never found any like this.

Wellington is a low dirty Place, and is only remarkable for having been the
Place of Residence of the Lord Chief Justice Popham, in the Reigns of Q.
Elizabeth, and King James I. who was buried here. They talk much of one
Salkeld, who was converted from Popery by King James I. and made Minister of
this Place. He called himself, in Compliment to the King, The Royal Convert;
who, in return, complimented him with the Title of the Learned Salkeld, which,
by-the-bye, reflected no bad Compliment on himself, for having converted a
learned Man.

The County of Somerset joins to the North-east Part of Devonshire, and takes
its Name from the British Word Gladyr Haf, which signifies Summer-Country, and
so the Welsh call it in their Language to this Day. I touched only upon one
Point of the County in my last, as I went Westward. The whole County is worth a
more particular Account, than can be given within the Space of a Letter.

From Wellington we came to Taunton, leaving Blackdown Hills on our Right, and
Ilminster behind them Southward, a Market Town, famed for its very good Church,
and a stately Monument erected in it to Nicolas Wadham, and Dorothy, his Wife,
Founders of Wadham College, Oxon.

Near Taunton lies that rich Track of Ground, vulgarly called Taunton-dean.
This large, wealthy, and very populous Town takes its Name from the River Tone,
whereon it is situated. One of the chief Manufacturers here told us, That there
was at that time so good a Trade in the Town, that they had eleven hundred
Looms going for the Weaving of Sagathies, Duroys, and such kind of Stuffs; and
that not one of those Looms wanted Work: he added, That there was not a Child
in the Town, or in the Villages round it, of above Five Years old, but, if it
was not neglected by its Parents, and untaught, could earn its own Bread. This
was what I never met with in any Place in England, except at Colchester in
Essex.

The Election of Members here, is by those whom they call Pot-Walloners, that
is to say, Every Inhabitant, whether Housekeeper or Lodger, who dresses his
own Victuals: to make out which, several Inmates or Lodgers will, some little
time before the Election, bring out their Pots, and make Fires in the Street,
and boil their Victuals in the Sight of their Neighbors, that their Votes may
not be called in Question.

There are Two large Parish Churches in this Town, and Two or Three
Meeting Houses, one of which is said to be the largest in the County. The
Inhabitants have been noted for Dissenters principally; for Taunton was always
counted a Seminary for such. They suffered much in the Duke of Monmouth's
Rebellion, but paid King James home for the Cruelty exercised by Jefferies
among them; for when the Prince of Orange arrived, the whole Town ran in to
him, with so universal a Joy, that it was thought, if he had wanted it, he
might have raised a little Army there, and in the adjacent Part of the Country.

There is a kind of College, or Academy, for the Dissenters in this Town; and
it is by far the greatest Town in all this Part of the Country.

From Taunton we went North to take a View of the Coast. Exmore, of which
mention was made above, where the River Ex rises, lies in the Way, Part of it
in this County, and extending to the Sea Side: it gives, indeed, but a
melancholy View, being a vast Track of barren and desolate Lands; yet on the
Coast there are some very good Seaports.

Porlock, mentioned before, on the utmost Extent of the County, has but a small
Harbor, nor has it any thing of Trade.

But Minehead, the safest Harbor on this Side, is a fine Port: no Ship is so
big, but it may come in; and no Weather so bad, but the Ships are safe when
they are in; and they told me, that in the great Storm, Anno 1703, when the
Ships were blown on Shore, wrecked, and lost, in every Harbor of the County,
they suffered little or no Damage in this.

The Trade of this Town lies chiefly with Ireland, and this was for many Years
the chief Port in these Parts, where Wool from Ireland was allowed to be
imported; but that Liberty is since enlarged to several other Ports by Act of
Parliament.

The Town is well built, is full of rich Merchants, and has some Trade also to
Virginia, and the West Indies. They correspond much with the Merchants of
Barnstable and Bristol, in their foreign Trade. What has greatly contributed to
the Improvement of Minehead, was an Act passed in the 12th and 13th Year of the
late King William's Reign, which was continued by an Act of the Tenth of the
late Queen Anne, For Recovering, Securing, and keeping in Repair, the Harbor
of Minehead. And now so lately as in the Session 1737-8, another Act passed for
further continuing the Terms and Powers of the Two former Acts, for the
bringing to Effect the same laudable Purposes, in pursuance of which a new Head
has been built, the Beach cleared, and a great Progress made in the Piers and
designed Works.

From hence the Coast bears back West to Watchet, a small Port of late Years,
though formerly much more considerable; for it had given Place to Minehead, though
now it is in a much better Condition than it used to be in; and this it owes to
Two Acts of Parliament, one passed in the Sixth Year of the late Queen Anne,
for repairing of its Quay and Harbor, and the other in the Tenth. But when the
Works designed were near completed, it was found, that the Quay was built much
too low, and not extended to a sufficient Length to preserve the Town, and the
Ships and Vessels riding in the Harbor, from the Violence of the Sea:
whereupon another Act passed in the Seventh of King George I. for continuing
the Duties laid by the former Acts, and remedying the Inconveniences
beforementioned.

It seems to me, that the Town of Minehead rose out of the Decay of the Towns
of Porlock and Watchet.

On this Coast are vast Quantities of Rock, or rather Pebbles, which the Sea,
at low Water, leaves uncovered, from whence the neighboring Inhabitants fetch
them on Shore to a higher Ground, and burn them into Lime for dressing their
Land; but it is more especially useful in Building; for that no Cement
whatsoever is more lasting for Jets d' Eau Heads, Piers, and other Masonry that
is to lie under Water; in which Position it runs up to a Stone as hard as
Marble, and is scarce to be beaten abroad. The Cliffs are stored with
Alabaster, which, by the Wash of the Sea, falls down, and is conveyed from
hence to Bristol, and other Places on this Shore, in great Quantity. Neither
should it be omitted, that the Inhabitants burn great Quantities of Seaweed to
supply the Glass-makers at Bristol.

Walking on the Beach near Watchet, I discovered among the large Gravel great
Numbers of Stones, fluted in Imitation of the Shells of Fishes of all kinds:
many of the flat kind are double, and curiously tallied one in another, which
may, by a violent Stroke, be separated. How to account for the vast Variety to
be found here of this Sport of Nature, I know not: some I have seen as broad as
a Pewter-dish, and again others no bigger than a Pepper-corn; but in all of
them the Flutings are regular; some like the Escallop, in Rays from a Center,
others like the Perriwinkle, in spiral Lines: in these and all other Forms,
they lie here in great Plenty.

Quantock is a high Down in the Neighborhood; from whence, besides the two
little Islands, called the Steep-Holmes, and the Flat-Holmes, and an extensive
View of the Chanel, I had a fair and distinct Prospect of the Welsh Coast for
many Leagues in Length.

From hence the winding Shore brings us to Bridgwater. This is an ancient and
very considerable Town and Port; it stands at the Mouth of the River Parrat, or
Perrot, which comes from the South, after having received the River Tone from
the West, which is made navigable up to within a few Miles of Taunton, by a
very fine new Chanel, cut at the Expense of the People of Taunton, and which,
by the Navigation of it, is infinitely advantageous to that Town, and well
worth all their Expense, first by bringing up Coals, which are brought from
Swanzy in Wales by Sea to Bridgwater, and thence by Barges up this River to
Taunton; next for bringing all heavy Goods and Merchandises from Bristol, such
as Iron, Lead, Oil, Wine, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Grocery, Dye-stuffs, and the
like.

This Town of Bridgwater is a populous, tradeing Town, well built, and as well
inhabited, having many Families of good Fashion dwelling in it, besides
Merchants. The famous Admiral Blake, who under the Commonwealth so much exalted
the Glory of the English maritime Force, was a Native of this Town.

This Town was regularly fortified in the late Civil Wars, and sustained more
than one Siege. The Situation of it renders it easy to be fortified, the River
and Haven taking one chief Part of the Circumference. Over the River, they have
a very good Bridge of Stone; and the Tide rises here, at High Water, near Six
Fathoms, and sometimes flows in with such Impetuosity, that it comes Two
Fathoms deep at a time; and when it does so, unawares, it often occasions great
Damage to Ships, driving them foul of one another, and frequently oversets
them. This sudden Rage of the Tide is called the Boar, and is frequent in all
the Rivers of this Chanel, especially in the Severn; it is also known in the
North, particularly in the Trent, and the Ouse, at their Entrance into the
Humber, at Bristol, and in several other Places.

There is in Bridgwater, besides a very large Church, a fine Meeting House,
built since the Toleration, in which it is remarkable, that they have an
advanced Seat for the Mayor and Aldermen, when any of the Magistrates shall be
of their Communion, as sometimes has happened. Here also is a College, or
private Academy, for the Dissenters to breed up their preaching Youth.

From Bridgwater is a Road to Bristol, which they call the Lower-way; the
Upper-way, which is the more frequented Road, being over Mendip Hills. This
Lower-way is not always passable, being subject to Floods, and dangerous
Inundations. All this Part of the Country, viz. between Bridgwater and the Sea,
and on Northward upon the Coast, lies low, and is wholly employed in feeding of
Black Cattle, which they bring out of the West Part of Devon, and the
neighboring Borders of Cornwall, where the finest are bred; for as to those
few bred in these low Lands, they are very heavy, sluggish, and unshapely, and
the Beef soft and spongy, such as they seldom or never drive to London Markets.
Indeed, they breed a great many Colts; but then they too must be transplanted
very young, into a dry, healthy Soil; for it is very difficult to find a Horse
of their own Breed fit for any thing but a Drudge. The Moors, or Marsh-grounds,
which are also employed in the same way, extend themselves up the Rivers Perrot
and Ivil, into the Heart of the Country; of which in its Place.

This low Part, between Bridgwater and Bristol, suffered exceedingly in that
terrible Inundation of the Sea, which was occasioned by the great Storm, Anno
1703; and the Country People have set up Marks upon their Houses and Trees,
with this Note upon them, Thus high the Waters came in the great Storm: Thus
far the great Tide flowed up in the last violent Tempest; and the like.

In one Place they showed us where a Ship was driven up upon the Shore, several
hundred Yards from the ordinary High Water Mark, and left upon dry Land.

As the low Part is thus employed in grazing and feeding Cattle, so all the
rest of this large extended Country is employed in the Woollen Manufacture, and
in the best and most profitable Part of it, viz. In Taunton The Serges,
Druggets, etc. and several other kinds of Stuffs. In Wells, Shepton,
Glastenbury, etc. Knitting of Stockens, principally for the Spanish Trade. In
Bristol, and many Towns on the Somersetshire Side Druggets, Cantaloons, and
other Stuffs. In Froom, Philips-Norton, and all the Country bordering upon
Wiltshire Fine Spanish Medley Cloths, especially on that Part of the County
from Wincanton, and Mere, to Warminster, Bruton, Castlecary, Temple-comb, down
to Gillingham and Shaftsbury, in Dorsetshire.


These fine Spanish Medley Cloths are the mixed colored Cloths, which all the
Persons of Fashion in England wear. There are vast Quantities of these exported
to all Parts of Europe, and it is so very considerable a Trade, and of so vast
an Advantage to England, in maintaining and supporting so many poor Families,
and making so many rich ones, that it is almost impossible to give a just
Description of it. The above Sketch, however, may serve as an Introduction to
it. But I shall add a little more concerning this County; and upon my entering
into the North-west and West Parts of Wiltshire, where the Center of this
Prodigy of a Trade is, I shall sum it all up together, and show you the Extent
of Land which it spreads itself upon, and so give you some Idea, as well of the
vast Numbers of People who are sustained, as of those who are enriched by it.

But I must first go back a little while into Somersetshire: The Northern Part
of the County I did not visit in this Journey, which, as I hinted before, is
only a Return from my long Travel to the Land's-end. In omitting this Part, I,
of course, leave the two Cities of Bristol and Bath, and that high Part of the
County called Mendip-hill, to my next Western Journey, which will include all
the Counties due West from London; for these now spoken of, though ordinarily
called the West-country, are rather North-west than West.

In that Part of the Country which lies Southward of Taunton and Bridgwater, is
Langport, a well-frequented Market Town, on the River Parr, which is navigable
for Barges to Bristol, and occasions a good Trade here. Eels are exceeding
plentiful and cheap here. Near this Place General Fairfax beat up the
discontented Goring's Quarters, and entirely defeated him.

South Petherton is a Market Town on the same River, famous, of old, for the
Place of King Ina, but now of no other Note than an annual Fair, which lasts
Five Days, in June.

From hence you come to Yeovil, which I have already mentioned in a former
Letter.

Ivelchester is a Borough Town, and, as its Ruins show, was formerly very
large, and encompassed with a double Wall, and had Four Churches. It has now a
good Bridge over the Ivel. It was here that, on the 3d of May 1740, Mrs.
Elizabeth Branch, and her Daughter, Miss Betty Branch, were executed for a most
barbarous Murder committed on the Body of a Servant Girl, by one continued
Series of Seven Hours beating and whipping, which with the Behavior of the
Criminals, was of so cruel and atrocious a Nature, that it shocked the whole
Kingdom. The Particulars are too well known to need any farther Mention here,
had we Room, which we have not.

Somerton is a good Market Town, whence, some say, the Country takes its Name.
It was anciently very noted, and had a strong Castle, in which John King of
France was Prisoner. Here is a Fair which holds from Palm Sunday to the Middle
of June.

Milbourn lies on the Edge of Dorsetshire, and is very ancient; but has neither
Market, nor Fair.

Camalet is a noted Place, situated on the highest Ground in this County, on
the Edge of Dorsetshire: its vulgar Name is Cadbury-castle, from the Village of
North-Cadbury, wherein it stands. Hereabouts rise the Rivers of Somersetshire,
which run into the Severn Sea Westward, and that in Dorset, which goes
Eastward, through Sturminster, into the Southern Ocean. It is a noble
Fortification of the Romans. The Prospect is woody, and very pleasant;
here-and-there lofty and steep Hillocks. Roman Coins, in great Plenty, have
been found here, and in all the Country round. The Entrance is guarded with Six
or Seven Ditches. On the North-side, in the fourth Ditch, is a never failing
Spring, called King Arthur 's Well. Over it they have dug up square Stones,
Door-jambs with Hinges, and say there are subterraneous Vaults thereabout. The
Church and Tower of Cadbury is small, but neatly built of Stone.

At Wincaunton, an Urn was lately found full of Roman Money. Half a Peck of the
same Coin was discovered in enclosing Ground, toward Beacon-ash, a little above
Sutton; as also Patera's, a Knife, and other Antiquities, now in Lord
Winchelsca's Custody: in particular, at Long-leat, in Lord Weymouth's Library,
a Piece of Lead weighing 50 Pounds, One Foot Nine Inches long, Two Inches
thick, Three and an half broad, found in Lord Fitzharding's Grounds near Bruton
in Somersetshire, was discovered by digging a Hole to set a Gate-post in, with
a legible Inscription.

The Road from hence to Glastenbury, is over Rocks and Heads of Rivers. But
that is alleviated by the many natural Curiosities such Places afford.

Kyneton Village, for half a Mile together, is naturally paved with one smooth
broad Rock, the whole Length of the Road; so that it looks like Ice.

Crossing the Fosse Road at Lyteford, you enter a flat moorish Country, full of
artificial Cuts and Drains. The Ascent to the Torr, which overhangs the Town of
Glastenbury, is very difficult. Upon a narrow Crest of the Torr, which is much
the highest; the Abbot built a Church to St. Michael, of good square Stone. The
Tower is left, though ruinous, and is an excellent Sea-mark. It probably cost
more to raise the Stone to this Height, than to erect the Building. Half way up
is a Spring: it is certainly higher than any Ground within Ten Miles of the
Place. In the Times of Superstition this great Monastery held the first Place
for Reputation of Sanctity.

The Inhabitants will have it, that King Arthur was buried here, and, as a
Proof thereof, that his Coffin had been found in this Place; and also, that
Joseph of Arimathea had been here, and that when he had fixed his Staff in the
Ground, which was on Christmas Day, it immediately took Root, budded, put forth
White-thorn Leaves, and the next Day was in full Blossom, white as a Sheet; and
that the Plant is preserved, and blows every Christmas Day, as at first, to
this very Time.

I believe the Miracle amounts to no more than this; viz. That a kind of
White-thorn grows hereabout, which, in a mild Winter, puts forth some Blossom
about Christmas; and I doubt not, but some of the same Kind may be found at
other Places, if any Observations were made of it. But this Place is remarkable
for many other mavelous Stories, recorded by the Monks, who formerly
possessed it.

As to the Burial of King Arthur, Mr. Camden makes no doubt of it, and gives us
from Giraldus Cambrensis an Account how King Henry II. caused Search to be made
for his Tomb, and before the Workmen had dug Seven Feet deep, they came to a
great Stone, having a Cross of Lead on the Inside of it, and the subsequent
Letters or Inscription upon it, and in the following rude Character; which the
said Giraldus Cambrensis, Mr. Camden says, was an Eyewitness of, as well as of
a Coffin of hollowed Oak, which they found by digging Nine Feet deeper than the
Inscription, wherein were deposited the Bones of that great Prince. The
Inscription is as follows:

But to leave these more disputable Points for Matters of greater Certainty: it
is not doubted but King Ina built the Church of Glastenbury, as one of the most
ancient, so the most wealthy and magnificent, loaded with Revenues by the
Saxon, and perhaps the British Monarchs. The Abbot lived in little less State
than the Royal Donors, his Revenue amounting to 40,000 l. annually. He could
from the Torr see a vast Track of this rich Land in his own Possession, and
Seven Parks well stored with Deer belonging to the Monastery. It Is walled
round, and imbattled like a Town, a Mile in Compass.

When I was last at Glastenbury, there were magnificent Ruins; but, within a
few Years, a Presbyterian Tenant had made more barbarous Havoc there, than had
been since the Dissolution; for every Week a Pillar, a Buttress, a Window-jamb,
or an Angle of fine hewn Stone, was sold to the best Bidder. And they were
actually stripping St. Joseph's Chapel for that Purpose, and the squared Stones
were laid up by Lots in the Abbot's Kitchen. The rest goes to paving Yards and
Stalls for Cattle, or to the Highway. So much Dread indeed have the People here
of Founders Curses, that they are afraid to make use of the Materials for
Dwelling-houses; and are full of Stories of sad Accidents and Judgments, that
have fallen upon such as have; but venture it for the Highways, for a
Townhouse, and even for Barns and Stables; so that, as one observes, where few
are so hardy as to apply them to their particular or personal Use, a public
Building shall be erected, where all come in for their Snack.

The Abbot's Lodging was a fine Stone Building, but could not content the
just-mentioned Tenant, who pulled it down, and out of it built a new House,
absurdly setting up the Arms and Cognizances of the great Saxon Kings and
Princes, who were Founders, and of the Abbots, over his own Doors and Windows.
Nothing is left entire, but the Kitchen, a judicious Piece of Architecture. But
Tradition says, that this is but a modern Building; for the Story goes, That
Whiting, the last Abbot, being dealt with by Henry VIII. and his Cormorants,
for a Surrender, and bravely refusing to join in the Sacrilege, that Prince
proceeded to Menaces, and told him, he "would burn his Kitchen about his Ears."
To which he returned Answer, "That he would build such an one as all the Timber
in the Forest should not burn." And accordingly, as it is said, built this in
Defiance, which is all of firm Stone, Walls and Roof, having nothing
combustible in it. But what neither Flattery nor Menaces could effect, Tyranny
and Murder brought about. For the Abbot was hanged on St. Michael's Tower, just
now mentioned, on the Top of the high Hill, called The Torr, thereby
accomplishing a Prophecy, (as the Townsmen call it; but rather occasioning a
Saying since spread abroad) That a Whiting should swim over Glastenbury Torr.

The Church was large and magnificent; the Walls of the Choir are standing, 25
Fathom long, and 12 broad. There is one Jamb at the East End of the High Altar
left.

Hereabout were buried King Edgar, and many of the Saxon Monarchs, whose noble
Ashes ought to have protected the Whole.

Two Pillars of the great Middle Tower are left, next the Choir. On the
North-side is St. Mary's Chapel, as they told me; the Roof beat down by
Violence, and a mean wooden one in its Place, thatched with Stubble, to make it
serve as a Stable. The Manger lies upon the Altar and Nich, where they put the
Holy Water. St. Edgar's Chapel is opposite to it; but there is not much left of
it beside the Foundations. The present Work is 44 Paces long, 36 wide without.
The Roof is chiefly wanting. Two little Turrets are at the Corners of the
West End, and Two more at the Interval of Four Windows from thence, which seem
to indicate the Space of Ground the first Chapel was built on: the rest between
it and the Church was a kind of Antechapel. Underneath was a Vault, now full of
Water, the Floor of the Chapel being beaten down into it: it was wrought with
great Stones.

Here was a capacious Receptacle of the Dead. They have taken up many leaden
Coffins, and melted them into Cisterns.

The Roof of the Chapel was finely arched with Ribwork of Stone. The Sides of
the Walls are full of small Pillars of Sussex Marble, as likewise the whole
Church, which was a mean way of Ornamenting in those Times: they are mostly
beaten down. Between them the Walls are painted with Pictures of Saints, as
still easily seen. All the Walls are overgrown with Ivy, which is the only
thing here in a flourishing Condition; every thing else presenting a most
melancholy, though venerable Aspect. On the South Side the Cloisters was the
great Hall.

The Townsmen bought the Stones of the Vaults underneath to build a sorry
Market-house, not discerning the Benefit accruing to the Town from the great
Concourse of Strangers purposely to see this Abbey, which is now its greatest
Trade, as formerly its only Support: for it is in a most miserable decaying
Condition, as wholly cut off from the large Revenues spent among them.

There are many other Foundations of the Buildings left in the great Area; but
in the present Hands will soon be rooted up, and the very Footsteps of them
effaced, which so many Ages had been erecting.

The Abbot's Hall, I have been told, was curiously wainscotted with Oak, and
painted with Coats of Arms in every Panel. The Mortar of these Buildings is
very good, and great Rocks of the Roof of the Church lie upon the Ground,
chiefly consisting of Rubble-stone untouched by the fanatical Destroyers, who
chiefly work on the hewn Stone of the Outside, till a whole Wall falls, when
undermined a little.

Throughout the Town are the tattered Remains of Doors, Windows, Bases,
Capitals of Pillars, etc. brought from the Abbey, and put into every poor
Cottage.

In the Town are Two Churches; the upper a handsome Fabric with a fine Tower
of good Design, adorned with Figures in Niches. The George Inn is an old Stone
Building, called the Abbot's Inn, where chiefly the Pilgrims were lodged, who
came strolling hither, and idling their Time away for Sanctity. A Coat of Arms
of the Kings of England, supported by a Lion and a Bull, is over the Gate, with
many Crosses. There was a Bed of large Timber, with imbossed gilt Panels, which
seemed to have been the Abbot's.

Four Miles from Glastenbury, lies the little City of Wells, where is one of
the neatest Cathedrals in England; particularly the West Front of it, which is
a complete Draught of Imagery, as well as very ancient.

The Close, or Part of the City where the Bishop's Palace is, is very properly
called so; for it is walled in, and locked up like a little Fortification, and
has a Ditch round it. The dignified Clergy live in the Inside of it, and the
Prebendaries and Canons have very agreeable Dwellings. Here are no less than 27
Prebendaries, and 19 Canons, besides a Dean, a Chancellor, a Precentor, and
Three Archdeacons; a Number which very few Cathedrals in England have besides.

The County is the Diocese, and contains 388 Parishes, and the Archdeaconries
are of Wells, Bath, and Taunton.

The City lies just at the Foot of the Mountains called Mendip-hills, and is
built on a stony Foundation. Its Manufacture is chiefly of Stockens, as has
been said; it is well built, and populous.

Near this City, and just under the Hills, is the famous Wokey Hole, the chief
Curiosity of which is frequently found in all such subterraneous Caverns; that
the Water, dropping from the Roof of the Vault, petrifies and hangs in long
Pieces like Icicles, as if it would, in Time, turn into a Column to support the
Arch.

Not far from hence is Sedgmore, a watery splashy Place, and infamous for the
Defeat of the Duke of Monmouth.

In the low Country, on the other Side Mendip Hills, lies Chedder, a Village
pleasantly situated under the very Ridge of the Mountains: before the Village
is a large Green, or Common, on which all the Cows belonging to the Town feed:
the Ground is exceeding rich, and as the Inhabitants are Cow-keepers, they take
care to maintain the Goodness of the Soil, by agreeing to lay on large
Quantities of Dung for manuring and enriching the Land.

Several Persons frequently, here mix their Milk together, which often weighs a
hundred Weight, sometimes more; and is so excellent, that it is often sold from
Sixpence to Eight-pence per Pound, when the Cheshire Cheese is sold but from
Twopence to Twopence Halfpenny.

Here is a deep frightful Chasm in the Mountain, in the Hollow of which the
Road goes toward Bristol; and out of the same Hollow springs a little Stream,
which is so rapid, that it is said to drive 12 Mills within a Quarter of a Mile
of the Spring; but it must be supposed to fetch some winding Reaches in the
Way; otherwise there would not be room for 12 Mills to stand, and have a
sufficient Head of Water to each, within so small a Space of Ground. The Water
of this Spring grows quickly into a River, and runs down into the Marshes, and
joins another little River called Axe, about Axbridge, and thence into the
Bristol Chanel, or Severn Sea.

I must now turn East, and South-east; for I resolved not to go up the Hills of
Mendip at all, this Journey; leaving that Part to another Tour, when I shall
give an Account of these Mountains, as also of the Cities of Bath and Bristol,
to which they are very near, in one Letter.

I come now to that Part of the County which joins to Wiltshire, which I
reserved in particular to this Place, in order to give some Account of the
Broad-cloth Manufacture, which I several times mentioned before, and which is
carried on here, to such a Degree, as to deserve a Place in all the
Descriptions or Histories which shall be given of this Country.

As the East and South Parts of Wiltshire are all hilly, spreading themselves
far and wide in Plains, and grassy Downs, for breeding and feeding vast Flocks
of Sheep; and as the West and North Parts of Somersetshire are, on the
contrary, low and marshy, or moorish, for feeding and breeding of Black Cattle
and Horses, or for Lead Mines, etc. so all the South-west Part of Wiltshire,
and the East Part of Somersetshire, are low and flat, being a rich, enclosed
Country, full of Rivers and Towns, and infinitely populous, insomuch that some
of the Market Towns are equal to Cities in Bigness, and superior to many of
them in Numbers of People.

This low flat Country contains Part of the Three Counties, of Somerset, Wilts,
and Gloucester; and that the Extent of it may be the easier understood by those
who know any thing of the Situation of the Country, it reaches from Cirencester
in the North, to Sherburn on the Edge of Dorsetshire South, and from the
Devizes East, to Bristol West, which may take in about 50 Miles in Length where
longest, and 20 in Breadth where narrowest.

In this Extent of Country, we have the following Market Towns, which are
principally employed in the Clothing Trade, that is to say, in that Part of it,
which I am now speaking of, namely, fine Medley, or mixed Cloths, such as are
usually worn in England by the better Sort of People; and also, exported in
great Quantities to Holland, Hamburgh, Sweden, Denmark, Spain, Italy, etc. The
principal Clothing Towns in this Part of the Country, are these, Somersetshire,
From, Pentford, Philip's-Norton, Bruton, Shepton-Mallet, Castle-Carey, and
Wincaunton. Wiltshire, Malmsbury, Castlecomb, Chippenham, Caln, Devizes,
Bradford, Trubridge, Westbury, Warminster, Mere. Dorsetshire, Gillingham,
Shaftsbury, Bemister, and Bear, Sturminster, Shireborn. Gloucestershire,
Cirencester, Tetbury, Marshfield, Minchinghampton, and Fairford.


These Towns, as they stand thin, and at considerable Distance from one
another, (for, except the Two Towns of Bradford and Trubridge, the others stand
at an unusual Distance) are interspersed with a very great Number of Villages,
Hamlets, and scattered Houses, in which, generally speaking, the spinning Work
of all this Manufacture is performed by the poor People; the Master Clothiers,
who generally live in the greater Towns, sending out the Wool weekly to their
Houses, by their Servants and Horses, and at the same time bringing back the
Yarn that they have spun and finished, which then is fitted for the Loom.

The increasing and flourishing Circumstances of this Trade are happily visible
by the great Concourse of People to, and Increase of Buildings and Inhabitants
in, these principal Clothing Towns, where this Trade is carried on, and in the
Wealth of the Clothiers. The Town of From, or, as it is written in our Maps,
Frome-Sellwood, is a Specimen of this, which is so prodigiously increased
within these last 30 or 40 Years, that they have built a new Church, and so
many new Streets of Houses, and these Houses are so full of Inhabitants, that
From is now reckoned to have more Inhabitants in it, than the City of Bath;
and some say, than Salisbury; and if their Trade continues to increase in like
manner for a few Years more, it is very likely to become one of the greatest
and wealthiest inland Towns in England.

Its Trade is wholly Clothing, and the Cloths they make are, generally
speaking, all conveyed to London: where Blackwell-hall is their Market; and, if
we may believe common Fame, there are above 10,000 People in From now, more
than lived in it 30 Years ago; and yet it was a considerable Town then.

Here are also several large Meeting Houses, as well as Churches, as there are,
generally, in all the manufacturing trading Towns in England, especially in the
Western Counties.

The Devizes is, next to From, a large and important Town, and full of wealthy
Clothiers; but it has lately run pretty much into the Drugget-making Trade; a
Business, which has made some Invasion upon that of the Broad-cloth, great
Quantities of Druggets being worn in, as well as exported from England, instead
of Broad-cloth; but this is much the same as to the Trade still; for since it
is all a Woolen Manufacture, and the Druggets may properly be called Cloth,
though narrow, and of a different Make, so the Makers are all called Clothiers.

The River Avon, a noble and large fresh River, branching itself into many
Parts, and receiving almost all the Rivers on that Side of the Hills, waters
this whole fruitful Vale; and the Water of this River seems particularly
qualified for dying the best Colors, and for Fulling and Dressing the Cloth,
so that the Clothiers generally plant themselves upon this River, but
especially the Dyers, as at Trubridge and Bradford, which are the Two most
eminent Clothing Towns in that Part of the Vale, for the Making fine Spanish
Cloths, and for the nicest Mixtures.

From these Towns, South to Westbury and Warminster, the same Trade continues,
and the finest Medley Spanish Cloths in the whole World are made in this Part.
They told me at Bradford, that it was no extraordinary thing to have Clothiers
thereabout worth from 10,000 to 40,000 l. a Man; and many of the Gentry in
those Counties have been originally raised from this truly noble Manufacture.

If I may speak here from the Authority of the ancient Inhabitants of the
Place, who have been curious Observers upon this Subject, the Country which I
have now described, as principally employed in, and maintained by this Prodigy
of a Trade, contains 2,330,000 Acres of Land, and has in it 788 Parishes, and
374,000 People. It is true, that this is all Guesswork; but I must confess
myself very willing to believe, that the Reckoning is far short of the Account;
for this Part is exceeding large and populous.

It may be worth Inquiry, how the Manufacturers in so vast a Consumption of the
Wool, as such a Trade must take up, can be supplied with Wool for their Trade;
and indeed it would be something strange, if the Answer were not at hand.

1. We may reasonably conclude, that this Manufacture was at first seated in
this County, or, as we may say, originally planted itself here, because of the
infinite Numbers of Sheep, which were always upon the Downs and Plains of
Dorset, Wilts, and Hampshire, all adjoining. This, no doubt, induced the first
Planters of the Clothing Manufacture to make Choice of this delightful Vale in
the Neighborhood of those Plains, which afforded such immense Funds of Wool
for the carrying on their Works. Thus the Manufacture of white Cloth was
planted in Stroud-water in Gloucestershire, for the sake of the excellent Water
there for the Dying Scarlets, and all Colors that are dyed in Grain, which are
better done there, than in any other Place of England, some Towns near London
excepted. Hence therefore we first observe, they are supplied yearly with the
Fleeces of Two or Three Millions of Sheep.

2. But as the Number of Sheep fed on these Downs is lessened, rather than
increased, because of so many thousand Acres of the Carpet Ground being of late
Years converted into Tillage, and sowed with This Alteration has made
Warminster, a Market Town on the Edge of Somersetshire, the greatest Market for
Wheat in England, where none of it is bought to send to London.
Wheat; and at the same time the Manufacture prodigiously increasing; the
Manufacturers applied to other Parts for a Supply, and hence began the Influx
of North Country Wool from the Counties of Northampton, Leicester and Lincoln,
the Center and Markets of which Trade are about Tetbury and Cirencester, where
several hundred Packs are sold every Week, to supply this prodigious
Consumption.

3. From London they have great Quantities of Wool, which is generally called
Kentish Wool, in the Fleece, which is brought up from thence by the Farmers,
since the late severe Acts against their Selling it within a certain Number of
Miles of the Sea; also Fell-wool for the Combers, bought of the Wool-staplers
in Barnaby-street, and sent back by the Carriers which bring up the Cloths to
Market.

4. They have also, sometimes, large Quantities of Irish Wool by the way of
Bristol, or of Minehead in Somersetshire; but this is uncertain, and only on
extraordinary Occasions. I omit the Spanish Wool, as being an Article by itself.

Thus, as those who see the almost countless Numbers of Sheep on the Downs and
Plains, and the great Quantities of Wool brought to the Markets of Tetbury, and
other Towns, as well as what are sent down from London into this single Vale,
would wonder how it was possible so much Wool could be consumed, manufactured,
and wrought up; so, on the other hand, those that see what Numbers of People
are employed, and what vast Quantities of Goods are made, in this Part of
England, would wonder how the Nation should be able to supply them with Wool.

And yet, notwithstanding the whole Country is thus busied in the Broad-cloth
Manufacture, I must not omit to mention, that here is a very great Application
to another Branch or two of Trade, viz. The supplying the City of London with
Provisions: Though it is true, that the general Employment of the People in all
this County, is in the Woollen Manufacture; yet, as the Spinning is generally
the Work of the Women and Children, and the Land is here exceeding rich and
fertile, so it cannot be supposed, but that here are Farmers in great Numbers,
whose Business it is to cultivate the Land, and supply the rest of the
Inhabitants with Provisions; and this they do so well, that notwithstanding the
County is exceeding populous, yet Provisions of all Sorts are cheap, the
Quantity very great, and a considerable Overplus sent every Day to London.

All the lower Part of this County, and also of Gloucestershire adjoining, is
full of large feeding Farms, which we call Dairies; and the Cheese they make is
excellent, and is eaten newer than that from Cheshire. Of this a vast Quantity
is every Week sent up to London, where, though it is called Gloucestershire
Cheese, yet the greatest Part of it comes from Wiltshire; the Gloucestershire
Cheese being more generally carried to Bristol and Bath, where a very great
Quantity is consumed, as well by the Inhabitants of these two populous Cities,
as in Exportation to our West India Colonies, and other Places; whereas this
Wiltshire Cheese is carried to the River of Thames, which runs through Part of
the County, by Land-carriage, and so by Barges to London.

Again, in the Spring of the Year, they make a vast Quantity of that we call
Green or New Cheese, which is a thin and very soft Cheese, resembling Cream
Cheeses, but somewhat thicker. These are so universally liked in London, that
all the low rich Lands of this County are hardly enough to supply the Market;
but then this holds for little more than the Two first Summer Months of the
Year.

Besides this, the Farmers in Wiltshire, and the Part of Gloucestershire
adjoining, send a very great Quantity of Bacon up to London, which is esteemed
the best Bacon in England, Hampshire only excepted. This Bacon is raised here,
by their great Dairies, as the Hogs are fed with the vast Quantities of Whey,
and skimmed Milk, which the Farmers must otherwise have thrown away.

But this is not all; for as the North Part of Wiltshire, as well the Downs as
the Vales, border upon the River Thames, and in some Places come up even to the
Banks of it, so most of that Part of the County being arable Land, they sow a
very great Quantity of Barley, which is carried to the Markets at Abingdon, at
Faringdon, and such Places, where it is made into Malt, and carried to London.
This imploys all the Hill-country from above Malmsbury to Marlborough, and on
the Side of the Vale of White-horse, as it is called, which is in Berkshire, and
the Hills adjoining; a Track of fertile Ground, which furnishes a prodigious
Quantity of Barley.

Thus Wiltshire helps to supply London with Cheese, Bacon, and Malt, Three very
considerable Articles, besides that vast Manufacture of fine Spanish Cloths, of
which I have said so much; and I may without Partiality say, that it is thereby
rendered one of the most important Counties in England to the public Wealth of
the Kingdom. The bare Product is in itself prodigiously great; the Downs are an
inexhausted Storehouse of Wool, and of Corn; and the Valley, or low Part of
it, is the like for Cheese and Bacon.

One Thing here is worth while to mention, for the Observation of those
Counties in England, where they are not yet arrived to that Perfection in
Husbandry, as in this County; and I have purposely reserved it to this Place;
and that is, The Downs or Plains, which though generally called Salisbury Plain,
yet extend themselves into the Counties of Southampton, Wilts, and Dorset, were
formerly wholly taken up with Sheep, as being thought incapable of producing
Grain, but now are made to yield most plentiful Crops, by folding their Sheep
upon the plough'd Lands, removing the Fold every Night to a fresh Place, till
the whole Fallow has been folded on. This alone has made these Lands, which in
themselves are poor, and, in some Places, so shallow as that the Earth is not
six Inches deep over the solid Chalk, able to bear as good Wheat, as any of the
richer Lands in the Vales, though not altogether in such great Quantities: And
were it not for this Improvement, the Product would hardly compensate the
Ploughman's Labor; for many of these Lands lie up such high Hills, so remote
from the Farmers Houses, which are always in the Valleys, that it would be very
difficult to carry up their Dung to manure them.

If this way of folding Sheep upon the Fallows and ploughed Lands were
practiced in some other Parts of Britain, and especially in Scotland, it would
effectually improve the waste Lands, which now are useless and uncultivated,
and turn both Sheep and Lands to a better Account than was ever yet known among
them. In Wiltshire it appears to be so, very significantly; for if a Farmer has
a Thousand Sheep, and no Fallows to fold them on, his Neighbors will give him
Ten Shillings a Night for every Thousand.

But as I have not mentioned these Clothing Towns other than as they contribute
to that Trade, I shall now proceed to say something of the Towns themselves,
except those in Gloucestershire; of which I shall speak in my next Letter, as I
fall down Westward.

Shipton-Mallet, Castle Carey, Wincaunton, and Bruton, lie to the Southward of
Wells, and have nothing remarkable in them except the last, which lies on the
River Brews. It has a fair Church, a good Free School, and a stately
Almshouse, the Ruins of a Priory, and beside the Clothing-trade, is famous for
Stockens.

From, and Philips Norton, lie East of Somersetshire, upon the Borders of
Wilts. The first is near the Forest of Selwood, and I have already mentioned
its prodigious Increase of late Years. The last is a very good Market Town, and
has Two annual Fairs, one reputed, for a One-day Fair, as great as any in
England.

Bensford is a small Market Town, and lies North-west toward Bristol.

Malmsbury is a very ancient Town, and, it is said, was built by a British
Prince, called Caer Bladdon. It was formerly defended by Walls, and a large
strong Castle, which was razed afterward, to enlarge the Abbey, which was very
famous, and the greatest in Wiltshire: the Abbot sat in Parliament. King
Athelstane was buried here, and they still show his Tomb here. Vast Piles of
Buildings were pulled down at the Dissolution, but the Church of the Abbey was
saved, a great Part of which still remains, and is used as the Parish Church.
It is a Corporation governed by a Justice, who is an annual Magistrate, and
called The Alderman. It has a good Market weekly. The Town is neat, and lies on
the River Avon. It is also famous for the Birthplace of William of Malmsbury,
the Historian; and of that great Scholar, Philosopher, and Mathematician,
Hobbes; and of diverse other very great and remarkable Men.

Near this Town, Southward, on the same River, lies the Village of Dantsey,
which, though but an obscure Place, has given Title of Honor to many eminent
Persons, and among the rest, to Henry Danvers, created Baron of this Place by
King James I. though afterward made Earl of Danby. He had distinguished himself
in Queen Elizabeth's Irish Wars, was as good as great, and died with Glory; but
his Brother and Heir, having sat, ungratefully, a Judge on that very King who
made his Brother Earl, was, at the Restoration, attainted of High Treason; and
this his Manor of Dantsey given to James then Duke of York, who settled it in
Dowry on his second Consort. On his Abdication, it became a second time
forfeited, and King William conferred it on Charles Lord Mordaunt, late Earl of
Peterborough and Monmouth, in whose Family it still remains. But as there are
some other Things more than ordinarily particular, relating to this Manor, I
shall enlarge a little upon it.

The whole Parish of Dantsey consists of this Manor only, and not a Foot of
Ground in it belongs to any other Person: it is altogether Pasture, and indeed
very rich. The Inhabitants, who are all Tenants of the Manor, make most
excellent Cheese, not at all inferior to that of Chedder, which is the only
Commodity in the Place; for the late Lord would not permit the Grounds to be
ploughed up; and, I believe, there is not an Acre in the Parish of arable Land,
though the Tenants have offered a considerable Advance of Rent, for Liberty to
break up the Ground, which indeed seems to want it, and would be much bettered
by the Plough; nor would his Lordship, for some Years before his Death, renew a
Life upon it, either by Lease or Copyhold, except as many of the last, as would
keep up the Homage, and the Rights of the Manor: and the Reason of this was,
not only to get a clear Rack-rent Estate in it, but to prevent the Cheats and
Impositions which the Copyhold Tenants of the Manor put upon their Lord; for as
every Widow has her Life in her Husband's Copyhold after his Death, if she
continues sole and continent, it is a very common thing there for an old Man, on
his Deathbed, to marry a young Woman, who privately contracts to give Part of
the Profits of the Copyhold, or some Consideration for it, to the Husband's
Relations, and not seldom selects, for a Bedfellow for herself, one of her
favorite Menservants.

The Abuse which accrued from granting Leases on Lives is this, That whereas a
Person takes a Lease for Three Lives, viz. his own, his Wife's, and his Son
John's; to defraud the Lord of the Manor, he names all his Sons John; so that,
as long as any of the Sons live, John in the Lease never dies.

By these Frauds, the Earl, who was none of the best Oeconomists, and lived
remote from this Place, suffered considerably, though he could not find out how;
but frequently complained, That his Lessees, and his Copyhold-Widows, were very
long lived; and, in an humorous way, used to recommend his Manor of Dantsey to
all such as were apprehensive of dying.

As all in the Parish were his Tenants, and had an Interest in the Fraud, they
combined against him, so that he could get no Intelligence of it: and though his
Lordship enjoyed the Manor ever since the Revolution, yet, by reason of its
being then full estated, that is, all let out upon Lives then actually
subsisting, and continued by the abovementioned Frauds, his Lordship received
no great Benefit out of it till some few Years before his Death; when he came
to a Resolution not to renew, though, when all the Lives drop in, this Manor
will, at a Rack-rent, amount to at least 3000 l. a Year.

There is a large old Mansion House here, lying just on the River, with Gardens
formed after the Manner of those at Parsons-green; but it is not a kindly Place
for ripening Fruit, and the Grounds lie very low and splashy, being all of a
stiff Clay, and yet very good Pasture. Here is also a fine Park well timber'd,
but without Deer. His Lordship had once a Design to improve this Mansion House
and Estate, and resided here in 1705, when he was called to Court, and sent to
command the Queen's Forces in Spain, where his Conduct, and great Services to
his Country, are too well known to need mentioning here.

Though this Place is often overflowed with Water, yet there is none good, either
for Brewing or Washing, or any Spring of sweet Water. Here is a Spring of a
chalybeat Kind, which would turn to good Account, were it not in such a
distant, and an almost inaccessible Part of the Country, occasioned by bad
Roads, which were a great Protection to the Inhabitants in the late Civil Wars,
who were never visited by either Party; but enjoyed an easy and uninterrupted
Repose, whlist their Neighbors, on all Sides, were involved in the Calamities
of that unnatural War.

Here is likewise a good neat Church, with one of the best-built, high, square
Towers I ever saw, raised at the Expense of one of the Lords of Dantsey,
probably the aforementioned Henry, who lies buried here under a very large
magnificent Tomb. Here likewise is interred Lieutenant General Lewis Mordaunt,
a Brother of the late Earl, a Gentleman noted for his great Wit, Humor, and
polite Conversation, as indeed all his Brothers were, as well as his Lordship.

Castlecomb is a Village of small Account.

Chippenham is a corporate, good Market Town, likewise on the River Avon, over
which it has a Bridge of Sixteen Arches, famous for the Residence and Resort of
many of the West Saxon Kings, particularly Alfred. Here is a very magnificent
Church; and near this Place, formerly, was a famous Forest.

Bradford is a Market Town, and has a Bridge over the Avon. It Is well built of
Stone, and lies in the Side of a Hill.

Trubridge is an ancient Market Town, and had formerly a Castle of Seven
Towers, but long since destroyed. The Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, for this
County, is annually held here.

Westbury is a little Borough Market Town, but was formerly of great Note. Some
Quantity of Roman Coins have been found here.

Warminster is noted, as I have said, for the prodigious Quantity of Corn,
which is sold in it every Market Day. Upon the Downs, near this Town, are two
ancient Camps, supposed to be Danish.

It is observable, That these Five last Towns belonged anciently to the Family
of the Hungerfords, which in King Edward IV.'s Reign came by Marriage to the
Lord Hastings, who being executed in Richard III.'s Time, this vast Estate was
given by that King to Howard, Duke of Norfolk, first Earl-Marshal of that
Family, in England.

Near Warminster is the famous Forest of Selwood, called by the ancient
Britons, Coedmaur, i. e. Greatwood. It is 15 Miles in Length, and very thick of
Wood.

Mere, which in the old Saxon signifys Boundary, as this Place seems to be on
the Borders of Wilts, Somerset, and Dorset, is but a Village, and yet gives
Name to the Hundred where it stands. It has neither Fair nor Market in it; but
it had, anciently, a Castle. Not far from this Place is an old Danish Camp
called Whiteshole-hill. Sir Francis Cotton, who flourished in the Reign of King
James, and afterward of Charles I. was born here.

A little South-east of Mere lies Hindon, a small Borough and Market Town. And
North-east of it stands Heightsbury, an inconsiderable Town; but noted formerly
for an Hospital.

Lavington is also a little more North; a very indifferent Market Town.

The Devizes is excellently situated, about Two Miles from the Bottom of the
Hills, which keep off the Eastern Winds, and in a rich Soil. Under the Hill, at
Runway, is an excellent Spring, which the Inhabitants have not yet found Means
to convey thither, though it runs but a little way off the Town, where they want
Water. It is a very large old Town, consisting chiefly of Two long parallel
Streets, the Houses mostly of Timber, but of a very good Model. The Inhabitants
value themselves for being Tenants to the King, and for one of the best weekly
Markets in England. The Castle was originally Roman, judiciously seated upon a
natural Fortification; but in Aftertimes, made in a manner impregnable by
Roger, a Bishop of Salisbury, though now it suffers daily by Peoples taking away
the Materials. Here are Two Churches. The Choir of St. Mary's is of a very old
Model, as are the Steeple, Choir, and both Wings of St. John's, to which
Additions have been made; and new wide Windows with pointed Arches, in the room
of the ancient, narrow, semicircular ones.

Just out of Town is a pretty Plain called the Green, with another handsome
Church and Steeple, Suburbs to the old Town. Here William Cadby, a Gardener,
dug up his Collection of Gods, which he carried about for a Show. They were
found in a Garden in a Cavity enclosed with Roman Brick. The Venus is of an
excellent Design; and the Vestal Virgin, as they call it, a Fragment of
Corinthian Brass, and of very curious Workmanship. Vulcan is as lame as if made
at a Forge. He had also several Coins found thereabouts, and a Brass Roman Key,
which my Lord Winchelsea bought. Roman Antiquities are discovered here every
Day. The same Nobleman has a Brass Probus; on the Reverse Victoria Germ. with a
Trophy. A great Number of such Relics is to be met with all round the Country.

Calne is a little Town, situate on a stony Hill, and very ancient, and is
supposed to have been one of the Seats of the West Saxon Kings. It has a neat
Church, and a good weekly Market. After a great Rain, in November 1725, the
Waters rose so very high here, on a sudden, that they overflowed the Town,
damaged a great Quantity of Goods, drowned Two Men in the Street, and carried
off a Cask of Oil of 100 Gallons, which could not be found for several Days
after. A great Parcel of Roman Coins were dug up here formerly. Here was,
likewise, anciently an Hospital of Black Canons.

I am now come into the Road to Marlborough: On the Downs, about Two or Three
Miles from the Town, are abundance of loose Stones, lying scattered about the
Plain, some whereof are very large, and appear to be of the same Kind with
those of Stone-henge, and some larger: they are called by the Country People,
the Gray Weathers; and it must be confessed, that they look not unlike Sheep
straggling upon the Downs, on a transient and distant View, as Travelers pass.
These Gray Weathers, on a more curious Inspection, are found to be a Sort of
white Marble, and lie upon the Surface of the Ground in infinite Numbers, and
of all Dimensions. They are loose, detached from any Rock, and, as Dr. Stukeley
thinks, lay there ever since the Creation, being solid Parts thrown out to the
Surface of the fluid Globe, when its Rotation was first impressed.

Marlborough, so called from its Hills of Chalk, which anciently was called
Marle. It is the Cunetia (from Kenet) of the Romans; but from the coming of the
Saxons to the Conquest, there is no Mention of it. It is governed by a Mayor,
Aldermen, and Burgesses, and is well built. It consists chiefly of One broad
and strait Street. To the South are some Relics of a Priory; the Gate House is
still remaining. On the North, the Chapel of another Religious House remains,
now turned into a Dwelling House. The Seat of my Lord Hertford was the Site of
the Roman Costrum; for there they find Foundations, and Roman Coins; and
toward the River, without the Garden-walls, one Angle of it very manifestly
remains; and the Rampart ^d Ditch entire. The Road going over the Bridge cuts
it off from the present Castle. The Ditch is still 20 Feet wide in some Parts.
The Mount, so much noted, was the Keep of the Castle; it is now converted into
a pretty spiral Walk, on the Top of which is an octagonal Summer House, from
whence you have a pleasant View over the Town and County. The Town has at
present a pretty good Shop-keeping Trade, but not much of the manufacturing
Part. The River Kennet, some Years ago made navigable by Act of Parliament,
rises just by this Town; from whence running to Hungerford and Newbury, it
becomes a large Stream; and passing by Reading, runs into the Thames near that
Town. This River is famous for Crayfish, which they help Travelers to at
Newbury; but they seldom want for Price.

At Abury, near Marlborough Downs, in the Way to Bath, are to be seen the
stupendous Remains of a Druids Temple, being a Collection of monstrous Stones
of the like Nature with those of Stone-henge, and brought together from the
Downs for the same religious Purposes, as Dr. Stukeley makes no Question.

On the Hills on this Side the Devizes is Roundway Down, where the King's
Forces, under Prince Maurice, but owing chiefly to the Lord Wilmot, beat and
entirely routed the famous Sir William Waller, in the Civil Wars; from whence
the Place is called by some, Runaway Down, to this Day.

A little nearer toward Marlborough is St. Ann's Hill, where, notwithstanding
several high Hills between, and the Distance of Twenty-two Miles, or more, is a
fair View of Salisbury Steeple, or Spire, which is deemed the highest in
England.

At Badmington in Wiltshire have been found Nine Caves all in a Row, but of
different Dimensions, the least of them Four Feet wide, some Nine or Ten Feet
long, Two long Stones being set upon the Sides, and the Top covered with broad
Stones. Spurs, Pieces of Armor, and the like, have been found in these Caves;
which gives Ground to believe, that they were Tombs of some ancient Warriors,
Romans, Saxons, or Danes.

In our Way from Marlborough to Newbury, we mounted a chalky Hill, (of which
Sort is much of the Soil of Wilts) on the Top of which we entered into
Savernack Forest, belonging to the R^ght Hon. the Lord Bruce, and is almost the
only privileged Ground of Hunting, of that Denomination, possessed by a
Subject. It is in Circumference about Twelve Miles, plentifully stocked with
Deer of a large Size, and rendered very pleasant and delightful by the many
Walks and Vistas lately cut and levelled through the several Coppices and Woods
with which it abounds. Eight of these Vistas meet like so many Rays of a Star,
in a Point near the Middle of the Forest, where his Lordship has prepared and
cleared the Ground for erecting an Octagon Tower, whose Sides will be
correspondent to the Vistas, through one of which you will have a View of his
Lordship's Seat at about Two Miles Distance, called Tottenham, from a Park of
that Name, in which it is situate, contiguous to the Forest.

It is a stately Edifice, newly erected on the same Spot of Ground where stood
an ancient Palace, destroyed by Fire, of the Marquis of Hereford, so justly
celebrated for his steady Adherence, and powerful Assistance, to the Royal
Cause, during the whole Course of the Civil Wars, from whom his Lordship is
descended, by his Mother the Lady Elizabeth, Sister and Niece to the Two last
Dukes of Somerset, of the elder Line.

To give you some Idea of the Grandeur and Magnificence of the Structure, it
will be sufficient to observe, that it was begun, carried on and finished,
after the Model, and under the Direction, of our modern Vitruvius, the Earl of
Burlington, who, to the Strength and Convenience of the English Architecture,
has added the Elegance and Politeness of the Italian Taste.

The House has Four Towers, and Four Fronts, each of them diversely beautified
and adorned; to which are now added Four Wings, wherein are Rooms of State, a
noble and capacious Room for a Library, containing a judicious and large
Collection of several Thousand Books in all Languages, but especially the
modern.

The Beauty and Delightfulness of the Buildings are much augmented by the large
Canals, the spacious and well-planted Walks which surround it, one of which,
leading to the London Road, extends Two Miles in Length.

About the same Distance from hence, on the opposite Side, are to be seen the
Remains of a large House, the Seat of Sir John Seymour, Father of the
unfortunate Protector, called Wolf-Hall, of which no more is standing than
suffices for a Farm-house. Here King Henry VIII. as, Tradition goes, celebrated
his Nuptials with the Lady Jane Seymour, and kept his Wedding-dinner, in a very
large Barn, hung with Tapestry on the Occasion; for Confirmation of which they
show you, in the Walls thereof, some Tenter-hooks, with small Pieces of
Tapestry fastened to them; and between this Place and Tottenham th^re is a
Walk, with old Trees on each Side, still known by the Name of King Harry's Walk.

From hence, continuing our Course Easterly, we came to a Borough-town, called
Great Bedwin, which Dr. Stukeley takes to be the Leucomagus of Ravennas. It is
an old Corporation, and gave Birth to the famous Dr. T. Willis, the Ornament of
English Physicians. Castle Copse, half a Mile from the Town South East, was
probably the Roman Castle; and Havisdike, a Camp of that People. Some time
since there was in the East Window of the Church, the Picture of a Priest, with
Two Crutches, a Cup in his Hand, and a Can standing by him, with an Inscription
in old English Capitals, but in the Language obsolete French, which in English
is this: I am Peris called, Vicar of this Church,
Upon my Crutches leaning just in this wise;
My Pouch in my Fist, and I Will drink without Guile,
My Pot at my Back, set after the new Mode.
To my Pot and my Pouch I will have Justice done;
For none shall drink without putting in as much again.


The Church is large and capacious, in which are some ancient Monuments,
particularly one of a Knight-Templar, called Adam of Scott, from a Manor of
that Name in the Parish, with an Inscription not legible, and another
abovementioned of Sir John Seymour, Father of the Protector, wherein we have
an Account of the Names of all his Children, with their several Inter-marriages
and Deaths The Church is very strongly built with Flint, and a Cement near as
hard as themselves, in form of a Cross, in the Center of which is erected a
high Tower, containing a good Ring of Six very musical Bells.

Moving hence toward the North-east a little, we crossed the much famed
Wansdyke, a Work of prodigious Labor and Expense, and concluded by most
Writers to be a Boundary of one of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, probably that
of the West Saxons, before its Enlargement by incroaching on other Kingdoms. It
may be traced from near Bath, all over the Downs, to this Place, where it turns
its Course toward the Southern Coasts: it is supposed, by some, to derive its
Name from Woden, one of the Saxon Deities.

Soon after we mounted a small Hill, of easy Ascent, on the Summit of which was
erected, as Historians inform us, a fortified Place, the Residence of Cissa, a
Viceroy of one of the South-Saxon Kings, from whom it derives its Denomination
of Chisbury, or Cisbury, who also built Chichester, for the Resort of his
People, as he did this for the Repose of himself. It seems to have been
strongly fortified, being surrounded with a double Ditch or Mote, of
considerable Depth and Breadth, and full of Water: since which time there has
been a Religious House here, the Chapel of which is still remaining, but
converted into a Barn.

From hence we returned to the great London Road, and soon arrived at a Village
called Froxfield, about Seven Miles from Marlborough, in which is a handsome
and well-endow'd Almshouse, founded by Sarah Duchess Dowager of Somerset,
Relict of John the last Duke of the elder Branch of the noble Family of
Seymours, descended from the great Duke of Somerset, Protector of the King and
Kingdom, during the Minority of King Edward VI. This Lady bequeathed by her
Will above 2000 l. for the Building and Furniture of this Almshouse, and
devised several Manors, Messuages, and Farms, for the Maintenance of Thirty
poor Widows, not having 20 l. per Ann to subsist upon; one Half of which are
Widows of Clergymen, and the other of Laymen, giving a Preference to those of
the last Sort, who live on the Manors so devised by her. She left in her Will
particular Directions for the Form, Dimensions, and Site of the Structure, and
for the Manner of electing, ruling, and providing for the Widows, which her
Executors, especially Sir William Gregory, who chiefly took upon him the
Execution of the Trust, punctually observed.

The Building is neat and strong, in the Form of a Quadrangle, having one
Front, and a Court before it facing the Road. It contains Thirty Groundrooms,
and as many Chambers, one of each Sort being allowed to every Widow, for her
Apartment, with an Area or Bed in a Garden, on the North Part of the Building,
enclosed with a Brick-wall.

In the midst of the Quadrangle is built a handsome and convenient Chapel,
furnished with a Communion Table, Pulpit, Desk, Pews and Books, for the Use of
the Widows, wherein the Chaplain, whose Stipend is 30 l. per Ann. is to read
Prayers every Day, and to preach on Sundays: and for his further Encouragement,
is to be presented, on a Vacancy, to the Rectory of Kemish, in the same County,
which the Duchess has appropriated to that Use. Besides the yearly Pension in
Money, which is now about Eight Guineas, she has also ordered a Cloth-gown,
with a certain Quantity of Wood every Winter, to each of the Widows: and when
the Estates which she has given to the said Almshouse, (many of which are now
demised upon Leases for Lives) shall fall in, and shall produce a clear yearly
Income of more than 400 l. she has appointed additional Lodgings to be built
for the Reception of Twenty more Widows, who are to be placed on the same
Establishment, elected and provided for in the same manner as the Thirty
former; and then all the Rents and Profits of the said Estates (the Salary for
the Chaplain and a Steward being first deducted) shall be distributed in equal
Shares and Proportions between the Fifty Widows.

The Produce of all the Estates devised to this, and another charitable Use,
which I shall mention by-and-by, upon the Determination of the Leases granted,
will, according to the best Information I could get, amount to little less than
1000 l. per Ann.

This truly useful and excellent Charity, which displays the Judgment, as well
as charitable Disposition, of the noble Foundress, is under the Inspection and
Management of several worthy Gentlemen and Clergymen of the Neighborhood, who
discharge the Trust reposed in them with a very laudable Diligence and
Integrity, scrupulously, or religiously rather, pursuing the Directions of the
Will, carefully preventing all Imbezelments, and frequently meeting, at their
own Expense, for the Dispatch of Business in the Execution of their Trust;
which worthy Example, if imitated by other Trustees or Directors of charitable
Benefactions, (who too often make a Property of their Trust) would be of
public Emolument, and singular Benefit to the Poor, by rescuing charitable
Devises from the Discouragement they now lie under, and rendering unnecessary
the Trouble and Expense of applying for, and suing out Commissions of
Charitable Uses.

The same charitable Lady, to make Provision for the helpless Young, as well as
destitute Old, has also bequeathed a considerable yearly Sum for the
apprenticing of Ten or Twelve Children, in which a Preference is to be given to
such as were born in her Manors. In the Management of which Trust, another Set
of Trustees act, with the same commendable Uncorruptness and Integrity as the
former.

We next came to Hungerford, a little Markettown, situate in a Moorish-place,
remarkable only for being a great Thoroughfare to Bath and Bristol, and for
Plenty of Trout and Crayfish. It is governed by the Lord of the Manor, as
Constable, who is however chosen annually into that Office. From this Town the
ancient Family of the Barons of Hungerford took their Name and Title. The first
of the Family was the first Speaker of the House of Commons, in 51. Edward III.
They possessed a vast Estate this Way, and in all the neighboring Counties,
which was twice forfeited for their Attachment to the House of Lancaster. This
vast Estate fell by a Daughter to the famous Lord Hastings, who was executed in
the Reign of Richard III. when Howard, first Duke of Norfolk, had a Grant of it
from that Prince, who falling with his Master in the Battle of Bosworth-Field,
King Henry VII. restored it, with the Honor, to a younger Branch of the
Hungerfords, who had joined him, and shared in the Glory of that Victory. But
his Descendants suffered Death for Treason, 31 Henry VIII. though Queen Mary
restored them again. He was the Third of the Family who died for Treason: such
Vicissitudes attended this noble Family, and their great Estate.

We pursued the great Road, and arrived at Newbury, situate in a most fruitful
Plain, and watered by the River Kennet, which is made navigable up to the Town,
which carries on a very great Trade in Malt, etc. with London. It is governed
by a Mayor, High Steward, Aldermen and Burgesses. The Streets are spacious, and
the Marketplace large, where there is great Store of Corn sold; and a Hall for
the Business of the Corporation stands in it.

Here is also a good Charity-school, very well endowed, and this Place is noted
for good Trout and Crayfish.

Near this Town was a double Scene of Blood; for here were Two obstinate
Battles fought at different Times, between the King's Army and the
Parliament's, King Charles being present at them both, and both were fought
almost upon the same Spot of Ground. In these Two Battles it was observed by an
experienced Soldier, who served in the King's Army, that the Generals on both
Sides showed the most exquisite Skill in the managing, posting, bringing up,
and drawing off their Troops; and the Men fought with equal Bravery. In the
first of these Battles the Success was doubtful, and both Sides claimed the
Advantage: in the last, the King's Army had apparently the worst of it, and yet
the King in a very few Days, with a great Body of Horse, brought off his
Cannon, which he had, in the Close of the Battle, thrown into Dunington Castle,
and carried them away to Oxford, the Head Quarter of his Army; and this he did
in the Sight of the victorious Army, facing them at the same time with a Body
of Six thousand Horse; they, on the other hand, not thinking fit to draw out to
attack him. That Retreat, in point of Honor, was equal to a Victory, and gave
new Courage, as well as Reputation, to the King's Troops.

Part of Newbury is also known by the Name of Spinham-lands. For it arose out
of the Ruins of an old Town, called Spine, the Remains of which now join to
Newbury, in respect to which it was called New Borough, and for Shortness
Newbury. It is noted, among other Things, for Two or Three good Inns, where
Travelers are well accommodated.

This Town of Newbury was an ancient Clothing Town, though now little of that
Business remains to it; but it retains still a manufacturing Genius, and the
People are generally employed in making Shalloon, which, though it be used only
for the Lining and Insides of Men's Clothes, yet it becomes so generally worn
both at home and abroad, that it is increased to a Manufacture by itself, and
is more considerable than any single Manufacture of Stuffs in the Nation. This
imploys the Town of Newbury, as also Andover, a Town I have already described,
and many others in different Counties of England.

Here lived the famous Jack of Newbury, the greatest Clothier that ever was in
England, having 100 Looms at work in his own House. He flourished in the Reign
of Henry VIII. and marched at the Head of 100 of his own Men, all clothed and
maintained by himself, to the Battle of Flodden-Field, where he behaved well.
He rebuilt Part of Newbury Church, and the whole Tower of it. This is One of
the Two Legatee Towns (as they were called) in the Will of the famous Mr.
Kenrick, who being the Son of a Clothier of Newbury, and afterward a Merchant
in London, left 4000 l. to Newbury, and 7500 l. to Reading, to encourage the
Clothing Trade, and to set the Poor at Work, besides other Gifts of
extraordinary Value to the Poor.

This Gentleman's Will is to be seen at large in Stow's Survey of London, to
which I refer.

What Improvement the Towns of Newbury and Reading have made of these great
Sums, I did not inquire into.

Near Newbury the late Earl of Craven built a very stately Pile of Buildings
for his own Dwelling, called Spine; but as it was never quite finished, so I do
not understand, that his Lordship ever came to live in it, and some Years ago
it was by a sudden Fire burnt down to the Ground. It was reported, that that
Lord built this magnificent Palace, (for such it really was) at a Time when he
had Hopes of marrying Madame Royale, as she was then called, viz. the Queen of
Bohemia, Sister to King Charles I. who, then a Widow, lived under the Shadow of
the English Coutt; but being frustrated in that View, the Earl went no farther
in his Building. But his present Lordship has lately rebuilt this House, and
though not in so grand a manner as the former, it is very commodious.

Westward, a little out of our Way, we visited the Ruins of the Castle of
Donnington, just mentioned, which was seated on the Brow of a high Hill, washed
by the little River Lambourn, and had been the Seat of Sir Geoffrey Chaucer,
Father of English Poetry. They show us a Place here, where, in his Days, as
well as many Years since, even down to the Memory of some of the Inhabitants
now living, flourished a great Oak, called Chaucer's Oak, where they very
gravely tell you he used to sit and compose his Poems.

We went forward to the Town of Lambourn, so called from the River which runs
down and falls into the Kennet, near Thatcham. It is situate on the South Side
of White-Horse-Hill, and has a Market. This River is remarkable for being very
low in Winter, and high in Summer. It goes off about Michaelmas, and the sooner
it goes, the more plentiful, say the Inhabitants, will that Year be. This Town
is likewise noted for the Birthplace, or at least, the Residence of the Poet
Sylvester, who celebrates the River in the following Lines: And little
Lambesbourn --
All Summer long, while all thy Sisters shrink,
Then of thy Waters Thousands daily drink;
Besides, shed Water, which in haste does run
To wash the Feet of Chaucer's Donnington;
But while the rest are full unto the Top,
All Summer long thou do not shed a Drop,
Nor send'st a Doit of needless Subsidy
To cram the Kennet 's wantless Treasury,
Before her Stores be spent, and Springs be staid:
Then, then, alone, thou lend'st a liberal Aid,
Teaching thy wealthy Neighbors (mine of late)
How, when, and where, to right participate
Their Streams of Comfort to the Poor that pine,
And not to grease the still too greasy Swine;
Neither for Fame or Form (when others do)
To give a Morsel, or a Mite or two,
But sev'rally, and of a selfly Motion,
When others miss, to give the most Devotion.


At Newbury we quitted the high Road, and being desirous to see something of
the North of Berkshire, we struck up to Islip, which though but an inconsiderable
little Town, yet has a good weekly Market for Sheep.

We passed North-eastward to Wantage, a Town of some Antiquity, pretty good and
neat. It is noted for the Birthplace of the renowned King Alfred, and is
watered by the Och.

From Wantage we advanced into the fine and fertile Vale of White-Horse, which
extends almost from Farringdon to Abington, though not in a direct Line. Looking
South from the Vale, we see a Trench cut on the Side of a high green Hill, in
the Shape of a Horse, and not ill done. The Trench is about a Yard deep, and
filled almost up with Chalk; so that at a Distance you see the exact Shape of a
White-Horse, so large as takes up near an Acre of Ground. From this Figure the
Hill is called White-Horse-Hill, and the Vale below takes also its Name. It Is
said to be done in order to commemorate a signal Victory; and some give it to
the Saxons, whose Device was, and still is, a white Horse. Westward of this
Vale, lies Ashbury, betwixt which and Wantage is a very large Camp on the Brow
of a Hill: it is single worked, and of a quadrangular Form, which shows it a
Roman Work.

The neighboring Parish to this White-Horse have a Custom annually at
Midsummer, to go and weed it, in order to keep it in Shape and Color; and when
they have done their Work, they end the Day in Feasting and Meriment.

We arrived at Farringdon, noted for its pleasant Situation on a Hill. It has a
very good Market weekly, and is very neat and clean. In this Place may be seen
the Ruins of a Castle, built by Robert Earl of Gloucester, in King Stephen's
Reign. Here was also a Priory of Cistertian Monks. The Church is large and
handsome.

From hence we went partly by the Forest to Abingdon, a handsome well built
Town, where the Assizes and Sessions, and other public Meetings of the County,
are generally held. Here is a stately Market-house, built on high Pillars, over
which is a large Hall for the Assizes. The Town consists of several well-paved
Streets, which center in an open and spacious Place, where the Corn-market is
kept. They make great Quantities of Malt here, and send it up by Barges to
London. Here is a good Free School, and also a Charity-School. The Corporation
is governed by a Mayor, Two Bailiffs, and Nine Aldermen.

It is an ancient Town, and was famed for Religious Houses in the Time of the
ancient Britons. It was also famous for having several Synods held there, and
for one of the noblest Abbeys in the Kingdom, founded, as it is said, by Heane,
Nephew to Cissa, Father to King Ina. Henry I. was educated in this Monastery.

We next came to Wallingford, called by the ancient Britons Gwal Hen, i. e. Old
Fort, a Place of great Figure, as well in their Days and of the Romans, as of
the Saxons and Danes, the last of whom destroyed it in 1006; but it was soon
rebuilt, and esteemed a Borough, in the Confessor's Time. It has been defended
by a strong Castle, which has been long since demolished. It is still a large
well built Town, has a good Marketplace and Town Hall, where the Assizes have
been sometimes held, and a Quarter-session for the Borough always. It has still
Two Churches standing; but one was very much damaged in the Civil Wars, when
Two others here were altogether destroyed. It has Two weekly Markets, and is
governed by a Mayor, Burgesses, etc.

Here we crossed the Thames into Oxfordshire, and leaving Wathington, a little
inconsiderable Market Town on the Left, we fell down through Netlebed (likewise a
Town of little Note) to Henley upon Thames, a very ancient Town, the Name being
derived from the British Word Hen-lley, i. e. Old Place. It was formerly part
of the Estate of the Barons of Hungerford, mentioned before. It is now a
Corporation of great Account, governed by a Warden, Burgesses, and other
Officers. It has a considerable Corn and Malt-market. The Inhabitants are
mostly Maltsters, Mealmen and Bargemen, who by carrying Corn and Timber to
London, get a gainful Living, and enrich the Neighborhood. It has a good Free
Grammar School, and also a Charity School, liberally endowed for teaching,
clothing, and apprenticing several poor Children. Here is also an Almshouse,
but meanly endowed; for though there are not above Six or Seven Persons in it,
they have but Sixpence a-piece weekly for their Allowance.

We returned over a wooden Bridge, into Berkshire; and as Thatcham, Woolhampton
and Theal, which lie between Newbury and Reading, are at present noted only for
being great Thoroughfare Towns, and full of Inns, we went no further back than
Reading.

Reading is so called from the British Word Rhedin, i. e. Fern, which formerly
grew in great Quantity there. It is a very large and wealthy Town, handsomely
built, the Inhabitants rich, and driving a very great Trade. The Town is
situated on the River Kennet, but so near the Thames, that the largest Barges
which they use, may come up to the Town Bridge, where they have Wharfs to load
and unload them. Their chief Trade is by this Water-navigation to and from
London, though they have necessarily a great Trade into the Country, for the
Consumption of the Goods which they bring by their Barges from London, and
particularly Coals, Salt, Grocery Wares, Tobacco, Oils, and all heavy Goods.

They send from hence to London by these Barges, very great Quantities of Malt
and Meal, and these are the Two principal Articles of their Loadings. Some of
those Barges are so large, that I was told, they bring a Thousand, or Twelve
hundred Quarters of Malt at a time, which, according to the ordinary
Computation of Tonnage in the Freight of other Vessels, is from a Hundred to an
Hundred and Twenty Ton, dead Weight.

They also send very great Quantities of Timber from Reading; for Berkshire
being a well-wooded County, and the River Thames a convenient Conveyance for
the Timber, they transport the largest and fairest of the Timber to London,
which is generally bought by the Shipwrights in the River for the building
Merchant-Ships. The like Trade of Timber is carried on at Henley
abovementioned, and at Maidenhead; of which in its Place.

A large Manufacture of Sail-Cloth was set up in Reading by the late Sir Owen
Buckingham, Lord Mayor of London, and many of the poor People were profitably
employed in it; but Sir Owen dying, and his Son being unhappily killed in a
Duel a little while after, that Manufacture died also.

Here is however still a Remnant of the Woollen Manufacture, which was once
carried on in it to a very considerable Degree; and this Town, as well as
Newbury, has enjoyed the abovementioned Legacies of Mr. Kenrick, to set the
Poor at Work, and encourage the Clothing Trade; viz. 7500 l.

Mr. Camden's Continuator says, there were once 140 Master-Clothiers in this
one Town; but now they are almost all gone. During the Civil Wars in England
this Town was strongly fortified, and the Remains of the Bastions and other
Works are still to be seen.

There are Three Churches built of Flint and square Stones in the quincunx
Fashion, with tall Towers of the same. Here are also Two large Meeting Houses,
besides that of the Quakers. Camden calls it a little City: it is said to
contain about 8000 People, including a little Hamlet at the Bridge over the
Thames. Archbishop Laud was born in this Town.

It was formerly noted for a very famous Abbey, and other Religious
Foundations. The Abbey stood in a charming Situation, and large Ruins of it are
still visible, built of Flint: the Walls which remain are about Eight Feet
thick, though the Stone that faced them is gone. What is left is so hard
cemented, that the Labor in separating them would not be answered by their
Use. There are many Remnants of arched Vaults, a good Height above Ground,
whereon stood, as may be presumed, the Hall, Lodgings, etc. The Abbey
Gate House is yet pretty entire.

This was built by King Henry I. on an old Abbey, formerly erected by a Saxon
Lady. That Prince was buried in it, with his Queen; but their Monuments are
lost in the Ruins of the Place, and nowhere to be found.

There was a famous old Castle, long since demolished.

The Empress Maud, Daughter of Henry I. was also buried here; but her Monument
is lost, as well as the others. It bore this Inscription, as we are assured:
Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima partu,
Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens.
Thus translated: Illustrious in Descent, in Marriage more,
But noblest in her Offspring's Royal Power,
Great Henry's Daughter, Parent, Wife, deplore.


The deceased Earl Cadogan, who was created Baron of Reading, by his late
Majesty King George I. in 1716, built a fine large House at Caversham near
Reading; which his Successor the present Lord Cadogan thought fit to reduce to
a smaller and more convenient Size, as less regarding the outward Glare of
Magnificence, than Use and Convenience.

At Reading, in the Year 1688, began the universal Alarm that spread over the
whole Kingdom (almost at the same time) of the Irish being coming to cut every
body's Throats; which was carried from Town to Town by Peoples Fears and
Terrors, aggravated by the Menaces of an Irish Detachment of Soldiers, who were
beat out of Reading by the Dutch, and prevented taking the Quarters they
intended at Maidenhead, Colebrook, Stanes, etc.

It is impossible to express the Consternation of the People all over England
on this Occasion; for the terrible Story spread (like the Undulations of the
Water in a Pond, when a flat Stone is cast upon the Surface) all over the
Kingdom, as I have said, in one Day; for Fear gave Wings to the News: no Post
could carry it as it flew from Town to Town; and still every Messenger had Two
Articles with him: 1. Not that such and such Towns were to be burnt and
plundered by them; but that they were already burnt: And, 2. that the Irish
were at their Heels to do the like there. And the Service this Report did to
the Cause of the Revolution, is hardly to be imagined.

Twyford is about Five Miles East of Reading, and is only noted, like Theale,
and the other Towns beyond Reading, for its Number of Inns, for the
Accommodations of Carriers, etc.

Just beyond Theale, is Inglefield, where King Ethetwolf routed the Danes.

From Reading I went to Great Marlow in Buckinghamshire, which, though not in
the direct Road, yet lying on the Banks of the River Thames, is proper enough
to be spoken of, and is particularly worth Notice for several Things.

1. It is a Town of very great Imbarkation on the Thames, not so much for
Manufactures wrought here, (for the Trade of the Town is chiefly in Bonelace)
but for Goods brought from the neighboring Towns; a very great Quantity of
Malt and Meal particularly being brought hither from High Wickham, which is one
of the greatest Corn-markets on this Side of England, and lies on the Road from
London to Oxford.

2. Between High Wickham and Marlow is a little River called the Loddon, on
which are a great many Corn-mills, and some Paper-mills: the first of these
grind and dress the Wheat, and then the Meal is sent to Marlow, and put on
board the Barges for London; and the second make great Quantities of ordinary
Printing-paper.

3. On the Thames, just by the Side of this Town, though on the other Bank, are
Three very remarkable Mills, called the Temple-Mills, or the Brass-Mills, for
making Bisham Abbey Battery Work, as they call it, viz. Brass Kettles and Pans,
etc. of all Sorts. And these Works were attended with no small Success, 'till
in the Year 1720. they made a Bubble of it, and then it ran the Fate of all the
Bubbles at that time.

4. Next to these are Two Mills which are both of an extraordinary Kind, one
for making of Thimbles, a Work which performs to Admiration; and another for
pressing of Oil from Rape and Flaxseed, both which turn to very good Account to
the Proprietors.

Hither is also brought down a vast Quantity of Beech Wood, which grows in
Buckinghamshire more plentifully than in any other Part of England; and from
whence the County itself derives its Name.

At Bisham, over against this Town, was formerly an Abbey, and the Remains of
it are still to be seen. The Estate belonged once to the Knights Templars, and
since came to the ancient Family of Hobby, whereof Sir William Hobby, and Sir
Edward Hobby, are noted in our Histories, the latter as having been employed by
Queen Elizabeth in the most important foreign Negotiations, as a learned Man,
and great Antiquary. Their Monuments, with those of their Ladies and Children,
are in the little Church of Bisham, and well worth seeing. The Seat of the
Family is now in Dorsetshire; but hither they are generally all brought, when
they die, to be buried with their Ancestors.

A little higher, on the same Side of the River, is Hurley, an ancient Seat of
the Lord Lovela^^; and all the Male Branches of the Family b^^^g extinct, it
came by the Daughter and Heirs ^ o S^r H^nry Johnson of Blackwall, near
Ratcliffe, who originally was only a Shipwright, or Master-build^r, at the
great Yard and Dock there, of which I shall speak in their Place. This Lady
left only one Daughter, married to the late Earl of Strafford.

From hence we fell with the Thames into Maidenhead, and so came into the
London Road again. It is an ancient Corporation under the Government of a High
Steward, a Mayor, a Steward, and Ten Aldermen, out of which they annually elect
Two Bridgmasters to look after the large Timber-bridge which here crosses the
Thames, for the Repair of which the Town has Three Trees annually allowed them
out of Windsor Forest. The Mayor, for the Time being, is Clerk of the Market
and Coroner, and he and the Mayor for the preceding Year, and the Steward, are
Justices of the Peace: they choose yearly Two Mace-bearers. The Town is a large
Thoroughfare, with many good Inns in it, and has a good Market weekly. It lies
in Two Parishes, one Part of it is in Bray, famous of old for its conforming
Vicar to all Times, Changes, and Seasons.

As soon as you are out of Maidenhead, you see Cliefden on your Left, where
George Duke of Buckingham began a magnificent and delightful Palace, which the
late Earl of Orkney afterward purchased of the Family, and finished; and now
has the Honor to be the Summer Retreat of his Royal Highness Frederick Prince
of Wales.

We came to Slough, a Village Five Miles East of Maidenhead, which consists
almost entirely of Inns. They seem to vie with one another, and it is wonderful
how they all subsist; and especially as they are opposed by the Two famous new
ones of the Castle and Windmill, a little Way out of Slough, which are much
more delightfully situated, and have better Accommodations.

Here we left the Road, and turned to the Right, and soon arrived at Eton,
where there is the finest School for Grammar Learning, that is in Britain, or
perhaps in Europe.

The Buildings, except the great School-room, are ancient; the Chapel Gothic;
but all has been repaired, at a very great Expense, out of the College Stock,
within these few Years, and a noble Library built for the Reception of Books.

In the great Court a fine Statue is erected to the Honor of the Founder, by
Dr. Godolphin, late Dean of St. Paul's, and Provost of this College; and the
Library has received several considerable Benefactions, particularly very
lately, the fine Collection of Richard Topham, Esquire formerly Keeper of the
Records in the Tower, which was presented to it, by the late excellent Lord
Chief Justice Reeves. And before that a Collection of Books, valued at 2000 l.
was left to it by Dr. Waddington, late Bishop of Chichester.

The Gardens, which extend from the College down almost to the Bank of the
Thames, are well planted and kept.

This College was founded by King Henry VI. a Prince munificent in his Gifts
for the Encouragement of Learning. Witness, besides this noble Foundation, that
of King's College in Cambridge, to which the Scholars of Eton are annually
removed; and which, had it been perfected as he designed it, would have been
the noblest Building of the Kind in the World. But his Successor and Deposer,
K. Ed. IV. took several Manors from Eton College, and bestowed them on their
Neighbors at Windsor; and had intended to have taken from them still more, had
not the celebrated Jane Shore solicited in their Behalf.

This College has a settled Revenue of about 5000 l. per Ann. and maintains a
Provost, a Vice-provost, who is also a Fellow; Six other Fellows, and 70
Scholars on the Foundation, besides a full Choir for the Chapel, with necessary
Officers and Servants. The School is divided into the upper and lower, and each
into Three Classes; each School has One Master, and each Master Four Assistants
or Ushers. None are received into the upper School, till they can make Latin
Verses, and have a tolerable Knowledge of the Greek. In the lower School the
Children are received very young, and are initiated into all School-learning.
Besides the Seventy Scholars upon the Foundation, there are always abundance of
Children, generally speaking, of the best Families, and of Persons of
Distinction, who are boarded in the Houses of the Townsmen, and within the
College.

The Number of Scholars instructed here used to be from 400 to 500; but has not
been, for Seven Years past, more than 320.

The Election of Scholars for the University, out of this School, is made
annually on the First Tuesday in August. In order to it, Three Persons are
deputed from King's College in Cambridge, viz. the Provost of that College, and
One Senior, and One Junior Poser, Fellows of the same; who being joined by the
Provost, the Vice-provost, and the Head Master of Eton College, call before
them the Scholars of the upper Class, and examining them in the several Parts
of their Learning, choose out Twelve such as they think best qualified, and
enter them in a Roll or List for the University. These Youths are not
immediately removed from the School, but must wait till Vacancies fall in
King's College; and as such happen, are then taken as they stand in Seniority
in the Roll of Election.

When a Scholar from Eton comes to King's College, he is received upon the
Foundation, and pursues his Studies there for Three Years; after which he
claims a Fellowship, unless forfeited by Marriage, accepting of Ecclesiastic
Preferments, etc. according to the Terms of the Statutes.

The Provost has a noble House and Garden, besides the Use of the College
Gardens at his Pleasure.

Will you, Sir, excuse me here a few Lines to the Memory of the late excellent
Lord Chief Justice Reeves, beforementioned? This worthy and eminent Lawyer had
a Seat in this Town, to which he constantly retired at the Close of every Term,
while he was at the Bar; for he would never go the Circuit, or attend the Court
of Chancery; and actually declined accepting of the high Office of a Judge,
while his Lady lived, choosing rather to spend his Vacations in Retirement with
his Family, than either Honor or Profit; yet he was pursued even here with
Cases for his Opinion, as being the greatest Lawyer of his Time; and these were
conveyed to him by his Clerk from his Chambers in the Temple; and after he had
answered them, he would return them thither again, without seeing the
Practisers who left them.

This Gentleman lay a long time undistinguished in his Profession, under an
invincible Modesty; insomuch that he thought once of quitting the Bar: but a
lucky Occasion happening, whereby he had an Opportunity to show his great Parts
and Learning, he was soon taken Notice of, and retained in every Cause of
Moment; but however confined himself entirely to the Courts of Law, and chiefly
to that of the King's Bench. After the Death of his Wife he was prevailed with
to ascend the Bench as a Judge, in the last Court, which he accepted, probably
to alleviate and divert the Concern he was in for her Death. He was afterward
made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in which Office he lived but Two
Years. His Death was a public Loss, and much lamented.

I am now come to Windsor, where I must for a while quit the Subject of Trade
and Navigation, in order to describe the most beautiful and most pleasantly
situated Castle, and Royal Palace, in the whole Isle of Great Britain.

William the Conqueror was the first of our English Monarchs, who distinguished
Windsor. That Prince, who delighted much in Hunting, finding it a Situation
highly proper for that Purpose, and, as he said of it, a suitable Place for the
Entertainment of Kings, agreed with the Abbot of Westminster for an Exchange,
and so took Possession of it. He built a Castle here, and had several little
Lodges or Hunting-houses in the Forest adjoining; and frequently lodged, for
the Convenience of his Sport, in a House which the Monks before enjoyed near or
in the Town of Windsor; for the Town is much more ancient than the present
Castle, and was an eminent Pass upon the Thames in the Reign of the Saxon Kings.

After him King Edward III. taking an extreme Liking to that Place, resolved to
fix his Summer Residence here; and accordingly laid out himself the Plan of
that magnificent Palace, which, as to outward Form and Building, we now see
there; for whatever has been done as to beautifying, altering, or amending the
Inside and Apartments, nothing has been added to the Building itself, except
that noble Terrace, which runs under the North Front, and leads to the Green on
the Park, at the East Side or End of it, along which the fine Lodgings, and
Royal Apartments, were at first built; all the North-part being then taken up
in Rooms of State, and Halls for public Balls, etc.

The House itself was indeed a Palace, and without any Appearance of a
Fortification; but when the Building was brought on to the Slope of the Hill on
the Town Side, the King added Ditches, Ramparts, the Round Tower, and several
other Places of Strength; and thence it was called a Castle.

Such a Pride did this great King take in being the Founder of this sumptuous
Building, that when it was suggested to him, that William of Wickham had
assumed the Honor of it to himself, it had like to have cost William all his
Interest in the King's Favor, which at that time was very great; but the
Prelate cleared himself by disavowing the Charge, urging that all he protended
to, was to acknowledge, That the Money and the Reputation he had gained by
building that Castle for the King, had been the making of him. For it seems he
had caused these Words, THIS MADE WICKHAM, to be cut in Stone in the inner Wall
of the little Tower, which from him is, to this Day, called Winchester Tower.

William of Wickham, whom I have beforementioned in my Account of Winchester,
was, at that time, the Architect of the Court; and so well performed his Part,
that in all the Decorations and Ornaments which have been made since by
succeeding Princes, they have found no Occasion to add to or diminish any
thing, except it be to alter some small Matter at the Entrance to the great
Staircase, the Kitchen, and Offices below Stairs, and suchlike; but the great
North and East Fronts, the Square of the inner Court, the great Gates at the
entering from the Town, with the Round Tower, and the Walls annexed, are all
standing in the very Form in which King Edward III. left them.

The only Addition in the Inside, is a fine Equestrian Statue of King Charles
II. which stands over the great Well, sunk, as may be supposed, in the first
Building, for the Supply of the Castle with Water, and in which was an Engine
for raising it, notwithstanding the great Depth, by very little Labor; the
Contrivance and Performance of Sir Samuel Morland, an excellent Mechanic and
Mathematician.

On the Outside, as I have said, was added the Terrace Walk, by Queen
Elizabeth, where she usually walked for an Hour every Day before her Dinner, if
not hindered by windy Weather, to which she had a peculiar Aversion; for she
loved to walk in a mild, calm Rain, with an Umbrella over her Head.

This is really a magnificent Work; for as it is raised on a steep Declivity of
the Hill, it was necessarily cut down a very great Depth, to bring the
Foundation to a Flat equal to the Breadth, which was to be formed above. From
the Foundation it was raised by solid Stone Work of a vast Thickness, with
cross Walls of Stone, for banding the Front, and preventing any Thrust from the
Weight of Earth within.

This noble Walk is covered with fine Gravel, and has Cavities, with Drains, to
carry off the Water; so that not a Drop of Rain will rest on the Terrace, but
it is dry, hard, and fit to walk on immediately after the greatest Showers. The
Breadth of this Walk is very spacious on the North Side; on the East Side it is
narrower. Neither Versailles, nor any of the Royal Palaces in France, Naples,
or Rome, can show any thing like this. The Grand Seignior's Terrace, in the
outer Court of the Seraglio next the Sea, is what I think comes the nearest,
and yet is not equal to it, if I may believe the Account of those who have seen
it.

At the North-east Corner of this Terrace, where it turns South, to run on by
the East Side of the Castle, are Steps, by which you go off upon the Plain of
the Park, which is kept smooth as a Carpet, and on the Edge of which the
Prospect of the Terrace is doubled by a Vista, South over the Park, and quite
up to the great Park, and toward the Forest. Here also is a small Seat, that
will not contain above One, or Two at most, with an high Back and Cover for the
Head, which being fixed on a Pin of Iron or Brass, the Persons who sit in it
may easily turn it from the Wind, however it may blow; and enjoy a complete
Calm. This is said also to be Queen Elizabeth's Invention, to avoid being
ruffled with the Wind; and it affords no less Shelter from the Sun.

From this lofty Terrace the People within have an Egress to the Park, and to a
most beautiful Walk, which neither King Edward III. nor his Successors, for
some Hundreds of Years, knew any thing of, all their Prospect being from the
Windows of the Castle.

On that Side of the Building which looks out upon the Terrace, are all the
Royal Apartments; those of King Edward III. which were on the East Side, being
now allotted to great Officers of State.

You mount into the Royal Apartments by several back Stairs; but the public
Way is up a small Ascent to a Flat or Half-pace, where there are two Entries of
State by two large Stair-cases, one on the Left Hand to the Royal Apartments,
and the other on the Right, to St. George's-hall and the Royal Chapel.

Before the Entrance to these on either Side, you pass through the
Guard-chambers, where you see the Walls furnished with Arms, and the King's
Yeomen of the Guard keep their Station. These Rooms lead as well to the fine
Lodgings, as to St. George's-hall.

In the Royal Lodgings there have been so many Alterations of Furniture, that
there can be no entering upon a particular Description. In the Chimney-piece of
one of these Apartments, is a Piece of Needle Work exquisitely fine, performed,
as they say, by the Queen of Scots, during the Time of her Confinement in
Fotheringay-castle. There are several Family Pictures in the Chimney-pieces,
and other Parts of those Lodgings, which are very valuable.

These Rooms look all out North toward the Terrace, and over Part of the
finest and richest Vale in the World; which along the Course of the River
Thames, with very little Interruption, reaches to, and includes the City of
London East, and the City of Oxford West; the River, with a beautiful winding
Stream gliding gently through the Middle of it, and enriching by its Navigation
both the Land and the People on every Side.

It may be proper to say something of the Beauties and Ornaments of St.
George's-hall, though nothing can be said equal to what the Eye may be Witness
to. It Is surprising, at the first Entrance, to see at the Upper-end the Picture
of King William on Horseback; under him an Ascent with Marble Steps, a
Balustrade, and a half Pace, which formerly was actually there, with room for a
Throne, or Chair of State, for the Sovereign to sit on, when on public Days he
thought fit to appear in Ceremony.

At the West End of the Hall is the Chapel Royal, the neatest and finest of the
Kind in England: the carved Work is beyond any that can be seen in the Kingdom.

After we had spent some Hours in viewing all that was curious on this Side, we
came down to the Dungeon, or Round Tower, which goes up a long, but easy Ascent
of Steps, and is very high. Here we were obliged to deliver up our Swords, but
nowhere else: though here is nothing curious. The Governor or Constable's
Lodgings are neatly furnished, but nowise extraordinary.

From this Tower you see St. Paul's Cathedral at London very plainly.

Coming down from hence we entered into the other Court, where is the great
Chapel of the Garter, and the House or College for the poor Knights, as they
are called.

I might go back here to the History of the Order of the Garter, the
Institution of which by King Edward III. had its Original here: but this is
done so fully in other Authors, that I shall only mention, That this Order was
not founded on the Countess of Salisbury's Garter, as Polydere Virgil, the most
conceited and most erroneous Author that ever wrote of the English Affairs,
ridiculously asserts; but on that martial King's own Garter, which he gave as
the Signal at the glorious Battle of Cressi, as St. George was given for the
Word of the Day. To commemorate which, in Honor of his brave and warlike Son,
and of those Nobles and Gentlemen who shared with him in the Glory of that ever
memorable Day, he instituted this Order. And here I cannot forbear observing,
(though entirely out of my way) how fond we have ever been in following
Foreigners in most Things, even from the Coxcomb in Dress, up to the Historian;
as is evident not only from this idle Story of the abovementioned Author
prevailing among u^ in particular, and of his History in general, but likewise
of the Performance of a late Foreign Author, of the Affairs and Transactions of
this Country; whereby the Translator, and Undertake^, to usher it out in
English, got at least 10,000 l. when it had nothing more, but rather much less*
to recommend it, than any of our own English Histories.

The following are the Names of the first Knights of this most Noble Order.
King Edward III. The Black Prince. Henry, D. of Lancaster. Thomas, Earl of
Warwick. Peers Capitow de la Bouch. Ralph, Earl of Stafford. W. Montacute, E.
of Salis. Roger Mortimer, Earl of March. John de Lysle. Bartholomew Burghersh.
John de Beauchamp. John de M^^un. Hugh Courteney. Thomas Holland. John de Gray.
Richard Fitz Simon. Miles Stapleton. Thomas Wale. Hugh Wortesley. Nele Loring.
John Chandos. James d' Audeley. Otho Holland. Henry Eam. Sanchet Daubricourt.
Walter Paveley, alias Pevrell.


These, though not all Noblemen, were however Men of great Characters and
Stations, either in the Army, or in the Civil Administration, and such as the
Sovereign did not think it below him to make his Companions.

The lower Court of the Castle, although not so distinguished by Lodgings and
Rooms of State, is nevertheless particularly glorious for the fine Chapel of
the Order, a most beautiful and magnificent Work, and which shows the Greatness
not only of the Court in those Days, but the Spirit and Genius of the
magnanimous Founder. The Chapel is not only fine within, but the Workmanship
without is extraordinary; nothing so ancient is to be seen so beautiful.
King's-College Chapel at Cambridge, built by Henry VI. and Henry VII.'s Chapel
in Westminster-Abbey, are fine Buildings; but they are modern, compared to
this, which was begun, as by the inscribed Dates upon the Walls appears, in the
Year 1337.

The Coats of Arms, and the various Imagery and other Ornaments both inside and
outside, not only of the King, but of several of the first Knights Companions,
are wonderfully finished, and the Work has stood out against the Injury of Time
to Admiration.

It Is observable, that King Edward owns this Chapel was begun by his Ancestors,
and some think it was by King Edward I. and that he himself was baptized in it,
and there was a Castle built by William the Conqueror also: As to the Chapel,
which was then called a Church, or a Convent, King Edward III. did not pull
down the old Building entirely; but he added all the Choir to the first Model,
and several other proper Parts for the Purposes intended, as Houses and
handsome Apartments for the Canons, Dignitaries, and other Persons belonging to
the Church, which are generally situated on the North Side of the Square, out
of Sight, or rather skreened from the common View by the Church itself; which
Dwellings are notwithstanding very good, and well accommodated for the Persons
who are Possessors of them; then the King finished it in the Manner we now see
it: As for the old Castle, the Building of William the Conqueror, the King
pulled it down to the Foundation, forming a new Building according to the
present Plan, and which stood, as above, to the Time of King Charles II.
without any Alteration.

The Establishment for this Chapel was very considerable, by the Donation of
diverse Subjects, before it was set apart to be the Chapel of the Order: the
Duke of Suffolk in particular, as appears in Dugdale's Monasticon, gave near
3000 Acres of Land, 19 Manors, 170 Messuages and Tofts, and several Advowsons
of Churches, to it; which, with other Gifts afterward, made the Revenue above
1000 l. a Year in those Days, which was a prodigious Sum, as Money went at that
Time.

In the Choir are the Stalls for the Knights of the Order, with a Throne for
the Sovereign; also Stalls in the Middle of it for the poor Knights-Pensioners,
who live in their House or Hospital on the South Side of the Square or Court in
which the Church stands.

Here are to be seen the Banners of the Knights who now enjoy the Honor of the
Garter: When they die, those Banners are taken down, and the Coat of Arms of
the deceased Knight set up in the Place allotted for those Arms over the same
Stall: so those Coats of Arms are a living History, or rather a Record of all
the Knights, that ever have been since the first Institution of the Order, and
how they succeeded one another; by which it appears, that Kings, Emperors, and
Sovereign Princes, have not thought it below them to accept of the Honor of
being Knights Companions of the Order, while at the same time it must be noted,
to the Honor of the English Crown, that our Kings have never thought fit to
accept of any of their Orders abroad, of what Kind soever; whereas there is an
Account in the Registry of the Order, that there are reckoned up of this most
Noble Company, 8 Emperors of Germany. 3 Kings of Sweden. 5 Kings of Denmark. 2
Kings of Prussia. 3 Kings of Spain. 6 Princes of Orange. 5 Kings of France. 4
Peers of France. A King of Scotland, besides James VI. 5 Kings of Portugal. A
King of Poland. 2 Kings of Naples. A King of Arragon. 3 Infants of Portugal. A
Prince of Denmark. A Bishop of Osnabrug. 5 Princes of Lunenburg. An Elector of
Brandenburg. 7 Electors Palatine. 2 Electors of Saxony. 2 Dukes of Lorrain. 3
Dukes of Wirtenberg. 2 Dukes of Holstein. 2 Grandees of Spain. 2 Dukes de
Urbino. A Duke of Savoy. A Duke of Saxe Gotha. A Prince of Hesse, etc.


Besides these Foreign Princes, there is a little Galaxy of English Nobility,
the Flower of so many Courts, and so many Ages, to whose Families the Ensigns
of the Order have been an Honor, and who are not the least Glory this Order
has to boast of. But as to the List of the present Knights, that being subject
to Fluctuation, comes not within my Design in this Letter.

Several Kings and Persons of high Rank have been buried also in this Chapel,
as Edward IV. and Charles I. Here also is the Family Burying-place of the Dukes
of Beauford, who are a natural Branch of the Royal Family of Lancaster.

All the Ceremonies observed here in the Instalment of the Knights, are so
perfectly set down in Mr. Ashmole's History of the Order of the Garter, that
nothing can be said but what must be a Copy from him.

As the upper Court and Building are fronted with the fine Terrace, so the
lower Court, where this beautiful Chapel stands, is encompassed with a very
high Wall, which goes round the West End of the Court to the Gate; and looking
South, leads into the Town, as the Gate of the upper Court looks likewise
South-east into the little Park.

The Parks about Windsor are very agreeable and spacious: the little Park, as
it is called, is above 3 Miles round, the great one 14, and the Forest above
30. The first is particular to the Court; the others are open for Riding,
Hunting, and taking the Air, for any Gentlemen that please.

The Lodges in those Parks may be called Palaces, were they not eclipsed by the
Palace itself. They have been beautified by the noble Persons to whom the Post
of Rangers has been generally assigned, who, having been enriched by other
Advancements, Honors, and profitable Employments, thought nothing too much to
lay out to adorn their Apartments, in a Place wherein it was so much to their
Honor, as well as Convenience to reside: such is the Lodge belonging once to
Admiral Churchill, the Duchess of Marlborough, and others.

We left Windsor, and struck again into the London Road at Colebrook, and
passed over the Heath, and through the Town of Hounslow, Brentford, Hamersmith,
and Kensington into London.

And here I shall conclude this Letter with assuring you, that I am, Sir,

Your humble Servant.

LETTER II. CONTAINING A Description of the City of LONDON, as taking in the
City of Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and the Buildings circumjacent.
SIR,
I Am now to describe the City of LONDON, and Parts adjacent: a Work infinitely
difficult to be performed in the narrow Compass of a Letter, since we see it so
fully takes up Two large Volumes in Folio, which yet, if I may venture to give
an Opinion of it, is very imperfectly executed, and has employed since another
very large one in Folio, written by Mr. W. Maitland, F. R. S. which has much
more Merit than the Two Volumes, and contains many Things needful to be known
by the Curious, which are incompatible with the Brevity to which our narrow
Limits confine us.

LONDON, as a City only, and as its Walls and Liberties line it out, might
indeed be viewed in a smaller Compass, than what we propose to consider it in;
for when I speak of London, in the modern Acceptance, I take in all that vast
Mass of Buildings reaching from Blackwall in the East, to Tothill-fields in the
West; and extended in an unequal Breadth from the Bridge or River in the South,
to Islington North; and from Peterborough-house on the Bankside in Westminster,
to Cavendish-square; and all the new Buildings by and beyond Grosvenor and
Hanover Squares to the Brentford Road one way, to the Acton Road another; a
Prodigy of Buildings, that nothing in the World does, or ever did, surpass,
except old Rome in Trajan's Time, when the Walls of that City were 50 Miles in
Compass, and the Number of Inhabitants 6,800,000 Souls.

London, as to its Figure, must be owned to be very irregular, as it is
stretched out in Buildings just at the Pleasure of every Undertaker of them,
and as the Convenience of the People directs, whether for Trade, or otherwise.
This has given it a very confused Face, and made it uncompact and unequal,
being properly neither long or broad, round or square; whereas the City of
Rome, was, in a manner, round, with very few Irregularities in its Shape.

One sees London, including the Buildings on both Sides the Water, in some
Places Three Miles broad, as from St. George's in Southwark, to Shoreditch in
Middlesex; or Two Miles, as from Peterborough-house to Montague-house; and in
some Places not half a Mile, as in Wapping; and less in Rotherhith.

We see several Villages, formerly standing, as it were, in the Country, and at
a great Distance, now joined to the Streets by continued Buildings, and more
making haste to meet in the like manner; for Example,

1. Deptford: This Town was formerly reckoned at least Two Miles from
Rotherhith, and that over the Marshes too, a Place unlikely ever to be
inhabited; and yet now, by the Increase of Buildings in that Town itself, and
the many Streets erected at Rotherhith, and by the Docks and Building-yards on
the Riverside, which stand between both, the Town of Deptford, and the Streets
of Rotherhith, are in a manner joined, and the Buildings daily increasing; so
that Deptford may be reckoned a Part of the great Mass, and infinitely full of
People also; and were the Town of Deptford now separated, and rated by itself,
I believe it contains more People, and stands upon more Ground than the City of
Wells.

2. The Town of Islington, on the North-side of the City, is in like manner
joined to the Streets of London, excepting one small Field, and which is in
itself so small, that there is no Doubt but in a very few Years they will be
entirely joined. And the same may be said,

3. Of Mile-end, on the East End of the Town.

4. Newington-butts, in Surrey, reaches out her Hand North, and is so joining
to Southwark, that it cannot now be properly called a Town by itself, but a
kind of Suburb to the Borough; and if, as once was talked of, St.
George's-fields should be built into Squares and Streets, Newington, Lambeth,
and the Borough, would make but one Southwark.

That Westminster is in a fair way to shake Hands with Chelsea, as St. Gyles's
is with Marybone; and Great Russel Street by Montague-house, with
Tottenham-court, is very evident; and yet all these put together, may still be
called London: Whither will this City then extend, and where must a
Circumvallation Line of it be placed?

I have, as near as I could, caused a Measure to be taken of this mighty Body;
and for the Satisfaction of your Curiosity, I have here given as accurate a
Description of it, as I can do in so narrow a Compass, or without drawing a
Plan of the Places.

As I am forced, in many Places, to take in some unbuilt Ground, so I have, on
the other hand, been obliged to leave a great many whole Streets of Buildings
out of my Line: so that I have really not stretched my Calculations, to make it
seem bigger than it is; nor is there any Occasion for it.

A LINE of Measurement, drawn about all the continued Buildings of the City of
London, and Parts adjacent, including Westminster and Southwark, etc.
N.B. I shall sum up by Figures, 1, 2, 3, etc. the Particulars at last.

The Line begins, for the MIDDLESEX Side of the BUILDINGS,
1. AT Peterborough-house, the farthest House West upon the River Thames, and
runs North-west by West by the Marshes to Tothill-fields, and passing by the
Neat-houses and Arnold's Brewhouse, ends at Chelsea Road. Measured, 1 Mile, 6
Furlongs, 16 Rods.

2. Then, allowing an Interval from Buckingham-house cross the Park, about one
Furlong and half to the Corner of my Lord Godolphin's Garden-Wall, the Line
goes North behind the Stable-yard Buildings, and behind Park-place, and on the
Park-wall behind the Buildings, on the West Side of St. James's-street, to the
Corner in Soho, or Piccadilly; then crossing the Road, goes along the North
Side of the Road West, Hyde-park Gate. 1 Mile, 2 Furlongs, 11 Rods.

3. Then the Line turns North-east by East, and taking in the Buildings and
Streets, called May-fair, holds on East, till the new Streets, formed out of
Hyde-house Garden, cause it to turn away North, a Point West reaching to
Tyburn-road, a little to the East of the great Mother Conduit; then it goes
North, and crossing the Road, takes in the West Side of Cavendish-square, and
the Streets adjoining, and leaving Marybone, goes away East, till it reaches to
Hampstead-road, near a little Village called Tottenham-court. 2 Miles, 5
Furlongs, 20 Rods.

4. From Tottenham-court the Line comes in a little South, to meet the
Bloomsbury Buildings; then turning East, runs behind Montague and Southampton
Houses, to the North-east Corner of Southampton-house; then crossing the Path,
meets the Buildings called Queen's-square; then turning North, till it comes to
the North-west Corner of the Square; thence it goes away East, behind the
Buildings on the North Side of Ormond-street, till it comes to Lamb's Conduit.
1 Mile, 1 Furlong, 13 Rods.

5. Here the Line turns South, and indents to the Corner of Bedford-row; and
leaving some few Houses, with the Cockpit and Bowling-green, goes on the Back
of Gray's-inn Wall to Gray's-inn-lane; then turns on the Outside of the
Buildings, which are on the West Side of Gray's-inn-lane, going North to the
Stone's End, when turning East, it passes to the New River Bridge without
Liquor-pond-street; so taking in the Cold-bath and the Bear-garden, but leaving
out A large Mass of Buildings has been erected since our Author drew this Line,
consisting of many Streets and Passages, the whole Cold-bath-fields being built
upon, quite up to Sir John Oldcastle's.
Sir John Oldcastle's and the Spaw, goes on East by the Ducking-pond to the End
of New Bridewell, and crossing the Fair-field, comes into the Islington Road by
the Distiller's House, formerly Justice Fuller's. 1 Mile, 2 Furlongs, 6 Rods.

6. Here, to take in all the Buildings which join Islington to the Streets, the
Line goes North on the East Side of the Road to the Turk's-head Alehouse; then
turning North-west, passes to the New River House; but leaving it to the West,
passes by Sadler's-wells, from thence to Busby's-house, and keeping on the West
Side of Islington, till it comes opposite to Canbury-house-lane, turns into the
Road, and passes South almost to the Lane which turns East down to the lower
Street; but then turns East without the Houses, and goes to the Cowkeeper's in
the lower Street crossing the Road, and through the Cowkeeper's Yard into
Frog-lane; then turning West on the South Side of the Town, just without the
Buildings, joins again to the Buildings on the West Side of Wood's-close,
passing behind the Sheep-market Wall. 2 Miles, 4 Furlongs, 39 Rods.

7. From Wood's-close the Line goes due East to Mount-mill, where, leaving
several Buildings to the North, it passes on, crossing all the Roads to
Bricklane, to the North Side of the great new Square in Oldstreet, and taking
in the Pesthouse Wall, turns South at the North-east Corner of the said Wall to
Oldstreet Road; then going away East till it meets the Buildings near
Hoxton-square, it turns North to the North-west Corner of the Wall of Ask's
Hospital; then sloping North-east, it passes by Pimlico, the Cyder-house, and
the two Walls to the North End of Hoxton, when it turns East, and enclosing the
Garden-walls, comes into the Ware Road just at the King's-head in the New
Buildings by the Land of Promise. 2 Miles, 16 Rods.

8. From the King's-head the Line turns South, running to the Stone's End in
Shoreditch; then turning East, it takes in a Burying-ground, and some Buildings
in the Hackney Road, when sloping South-east by South, it goes away by the
Virginia-house to a great Brewhouse, and then still more East to the Back of
Wheeler-street, and then East by South to Brick-lane, crossing which, it goes
away East toward Bethnal-green; but then turning short South, it goes toward
White-chapel Mount; but being intercepted by new Streets, it goes quite up to
the South End of the Dog-row at Mile-end. 1 Mile, 6 Furlongs, 19 Rods.

9. From the Dog-row the Line crosses the Road, and takes in a Hamlet of
Houses, called Stepney; and coming back West to the Street's End at Whitechapel
Mill, goes away South by the Hog-houses into Church-lane, and to Rag-fair; when
turning again East, it continues in a strait Line on the North Side of Ratcliff
Highway, till it comes almost to the farthe^ Glass-houses; then turning North,
it surrounds all Stepney, and Stepney-causway, to Mile-end Road; then turning
East again, and afterward South, comes back to the new Streets on the North
Side of Limehouse, and joining the Marsh, comes down to the Waterside at the
Lower Shipwright Dock in Limehouse-hole. 3 Miles, 7 Furlongs, 1 Rod.

The Particulars of the Middlesex Side, put together, are as follows; viz.
Miles. Furl. Rods. 1. 1: 6: 16 2. 1: 2: 11 3. 2: 5: 20 4. 1: 1: 13 5. 1: 2: 6
6. 2: 4: 39 7. 2: 0: 16 8. 1: 6: 19 9. 3: 7: 1 Total 18: 4: 21

N.B. This Line leaves out all the North Side of Mile-end Town, from the End of
the Dog-row to the Jews Burying-Ground, which is all built; also all the North
Part of the Dog-row, and all Bethnal-green; also Poplar and Black-wall, which
are indeed contiguous, a Trifle of Ground excepted, and very populous.
For the Southwark Side of the Buildings, the Line is as follows:
HAving ended the Circumference of the Middlesex Building at Lime-house, and
the Street extending toward Poplar, the Hamlets of Poplar and Blackwall, though
very near contiguous in Buildings, being excluded, I allow an Interval of two
Miles, from Poplar, cross the Isle of Dogs, and over the Thames, to the Lower
Watergate at Deptford; and though in measuring the Circumference of all Cities,
the River, where any such runs through Part of the Buildings, is always measured;
yet, that I may not be said to stretch the Extent of the Buildings which I
include in this Account, I omit the River from Limehouse to Deptford, (where,
if included, it ought to begin) and begin my Line as above.

1. From the said Watergate at Deptford, the Line goes East to the Corner next
the Thames, where the Shipwright's Yard now is, and where I find a continued
Range of Buildings begins by the Side of a little Creek or River, which runs
into the Thames there, and reaches quite up the said River, to the Bridge in
the great Kentish Road, and over the Street there, taking in the South Side of
the Street to the West Corner of the Buildings in that Street, and then
measuring down on the West Side of the long Street, which runs to the Thames
Side, till you come to the new Street which passes from Deptford to Rotherhith;
then turning to the Left, passing on the Backside of the King's Yard to Mr.
Evelin's House, including the new Church of Deptford, and all the new Streets
or Buildings made on the Fields Side, which are very many, this amounts in the
Whole, to 3 Miles, 1 Furlong, 16 Rods.

2. From Mr. Evelin's Garden-gate the Line goes North-west, taking in all the
new Docks and Yards, the Red-house, and several large Streets of Houses, which
have been lately built, and by which the said Town of Deptford is effectually
joined to the Buildings, reaching from Cuckolds-point Eastward, and which are
carried out, as if Rotherhith stretched forth its Arm to embrace Deptford; then
for some Length Rotherhith continues narrow till you come to Church-street,
where several Streets are also lately built South, and others parallel with the
Street, till gradually the Buildings thicken, and extend farther and farther to
the South, and South by East, till they cross over the East End of Horslydown
to Bermondsey Church, and thence East to the Sign of the World's-end,
over against the great Fort, being the Remains of the Fortifications drawn
round these Parts of Southwark in the late Civil Wars. This Extent is, by
Computation, Four Miles; but being measured as the Streets indented, the
Circuit proved 5 Miles, 6 Furlongs, 12 Rods.

3. From this Fort to the Corner of Long-lane, and through Long-lane to the Lock,
at the End of Kent-street, is 1 Mile, 7 Furlongs, 2 Rods.

4. From the Corner of Kent-street to the Town of Newington-butts, drawing the
Line behind all the Buildings as they stand, and round the said Village of
Newington to the Haberdashers Almshouses, and thence by the Road to the
Windmill at Blackman street, is 3 Miles, 2 Furlongs, 16 Rods.

5. From the Windmill crossing St. George's-fields, on the Back of the Mint, to
the Fighting Cocks, thence to the Restoration Gardens, and thence on the
Outside of all the Buildings to Lambeth-wells, and on to Vaux-hall Bridge,
over against the other Fort of the old Fortifications, being just the same
Length that those old Fortifications extended, though infinitely fuller of
Buildings. This last Circuit measures 3 Miles, 5 Furlongs, 12 Rods.

The Particulars of the Southwark Side, put together The Town of Greenwich,
which may indeed be said to be contiguous to Deptford, might be also called a
Part of the Measurement; but I omit it, as I have the Towns of Chelsea and
Knightsbridge on the other Side, though the latter actually joins the Town, and
the other, as also Kensington, very nearly.
, are as follow; viz. Miles. Furl. Rods. 1. 3: 1: 16 2. 5: 6: 12 3. 1: 7: 2 4.
3: 2: 16 5. 3: 5: 12 17: 6: 18 Middlesex Side 18: 4: 21 Total 36: 2: 39

Were it possible to reduce all these Buildings to a compact Situation, it is
generally thought, that the whole Body so put together, allowing the necessary
Ground, which they now employ for the several Trades in the Out-parts, such as
the Building-yards by the River for Shipwrights, Tanners Yards, Dyers,
Whitsters, etc. would take up 28 Miles in Circumference, very compactly built.

The Guesses that are made at the Number of Inhabitants, have been variously
formed; Mr. Maitland abovementioned ( Anno 1739) computes, that within the
Walls, and the Bars, as I may say, it contains 725, 903; but Sir William Petty,
famous for his Political Arithmetic, supposed the City, at his last
Calculation, to contain a Million of People, and this he judges from the Number
of Births and Burials; but he must take in a greater Compass than Mr. Maitland,
to make up this Number; and according to this Rule, as well by what is well
known of the Increase of the said Births and Burials, as of the prodigious
Increase of Buildings, it may be very reasonable to conclude the present Number
of Inhabitants within the Circumference I have mentioned in my Line, to amount
to about 1,500,000 Souls.

The Government of this great Mass of Building, and of such a vast collected
Body of People, though it consists of various Parts, is perhaps the best
regulated that any City can pretend to; and of late Years it boasts of several
new Regulations, as to Beggars, Lights, Pavements, etc. which turn out greatly
to its Advantage.

The Government of the City of London in particular, and abstractedly
considered, is by the Lord Mayor, Twenty-four Aldermen, Two Sheriffs, the
Recorder, and Common Council; but the Jurisdiction of these is confined to that
Part only which they call the City and its Liberties, which are marked out,
except the Borough, by the Walls and the Bars, as they are called.

Besides this, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London have a Right Presidial in
Southwark, and hold frequent Courts at St. Mary-hill in the Borough: they are
also Conservators of the Bridge, and the Bridge itself is their particular
Jurisdiction.

Also the Lord Mayor, etc. is Conservator of the River Thames, from Stanes
Bridge in Surrey and Middlesex, to the River Medway in Kent, and, as some
insist, up the Medway to Rochester Bridge.

The Government of the Out-parts is by Justices of the Peace, and by the
Sheriffs of London, who are likewise Sheriffs of Middlesex; and the Government
of Westminster is by a High-bailiff, constituted by the Dean and Chapter, to
whom the Civil Administration is committed, and who presides in Elections of
Parliament for the City of Westminster, and returns the Candidates who are
chosen.

The remaining Part of Southwark Side, where the City Jurisdiction does not
obtain, is governed also by a Bench of Justices, and their proper substituted
Peace-officers; excepting out of this the Privileges of the Marshalseas, or of
the Marshal's Court, the Privilege of the Marshal of the King's Bench, and the
like.



That I may observe some Method in the Description of this noble Metropolis,
and avoid Repetitions, I will divide my Subject into the following Branches. I.
I will give a brief Account of what the City was before the Fire, and how
improved when rebuilt, and within a few Years after it. II. Of the prodigious
Increase of Buildings within our own Memory, down to the Year 1740, III. Of the
Public Offices, and City Corporations. IV. Of the Mansion House, and other
most noted Edifices, Structures and Squares, in and about London. V. Of the
principal Hospitals, and other charitable Institutions in about London. VI. Of
the Churches of London and Westminster, Southwark, etc. VII. Of St. James's
Palace, the Parliament House, Westminster Hall, etc. VIII. Of the Statues, and
other Public Ornaments. IX. Of the Gates of London and Westminster. X. Of the
Public and Private Prisons. XI. Of the Markets of London, etc. XII. Of the
Public Schools and Libraries. XIII. Of the Shipping in the Thames, and the
Trade carried on by means of that noble River. XIV. Of the Manner by which the
City is supplied with Water. XV. Of the Christenings and Burials in London. The
Importance of the City of London to the whole Kingdom: Of its comparative
Proportion to the Public Expense, and the disproportionate Number of Members
it returns. XVI. The Benefit to the Public of a good Understanding between the
Court and City.


To begin then with the first; viz.

I. I. A brief Account of what the City was before the Fire, and how improved
when rebuilt, and within a few Years after it.
TAKE the City, and its adjacent Buildings, to stand as described by Mr. Stow,
or by any other Author, who wrote before the Fire of London; and the Difference
between what it was then, and what it is now, may be observed thus:

Before the Fire of London, Anno 1666, the Buildings looked as if they had been
formed to make one general Bonfire, whenever any wicked Incendiaries should
think fit to attempt it; for the Streets were not only narrow, and the Houses
all built with Timber, Lath, and Plaster; but the Manner of the Building in
those Days, one Story projecting out beyond another, was such, that in some
narrow Streets the Houses almost touched one another at the Top; insomuch that
it often happened, that if a House was on Fire, the opposite House was in more
Danger, according as the Wind stood, than the Houses adjoining on either Side.

And though by the new Buildings after the Fire much Ground was given up to
enlarge the Streets, yet it is to be observed, that the old Houses stood
generally upon more Ground, were much larger upon the Flat, and in many Places
Gardens and large Yards about them, so that there are many more Houses built
than stood before on the same Ground. For Example:

Swithen's Alleys by the Royal Exchange were all, before the Fire, taken up
with one single Merchant's House, Mr. Swithen by Name; whereas, upon the same
Ground where the House stood, stand now about 22 or 24 Houses, which belong to
his Posterity.

Copt-hall Court in Throgmorton-street was also, before the Fire, a single
House, inhabited by a Dutch Merchant: likewise Three more Courts in the same
Streets were single Houses, Two on the same Side of the Way, and one on the
other.

The several Alleys behind St. Christopher's Church, now vulgarly called St.
Christopher's Churchyard, were likewise, before the Fire, one great House,
with Warehouses, in which Mr. Kendrick lived; whom I have mentioned in my
Account of Reading and Newbury, and took up almost all the Ground, on which now
a Street of Houses is erected, called Prince's-street, going through into
Lothbury.

King's-Arms Yard in Coleman-street, now built into fine large Houses, and
inhabited by eminent Merchants, was, before the Fire, a Stable-yard for Horses,
and an Inn, which gave the Sign of the King's Arms.

I might give many more Instances; but these will account for what some assert;
viz. That so many great Houses were converted into Streets, Courts, Alleys and
Buildings, that near 4000 Houses stand on the Ground which the Fire left
desolate, more than stood on the same Ground before.

Another Increase of Buildings in the City, is to be taken from the Inhabitants
in the unburnt Parts following the same Example, of pulling down great old
Buildings, which took up large Tracks of Ground in some of the well inhabited
Places, and building on the same Ground not only several Houses, but even whole
Streets of Houses, which are since fully inhabited: For Example,

Crosby-square, within Bishopsgate, formerly the House of Sir James Langham,
Merchant.

Devonshire-Square and Street, with several back Streets, and Passages into
Petticoat-lane one Way, and Houndsditch another, all built on the Ground where
the old Earl of Devonshire had an House and Garden.

Bridgwater-square, and several Streets adjoining, built on the Ground where
the Earl of Bridgwater had a large House and Garden in Barbican.

Billeter-square, and several Passages adjoining, built upon the Grounds of one
great House, in which one Merchant only lived.

All those Palaces of the Nobility, formerly making a most beautiful Range of
Buildings fronting the Strand, with their Gardens reaching to the Thames, where
they had their particular Water-gates and Stairs, have had the same Fate, such
as Essex, Arundel, Norfolk, Salisbury, Worcester, Exeter, Hungerford, and York
Houses; the Lord Brook's House in Holbourn, in the Place of which are now so
many noble Streets and Houses erected, as are in themselves equal to a large
City; all which extend from the Temple to Northumberland-house, Somerset House
and the Savoy only intervening; and the latter of these may be said to be, not
an House, but a little Town, being separated into innumerable Tenements and
Apartments.

These are prodigious Inlargements to the City, even upon that which I call
inhabited Ground, and where infinite Numbers of People now live, more than
lived upon the same Spot of Ground before.

Suoh was the State of London before the Fire in 1666, and so prodigious were
the Improvements made in it, within the Course of a few Years after that
Disaster. But what are these, compared to what has been done since within our
own Memory? And this brings me to my second Article,

II. Of the prodigious Increase of Buildings within our own Memory, down to the
Year 1740.
NOT to enter on a particular Description of the Buildings, I shall only take
notice of the Places where such Inlargements are made: As,

1. All those numberless Ranges of Building, called Spital-fields, reaching
from Spital-yard at Northern Fallgate, and from Artillery-lane in
Bishopsgate-street, with all the new Streets, beginning at Hoxton and the Back
of Shoreditch Church North, and reaching to Brick-lane, and to the End of
Hare-street, on the Way to Bethnal-green East; then sloping away quite to
Whitechapel Road South-east, containing, as some People say, above 320 Acres of
Ground, which are now close built, and inhabited with an infinite Number of
People.

The Lanes were deep, dirty and unfrequented; that Part now called
Spitalfields-market was a Field of Grass, with Cows feeding on it, since the
Year 1670. The Old Artillery-ground (where the Parliament listed their first
Soldiers against the King) took up all those long Streets leading out of
Artillery-lane to Spital-yard Back gate, and so on to the End of
Wheeler-street. Brick-lane, which is now a long well-paved Street, was a deep
dirty Road, frequented chiefly by Carts fetching Bricks that way into
Whitechapel from Brick-kilns in those Fields, whence it had its Name.

2. On the more Eastern Part the same Increase goes on in Proportion; namely,
all Goodman's-fields, and the many Streets between Whitechapel and
Rosemary-lane, all built since the Year 1678. Well-close, now called Marine
square, all the hither or West End of Ratcliff-highway, from the Corner of
Gravel-lane to the East End of East Smithfield, was a Road over the Fields;
likewise those Buildings now called Virginia-street, and all the Streets on the
Side of Ratcliff-highway to Gravel-lane abovenamed, which of late Years
extends so far, that the End of Lime-house stands a Chance to be soon joined to
the Beginning of Poplar.

3. To come to the North Side of the Town, and beginning at Shoreditch West,
and Hoxton square, and Charles-square adjoining, those were all open Fields,
from Agnes St. Clare, to Hoxton Town, till the Year 1689, or thereabout.
Pitfield-street was a Bank, parting two Pasture-grounds, and Ask's Hospital was
another open Field. Farther West the like Addition of Buildings begins at the
Foot-way by the Pesthouse, and includes the French Hospital, Old-street Two
Squares, and several Streets, extending from Brick-lane to Mount-mill and the
Road to Islington, and from that Road, still West, to Wood's-close, and to St.
John's and Clerkenwell, all which Streets and Squares are built since the Years
1688 and 1689, and were before that, and some for a long Time after, open
Fields or Gardens, and never built on till after that Time; and moreover,
within these few Years, all those open Grounds, called Bunhill-fields,
adjoining to the Dissenters Burying-ground, are now built upon, and are
complete Streets of Houses to the very Road, and generally well inhabited.

From hence we go on still West, and beginning at Gray's-Inn, and going on to
those formerly called Red-lion Fields, and Lamb's-conduit Fields, we see there
prodigious Piles of Buildings; they begin at Gray's-Inn-Wall toward
Red-lion-street, from whence, in a strait Line, they go quite to Lamb's-conduit
Fields North, including a great Range of Buildings reaching to Bedford-row and
the Cockpit East, and including Red-lion-square, Ormond-street, Great and
Little Marlborough-streets, Queen's-square, and all the Streets between the
Square and King's-gate in Holbourn. These Piles are very great, and the Houses
so magnificent and large, that abundance of Persons of Quality are found among
them.

Farther West in the same Line is Southampton great Square, called Bloomsbury,
with Kingstreet on the East Side of it, and all the numberless Streets West of
the Square to the Marketplace, and through Great Russel Street by Montagu-house
quite into the Hampstead Road; all which Buildings, except Southampton-house,
and some of the Square, have been formed from the open Fields since the Time
abovementioned, and contain several Thousands of Houses.

The Increase of the Buildings in St. Gyles's and St. Martin's in the Fields,
is really a kind of Prodigy; comprising all the Buildings North of Long-acre,
up to the Seven Dials; all the Streets from Leicesterfields and St.
Martin's-lane, both North and West, to the Hay-market and Scho, and from the
Hay-market to St. James's-street inclusive, and to the Park-wall; then all the
Buildings on the North Side of the Street, called Picadilly, and the Road to
Knights-bridge, and between that and the South Side of Tyburn Road, including
Soho-square, Golden-square, Hanover-square (...) Two Bond-streets,
George's-street, and that new (...) out to Tyburn Road, called Grosv^^^^square,
and Cavendish-square, and all the (...) them. Some Part of which will be
briefly mentioned under the Head of Squares.

This last Addition is by Calculation more in Bulk than the Cities of Bristol,
Exeter and York, if they were all put together; all which Places were, a few
Years ago, mere Fields of Grass, and employed only to feed Cattle.

In Spring-gardens, near Charing Cross, are lately erected several very
handsome new Buildings, and a neat Chapel.

The new Buildings in the End of Broad-street, near Bishopsgate, formerly
called Petty-France, deserve to be mentioned here. It is in every one's Memory,
what a poor and decayed Place Petty-France was; but now the Spot where it
stood, is called New Broad-street, and consists of regular and stately Houses,
built after the Manner of those by Hanover-square, and are the most elegant
Buildings in the City. They are increased quite into Old Bethlehem, which
consisted of mean and ruinous Houses, and there may be said to be a new and
stately Town of Buildings erected here.

And it would be endless to enumerate the other new Buildings, that have taken
Place in and about this great City, of old and ruinous Houses and Streets. See
the Articles of Churches, Squares, etc.

III. Of the Public Offices, and City Corporations.
THE EXCISE-OFFICE is kept in the Old Jewry, in a very large House, formerly
the Dwelling of Sir John Frederick, and afterward of Sir John Hern, very
considerable Merchants. In this one Office is managed an immense Weight of
Business, and they have in Pay several Thousands of Officers. The whole Kingdom
is divided by them into proper Districts, and to every District a Collector, a
Supervisor, and a certain Number of Gaugers, called, by the Vulgar, Excise-men.

Under the Management of this Office are now brought not only the Excise upon
Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, as formerly, but also the Duties on Malt and
Candles, Hops, Soap, and Leather, Coffee, Tea, and Chocolate; all which we
managed in several Classes.

The Act lately passed against retailing spirituous Liquors in less Quantities
than Two Gallons, which had become so pernicious a Trade, that the lower Class
of People was almost wholly debauched and enervated by it, has very much
increased the Consequence, as well as the Business, of this Office; for the
Commissioners for what relates to this Matter, are a kind of absolute Judges in
the Cases brought before them.

The POST OFFICE is kept in Lombard Street in a large House, formerly Sir
Robert Viner's, and is under an admirable Management. The Peny-post is a Branch
of it, and a most useful Addition to Trade and Business; for by it Letters are
delivered at the remotest Corners of the Town, almost as soon as they could be
fent by a Messenger, and that from Four, Five, Six, to Eight times a Day,
according as the Distance of the Place makes it practicable; insomuch that you
may send a Letter from Limehouse in the East, to the farthest Part of
Westminster, for a Penny, several times in the same Day; and to the neighboring
Villages, as Kensington, Hamersmith, Chiswick, etc. Westward; Newington,
Islington, Kentish-town, Hampstead, Holloway, Highgate, etc. Northward; to
Newington-butts, Camberwell, etc. Southward; and Stepney, Poplar, Bow,
Stratford, Deptford, Greenwich, etc. Eastward, once a Day.

Nor are you tied up to a single Piece of Paper, as in the General Post Office;
but any Packet under a Pound-weight goes at the same Price.

The CUSTOM-HOUSE comes next to be mentioned. The Long Room is like an Exchange
every Morning, and the Crowd of People who appear there, and the Business they
do, is not to be explained by Words. The whole Building is very convenient, but
not like what it might or ought to have been; and moreover, the Quays
thereabouts are so thronged and crowded, that they are much too little for the
Business continually carrying on there.

Between the Horse-guards at Whitehall and Charing Cross, at an huge Expense,
but with very little Taste, is seen the new-erected ADMIRALTY-OFFICE. This
Office is, perhaps, of the most Importance of any of the public Parts of the
Administration; the Royal Navy being the Sinews of our Strength.

The NAVY-OFFICE, a neat and convenient Building in Cruched-fryars, and the
VICTUALLING-OFFICE on Tower Hill, near East Smithfield, both which, had we
room, deserve a particular Description, are but Branches of this
Administration, and receive their Orders from hence; as do likewise the Docks
and Yards theirs from the Navy-office: the Whole being carried on with the most
exquisite Order and Dispatch. The Admiralty has been in Commission ever since
the Death of Prince George of Denmark. The Commissioners so often change by
Deaths or Removals, that it will be of very little Use to insert them in a Work
like this.

Though his MAJESTY resides all the Winter at St. James's, yet the Business of
the Government is chiefly carried on at the Cockpit, Whitehall. Near which is
lately finished a magnificent Building, with a very grand Front looking to the
Parade in St. James's- park, for the TREASURY-OFFICE; and, it being a lofty
Structure, over that is the OFFICE of the SECRETARIES OF STATE.

The OFFICE for the BOARD OF TRADE is held just by the Upper-end of the
Privy-garden, adjoining to an old Gate at the Entrance of King Street, which is
now demolished. It is a large House, and convenient for the Purpose.

At the Horse-guards is a Building commodious enough, built as a Barrack for a
large Detachment of the Horse-guards, who keep Post here; over it are Offices
belonging to the Judge-advocate for holding Councils of War for Trial of
Deserters and others, according to the Articles of War.

A new Office and House is very lately erected, adjoining to the Horse-guards,
for the Paymaster-general of the Army.

The BANK used to be kept in Grocers-hall; but is within these few Years
removed to an entire new Edifice, built for that thriving Corporation in
Threadneedle-street, adjoining to St. Christopher's Church. It is a noble
Structure; but I have not room for a particular Description of it.

The EAST INDIA HOUSE, situated where formerly was that of Sir William Craven,
was rebuilt in the Year 1726. It is very convenient within; but without makes
not the Appearance that is worthy of the Company's Trade and Figure in the
World, its Front being not extended enough. In the back Part toward
Lime-street, they have also Warehouses, which were rebuilt in a very handsome
manner, Anno 1725.

The AFRICAN COMPANY'S HOUSE is in the same Street; a convenient House, which
serves for all the Offices their Business requires.

The SOUTH SEA HOUSE is situate in a large Spot of Ground between Broad-street
and Threadneedle-street. At first two large Houses were taken in to form the
whole Office; but, as they were streighten'd for Room, and were obliged to
summon their General Courts at Merchant Taylors-hall, hard by; so they have
lately erected a new Building for the whole Business, which my Limits will not
permit me particularly to describe.

The YORK-BUILDINGS COMPANY has been struggling for some Years past with the
great Difficulties into which it has been plunged by the Fatality attending
some late Transactions, and I shall say no more of it here.

Here are also several great Offices for Societies of INSURERS, where almost
all Hazards may be insured. The Four principal are called, 1. The Royal
Exchange Insurance, kept in a Part of the Royal Exchange. 2. The Royal
Insurance, kept in Cornhill. 3. The Hand-in-hand Fire-office, kept on
Snow-hill. 4. The Sun Fire-office, in Threadneedle-street.

In the Two first, all Hazards by Sea of Ships and Goods, not Lives, are
insured; as also Houses and Goods are insured from Fire.

In the last Two, only Houses and Goods.

In all which Offices the Premio is so small, and the Recovery, in case of
Loss, so easy and certain, that nothing can be shown like it in the World.

There are also Offices of INSURANCE ON LIVES, the Union Fire-office in
Gutter-lane, the Westminster Fire-office, and others, which manage a great deal
of Business in the same way.

The CHARITABLE CORPORATION OFFICE is in Spring-garden. A Society that set out
with laudable Pretensions; but many Hundreds of People have found to their
Cost, that the best Pretenses are often made a Cloak for the worst Practices.
Fair and Softly is now the Word with them: and it is fit a profound Stilness
should succeed the boisterous Storm they occasioned, in which the Fortunes of
Multitudes of innocent Subjects suffered a Wreck, which they will never recover.

The Offices of ORDNANCE and the MINT for Coining Money, are kept in the Tower
of London.

IV. Of the Mansion House, and other most noted Edifices, Squares, and Public
Structures in and about London.
1. THAT beautiful Column, called the Monument, erected at the Charge of the
City, to perpetuate the fatal Burning of the Whole, cannot be mentioned but
with some due Respect to the Building itself, as well as to the City. It is 202
Feet high, and exceeds all the Obelisks and Pillars of the Ancients. There is a
Staircase in the Middle, to ascend to the Balcony, which is about 30 Feet
short of the Top, and whence there are other Steps made even to look out at the
Top of all, which is fashioned like an Urn, with a Flame issuing from it.

The Lord Mayors of this famous Metropolis have been hitherto forced to content
themselves with residing in some one or other of the stately Halls of the City
Companies, hired for that Purpose; an Inconvenience which was equally unworthy
of the Grandeur of the great Officer, and of the City over which he presided,
and which now will be soon remedied; for on the 25th Day of October 1739, the
chief Cornerstone of the Mansion House was laid by the Right Honorable
Micajah Perry, Esquire then Lord Mayor, and by the Committee appointed for that
Purpose, in the Place where Stocks-market used to be kept, with an Inscription
on it signifying as much, and giving the Names of the Gentlemen of the said
Committee, the Sheriffs, and the Architect; but perhaps it may be as much to
the latter Gentleman's Credit, not to name him, as to name him; for
Connoisseurs find so many Faults with the Design, that if what they say is
true, though it may be a costly Building, yet will it not do any great Honor to
this famous Metropolis, among good Judges.

The Royal Exchange is the greatest Burse in the World. It is so well known,
and has been so often described, that it is unnecessary for me to enter upon it
here. It Is said, that it cost above 80,000 l. in building; and yet the Interest
of the Money was a great while answered by the Rent made of the Shops and
Vaults: but now the Trade that used to be carried on there, is so dispersed in
other Places, that it cannot be supposed to do so. According to Architectural
Criticism, the Building has numerous Faults: the Turret is egregiously bad,
though a very expensive Part of the Structure.

The Hospital of Bethlehem is a noble Pile; but we shall take notice of it
under the Head of HOSPITALS.

The South Sea House, the Bank, the East India House, etc. also the Treasury,
the Admiralty, the Custom-house, the Excise, and other Public Offices, are
taken notice of under the preceding Article of PUBLIC OFFICES, etc.

The College of Physicians in Warwick Lane is a beautiful and magnificent
Structure, built of Brick and Stone, and is one of the finest Ornaments of the
City, though built in a Place where all its Beauties are in a manner buried. We
have not room to be so particular in its Description as it very well deserves;
but we shall take notice, that in the Front of the Hall toward the Court, is a
Statue of King Charles II. well cut in Stone.

On the West Side of the Theater is another, of Sir John Cutler; and in June
1739, a very fine Busto, carved out of a Block of White Marble, was erected in
the great Hall of this College, to the Honor of the famous Dr. Harvey, with
the following Inscription on its Marble Pediment. Hanc magni illius Senis
Octogenar^ Imaginem A. D. M.DCC.XXXIX. In English thus: Richard Mead, Physician
to his Majesty, caused this Statue of the Great William Harvey, who first
demonstrated the Circulation of the Blood, and instituted a rational Course of
Medicine, to be here erected in the Year 1739, in Token of his Veneration,
according to the original Picture, drawn at 80 Years of Age, which he keeps in
his own Library.

The Surgeons Theater in Monkwell-street is a fine Piece of Architecture,
admirably disposed for Seeing and Hearing; the Work of the famous Inigo Jones.
The noble Earl of Burlington, out of Love to the Memory of this Architect, was
pleased to repair it at his own Charge.

In the Hall of this Theater is a capital Picture of Hans Holbein, in which is
the Portrait of King Henry VIII. sitting in his Chair, delivering the Charter
which he granted to the College of Physicians, etc. It is said, the Company
have been offered 800 l. for this Piece; for it is highly valuable as it is the
only remaining Picture of the first Painter of Note in this Kingdom (his
celebrated Piece, called The Dance of Death, being destroyed by Fire); and not
only presents the King taken from the Life, but also the most eminent
Physicians of that Time, when the Incorporation was granted; and excepting the
famous Family-piece, by Titian, in the Possession of the Duke of Somerset, and
another of the Pembroke Family, at Wilton, painted by Vandyke, it is esteemed
the most valuable Portrait-picture in the Kingdom.

Thanet-house, in Aldersgate Street, built by Inigo Jones, is entirely worthy
of him; but it is now let out to a Tavern, and other Trades, as unworthy of its
Founder, as of its Architect.

The Palace of the Bishop of London is over against it. It is an old Building,
and no otherwise remarkable, than that it is let out to Tradesmen chiefly, and
has not been for a great while the Residence of its Bishop, who has a Country
Palace at Fulham; and the Air of the Court being judged better than that of the
City, Whitehall has been preferred to it for a Town-residence.

Several Acts of Parliament have passed within these few Years, for building a
new Bridge over the Thames at Westminster, and Three successive Lotteries have
been given for that End. It was at first resolved to be built at the
Horse-ferry over to Lambeth; but those who had most Influence changing their
Minds, the Design was altered, and it is now begun at the Woolstaple, near
Palace-yard, and is to be carried to Stangate on the opposite Side. Great
Powers are given by this Act to Commissioners to agree with Persons who own
Houses and Lands on either Shore: and they intend to pull down whole Streets
about Palace-yard, and Channing-row, besides what they are to do on the Surry
Side, for the more commodious Passage to it. In short, if the Plan be pursued
that is proposed, it will be a very considerable Work: but yet, we must say,
that the greatest Part of the Expense would have been saved, had it been built
where first proposed; and as the Money is raised by Lotteries, which are always
of pernicious Consequence to Trade, it had been perhaps as well, in the present
Juncture of the public Affairs, that the nearest way had been followed: and I
may presume to intimate, that though the Horse-ferry were to be rejected, yet
Scotland-yard, which is a great Body of ruinous or decaying Buildings, and
joins to Whitehall, and to which the main Streets point, leading down from
Pall Mall, Picadilly, etc. by Charing Cross, would have been, in my humble
Opinion, a preferable Situation. It Is certain it might have been effected
there, not only with more Convenience, but at an easy Expense to what now must
be the Case; and there had been no need to have pulled down the Houses of
Tradesmen, and others, which brought in tolerable Rents, by their Vicinity to
Westminster Hall, and the Two Houses of Parliament. Several Stone Piers are
already erected in the Thames, and they are proceeding with one of the noblest
Streets of Houses, that are any where to be seen, fronting Palace-yard. And
here we shall leave it for this time, choosing rather to describe what is, than
what is designed to be; since the Time this Work will take up still, may
subject it to several Alterations, now not easy to be foreseen.

The new-built Houses of the Dukes of Montagu and Richmond, in the
Privy-Garden, are convenient and noble Structures.

The Meuse, near Charing Cross, where the King's Horses are kept, and the
Coaches of State set up, is a very large kind of Square; but the Buildings
being old, and unworthy of the Situation, as well as of the Use, are, as it is
said, to be pulled down, and built in a beautiful manner. The principal Range
at the upper End is already finished; and when the other Parts are completed,
it will be one of the finest Things of its kind in Europe.

On the right Side of the Street, coming from Whitehall, is
Northumberland-house, belonging to the Duke of Somerset in Right of Marriage.

It is an ancient, but large and well-design'd Building, and fit to receive a
Retinue of One hundred in Family; nor does the Duke's Family come so far short
of the Number, as not very handsomely to fill the House.

Carlton House and Gardens, adjoining to St. James's Park, belong to his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales; who has built an Octagon at the West End of his
Garden, which is elegantly furnished. The lower Part is a Grotto, or fine
Batheing-room; over which is a Dining Room finely adorned with Pictures, etc.
and with Four Marble Busto's of Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden, and Mr. Pope. On
the Outside over the Door, one on each Side, are placed the Busto's of the
renowned King Alfred and Edward the Black Prince, both so famous in English
History, with Inscriptions to their Honor, which, at the same time, are
equally so to that of the Royal Erector of them, who gives a glorious Specimen
therein of what Examples he thinks most worthy of his heroic Imitation.

The noble Houses of the late Dukes of Marlborough and Buckinghamshire in St.
James's Park, are too well known to need any particular Description.

The new-built House of the Duke of Devonshire in Picadilly (that noble one
built by the famous Inigo Jones, being destroyed by Fire in 1733); the newly
beautified one of the Duke of Bedford in Bloomsbury-Square; those of the Lord
Bateman, the Duke of Queensbury, General Wade, and the late Lord Bingley; the
noble and extensive Streets of Buildings about Soho, Grosvenor, Cavendish, and
Hanover-squares, with those noble Squares themselves, and the new Alterations
in St. James's- square, Red-lion-square, Lincoln's-Inn-Fields; the new
Buildings about Jockey-Fields, Chancery Lane, Fetter-lane, Serjeants-Inn,
Craven-street, and the New-Exchange in the Strand, now all built into fine
Houses, would take up too much of my Room to particularize; and I can therefore
only name them, having so many curious Matters to add in these Letters.

But yet I cannot forbear particularly to mention one Beauty, because it is an
Honor to our Country; and that is the great Piazza in Covent Garden, the
noblest Square in Europe, for Grandeur of the Design, especially with the
Beauty of the East Front of that elegant Church, the only Piece the Moderns
have yet produced, that can admit of a just Comparison with the Works of
Antiquity; where a majestic Simplicity commands the Approbation of the
Judicious. The rustic Arcade round the Square is of an excellent Composition;
above which is a grand Story and an Attick, and the Windows dressed with a
regular Entablature.

I must but slightly mention, for the Reasons already given, the new Road in
Hyde-park, the Reservoirs in the Two Parks, the late Queen's Library, etc.
which may just serve as a Hint to Travelers who have less upon their Hands
than I have upon mine.

V. Of the principal Hospitals and other Charitable Institutions in and about
the City of London.
NO City in the World can show the like Number of private and public
Charities, as the Cities of London and Westminster.

I have not Room particularly to describe them; and must therefore content
myself with giving little more than their Names, and those of their munificent
Founders, referring to those larger Works where more ample Accounts and
Descriptions may be expected.

1. then, I will mention Bethlehem Hospital in Moorfields, erected at the
Charge of the City, Anno 16 6, and said to be built after the Model of
Versailles. This has lately received very great Additions, and is designed for
the Reception of Lunaticks.

2. Bridewell is as well an House of Correction as an Hospital. It was formerly
the King's City Palace, but given to the City by King Edward VI. for the
reclaiming of idle Persons, Vagrants, etc. and for bringing up Lads to
Handicraft Businesses.

There are Two other Houses of Correction, called Bridewells, one at
Clerkenwell, for Middlesex, the other in To^hill-fields for Westminster.

3. Christ's-Hospital, originally founded by King Edward VI. (at the Request of
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and of the pious Martyr Dr. Ridley, then
Bishop of London) for entertaining, educating, nourishing, and bringing up the
poor Children of the Citizens, such as, their Parents (or Fathers, at least)
being dead, have no other way of Support.

This noble Charity maintains near 1000 poor Children, who have Food,
Clothing, and Instruction, useful and sufficient Learning, and an exceeding
good Discipline observed; and at the proper Ages they are put out to Trades
suitable to their several Genius's and Capacities; and others are taught
Mathematics, Navigation, and Arithmetic, to fit them for private and public
Service. The seeing of these Children at Church on a Sunday at Christ-Church,
and at Supper on Sunday Evening, may be reckoned as fine a Sight as any in
London, and occasions a constant Resort of People of all Ranks, who admire the
Neatness of their Appearance, and the good Management of the House. Dependent
on this noble Charity is also an House at Hertford, where Diet, Schooling, etc.
are given to the younger Boys.

4. St. Bartholomew's Hospital adjoins to Christ's Hospital. Its first
Foundation may be said to be owing to King Henry VIII. whose Statue in Stone,
very well done, is, for that Reason, erected in the new Front, over the
Entrance to the Cloister in West-Smithfield, with Two Cripples, no mean Pieces
of Sculpture, on the Top of the Pediment over his Head. This Hospital has
received very great Additions of late Years, and they are going on building
still, and it is well if they do not overdo it; for they demolish their Houses,
and reduce their Estates by it, and leave it upon the Generosity of future
Benefactors to support what they are about.

This Hospital relieves about 600 Patients daily with Lodging, Diet, Physic,
and Surgery.

The Lock at Kingsland, and that in Southwark, belong to St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, and are used for such as have the foul Disease only.

There generally is under the Care of this Hospital upwards of 5000 poor sick
and lame Persons, destitute of other Relief.

5. St. Thomas's Hospital in Southwark is also a noble Piece of Charity, of the
like Nature with that of St. Bartholomew. The Church and most of the Hospital
was rebuilt in a beautiful manner from the Year 1701 to 1706. It was founded by
Edw. VI. and Inscriptions are set up in it to the Honor of Mr. Guy, Mr.
Frederick, Sir Robert Clayton, the last of whom has his Statue there, as has
King Edw. VI. lately erected by Charles Joy, Esquire late Treasurer of this
Hospital.

6. Guy's Hospital is situated very near St. Thomas's Hospital, and is perhaps
one of the greatest private Charities that was ever known. Its Founder, Thomas
Guy, was a Bookseller in Lombard Street. He lived to see this Work in great
Forwardness, and at his Death, Anno 1724, left about 200,000 l. to finish and
endow it. Anno 1734, Mr. Guy's Statue was erected in the principal Square.

Though this Hospital is said to be for Incurables, it is not for such as are
absolutely so; for the Founder used to say, That he would not have his Hospital
made an Almshouse.

Over and above the 200,000 l. left to this Hospital, the Founder left as many
Legacies, and other Dispositions, as were computed to amount to near 150,000 l.
more.

7. The London Workhouse, as it is called, founded on an Act of Parliament
passed in the 13th Year of King Charles II. is situated without Bishopsgate,
and is an Edifice consisting of several Work-rooms and Lodging-rooms for
Vagrants and Parish-Children.

They have a handsome Chapel built at the upper End of the Yard belonging to
the House, where they go to Prayers twice a Day, at Seven in the Morning, and
at Seven in the Evening. On Sundays they all go to St. Helen's, where they have
Seats.

The Charity-schools and Workhouses set up in almost every Parish of this
prodigious City, have in some measure pursued the Design of this laudable
Workhouse; and if they have thereby interfered with it, and taken off some
Benefactions that otherwise might have flowed into that Canal, it will be the
less to be wondered at.

8. The Hospital called the Charter House, or Sutton's Hospital, must be
recorded to be the greatest and noblest Gift that ever was given for Charity,
by any one Man, public or private, in this Nation, since History gives us any
Account of Things; except we give a Preference to that of Mr. Guy. The Revenue
of Mr. Sutton's Hospital being, besides the Purchase of the Place, and the
Building of the House, and other Expenses, little less than 6000 l. per Annum
Revenue: it is of so long standing, and its Government, etc. so well known,
that we shall afford it no further Mention.

The Royal Hospitals of Greenwich and Chelsea are also not mentioned in this
Account, as not being within the Reach of the extended Bounds of the City of
London, as we have laid them down, and are therefore taken Notice of in their
proper Places.

The Greycoat and Greencoat Hospital in Tothillfields, Emanuel Hospital,
Westminster; that for the Poor of the French Refugees, near Islington; the
Ironmongers Almshouses near Shoreditch; Alderman Aske's at Hoxton; those
stately ones of the Trinity-house, the Vintners, and several others in the Way
to Mile-End; as also those handsome ones, lately erected by the Will of Mr.
Francis Bancroft, a Lord-Mayor's Officer, in the same Road, all deserve
particular Mention, had I room for it.

But I must say a Word or two of those useful Charities, the Two Infirmaries,
one in James's- street, Westminster, and the other at Hyde-park Corner, which
have given Birth to the like laudable Institutions in other Parts of the
Kingdom. The Design of them is to supply the Places of the Hospitals of St.
Bartholomew and St. Thomas's aforementioned, there being no such charitable
Foundations in the City of Westminster. And here the best Order is observed,
the best Medicines dispensed, and the best Assistances given, as well by
Physicians, as Surgeons and Apothecaries, to all who are admitted into these
Charities. I shall refer you to the Accounts published by each every Year, for
further Particulars of their Institutions, Progress and Success.

In August 1732, a Corporation was erected for the Relief of poor Officers
Widows belonging to the Navy, which allots 45 l. per Ann. to a Captain's Widow;
30 l. to a Lieutenant's; and 20 l. to the Widows of Boatswains, Gunners,
Carpenters, Pursers, Surgeons, Second Master of a Yacht, or Master of a Naval
Vessel, warranted by the Navy-board; provided the annual Incomes of their Real
and Personal Estates do not amount to the aforesaid yearly Sums. To this
Charity all Admirals, Captains, Lieutenants and Warrant Officers, pay 3 d. per
Pound out of their Salaries; and his Majesty King George II. graciously
contributed 10,000 l. as a Foundation for it.

In the Year 1739, a most useful and long-wish'd-for Charity was established by
Royal Charter, in order to found an Hospital for the Maintenance and Education
of exposed and deserted young Children, otherwise called Foundlings.

An Act of Parliament has passed for confirming and enlarging the Powers
granted by this Charter, and to enable them to execute the good Purposes
thereof; and several Meetings of the Governors and Guardians have been held,
and Sixty Children have been determined to be admitted for a Beginning; and as
many Gentlemen have already subscribed, it is to be hoped, that Succes^ will
attend this praiseworthy and long-wish'd-for Undertaking. The Governors have
hired the House in Hatton-Garden, wherein the late Sir Fisher Tench lived, till
they shall be able to build a proper Hospital, which they intend to do on the
North Side of Ormond-street, and Lamb's Conduit, having purchased of the Earl
of Salisbury Four Fields of Pasture Land, containing Fifty-six Acres, at the
Rate of 7000 l. for the Purpose.

The Corporation for Clergymens Sons deserves also to be taken Notice of, as an
excellent Institution; but we must draw to a Conclusion of this Article.

We shall only further observe in general, That those noble Foundations, added
to the innumerable Almshouses which are to be seen in almost every Part of
London, make it certain, that there is no City in the World can show the like
Number of Charities from private Hands, there being not less than Twenty
thousand People maintained of Charity, besides the Charities of Schooling for
Children, and besides the Collections at the annual Feasts of several Kinds,
where Money is given for putting out Children Apprentices, etc. a great Number
of which owe their Rise to the Period of Time included in 40 Years past; so
that the Papists have no Reason to boast, that there were greater Benefactions
and Acts of Charity to the Poor given in their Days, than in our Protestant
Times. And this is, indeed, one of the principal Reasons for my making mention
of it in this Place; for let any particular Age be singled out, and let the
Charities of this Age, for about 40 Years past, and the Sums of Money bestowed
by Protestants in this Nation on mere Acts of Charity to the Poor, not
reckoning Gifts to the Church, be cast up, it will appear they are greater by
far, than can be found in England in any the like Number of Years, take the
Time when we will.

Nor do I include in this, the Money collected by Briefs all over England, upon
Casualties by Fire, though that is an eminent Act of Charity as any can be; nor
the Money given either in public or private, for Rebuilding St. Paul's and
other Churches demolished by the Fire of London, or the Augmentation of poor
Benefices by the Bounty of Queen Anne, and many other such Gifts.

VI. Of the Churches of London, Westminster, and Southwark.
THERE are within the Walls of London, 97 Parishes; without the Walls, 17; in
the Out-Parishes in Middlesex and Surrey, in the Bills of Mortality, 21; and in
the City and Liberty of Westminster, 10; in all, 145. We shall as briefly as
possible touch upon the most remarkable Churches.

We must observe in the first Place, That the Churches in London are rather
convenient than fine, not adorned with Pomp and Pageantry, as in Popish
Countries; but, like the true Protestant Plainness, have very little Ornament
either within or without.

But the most famous of all the Churches in the City, and of all the Protestant
Churches in the World, is the Cathedral of St. Paul; an Edifice exceedingly
beautiful and magnificent, with fewer Faults than are to be found in any
Building of the like Nature and Extent; though some, who would be thought to have
Skill in Architecture, are pleased to say there are many, and particularly
censure it for its Heaviness, though perhaps it would be found, that the Fault is
in their not considering separately the Beauty and Proportion of every Part, in
order to enter into the Nature and Design of the whole Composition.

The vast Extent of the horizontal Arch of the Cupola, which supports a Stone
Lantern near 70 Feet high, may well account for the Strength of the Piers and
Butments below: Eight of which support the Whole of that prodigious Weight. And
though common Observers assert, that those Piers, as also the Piers of all the
Arches within-side, are too thick and heavy, yet, whoever knows any thing of
the Rules of Architecture, must allow them to be as slender as the Strictness
of those Rules would admit of; for the Thickness of each Pier is not one Third
Part of the Void of each Arch. And as to the Piers which support the Dome,
they, when compared with those that support the Cupola of St. Peter's at Rome,
come out to be but one Third Part of the Bigness of the latter, the one
measuring 240 Feet in Circumference, the other not quite 80; yet there is not a
great deal of Difference in the Dimensions and Weight of the Two Cupola's. For
that of St. Paul's is considerably larger and higher in Proportion to the Piers
that support it, and to the Body of the Church, than that of St. Peter's.
Wherefore I may venture, upon the whole, to assert, that were we to compare
every Part of the Two Buildings together, we shall find St. Paul's to be much
less liable to the Objection of being a heavy Pile, than St. Peter's.

The chief Reason, as I imagine, why this Church is censured for Heaviness, is,
not that it is really so in itself, but appears so, compared with the Gothic
Architecture, which is more familiar to some Persons than the other, and admits
of an extravagant Airiness and Lightness In that (...) of Building the Designer
is bound down to no Rules of Proportion but what his own F^ncy sug^^sts (...)
whereas in the other, the Dimens^^ns of every individual Member are
ascertained, which cannot be deviated from without occasioning a Fault. The
Height of every Arch has a fixed Proportion to its Breadth; the Doors, Windows
and their Ornaments are the same; the Intercolumniations and their Intablatures
are all confined to certain Admeasurement. But who ever found that Exactness
observed in any Gothic Structure? It must be allowed there are Pieces of that
Sort of Architecture, that, in the Whole, look very august and venerable. Yet
let any one view the vast Stone Buttresses round the Outside of Westminster
Abbey, and see what Confusion of Lines, and Breaks they occasion in the
Perspective, and they will then easily account for the Lightness of the Inside
of that Building; for they are those Buttresses, which by extending so far out,
support the whole Structure, more than its Walls or Pillars. This I mention for
the sake of common Observers only; for to the Judicious it is altogether
unnecessary.

Sir Christopher Wren had the Satisfaction to find the injudicious Reprovers of
his Work confuted by the Approbation of the best Masters in Europe, who
allowed, That the Church of St. Peter's at Rome, which is the most stupendous
Structure in the World, only exceeds St. Paul's with respect to the Largeness
of its Dimensions, its rich Mosaic Work, the beautiful Marble, of which both
its Outside and Inside entirely consist, the latter in different Colors, its
Statues, Paintings, Gildings, Altars, and Oratories; Ornaments not allowed of
in Protestant Churches.

Had the Inside of St. Paul's been adorned in as profuse and pompous a Manner
as St. Peter's, it would have attracted the Admiration of superficial Critics,
so that they would never have been able to discover the Faults they now pretend
to find; Faults which can only be attributed to the Plainness of its Materials.
But to such as are real Judges, the Harmony, Proportion and Beauty of Buildings
are equally admirable, whether they be executed in plain Freestone, or the
most beautiful Marble; whether the Carvings or Mouldings be gilt or not; the
Recesses or Panels in the Walls be curiously painted, or only plastered.

In the Year 1707, the House of Commons had it under Consideration, whether the
Cupola should be covered with This is an authentic Account of the Matter.
Copper or Lead; and upon Inquiry into which was most expedient and least
expensive, it appeared, that the Covering of Lead would amount to about 170
Tons, and the Expense thereof, including Workmanship, was estimated at 2500 l.

The Copper Covering was computed at Eleven Tons, Three hundred, Three Quarters
and odd Pounds, and the Expense was estimated at 3050 l. Upon which the House
fixed upon a Copper Covering.

But when the Bill which had a Clause in it for that Purpose, went up to the
Lords, their Lordships left out the Clause; upon which the Commons desired a
Conference, alleging, that Copper was preferable to any other Covering, as well
in respect of Duration as Lightness; for that Lead being subject to frequent
Repairs, the necessary Scaffolding for that Purpose at any one time, would
exceed the Difference of Charge between that and Copper: besides, that frequent
Scaffolding would very much prejudice the Building. But the Sessions closing
the same Day, put an End to the Affair, and there were no Conferences; though the
preceding Reasons were what the Commons intended to offer, if there had been
one.

It very probably was upon this Occasion, that Sir Christopher is said to have
declared his Opinion in the House of Commons, when some Gentlemen doubted
whether the Cupola would bear the Leaden Covering, that it was able to bear
7000 Tons more than what is now upon it, and that he would undertake to raise a
Spire of Stone upon the whole 100 Feet higher than the Cross now stands.

The Expense of this magnificent Structure, as it was laid before the
Parliament Anno 1711, including the Building of the Chapter House near it, a
neat and elegant Fabric, purchasing of Property, together with the Estimate of
what was necessary to complete the whole, in which was concluded a Ring of
Twelve Bells, not yet put up, nor cast, as also the Furniture for the Choir,
amounted to 810,380 l. 4 s.

These Things, that were not so easy for every one to know, we have thought it
necessary to enlarge upon. Our Bounds will not permit us to say all that the
Subject requires, and we would not dwell upon Points which every one knows, or
may easily inform himself of by his own Observation, or from other Writers, in
relation to this famous Structure.

But one thing it will be requisite to observe further, which every one does
not know, and which therefore I shall mention.

This able Architect, Sir Christopher Wren, at the first setting about the
Church, would have had its Situation removed a little to the North, to stand
just on the Spot of Ground which is taken up by Paternoster Row, and the
Buildings on either Side; so that the North-side of the Church should have
stood open to Newgate-street, and the South Side to the Ground on which the
Church now stands.

By this Situation, the East End of the Church, would have looked directly down
the main Street of the City, Cheapside; and for the West End, Ludgate having
been removed a little North, the main Street called Ludgate Street, and
Ludgate Hill, would only have sloped a little W. S. W. as they do now
irregularly Two Ways, one within, and the other without the Gate, and all the
Street beyond Fleet-Bridge would have received no Alteration at all.

By this Situation, the common Thorough-fare of the City would have been
removed at a little farther Distance from the Work, and we should not then have
been obliged to walk just under the very Wall, as we do now, which makes the
Work appear out of all Perspective, and is the chief Reason of the Objections I
have mentioned, as to the outside Appearance; whereas, had it been viewed at a
little Distance, the Building would have been seen infinitely to more Advantage.

Had Sir Christopher been allowed this Situation, he would then, also, have had
more room for the Ornament of the West End, which, though a most beautiful Work,
would have been much more so then, and he would have added a circular Piazza to
it, after the Model of that of Rome, but much more magnificent, and an Obelisk
of Marble in the Center of the Circle, exceeding any thing that the World can
show of its Kind, of modern Work.

But the Circumstance of Things hindered this noble Design, and the City being
almost rebuilt before he obtained an Order and Provision for laying the
Foundation, he was prescribed to the narrow Spot where it now stands, in which
the Building, however magnificent in itself, stands with great Disadvantage as
to the Prospect of it. The Inconveniences of this were so apparent when the
Church was finished, that Leave was at length, though not without Difficulty,
obtained, to pull down one whole Row of Houses on the North-side of the Body of
the Church, to make Way for the noble Balustrade of cast Iron, raised upon an
handsome Stone Wall of above a Yard high, that surrounds the Churchyard; and,
indeed, to admit Light into the Church, as well as to preserve it from the
Danger of Fire.

That admirable Architect met with no better Success in a Plan which was one of
the most beautiful that could enter the Mind of Man, and would have made this
City the noblest on Earth: this I shall relate in the Words of a certain
Author, viz.

"The Fire of London furnished the most perfect Occasion that can ever happen
in any City, to rebuild it with Pomp and Regularity. This Sir Christopher Wren
foresaw, and, it is said, offered a Scheme which would have made it the Wonder
of the World. He proposed to have laid out one large Street from Aldgate to
Temple Bar; in the middle of which was to have been a large Square capable of
containing the new Church of St. Paul's, with a proper Distance for the View
all round; whereby that huge Building would not have been cooped up, as it is at
present, in such a manner, as nowhere to be seen to Advantage at all; but
would have had a long and ample Vista at each End, to have reconciled it to a
proper Point of View, and give it one great Benefit, which in all Probability,
it must now want for ever. He farther proposed to rebuild all the
Parish-churches in such a Manner, as to be seen at the End of every Vista of
Houses, and dispersed in such Distances from each other, as to appear neither
too thick, nor thin in Prospect, and give a proper Heightening to the whole
Bulk of the City, as it filled the Landschape. Lastly, he proposed to build all
the Houses uniform, and supported on a Piazza, like that of Covent Garden: and
by the Waterside from the Bridge to the Temple, he had planned a long and
broad Wharf, or Quay, where he designed to have ranged all the Halls that
belong to the several Companies of the City, with proper Warehouses for
Merchants between, to vary the Edifices, and make it at once one of the most
beautiful and most useful Ranges of Structure in the World. But the Hurry of
Rebuilding, and the Disputes of Property, prevented this glorious Scheme from
taking Place."

When this great Man found he could not carry this Point, he proposed what we
have already mentioned; but, as we have observed, with as little Success as the
above grand Scheme; private Property, on this Occasion, as it does on most
others, getting the better both of public Utility and public Spirit.

The new Churches at Lime-house, Ratcliffe-highway, Spital-fields, Old-street,
the Strand, Ormond-street, Hanover-square, the Horse-ferry, Bloomsbury, I can
but just mention, though they deserve to be taken notice of by Travelers. But
the latter, I must observe, was the first Building, wherein was introduced a
Portico after the Manner of the ancient Temples. The Body of the Church is a
masterly Performance; but the placing, for a Weathercock, the Statue of a
Prince famous for good Sense and Steadiness, is an Absurdity peculiar to the
Church of Bloomsbury.

The new-built Steeples or Towers of St. Margaret's Westminster, St. Michael's
Cornhill, St. Mary Aldermary, St. Sepulchre's, St. Christopher's, St. Dunstan's
in the East, St. Clement's- Danes, and the new-built Churches of St. Mary
Woolnoth, Bishops-gate, St. Leonard Shoreditch, St. Catharine Coleman, St.
Martin's in the Fields, St. Giles's, I can only mention.

Among the Beauties of London, must be numbered the admirable Church of St.
Stephen Walbrooke, the Temple-Church, Bow-Church, St. Clement's- Danes, St.
Paul Covent Garden; and that incomparable Piece called The Banqueting House at
Whitehall, now made use of as a Chapel. This was the Design of Inigo Jones, as
one Pavilion for that admirable Model he gave for a Palace. And if this
Specimen has justly commanded the Admiration of Mankind, what must the finished
Piece have done! It is to be hoped Britain will one Day have the Glory to
accomplish it, according to this Plan, and then it will far exceed all the
Palaces of the Universe. Here is Strength with Politeness, Ornament with
Simplicity, and Beauty with Majesty. It is without Dispute one of the noblest
Structures in the World. The Ceiling is an admirable fine Piece of Painting by
Rubens.

The Abbey or Collegiate Church of Westminster is a venerable old Pile of
Building; but begins to appears with a new Face; for a Tower is actually
finished at the West End, and another is about. The Beginning of a fine and
costly Spire was also laid some time ago, near the Middle of the Edifice, which
however is yet uncertain whether it will be proceeded on or not. The West
Window fronting these Towers is one of the most beautiful in Glass Painting
that has been done of late Years; and the Window also fronting King Street,
finished in the Deanery of the late Bishop Atterbury, is one of the finest
modern Performances of its kind.

We are also assured, that the Houses adjoining to this venerable Building will
be all pulled down, and the Building left clear: an Action that will be as
laudable when done, as it was scandalous when begun; the Effect of private
Avarice, whereby that venerable Pile is subjected to the Hazards of Fire, and
other Accidents, whenever an idle Servant shall get in a sottish, a careless,
or sleepy Fit.

But after all, this Building, though very expensive, is far less elegant than
several other Gothic Structures. Its Outside can never be made beautiful; and
within, it is extravagantly out of Proportion, with regard to the Height and
Breadth of the middle Nef and Side-Ayles. The high Altar withinside is a noble
Piece, and had a wonderful fine Effect from the West Door, before the Organ
lately erected intercepted its View.

The Towers at the West End, which I have just mentioned, as they stand so
close together, are not sufficiently contracted in the carrying them up. The
Four Pinacles have a very wretched Effect, when viewed in a diagonal Line. The
Style of the Building, so far as is entire new Work, is a sort of Medley,
neither Gothic, nor any thing else. As so many beautiful Structures of this
Kind are to be seen, it is amazing, that any Architect should be above
imitating them, when it is plain he cannot equal, much less excel them.

This Abbey is the Repository of the deceased British Kings and Nobility, and
very fine Monuments are seen over the Graves of our ancient Sovereigns: the
Particulars are too long to enter into here.

The Monarchs of Great Britain are likewise always crowned here.

The Churches in Southwark are as follow: 1. The Church of St. Mary, vulgarly
called St. Mary Overy, and St. Savior in Southwark, is a noble Gothic Pile;
having Three Ails running from East to West, and a Cross Ayle after the Manner
of a Cathedral. 2. The new-built Church of St. George Southwark makes a
handsome Appearance. 3. St. Thomas's is a neat and convenient Building. 4. St.
Olave's is also new-built. 5. St. John's, vulgarly called Horsley-down Church,
is one of the Fifty new ones. 6. The Church of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondsey is
a neat Structure. 7. Christ-Church is new-built; as is also, 8.
Rotherhith-Church; but the particular Description I have not room for.


VII. Of St. James's Palace, the Parliament House, Westminster Hall, etc.
THE Palace of St. James's, though the Winter Receptacle of all the Pomp and
Glory of this Kingdom, is really mean, in Comparison of the glorious Court of
Great Britain. The Splendour of the Nobility, the Wealth and Greatness of the
Attendants, the Economy of the House, and the real Grandeur of the whole Royal
Family, out-does all the Courts of Europe; and yet this Palace comes beneath
those of the most petty Princes in it; although there cannot be in the World a
nobler Situation for a Royal Palace than Whitehall. And it is with some
Concern, that we see so fine a Spot become a Sacrifice to private Spirit, so
much of it being given away to particular Families, as makes more remote than
we might otherwise expect it to be, the Hope we might justly have entertained,
of seeing a Palace built there, worthy of the Glory of our Monarchs.

Many Plans have been drawn for the rebuilding of this Palace; but the most
celebrated Draughts are those of Inigo Jones, and may be seen in Mr. Campbell's
Vitruvius Britannicus, and Mr. Kent's Edition of Jones's Works. The last of
these, if executed, would, for Magnificence and Beauty, transcend even the
Temple of Solomon, if we are to form a Judgment from the Plans given of that
famous Edifice. But it is a Question whether the Expense would not exceed that
of St. Peter's at Rome, which cost Forty Millions of Roman Crowns.

As the Court is now stated, all the Offices and Places for Business are
scattered about, here and there.

The Parliament meets as they used to do, while the Court was at Westminster,
in the King's Old Palace; nor can it be said but the Place is made tolerably
convenient for them, and is still more so of late Years than it used to be; for
the Court of Requests is entirely new-built, and made a noble Room; and other
Conveniences are added. The House of Commons meet in the Chapel of the Palace
at Westminster, dedicated to St. Stephen, and fitted for this Purpose by that
admirable Architect Sir Christopher Wren.

The House of Lords is a venerable old Place, though it must be said to be much
streightened in the several Avenues to it, and Rooms above it; and particularly
the matted Gallery, the Lobby, the back Ways the King goes to it, are very
short of the requisite Dignity or Convenience of the Place, and of the Glory of
a King of Great Britain, who there meets the Peers and Commons of his Realm,
who together constitute the most august Assembly in the World.

Westminster Hall, a very noble Gothic Building, in which are held the Courts
of Justice, is said to be the largest Room in the World: its Roof, which is the
finest of its Kind that can be seen, is 100 Feet wide. And here is held the
Coronation-Feast of the Kings and Queens of England; also the Courts of
Chancery, King's Bench and Common Pleas; and above Stairs, that of the
Exchequer. But it must be confessed, that it makes no very advantageous
Appearance without, resembling at a Distance a great Barn, of 300 Feet long;
within, it is filled with Booksellers Shops, and those of other Trades; though
the Alteration lately made in the Chancery and King's Bench Courts, at the
upper End of the Hall, and those for the Common Pleas on the Right Hand of it,
give it a much better Appearance than it had before.

Adjoining to the Hall are kept the numerous Offices belonging to the Exchequer
of England, some of them very dark and inconvenient; and such as to a Stranger
would afford a no very remote Idea (particularly in some of the Avenues from
Office to Office) of the dismal Mansions to which Money-Transactions often are
thought to bring the devoted Subjects of Plutus.

VIII. Of the Statues and other public Ornaments in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster.
THIS Article we insert rather for the sake of the Number of the Statues, etc.
than their Excellency; though some of them must be allowed to be very valuable.

The Brass Statue of K. James II. in the Habit of a Roman Caesar, in the
Privy-Garden at White Hall, is a very beautiful one, and can hardly be outdone
by any modern Performance of that Kind in Europe.

A fine Brass Bust of King Charles I. done by Panini, a famous Italian Master
of Sculpture, is placed over the Passage at the upper End of Westminster Hall,
adjoining to the Court of King's Bench, which, though little observed, is very
curious.

The Statue in Brass of King Charles I. on Horseback, at Charing Cross, is a
curious Piece, though not perfect according to the Notion of some Critics.

In the Center of Soho-square, is the Statue of King William III. with Four
Figures representing the Thames, the Medway, the Severn, and the Humber; but
the Piece is not extraordinary.

On the Front of Montagu-house, the Four Cardinal Virtues. Also in the Garden,
in Metal, a curious Figure of a Gladiator, and likewise a Venus and a Satyr.

The Busts over the Entrance of the Prince of Wales's Octagon, at
Carlton-house, are fine.

In Grosvenor-square, an Equestrian Statue of King George I. finely gilded; but
that is its chief Beauty.

In Queen's-square, Westminster, is a Statue of Queen Anne, at full Proportion,
on a Pedestal.

At Somerset House, on the South Front, in a Niche, Apollo, finely done in
Marble, with a Bow, Arrows and Dogs; a neat Figure in Brass of a Cleopatra,
with her Asps invironing one Arm, and fixed on her Breast: also in an
Alto-Relievo, on the Front of the Watergate, Two Figures representing Isis and
Them. Also in the Garden a naked Venus, with a Dolphin, and a Cupid, and a Boy
on his Back.

In the Gardens of Lincoln's End, are the Figures of Julius Caesar, Pompey,
Augustus Caesar, Mark Antony, and an Hercules and a Neptune in the Benchers
Garden.

At Temple Bar, Anne, Queen to King James I. finely cut in a Niche: also King
James I. Charles I. and Charles II. in other Niches.

King Lud, and his Two Sons, on the East Side of Ludgate: Queen Elizabeth on
the West Side.

At St. Paul's the Figures of the Apostles and Evangelists, on the West, North,
and South Fronts; and in the Middle of the Area, the Statue of her late Majesty
Queen Anne, at full Length, crowned, with a Scepter in one Hand, and a Globe in
the other, round the Pedestal of which, are the Figures of Britannia, France in
a pensive Attitude, Ireland, and America: also St. Paul, with a Group of other
Figures expressing his Conversion, finely done in Relievo, over the Door in the
West Front.

On the Front of the Hall of the College of Physicians, toward the Court, is a
Statue of King Charles II. well cut in Stone. On the West Side of the Theater
is also the Statue of Sir John Cutler, carved in Stone. A fine Busto of Dr.
Harvey is also newly erected in the Front of the Hall.

Another of King Charles II. in a Niche, is also to be seen in that Part of
Christ's-Hospital fronting Grey-friers; as are also Two of King Edward VI. in
different Parts of that Hospital. Also the Statue of Sir J. More.

In the Front of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, next Smithfield, which is a very
handsome Gate-way, is a Statue of King Henry VIII. done in a very good Taste.

In Aldersgate, King James I. on Horseback, well carved in Alto-Relievo: also
the Prophets Samuel and Jeremiah.

On Newgate, in both Fronts, are the Figures of Justice, Liberty, Mercy, Peace,
Plenty, and Truth.

In Mercers-Chapel, in the Front, Charity, and her Three Children.

In Clothworkers-hall, is a curious Figure of King James I. and King Charles I.

At the Chapel by Guildhall, the Statues of King Edward VI. Queen Elizabeth,
with a Phoenix under her, and King Charles I. treading upon a Globe, etc.

In the Royal Exchange, the Statues of Edward I. Edward III. Henry V. Henry VI.
Edward IV. Edward V. Henry VII. Henry VIII. Edward VI. Queen Mary I. Queen
Elizabeth, King James I. King Charles I. King Charles II. King James II. King
William III. and Queen Mary, Queen Anne, King George I. and King George II.
Also on the South Side are Two fine Statues of King Charles I. and King Charles
II. A Statue of King Charles II. in a Roman Habit, in the Center of the Area,
is a very noble Performance. Also in Two Places of the Exchange, Statues of Sir
Thomas Gresham; one of them deserves a better Situation than the dark Corner in
which it is placed, under the Piazza of the North-west Angle, just regarding
the Turkey Walk, with a Bale of Silk by him.

The Two Figures over the Gate of Bethlem Hospital, one representing a Person
melancholy mad, the one raving, are inimitable Performances, by Cibber.

On the Pediment over the outer Door of St. Magnus Church, by London Bridge,
the Figure of Atlas, in a cumbent Posture, is curiously carved and gilt.

In St. Thomas's-Hospital, Southwark, a Statue of Sir Robert Clayton, in
Marble; another in Brass of King Edward VI.

In Mr. Guy's Hospital a Statue in Brass of that Gentleman.

On the South Side of the Sessions House in Southwark, is a fine Stone Statue
of King James II. in his Royal Habiliments.

A good Statue of King Charles II. in Brass, in a Roman Habit, is in the
Quadrangle before Chelsea College.

In the public Office of the Bank, is set up a curious Marble Statue of King
William III. with the following Inscription on its Pedestal: Ob Legibus Vim,
HUJUS AERARII SOCIETAS, Which may be rendered thus: In Remembrance of Vigor
restored to the Laws, Authority to the Courts of Judicature, Reverence to the
Parliament, and to all Britons their Civil and Religious Rights, and assuring
to Posterity the Succession of the most illustrious House of HANOVER to the
Throne of Great Britain;

The Society of this BANK has gratefully placed and dedicated this Statue to
the most excellent Prince, WILLIAM III. their Founder; in the Year of Christ
1734, and of this Building the First.



The noble Collections made by several of our English Nobility and Gentry, from
abroad, would afford a curious Article in this Place; but our Design is to give
an Account of Things as they are in and about this great City.

IX. Of the Gates of London and Westminster.
THE Gates of the City of London are seven, besides Posterns. Two of them were
demolished at the Fire, but beautifully rebuilt. These are Ludgate and Newgate.

Ludgate is a Prison for Debt, for Freemen of the City only.

Newgate is a Prison for Criminals, both in London and Middlesex, and for
Debtors also for Middlesex, being the County Gaol.

Moregate is also rebuilt, and is a very beautiful Gateway, the Arch being near
Twenty Feet high, which was done to give room for the City Train'd-bands to go
through to the Artillery Ground, where they muster, and that they might march
with their Pikes advanced; for then they had Pikemen in every Regiment, as well
in the Army as in the Militia, which since that, is quite left off. This makes
the Gate look a little out of Proportion, to those who know not the Occasion of
it.

Cripplegate is very old, and makes but a mean Figure.

Bishopsgate is newly rebuilt, but not with the Elegance that might have been
wished.

Aldersgate and Aldgate both make a very handsome Appearance.

Most of these Gates are given by the City to the chief Officers to live in,
and are very convenient Dwellings.

Temple Bar is the only Gate which is erected at the Extent of the City
Liberties, and this was occasioned by some needful Ceremonies, as at the
Proclaiming any King or Queen of England, at which Time the Gates are shut. The
Herald at Arms knocks hard at the Door, the Sheriffs of the City call back,
asking, Who is there? Then the Herald answers, I come to proclaim, etc.
according to the Name of the Prince who is to succeed to the Crown, and
repeating the Titles of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. at which the
Sheriffs open, and bid them welcome; and so they go on to the Exchange, where
they make the last Proclamation.

There was formerly another Gate belonging to the City of London, called the
Postern-Gate at Tower Hill; but it being partly demolished by Time, it is now
turned into private Buildings.

Westminster had no less than Five Gates, and all standing within a small
Compass of Ground; as, first, The noble Gothic Gate at Whitehall, which is
left standing for the Beauty of its Workmanship. Secondly, A Gate a little
farther, where King Street begins, which was a good old Structure, and pulled
down a few Years ago to enlarge the Passage. Thirdly, A Gate where now
Union-street is, communicating King Street with the New Palace-yard; and this
has been several Years demolished, and the said little Street built where it
stood. Fourthly, A Gate leading from New Palace-yard to St. Margaret's-lane,
which has been lately demolished, to enlarge that Passage, by which the King
goes to the House of Lords. Fifthly, The Gate House, near the West End of the
Abbey, which is an old Building, used for the public Gaol of the City of
Westminster.

To these we may also add, the Watergate at Westminster, in New Palace-yard,
near which is begun to be erected the new Bridge.

X. Of the public and private Prisons.
THERE are in London, and its far extended Bounds, notwithstanding we are a
Nation so fond of Liberty, more public and private Prisons, and Houses of
Confinement, than in any City in Europe. The Public ones are as follow:
Public Gaols. The Tower. Newgate. Ludgate. King's Bench. The Fleet. Bridewell.
Marshalseas. The Gatehouse. Two Counters in the City. One Counter in the
Borough. St. Martin's le Grand. The Clink, formerly the Prison to the Stews.
Whitechapel. Finsbury. The Duchy. St. Catharine's. Bale-dock. Little-ease. New
Prison. New Bridewell. Tothill-fields Bridewell. Night Prisons, called
Round-houses, etc.
Tolerated Prisons. Bethlem or Bedlam. Above 100 Sponging-houses. 15 Private
Madhouses. The Sergeant at Arms's Officers Houses. The Black-rod Officers
Houses, etc. The Admiralty Officers Houses, etc. 3 Pesthouses. Tipstaffs
Houses. Chancery Officers Houses.



These private Houses of Confinement are pretended to be like little
Purgatories, between Prison and Liberty, Places of Advantage for the keeping of
Prisoners at their own Request, till they can get Friends to deliver them, and
so avoid going into public Prisons; though in some of them the Extortion is
such, and the Accommodation so bad, that Men choose to be carried to Prison
directly.

XI. Of the Markets of London.
AND, 1. That of Smithfield for Cattle is, without question, the greatest in
the World: no Calculation of the Numbers of Horses, Oxen, Cows, Calves, Sheep,
etc. can be made. This Market is held every Monday and Friday.

There is also a great Market, or rather Fair for Horses, in Smithfield, every
Friday in the Afternoon, where very great Numbers of Horses, and those of the
highest Price, are sold weekly.

The Flesh Markets are Leaden Hall, Honey-lane, Newgate, Clare, Shadwell,
Southwark, Westminster, Spitalfields, Whitechapel, Brook, Bloomsbury, Newport,
St. James's, Hungerford; and now lately the new Market, at Fleet-ditch: as also
another, for which a Patent was granted, May 1740, to be held on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, weekly, at Brook-field by May-fair, in the Parish of St.
George Hanover-square, for Meat, Herbage, etc.

At all these Markets, a Part is set by for a Fishmarket, and a Part for an
Herb-market; notwithstanding which, there are the following particular Fish and
Herb-markets, viz.

Fish-markets, at Billinsgate, Fishstreet-hill, and Old Fishstreet.

Herb-markets, Covent Garden, and till within this little while Stocks-market,
which is removed to the new one at Fleet-ditch, to make room for a
Mansion House for the Lord Mayor of this City.

At the Three Cranes, are also Markets for Cherries, Apples, and other Fruits.

Corn-markets, are at Bear Quay, and Queenhith.

Meal-markets, at Queenhith, Hungerford, Ditchside, and Whitecross-street.

Hay-markets, at Whitechapel, Smithfield, Southwark, the Hay-market-street,
Westminster, and Bloomsbury.

Leather-market, at Leaden Hall.

Hides and Skins, at Leaden Hall, and Wood's-close.

Coal-markets, at Room-land, and Billinsgate.

Bay-market, at Leaden Hall.

Broad-cloth-market, at Blackwell-hall A Grant for a new Market near
Grosvenor-square is now ( Anno 1741.) obtained.
.

The last Three are, without Doubt, the greatest in the World of those Kinds.
-- There are moreover Multitudes of Coal-merchants, who have Coalwharfs, from
the Hermitage one Way, to the Horseferry and Westminster another, which may be
deemed so many Markets, though not public ones.

These Markets are so considerable in themselves, that they merit a larger and
more particular Description, than I have room for. I shall, however, briefly
observe of them, That of the fifteen Fleshmarkets for Provisions, Seven of them
are of ancient Standing; but the others are erected since the Increase of the
City. The old ones are, Leaden Hall, Whitechapel, Newgate-market, Southwark,
Clare, St. James's, and Westminster; to which some add Honeylane, and these are
so considerable, have such Numbers of Buyers, and such an infinite Quantity of
Provisions of all Sorts, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, that especially, with regard to
Leaden Hall, no City in the World can equal them.

The great Market called Leaden Hall (of which a certain Spanish Ambassador
said, There was as much Meat sold in it in one Month, as would suffice all
Spain for a Year) contains Three large Squares, every Square having several
Outlets into diverse Streets, and all into one another. The first, and chief, is
called the Beef-market, which has two large Gates, one into Leaden-hall-street,
one into Grace Church Street; and two smaller, viz. one by a long paved Passage
leading into Lime-street, and one under a Gateway from the second Square. In
this Square, every Wednesday, is kept a Market for raw Hides, tanned Leather,
and Shoemakers Tools; and in the Warehouses, up Stairs, on the East and
South-sides of the Square, is the great Market for Colchester Bays.

The second Square is divided into two Oblongs: in the first is the
Fish-market, and in the other, a Market for Country Higglers, who bring small
Things, as Pork, Butter, Eggs, Pigs, Rabbets, Fowls, etc.

In the North Part of the Fish-market, the Place being too large for the
Fishmongers Use, are the Stalls of the Town Butchers for Mutton and Veal, the
best and largest of which, that England can produce, are to be bought there;
and the East Part is a Flesh-market for Country Butchers.

The third and last Square, which is also very large, is divided into Three
Parts: round the Circumference, is the Butter-market, with all the Sorts of
Higglery Goods, as before: the South Part is the Poultry-market, and the
Bacon-market; and the Center is an Herb-market. And there have been, lately,
still more Conveniences and Additions made to this prodigious Market, which we
have not room to particularize.

All the other Markets follow the same Method in proportion to the Room they
have for it.

There are Two Corn-markets; viz. Bear-quay and Queenhith. To the first comes
all the vast Quantity of Corn that is brought into the City by Sea, from the
Counties which lie commodious for that Carriage; and here Corn may be said not
to be sold by Cart-loads, or Horse-loads, but by Ship-loads; and except the
Corn-chambers and Magazines in Holland, when the Fleets come in from Dantzick
and England, the whole World cannot equal the Quantity bought and sold here;
for no Quantity can be wanted either for Home Consumption, or for Foreign
Exportation, but the Corn-factors, who are the Managers of this Market, are
ready to supply it.

Queenhith is chiefly for Malt; the Barley of which takes up the Ground of so
many Hundred thousand Acres of Land in the Counties of Surrey, Bucks, Berks,
Oxford, Southampton, and Wilts, and is called West Country Malt.

It is true, there is a very great Quantity of Malt, and of other Corn too,
brought to some other Places on the River, and sold there; viz. to
Milford-lane, above the Bridge, and the Hermitage, below the Bridge; but this
is but, in general, a Branch of the Trade of the other Places.

It must not be omitted, that Queenhith is also a very great Market for Meal,
as well as Malt, and, perhaps, the greatest in England.

The Vessels which bring this Malt and Meal to Queenhith, are worthy
Observation. They are remarkable for the Length of the Vessel, and the Burden
they carry, and yet the little Water they draw; for some of those Barges carry
above a Thousand Quarters of Malt at a time, and yet do not draw Two Feet of
Water; and a Thousand Quarters of Malt must be granted to be, at least, a
Hundred Tons Burden; and some of these large Barges come as far as from
Abington, which is about One hundred and Fifty Miles from London, if we measure
by the River.

The next Market, which is more than ordinary remarkable, is the Coal-market at
Billinsgate. This is kept every Morning on the broad Place just at the Head of
Billinsgate-dock, and the Place is called Room-land: from what old forgotten
Original it has that Name, History is silent. I need not, except for the sake
of Strangers, take Notice, that the City of London, and Parts adjacent, as also
all the South of England, is supplied with Coals, called therefore Sea-coal,
from Newcastle upon Tine, and from the Coast of Durham, and Northumberland.
This Trade is so considerable, that it is esteemed the great Nursery of our
Seamen. I shall have occasion to say more of it in my Account of the Northern
Parts of England. The Quantity of Coals, which, one Year with another, are
burnt and consumed in and about this City, is supposed to be about 500,000
Chalders, every Chalder containing 36 Bushels, and generally weighing 3000
Weight.

Most of these Coals are bought and sold on this little Spot of Room-land; and
though sometimes, especially in case of a War, or of contrary Winds, a Fleet of
500 to 700 Sail of Ships, comes up the River at a time, yet they never want a
Market. The Brokers of these Coals, are called Crimps; the Vessels they load
their Ships with at Newcastle, Keels; and the Ships that bring them, Cats, and
Hags, or Hag-boats, Fly-boats, and the like.

The Increase of this Consumption of Coals is another Evidence of the great
Increase of the City of London; for, within a few Years past, the Import of
Coals was not, in the River of Thames, so great by very near half.

It must be observed, that as the City of London occasions the Consumption of
so great a Quantity of Corn and Coals, so the Measurement of them is under the
Inspection of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen; and for the Direction of
it, there is allowed a certain Number of Corn-meters, and Coal-meters, whose
Places are for Life, and bring them in a very considerable Income.

They have abundance of poor Men employed under them, who are also called
Meters, and are or ought to be Freemen of the City.

This is, indeed, a kind of Tax, as well upon the Coals as Corn; but the Buyer
is abundantly recompensed, by being ascertained in his Measure; for the sworn
Meters are so placed between the Buyer and the Seller, and have so many Eyes
upon them, (being besides Men of Character) that there is hardly ever any room
for Complaint on this Head.

XII. Of the Public Schools and Libraries.
WE must be very brief in this Article; nor have we room to say anything of the
private Schools, which are hardly to be numbered.

Near the Abbey at Westminster is the Royal Free School, founded by Queen
Elizabeth; it is not outdone even by those of Winchester and Eton, for the
excellent Scholars it has produced, and is in a very flourishing Condition.
Several good Houses, and even Streets, are lately built in its Neighborhood.

St. Paul's School, founded by Dr. Colet, Dean of St. Paul's, is a fair
Foundation for 153 Boys, to be taught gratis.

Merchant Tailors School was founded by Sir Thomas White, Founder of St. John's
College, Oxon, for 100 Scholars to be taught gratis, 100 more for Half a Crown,
and another 100 for Five Shillings a Quarter; and has 46 Fellowships
established in St. John's College, for Scholars elected from this School.

Another excellent School was founded at Mercers-chapel, by that Company.

To say nothing of upwards of 70 Charity Schools upheld by the benevolent
Contributions of charitable Persons; also the Mathematical, and other Schools,
at Christ's Hospital, which I have not room to be more particular in.

As to the LIBRARIES, I can only mention 'em likewise in a cursory manner.
Those at Sion-college, the Temple, and other Inns of Court, Castle-yard, near
the Meuse, the King's, etc. deserve more particular Mention than we can give
them. In Redcross-street, near Cripplegate, an handsome Building was erected,
Ann. 1727, by the late Dr. Daniel Williams, a Dissenting Divine, for a public
Library for the Use of the Dissenting Ministers of London.

The valuable Collections, called the Cotton Library, is so well known, that we
shall only mention the great Disaster that befell it in the Year 1730, when a
Fire happened, not through Over-care, we may be sure, which burnt and defaced a
great Number of valuable Manuscripts. But most happily it was discovered and
extinguished, before it made so great a Destruction as was at first
apprehended. The learned Keeper of this inestimable Treasure, Dr. Bentley,
Master of Trinity-college, Cambridge, whose Labors have done so much Honor to
the Commonwealth of Learning, was the first, we are told, to express to some of
his Friends, who came to condole with him the public Loss, the great Joy he
conceived that all his own Works had escaped the Ravages of that furious
Element, which had been so little complaisant to many curious Pieces of
Antiquity. I would studiously avoid all ill-natured Insinuations; but wish,
that with all the Excellencies which adorn this learned Man's Character, the
Age in which he lives might be able to hand down his Fame to succeeding Times,
free from that private Spirit and Narrowness of Mind, of which his Enemies
accuse him. If he deserves not the Ill Will of such, he has to comfort himself,
that Envy always pursues true Merit, and so may make himself easy: If he does,
we will venture to say, that it is a Pity that any Man's listing himself either
on this or that Side, as to Party, should shield him from deserved Censure.

The inestimable Collections made by the Earl of Oxford, the late Lord
Sunderland, etc. are rather private than public, and so come not under our
Notice.

XIII. Of the Shipping in the Thames, and the Trade carried on by means of that
noble River.
THE whole River from London Bridge to Black-wall, is one great Arsenal:
nothing in the World can be like it. The great Building-yards at Schedam near
Amsterdam, are said to outdo them in the Number of Ships which are built
there; and they tell us, that there are more Ships generally seen at Amsterdam,
than in the Thames.

I will not say, but that there may be more Vessels built at Schedam, and the
Parts adjacent, than in the River Thames; but then it must be observed,

1. That the English build for themselves principally, the Dutch for all the
World,

2. That almost all the Ships the Dutch have, are built there, whereas not one
fifth Part of our Shipping is built in the Thames; but abundance of Ships are
built at the Seaports in England, such as, at Newcastle, Sunderland, Stockton,
Whitby, Hull, Gainsborough, Grimsby, Lynn, Liverpole, Yarmouth, Alborough,
Walderswick, Ipswich and Harwich, upon the East Coast; and at Shoreham,
Arundel, Brighthelmston, Portsmouth, Southampton, Pool, Weymouth, Dartmouth,
Plymouth, besides other Places, on the South Coast.

3. That we see more Vessels in less Room at Amsterdam; but setting aside their
Hoys, Bilanders, and Schouts, which are in great Numbers always there, being
Vessels peculiar to their Inland and Coasting Navigation, you do not see more
Ships, nor near so many Ships of Force at Amsterdam, as at London.

That Part of the River Thames which is properly the Harbor, and where the
Ships usually deliver or unload their Cargoes, is called the Pool, and begins
at the Turning of the River out of Limehouse Reach, and extends to the
Custom-house Quays: In this Compass I have had the Curiosity to count the Ships
as well as I could, en passant, and have found about 2000 Sail of all Sorts,
not reckoning Barges, Lighters or Pleasure-boats, and Yachts; but of Vessels
that really go to Sea.

It is true, the River or Pool seemed at that time to be pretty full of Ships;
as also that I included the Ships which lay in Deptford and Blackwall Reaches,
and in the Wet Docks; but then I did not include the Men of War at the
King's-yard, and in the Wet Dock at Deptford, which were not a few.

In the River there are, from Battle-bridge, on the Southwark Side; and the
Hermitage-bridge, on the City Side; reckoning to Blackwall, inclusive, 3 Wet
Docks for laying up Merchant-ships. 22 Dry Docks for Repairing Merchant-ships.
33 Yards for Building Merchant-ships.


Including the Buildings of Lighters, Hoys, etc. but excluding all
Boat-builders, Wherry-builders, and above Bridge, Barge-builders.

To enter into any Description of the great Magazines of all manner of Naval
Stores, for the furnishing those Builders, would be endless; it is sufficient to
add, That England is an inexhaustible Storehouse of Timber; and all the Oak
Timber, and generally the Plank also, used in the Building these Ships, is
found in England only; and that principally in the Southern Counties near us;
as particularly Berks, Bucks, Surrey, Kent, Sussex and Suffolk; and very little
is brought farther.

XIV. Of the Manner by which the City is supplied with Water.
NO City in the World is so well furnished with Water as London, for their
necessary Occasions there, as well as for the extinguishing of Fires, when they
happen.

1. By the great Convenience of Water, which being everywhere laid in the
Streets in large Timber Pipes, as well from the Thames as the New River, those
Pipes are furnished with a Fire Plug, of which the Parish Officers have the
Key; and when opened, let out not a Pipe, but, as one may say, a River of Water
into the Streets; so that making but a Dam in the Chanel, the whole Street is
immediately under Water to supply the Engines.

2. By the great Number of admirable Engines, of which almost every Parish has
one, and some Halls also, and several private Citizens, have them of their own;
so that no sooner does a Fire break out, but the House is surrounded with
Engines, and a Flood of Water poured upon it, till it is extinguished.

3. The several Insurance Offices, of which I have spoken in Article III. have
each of them a certain Set of Men, whom they keep in constant Pay, and furnish
with Tools proper for their Work, and to whom they give Jack Caps of Leather,
able to keep them from Hurt, if Brick or Timber, or any thing not of too great
a Bulk, should fall upon them. These Men, whom they call Firemen, make it their
Business to be ready at Call, all Hours, to assist in case of Fire; and it must
be acknowledged, they are very dexterous, bold, diligent and successful.

There are two great Engines for the raising the Thames Water, one at the
Bridge, and the other near Broken-wharf; and these raise so great a Quantity of
Water, that it is said, they are able to supply every House throughout the whole
City, with a running Pipe of Water up to the uppermost Story.

However, the New River, which is brought by an artificial Stream from Ware,
continues to supply the greater Part of the City; and that with more Ease than
the Thames Engines. Of this River I shall take farther Notice in my Description
of Hertfordshire, where it takes its Rise.

The Chelsea Waterworks, as they are called, are also of no small Use for the
new Buildings at that End of the Town; and a noble Cut, being a large, though not
long River of itself, from the Thames to near Buckingham Garden-wall, and a
great Reservoir of Water, in Hyde-park, produced by the same Undertaking, are
no small Additions to the great Convenience we are speaking of, for the Parts
which they respectively serve.

Formerly there were several beautiful Conduits in London, the Water of which
was very sweet and good, and brought to them at a vast Expense from several
distant Springs in large Leaden Pipes: some of these were rebuilt since the
Fire; but now the City is so well supplied with Water, that they are either
quite demolished, or entirely out of Use. That in Cheapside was pulled down but
very lately, and a Statue proposed to be built in its Place, in Honor to the
great King William III. and it must be owned, that it is one of the most
commodious Places for such a Purpose in the whole City. But it being set on
Foot, as some thought, by Party on one Side, was rejected, from far less
laudable Motives, by Party on the other.

It is a well known Fact, that the bringing the New River to Islington, for the
Benefit of the City, was the Ruin of the first Attempter Sir Hugh Middleton.

The Society of the Temple neglected to lay in Water till the Year 1737, when a
terrible Fire happening in it, which burnt down several Houses, and the Middle
Temple Kitchen among the rest, that Society agreed with the New River Water
Company, and there are nowfine Conveniences built for that Purpose in every
Court and open Place, which are only to be uncovered on occasion of such
Accidents. This Fire happened Jan. 3. 1736-7, and in it was consumed one of the
most valuable Collections of Antiquity in England, belonging to James West, Esquire
except the Cotton and Harleian Library.

To sum up my Description of London, take the following Heads: There are in
this great Mass of Buildings thus called London, Two Cathedrals. 4 Choirs for
Music Worship. 145 Parishes. 69 Chapels, where the Church of England Service
is performed. 2 Churches at Deptford, not taken into the Limits now described.
28 Foreign Churches. Besides Dissenters Meetings of all Persuasions. Popish
Chapels; and 2 Jews Synagogues. There are also 13 Hospitals, besides lesser
Charities, called Almshouses, of which they reckon 100, many of which have
Chapels for Divine Service. 3 Colleges. 27 Public Prisons. 8 Public Schools,
called Free-schools. 131 Charity-schools, in London and Westminster, and 10
Miles round. 15 Markets for Flesh. 2 for live Cattle. 2 Herb-markets. 23 Other
Markets. 15 Inns of Court. 4 Fairs. 27 Squares besides those within any single
Building, as the Temple, Somerset House, etc. 5 Public Bridges, and a new one
now Building. A Townhouse, or Guild Hall. A Royal Exchange. Another Exchange
for Shops. A Custom-house. 3 Artillery-grounds. 4 Pest-houses. 2 Bishops
Palaces. 3 Royal Palaces.


XV. Of the Christenings and Burials in London, etc. Of the Importance of the
City of London to the whole Kingdom. Of its comparative Proportion to the
Public Expense of the Kingdom, and the disproportionate Number of Members it
returns.
LET us now mention something briefly in relation to the yearly Births and
Burials of this extended Ci^y: from an Account of which Sir William Petty
thought he might make some Calculations of the Numbers of the Inhabitants. And
I shall only take Notice, that whereas the general Number of the Burials in the
Year 1666, and farther back, were from 17000 to 19000 in a Year, the yearly
Bill for the Year 1736, amounted as follows: Parishes. Christened Buried In the
97 Parishes within the Walls 1279 2580 In the 17 Parishes without the Walls
3852 8001 In the 21 Out-parishes in Middlesex and Surry 6141 13250 In the 10
Parishes in the City and Liberty of Westminster 3955 6980 145 15227 39811

Here is to be observed, that the Number of Burials exceeding so much the
Number of Births, is, because as it is not the Number born, but the Number
christened that are set down, which is taken from the Parish Register; so all
the Children of Dissenters of every Sort, Protestant, Popish and Jewish, are
omitted, also all the Children of Foreigners, French, Dutch, etc. which are
baptized in their own Churches, and all the Children of those who are so poor,
that they cannot get them registered: so that if a due Estimate be made, the
Births may be very well supposed to exceed the Burials, one Year with another,
by many Thousands.

London returns Four Members to Parliament, Westminster two; and these Six,
with Two for the County of Middlesex, make the Eight, which is all that this
exceeding populous County returns, although every single Ward in London is far
superior to most of the Boroughs in England, and really to many of the greater
Towns, that are represented by Two Members, and contributes infinitely more to
the Public Charge: and indeed one may ask, What are the greatest Part of the
Boroughs of Cornwall, and many in that of Devon, which Two Counties alone
return 70 Members, compared to 20 populous Villages one might name in the
Neighborhood of London? Some of which, no doubt, would be considered, were a
new Repartition of this kind practicable, and many of those peddling Boroughs
be obliged to give up to them: a Scheme that must be set on foot under a very
undesigning and honorable Administration, for Reasons too obvious to need
particularizing.

The following Scheme, though calculated before the Union, and consequently
before the 45 Members, which represent North Britain, were added to the 513,
returned for England and Wales, will set this Matter in a still clearer Light.

A SCHEME of the Proportions the several Counties in England paid to the Three
Shillings AID, 1699, compared with the Number of Members they send to
Parliament.
In this Scheme the Proportions are thus considered, viz. That as the whole
Kingdom send 513 Members to Parliament, so the whole Tax is divided into 513
equal Parts;

The 1. Column shows the Name of the County. 2. How many Parts of the of 513
each County paid. 3. How many Members of the 513 each County send.


COUNTIES. P. M Bedford 7 4 Berks 10 9 Bucks 12 14 Cambridge 9 6 Chester 7 4
Cornwall * 8 44 Cumberland * 1 6 Derby 6 4 Devon * 21 26 Dorset * 9 20 Du^ham *
3 4 Essex 24 8 Gloucester 12 8 Hereford 5 8 Hertford 11 6 Huntingdon 4 4 Kent
22 18 Lancaster * 5 14 Leicester 9 4 Lincoln 19 12 Midd^esex 80 8 Monmouth 3 3
Norfolk 22 12 Northampton 12 9 Northumberland * 4 8 Nottingham 7 8 Oxon 10 9
Rutland 2 2 Salop 7 12 Somerset 19 18 Southampton * 14 26 Stafford 7 10 Suffolk
20 16 Surrey 18 14 Sussex 18 28 Warwick 10 6 Westmorland * 1 4 Wilts * 13 34
Worcester 9 9 York * 24 30 Wales 11 24 All England and Wales 513 513 P. M.
Note, That the Proportion of the Six Northern, and Five Western Counties,
marked thus, *, are... 103 216 And that Middlesex and Essex are...... 104 16

Cities are included in their respective Counties.



XVI. The Benefit to the Public of a good Understanding between the COURT and
CITY.
HAVING shown the Grandeur and Importance of this great Metropolis, it remains
only to observe, How necessary it is for the Good of the whole Kingdom, that
there should be a right Understanding cultivated between the Administration and
that, For,

There has formerly been a great Emulation between the Court-end of the Town,
and the City; and it was seriously proposed in a certain Reign, how the Court
should humble the City: nor was it an impracticable Thing at that time, had the
pernicious Scheme been carried on. Indeed it was carried further than consisted
with the Prudence of a good Government, or of a wise People: for the Court
envied the City's Riches, and the Citizens were ever jealous of the Court's
Designs. The most fatal Steps the Court took at that Time to humble the City,
were, 1. The shutting up the Exchequer: And, 2. The bringing a Quo Warranto
against their Charter. But these Things can but be touched at here. The City
has outlived it all, and both the Attempts turned to the Discredit of the Party
who pushed them on. The City is indeed, and at all times must be, so necessary
to the Court, that no prudent Administration will ever seek Occasions for
Misunderstandings with it: but will, if not infatuated, do all in its Power to
encourage and increase the Opulence of the City, which upon any Emergency will
be able and willing, if not disobliged, to support the Court, and furnish Means
to protect the Kingdom, against either Foreign or Domestic Enemies.



And here having exceeded all Bounds of a Letter, for which however the Subject
is an Excuse, I will close my Account of this famous Metropolis, and with it my
Letter: being, Sir,

Yours, etc.

LETTER III. CONTAINING A Description of Part of Middlesex; and of the whole
County of Hertford.
SIR,
THE Villages round London partake of the Influence of London, as I have taken
Notice in the Counties of Essex, Kent, and Surrey.

Hackney and Bromley are the first Villages which begin the County of
Middlesex, East: for Bow, as reckoned to Stepney, is a Part of the great Mass.
This Town of Hackney is of great Extent, containing no less than Twelve Hamlets
or separate Villages, though some of them now join, viz. Church-street, Homerton,
Wyck-house, Grove-street, Clapton, Mare-street, Well-street, Cambridge-heath,
Shaklewell, Dalstone, Kingsland, Newington.


All these, though some of them are very large Villages, make up but one
Parish, and are within a few Years so increased in Buildings, and so well
inhabited, that there is no Comparison to be made between their present and
former State; every separate Hamlet being increased, and some of them more than
trebly bigger than formerly they were.

Hackney is so remarkable for the Retreat of wealthy Citizens, that there are
at this time near an Hundred Coaches kept in it.

Newington, Tottenham, Edmonton, and Enfield, stand all in a Line North from
the City. The Increase of Buildings is so great in them all, that they seem to
a Traveller to be one continued Street; especially Tottenham and Edmonton; and
in them all, the new Buildings so far exceed the old, especially in their
Value, and the Figure of the Inhabitants, that the Fashion of the Town is quite
altered.

At Tottenham we see the Remains of an ancient Building called the Cross, from
which the Town takes the Name of High-Cross. Here is a small, but pleasant Seat
of the Earl of Colerain.

Highgate and Hamstead are next on the North-side. At the first is a very
beautiful House built by the late Sir William Ashurst, on the very Summit of
the Hill, and with a View from the very lowest Windows over the whole Vale, to
the City: and that so eminently, that they see the Ships passing up and down
the River, for Twelve or Fifteen Miles below London.

As the County does not extend far this way, I take no notice of smaller Towns;
nor is there any thing of Note but Citizens Houses for several Miles; except
the Chase, at Enfield, which was a very beautiful Place, when King James I.
resided at Theobalds, for the Pleasure of his Hunting; and was then very full
of Deer, and all sorts of Game; but it has suffered several Depredations since
that, and particularly in the Times of Usurpation, when it was stripped both of
Game and Timber, and let out in Farms to Tenants for the Use of the Public.

After the Restoration it was laid open again; Woods and Groves were
everywhere planted, and the whole Chase stored with Deer: but it is not, nor
perhaps ever will be, what it was.

Hampstead is risen from a little Village, almost to a City; nor could the
uneven Surface, inconvenient for Building, check the Humor of the Builders;
for even on the very Steep of the Hill, where there is no walking Twenty Yards
together, without tuging up, or straddling down a Hill, the Buildings are
increased to that Degree, that the Town almost spreads the whole Side of the
Hill.

The Heath extends about a Mile every way, and affords a most beautiful
Prospect; for we see here Hanslop Steeple one way, which is within Eight Miles
of Northampton, N. W. to Landown-hill in Essex, another way East, at least
Sixty-six Miles from one another. The Prospect to London, and beyond it to
Banstead-downs, South; Shooters-hill, South-east; Red-hill, South-west, and
Windsor-Castle, West, is also uninterrupted. Indeed, due North, we see no
farther than to Barnet, which is no love Six Miles from it.

At the Foot of this Hill is an old Seat of the Earls of Chesterfield, called
Bel-size; which for many Years had been neglected: but being tenanted by a
certain Projector, who knew by what Handle to take the gay Part of the World,
he made it a House of Pleasure and Entertainment: this brought a wonderful
Concourse of People to the Place; and they were effectually gratified in all
Sorts of Diversion; but there being too great a License used, it alarmed the
Magistrates, and now the House is hastening apace to Ruin.

Besides the Long Room at Hampstead, in which the Company meet publicly on a
Monday Evening to play at Cards, etc. Mr. Vipand, the Master of that, built in
the Year 1735, a fine Assembly-room, Sixty Feet long, and Thirty wide,
elegantly decorated; every one who does not subscribe, pays half a Crown for
Admittance. Every Gentleman who subscribes a Guinea for the Season, has a
Ticket for himself, and for Two Ladies. Gentlemen and Ladies, who lodge in the
Town, are entertained every Sunday for 6 d. each, with Tea and Coffee; but no
other Amusements.

I could not be at Hamstead without making an Excursion to Edgworth, a little
Market Town, on the Road to St. Albans; for it is certain, that this was
formerly the main Road from London to St. Alban's, being the famous high Road,
called Watling-street, which reached from London to Shrewsbury, and on toward
Wales.

Near this Town, the Duke of Chandos has built one of the most magnificent
Palaces in England, with a Profusion of Expense, and so well furnished within,
that it has hardly its Equal in England. The Plaistering and Gilding are done
by the famous Pargotti, an Italian. The great Salon or Hall is painted by
Paolucci. The Pillars supporting the Building are all of Marble: the great
Staircase is extremely fine; and the Steps are all of Marble, every Step being
of one whole Piece, about Twenty-two Feet in Length.

The Avenue is spacious and majestic, and as it gives you the View of Two
Fronts, joined, as it were, in one, the Distance not admitting you to see the
Angle, which is in the Center; so you are agreeably drawn in, to think the
Front of the House almost twice as large as it is.

And yet, when you come nearer, you are again surprised, by seeing the winding
Passage opening, as it were, a new Front to the Eye, of near 120 Feet wide,
which you had not seen before; so that you are lost a while in looking near
hand for what you so evidently saw a great way off.

The Gardens are well designed, and have a vast Variety, and the Canals are
very large and noble.

The Chapel is a Singularity, both in its Building, and the Beauty of its
Workmanship; and the Duke used to maintain there a full Choir, and had the
Worship performed with the best Music, after the manner of the Chapel Royal.

Two Miles from hence, we go up a smaller Ascent by the great Road; when
leaving the Street Way on the Right, we enter a spacious Common called
Bushy-heath, where again we have a very agreeable Prospect. On the Right Hand,
we have in View the Town of St. Alban's; and all the Spaces between, and
further beyond it, look like a Garden. The enclosed Cornfieldsd make one grand
Parterre: the thick-planted Hedge-rows seem like a Wilderness or Labyrinth; the
Villages interspersed, look like so many several noble Seats of Gentlemen at a
Distance. In a Word, it is all Nature, and yet looks like Art. On the Left Hand
we see the West End of London, Westminster Abbey, and the Parliament House; but
the Body of the City is cut off by the Hill, at which Hampstead intercepted the
Sight on that Side. More to the South we have Hampton Court, and S. W. Windsor,
and between both, those beautiful Parts of Middlesex and Surrey, on the Bank of
the Thames, which are the most agreeable in the World. But I must travel no
farther this Way, till I have taken a Journey West from London, and seen what
the Country affords that Way.

The next Towns adjacent to London, are Kensington, Chelsea, Hamersmith,
Fulham, Brentford, Twickenham, etc. all of them near, or adjoining to the River
of Thames, and which, by the Beauty of their Buildings, make good the North
Shore of the River, answerable to what I have already described.

But here I ought not to omit mentioning the new Bridge from Fulham to Putney,
cross the Thames, which is a handsome wooden Fabric, and as convenient, by its
many angular Indentings, for Foot-passengers, as for Horses and Coaches. A Toll
is paid for every one that passes it, let it be ever so often in a Day; and the
Rate pretty much the same as the Ferry used to be. And as the Proprietors are
said to divide 10 or 12 l. per Cent. from the Profits of it, it is pity,
methinks, that Foot-passengers, who cannot wear the Bridge, should pay at all.

Kensington cannot be named without mentioning the King's Palace there: it was
originally an old House of the Earl of Nottingham's, of whom the late King
William bought it, and then enlarged it as we see; some of the old Building
still remaining in the Center of the House.

The House itself fronts to the Garden Three Ways, the Gardens being now made
exceeding fine, and enlarged to such a Degree, as to reach quite from the great
Road in Kensington Town, to the Action Road North, more than a Mile, besides a
great Track of Ground out of Hyde-Park. An artificial Mount is also erected,
which affords a fine View, is planted with Ever-greens, and has a Seat upon it,
which turns round with great Ease at Pleasure. The noble River that is lately
dug in Hyde-Park, affords a fine View from these beautiful Gardens. The first
laying out of these Gardens was the Design of the late Queen Mary, who finding
the Air agreed with the King, resolved to make it agreeable to herself too, and
gave the first Orders for enlarging them.

The late Queen Anne improved what Queen Mary began, and delighted very much in
the Place; and often was pleased to make the Green-house, which is very
beautiful, her Summer Supper-house.

And her late Majesty Queen Caroline completed the Whole, by the Additions just
now mentioned.

King William, Prince George of Denmark, and Queen Anne, died here.

As this Palace opens to the West, there are Two great Wings built, for
receiving such as necessarily attend the Court, and a large Port-cocher at the
Entrance, with a Postern, and a Stone Gallery, on the South Side of the Court,
which leads to the great Staircase.

It is no Wonder, the Court being so much at Kensington, that the Town has
increased in Buildings; and indeed it abounds with handsome Houses, and has a
very pretty Square.

South of this Town stands Chelsea, at which Place is the noblest Building, and
one of the best Foundations of its kind in the World, for maimed and old
Soldiers, built by Sir Christopher Wren.

Here also are the Physick-gardens belonging to the Company of Apothecaries of
London. In it is lately built a stately and convenient Edifice, which serves at
the same time for a Green-house, and Apartments over it for meeting of the
Company of Apothecaries, etc. and over them are very convenient Apartments,
which may be used for drying Seeds of Plants, etc. As this Ground was made a
Present by Sir Hans Sloane, they have erected in the new Building, a Statue of
that Gentleman; and intend to make, in due Time, an Opening down to the River,
which will have a beautiful Effect upon the Thames, and receive no less Grace
from it. On the Pedestal of this Statue is an Inscription expressing the
Company's Gratitude to Sir Hans.

Near the Royal Hospital was, till very lately, a neat and beautiful House and
Gardens built by the late Earl of Ranelagh; but they are now quite destroyed,
being sold out in Parcels to Builders, and other Purchasers.

Sir Robert Walpole has a fine House here, and good Gardens, adjoining to the
Hospital, adorned with noble Pictures, etc.

In short there is an incredible Number of fine Houses built in all these Towns
within these few Years, which in other Places would pass, in a manner, for
Palaces; and most of the Possessors whereof keep Coaches.

Among these are the late Lord Peterborough's at Parsons-Green; Lord Halifax's
at Bushy-Park; Earl of Bradford's, Earl of Strafford's, Earl of Shrewsbury's,
Earl of Burlington's, Sutton-Court Chiswick, Mr. Barker's, Lord Wilmington's,
General Whetham's, Holland-House, near Kensington, situated on a fine Eminence,
and which now is taken by the Lord Bruce, who is making it once more a
delightful Habitation; the late Secretary Johnson's, at Twickenham, and
Multitudes of others.

But I must not pass over so slightly the noble Seat of the Right Hon. the Earl
of Burlington, at Chiswick; and yet I can only mention cursorily some of its
Beauties: as the River his Lordship has dug in his Gardens, a very fine one
indeed; from the Earth of which he has formed a noble Mount next the Road, or
rather a Terrace, from which the whole Country may be viewed, and which serves
at the same time, for a Defense to his Gardens on that Side, and is planted to
the Road with all manner of sweet Shrubs, Roses, Honeysuckles, etc. that yield
in the Season a delightful Fragrance, as well to the Passengers as to those on
the Terrace; the magnificent Buildings in Imitation of ancient Temples, etc.
interspersed in the Gardens; the beautiful Bridge over the River in it; the
fine Walks; the unbounded Prospects; several curious Statues, a noble Obelisk,
delicate Vistas, and the sumptuous Buildings adjoining to the old House,
commanding a fine View to the River; which, with the Pictures and valuable
Curiosities withinside, altogether exceed Description.

In the Village of Hamersmith, which was formerly a long scattering Place, full
of Gardeners Grounds, with here and there an old House of some Bulk, we see now
great Numbers of fine Houses, and a continued Range of a great Length, which
makes the main Street.

I have now traversed the best Part of Middlesex, a County made rich, pleasant
and populous, by the Neighborhood of London. The Borders of the County have
Three Market Towns, Stanes, Colbrook and Uxbridge: this last is a pleasant
large Town, full of good Inns, as the others are, and famous, in particular,
for having abundance of fine Seats of Gentlemen, and Persons of Quality, in the
Neighborhood; and also for a vain Attempt made in the great Civil War, to
settle the Peace of these Nations by a Treaty here. I should never have done,
were I to pretend to describe, though ever so slightly, the large Towns on both
Sides the River; as Lambeth, Battersea, Wandsworth, Fulham, Putney, Barnet,
Roehampton, Hamersmith, Mortlack, Brentford, Kew, Richmond, Isleworth,
Twickenham, Padington, Acton, Ealing,
where a new Church is just finished; and others all crowded and surrounded
with fine Houses, or rather Palaces, of the Nobility, Quality and Gentry of
England.

There are but Three more Market Towns in the County, viz. Brentford, the
County-town, Edgworth, and Enfield.

And now I enter the County of Hertford, a fruitful Soil, as it is managed; for
it is certain, it is more indebted, for its Fertility, to the Sagacity and
Industry of the Husbandman, than to Nature. Rich Meadows are seldom found here;
for it affords not any large Rivers: the Arable has generally too much Gravel,
or too much Clay; but these last cold and wet Lands have been within these
Forty Years greatly improved by draining off the Rainwater, which stagnated on
the clayey Surface, as in a Cup, and chilled the Roots of the Corn; an
Invention, called Bush-draining.

The County is well-water'd for the Convenience of the Inhabitants; though the
Lea is the only navigable Stream in it, which has its Rise in Bedfordshire; of
which more anon. But this County assumes the Honor of giving Rise unto several
Rivers, viz. the Parish of Tring to the Thames, which leaving the County at
Putenham, goes by Ayleshury to Them, and thence by Wheatley-bridge to
Dorchester, and falls into the Isis.

The County may be divided into Three Parts pretty equal, by Two great Roads,
one Part lying between the North Road, which goes through Hertford to Nottingham,
etc. and the Borders of Cambridgeshire North, and those of Essex East. Another
Part lying between that Road and the other, which leads through St. Alban's to
Coventry and Chester; and the third lying between this last Road, and the
Borders of Middlesex South, and those of Bucks West.

I shall begin with the last at East-Barnet, a Thoroughfare-town of Note, and
well supplied with Inns: it lies high and pleasant, and was formerly frequented
for its medicinal Waters, and now for its Swine-market. It has in its
Neighborhood several very handsome Houses of the Londoners, and which are the
more pleasant by being so near the Chase.

Totteridge is near it also, and is a very pleasant Village. It is situated on
a fine Eminence looking to the North, over the St. Alban's Road into the
Forest; and on the South over the Edgware Road, to Harrow, etc. It is very
clean, and has several very good Houses in it. The Road from Hampstead here is
extremely pleasant, and so well repaired, that in the worst Season there is
scarce any Water or Dirt remaining in it; and as it lies not on any great Road,
there are no heavy Carriages passing that Way; therefore a small Expense
annually, well laid out, will always keep this Road in excellent Repair.

Cheaping-Barnet lies a little North, in the St. Alban's Road, and is
remarkable for the decisive Battle fought there on Easter Day 1468, between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, in which the great Earl of Warwick, styled
Make-king, was killed, with many of the prime Nobility, and 10,000 Men. The
Place supposed to be the Field of Battle, is a green Spot near Kicks-End,
between St. Alban's and Hatfield Roads, a little before they meet. The Manor is
in the Property of the Duke of Chandois. A handsome Row of Six Almshouses, for
so many Widows, founded by James Ravenscroft, Esquire in 1672, with a little
Furniture to each, is in the Street. Queen Elizabeth built a Free School-house
of Brick in the same Street, where Nine Children are taught gratis, and all
other Boys at Five Shillings the Quarter.

About Two Miles N. W. from hence, on the Left Hand, lies Durhams, formerly the
Seat of the Austins, but is now the Property of the Earl of Albemarle, who
purchased it of Sir John Austin, and has since greatly beautified the Seat, by
laying most of the neighboring Fields belonging to the Estate, into a Park,
and turning and repairing of the Roads. The House stands on an Eminence,
situated in a small Valley, surrounded with pretty high Hills at a little
Distance, so that in the Summer Months it is an agreeable Retirement: but the
Soil all round it being a strong Clay, all the Rain which falls in Winter being
detained on the Surface, renders the Situation very cold and moist. Add to this
the Want of good Water, and Timber near the House, (except the young Trees
which have been planted by his Lordship) and upon the Whole it cannot be
esteemed a good Seat.

Idlestrey or Elstre is a Village on the Roman Watling-street, on the very Edge
of Middlesex; but it is chiefly noted for its Situation, near Brockly-Hill, by
Stanmore, which affords a lovely View cross Middlesex, over the Thames, into
Surrey. Near this is Kendale Wood, where formerly was found an old Flint Wall,
so hard as not to yield to the Strokes of the Pick-ax; as likewise an Oven. Mr.
Philpot digging his Canal and Foundations for his Buildings, upon the Spot of
the old City, Suellaniacis, found many Coins, Urns, and other Antiquities. They
have a Proverb here, relating to the Antiquities: No Heart can think, nor
Tongue can tell,
What lies 'tween Brockley-Hill and Pennywel.


Pennywel is a Parcel of Closes across the Valley beyond Brockley-Hill, where
Foundations are discernible, and where, they say, has been a City.

About Two Miles further West lies Watford, a Market Town, Seventeen Miles from
London, upon the Colne, where it has Two Streams, which run separately to
Rickmersworth. Several Almshouses belong to this Town, and an handsome
Free School, built in 1704, and finished 1709, by Elizabeth Fuller, Widow; and
in the Church are several handsome Monuments. The Town is very long, having but
one Street, which is the public, and so is extremely dirty in Winter; and the
Waters of the River, at the Entrance of the Town, are often so much swelled by
Floods, as to be unpassable; and the Bridge designed as the Road at such times,
is so much out of Repair, that it is very dangerous for any Carriages of
Burden to pass over it; which is a very great Disadvantage to the Town.

Cassioberry, the Seat of the Earl of Essex, is the next thing that occurs
worth notice, and is elegant. The Situation is the best in the County, upon a
dry Spot, within a Park of a large Extent: the House is built in Form of an H:
the Middle and the East Wing is modern, and in good Repair; but the West Wing
is very old, and by no means corresponding with the other Parts of the House.
The Front faces the South-east, and looks directly on the House in Moore-Park,
on which the late Mr. Styles expended such great Sums of Money, and which has a
noble Look from Cassioberry House. In the Front of the House is a fine dry Lawn
of Grass, which immediately after the heaviest Winter Rains may be rode or
walked on, as on the driest Downs; and a little below the House is a River,
which winds through the Park, and in the driest Seasons constantly runs with a
fine Stream, affording great Plenty of Trout, Cray-fish, and indeed most other
kinds of fresh water Fish. On the North and East Sides of the House are large
Wood-walks, which were planted by the famous Le Notre, in the Reign of Charles
II. The Woods have many large Beech and Oak-trees in them; but the principal
Walks are planted with Lime-trees, and these are most of them too narrow for
their Length, and too regular for the modern Taste. On the other Side of the
River, the Ground rises to a considerable Height, which affords an agreeable
Variety; part of which being covered with stately Woods, appearing at a proper
Distance from the Front of the House, have a fine Effect to the Eye. In short,
the whole Spot (if a small Expense was bestowed to improve and put it more in
the modern Taste) would be one of the finest Places near London.

Near Cassioberry is a pleasant Seat, purchased by the late Lord Raymond,
called Langleybury.

Rickmersworth is a Market Town, within Three or Four Miles West of Watford. It
gave Birth to Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor of London, who founded
Gloucester Hall, and St. John's College in Oxford. Here are Two Almshouses,
one for Four, the other for Five Widows.

We visited in this Neighborhood More-Park, with a fine House in it, of the
late Duke of Monmouth, standing upon the Side of the Hill, facing Cassioberry,
on the other Side the River. It has been allowed one of the best Pieces of
Brick-work in England. Sir William Temple commends the Garden as one of the
best laid-out in England. The Duchess of Monmouth, on whom it was settled by
Marriage, sold it in 1720, to Benjamin-Heskins Styles, Esquire who has made it a
magnificent Edifice, having built a South Front of Stone with Colonnades, by
which an Opening is made through the Hill that once obstructed its View toward
Uxbridge. A North Front is also erected, and the Hill toward Watford cut through
for a Vista. The Inside of the House is also adorned with admirable Work of
Painting. In digging this Hill, Veins of Sea-sand with Muscles in it were found.

Abbots-Langley, Twenty-two Miles from London, situated about Three Miles North
of Cassioberry, in a good Air and Soil, is remarkable for the Birth of an
English Pope, Nicolas Brakespear, by the Title of Adrian IV. The Emperor
Frederick held his Stirrup, while he dismounted. He was choked, as some say,
by a Fish, and, as others, by a Quinsy: but it is an indelible Stain on his
Memory, that, when sovereign Pontiff, he suffered his Mother to be maintained
by the Alms of the Church of Canterbury.

We proceeded to Kings-Langley, so called, because Henry III. built himself a
Royal House here, of which the Ruins still exist: and here was born and buried
Edmund de Langley, Duke of York, Fifth Son of Edward III. and his Wife Isabel,
youngest Daughter of Don Pedro, King of Castile, was also buried here, and the
Tomb is in the Church of this Place.

We next went to Hempsted, a little further North, and about Twenty-three Miles
from London, a Bailiwick Corporate Town. It has the greatest Corn-market in the
County, or perhaps in England; in which 20,000 l. a Week are frequently
returned for Meal only. Eleven Pair of Mills stand within Four Miles of the
Place, which bring a great Trade to it: but the Road is by this means so
continually torn, that it is one of the worst Turnpikes round about London.

A little North of Hempsted we turned West, and came to Great Barkhamsted,
about Twenty-four computed Miles from London. It is a very ancient Town, which
for many Hundred of Years has been one of the Crown Manors, which granted to it
many very ample Privileges. It is now annexed to the Dukedom of Cornwall, and
as such appropriated to the Princes of Wales. The Castle and Manor are at
present held by Lease from the Prince, by Edward Carey, Esquire which was obtained
by his Ancestors of Queen Elizabeth.

Barkhamsted has evidently been a Roman Town, by the Name of Durobrivae; and
probably the Castle stands upon a Roman Foundation. Roman Coins are frequently
dug up there. It is most pleasantly environed with high and hard Ground, full
of Hedge-rows, Pastures, and Arable, though situated upon a South Side of a
Marsh. It extends itself far in handsome Buildings, and a broad Street In the
Time of the Heptarchy it was the Residence of the Kings of Mercia; and here
Wightred King of Kent and Mercia, in the Year 69, held a Parliament: here also
King Ina's Laws were published.

The Castle was judiciously set on the North-side of the Town, on dry Ground,
amongst Springs, and made exceedingly strong by the Saxons. It was rebuilt by
Moreton, Earl of Cornwall, Brother to William the Conqueror, and razed for
Rebellion in his Son's Time, and so with the Manor fell to the Crown. Henry II.
kept his Court here, and granted great Privileges to the Place. The Castle was
afterward rebuilt, as it is thought, in the Reign of King John, for the
Dauphin of France, in Conjunction with the Barons, besieged it, and the
Defendants surrendered not till they had the King's Orders for it.

When the Castle was demolished, a large House was built out of its Ruins,
which is beautifully situated. What now remains of it is but the third Part,
and the Back of the great House; for the other two Thirds were destroyed by
Fire in the Reign of Charles I. It was in King James's Time a Nursery for that
Prince's Children; and Prince Henry and Prince Charles were bred up there; and
in the Time of the late Troubles, Colonel Axtel, a Parliament Officer, held it.
It is now in the Possession of the Roper Family.

The Corporation sunk in the War between the King and Parliament. In King
Charles II.'s Time an Attempt was made to revive the Charter; but it was dropped.
This Body Politic is now reduced to a Skeleton, like the Castle, which is only
to be known by its Moats and Walls.

The Castle contains within its first Moat, Four or Five Acres. There is again
a Division by another Moat. The South Part, consisting of about Two Acres, is
upon a Level with most of the outward Walls and Chimneys remaining. Toward the
North, across a Moat, is a high Hill or Keep, capable of defending itself
against the former, if possessed by an Enemy. The Traces of the Bridge of
Communication, and the Moat dividing these Two Places of Strength, are
continued to the grand one, that takes in the whole Site of the Fortification.
The Remains of the Bridge for Entrance from the Town, are visible, answering
exactly to the other, as the North of the first Area, which led to the Hills.

In this Town was the famous Interview between William the Conqueror and the
English Nobility, in his March toward London, after his Victory over Harold.
He passed the Thames at Wallingford, and was going forward to St. Albans, when
the stout Abbot Frederick stopped his March by Trees, etc. till he could get
the English Nobility together, and then he made him swear to keep inviolably
the good and ancient Laws of the Kingdom; yet he took away all their Lands, and
divided them among his hungry Normans.

This Town gives Name to the Deanery. The Church is handsome, dedicated to St.
Peter; it has had many Chapels and Oratories. On the Pillars of the Church are
the Eleven Apostles, with each of them a Sentence of the Creed, and St. George
killing a Dragon, on the Twelfth. These were whited over by the Zeal of the
late Times, and are but lately come to Light.

The Chapel of St. John is used only by the Master, Ushers and Scholars of the
Free School. St. Leonard's Hospital was at the South-east End of the
High Street, and St. James's Hospital at the other End. The Free Grammar School
was built by Dean Incent, of St. Paul's. It is a handsome Brick Structure, with
an Apartment at one End for the Master, at the other for the Usher and
Chantry-Clerk. It was Twenty Years in Building.

They have had other large Benefactions, which we have not room for.

Tring, being Twenty-eight computed Miles from London, is a small Market Town,
stands upon the Extremity of Hertfordshire, next to Buckinghamshire, East of
and near the Ikening-street.

It is very ancient, and was formerly a Royal Manor; but now possessed by
William Gore, Esquire who has made a Park of 300 Acres, of which Part is on the
Chiltern. In it is a beautiful Wood enclosed, lying close to the
Ikening-street. Mr. Gore has beautified and wainscotted the Church in a most
elegant Manner, and gives 20 l. per Ann. for a Charity-School. The Church is a
handsome Pile of Building, with a Ring of Six Bells. The Chancel was
wainscotted by Sir Richard Anderson. It is decent and capacious, and worthy a
Choir. Both Church and Chancel are paved with Freestone; the Pillars are
painted; the Pulpit and sounding Board are of fine Inlaid-work; and a handsome
Vestry is under the Belfry.

Among other Monuments is a magnificent one for Sir William Gore and his Lady;
with Inscriptions to their Honor, but too long for a Place here.

From Tring I passed next Eastward, and came to Gadesden-Little; where I had
heard was a fine Prospect; and I wanted not Curiosity to see it. This Vill has
Cawley-Wood, and Ivingo-Hills on the North-west, Aldbury-Cliffs on the
South-west, Dunstable-Downs to the North. The Prospect I mean is from one Part
of this Parish, to which a Common of fine Turf leads under the Duke of
Bridgwater's shady Park; and a noble one it is of Three Counties, worthy of the
Pencil of the greatest Artist in Landschape.

The Variety of Woods, Cliffs, Arable and Pasture, are charming; but they must
be tempted to half a Mile's pleasant Exercise to get to the beautiful Scene.

Cawley-Wood belonging to the Duke of Leeds, is a small Covert, a Mile from
hence, at the Top of a Hill, in Bucks, one of the greatest Landmarks in the
South of England, which overlooks Eleven Counties. It stands as a Monument to
show, notwithstanding all the modern Improvements, that Nature will not be
outdone by Art.

Now I am on this Subject, I shall just mention Penley-lodge, for a most
delightful Retirement to a Man who wants to deceive Life, in an Habitation
which has all the Charms Nature can give. There is behind a large Common of
fine Turf, bounded on a Wood on the West, to which if one ascend a Quarter of a
Mile, he has a View of Northamptonshire and Warwickshire. From the House a
Semicircular Prospect of Bedfordshire, Middlesex, and Bucks; a bended one
toward Ivingo and Aldbury-Cliffs, with the shady Woods of the Dukes of Leeds
and Bridgwater, seeming to hang over the Rivulet called Bulborn.

The Manor of Aldbury lies North-east of Tring, and in the Way to Gadesden. It
belongs to the Duke of Leeds, whose Father married the Heiress of the Family of
Hyde; and so does Muniborough-Hill lie in the Way from Aldbury to
Little-Gadesden, and affords a handsome Prospect.

Ashridge stands near Aldbury, but in Bucks, an ancient Mansion House and fine
Park, belonging to the Duke of Bridgwater.

Gadesden is famous for the Birth of John de Gadesden, who flourished in the
Beginning of the Fourteenth Century; the first Englishman who was a Court
Physician, and of whose Skill Chaucer makes honorable mention, in his Doctor
of Physic, prefixed to his Canterbury Tales; though Dr. Friend, from John's
own Books, will not allow him to deserve it. There are several Monuments in the
Chancel of this Church of the Bridgwater Family, whose finely situated Seat and
Park at Ashridge, formerly a Royal House of Pleasure, and where Edward I. held
a Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of his Reign, is in this Parish, but in the
County of Bucks. The Duke is Lord of this Manor, as also of that of
Great-Gadesden.

I crossed over a Slip (as I may call it) of Bucks, which runs into
Hertfordshire, between Aldbury and Kensworth-Green, which lies a little South
of the Road which leads from St. Alban's to Dunstable, and is a Situation
surprisingly fine, about half a Mile in Length, a good Turf, and level with
Whipsnape-Woods on the Back of it, and Rows of high Trees on the other Side.
Nothing but Sky is to be seen from it one Way, and the other we have only a
View of the Top of a Grove, at Market-Cell. It seems to claim a Preference of
every Place in the County for a Cell, yet never had one on it: it comes very
little short of the famous Guy's Cliff, near Warwick. There the shady Grove,
and rolling Stream below it, make a beautiful Scene for Solitude: here the
Woods and Trees afford Shade enough, and the pure circumambient Either, with
nothing in View but the Tops of Trees, would make a Hermit think himself in
another World.

Here I came into the Road, and so turned South-east for St. Alban's, through
Flamstead Parish, where is a well built and delightful Seat of Sir
Thomas-Saunders Sebright, Bart. on a rising Ground in the middle of a Park. It
is called Beechwood Manor, from the great Number of fine Beech-trees which were
formerly growing here, some of which are yet remaining on the Sides of the
Park. The Soil of this Park is, for the most part, dry, the Surface being
shallow, on a strong or chalky Bottom, which renders the Turf very fine and
short, and very pleasant for the Exercise of either riding or walking. It was
formerly a Nunnery for a Prioress and Ten Nuns, independent of any other
Convent, and then called St. Gyles in the Wood. A very serious Inscription in
Flamstead Church, on a Monument of one of the Saunders Family, may be worth
transcribing, as it certainly is a Piece of sound Doctrine, in which every
living Man may find an Use.

"He that looks hereon, may consider how fleeting all worldly Comforts are, and
how great a Vanity it is to place his Affection thereon. Such Things there are
as worldly Comforts, it is true; but they ought to be looked on as little
Streams; and whoever delights in them, more than in the FOUNTAIN from whence
they proceed, may soon find them dry and vanished. The Truth of which he that
wrote this, has sensibly found; and wills others to place their Affections
chiefly on that OBJECT OF LOVE, which is unchangeable, and is the Center of all
true Joy and Felicity."

Pursuing still the same Course along the great Road, we came next to St.
Alban's, the capital Town of Hertfordshire, famous for deriving its Name from
the Proto-martyr of England, who suffered so early in the fourth Century. It Is
governed by a Mayor, 10 Burgesses, a Steward and a Chamberlain, and is a
peculiar Liberty both for Ecclesiastical and Civil Government.

The Town rose out of the Ruins of old Verulam; of which so much has been said
by Mr. Camden and others, that we refer to them for Particulars. In that great
Man's Time, the Ruins afforded much more for the Observation of the Curious
than now; for they are since dug away, for mending the Highways. The first
Verulam was stormed and taken by Julius Caesar. And here Cassibelan, a famous
British King, then kept his Court. The first Destruction of the Place is
supposed to have been by Boadicea, the famous British Queen, who cut off 70000
Romans in one Battle; and the second, (which was erected on the Ruins of the
other) in the Wars between the Britons and Saxons; and almost infinite are the
Numbers of Antiquities here dug up.

The Origin of St. Alban's was owing to the Monastery built by Offa, King of
the Mercians, to the Memory of St. Alban, in Expiation of his barbarous Murder
of Ethelbert, King of East Angles, whom he had treacherously inveigled to his
Court, on Pretense of marrying his Daughter; and the same Offa it was that
built Hertford Cathedral, and dedicated it to St. Ethelbert, and made a Journey
to Rome as further Penance, where he was absolved, though he kept the murdered
Prince's Dominions, and joined them to his own.

Of all the Monasteries in England, none could outshine this. Its Revenue was
great, and its Privileges still greater. In the Royalties it had from its
Founder, and the Episcopal Powers from the Pope, none came up to it. The mitred
Abbot had Precedence of all in England, and subject to no Ecclesiastical Power
but the Pope immediately; and he had Episcopal Jurisdiction over both Clergy
and Laity in all the Lands belonging to his Monastery. From first to last they
were Forty-one in Number, and many of them Persons of great Accomplishments,
and high Birth: the 39th of which, though not highborn, was Cardinal Wolsey. The
last Abbot was Richard Boreman, who at the Dissolution quietly surrendered on
the Royal Command, and accepted of a Pension for Life, of 266 l. 13 s. and 4 d.

Two bloody Battles were fought near this Place, between the Houses of York and
Lancaster; the first upon the 23d of May 1455, in which the Yorkists got the
Day; the second on Shrove-Tuesday, in the 39th of Henry VI. when the martial
Queen Margaret overcame the Yorkists, who had then the King in their Power, and
fought under the Sanction of his Name.

But we must not dismiss this Subject without giving some brief Particulars of
the famous Abbey Church. We have before observed, that it was founded by King
Offa; but it has been rebuilt in Whole or Part several times. The Town
purchased it at the Dissolution, for 400 l. which prevented so noble a Fabric
being pulled down, and torn to Pieces, for making Money of the Materials; and
it is made a Parish Church for the Borough. The High Altar is a curious Piece
of Gothic Architecture.

Within the North Entrance is Offa on his Throne. Underneath, Fundator
Ecclesiae circa annum 793. Quem male depictum, et residentem cernitis alte
Sublimem solio, MERCIUS OFFA fuit.
That is: The Founder of the Church, about the Year 793. Whom you behold
ill-painted, on his Throne
Sublime, was once for MERCIAN OFFA known.


In the most Eastern Part of the Church stood the Shrine: Six Holes remain in
the Pavement, where the Supporters of it were fixed. This Inscription is still
to be seen. S. ALBANUS VEROLAMENSIS, ANGLORUM Junij 293.

On the South Side the Shrine, in the Wall of the South Isle, is Duke
HUMPHREY's Monument, with the Arms of France and England quartered, and a Ducal
Coronet. In Niches on the South Side are 17 Kings; the Niches on the other Side
have none remaining. Piae Memoriae V. Opt. Sacrum. Hic jacet HUMPHREDUS, Dux
ille Glocestrius olim,
Henrici sexti Protector, fraudis ineptae
Detector, dum ficta notat miracula coeci.
Lumen erat Patriae, Columen venerabile Regni,
Pacis amans, Musisque favens melioribus; unde
Gratum opus Oxonio, quae nunc Schola sacra refulget.
Invida sed mulier regno, regi, sibi nequam,
Abstulit hunc, humuli vix hoc dignata Sepulcro.
Invidia rumpente tamen, post funera vivet.
In English thus: Sacred to the pious Memory of an excellent Man. Interred
within this consecrated Ground
Lies he, whom Henry his Protector found,
Good Humphrey, Glo'ster's Duke, who well could spy
Fraud couched within the blind Impostor's Eye Alluding to a pretended
miraculous Cure of a blind Man, detected by the Duke.
.
His Country's Light, the State's revered Support,
Who Peace, and rising Learning deigned to court;
Whence his rich Library, at Oxford placed,
Her ample Schools with sacred Influence graced:
Yet fell beneath an envious Woman's Wile,
Both to herself, her King, and Kingdom, vile;
Who scarce allowed his Bones this Spot of Land:
Yet, 'spite of Envy, shall his Glory stand.


It is but little above 30 Years ago, that, digging for a Grave, the Stairs
leading down to the Vault where the Body lies, were discovered.

In the Vault is a leaden Coffin, with the Body preserved by the Pickle it lies
in, except the Legs, from which the Flesh is wasted, the Pickle of that End
being dried up. On the Wall at the East End of the Vault is a Crucifix painted,
with a Cup on each Side of the Head; another at the Side, and a fourth at the
Feet. The Vault is very neat, and has no offensive Smell. The Coffin, we are
told, had an Outside of Wood, which is entirely gone.

The West End of the Choir has a noble Piece of Gothic Workmanship for the
Ornament of the High Altar. Capt. Polehampton, about 30 Years ago, gave an
Altar-piece, which represents the last Supper.

There are many curious Medals and Coins to be seen in the Church, which have
been dug out of the Ruins of old Verulam.

This noble Fabric has wanted its Abbot's Zeal and Purse too, for Repairs,
since it has been a Parish Church. The Roof was preserved by Contribution of
the Nobility and Gentry of England, many of whose Arms are put up on this
Occasion; and Money has been collected several times besides for its Support:
indeed such a fine Fabric must too often stand in need of such Helps, as there
is no settled Fund to maintain it.

There are Three Churches in the Town at present, besides the Abbey Church,
viz. St. Michael's abovementioned, St. Peter's, and St. Stephen's.

There were also formerly belonging to this Town St. German's Chapel, St. Mary
Magdalen's Chapel, St. Julian's Hospital, the Hospital of St. Mary des Prees,
the Nunnery of Sopwell, etc. But they are all demolished and secularized. There
was also in the Town the Parish Church of St. Andrew; but that had dropped down
before the Dissolution.

Near this Place is Sopwel Nunnery, where they say King Henry was married to
Anne of Bolen. In the Heart of the adjoining Corporation stood one of Queen
Eleanor's Crosses, demolished by the Inhabitants.

In the Neighborhood of St. Alban's is Gorhambury, where is a Statue of King
Henry VIII. with other Things worthy a Traveller's Curiosity. It is now the
Seat of the Lord Grimston: but what it will be always most famous for, is, that
the Manor is the paternal Estate of that Mirror of all Ages, and Ornament of
his Country for Learning, Francis Bacon, created Lord Verulam and Viscount of
St. Alban's, once Lord Chancellor of England, who first revived Experimental
Philosophy: Of whose Merits, Rise and Fall, we shall say nothing, but refer our
Readers to his Life now lately, in 1740, published, and prefixed to a new and
beautiful Edition of his Works, written by the ingenious Mr. Mallet. Sir Thomas
Meautys, who had been the Secretary of this wonderful Man, and to whom he
conveyed this Estate, in Gratitude, erected a Monument for him in St. Michael's
Church in this Town, sitting thoughfully in an Elbow-chair.

The Monument bears this Inscription: Francisc. Bacon, Baro de Verulam, Sti.
Albani Viceco. An. Dom. 1626. Aetat. 66. Tanti Viri Mem. Thomas Meautys,
Superstitis Cultor, Thus translated: Francis Bacon Baron of Verulam, and
Viscount of St. Alban's; or, by his more known Titles, The Light of the
Sciences, and the Law of Eloquence, was thus accustomed to sit; who, after
having unravelled all the Mysteries of Natural and Civil Wisdom, fulfilled the
Decree of Nature, That Things joined should be loosed, in the Year of our Lord
1626, and of his Age 66. To the Memory of so great a Man, this was erected by
Thomas Meautys, who reverenced him while living, and admires him dead.



The Manor of Kingsbury was sometimes the Residence of the Saxon Monarchs,
whence its Name. It had a Castle, which was kept up till King Stephen's Time,
when it was demolished, and the Site given to the Abbey.

The Duchess Dowager of Marlborough has a Seat here, built by the late Duke
upon the River Verlam, which runs through the Garden; and who also built handsome
Almshouses at the Entrance of the Town.

The following remarkable Inscription and Character is cut upon the Pedestal of
a fine Statue of the late Queen Anne, carved by the noted Mr. Rysbrach, and
erected at St. Alban's, at the Expense of the Duchess, in Gratitude to the
Memory of that excellent Princess:

QUEEN ANNE was very graceful and majestic in her Person: Religious without
Affectation. She always meant well. She had no false Ambition; which appeared,
by her never complaining at King William's being preferred to the Crown before
her, when it was taken from the King her Father, for following such Counsels,
and pursuing such Measures, as rendered the Revolution necessary. It was her
greatest Affliction, to be forced to act against him, even for Security. Her
Journey to Nottingham was never concerted, but occasioned by the great
Consternation she was under at the King's sudden Return from Salisbury.

She always paid the greatest Respect to King William and Queen Mary; never
insisted upon any one Circumstance of Grandeur, more than what was established
in her Family by King Charles II. though, after the Revolution, she was
presumptive Heir to the Crown, and after the Death of her Sister, was in the
Place of Prince of Wales.

Upon her Accession to the Throne, the Civil List was not increased. The late
Earl of Godolphin, Lord High Treasurer of England, often said, that, from
Accidents in the Customs, and Lenity in the Collection, it did not arise, one
Year with another, to more than Five hundred thousand Pounds a Year.

She had no Vanity in her Expenses, nor bought any one Jewel in the whole Time
of her Reign.

She paid out of her Civil List many Pensions granted in former Reigns, which
have since been thrown upon the Public.

When a War was necessary to secure Europe against the Power of France; she
contributed, in one Year, toward the War, out of her Civil List, One hundred
thousand Pounds, in Ease of her Subjects.

She granted the Revenue arising from the First Fruits, to augment the
Provisions of the poorer Clergy.

She never refused her private Charity to proper Objects.

Till a few Years before her Death, she never had but Twenty thousand Pounds a
Year for her Privy Purse. At the latter End of her Reign, it did not exceed
Twenty-six thousand Pounds a Year; which was much to her Honor, because it is
subject to no Account. And as to her Robes, it will appear by the Records in
the Exchequer, that in Nine Years she spent only Thirty-two thousand and Fifty
Pounds, including the Coronation Expense.

She was extremely well-bred, treated her chief Ladies and Servants as if they
had been her Equals. Her Behavior to all that approached her was decent, and
full of Dignity, and showed Condescension, without Art or Meanness.

All this I know to be true.

SARAH MARLBOROUGH.

M.DCC.XXXVIII.

At Colney is also a very handsome Seat of Sir. Henry-Pope Blunt's, standing
about a Quarter of a Mile North of the Road. It seems to be very large, and the
Fields and Meadows about it make it very pleasant in Summer.

Having thus gone over the first Part I proposed of this Country, which lies
South and South-west of St. Alban's Road, I shall now bend my Course North-east
toward Hertford, and from thence North-west, to take in such Part of the
middle Division as lie between the Two capital Roads on that Side of Hertford;
reserving that which lies East of it, for my Return toward London.

The next Town in my Way is Hatfield, 17 computed Miles from London: it is a
Market Town; but much more famous is Hatfield House, which lies near it; from
whence Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, were both conducted to the Throne,
having resided here for some time. King James made an Exchange of this Manor in
the fourth Year of his Reign, for that of Theobald's, as hereafter mentioned,
with Sir Robert Cecil, afterward Earl of Salisbury, who built this magnificent
House, and made the Vineyard in the Park, through which the River Lee has its
Course, adorning that Garden. The Rectory of Hatfield is esteemed one of the
best in England; Winwich in Lancashire, and another in Durham, have larger
Revenues; but this has a better Situation.

Saundridge, which lies a little North-west of Hatfield, deserves to be
mentioned, as it gave Title of Baron to the late great Duke of Marlborough; and
it now belongs to his illustrious Relict, a Descendant of the Family of
Jennings, of this Place. But one Thing must be observed withal, that when I was
there last, the Steeple lay buried in its own Rubbish, as it had done for 40
Years together; and the Bells hung in the Church behind the Door; and this, I
suppose, continues to be its present State.

North-Mymms stands a little East of Colney, and is remarkable for having in
its Neighborhood the Seat of the late Sir Joseph Jekyll, Master of the Rolls,
in Right of his Lady, who was Heir to her late Brother the great Lord Summers.
It has a most delightful Prospect. The Body of that noble Lord lies interred in
the Chancel of the Church here, without any Inscription, in Allusion, as one
would expect, to his Motto, Prodesse quam conspici. This Seat is now the
Property of his Grace the Duke of Leeds, (who has put a great Part of the House
and Gardens in good Repair) and is his Retirement from London, during any short
Interval that may happen in the Sessions of Parliament.

We come now to Hertford, the County Town, 20 computed Miles from London; a
Corporation, governed by a Mayor and Burgesses. It is pleasantly situated in a
wholesome Air, and a dry Vale, having a good weekly Market well stored with
Corn, and all sort of Provisions. It is very ancient, and is built in the Form
of a Y, with a Castle in the Middle of the two Horns. It contains several
Streets and Lanes, well filled with handsome new-built Houses. In Edward III.'s
Time, it had petitioned to be disburden'd of the Expense of sending Two Members
to Parliament, on their Inability to pay their Representatives Wages: But 21.
Jac. I. they petitioned to be restored to their Right, and succeeded.

There is a Free Grammar School for the Children of this Town, erected by
Richard Hale, Esquire in King James I.'s Reign. The House, being rebuilt a few
Years ago, is a very good one. Of the Five Churches Hertford once had, there
are but Two remaining, viz. All Saints and St. Andrew's.

Near Hertford is a Seat of Governor Harrison situated on a Hill, which
commands a Prospect of the Country round it, as is likewise, in its
Neighborhood, a Seat of the Clarks, very delightfully situated too.

The Earl Cowper has a handsome Seat near Hertingfordbury, in the Neighborhood
of Hertford, built by his Father the great Lord High Chancellor of that Name;
who erected in the Churchyard a Tomb for his Mother, with an Inscription to
her Honor: in this Churchyard is also the Tomb of Mrs. Elizabeth Culling,
Heiress of a Family of that Name.

The Manor of Gobions lies a little North of Hertford, and will be for ever
famous on Occasion of its being the Family-seat of the great Sir Thomas More,
Lord High Chancellor of England in the Reign of Henry VIII. who took off his
Head, for refusing to acknowledge his Supremacy. It is now the Property of Sir
Jeremy Sambroke, Bart. who for the Beauty of its Gardens, as well as the House,
has made the Place one of the most remarkable Curiosities in England.

A little still farther North, at Wotton, is the Mansion House of the Botelers,
nobly situated on a rising Ground, and watered with small Streams, which fall
into the Bean on the South of it. It stands in a Park beautifully consisting
of Hills and Flats, and renowned for as good Timber as the Island produces.
About 40 Years since, one Tree was sold for 43 l. 18 Horses were had to draw
one Part of it, when slit, and out of it the Cutwater to the Royal Sovereign
was made. Another, called the Walking-Stick, might some Years ago have been
sold for Fifty Guineas; but was decaying when I was there, by the burrowing of
Rabbets under it. There is a good Free School in this Village, for poor
Children; with some of whom 5 l. is to be given Apprentice.

Stevenage is 28 computed Miles from London, and lies North-west of Hertford.
It is a small Market Town: the Church stands upon a Hill, and consists of a
Nave and Two Isles, and the Chancel has a Chapel on each Side. In the Steeple
is a Ring of Six Bells. Here is a good Free School, as well for Petit as
Grammar Scholars.

Walkern is near it, North-east, on the River Bean. I mention it on Account of
the poor Jane Wenman, who within these 30 Years was tried for a Witch, the
last, we hope, that ever will undergo such a Trial in England; for the old
obsolete Law against Witches was very lately repealed. Mr. Justice Powell got a
Reprieve for the poor Creature, after the Jury had found her guilty, contrary
to his Directions. She lived several Years afterward on an Allowance from the
Parish. The poor Wretch had been frighted into a Confession, that she was a
Witch; and thereupon was committed by Sir Harry Chauncy, of Yardlybury, who
would fain have had her retract, and pacify her Accusers. This Gentleman was
one of the deprived Judges of King James II. but it is said he never sat as
Judge but one Day. He wrote The Antiquities of HERTFORDSHIRE.

It is reported likewise, that another Woman being tried before Judge Powell,
who among other Things that constituted her a Witch, had laid to her Charge,
That she could fly; Ay! said the Judge; And is this true? Do you say you can
fly? Yes, I can, said she. -- So you may, if you will, then, replied the Judge;
I have no Law against it. And at the Trial of Jane Wenman, the Court being full
of fine Ladies, the old Judge very gallantly told the Jury, "They must not look
out for Witches among the Old Women, but among the Young."

I passed by Benington-place, the Seat of the ancient Family of the Caesar's.
There was formerly a Castle there; the Hill on which it stood, still remains
deep ditched.

At Siffivernes, in Codicote Parish, in the Year 1627, was a most prodigious
Walnut-tree, covering 76 Poles of Ground. The Weight of the Boughs at last
cleft the Trunk to the Ground. Mr. Penn, then Lord of the Manor, had 19 Loads
of Planks out of it; a Gun-stock Maker at London had as much as cost 10 l.
Carriage: There were 30 Loads more of Roots and Branches. This was attested by
Edward Wingate, before a neighboring Justice of Peace, to whom Mr. Penn
declared, he had been offered 50 l. for the Tree. And Jasper Docura of the
Parish attested, That when he was 15 Years old, the Compass of both his Arms
would not reach round it at Eight times.

Hitchin is a Market Town, lying in a Bottom, out of any great Road, distant
from London 30 computed Miles, and within three Miles of Bedfordshire. It Is
governed by a Bailiff and Four Constables, and was formerly famous for the
Staple Commodities of this Kingdom. The Church is large, dedicated to St. Mary.
It consists of the Nave and Two Ails, with Two Chapels or Chancels. The
Steeple has a Ring of Six Bells, but is low, and disproportionate to the
Chancel. In the North Ayle Window are Paintings of Faith, Hope, and Charity,
and of the Four Cardinal Virtues; and in the next North Window, the Beatitudes.
The Front has the Twelve Apostles round it; but they have been Sufferers from
the booted Saints of Forty-one. There are many Monuments in it. A good
Free School, and other charitable Benefactions, have been made to the Town.

I could not miss taking notice of Hexton, on the North-west Edge of the
County, next Bedfordshire, where was a Battle between the Danes and Saxons,
some Remains of which are visible between this Place and Luton, as large
Barrows, etc. Half a Mile to the South of this Town is a fortified Piece of
Ground, called Ravensborough Castle. The Camp is a sort of Oblong, containing
about 16 Acres, the Fortification entire. Nature has so well strengthened it,
that 1000 Men may defend it against a very great Army: it is encompassed with a
Valley, and a very steep Hill, inaccessible by an Army any-where but at the
Point of Entrance, which is by a gradual Ascent of a Quarter of a Mile.

The Beryslade, a House possessed by John Cross, Esquire though low and in the Dirt,
is now an agreeable Summer House; which it owes chiefly to St. Faith's Well, a
fine Spring at Ravensburg. A moory Piece of Ground, where the Spring rises, is
cut into Canals, which are stocked with Trouts, many of them 22 Inches long.
These having been used to take their Food from the Master's Hand, out of a Bowl
with a long Handle to it, come rolling up to the Surface. The Bottom is white,
either from Chalk or Sand; and so transparent, that every Fish may be seen that
comes out of its Hole. To preserve them from Groping, the Banks are wharfed,
and in some Places supported with Timber; so that the Fish can shelter
themselves underneath; and a Man must have his Head and Shoulders in Water, who
stoops down to them. From hence the Water feeds a large Canal in the Garden
stored with Carp and Tench; and there might be made Basins or Canals to any
Dimensions.

Near Hexton is a Square Roman Camp upon a Promontory just big enough for the
Purpose, and under it is a fine Spring.

Lilibo is a fine Plot of Ground upon a Hill, where a Horse-race is kept. It
lies a little South of Hexton, just by the Ikening.

Near Pirton Church has been a Castle of the Saxons or Normans, with a Keep.

I proceeded next to Baldock, situated on the Ikening-street, as it leads from
Dunstable to Royston. It is a large Market Town, 29 computed Miles from London.
It is of chief Note for its many Maltsters. The Church stands in the Middle of
the Town; it is a handsome high-built Edifice, with a Ring of Six good Bells.
It has Three Chancels, but the Two outward are rather Chapels. The
Ikening-street, about Baldock now appears but like a Field-way. Between Baldock
and Icleford it goes through an Intrenchment, consisting of the Remains of a
British Town, now called Wilbury-hill. Icleford retains the Name of the Street,
which at this Place passes a Rivulet with a strong Ford, wanting Reparation.

This Street, quite to the Thames in Oxfordshire, goes at the Bottom of a
continued Ridge of Hills, called the Chiltern, being Chalk, and the natural and
civil Boundary between the Counties of Hertford and Bedford, very steep
Northward.

As the Ikening-street and the Fosse traversed the Kingdom from South-west to
North-east, parallel to each other, and Watling-street crossed these quite the
contrary Way with an equal Obliquity, the Herman-street passed directly North
and South. This Word is Saxon, and signifies a Soldier or Warrior, which Name
it obtained from being a Military Way.

It begins at Newhaven, at the Mouth of the River Ouse in Sussex, and passes on
the West Side of that River, through Radmil, then through Lewis by Isfield; after
which it seems to pass over the River at Sharnbridge, and so proceeds to East
Grinstead; but is lost in passing through the great Woods. Then through Surry it
goes by Stane-street, Croydon, Stretham, and by its pointing we may conclude
was originally designed to pass the Thames at the Ferry called Stangate by
Lambeth, where it coincides with the Watling-street. There the Road went,
before London became considerable: but since that Period the Traces of the
Roads near that Capital have grown very obscure. The original Road perhaps
passes through unfrequented Ways near Enfield, and Harman-street, which seems
from thence to have borrowed its Name.

On the Eastern Side of Enfield Chase by Bush-hill, is a circular British Camp
upon an Eminence, declining South-west. But the ancient Road appears upon a
Common on this Side Hertford by Ball's-park, and passes the River below
Hertford; then, goes through Ware-park, and falls into the present Road on this
Side Buntingford, and so to Royston, where it crosses the Ikening-street,
coming from Tring through Dunstable, going into Suffolk. These are the principal
Places upon the Two Roads, which we thought fit to mention together.

At Baldock I crossed the North Road, and got into the Third Division I
proposed, next Cambridgeshire and Essex; and when I have passed through it, I
will return back again South, and take a View of such Towns as lie on the East
Side of the middle Division as I have not been at already.

In the Year 1724, between Caldecot and Henxworth, several Roman Antiquities
were dug up. Workmen, digging Gravel for the Repair of the great Northern Road,
struck upon some earthen Vessels or large Urns, full of Ashes and burnt Bones,
but rotten; near them a human Skeleton, with the Head toward the South-east,
the Feet North-west. Several Bodies were found in the same Position, not above
a Foot under the Surface of the Earth, and with Urns, great or small, near
them, and Patera's of fine red Earth, some with the Impression of the Maker at
the Bottom; also Glass Lacrymatories, Ampulla's, a Brass Tribulus, Six small
Glasses, Two large Beads of a Green Color, and other Fragments.

I went through the Village of Ashwell, which stands not far from Caldecot, on
the Source of the Rhee, by the Borders of Cambridgeshire, which breaks out of a
Rock here from many Springs, with such Force as to form a Stream remarkably
clear, but so cold, that it gripes Horses not used to drink it. The Water here
bubbles out at as many Places, and as abundantly, and in just such a Bottom
under a Hill, as does the Isis or Thames in Gloucestershire. In Domesday Book
this Village is called a Borough, having Fourteen Burgesses, and a Market;
anciently also it had Four Fairs. Mr. Camden thinks the Village Roman; and at
half a Mile Distance, South of this Source of the Rhee, is a Spot of Ground
taken in by a Vallum, and generally thought to be one of the Castra
Exploratorum of the Romans; it is called Arbury Banks, and consists of about 12
Acres, and Roman Coins have been found here; but still it wants several
Requisites, that go to a Roman Camp, which I have not room to particularize.
Ashwell-field affords a Stone Quarry, out of which the Stones of most of the
Churches of this Side, and the neighboring Part of Bedfordshire, have been
dug. The Church has a handsome Chancel, Three large Ails, a lofty Tower at the
West End, with a Ring of Six Bells, and a Chapel on the North Side the Chancel.

I now come to Royston, situated upon the utmost Northern Border of
Hertfordshire, insomuch that Part of it is in Cambridgeshire, 33 computed Miles
from London. The Fields about this Towns have upon almost every Eminence a
Barrow, and they lie very thick by the Ikening-street, East of this Town. Here
was a Monastery founded in Honor of St. Thomas a Becket, as also an Hospital,
both swallowed up in the Dissolution of Henry VIII. but the Priory-church was
purchased by the Inhabitants, and made a Parish Church of. It consists of a
Nave, and an Ayle on each Side, and a square Tower with a Ring of Five Bells in
it.

The Town became populous, on erecting the present Post-road through it, which
before ran along the Ermine-street, through Barkw^ (...) ^iggleswade. It is now a
good Town, and well (...), and has a very great Corn-market on Wednesdays, and
is full of good Inns. In the Year 1716, a School-house was erected here by
Contribution of the Town and Country.

Two Miles both Ways of Royston is chalky Soil; about Puckeridge it is
gravelly: in other Places adjoining are Camps, and Roman Antiquities. At
Hadstock is the Skin of a Danish King nailed upon the Church Doors, as reported.

Royston was a Roman Town before Roisia built her religious House here; for
Roman Coins have been dug up near the Spot. There seems to be the Stamp of
Roisia's Cross still remaining at the Corner of the Inn, just where the Two
Roads meet. The Earl of Oxford, digging Canals at Wimple, when he had that
Seat, found many Bodies, and rusty Pieces of Iron, the Remains of some Battle.

And now I bend my Course Southward, toward London.

The Church of Therfield, which lies among the Hills, a little South of
Royston, is obliged to Francis Lord Bishop of Ely, once Rector of it, who paved
the Chancel with Freestone, the Area of the Altar with Marble; wainscoted the
Walls, made it into the Form of a Choir, and ceiled it with Fret-work. It Is a
Rectory of great Value, and is rated in the First Fruits Office, at 50 l. a
Year. Till lately was at Therfield Furniture of all Sorts for the Use of poor
Peoples Weddings, such as was at Braughing; but they are now lost, or converted
to other Uses, even literally to Ploughshares and Pease-hooks.

Barkway is a Market Town. The Church stands in the midst of the Town, with an
Ayle on each Side, and a Tower with Five Bells, and a Turret-clock. The
Creation of the World is painted on one of the Windows. In one Pane at Top is a
bodily Representation of the Deity, as a Man in a loose R^be, down to his Feet,
with the Globe before him, and the Motto under, De operae primae diei. The next
Pane has the same, with Hands expanded, standing on the Firmament, in the midst
of the Water; under which, De opere Secundae diei. The Third has the same
Figure, amongst green Trees and Herbs; the Legend lost, and Three other Panes,
in Order, under these. The Painting of the Fourth is lost. The Fifth has the
same Figure, with Birds flying about it. A Piece of the Sixth remains, where
Fowls and Beasts are brought to Adam to be named. Another Window, in the North
Isle, has St. George slaying a Dragon, a Bishop, etc.

The Roman Road, called Ermine-street, passes through the Parish of Amsty; and
all the Way upon it we find Remains of Camps and Stations, exactly according to
the Itinerary. The Castle formerly here, was said to be built by Eustace Earl
of Bologne, at the Conqueror's Command; and it is not improbable, that there
were Fortifications before. It consisted of a Keep, or round artificial Hill,
yet remaining, with a large and deep Fosse about it; the Mount, probably, made
from the Ditch. The Barons, in King John's Time, made another Retrenchment
South of it, which would contain a Garrison as numerous as the Castle would
hold. Henry III. obliged Nicolas de Avestic to demolish the additional
Fortification, and keep up only the old one.

The Church was built in the Reign of Henry III. as is said, out of the Stones
of the demolished Fortifications made additional to the Castle. It is certainly
very old, and built with a low Tower in the Middle, and Two Ails. The Chancel,
perhaps, was rebuilt with the Materials of the Keep, being of later Date. It is
large and lofty, and has Stalls, as if for a Choir.

Buntingford is the next Town, and lies in the Cambridge Road, noted for a
great Thorough-fare, 28 computed Miles from London, and owes its Being as a
Town to the present Post-road through it to the North. The first Mention of it
is in the Reign of Edward III. who gave a Market and a Fair to it. It is
situated in Layston Parish; but has a Chapel of Brick, built by Contribution
for the Inhabitants here. Dr. Seth Ward Bishop of Salisbury, who died Jan. 6.
1688, built a neat Brick-house near the Chapel, for Four poor Men, and Four
poor Women, who had lived handsomely, and came to Decay through Misfortunes; each
of which has Two Rooms below, and Two above. Buntingford Free School owes much
also to the same worthy Prelate, who had his Education in it. He built, 1683,
an Hospital at Salisbury, for Ten poor Widows of Clergymen, was a Benefactor to
Layston, gave a good Sum of Money to make Salisbury River navigable; 600 l. to
be laid out in Land, for putting out Three poor Children Apprentices, Two out
of Alseden, and One out of Layston, alternately. In short, the good Bishop
seems to have thought, that the Revenues he reaped from the Church, ought to
have some other more public Designation, than to lift out of Obscurity a
private Family.

Braughing lies a little on the East of the Road, was anciently, next to
Verulam, the most considerable Place in the County, and is thought to have been
the Roman Caesaromagum, situated 28 Miles from London, as by Antoninus's
Itinerary. It still has some Ruins of its ancient Eminence, giving Name to the
Deanery and the Hundred. On the West Side the Ermin-street, now the Road to
Cambridge, we find the Ruins of a Roman Camp. The Church is an handsome
Building, and has a Ring of Five good Bells.

Near the Churchyard is an old House, at present inhabited by poor Families,
which was given with all Sorts of Furniture for Weddings. They brought hither
their Provisions, and had a large Kitchen, with a Caldron, large Spits and
Dripping-pan; a large Room for Merriment; a Lodging-room with a Bride-bed and
good Linen; some of which Furniture was in being a few Years ago.

This Provision was also at Therfield, and the Kitchen Utensils, but lately
lost.

We proceeded through Puckridge, a little Hamlet Town, but a great Thorough-fare,
standing on the Ermin-street, where there are several good Inns for Travelers,
and came to Standon, a small Market Town. The Church has Three Ails; the
Floor of the Chancel is Seven Steps above that of the Church, and the Altar
Three Steps above the Chancel-floor.

Here we turned short to the East, to visit Bishop-Stortford, lying on the
Borders of Essex, 27 Miles from London. The Conqueror gave this Town and Castle
to the Bishop of London, whence its Praenomen; and King John seized and
demolished it, for the Offense of the then Bishop, who was one of those who
published the Pope's Interdict against the Nation. The Town, in the same Reign,
was incorporated, and returned Members to Seven successive Parliaments. The
Bishop was restored by the same Prince, and Satisfaction made him for
demolishing the Castle. The Hill or Keep of the Castle is artificial, made of
Earth carried thither, with a Breast-work at Top of Stones and Mortar. A Bank
of Earth leads from it through the moory Ground, on which it was situated, to the
North-east. There is a large Wall from the Top of the Hill yet remaining. The
Bishop's Prison was in being in Bishop Bonner's Time; though all the old
Buildings are since demolished. But the Castle-guard is still paid by several
Places to the Bishop, besides other Quit-rents.

The Town is large, and well built; it is a Thorough-fare from London to
Cambridge, New Market, and St. Edmundsbury, and full of convenient Inns. It is
built in the Form of a Cross, having four Streets turned to the Cardinal
Points, and the River Stort runs through it.

The Church dedicated to St. Michael, is lofty, and stands on high Ground; it
has a fine Ring of Eight Bells. There were anciently Three Guilds and a
Chantry founded here. In the Church are Nine Stalls on a Side, for a Choir. On
the North Side the Church is a Gallery for the young Gentlemen of the School,
built by Contribution; upon it Sir John Hobart's Arms, who was educated there,
and a great Benefactor to this Work.

At the West End is another Gallery, built a few Years ago, upon which is an
Organ; and it is observable, that there was an Organ in this Church so long ago
as in the Reign of Henry VII. A new Font stands before it, with a Pavement of
Black and White Marble, enclosed with Iron Ralis.

There are a great Number of Monuments in the Church, particularly one in the
North Ayle, for Seven Children of Edward Maphesden, who died of the Smallpox,
with a Latin Inscription, deploring that heavy Dispensation.

Several Benefactions are bestowed on the Poor of this Town, particularly Two
Almshouses in Potters-street. But the greatest Ornament of the Town is the
School, built 35 Years ago, by Contribution of the Gentlemen of Hertfordshire
and Essex, at the Request of Dr. Thomas Took late Master, who also procured
several Sums for completing it, from the young Gentlemen educated here. When
this Gentleman engaged in it, it was at the lowest Ebb of Reputation; but he
raised it to a great Degree of Fame, and considerably increased the Trade of
the Town, by the beneficial Concourse that it brought thither. He revived the
annual School-feast, and charged his own Estate with a yearly Present to the
Preacher on that Occasion. He died May 4. 1721, after upwards of 30 Years
successful and diligent Labors here. By his Interest and Care the Gallery in
the Church, for the Use of the School, was erected: He gave a Chalice of 20 l.
Value to the Church, and was a great Benefactor to the School Library, which is
a very good one, and was first set on foot by the Reverend Mr. Thomas Leigh, B.
D. who was Vicar of the Church Anno 1680.

The School stands in the High Street, with the West Front to the Churchyard,
consisting of Three Rooms, which, with the Staircase, make a square Building.
The Grammar School takes up half of it, all the Front to the Street; the other
Two are the Library, and Writing-school. These stand upon Arches, under which
are a Market and Shops, which are the Property of the Parish; and here the
School was built at the Desire of the Inhabitants, who got by it a Covering for
their Market, and at the same time an Ornament to their Town.

Every Gentleman at leaving the School presents a Book to the Library.

Hadham Parva stands a little North of Bishop-Stortford, and is of chief Note
for being the Burying-place of the Capels, Earls of Essex.

The Manor of Rye, in the Parish of Stansted-Abbots, is famous for the Plot,
called thence the Rye-house Plot, said to be formed for assassinating King
Charles II. in his Return from New Market; for which several Persons suffered,
and among the rest the Tenant of the Place, Rumball, a Man of a daring and
intrepid Spirit.

Honesdon, separated from Essex by the Stort, deserves to be mentioned for
Three Reasons; first, for its noble Situation upon a gravelly rising Ground,
overlooking the Meadows; 2dly, for being the Residence of the Children of King
Henry VIII. in whose Hands it was then, on account of its good Air, and
Vicinity to London; and 3dly, for the Seat of Robert Chester, Esquire built within
these few Years, enclosed with a Park. It stands upon a beautiful Hill,
overlooking the Meadows, the River Stort, and Part of Essex, from the back
Front; from the other it has a Prospect over great Part of Hertfordshire, and
is seen from Cheshunt Common, on one hand, as St. Paul's is from the other. At
the Entrance of the Avenue it has a large Basin, through which runs a small
Stream, and there is a graceful Plantation of Trees, with Variety of Slopes,
adorned with Statues. The same Stream afterward feeds a Canal.

We pursued our Way directly South, and came to Sawbridgeworth, or Sabsworth.
Among several ancient Monuments in the Church, is an handsome one erected to
the Memory of General Lumly, Brother to the then Earl of Scarborough, with an
Inscription greatly to his Honor. As follows:

"Here lies the Honorable HENRY LUMLEY, Esquire only Brother to Thomas Earl of
Scarborough; who was in every Battle, and at every Siege, as Colonel,
Lieutenant General, or General of the Horse, with King William, or the Duke of
Marlborough, in Twenty Campaigns, in Ireland, Flanders, and Germany; where he
was honored, esteemed and beloved by our own Army, by our Allies, and even by
the Enemies, for his singular Politeness and Humanity, as well as for all his
military Virtues and Capacity. He sat long in Parliament, always zealous for
the Honor of the Crown, and for the Good of his Country; and knew no Party,
but that of Truth, Justice, and Honor. He died Governor of the Isle of Jersey,
the 18th of October 1722, in the 63d Year of his Age."

The Manor House of Pish^bury, in Sabsworth Parish, deserves to be mentioned on
account of its remarkable Strength, (though built in Queen Elizabeth's Time)
and lofty Rooms. It is situated on a clean Soil, has handsome Avenues to it,
with the River Stort behind, which communicates with the Canals in the Gardens.
It is in the Possession of the Family of Gardener.

We then crossed the Country directly West to Ware, situated 20 Miles from
London, on the River Lee, in its Course from Milford. The Town stands low, upon
a Level with the River. It is a Place of great Trade for all sorts of Grain,
but chiefly Malt, which is conveyed in great Quantities to London, by the River
Lee, which is navigable from hence; and the Barges bring Coals, etc.

It consists of one principal Street a Mile long, and other back Streets and
Lanes. At an Inn in this Town is the famous great Bed, which is 12 Feet square.

Ware being 20 Miles from London, is the second Post Town from thence on the
Northern Road. The next is Royston, 13 Miles further. Several Almshouses, and
a Free School, and other Charities belong to this Town.

Thomas Bide, Esquire Lord of the Manor, has a House pleasantly situated in the
Park here, to which is an Ascent of every Side; also a Vineyard newly planted.
One late Improvement, besides many others, is, a Cut from the Rib, which by
that Means turns that Stream through the Park on the South Side, which is a fine
Nursery and Protection for Trouts.

In the North Part of the Town was situated the Priory, now in the Possession
of the Family of Hadsley.

An eminent Tradesman of Ware, having lost by Death a favorite Mare, which he
had had many Years; in Consideration of her good Services, made, in March 1739,
a grand Burying for her, and invited near 300 People to it. He and his Wife
going next the Carcass, as chief Mourners, were followed by the rest of the
Company in Couples; and about Four o'Clock she was interred in Hare-lane-field,
near the Town, with great Pomp: After which the Company returned, and were
treated with Plum Cake and Strong Beer, at the Mourner's House, who expressed
great Concern for the Loss of the valuable Creature.

At Blake's- ware, the most Eastern Part of the Parish, is a Seat of William
Plummer, Esquire with a Stream called the Ash, on the East Front, which feeds a
Canal and a Garden by the Riverside. The chief Gardens are seen from the
western Front, which being upon a Declivity, afford an handsome Prospect that
Way.

A little South of Ware lies Amwell, a Village, famous for giving Rise to the
New River, which proceeding in a direct Course by the Church, receives a Spring
which flows with great abundance. It is 20 Miles from London; but the Course of
the River is computed at 36. It was begun by Sir Hugh Middleton; but he being
ruined by the Project, the City of London undertook it, and by Aid of an Act of
Parliament, brought it to Perfection. The yearly Profit of the River has, some
Years ago, been computed at 30000 l. and the Expense in supporting and keeping
it up, is said to amount to half the Profit. 'Twas divided originally into 72
Shares, one Moiety whereof belonged to private Persons, and the other to the
Crown: For King James I. for the sake of his Palace at Theobalds, was a great
Promoter of it. The Crown's Moiety is since come into private Hands; who
however have no Part in the Management; for the Corporation consists of 29 of
the Proprietors of the first 36 Shares.

This River, in Fact, draws most of its Water from the Lee; which being the
Property of the City of London, that Corporation opposed a Bill brought into
Parliament, for giving further Powers to the New River Company, to benefit
itself by the Lee River: But the Opposition availed not, and in the Session
1738-9 the Bill passed into a Law.

The Governors of the New River Company agreed with the Proprietors of the
Lands on the River Lee, for a Cut of Two cubick Feet of Water from the said
River, at a certain Rate; and after the Agreement, they told them they would
double the Price for a Four-foot Cut; which the Proprietors agreed to, not
considering the great Disproportion of the Two Cuts. And this Cut of the River
Lee supplies the largest Share of the New River Water.

We kept along the great Road, through Hoddesdon, (which is a considerable
Market Town, and noted also as a Thoroughfare) till we came to Broxbourn, which
lies near it on the New River; a small, but pleasant Village, situated on a
rising Ground, having pleasant Meadows down to the River Lee. On the Lefthand
of the Village is Broxbournbury, the Seat of the Lord Monson. The House is
large, and in the old Gothic Style, and situated in the Middle of the Park
(which has been planted and beautified of late). There are also new Offices
erected at a little Distance from the House, in a Quadrangle, on the same Plan
with the King's Meuse at Charing Cross. They are placed behind a large
Plantation of Trees, so that they do not appear until you are near upon them,
yet are at a convenient Distance from the Mansion House, which I was informed
his Lordship also proposes to rebuild.

The Manor of Theobalds is in this Neighborhood, where formerly was built a
magnificent Seat by Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who gave it his younger Son Sir
Robert Cecil, and he exchanged it for that of Hatfield, at the Desire of King
James I. who made it his Sporting Seat; and here ended his Life. From this
Place Charles I. set out to erect his Standard at Nottingham. King Charles II.
made a Grant of it to Monck, Duke of Albemarle, and to his Male Issue, which
failing in his Son Christopher, King William gave it to Bentinck, Earl of
Portland, in whose Grandson, the present Duke, it still continues. In the late
Civil Wars the Palace was plundered and defaced; and is become a poor Village,
from a Royal Residence. The great Park, which was enclosed within a Wall of 10
Miles Compass, by King James, is now converted into Farms. The Place is however
popular, and the New River runs just by, and sometimes through the Gardens of the
Inhabitants. In this Neighborhood Richard Cromwell, the abdicated Protector,
passed the last Part of his Life in a very private Manner.

Waltham-cross is the next, and, as you enter Middlesex by the North Road, the
last Place in Hertfordshire, standing just on the Edge of Middlesex. It is
noted for, and takes its Name from, the Cross, built by King Edward I. in
Honor of his beloved Queen Eleanor, whose Corpse, in its Way from Lincolnshire
to Westminster, rested here; as a Cross was built at every Stage where it
rested, and Charing Cross was the last. That Princess's Effigies placed round
the Pillar and the Arms of her Royal Consort, as well as her own, viz. England,
Castile, Leon, and Poictou, are still remaining, though much defaced.

And thus much for the County of Hertford, with which I conclude myself, Sir,

Yours, etc.

LETTER IV. CONTAINING A Description of Part of BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, of the County
of OXFORD, and Part of WILTS.
SIR,
I NOW proceed to give you an Account of my next Journey through Part of Bucks,
into Oxfordshire, and shall touch upon some Parts of Wiltshire, of which I have
not-yet taken notice.

On the Right Hand, as we ride from London to Uxbridge or to Colebrook, we see
Harrow; the Church of which standing on the Summit of an Hill, and having a
very high Spire, they tell us, King Charles II. ridiculing the warm Disputes
among some critical Scripturalists of those Times, concerning the Visible
Church of Christ upon Earth; used to say, This was it.

From Uxbridge we proceeded on the Road toward Oxford, and came to
Beaconsfield, a small Town on the Road to Oxford, full of good Inns, and
situated on a dry Hill, famous for the Residence of Mr. Edmund Waller, eminent
for his poetical Talent.

Then we went on to Wickham, commonly called High or Chipping Wycoomb, from
Coomb, a British Word for Valley. This is a large Town, consisting of one great
principal Street, branching out into diverse small ones. It is full of good
Houses and Inns, being a great Thorough-fare from London to Oxford.

Not far from Wickham lies Amersham or Agmondesham, a small Market Town, very
ancient; and a little beyond it you go through Chesham, a little inconsiderable
Market Town; and likewise Wendover, a mean, dirty corporate Town. From hence we
proceeded to Aylesbury, which is the largest and best Town in the County. -- It
stands on a Hill, but the Country round it is low and dirty. It consists of
several large Streets, and has a handsome built Market-house, which stands in a
kind of Quadrangle. It has also a Townhouse, where the Assizes and Sessions,
and other public Meetings of the County, are held. Provisions are here cheap
and plentiful, which is owing to the rich Vale adjoining. It was a strong Town
in the Beginning of the Saxons Time, and a Manor Royal in that of the
Conqueror's, who parcell'd it out under this odd Tenure, That the Tenants
should find Litter or Straw for the King's Bed-chambers Three times a Year, if
he came that Way so often, and provide him Three Eels in Winter, and Three
Green Geese in Summer; which would be but a mean Entertainment at Bed and Board
for a King in these Days.

All round this Town is a large Track of the richest Land in England, extended
for many Miles almost from Tame, on the Edge of Oxfordshire, to Leighton in
Bedfordshire, and is called from this very Town, The Vale of Aylesbury. It is
famous for fattening Cattle and Sheep, and it is frequent that they sell a Ram
here for Breeding for Ten Pounds. Here it was, that conversing with some
Gentlemen who understood Country Affairs, (for all Gentlemen hereabouts are
Graziers, though all the Graziers are not Gentlemen) they showed me one
remarkable enclosed Field of Pasture-ground, which was let for 1400 l. per
Ann. to a Grazier; and I knew the Tenant very well, whose Name was Houghton,
who confirmed the Truth of it.

The late Duke of Wharton had a very fine Seat at Winchenden, and another much
finer nearer Windsor, called Ubourn. But the Catastrophe that has befallen this
once flourishing and truly noble Family, is too melancholy, and too well known,
to be animadverted upon here.

Near this Place lies Chilton, famous for giving Birth to that steady Patriot
the Lord Chief Justice Crook, who strenuously opposed the arbitrary Measures of
levying Ship Money without the Authority of Parliament.

South-west of Aylesbury lies the Market Town of Tame, situated on the Side of
a Meadow, and almost encompassed with Rivulets. It consists of one long broad
Street. The Church is large and fine, in Form of a Cross; near which are the
Ruins of a Priory. A Pot of Roman Coin was found here about 15 Years since.

The Them joins the other Branch, named also the Thames, at Dorchester, in
Oxfordshire. In this Vale of Aylesbury flourished the great and ancient Family
of Hampden, for many Ages, in the Enjoyment of very large Estates, which, like
that of Wharton, are now dissipated.

At the Confluence of the Them and Isis, stands Dorchester, a Town of Note
among the ancient Romans, and in the Year 634 was made a Bishop's See, till
Remigius, in 1094, removed it to Lincoln. It has a very large Church, and a
fine large Stone Bridge, of great Length and Antiquity.

East of Aylesbury lies Ivingo, a pleasant Market Town situate among Woods, in
a Nook, or kind of Peninsula, which runs in between Bedfordshire and
Hertfordshire.

We passed forward North-west through Win^low, a small Market Town, to
Buckingham, the County-Town, situated in a low, fruitful Ground, surrounded by
the Ouze on all Sides but the North. It Is governed by a Bailiff and Capital
Burgesses. The Castle is now old and ruinous, and the Buildings of the Town are
also old. It has Three Stone Bridges over the River, and a well built Church,
and a Chapel built by Archbishop Becket, which is now used for a Free School.
Several Paper-mills are erected on the Ouze, and the Town is divided into two
Parts; one where the Church stands, and the other where the Townhall is. The
County Gaol, and Court, are kept here, and sometimes the Assizes.

Going still farther Northward, we come to the following Towns:

Stony Stratford is remarkable for standing on the Roman Causeway, called
Watling-street. It is an ancient and well-known Thoroughfare Town in the
Chester Road from London. It is large, and well built of Stone, has Two
Churches in it, and a Cross erected by Edward I. to the Honor of his Queen
Eleanor, and has a good Stone Bridge over the River. The principal Manufacture,
as well in the Neighborhood as in the Town, is Bone-lace.

Newport-pagnell is a large well built, populous Town, seated on the River
Ouze, over which it has Two large Stone Bridges. It carries on a great Trade in
Bone-lace, and the same Manufacture imploys also the neighboring Villages.

Oulney is a pretty good Town, where also is carried on a considerable
Manufacture of Bone-lace. It lies on the Extremity of the County.

We then fell down, back again, to Buckingham; and following the great Road
North-west, we came to Brackley, in Northamptonshire, situate on the River
Ouze, an ancient large corporate Town, in which are Two Parish Churches. It had
formerly a College, but it is now used for a Free School. It is governed by a
Mayor and Aldermen; and the Market used to be the Staple for Wool, in that
County; but it is now removed.

We next came to Banbury in Oxfordshire, on the River Charwell. It is a large
Market Town under the Government of a Mayor and Aldermen. It has a considerable
Trade, especially in Cheese, as all the Country round it is a rich feeding
Meadow-ground. Here the famous Make-king, Earl of Warwick, surprised the Earl
of Pembroke and his Brother, of the Party of Edward IV. and beheaded them.

On the Borders of this County Westward from this Town in Warwickshire, was the
famous Battle of Edgehill, fought between the Forces of King Charles I. and
those of the Parliament; where, though the Victory was dubious, yet the
Advantage, in the Event, inclined to the King's Side; for he thereupon took
Lord Says House at Broughton, and Banbury Castle, in which were 800 Foot, and
a Troop of Horse.

Edgehill lies at the West End of the Vale of Redhorse, and gives a most
extensive Prospect. It is steep to the North, and on the Top of it, at
Warmlington, is a strong large Entrenchment, said to be Danish, but looks more
like British. On the Descent of the Hill, between Radway and Keynton, was
fought the aforementioned Battle; here also they show where the Slain were
buried, and have a Tradition, that King John had a Palace, and resided at
Keyntor.

There was likewise, at Cropredy Bridge, an Encounter between the Royalists and
the Parliamentarians under Waller's Command.

West of Edgehill stands Shipton, a little Town, which has a very large Market.

Banbury gave Title of Earl to the noble Family of Knolles, which it seems
became extinct in 1632, when the last Earl died; but his Wife, marrying Nicolas
Lord Vaux, had a Son by him, who took the Name of Knolles, and the Title of
Earl; but was never summoned to Parliament, nor his Son after him, who is now
living, and commonly called Lord Banbury.

From hence we rode Southward to Deddington, a large Town, but a very small
Market. It is governed by a Bailiff, and did formerly return Members to
Parliament.

We turned a little East, and came to Bicester, a straggling indifferent Town;
but remarkable for having had once a famous City in its Neighborhood, called
Aldchester, long since passed over by the Plough; and where many Roman Coins,
Stones, and other Antiquities are found; which was undoubtedly the Maima of
Ravennas. Bicester is famous for excellent Malt Liquor, and has had formerly a
Religious House.

Islip lying directly in our Way to Oxford, we passed through it. It is
remarkable for the Birth of Edward the Confessor, and that Dr. South, as well
as other eminent Divines, were Ministers here. There are some Remains of an
ancient Palace still left.

From hence I came to Oxford, famous for several Things, but chiefly for its
being the most flourishing and considerable University in the World.

There has been a long Contest between the Two English Universities, about the
Priority of their Foundations, which perhaps will never be decided, and so I
pass it over.

It is out of Question, that in the Largeness of the Place, the Beauty of
Situation, the Number of Inhabitants, and of Scholars, Oxford has the
Advantage. In short, Oxford has several Things as an University, which
Cambridge has not; and Cambridge has several Things in it, which cannot be
found in Oxford. For Example,

The Theater, the Museum or Chamber of Rarities, the Bodleian Library, the
Number of Colleges, and the Magnificence of their Buildings, are on the Side of
Oxford; yet King's College Chapel, and College, is in favor of Cambridge,
being one of the finest Structures of its kind that can be seen; and the new
Buildings erected lately there, make that whole University still more
considerable in this way.

Oxford is a noble flourishing City, so possessed of all that can contribute to
make the Residence of the Scholars easy and comfortable, that no Spot of Ground
in England goes beyond it. It is situated in a delightful Plain, on the Bank of
a fine navigable River, in a plentiful Country, and at an easy Distance from
London.

The City itself is large, populous and rich: and as it is adorned by the most
beautiful Buildings of Colleges and Halls, it makes the most noble Figure of
any City of its Bigness in Europe.

We shall present our Readers with a List of the Colleges and Halls in this
famous City, with a brief History of them; but must observe, that as it would
exceed our Limits to give an Account of the particular Benefactions by which
their Revenues and Buildings are so splendidly augmented, we shall only mention
such of those Benefactions as have been conferred within so few Years back,
that they are not likely to be found in other Authors.

Of the COLLEGES and HALLS in OXFORD.
1. UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
IS situate near the East Gate of the City. It Is so very ancient, that we are
left in the dark, as to the Time of its Foundation. That it was in being before
the Year 721, is certain; but how much sooner, is not evident. King Alfred
could not be so properly called the Founder of this University, as the
Restorer, after the Danish Devastations. In the Year 1332, this College was
recovered into a State of Liberty and Independency, by a Sum of Money, which
William of Durham had left for the Maintenance of a Society of Students in
Oxford, from whom it was some time called Durham-hall; and by other
Benefactions it increased to what it now is. It has One Master, Twelve Fellows,
Ten Scholars, Two Exhibitioners, etc.

Before the very noble Benefaction of Dr. Radcliffe, it had one large beautiful
Quadrangle, or square Court; the South Side of which is divided into a handsome
Hall and Chapel. In a Niche before the said Quadrangle, is a Statue of the late
Queen Anne; and in a Niche on the Inside of the new Quadrangle, since built, is
that of Dr. Radcliffe; but not extraordinary either of them. The Additions to
this College will be mentioned in the Abstract we shall by-and-by give of Dr.
Radcliffe's Will.

The Visitors are the Vice Chancellor and Proctors.

2. BALIOL COLLEGE
Stands in the North Part of the Town, in the Suburbs. It was founded by John
Baliol, Father to the King of Scots of that Name, and Devorguilla his Wife. The
former began it about the Year 1262; the latter, after her Husband's Death,
completed and ended it, and gave it a Body of Statutes, which was afterward
enlarged by Philip Somerville, a great Benefactor to this College; but that
Body was afterward laid aside, and a more advantageous one substituted in its
Room, Ann. 1507, by the then Bishops of Winchester and Carlisle. This College
has One Master, Twelve Fellows, Thirteen Scholars, and Three Exhibitioners,
besides Four others founded by John Warner, Bishop of Rochester, for Scotsmen.

It has one large ancient Quadrangle, on the Northside of which is the Chapel,
and the Library, furnished with a very noble Collection of Books. Sir Thomas
Wendy gave his Study to it, a few Years ago, valued at 1500 l.

The Visitor is chosen by the College.

3. MERTON COLLEGE,
Situate on the South Side of the City, was founded by Walter of Merton, Bishop
of Rochester, Lord High Chancellor of England. The Society was first planted at
Maldern, in Surrey, in 1264; and he transferred it to Oxford, Ann. 1267. The
Founder framed his Statutes so admirably, that they were proposed as a Pattern
to the Founder of Peter-house, Cambridge, by King Edward I. This College has a
Warden, Twenty Fellows, Fourteen Portionists, or Post-masters, etc.

The Chapel is the Parish Church of St. John Baptist; it is a splendid old
Building. The inner large Court or Quadrangle of the College is very beautiful;
it has a well-furnished Library, and a fine Garden.

The Visitor is the Archbishop of Canterbury.

4. EXETER COLLEGE
Is situate on the West Side of the Schools, in the North Part of the Town. It
was founded Ann. 1316, by Walter Stapledon, Bishop of Exeter, Privy Counselor
to Edward II. and Lord Treasurer of England, and named Stapledon-Inn; and
called Exeter College afterward, by Edmund Stafford Bishop of Exeter, who was
a Benefactor to it. It has a Rector, Twenty-three Fellowships, etc.

It is one large Quadrangle, now made 0regular and uniform by the new
Buildings, to which the most Reverend Dr. Narcissus Marsh, Archbishop of
Armagh, formerly a Fellow of it, contributed 1400 l. It has a very noble Front,
over the Gate of which is a splendid Tower.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Exeter.

5. ORIEL COLLEGE,
Situate on the South Side of the Town, was at first called St. Mary's College,
and King's College, and was founded Anno 1324, by King Edward II. His Son
Edward III. enlarging the Revenue of it with a rich Message, called Le Oriele,
it took the Name of Oriel College. The same Prince annexed to it for a
Retiring-place, in case of Pestilence, etc. St. Bartholomew's Hospital near
Oxford. It has a Provost, 18 Fellows, and Twelve Exhibitioners.

It consists of one handsome regular Quadrangle.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Lincoln.

5. QUEEN'S COLLEGE
Is situate near the Parish Church of St. Peter's in the East. It was founded
Anno 1340, by Robert Eglesfield, Chaplain or Confessor to Philippa, Consort of
King Edward III. in Honor of whom he called it Queen's College, recommending
it to her Royal Patronage and Protection, and to that of all future Queens of
England. There were to be a Provost and Twelve Fellows, out of regard to the
Number of Christ and his Apostles, and Seventy Scholars, in Allusion to the
Number of the Seventy Disciples; but he died before his Design was completed.
The Society consists of a Provost, Fourteen Fellows, Seven Scholars, Two
Chaplains, Taberders, whose Number is not always the same, etc.

Sir Joseph Williamson was a special Benefactor to this College, of late times,
as Edward III. his Queen, Archbishop Grindall, and King Charles I. were before.
As also was its late Provost, Dr. William Lancaster, in whose Time were begun
those noble and extensive Buildings, which are so justly admired; one Side
whereof, in which are the Library, the Provost's, and other spacious and
stately Lodgings, is 327 Feet long, supported by a Piazza, and adorned with
Statues, etc. The Library is long and lofty, very magnificent without, and
well-furnish'd within. The new Chapel and Hall, lately finished, answer the
other Side of the College.

On the 24th of May 1733, Arthur Onslow, Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons,
and Chancellor to her late Majesty Queen Caroline, transmitted to the Provost
1000 l. from her Majesty, as Queen Consort, and Patroness thereof, toward
finishing the new Buildings; and her Majesty's Statue is erected there under a
kind of Temple, supported by Pillars; but not to the Advantage which the Royal
Munificence, and the good Intentions of the College, deserved.

And in the Year 1739, we are assured, that Mr. Michael of Richmond has left an
Estate of 700 l. per Annum to this College, the Income whereof is to finish the
East End of the Buildings of the said College on the Plan laid down for that
Purpose, and after this to commence a Foundation of Eight Fellows, at 50 l. per
Ann. each, and as many Scholars, at 25 l. per Ann. each, to be elected from the
whole University; those on the present Foundation to be excluded. The
Fellowships to be vacated after Ten Years Enjoyment; as they are at Wadham,
Worcester, and Pembroke Colleges after Twenty Years.

The Visitor of this College is the Archbishop of York.

7. NEW COLLEGE,
Situate on the North-east Part of the Town, was at first called, The College
of the Blessed Virgin Mary; it was founded Anno 1386, by William of Wickham,
Bishop of Winchester, and Lord High Chancellor, who also founded the College at
Winchester. It has a Warden, 70 Fellows and Scholars, Ten Chaplains, Three
Clerks, Sixteen Choiristers, etc.

Great Additions have been made to the Beauty and Buildings of this College:
besides a third Story that was raised upon the Two original ones of the great
Court, at the Society's Expense, Anno 1674, they have enlarged their Buildings
toward the Garden, with two stately and uniform Wings, extending to the
Garden; their Chapel is most magnificent, solemn and splendid, with an Organ
and Choir. They have a very lofty Tower, with a Ring of fine Bells; and under
that and the West End of the Chapel, a very handsome square Cloister, and a
little Garden within it. Their Library is well furnished with Books and
Manuscripts, and their great Garden laid out in Form. The Front of it is a
Range of Iron Palisadoes, and a Gate of exquisite Work; and at the South End
they have a Bowling-green. Their Hall, which is at the End of the Chapel,
answers to the Magnificence of the rest.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Winchester.

8. LINCOLN COLLEGE,
Situate in the Middle of the City, was founded in the Year 1427, by Richard
Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln; who dying before it was completed, Thomas de
Rotherham, Bishop of Lincoln, afterward Lord High Chancellor, and Archbishop
of York, finished it Anno 1475. It has a Rector, Twelve Fellows, Two Chaplains,
etc.

It has Two small ancient Quadrangles, not very regular. The Chapel is
beautiful, and built by Archbishop Williams; the Windows are very curiously
painted.

The Lord Crew, Bishop of Durham, ordered to take Place from Michaelmas 1717,
the following Benefactions to this College; viz. 1. Twenty Pounds a Year to the
Headship, and 10 l. a Year to each of the Twelve Fellowships for ever. 2. Ten
Pounds per Ann. for ever to the Curates of Four Churches belonging to this
College. 3. He made up the Bible-clerk's Office, and Eight Scholarships, which
were before very mean, 10 l. per Ann. each for ever. And, 4. Settled, to
commence from Lady Day 1718, 20 l. per Ann. each on Twelve Exhibitioners for
ever.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Lincoln.

9. ALL SOULS COLLEGE.
Its Front faces the High Street. It was sounded by Henry Chichley, Archbishop
of Canterbury, for offering up Prayers for all those who fell in the Wars of
Henry V. in France. It has a Warden, Forty Fellows, Two Chaplains, Three
Clerks, Six Choiristers, etc.

Before the new Buildings, it had Two Courts, the larger a regular and stately
Edifice. The Chapel was very august and solemn: but the College now appears
with a new Face.

Colonel Christopher Codrington, Governor of the Leeward Islands, bequeathed to
this College 10,000 l. 6,000 of which he ordered to be laid out in building a
Library, and the other 4,000 l. in Books for it, and bequeathed his own Library
to it besides. This Library is 200 Feet long within the Walls, and 32 Feet and
half broad; it has Eleven large Windows to the South, and a Window of 17 Feet
wide at the East End, and one at the West of the same Dimensions. It is a fine
Gothic Structure, built so in Conformity to the Chapel. Against the Entrance,
in a Niche, is the Statue of the Benefactor, with a suitable Inscription to his
Honor; which he forbid to be mentioned on his Monument; on which is only cut
the Word CODRINGTON.

Besides what will be mentioned by-and-by of the Benefactions of Dr. George
Clarke, in the Abstract we shall give of his Will; that Gentleman in his
Lifetime adorned the Chapel of this College with a magnificent Marble
Altar-piece, rich Furniture for the Communion Table of crimson Velvet, trimmed
with Gold Lace and Fringe, Books, and Candlesticks, etc.

Henry Portman, Esquire also placed at the East End a clothed Resurrection Piece,
painted by Sir James Thornhill. And the Hon. Doddington Greville, Esquire was at
the Expense of painting finely the Ceiling-piece. And there are other
additional Ornaments, which render it worthy of the Attention of the Curious.

A very handsome Monument was erected Anno 1739, in the Chapel of this College,
with an Inscription upon it, in Honor of their worthy Benefactor Dr. Clarke
aforementioned.

The Visitor is the Archbishop of Canterbury.

10. MAGDALEN COLLEGE,
Situate without the Eastgate of the Town, was founded Anno 1458, by William
Patten, alias Wainfleet, Bishop of Winchester, and Lord High Chancellor. It has
a President, Forty Fellows, a Schoolmaster, Thirty Scholars called Demies, an
Usher, Three Public Readers, Four Chaplains, Eight Clerks, Sixteen
Choiristers, an Organist, etc.

When the new Buildings to this College, which they are now carrying on, are
finished, and which will form a stately Quadrangle, it will be one of the
finest in the University; and they have made a great Progress in them.

It had before Two Quadrangles, the innermost of which is regular, and consists
of a Library and Lodgings, supported by a spacious Cloister. The Chapel and the
great Tower, as also the little one in the West End of the inner Quadrangle,
and the Hall, are very lofty and magnificent. They have an exceeding well
furnished Library, to which Colonel Codrington gave lately 10,000 l. and a good
Collection of Books. Its Water-walks, as they are called, make this College
highly delightful; they are an almost triangular Gravel-walk, fenced with
Hedges and Trees on both Sides, surrounded on every Part with a running Stream,
and enclosing a large Meadow. Their Grove is also a fine spacious Extent of
Ground, planted with stately Vista's of Trees, one Part of which is laid out in
a handsome Bowling-green.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Winchester.

11. BRAZEN-NOSE COLLEGE
Is situate in the middle of the Town, where stood an Hall of the same Name,
and a monstrous Nose. It was founded by William Smyth, Bishop of Lincoln,
Counselor to Prince Arthur; and by Sir Richard Sutton Knight. It was begun in
1509, and finished 1522. It has a Principal, Twenty Fellows, Thirty-three
Scholars, and Exhibitions, etc.

It consists of Two very handsome Quadrangles; in the lesser of which are the
Chapel and Library, and under them a wide and pleasant Cloister, very compactly
and elegantly built.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Lincoln.

12. CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE
Stands on the South Side of the Town. It was founded Anno 1516, by Richard
Fox, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Privy Seal to the Kings Henry VII. and VIII.
Hugh Oldham, Bishop of Exeter, gave 6000 Marks toward the Building, besides
Lands toward endowing it. It has a President, Twenty Fellows, Twenty Scholars,
Two Chaplains, etc.

The Structure of the first Court is ancient, but within-side very regular and
handsome. The Library contains a noble Treasure of Books. Their Hall was
beautified a few Years ago, and their Gardens, though small, are kept very neat.
But the most spendid Part of this College is the stately Row of Lodgings
erected a few Years ago by their late President, Dr. Thomas Turner, who
moreover gave them his numerous and valuable Collection of Books.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Winchester.

12. CHRIST CHURCH.
This College takes up a vast Extent of Ground, and stands on the South Side of
the City. It was begun to be founded Anno 1515, by Cardinal Wolsey; but on his
Disgrace coming into the King's Hands, and thence called King's College, his
Majesty, that he might not seem to found any Part of his Fame on another's
Bottom, called it Christ-Church, and made it an Episcopal See, Anno 1546.
Afterward, Anno 1563, he joined to it Canterbury College, now called Canterbury
Quadrangle, and Peckwater-Inn, now called Peckwater-Court. However, the
Buildings lay very incomplete for almost 100 Years after, when Dr. Bryan Duppa,
and Dr. Samuel Fell, Deans of this House, and afterward Dr. John Fell, Bishop
of Oxford, Son of the latter, at different times, by the Help of many generous
Benefactors, brought the Buildings to surprising Perfection.

This Foundation is numerous and magnificent, has a Dean, Eight Canons, 101
Students, Eight Chaplains, Eight Singing-men, Eight Choristers, and a Teacher
of Music for them, an Organist, a Schoolmaster and Usher, Forty
Grammar-scholars, a Virger, etc. There is also belonging to it an Hospital in
St. Alat's Parish, which has Twenty-four Poor. In the stately Tower, in the
Front of the Gate, hangs the great Bell, called Tom; which was removed thither
out of the Steeple of the Cathedral, by Bishop Fell. It is Seven Feet and an
Inch Diameter, and Five Feet Nine Inches high; and weighs near 17,000 Pounds
Weight. This Bell is tolled every Night 101 Strokes, agreeable to the Number of
Students in the College, to give Warning for shutting up the Gates in the
Colleges and Halls in the University.

The Buildings of this College are very large, august and splendid. The great
Quadrangle has a wide and handsome Terrace round it, and a Fountain in the
middle. Peckwater-Quadrangle is finely rebuilt. Canterbury and the Chaplains
Quadrangles are also convenient Edifices. The Cathedral is lofty, but no
elegant Structure; the Hall and Library high and spacious; and the latter
contains a noble Collection of Books, to which Dr. Aldrich, late Dean, made a
fine Addition. It is impossible, in my narrow Limits, to do Justice to this
noble College, which is an University of itself. I shall only add, That
Archbishop Wake, lately deceased, left to it his Library, and a large Cabinet
of Medals, computed to be worth between 8 and 10,000 l. besides other Bequests.

The Visitor is the King.

14. TRINITY COLLEGE
Stands in the North Suburbs of the Town, where once stood Durham College,
founded Anno 1350, by Thomas Hatfield, Bishop of Durham. At the Dissolution of
Abbeys, it running the common Fate, Sir Thomas Pope, of Hertfordshire,
purchased it of those who had got a Grant of it from King Edward VI. and
obtained a Royal License to turn it into a College, which accordingly he did
Anno 1550, by this Name. It has a President, Twelve Fellows, Twelve Scholars,
etc.

It has Two Quadrangles. In the first are the Chapel, the Hall, and the
Library. The Chapel was rebuilt Anno 1693, and the Work of it, both within and
without, is wonderfully elegant. The Altarpiece is of Cedar inlaid: the Rails
and Screen of Cedar, and all adorned with exquisite Carving. The Roof is
enriched with Fretwork, and an admirable Piece of Painting, representing our
Savior's Ascension. The Pavement, from the Screen to the Altar, is of black
and white Marble. On the East Side of the College is a delightful Garden; and
at the Entrance and End of the great Walk that goes through it, very noble Iron
Gates, which have a Prospect open to the whole East Side of the College.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Winchester.

15. ST. JOHN BAPTIST'S COLLEGE
Is situated in the North Suburbs. It was founded Anno 1555, by Sir Thomas
White, Lord Mayor of London, in the Place where stood, before the Dissolution,
St. Bernard's College, built by Archbishop Chichley. It has a President, Fifty
Fellows and Scholars, an Organist, and Singing-men, Four Choristers, etc.

It has Two spacious and uniform Quadrangles. The inner Court was built by
Archbishop Laud, and is very elegant. The East and West-sides of it are
supported by noble Piazzas, in the middle of which are Two Portals finely
fronted with Pillars and Carving. In one of these Fronts stands a curious
Brazen Statue of King Charles I. and in the other of his Queen. Their Chapel,
which has an Organ and Choir in it, is very handsome. The Library takes up the
East and South Sides of the new Quadrangle, and is well stored with Books,
Manuscripts, and valuable Curiosities. The Hall is neat, and adorned with good
Pictures. They have also a Grove, Walks, and Grass-plots, etc.

Dr. Sherard, formerly Consul at Smyrna, who died August 12. 1728, left his
Library and Curiosities, which are very valuable, to this College, besides
another considerable Legacy.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Winchester.

16. JESUS COLLEGE
Is situate in St. Michael's Parish. It was begun, Anno 1571, by Hugh Price,
Professor of Common Law in this University, Prebendary of Rochester, etc. who
designed it particularly for the Benefit of his Countrymen of Wales; but the
Endowment that Gentleman made of it, sinking into nothing, Queen Elizabeth,
Anno 1589, gave another Charter at the Society's Request; and having styled
herself their Foundress in the first, it is frequently attributed to her. It
has met with so many generous Contributors, that it is in a flourishing State,
and has a Principal, Sixteen Fellows, Sixteen Scholars, Eight Exhibitioners,
etc.

It has Two large handsome Quadrangles, the innermost very regular and uniform.

The Visitor is the Earl of Pembroke.

17. WADHAM COLLEGE.
Stands in the North Skirts of the Town. Its Founders were Nicolas Wadham, of
Merefield, in Somersetshire, Esquire and Dorothy his Wife, Daughter of Sir William
Petre, Knight, Privy-counsellor to Queen Elizabeth. He formed the Design, and
died; and she, in Compliance with his Deathbed Request, completed it. It was
begun Anno 1609, and finished 1613. It has a Warden, Fifteen Fellows, Fifteen
Scholars, Two Chaplains, Two Clerks, etc.

This College has one large, regular, beautiful Quadrangle. The Chapel stands
out behind the Quadrangle to the East, regularly answering to the Library; and
its Windows are finely painted. They have a large Garden, handsomely laid out.

The Visitor is the Bishop of Bath and Wells.

18. PEMBROKE COLLEGE
Is situate on the South Side of the Town. It was formerly an Hall, and called
Broadgate-hall. It was made a College by the Munificence of Thomas Tesdale, Esquire
and Richard Wrightwicke, B. D. with the License of King James I. Anno 1624. The
Foundation of the first consisted of Seven Fellows and Six Scholars, the other
of Three Fellows and Four Scholars. It had its Name from the Earl of Pembroke,
then Chancellor.

It has one handsome Quadrangle, the Front of which is a regular neat Piece of
Building. A pleasant Garden also belongs to it.

The Visitor is the Chancellor of the University.

19. WORCESTER COLLEGE.
This College was lately called Gloucester-hall: After the Dissolution, Sir
Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, built it, for the Purpose of Education, and
called it St. John Baptist-hall, though still it retained the Name of
Gloucester-hall, till it acquired a collegiate Endowment by the noble
Munificence of Sir Thomas Cook, of Astely, in Worcestershire.

It had, before the late Dr. George Clarke's Will in its Favor, of which we
shall give an Abstract by-and-by, a Provost, Six Fellows, Six Scholars, etc.

The Buildings lately added, now adding, and the fine Additions left to it by
the said Gentleman, will give this College which had been in no very good
Condition for some time, a very advantageous Figure in the University; and it
already makes a very stately and splendid Appearance, and will be enabled to
make a still better; for on the 2d of October 1740, died at her Seat near
Gloucester, Mrs. Eaton, one of the Three Coheiresses of Dr. Birom Eaton,
formerly Principal of this College, when Gloucester-hall. This Lady has left a
very great Estate, partly to her Relations, and partly to Acts of Munificence,
such as the Foundation of Six Fellowships in Worcester College, for the Support
of which, and the erecting a Pile of Building for them, an Estate of 700 l. per
Annum is bequeathed. The Corpse of this Lady was honored by the Attendance of
the Vice Chancellor, and all the Heads of Houses, in the University.

20. HERTFORD COLLEGE.
This is a College of a very late Erection indeed; for it was but in Sept.
1740, that his Majesty's Royal Charter passed the Broad Seal, to erect
HART-HALL, as it was before called, into a College; to consist of a Principal,
as before; Four Seniors, and Eight Junior Fellows: so that at last the Reverend
Dr. Richard Newton, the worthy Principal, after an Opposition of several Years,
given by some who ought to have assisted his generous View, has obtained a
Point which lay very near his Heart: though not till several of his worthy
Friends (who would have contributed largely to its Endowment, had it been
effected in their Time) are demised, which must necessarily be a great
Disadvantage to the good Design.

This College, as it now must be called, stands in the Parish of St. Peter's in
the East. It is supposed to have its Name from the first Syllable of Elias
Hartford's Surname, who was once Owner of it. Walter Stapledon, Bishop of
Exeter, having bought it, converted it, Anno 1314, into an Academical Seminary,
by the Name of Stapledon-hall, and endowed it with Maintenance for Twelve
Scholars, which he removed afterward to Exeter College, on building the same;
and then this Hall resumed its own Name. It has a Stipend or Exhibition
belonging to it, of more than 16 l. per Annum.

It consists of one Quadrangle, not very regular, and the present worthy
Principal has made several, and had projected still greater Additions to it,
which would have taken place long ago, but for the Reasons above given.

These are the Twenty Colleges, of which at present this famous University
consists. There are besides Five Halls, which are Places unendow'd, though not
destitute of Exhibitions. The Students at these subsist at their own Charge,
are under the Government of a Principal and Vice-Principal, and pay the former
for their Lodging, etc. The Principals are nominated by the Chancellor, except
the Principal of Edmund-hall. Their Visitor is the Chancellor.

I will give a brief Account of each of these. And

1. ALBAN HALL.
It is situate on the South Side of the Town, and had its Name from Robert St.
Alban, once Proprietor of the Place. It became Academical about the Year 1230.

The Front makes but a tolerable Appearance; but the Inside falls short even of
that.

2. EDMUND HALL
Is situate in the Parish of St. Peter's in the East; and has its Name probably
from one Edmund, a Citizen of Oxford, Proprietor of the Place. Anno 1557, it
was purchased by Queen's College, and converted to its present Use.

It makes one Quadrangle; on the East Side of which stands a very neat Chapel
and Library, built some Years since by the Reverend Mr. Stephen Penton, its
Principal.

3. ST. MARY HALL,
Situate in the Parish of St. Mary, has its Name either from that Church, which
with this Hall, came to belong to Oriel College, by a Grant of King Edward II.
Anno 1325, or from Oriel College, heretofore called St. Mary Hall.

It consists of one Quadrangle, not very regular. Dr. John Hudson, Principal,
built here handsome Lodgings at his own Expense.

4. NEW-INN HALL
Is situate in the North-west Part of the Town. It was called Trilleck-hall,
from Two Brothers Proprietors of it, of that Name; one Bishop of Hereford, and
the other Bishop of Rochester. Afterward the Founder of New College bought it,
and gave it to that College, Anno 1392, and from that time it was called
New-Inn Hall.

The Building is ancient and irregular.

5. ST. MARY MAGDALEN HALL,
Situate near Magdalen College, was built by William Wainfleet, Bishop of
Winchester, Anno 1480, for a Grammar School. But it having Room for Academical
Students, and some Additions having been made to it, it became an Academical
Society. It enjoys Fifteen Exhibitions; Five of 8 l. per Annum, and Ten of 10 l.

The Front is the most considerable Part of it; but it has a pretty good
Library.



What Additions have been made to some of the Colleges, by means of the Wills
of Dr. Ratcliffe and Dr. Clarke, which I have just referred to, will, to avoid
Repetition where I am so pressed for Room, be best seen in Abstracts of the
said Wills, which may serve as a Supplement to the foregoing Accounts of the
Colleges. Dr. Ratcliff's is to the following Effect:

He left an Establishment of 600 l. per Ann. for Two young Physicians to
travel, to be enjoyed by them for Ten Years; after which, or in case of Death,
others were to succeed them, for ever.

The Remainder of the Estate charged to secure this annual Sum, he left to
University College, Oxon, for purchasing perpetual Advowsons for the Members of
the same.

To St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, he left 500 l. per Ann. for ever,
toward mending their Diet, as his Will expresses it; and 100 l. per Ann. more
for ever, for buying of Linen.

Five hundred Pounds, to build the Front of University College answerable to
what was before built, and for building the Master's Lodgings therein, and
Chambers for his Two traveling Fellows.

Forty thousand Pounds for building a Library in Oxon, and purchasing the
Houses between St. Mary's and the Schools in Cat-street, for that Purpose; and
when built, he bequeathed 150 l. per Annum to the Library Keeper, and 100 l. a
Year for ever to buy Books for the same.

He charged all his real and personal Estate with the Payment of these great
Benefactions, and other large Family Bequests; and willed that the Residue
should be applied to such charitable Purposes as his Executors should think
best.

He willed that 100 l. a Year for ever should be applied to keep in Repair the
said Library, to commence Payment in Thirty Years after his Death.

All the Livings in his Gift, he willed, should be bestowed on Members of
University College, and if wanting there, to Fellows of Lincoln College.

To his Executors, who were William Bromley, Esquire Sir George Beaumont, Bart.
Thomas Sclater, Esquire and Anthony Keck, Esquire all since deceased, he left 500 l.
each; and a Power of nominating Two Successors to each of them, as they
respectively died.



His Will bears Date Sept. the 13th 1714; and the Doctor died Nov. 1. the same
Year.

We shall now add, That every thing being done in pursuance of this Will, which
the Time since his Death would permit, it may be easily conceived what a
glorious Addition the Buildings finished, and finishing by its Direction, must
be to this renowned University.

George Clarke, LL. D. was several Years Representative in Parliament for the
University of Oxford. and died October 12. 1736. Of whose Will take the
following Abstract:

He bequeathed to the Library Keeper of Worcester College, 10 l. per Ann. and
to a young Gownsman, to attend to reach down Books, 5 l.

Four thousand Pounds for Building Nine Chambers at Worcester College, and
finishing the Chapel and Hall there; Six of these Chambers to be for Six
additional Fellows of that College, who are to have 45 l. each per Ann. the
other Three to be for so many additional Scholars, at 25 l. per Ann. each.

Fifty Pounds per Ann. to be laid out in Books for the said College Library.

He orders his Trustees, as soon as they can, to purchase the Ground adjoining
to Worcester College, for enlarging its Site and Conveniences.

To the University he gives the Whole-length Pictures of King William and Queen
Mary, to be hung in the Gallery over the Schools; the Half-lengths of Lord
Chancellor Clarendon, and his Son the Earl of Rochester, to be hung in the
Delegates Room at the Clarendon Printing House; and an Original, the only one,
of Dr. John Radcliffe, to be hung in his Library, when built.

Also he bequeaths to the University all his Medals, and several other valuable
Curiosities, which he wills may be kept in the Musaeum Ashmoleanum.

To the Worcester College Library, all his printed Books, and Prints, and such
Manuscripts as his Trustees shall think fit: also to the same, all the Designs
of Inigo Jones for Whitehall, which he takes notice are very valuable.

To the same College he gives a large two-ear'd Silver Cup, double-gilt,
weighing 112 Ounces

To the Warden and College of All Souls, whereof he was Fellow, all the
Furniture in his College-chamber, and all that in the Lodgings he had built
there, with his Prints therein, and Pictures over the Doors and Chimney-pieces,
the Ceiling-piece over the Staircase, Hercules in the Garden, and St. Luke in
two Columns, to be used in the Place they now are by the said Warden, and his
Successors.

To the Use of the Fellows of the said College, the Rooms under the great
Dining Room, the great Dining Room itself, and the great Bedchamber, and
Garrets over them.

To All Souls College he bequeaths also his 4th Turn of presenting to the
Vicarage of Yarnton, for the Benefit of such of its Chaplains as have but a
slender Provision; and 20 l. among the College-servants.

An Augmentation, as it shall rise out of one of his Estates, to the Allowance
of the Two Chaplains of All Souls, whom he hopes the Society will appoint their
Librarians.

To Queen's College he gives the Heads of Six Queens of England.



You will refer, Sir, to the Accounts I have already given of the Colleges, and
to the above Abstracts of Dr. Radcliff's, and Dr. Clarke's Wills, and you will
have a View of the State of these Colleges, even when the Works are finished as
directed by those Gentlemen, and which will hold for Years to come without
material Alteration, except in case of new Benefactions.

I shall now give a Summary of what a Traveller may observe further in Oxford,
en passant; and refer the more curious Inquirer to the Histories of the Place,
for a more ample and particular Account, than I have room to give.

Besides these Colleges and Halls, there are some public Buildings, which make
a most glorious Appearance: The first and greatest of all is the Theater, a
Building not to be equaled by any thing of its Kind and Bigness in the World.
Sir Christopher Wren was the Director of the Work. Archbishop Sheldon paid for
it, and gave it to the University: there is a world of Decoration in the Front
of it, and more beautiful Additions, by way of Ornament; and the inside Roof,
finely painted and decorated, is never enough to be admired.

The Bodleian Library is an Ornament in itself worthy of this famous
University. I have not Room for its History at large, but shall briefly
observe, that the first public Library in Oxford was erected in Durham
College, now Trinity, by Richard Bishop of Durham, Lord Treasurer to Edward
III. it was afterward joined to another, founded by Cobham Bishop of
Winchester, and both enlarged by the Bounty of Humphry Duke of Gloucester,
Founder of the Divinity Schools. But these Libraries being lost, and the Books
embezzled, and the Place where they were deposited, quite ruinous, Sir Thomas
Bodley, a wealthy and learned Knight, having, at a vast Expense, collected
Books and Manuscripts from all Parts of the World, placed them in the old
Library-room, built by the good Duke Humphry.

This great Work was brought to an Head the 8th of Nov. 1602, and has continued
increasing by the Benefactions of great and learned Men to this Day; such as
Archbishop Laud, the Earl of Pembroke, Oliver Cromwell, Seldom, Digby, and
other great Names.

Over it is a spacious Gallery, adorned with Pictures of Founders, Benefactors,
etc. and with the antique Marbles, which were the learned Part of the
inexhaustible Collection of the Earl of Arundel, which have been illustrated
with the accurate Comments of Seldom and Prideaux. Here are some of the most
valuable Greek Monuments now in the World. Over the Porch, upon an handsome
Pedestal of black Marble, stands the Brass Effigies of the Earl of Pembroke,
their noble and generous Chancellor, given by the late Earl, molded by Rubens.
Also a very large Collection of Greek, Roman, British, Saxon, English, and
other Coins, presented by Sir T. Roe, and other Hands. And that indefatigable
and learned Collector of Books, and valuable Manuscripts, Dr. Tanner, Bishop of
St. Asaph, who died December 12. 1735, bequeathed the most curious Part of his
fine Collection to this noble Library.

In the Year 1740, by the Death of Mrs. Crew, Relict of George Crew, Esquire an
Estate of 80 l. per Annum is fallen to the Head Librarian's Post, which before
was very inconsiderable, though it required a constant Residence. This was a
Legacy of the late Right Reverend and Right Honorable Nathanael Crew, Lord
Bishop of Durham, who was such a good Benefactor to Lincoln College as we have
mentioned.

Other curious Things in Oxford are, the Schools, (which are now beautifully
repaired, and the Names and Arms of old Benefactors renewed and repainted) the
Museum, the Chamber of Rarities, the Collection of Coins, Medals, Pictures, and
ancient Inscriptions, the Printing House, the Physick-garden, the University
and other Churches, the Convocation-house, etc. all worthy of a particular
Description, had I room to give it.

The University is governed by a Chancellor, chosen by Scrutiny or Collection
of Votes; he is generally one of the first Noblemen of the Kingdom.

By a High-steward, chosen by the Chancellor.

By a Vice Chancellor, who must be one of the Heads of a College, recommended
to the University by the Chancellor.

By Two Proctors, chosen annually by Turn out of the Colleges.

The other Officers are the public Orator, and the Keeper of the Archives,
Beadles, Virger, etc.

But though I have said so much of the University, I must not quite forget the
City. Let me then observe, That before Baliol College they show the Stone in
the Street, which marks the Place of the Martyrdom of Archbishop Cranmer and
Bishop Ridley, then upon the Banks of the Ditch, without the City Walls, which
went along where the Theater now stands.

Beyond the River, stood Oseny Abbey, founded 1129. Upon the Bridge is a Tower,
called Friar Bacon 's Study, from that famous and learned Monk.

Over another Bridge, on the Isis, we went to see Ruleigh Abbey, where some
Ruins still remain, turned to a common Brewhouse.

Of the Castle remains a square high Tower, by the Riverside, and a lofty
Mount, or Keep, walled at Top, with a Staircase going downward.

The White-friers was a Royal Palace, and near a Green called Beaumonds, they
showed us the Bottom of a Tower upon the Spot where the valiant Richard I. was
born.

Without the Town, on all Hands, are to be seen the Fortifications erected in
the late Civil Wars.

As to the City, though the Colleges make up Two-thirds of it, and are still
elbowing for more Room, yet it is large and regular, the Streets are spacious,
clean, and strait; the Place pleasant and healthful, the Inhabitants genteel
and courteous; the Churches many and elegant, especially Allhallows; and taking
it altogether, and including the Grandeur and Endowment of the Colleges, their
Chapels, Halls, Libraries, Quadrangles, Piazza's, Gardens, Walks, Groves, etc.
it must be considered as the first University in the World, as I have before
mentioned.

On the Left Hand, on the other Side the River, the last Remains of Godstow
Nunnery are situated among the sweet Meadows. Here fair Rosamond had a
remarkably fine Tomb; but before the Dissolution, scarce could her Ashes rest,
whose Beauty was thought guilty, as one says, even after Death.

I cannot leave Oxford without making one Observation, with regard to those who
insist, that it was to the Piety of the Popish Times which we owe the first
Institution of the University itself, the Foundation and Endowment of the
particular Colleges, and the Encouragement arising to Learning from thence: all
which I readily grant; but would have them remember too, that though those
Foundations stood, as they tell us, 800 Years, and that the Reformation, as
they say, is not above 200 Years standing, yet Learning has more increased, and
the Universities flourished more; more great Scholars been produced, greater
Libraries been raised, and more fine Buildings been erected, in these 200
Years, than in the 800 Years of Popery; and I might add, as many great
Benefactions have been given, notwithstanding this very momentous Difference,
that the Protestants Gifts are merely Acts of Charity to the World, and Acts of
Bounty, in Reverence to Learning, and learned Men, without the grand Incitement
of the State of their own Souls, and those of their Fathers, which were to be
prayed out of Purgatory, and get a ready Admission into Heaven.

Oxford was for many Years advantaged by the Neighborhood of the Royal Court,
while several Kings of England, being taken with the fine Situation of
Woodstock, made their Palace there the Place of their Summer Retreat.

Dr. Plott allows it to have been a Royal House ever since King Alfred; and a
Manuscript in the Cotton Library confirms it; and that King Henry I. was not
the Founder of it, but only rebuilt it. And as for Henry II. who kept his fair
Rosamond in it, he made only some Additions to it, for the Entertainment and
Security of his beautiful Mistress. Notwithstanding which, the Queen, having
got Access to her in the King's Absence, as Tradition informs us, dispatched
her by Poison.

When I was first at Woodstock some Years ago, I saw part of the old Palace,
and the famous Labyrinth of fair Rosamond; but now these are destroyed. Her
Bathing-place or Well, as it is called, is left; a quadrangular Receptacle of
pure Water, immediately flowing from a little Spring under the Hill,
overshadow'd with Trees; near which are some Ruins of Walls and Arches. King
Ethelred called a Parliament here. It has been a Royal Seat, as I have said,
from most ancient Times. Henry I. enclosed the Park. Across this Valley was a
remarkably fine Echo, that would repeat a whole Hexameter, but impaired by the
Removal of these Buildings. A stately Bridge, or Rialto rather, now leads along
the grand Approach to the present Castle: one Arch is above 190 Feet Diameter;
a Cascade of Water falls from a Lake down some stone Steps into the Canal that
runs under it.

The new Palace of Blenheim is a vast and magnificent Pile of Building; a Royal
Gift to the high Merit of the invincible Duke of Marlborough. The lofty Hall is
painted by Sir James Thornhill, the Ceiling by la Guerre. The Rooms are finely
enriched with Marble Chimney-pieces and Furniture, but more by the incomparable
Paintings and Hangings, which latter represent the principal Glories of the
Duke's Life. Among the Pictures are many of Rubens's best and largest Pieces;
that celebrated one of himself, his Wife and Child, among others: Vandyke's
King Charles I. upon a Dun Horse, of great Value: and the famous Loves of the
Gods, by Titian; a Present from the King of Sardinia. The Gallery is worthy
Admiration, lined with Marble Pilasters, and whole Pillars of one Piece,
supporting a most costly and curious Entablature, excellent for Matter and
Workmanship, the Window-frames of the same, and a Basement of black Marble
quite round. Before it, is stretched out a most agreeable Prospect of the fine
Woods beyond the great Valleys. What is of the most elegant Taste in the whole
House, is of the Duchess's own Designing. The Chapel is equal to the rest. The
Garden is a very large Plot of Ground taken out of the Park, and may still be
said to be a Part of it, well-contriv'd by sinking the outer Wall into a Fosse,
to give a View quite round, and take off the odious Appearance of Confinement
and Limitation to the Eye. It is within well adorned with Walks, Greens,
Espaliers, and Vista's, to diverse remarkable Objects, that offer themselves in
the circumjacent Country. Over the Pediment of this Front of the House is a
curious Marble Busto of Lewis XIV. bigger than the Life, taken from the Gate of
the Citadel of Tournay. The Orangery is a pretty Room. Near the Gate of the
Palace is the House where our famous Chaucer was born. At the Entrance into the
Castle from the Town, her Grace has erected a noble triumphal Arch, to the
Memory of the Duke; and has set up a vast Obelisk in the principal Avenue of
the Park, whereon is inscribed the best Account of the Duke's Actions and
Character, that ever was penned in the same Compass; and if done by the
masterly Hand of that extraordinary Genius, to whom I have heard it attributed,
must be a double Triumph to the Memory of the Duke, since his Merits extorted
so noble a Testimony from a Person who was once engaged in Measures quite
opposite to those, which derived upon his Grace so exalted a Reputation, and
who was thought to be at that Time one of his principal Adversaries.

The Inscription does so much Honor to the Memory of the Duke, and at the same
time to the British Nation, that I cannot deny to myself the Pleasure of
inserting it here, as follows: The Castle of Blenheim was founded by Queen
ANNE, French and Bavarians, Blenheim, Danube, Who by Wisdom, Justice, Candor,
and Address, Europe; France, Europe. Philip, a Grandson of the House of France,
united to the Interests, directed by the Policy, supported by the Arms of that
Crown, was placed on the Throne of Spain. King WILLIAM III. beheld this
formidable Union, of Two great, and once rival Monarchies. At the End of a Life
spent in defending the Liberties of Europe, he saw them in their greatest
Danger. He provided for their Security in the most effectual Manner. He took
the Duke of MARLBOROUGH into his Service.

Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary States General of the United
Provinces,

The Duke contracted several Alliance before the Death of King WILLIAM. He
confirmed and improved these. He contracted others, after the Accession of
Queen ANNE; and reunited the Confederacy, which had been dissolved at the End
of a former War, in a stricter and firmer League.

Captain General and Commander in Chief

The Duke led to the Field the Army of the Allies. He took with surprising
Rapidity Venlo, Ruremonde, Stevenswaert and Liege. He extended and secured the
Frontiers of the Dutch. The Enemies, whom he found insulting at the Gates of
Nimeghen, were driven to seek for Shelter behind their Lines. He forced Bonne,
Huy, Limburgh, in another Campaign. He opened the Communication of the Rhine,
as well as the Maes. He added all the Country between these Rivers to his
former Conquests. The Army of France, favored by the Defection of the Elector
of Bavaria, had penetrated into the Heart of the Empire. This mighty Body lay
exposed to immediate Ruin. In that memorable Crisis, the Duke of MARLBOROUGH
led his Troops with unexampled Celerity, Secrecy, Order, from the Ocean to the
Danube. He saw: He attacked: Nor stopped, but to conquer the Enemy. He forced
the Bavarians, sustained by the French, in their strong Intrenchments at
Schellenberg. He passed the Danube. A second Royal Army, composed of the best
Troops of France, was sent to reinforce the first. That of the Confederates was
divided. With one Part of it the Siege of Ingolstadt was carried on. With the
other the Duke gave Battle to the united Strength of France and Bavaria. On the
2d Day of August 1704, he gained a more glorious Victory than the Histories of
any Age can boast. The Heaps of Slain were dreadful Proofs of his Valor. A
Marshal of France, whole Legions of French, his Prisoners, proclaimed his
Mercy. Bavaria was subdued, Ratisbon, Augsbourg, Ulm, Meminghen, all the
Usurpations of the Enemy, were recovered. The Liberty of the Diet, the Peace of
the Empire, were restored. From the Danube, the Duke turned his victorious Arms
toward the Rhine, and the Moselle. Landau, Treves, Traerbach, were taken. In
the Course of one Campaign the very Nature of the War was changed. The Invaders
of other States were reduced to defend their own. The Frontier of France was
exposed in its weakest Part to the Efforts of the Allies.

That he might improve this Advantage, that he might push the Sum of Things to
a speedy Decision, the Duke of MARLBOROUGH led his Troops early in the
following Year once more to the Moselle. They, whom he had saved a few Months
before, neglected to second him now. They, who might have been his Companions
in Conquest, refused to join him. When he saw the generous Designs he had
formed, frustrated by private Interest, by Pique, by Jealousy, he returned with
Speed to the Maes. He returned; and Fortune and Victory returned with him.
Liege was relieved; Huy retaken. The French, who had pressed the Army of the
States General with superior Numbers, retired behind Intrenchments, which they
deemed impregnable. The Duke forced these Intrenchments, with inconsiderable
Loss, on the 7th Day of July 1705, He defeated a great Part of the Army which
defended them. The rest escaped by a precipitate Retreat. If Advantages
proportionable to this Success were not immediately obtained, let the Failure
be ascribed to that Misfortune which attends most Confederacies; a Division of
Opinions, where one alone should judge; a Division of Power, where one alone
should command. The Disappointment itself did Honor to the Duke. It became the
Wonder of Mankind how he could do so much under those Restraints, which had
hindered him from doing more.

Powers more absolute were given him afterward. The Increase of his Powers
multiplied his Victories. At the opening of the next Campaign, when all his
Army was not yet assembled; when it was hardly known, that he had taken the
Field; the Noise of his Triumphs was heard over Europe. On the 12th of May
1706, he attacked the French at Ramillies. In the Space of Two Hours the whole
Army was put to Flight. The Vigor and Conduct, with which he improved this
Success, were equal to those, wherewith he gained it. Louvain, Brussels,
Malines, Liere, Ghent, Oudenard, Antwerp, Damme, Bruges, Courtray, surrendered.
Ostend, Menin, Dendermond and Aeth, were taken. Brabant and Flanders were
recovered. Places which had resisted the greatest Generals for Months, for
Years; Provinces disputed for Ages; were the Conquests of a Summer. Nor was the
Duke content to triumph alone. Solicitous for the general Interest, his Care
extended to the remotest Scenes of the War. He chose to lessen his own Army,
that he might enable the Leaders of other Armies to conquer. To this it must be
ascribed that Turin was relieved; the Duke of Savoy reinstated; the French
driven with Confusion out of Italy.

These Victories gave the Confederates an Opportunity of carrying on the War on
every Side into the Dominions of France. But she continued to enjoy a kind of
peaceful Neutrality in Germany. From Italy she was once alarmed, and had no
more to fear. The entire Reduction of his Power, whose Ambition had caused,
whose Strength supported the War, seemed reserved for him alone, who had so
triumphantly begun the glorious Work.

The Barrier of France, on the Side of the Low Countries, had been forming for
more than half a Century. What Art, Power, Expense could do, had been done to
render it impenetrable. Yet here she was most exposed; for here the Duke of
MARLBOROUGH threatened to attack her.

To cover what they had gained by Surprise, or had been yielded to them by
Treachery, the French marched to the Banks of the Schelde. At their Head were
the Princes of the Blood, and their most fortunate General the Duke of
Vendosme. Thus commanded, thus posted, they hoped to check the Victor in his
Course. Vain were their Hopes. The Duke of MARLBOROUGH passed the River in
their Sight. He defeated their whole Army. The Approach of Night concealed, the
Proximity of Ghent favored their Flight. They neglected nothing to repair
their Loss, to defend their Frontier. New Generals, new Armies appeared in the
Netherlands. All contributed to inhance the Glory, none were able to retard the
Progress, of the confederate Army.

Lisle, the Bulwark of this Barrier, was besieged. A numerous Garrison, and a
Marshal of France, defended the Place. Prince EUGENE of Savoy commanded, the
Duke of MARLBOROUGH covered and sustained the Siege. The Rivers were seized,
and the Communication with Holland interrupted. The Duke opened new
Communications with great Labor, and much greater Art. Through Countries
overrun by the Enemy, the necessary Convoys arrived in Safety. One alone was
attacked. The Troops which attacked it were beat. The Defense of Lisle was
animated by Assurances of Relief.

The French assembled all their Force. They marched toward the Town. The Duke
of MARLBOROUGH offered them Battle, without suspending the Siege. They
abandoned the Enterprise. They came to save the Town. They were Spectators of
its Fall.

From this Conquest the Duke hastened to others. The Posts taken by the Enemy
on the Schelde were surprised. That River was passed the second time, and
notwithstanding the great Preparations made to prevent it, without Opposition.

Brussels, besieged by the Elector of Bavaria, was relieved. Ghent surrendered
to the Duke in the Middle of a Winter remarkably severe. An Army, little
inferior to his own, marched out of the Place.

As soon as the Season of the Year permitted him to open another Campaign, the
Duke besieged and took Tournay. He invested Mons. Near this City, the French
Army, covered by thick Woods, defended by noble Intrenchments, waited to
molest, nor presumed to offer Battle. Even this was not attempted by them with
Impunity. On the last Day of August 1709, the Duke attacked them in their Camp.
All was employed; nothing availed against the Resolution of such a General,
against the Fury of such Troops. The Battle was bloody. The Event decisive. The
Woods were pierced. The Fortifications trampled down. The Enemy fled. The Town
was taken. Doway, Bethune, Air, St. Venant, Bouchain, underwent the same Fate
in Two succeeding Years. Their vigorous Resistance could not save them. The
Army of France durst not attempt to relieve them. It seemed preserved to defend
the Capital of the Monarchy.

The Prospect of this extreme Distress was neither distant nor dubious. The
French acknowleged their Conqueror, and sued for Peace.

These are the Actions of the late Duke of MARLBOROUGH, British Nation had
Several Recitals of Clauses in Acts of Parliament made to do Honor to this
immortal Commander, are engraven on the same superb Pillar.
inscribed on this Pillar British Name and Language last,

At Woodstock they make the fine Steel Chains for Watches, and other Things of
polished Steel.

From Woodstock I went North-west to Chipping-Norton, which must have been once
a Town of great Trade, by the Number of Merchants, as they are called on the
Brasses over their Monuments; and besides, the Name Chipping denotes as much.
There are Marks of a Castle by the Church; and Roman Coins are frequently found
here. The Church is a good Building, and after a curious Model.

Hence we rode to see Rowldrich Stones, a little Stone-henge, being a Circle of
great Stones standing upright, some of them from Five to Seven Feet high, and
probably the Vestigia of an old British Temple, as that was; and Mr. Toland
positively asserts, that they were so.

At Tidmerton Parish is a large Camp of an orbicular Form, on the Summit of an
Hill, which is doubly entrenched, and able to contain a great Army.

When I was at Banbury, I should have mentioned Bloxham, which lies North of
it; where is a fine Church, the Steeple of an odd, but agreeable Make.

Near Bloxham, is also the famous Parish of Bright-well, of which it was
observed, that there had not been an Alehouse, nor a Dissenter from the Church,
nor any Quarrel among the Inhabitants, that rose so high as to a Suit of Law,
within the Memory of Man. But they could not say it was so still, especially as
to the Alehouse Part; though very much is still preserved as to the Unity and
good Neighborhood of the Parishioners, and their Conformity to the Church.

Being now on the Side of Warwickshire, as is said before, I still went South,
and passing by the Four Shire Stones, we saw where the Counties of Oxford,
Warwick, and Gloucester, join all in a Point; one Stone standing in each
County, and the fourth touching all Three.

Entering Gloucestershire here, Westward, we came, after a Mile's Ride, to
Moretonhenmarsh, a small Town which had formerly a Market, but now
discontinued: it lies on the great Road to Worcester. And the famous Roman
Fosseway, which coming out of Warwickshire, enters this County at Lemington,
which lies North-east of this Town, strikes through it, and also through Stow and
North-Leach, down to Cirencester, Southward.

Hence we come to the famous Cotswold-downs, so eminent for the best of Sheep,
and finest Wool in England: Fame tells us, that some of these Sheep were sent
by King Richard I. into Spain, and that from hence the Breed of their Sheep was
raised, which now produce so fine a Wool, that we are obliged to fetch it from
thence at a great Price, for making our finest Broad Clothes.

Upon these Downs we had a clear View of the aforementioned famous Fosse,
which evidently crosses all the Middle Part of England, and is to be seen and
known (though in no Place plainer than here) quite from the Bath to Warwick, and
thence to Leicester, to Newark, to Lincoln, and on to Barton, upon the Bank of
Humber.

We observed also how several cross Roads as ancient as the Fosse, joined it,
or branched out of it; some of which the People have by ancient Usage, though
corruptly, called also Fosses: For Example,

The Ackmanstreet, which is an ancient Saxon Road, leading from Buckinghamshire
through Oxfordshire, to the Fosse, and so to the Bath; this joins the Fosse
between Burford and Cirencester. Also Grimes-dyke, from Oxfordshire,
Wattle-bank, or Aves-ditch, from the same, and the Would-way, called also the
Fosse, crossing from Gloucester to Cirencester.

Many Seats of the Nobility are to be found in these Parts; Cornbury, Lord
Clarendon's; Ditchley, Lord Litchfield's; Hathorp, the late Duke of
Shrewsbury's, new built of Stone very beautifully.

The Lech, the Coln, the Churn, and the Isis, all rise in the Cotswould Hills,
and joining together, make a full Stream at Lechlade near this Place, and
become one River there, and are called the Thames, which begins there to be
navigable; and Barges may be seen at the Quay, taking in Goods for London:
which makes Lechlade very populous. Of which Town more by-and-by.

Stow on the Would, which is the next Town we came to, is but indifferent to
look at; but is, or rather has been, remarkable for its Two annual Fairs,
famous for Hops, Cheese, and Sheep, of which, it is said, that above 20,000 are
generally sold at one Fair, and that the Toll of these Fairs and the Markets,
amount to 80 l. a Year. The Parish is very large, being 12 Miles in Compass,
and consists of Meadow, Arable, and Pasture. Here is a good large Rectory
Church standing on a Hill, with a high Tower on the South Side of it, which is
seen a great Distance off. Here is also an Hospital, Almshouse, and
Free School, all well endowed; besides other Charities.

Northleche is also a Market Town, governed by a Bailiff and Two Constables,
and is named from the River Leche, which runs through it. Here is a Vicarage
Church, large and spacious, having Ails on each Side, and handsome Windows,
with a large Tower. Here is a Grammar School, free for all the Boys of the
Town, endowed with 80 l. a Year. And it is said, that the Founder, falling
afterward into Misfortunes, solicited for the Master's Place of his own
School, but could not obtain it from the Trustees.

Here we quitted the Roman Fosse, and went Eastward to Burford in Oxfordshire.
King Henry II. gave this Town a Charter, Guildam and omnes consuetudines, quas
habent liberi Burgenses de Oxenford; but they are almost all now lost: however
it retains some Marks of a Corporation still, being governed by Two Bailiffs,
and other inferior Officers. It is famous for Saddles, and, lying near the
Downs, draws great Profit from the Horse-races, which are frequent here. At
this Place was convened a Synod in 685, against the Error of the British
Churches in the Observance of Easter.

At Battle-edge, near this Town, Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, beat
Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, in a pitched Battle, and threw off his Yoke.
The Inhabitants celebrate yearly, on Midsummer-eve, a kind of Festival, which,
they say, commenced in Honor of this Battle. It was here the learned Dr.
Heylin (descended originally from an ancient Family in Wales) was born; and the
famous Speaker Lenthal had a Seat, and died here.

Being so near Witney, we could not forbear taking a Ride to see a Town so
famous for the Manufactures of Blanketing and Rugs, which thrive here in a most
extraordinary manner. Here are at work 150 Looms continually, for which above
3000 People, from Eight Years old and upward, are daily employed in Carding,
Spinning, etc. and consume above 100 Packs of Wool weekly. The Blankets are
usually 10 or 12 Quarters wide, and very white, which some attribute to the
abstersive nitrous Waters of the River Windrush, wherewith they are scoured;
but others believe it is owing to a peculiar way of loose Spinning they use
here; and others again are of Opinion, that it proceeds from both. But however
that be, this Town has engrossed the whole Trade in that Commodity, and
increases daily in its Reputation. They likewise make here the Duffield Stuffs,
a Yard and three Quarters wide, which are carried to New England and Virginia,
and now much worn even here in Winter. Here are likewise a great many
Fellmongers, who having dressed and stained their Sheepskins, make them into
Jackets and Breeches, and sell them at Bampton; from whence they are dispersed
all over the neighboring Counties. Here is a good Free School, and a fine
Library belonging to it.

Witney is an ancient Town, and of good Repute before the Conquest; but it is a
long, straggling, uncouth Place, though full of Inhabitants. 'Twas one of the
Manors which Alwinus, Bishop of Winchester gave to the Church of St. Swithin's
there, on Queen Emma's happily passing over the Fire Ordeal.

At Astal, a Village in the Road between Burford and Witney, is a Barrow which
stands very high, and is supposed to be the Sepulcher of some Person of great
Note.

Southward lies Bampton, on the Borders of the County next Berkshire. It is an
ancient Market Town, likewise in Repute before the Conquest: it is noted for
the greatest Market for Fellmonger-wares in England, which come from Witney,
and for nothing else that I know of, saving that the People talked much of a
Family of the Woods (that dwelt here and at Brisenorton) who hear always a
great Knocking before any of them die.

Turning here West, we entered Gloucestershire again, and came to Lechlade,
which lies on the great Road to Gloucester. It is probable, that it was
anciently a Roman Town upon the Thames; for a very plain Roman Road runs from
hence to Cirencester. Some say, that it was once a famous University for
teaching Latin, as Creeklade was for Greek.

The ancient Building lately discovered by digging in a Meadow near Lechlade,
deserves a particular Mention: it is 50 Feet long, 40 broad, and Four high;
supported with 100 Brick Pillars, curiously inlaid with Stones of diverse
Colors, of Tesseraick Work; and supposed to be a Roman Bath.

Not far from it are the Two Towns called Sarney; so named, in British, from
the Roman Causways; for Sarn, in that ancient Language, and at present, imports
a paved Way. The River Lech runs through it, and discharges itself into the
Thames. A great Number of Barges go from hence to London.

From Lechlade we proceeded West to Fairford, a small Market Town, through which
runs the River Coln, which has Two large Bridges over it. A great many Medals
and Urns have been often dug up here, and there are several Barrows in the
adjoining Fields, (which seem to have been a Scene of warlike Actions) the
Monuments of the Slain interred here.

A great many Charities are still subsisting in this Town; but what it is most
noted for is its Church, and the admirable Painting in its Windows: of which
take the following Description and History.

John Tame, a Merchant of London, purchased this Manor of King Henry VII. (to
whom it descended from the Beauchamps, Earls of Warwick) and having taken a
Prize-ship bound for Rome, wherein he found a great Quantity of painted Glass,
he brought both the Glass and the Workmen into England. The Glass was such a
Curiosity, that Mr. Tame built this Church at Fairford (dedicating it to the
Virgin Mary); which is in Length 125 Feet, and 55 in Breadth; and has Three
Chancels, a good Vestry, and a noble Tower, arising from the Midst of it,
adorned with Pinacles; and the Windows of the Church, 28 in Number, he caused
to be glazed with this invaluable Prize, which remains entire to this Day, the
Admiration of all that see it.

Mrs. Farmer (a Daughter of the Lord Lemster) gave 200 l. to be laid out in
mending and wiring the Windows: this has preserved them from Accidents. And in
the grand Rebellion, the Impropriator Mr. Oldworth, and others, (to their great
Praise be it remembered) took down the Glass, and secured it in some secret
Place, thereby preserving it from Fanatic Rage. The Painting was the Design of
Albert Durer, a famous Italian Master; and the Coloring in the Drapery, and
some of the Figures, is so well performed, that Vandyke affirmed, the Pencil
could not exceed it.

The Subject is all Scripture History, viz. The Serpent tempting Eve; God
appearing in the burning Bush to Moses, when a Shepherd; the Angel conducting
Joshua to War; Gideon's Fleece; the Queen of Sheba's Visit to Solomon; King
David judging the Amalekite Regicide; Samson slaying the Philistines, killing
the Lion, and his being betrayed by Dalilah; Solomon's Judgment between the Two
Harlots; and the Figures of the Twelve Major Prophets.

But the greatest Part is taken up with Stories of the New Testament: The Angel
appearing to Zacharias; Joseph and Mary contracted; the Visitation of Mary by
the Angel, and her visiting her Cousin Elizabeth; our Savior born in a Stable;
the Shepherds and Magi visiting him there; Herod waiting the Return of the wise
Men; Christ circumcised; the Purification of the Holy Virgin; Simeon with our
Savior in his Arms; Joseph's Flight into Egypt; Herod slaying the young
Children of Bethlehem; the Assumption of the Virgin, and Joseph and her seeking
Jesus at the Feast: our Savior's Transfiguration, Mary anointing his Head: the
Disciples going to embalm him, and the Angel relating to them his Resurrection;
Christ's Appearance to Mary Magdalen; his riding to Jerusalem on an Ass;
Zaccheus, and the People strewing Palm-branches, and Children crying Hosanna;
his Praying in the Garden; Judas betraying him; Pilate judging him, and washing
his Hands from the Guilt; the Crucifixion between two Thieves, the Women
standing by, and the Soldiers watching him; Joseph of Arimathea begging the
Body, and receiving it; his Burial by Nicodemus and others; the Darkness at the
Passion, and Michael contending with the Devil.

Christ's traveling to Emmaus, and his Appearance to the Eleven, and
afterward to Thomas; the Disciples going a Fishing, and Christ's appearing to
them, with the breaking of the Net, and broiling of the Fish; Christ's
Ascension, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost in cloven Tongues.

In the West Window is the Last Judgment curiously designed, and well executed,
containing a vast Number of Incidents relating thereto.

In the rest of the Windows are many historical Passages, that happened after
Christ's Ascension; viz. The Twelve Apostles at large, with the Article of the
Creed they are said to be severally the Authors of; the Four Evangelists, as
writing the Gospels; Four principal Fathers of the Church, viz. St. Jerome, St.
Gregory, St. Ambrose, and St. Austin; the Worthies that have preserved the
Christian Church, in four Upper-windows of the Middle Ayle on the South Side,
and the Persecutors thereof in the four opposite Windows.

I have been as brief as possible in this Description, being so much confined
in my Limits; but a curious Traveller will be highly delighted with this noble
Work. And I shall only add, That John Tame, Esquire the pious and worthy Founder,
who died in the Year 1500, lies buried on the North Side of the Church, under a
raised Marble Monument.

On the Churn, one of the Rivers I have just named, stands Cirencester, (or
Cicester, for Brevity) the ancient Corinium of the Romans, and said to be
rebuilt by Cissa, a Viceroy under one of the Saxon Kings, a great and populous
City; then enclosed with Walls and a Ditch of vast Compass, which may be traced
quite round. The Foundation of the Wall is also very visible in most Places. A
good Part of this Circuit is now Pasture, Corn Fields, and Gardens, besides the
Site of the present Town. Antiquities are dug up here every Day; old
Foundations, Houses and Streets, and many Mosaic Pavements with Rings,
Intaglia's, and Coins innumerable, especially in one great Garden called Lewis
Grounds, which might have been the Praetorium or General's Quarters; for Llys,
in British, signifies a Palace. Large Quantities of carved Stones are carried
off yearly in Carts, to mend the Highways, besides what have been used in
Building. A fine Mosaic Pavement was dug up here Anno 1723, with many Coins.
One Mr. Richard Bishop lately dug up in his Garden a Vault 16 Feet long, and 12
broad, supported with square Pillars of Roman Brick, three Feet and an half
high, on which was a strong Floor of Terrace. Near it are now several other
Vaults, on which Cherry-trees grow. These might have been the Foundations of a
Temple; for in the same Place they found several Stones of the Shafts of
Pillars Six Feet long, and large Stone Bases, with Cornices very handsomely
molded, and carved with Modilions and other Ornaments, which are now converted
into Swine-troughs, and Pavements before the Door. Capitals of these Pillars
were likewise found. A Mosaic Pavement near it, and entire, is now the Floor
of his Privy.

Half a Mile West of the Town, on the North Side of the Fosse Road, at a Place
called Quern, other Antiquities are to be seen worth an Antiquary's Attention;
but I must not take up too much Room in describing them.

Little of the Abbey is now lest, besides Two old and indifferent Gate-houses.
The Church is a very handsome Building; the Windows are full of painted Glass;
and it has a fine lofty Tower. East of the Town, about a Quarter of a Mile, is
Starbury Mount, a Barrow, where Roman Coins have been dug up. West, behind Lord
Bathurst's Garden, is Grismund's Mount, of which several Fables are told.

Cirencester is still a very good Town, populous and rich, full of Clothiers,
and driving a great Trade in Wool, which is brought from the Inland Counties of
Leicester, Northampton, and Lincoln, where the largest Sheep in England feed,
and where are but few Manufactures. The vast Quantities sold here are almost
incredible. The Wool is bought up here, chiefly by the Clothiers of Wiltshire
and Gloucestershire, for the Supply of that great Cloathing-trade, which I have
mentioned already: they talk of 5000 Packs in a Year.

The Town is governed by Two High Constables. It has Two weekly Markets; one on
Monday, for Corn, Cattle, and Provisions; and on Friday, for Wool chiefly. It
has also Five Fairs, Three for all Sorts of Commodities, and Two for Cloth
only. Here is a fine large beautiful Church with Two Ails, supported by strong
Pillars. The Chancel is handsomely decorated. It has Five Chapels adjoining to
it, and has a Tower very neat and lofty, with an excellent Ring of Bells in it.
The Windows show some beautiful Remains of exquisite painted Glass. There is a
Free School, and diverse Hospitals and Almshouses in this Parish.

The Churn runs from hence down Southward to Creeklade in Wiltshire, which is
said to have been anciently a very noted Place, containing 1300 Houses, and
that an University was here founded by the ancient Britons, for teaching Greek,
as I have said, as Lechlade was for Latin; which University was removed, as
they pretend, by the Saxons, to Oxon: but, I doubt, these are Monkish Accounts;
for Creeklade, which they would have to signify a Greek Town, is a Corruption
of the British Word Kerigg gwlade, i. e. a stony Country. The Churn and the Rey
fall, here, into the Thames. Here is a good Free School.

North-west of Cirencester, upon a Hill, stands Stroud, a little Market Town,
noted for Clothing, and particularly for dying excellent Scarlet. The Church is
90 Feet long, and 40 broad. The Chancel is 33 Feet long, and 16 wide. At the
West End of the Church rises a high Spire Steeple, and a Tower in the Middle.

North of it stands Paynswick, a Market Town, situate in the wholsomest Air in
the County, on the River Stroud, where the Cloathing-trade is also carried on.
The Church is a Vicarage, and very handsome, with Two Chancels, a North Ayle,
and a neat Spire.

Lower to the South-west of Cirencester stands Minching Hampton; so called,
because it belonged to the Minching Nuns at Caen in Normandy. Here is a good
Rectory Church worth 200 l. a Year, large, in the Form of a Cross with Ails on
each Side, and a Tower with Battlements rising in the Middle. In the North Ayle
are a great many Inscriptions of Benefactions. And in the South Ayle is a
Statue lying cross-legg'd, with a Sword and Shield by him, and his Wife lying
at his Feet.

Then we came to Tetbury, one of the Clothing Towns I mentioned; a
considerable Market Town, situate on a rising Ground, in a healthy Air, but
scarce of Water in Summer. It Is well built, has a large Market-house well
frequented for Yarn; and there is a lesser Market-house, for Cheese, Bacon, and
other Commodities. It Is governed by a Bailiff, and at the End of the Town is a
long Bridge, whereof one half is in Wiltshire. The Church is a Vicarage, worth
120 l. a Year: it is a good Building, large and handsome, in which are diverse
Monuments. Here is a Free School and an Almshouse. It had formerly a Castle
built by Dunwallo Malmufius, a British Prince. The Town seems to be well
furnished with every thing but Water, which is so scarce, that the Inhabitants
are obliged to buy it at the Rate sometimes of 18 d. for a Hogshead. In this
Parish rises the River Avon, which runs through Bristol, and afterward falls
into the Severn.

A little to the North of this Town is a Meadow called Maudlin Meadow, because,
as I was told, it belongs to Magdalen College in Oxford. Here the Inhabitants
showed me the Head of a Spring, which flowing from thence runs along a
Hedge-trough, and some Tops of the Wood, that grows in the Hedge, rotting, and
falling into this Rill of Water, are, by it, turned into Stone. I took up a
great many of them, which are generally in the Shape of the Pipes (as they are
commonly called) which the Peruke-makers curl their Hair upon, and of a whitish
stony Substance. I broke diverse of them, and in the middle found generally a
Stick of Wood, some as big as a Goose-quill, others larger; some had but a thin
stony Crust about them, in others the Stick was no biggar than a large Needle:
again, some had no Stick in them, but only a Hole through them, like that of a
Tobacco Pipe; and in some others, I could perceive no woody Substance, nor Hole
at all, but the Whole was a soft Kind of Stone. -- Hence I guess, that the Sand
which the Water brings down with it, gathers and crusts about those Sticks; and
that, in time, the Stick consumes, and the stony or sandy Substance fills up
and supplies its Place. And I would hence recommend it as an Inquiry, Whether
those other Transmutations of this Kind, that we meet with in the Natural
History of this and other Nations, be not brought about in the like manner.

And now I am dipped into this Work of Nature, let me digress a little, and
take notice of the Astroites, or Star-stones, found at Lassington in this
County, which have that peculiar Quality of Motion when put into Vinegar. -- In
the Fields, near Badminton, are found cylindrical and spherical Stones, almost
as big as Cannon Balls. And on the Hills about Aldely, are found Stones of the
same Kind with those I found about Watchet in Somersetshire, resembling all
Kinds of Shellfish: these, I must confess, are, of the two, more astonishing,
because they are found on the Hills; for if they were, as Fracastorius
conjectures, Animals ingendered in the Sea, no good Account of their being here
found can be given, unless we suppose them brought hither by the general
Deluge. -- The Water of the River Stroud, in this County, is esteemed the best
for Dying Scarlets, which draws many Clothiers to settle in that Neighborhood.
And lest I should be thought too tedious, let me but just mention the Diamonds
( Bristol Stones rather) found near the Banks of the River Avon. That soft,
easy-to-be-wrought Stone at Great Banington, called Puff-stone, prodigiously
strong and lasting; a great deal af of which has been used in the Repairs of
Westminster Abbey.

Wickwar, a small Market Town, but a very ancient Corporation, governed by a
Mayor, is the next. The Church is a large Edifice, with Two Chancels. The Tower
is at the West End, and is high, adorned with Pinacles. Here is a Free School.

Chipping Sodbury lies a little farther in the Road, an ancient Borough-town,
under a Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses. As it is a great Thorough-fare to
Bristol, it is full of good Inns. It has several Streets besides Lanes, and a
good Market; and a large spacious Church, which, however, is but a Chapel of
Ease to Old Sodbury. Here is the greatest Cheese-market in England, except
Atherstone in Warwickshire.

Here we dropped the Road, and fell down Southward, directly to Marshfield,
another of the Clothing Towns I spoke of. It consists of one Street of old
Buildings near a Mile long. It has a Market, and drives also a great Trade in
Malt, and is noted for good Cakes. It Is governed by a Bailiff. Here is a good
Vicarage Church, with several Monuments and Inscriptions in the Ails, and the
Chancel. Here is an Almshouse well endowed, and a Chapel to it.

We crossed the great Road from London to Bristol here, as at Cirencester we
did that from London to Gloucester; and keeping still the Fosseway, arrived at
Bath. But here I shall conclude this Letter, and am, Sir,

Yours, etc.

LETTER V. CONTAINING A Description of Part of the Counties of Somerset,
Gloucester, Warwick, Worcester, Hereford, and Monmouth.
SIR,
I Closed my last Letter with my Arrival at BATH, in Somersetshire; and I shall
now proceed with giving you an Account of what is most remarkable in it.

The Antiquity of this City, and of the famous Baths in it, must be allowed to
be very great, even though we should doubt of what is insisted on in the
Inscription under the Figure of King Bladud, placed in the King's Bath, which
says, that this Prince (whom Mr. Camden calls Blayden, or Bladen Cloyth, i. e.
Southsayer) found out the Use of these Baths, 300 Years before our Savior's
Time.

Bath is a Spot of Ground, which our Countrymen ought to esteem as a particular
Favor of Heaven. It lies in a great Valley, surrounded with an Amphitheatrical
View of Hills; and its Situation on the West Side of the Island is a
considerable Addition to its Delights, as being the less liable to the rude
Shocks of Tempests. But the Romans were induced prudently to make a Station
here by the admirable hot Springs. The Walls are almost entire, and perhaps the
Work of the Romans, except the upper Part, which seems repaired with the Ruins
of Roman Buildings; for the Lewis-holes are still left in many of the Stones,
and, to the Shame of the Repairers, many Roman Inscriptions, some sawn across,
to fit the Size of the Place. The Level of the City is risen to the Top of the
first Walls, through the Negligence of the Magistracy, who, in this, and all
other great Towns, connive at the Servants throwing Dirt and Ashes into the
Streets. These Walls enclose but a small Compass, of a pentagonal Form. There
are four Gates on four Sides, and a Postern on the other. From the South-west
Angle have been an additional Wall and Ditch carried out to the River; by which
short Work the Approach of an Enemy on two Sides is intercepted, unless they
pass the River. The small Compass of the City has made the Inhabitants crowd up
the Streets to an unseemly and inconvenient Narrowness. It is, however,
handsomely built, mostly of new Stone, which is very white and good. The great
Additions made, and still making, to the Buildings here, I shall mention
by-and-by.

It was of old a Resort for Cripples, and diseased Persons; and we see the
Crutches hang up at the several Baths, as the Thank-offerings of those who came
hither lame, and went away cured. But now we may say it is a Resort of the
Sound, as well as the Sick, and a Place that helps the Indolent and the Gay to
commit that worst of Murders, that is to say, to kill Time.

To such it is indeed a constant Round of Diversion. In the Morning the young
Lady is brought in a close Chair, dressed in her Bathing-cloaths, to the
Cross-bath. There the Music plays her into the Bath, and the Women who tend
her, present her with a little floating Wooden Dish, like a Basin; in which the
Lady puts a Handkerchief, and a Nosegay, and of late the Snuff Box is added.
She then traverses the Bath, if a Novice, with a Guide; if otherwise, by
herself; and having amused herself near an Hour, calls for her Chair, and
returns to her Lodgings.

The rest of the Diversion is at Mrs. Hayes's, formerly Harrison's, a stately
Room, and Mrs. Wiltshire's, who has now the Apartments that were the late Mrs.
Lindsey's, where not long since was the Bowling-green. And perhaps Mr. Leake,
who keeps one of the finest Booksellers Shops in Europe, has more than a Chance
for half an Hour of each Person's Company now-and-then, and to be sure a
Subscription, which is but five Shillings the Season, for taking home what Book
you please; but Persons of Quality generally subscribe Gold, and I think it is
the very best Money laid out in the Place, for those who go for Pleasure or
Amusement only. In the Afternoon there is frequently a Play, though the
Decorations are mean, and indeed the Performances too. In the Evening, People
assemble at the great Rooms, and there are Balls twice a Week. It Is also the
Fashion of the Place, for the Company to go every Day pretty constantly to hear
Divine Service at the great Church, and at St. Mary's Chapel in Queen's-square,
where are Prayers twice a Day.

It Is remarkable that for many Hundreds of Years, the Medicinal Virtues of
these Waters have been useful to the diseased People by Batheing only; whereas
of late Years they are found to be no less healthful in many Cases taken
inwardly; insomuch, that more come to drink than to bathe; nor are the Cures
they perform this way, less valuable than the outward Application.

Gaming used to obtain here, as at all public Places, to a scandalous Degree;
but the Act prohibiting that pernicious Practice; has a good deal checked its
Progress. This Act passed in the 12th of King George II. and suppresses, on the
Penalty of 200 l. and 50 l. the Adventures, the following Games by Name; viz.
The Ace of Hearts, Pharaoh, Basset, Hazard; also all Sales, Raffles, Lotteries,
Mathematical Machines, etc. Sales by Lotteries are declared void, and what is
put up by them forfeited; nor are Convictions to be vacated for want of Form.

But this Act being eluded by new Games set up, a Clause was inserted in the
Horse-racing Act, Anno 13 Geo. II. prohibiting Passage, and all other Games
with Dice, except what are played on the Backgamon Tables.

As to the more particular Nature and Virtues of the Waters, I have been
favored, by a very eminent Physician, with the following curious Account of
tham, and their Original. Of Bath Waters. The Bath Waters certainly owe their
Heat to a Mixture and Fermentation of two different Sources, distilling from
the Tops of two different Mountains ( Clarton and Landsdown) meeting in the
Valley where the Town stands; for all Hills are Nests of Metals or Minerals,
and their Bellies are cavernous and hollow. It is not therefore improbable,
that on Clarton Down there should lie the sulphurous Matter which must rise by
Impregnation from that excellent Stone Quarry, which hardens in the Air, and
grows cased with a nitrous Coat by Time, and cold Weather, and is so readily
cut out and carved into any the most exquisite Shapes. This the Discovery and
Property of the worthy, charitable, and pious Ralph Allen, Esquire For all Mineral
Waters owe their Virtue to an Impregnation of Rain Water, generated from the
Clouds, which are compressed in their Course by Mountains or Eminences, and
fall on the respective included Mineral. And every one knows, that a due
Mixture of Sulphur, and Filings of Iron, moistened with Water, will produce any
Degree of Heat. This Quarry therefore must have a large Quantity of sulphurous
or bituminous Matter in its Composition, as will be evident to a Natural
Philosopher, from these mentioned Qualities of the Stone. Neither is it
improbable, that the ferruginous or iron-tinctured Water takes its Rise from
Lansdown Quarry, the Stone on it being hard, and on the Top flinty, black, and
acrimonious, as Iron Ore is known to be. These Two Mountains, thus tinged by
Rain Water falling from the proper Heights, meet in some Caverns in the Valley;
and, there fermenting produce that hot, milky, soft, salutiferous Beverage,
called Bath Water, far beyond any hot mineral Waters for its Delicacy, and
supportable, though comfortable Heat, to any other such Water hitherto discovered
on the habitable Globe, as it possesses that Milkiness, Detergency, and
middling Heat so friendly adapted to weakened animal Constitutions, which all
other hot Waters want in the due Degree; either being too hot, or too cold, to
do any great Good in Cases where they are proper. These Waters are beneficial
in almost all chronical Distempers, and can hurt in none, except in
Hemorrhages, Inflammations, or bad Lungs, unless they be over-dosed in
Quantity, or too high and too hot a Regimen be joined with them; for they
always procure a great Appetite, and good Spirits, if cautiously managed; but
if high Meats, and strong Liquors, be indulged, they will create inflammatory
Disorders. However, in weak Stomachs, decayed Appetites, Colicks, low Spirits,
in the Intervals of the Fits of the Gout and Stone; in Rheumatisms, Palsies,
nervous Disorders; and, in a Word, all those called the Cold Diseases; but most
eminently, in all the Disorders of the chyliferous Tube, or the Stomach and
Belly not inflamed, they are more kindly and beneficial than any Medicine known
in Nature; and introduce a natural Warmth, and a new internal Heat, into
decayed, worn-out, superannuated Constitutions; and if a light Regimen, due
Exercise, and good Hours, be joined with them, they would truly work Wonders:
but by the Neglect of these, their Efficacy is often lost, and their Credit
brought into Question.



Great Additions have been made to the Buildings here within these few Years;
particularly by the Duke of Chandos.

Without the Walls, a stately new Square is erected, with a fine Chapel, and
the Middle is enclosed by Rails, and handsomely laid out within.

In the Center is a lofty Obelisk 70 Feet high from the Foundation, and
terminated in a Point. Level with one's Eye is the enclosed Inscription: IN
MEMORY FREDERICK PRINCE OF WALES, CONSORT, RICHARD NASH, Esquire

The Bath-stone, which I have mentioned before, affords a fine Opportunity to
imbellish and give a noble Look to the Buildings here, and at a very cheap
Rate; for the Front of the Houses on the North Side of the Square cost no more
than 500 l. though it is above 200 Feet in Extent, and enriched with Columns and
Pilasters in the Corinthian Order. All the Danger is, that they will over-build
themselves now they are got into the Humor, and make it less worth while to
those who let Lodgings, the principal Business of the Place; but then People of
Fortune, settling there, will make amends for it; since no less than 70 or 80
Families are already become constant Inhabitants, and others are daily taking
Houses.

The Grove too, near the Abbey-church, now called Orange-square, in Compliment
to the Prince of Orange, when there, has several handsome new-built Houses; and
a monumental Stone is erected, with an Inscription in Honor to the Prince of
Orange, and the Place; his Highness having been obliged to visit Bath for his
Health, just before he married the Princess Royal of England, and received
great Benefit by the Waters. This likewise was erected by the famous Mr. Nash,
to whose good Management and Behavior Bath is greatly indebted; every one
submitting with Delight to the Regulations he imposes, with regard to Decorum,
and the Economy of the Place.

The Inscription on the Stone above, is as follows: In Memoriam Sanitatis
Principi Auriaco Aquarum Thermalium Potu, Favente DEO, Ovante BRITANNIA,
Feliciter Restitutae. Thus translated: In Memory of the happy Restoration of
the Health of the Prince of Orange by the drinking of the Bath Waters, through
the Favor of GOD, and to the extreme Joy of Britain, 1735.

General Wade, one of the Representatives in Parliament for this City, has
given a fine Altar-piece to the great Church there: He has also been at the
Charge of having the Picture drawn of every one of his Electors, (the Members
of the Corporation) and set up round the Town Hall; and his own too he has
suffered to be put up over the Entrance, as if he would make good that Pass,
and keep them all to Duty. At the Upper-end of the Hall are lately set up the
Pictures of the Prince and Princess of Wales, a Present made by their Royal
Highnesses to the Corporation, who likewise before presented it with a fine
large wrought Silver Cup and Waiter, gilt.

There is a very great Narrowness of Spirit in most of the Inhabitants at Bath:
but, indeed, it is the same in all public Places of Resort. They have but
their Seasons; and they are so hungry by that time they come about, that they
look upon a new Comer, as a Person to be shared and divided among them: for
this Reason you will always find them with both Hands open to receive; and not
one to communicate, or do a generous Office, without a Benefit in Possession or
Reversion. And when they receive a Favor at your Hands, it is with such an Air,
as if it were their Due, and they quitted Scores with you by their Acceptance
of it.

The Abbey-church is a venerable Pile, and has many Monuments in it. But the
principal Front is almost blasphemously decorated, if it may be called
decorated, with the Figures of God the Father, and Saints and Angels, the Work
of Superstition. This Cathedral, though beautiful, is but small; and on the Spot
probably stood the Roman Temple of Minerva, Patroness of the Baths. Before it,
was an handsome square Area, but of late Years deformed with Houses.

On the South Side are the justly renowned hot Springs collected into a square
Area, called the King's Bath. The Corporation erected within these few Years
that pretty neat Building before it, called the Pump-room, for the Company to
meet in, who drink the Water, conveyed hither by a Marble Pump from the Bottom
of the Springs, where it is near boiling-hot.

This Water is admirably grateful to the Stomach, striking the Roof of the
Mouth with a fine sulphurous and steely Taste, like that of the German Spaw or
Pyrmont. Though you drink off a large Pint-glass, it is so far from creating a
Heaviness or Nausea, that you immediately perceive yourself more alert. At
first it operates by Stool, and especially Urine. It is of sovereign Efficacy
to strengthen the Bowels, restore their lost Tone, and renew the vital Heat.
But I have already mentioned its excellent Qualities.

The King's Bath is an oblong Square, the Walls full of Niches, perhaps the
Romans Work. There are Twelve on the North Side; Eight on the East and West;
about Four larger Arches on the South. At every Corner are the Steps to descend
into it, and a Parapet or Balustrade with a Walk round it.

The Springs were doubtless separated from common Springs by the Romans, and
fenced in with a durable Wall. There goes a probable Tradition of subterranean
Canals of their making, to carry off the other Waters, lest they should mix
with these, and destroy the Heat.

It is remarkable, that at the cleansing of the Springs, when they set down a
new Pump, they constantly find great Quantities of Hazel-nuts, as in many other
Places among subterraneous Timber. These, Dr. Stukeley doubts not, are the
Remainder of the universal Deluge, which the Hebrew Historian tell us was in
Autumn, Providence by that means securing the Revival of the Vegetable World.

In the Bath People stand up to the Chin, Men and Women, and stew, mostly in
the way of Gallantry.

Many are the Diseases which here find a Remedy, when judiciously applied, as I
observed above. The Confleunce hither is greater in Summer, than in Winter,
though the latter, of the two, seems the more preferable Season for medicinal
Purposes.

Behind the Southern Wall of the King's Bath, is a less Square, named the
Queen's Bath, with a Tabernacle of Four Pillars in the midst. This is of more
temperate Warmth, as borrowing its Water from the other. There are likewise
Pumps and Pumping-rooms, for pouring hot Streams on any Part of the Body; which
in many Cases is very salutary.

In the South-west Part of the Town are two other Baths, not to be disregarded.

The Hot-bath is not much inferior in Heat to the King's Bath; it is a small
Parallelogram, with a Stone Tabernacle of Four Pillars in the midst.

The Cross-bath near it is triangular, and had a Cross in the middle. Hard by
is an Hospital built and endowed by a Prelate of this See. The Water in these
two Places rises near the Level of the Streets.

On the South Side of the Cathedral are some Parts of the Abbey left, and the
Gate House belonging to it.

Within these few Years, by a Contribution, a cold Bath for the Benefit of the
Infirm was made at a Spring beyond the Bridge.

Two Roman Inscriptions have been set in the Eastern Wall of the Cathedral,
fronting the Walks; which, besides the Injuries of the Weather, are exposed to
the mischievous Sport of Boys, who throw Stones at them.

The several Baths are very indifferently kept, as their Use so much increases.
But a fine Design is now on foot to make convenient Slips, with Dressing-rooms,
and Apartments for Pumping on People, without going into the Bath, and for
enlarging the Pump-room so as to hold four or five Pumps.

The greatest Decency is observed here by both Sexes; and while Mr. Nash lives,
it must be always so. There is a very good Convenience of Chairs, of which
there are great Plenty, and very genteel ones, to go to any Part within the
Walls, and even to the adjoining Buildings without, for 6 d. provided the
Distance does not exceed 500 Yards; but if it does, the Fare is 1 s. and for
this the Chairmen are obliged to go a Mile. In short, it is a delightful Place
enough, when you are in it, but a dreadful one to come at, down high Hills, in
some Places like Precipices: but Health or Pleasure obliges People to dispense
with this Difficulty.

Bath being environed with Hills, there are few pleasant Walks out of the Town,
or even Rides, without clambering much to Landsdown-hill, or that called
Clarton-down.

It is for this Reason, that very few People care to keep Coaches here. And the
Hill up to Lansdown, particularly, is so steep, that the late Queen Anne was
extremely frighted in going up: her Coachman stopping to give the Horses
Breath, and the Coach wanting a Dragstaff, it ran back in spite of all the
Coachman's Skill; the Horses not being brought to strain the Harness again, or
pull together for a good while, and the Coach putting the Guards behind in
great Confusion: at last some of the Servants, setting their Heads and
Shoulders to the Wheels, stopped them by mere Force.

The General Hospital now near finished in this City, for the Reception of the
sick Poor all over the Kingdom, is a very noble Design. The first Stone of it
was laid the 6th of July 1738. It is built where the old Playhouse stood, and
is a noble Pile of Building, 100 Feet in Front, and 90 Feet deep. It is capable
of receiving 150 poor Cripples. Its chief Benefactor is Mr. Allen, of whom we
shall say more anon, who gave all the Wall-stone, Freestone ready wrought,
Paving-stone, and Lime used in it. The Prince and Princess of Wales have
likewise been great Promoters of the Work.

A very great Design is now also begun in this City, of which the following is
a brief Account.

On the 10th of March 1739-40, the first Stone of a new Square was laid, in the
Gardens adjoining to the public Walks. The principal Side of this Square is to
have the Appearance of one House, 520 Feet in Front, and 260 Feet in Depth, but
is to be divided into 40 Houses: each Front is to have 63 Windows, and each End
31. Two of the other Sides are to serve as Wings to the principal Side: each
Wing is to contain 24 Houses upon a perfect Square of 210 Feet, and the Front
of these Wings are every one to have 25 Windows; so that when the whole
Building is viewed in Front, it will show 113 Windows, extend 1040 Feet, and
from the distant Hills look like one grand Palace. The three Piles of Building
will be adorned with above 300 Columns and Pilasters in the Corinthian Order:
-- Upon the Corner of every Pile there will be a Tower, and in every Front will
be a Centre-house and a Pediment.

A noble House for public Assemblies is to be erected by Subscription in this
Square; the Ballroom will be like an Egyptian Hall, and contain in Length 90
Feet, and Breadth 52 Feet. The Assembly-room will be 90 Feet long. There will
be a Garden for the Ladies to walk in; a Bowling-green for the Gentlemen; a
grand Parade of 200 Yards long, a Terrace 500 Yards in Circumference, a Portico
of the same Dimensions, with diverse other Walks in common for all People, and
so disposed, that Gentlemen and Ladies may walk at any Season of the Year, at
any Hour of the Day, and in any Weather. So that by these great Improvements
Bath will be rendered one of the most agreeable Places in the World; for,
facing this Square, a Bridge with an Arch of 102 Feet opening will be built
over the River, by which People of Distinction may go to the Downs, as into
their own Gardens, for the Air and Exercise.

The River Avon runs by the Back of the Town; and on the Banks of it, Mr.
Allen, who is the Genius of the Place, and whose Works and Inventions there,
next to the Waters, are better worth the Attention of the Curious, than any
thing in Bath, has a fine Wharf, and other convenient Places, to shape, to
work, to imbark the Stones of many Tons Weight, which he digs from the Quarry,
on the adjacent Hill. This he does by an admirable Machine, which runs down the
Hill by Grooves placed in the Ground, without Horses or any other Help, than
one Man to guide it, who also by a particular Spring can stop it in the
steepest Part of the Hill, and in the swiftest Part of its Motion. These Stones
he can carry by the Avon to Bristol, whence they may be transported to any
other Part of England; and the new Works of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London,
are built with them. He is building for himself a very magnificent House of
this Stone, with a fine Chapel, and noble Stables and Offices; and has
delightful Gardens laid out with a Profusion of Fancy, yet with great Economy,
as to the Expense: for, in short, Mr. Allen is contented with the Situation of
his House and Gardens, (and indeed well he may, for it is a very fine one) and,
instead of forcing Nature by a great Expense to bend to Art, he pursues only
what the natural Site points out to him, and, by so doing, will make it one of
the cheapest, and at the same time one of the most beautiful Seats in England.
He levels no Hills, but enjoys the Beauty of the Prospects they afford; he cuts
down no Woods, but strikes through them fine Walks, and next-to-natural Mazes;
and has, by that means, a delightful Grove always filled with Birds, which
afford the rural Ear a Music transcending all others. Nor does he want for
fine Conveniences of Water; and as he is a Gentleman who is not entered into
the present fashionable Schemes of ridiculing Religion and Scripture, he has a
Figure of Moses striking the Rock, and the Water gushing out of it, which forms
a sort of natural Cascade, whence his Basin is supplied; and is a pretty
Allusion to his producing all his Works from the Stone Quarry in his
Neighborhood. This is the same Mr. Allen, who first invented the Cross-Post,
so useful for the Conveyance of Letters to Places, which before were, in that
Particular, at the greatest Uncertainty. The Taste of this Gentleman in his
Gardening, etc. is so aptly described by Mrs. Chandler of the Place, in an
ingenious Poem, called, The Description of BATH, that the following Quotation
from it, must be acceptable. Thy Taste refined appears in yonder Wood,
Not Nature tortured, but by Art improved;
Where covered Walks with open Vistas meet,
An Area here, and there a shady Seat.
A thousand Sweets in mingled Odours flow
From blooming Flowers, which on the Borders grow.
In numerous Streams the murmuring Waters thrill,
Uniting all, obedient to thy Will;
Till, by thy Art, in one Canal combined,
They through the Wood in various Mazes wind;
From thence the foaming Waves fall rapid down,
In bold Cascades, and lash the rugged Stone.
But here their Fury lost, the calmer Scene
Delights the softer Muse, and S^ul serene:
An ample Basin, Center of the Place,
In Lymph transparent holds the scaly Race;
Its glassy Face, from every Ruffle free,
Reflects the Image of each neighboring Tree;
On which the feathered Choir 's melodious Throng,
By Love inspired, unite in tuneful Song;
Their tuneful Song the echoing Woods resound,
And falling Waters add a solemn Sound:
Sure this the Muses haunt; it is hallowed Ground!


At Walcot has been a Camp, and many Roman Antiquities have been found. Lord
Winchelsea has an Urn, a Patera, and other things taken out of a Stone Coffin,
wherein was a Child's Body, half a Mile off the Bath.

When one is upon Kingsdown, and has passed all the Steeps and Difficulties of
the Ascent, there is a plain and pleasant Country for many Miles into
Gloucestershire, and two very noble Houses, the one built by Mr. Blathwait,
late Secretary at War; and the other is called Badmington, a Mansion of the
Duke of Beaufort.

Nor must we forget to mention the handsome Monument erected by Order of the
late Lord Lansdown, to the Honor of Sir Bevil Granville, his Lordship's
Ancestor, with an Inscription recording the Action in which he fell. It is
built on the Brow of Lansdown-Hill, on the very Spot, as near as possible,
where that brave Gentleman was killed, in the Action between him and Sir
William Waller, in the late Civil Wars; of which Lord Clarendon and others give
Account.

I ought not to omit, that in the Session of Parliament 1738-9, an Act passed
for enlarging the Terms and Powers granted by Two former Acts of Parliament,
for Repairing and Enlarging the Highways between the Top of Kingsdown-Hill and
the City of Bath; and for Amending several other Roads leading from Bristol,
and other Places, to Bath; and for cleansing, paving, and enlightening the
STREETS, and regulating the CHAIRMEN there; and for keeping a regular Nightly
WATCH, within the said City and Liberties: All which, when effected according
to the Intention of the Act, will be a great Convenience to Bath, and to
Persons resorting to it.

I will just mention also, that at Chipping-Norton-Lane, near Bath, was a Fight
between the Forces of King James II. and those of the Duke of Monmouth, in
which the latter had the Advantage, and, if they had pursued it, would have
gained a complete Victory. An old Elm-Tree, standing near Stanton-Drew, in a
Road leading three Ways, afforded a sad Testimony of the Event of the Duke's
Enterprise; for it was all overspread with the Heads and Limbs of the
unfortunate Persons engaged in his Cause, who suffered by the Sentence of the
merciless Jefferies.

About Twyfordton, not far from Bath, is a fallow Field, called Marsbury-Field,
with but little Quantity of Earth upon the Rock. This was very full of fossile
Shells, which had preserved their natural Color of Blue and White as perfectly
as at first.

In Chu Parish is Bowditch, so called from its circular Form; it was a large
Camp on a Hill trebly fortified, whence you may behold the Isles of Flatholm
and Steepholm in the Sea. Here is a petrifying Spring. This Country abounds
with Coal-pits. The Slates which lie upon it, and have not received their due
Quantity of Sulphur, so as to make perfect Coal, are most curiously marked with
Impressions of Plants, particularly those of Fern. This is indeed a Rock, full
of Springs, a very bad Road for Traveling, consisting of short and steep
Valleys, narrow Lanes, intricate, dark, and hard. The Ground is very rich, and
bears much Wood. The Neatness of the Houses even of the poorer Sort of People
is remarkable, being generally whited over, and imbellish'd with little
Gardens. We come in Ten Miles from Bath to the City of Bristol, the greatest,
the richest, and the best Port of Trade in Great Britain, London only excepted.

Bristol has been formerly a Place of Strength, and had a Castle, in which King
Stephen was kept Prisoner some time by Maud the Empress. It was besieged in the
Civil Wars, and made a good Defense. The Castle stood till the Time of Oliver
Cromwell, who demolished it. It is a County-Town, and one of King Henry VIII.'s
new Bishoprics.

The Merchants of this City have not only the greatest Trade, but they trade
with a more entire Independency upon London, than any other Town in Britain.
And it is evident in this Particular, viz. That whatsoever Exportations they
make to any Part of the World, they are able to bring the full Returns back to
their own Port, and can dispose of them there; which is not the Case in any
other Port in England; where they are often obliged either to ship part of the
Effects in the Ports abroad, on the Ships bound to London; or to consign their
own Vessels to London, in order both to get Freight, and dispose of their own
Cargoes.

But the Bristol Merchants, as they have a very great Trade abroad, so they
have always Buyers at home for their Returns, and that such Buyers, that no
Cargo is too big for them. To this Purpose, the Shopkeepers in Bristol, who in
general are Wholesale-men, have so great an Inland Trade among all the Western
Counties, that they maintain Carriers, just as the London Tradesmen do, to all
the principal Countries and Towns from Southampton in the South, even to the
Banks of the Trent, North; although they have no navigable River that Way.

Add to this, That, as well by Sea, as by the Navigation of two great Rivers,
the Wye, and the Severn, they have the whole Trade of South Wales, as it were,
to themselves, and the greatest Part of that of North Wales; and as to their
Trade to Ireland, it is prodigiously increased since the Revolution,
notwithstanding the great Trade which of late the Merchants of Liverpool also
drive with that Kingdom.

The greatest Inconveniences of Bristol are its Situation, its narrow Streets,
and the Narrowness of its River; and we might mention also another Narrow; that
is, the Minds of the Generality of its People; for, let me tell you, the
Merchants of Bristol, though very rich, are not like the Merchants of London: the
latter may be said (as of old of the Merchants of Tire) to vie with the Princes
of the Earth; whereas the former, being raised by good Fortune, and Prizes
taken in the Wars, from Masters of Ships, and blunt Tars, have imbibed the
Manners of these rough Gentlemen so strongly, that they transmit it to their
Descendants, only with a little more of the Sordid, than is generally to be
found among the British Sailors; and I would advise the rich ones among them,
if they would be a little more polite and generous, than they usually are, to
travel, but not out of England neither; I mean only to London (that is, from
the second great Trading Town to the first); and they will see Examples worth
their Imitation, as well for princely Spirit, as upright and generous Dealings.

The Corporation being very tenacious in not admitting Persons to trade in
their Liberty, who are not Freemen, there are not so many new Buildings, and
Improvements of Streets, etc. at Bristol, as would otherwise be. As for the
City itself, there is hardly Room to set another House in it. The great Square,
called Queen's, formerly the Mead, where the Ground was subject to the Hazard
of Inundations, is now so raised, that it is free from that Inconvenience: It
is very handsomely built and inhabited, and a fine Equestrian Statue of King
William III. erected in the middle of it, done by the famous Rysbrack.

The Quay along the River is very noble, and well filled with all Sorts of
Merchandise, and a handsome Row of Houses fronts it. And I was informed, when I
was there last, that in order to make the Back of this City more commodious
than ever, the Corporation have purchased several Houses adjoining to the
Back-Gate, in order to pull them down, and make all flush from the Conduit on
the Back, clear round to the Quay; which when finished, will be one of the
completest Harbors in Europe. This Quay is reckoned the longest in England. It
has a Crane on it, the Workmanship of the late ingenious Mr. Padmore, which is
not to be equalled in Europe. The Merchants are greatly benefited by it, in the
extraordinary Dispatch it gives to the discharging of their Ships.

College-Green is deemed the healthiest Situation in the City.

There is erected within these few Years an Assembly Room, for Entertainment
and Amusement of the Gay, as at other considerable Places; for Luxury must
always follow Riches. It is a very handsome Building, and stands in the Way
from the City to the Hot-well.

The old Theater at Stokes-Croft is also altered into a commodious Room for an
Assembly, which is held every Tuesday during the Winter.

There were, when I was there, no less than fifteen Glass-Houses in Bristol,
which is more than are in the City of London: they use indeed, themselves, a
very great Number of Glass Bottles, which they send filled with Beer, Cider,
and Wine, to the West Indies, much more than goes from London; also vast
Numbers of Bottles are now used for sending the Water of St. Vincent's Rock,
not only all over England, but, we may say, all over the World.

This Hot-well, or Water of St. Vincent's Rock, is without the City, at the
Confluence of the two little Rivers, and on the North-side of the Stream. Not
many Years since, this Spring lay open at the Foot of the Rock, and was covered
by the salt Water at every Tide; and yet it preserved both its Warmth and
Virtue entire.

The Rock, though hard to Admiration, has since that been worked down, partly by
Labor, and partly blown in Pieces by Gunpowder; and an handsome large House is
built upon it, where they have good Apartments for entertaining distempered
Persons. The Well is secured, and a good Pump is fixed in it, so that they have
the Water pure and unmixed from the Spring itself, and they export vast
Quantities; for this Water keeps its Virtue better than that of Bath.

The following curious Account of the Bristol Waters, I am indebted for to the
same eminent Physician, who favored me with the learned Account of the Nature,
and Efficacy of the Bath and Tunbridge Waters.

The Bristol Waters, he says, seem only a natural Limewater, or pure Element
impregnated with a natural unburnt Limestone. All the Hills and Mountains round
that Water are nothing but a Quarry of natural unburnt Limestone, which is
daily dug up there for Building, and manifests itself to the Senses. This makes
these Bristol Waters, one of the purest, best, and most salutary, mere aqueous
Elements on the Globe, to cool all overheated Bowels, and to lessen all
preternatural Discharges. But the small Milk-warmth in them, when immediately
pumped up, upon the Well's being drained of the Influx of the Tide, shows there
is some other Principle in them besides natural Limestone: and that in Nature
can be no other than some weak Impregnation of Sulphur with Nitre or Sea Salt,
or perhaps a slight Touch of Iron. The Stones are some reddish, some blackish,
that are dug out of the Mountains circumjacent, but all of them natural
Limestone. These reddish and blackish Colors in the Stones necessarily imply
Sulphur and Iron; and these Three Principles, by chemical Processes and
Mixtures, are discovered in some small Proportion in the Waters. They are
excellent in all scorbutic and nervous Atrophies, in Hecticks, weak Lungs, all
Inflammations in whatever Part, all preternatural Evacuations; in short, in all
acrid Juices and viscid Blood, being a natural Simple Alcali; and in the first
Stages of a Phthisis Pulmonum; and if early had recourse to, and long continued
under a low, cooling, nutritive Regimen, they would probably stop the Growth
and Causes of most chronical Distempers.

There are 17 Parishes in the City, but 19 Churches, including the Cathedral
and the Church of St. Mark. There are besides those Churches, several
Meeting Houses, for the different Sectaries, viz. Independents, Quakers, and
Baptists.

The Cathedral is far from extraordinary.

Several of the Churches are very neat, and beautifully decorated, and worthy a
Traveller's Attention. That of St. Mary Radcliffe, or Redcliff, is a noble and
stately Edifice. It is very large and spacious, and has a fine Steeple or Tower.

In it is a very ancient Monument for Mr. William Cannings, Burgess and
Merchant of Bristol, the Founder of the Church, and a great Benefactor
otherwise to the City of Bristol.

On one Part of the Monument is a Latin Inscription, full of Abbreviations;
and, on the other Side, in English, an Inscription to his Praise, which I have
not room to insert.

Here is also an Inscription on the Monument of Sir William Penn, Knt.
Vice Admiral of England, the Father of the great William Penn, one of the Heads
of the Quakers, who was a Native of the City of Bristol.

A great Face of Seriousness and Religion appears at Bristol, and the
Magistrates are laudably strict in exacting the Observation of the Sabbath,
considering the general Dissoluteness that has broken in almost everywhere
else.

One thing they deserve high Commendation for; and that is the Neatness
observed in keeping their Churches, and the Care they take in preserving the
Monuments and Inscriptions of those buried in 'em. A Practice scandalously
neglected almost everywhere else in England, and even at Places we might
mention, where Money (another scandalous Practice) is exacted for seeing them.
This Care of the Monuments of the Dead brings many Visitors to their Churches
of traveling Strangers, who are always pleased with it, and make Comparisons
in its Favor, though very little to the Credit of some others, who are more
negligent. It Is indeed strange, That the Heirs and Families of the Deceased
should not think themselves more concerned, than they generally are, to keep up
the Monuments of their Ancestors. With great Piety, and at a great Expense, the
next Heir, or the most obliged, rears a Monument to the Deceased, and it is
dedicated, too, professedly, to Posterity. In a very little while, the Monument
is covered with Dust and Cobwebs, and the Inscription often effaced. Common
Decency does not succeed to this Piety, and it becomes a Monument of the
Ingratitude or Neglect of the Survivors, rather than an Honor to the Deceased.

Methinks Vanity alone, the common Inducement to these Erections, should
inspire another Manner of Acting. I cannot account for it any other way, but
that from the Prince to the Peasant, as a Family generally lies together in one
Vault or Tomb, very few are willing to see or think of their Coffins; and hence
it is, That some Men often look upon their very Heirs as Memento Mori's.
Unhappy Narrowness of Mind, equally to be lamented and despised!

Bristol is supposed to have an hundred thousand Inhabitants in the City, and
within three Miles of its Circumference; and they say, above Three Thousand
Sail of Ships belong to that Port.

It Is very remarkable, That this City is so well supplied with Coals, that though
they are all brought by Land Carriage, yet they are generally laid down at the
Doors of the Inhabitants, at seven, eight, or nine Shillings per Chaldron.

The Situation of the City is low, but on the Side of a rising Hill. The Ground
Plat of it is said very much to resemble that of old Rome, being circular, with
a something greater Diameter one way than another, but enough to make it oval;
and the River cutting off one small Part, as it were, a Sixth, or less, from
the rest.

The Bridge over the Avon is exceeding strong, the Arches very high, because of
the Depth of Water, and the Buildings so close upon it, that in passing the
Bridge, you see nothing but an entire full-built Street. The Tide of Flood
rises here near six Fathom, and runs very strong.

They draw all their heavy Goods here on Sleds, or Sledges, which they call
Gee-hoes, without Wheels. This kills a Multitude of Horses; and the Pavement is
worn so smooth by them, that in wet Weather the Streets are very slippery, and
in frosty Weather it is dangerous walking.

The noble Charities of Mr. Edward Colston, a worthy Merchant of Bristol, and
his Foundations, are an Honor to the Place, and to the Memory of that
excellent Man: and I am sorry, that my narrow Limits will not permit me to give
a particular Account of them.

But I ought not to omit, that one of his Charities only, cost him 25000 l. and
that is the noble Hospital or Almshouse erected by him, in the Year 1691, upon
his own Ground, on St. Michael's-Hill. The Front and two Sides are faced with
Freestone: it contains a Chapel neatly adorned, 24 Apartments, and other
Conveniences, for 12 Men, and 12 Women. The elder Brother receives 6 s. and
each of the others 3 s. weekly, besides an Allowance for Coal, etc. To a
Clergyman is paid the Sum of 10 l. yearly, for reading the Common Prayer twice
every Day, except when Prayers are read in St. Michael's Church, at which every
Member of this Almshouse is to attend.

In the Year 1696, he also purchased a Piece of Ground in Temple-street, and
built at his own Charge a School and Dwelling House, for a Master to instruct
40 Boys, in Writing, Arithmetic, and the Church Catechism. The Boys are
likewise to be clothed.

And his other Charities and Benefactions were without Number.

On St. Peter's Day, June 29. 1738, was opened at the Mint, an Infirmary for
this City, for the Reception of the sick, lame, and distressed Poor, after the
Example of those in London, Winchester, etc. It is denominated St. Peter's
Hospital, and very liberal Contributions have been made to it; and
particularly, we are told, that John Elbridge, Esquire Comptroller of the Customs
in this City, who died February 1738-9, besides many other charitable
Donations, bequeathed 5000 l. to this Infirmary, besides endowing a Charity
School on St. Michael's Hill, which he built several Years before his Death,
for educating and clothing a certain Number of poor Girls.

Large Pieces of Ground are cleared for building a Market, and a magnificent
Exchange; the former in High Street, and the latter in Corn-street. The old
Buildings which have been destroyed for that Purpose, have cost the Chamber of
this City upwards of Twenty thousand Pounds. And on the 10th of March 1740-1,
the first Stone of the Exchange was laid by the Mayor, with great Ceremony,
with several Pieces of Gold and Silver Coin under it, and this Inscription, on
the Stone: Regnante GEORGIO II. Pio, Felici, Augusto, Libertatis and Rei
Mercatoriae Domi Forisque Vindice, primarium Lapidem hujusce Aedificii,
Suffragio Civium, and Aere publico extructi, posuit HENRICUS COMB, Praetor, A.
C. MDCCXL. That is, In the Reign of GEORGE II. Pious, Prosperous, August,
Vindicator, at Home and Abroad, of Liberty and Trade, HENRY COMB, Mayor,
placed the First Stone of this Structure erected by the Votes of the Citizens,
and at the public Expense, A. D. 1740.

This Edifice when finished, will be one of the completest of its Kind in
Europe.

The old Library in King Street is rebuilding in a very handsome Manner, as is
also Merchant-Taylors-Hall in Broad-street, a Freestone Building near 70 Feet
long, and Breadth proportionable.

From this City I had Thoughts of coasting the Marshes or Border of Wales,
especially South Wales, by tracing the Rivers Wye and Lug, in Monmouth and
Herefordshire: but changed my Mind on Occasion of the Danger of the Ferries
over the Severn. In the mean time, I resolved to follow the Course of this
famous River, by which I should necessarily see the richest, most fertile, and
most agreeable Part of England; the Banks of the Thames only excepted.

From Bristol, West, you enter the County of Gloucester, and keeping the Avon
in View, you see King-Road, where the Ships generally take their Departure, as
ours at London do from Gravesend, and Hung-Road; and where they notify their
Arrival, as ours for London do in the Downs. The one lies within the Avon, the
other in the Severn Sea. Indeed great Part of Bristol is in the Bounds of
Gloucestershire, though it be a County of itself. From hence going away a
little North-west, we come to the Pill, a convenient Road for Shipping, and
where therefore they generally run back for Ireland, or for Wales. There is
also, a little farther, an ugly, dangerous, and very inconvenient Ferry over
the Severn, to the Mouth of Wye; namely, at Aust; which I shall mention again
presently.

As we turn North toward Gloucester, we lose the Sight of the Avon, and, in
about two Miles, exchange it for an open View of the Severn Sea, which you see
on the West Side, and which seems as broad as the Ocean there; except that you
see two small Islands in it, and that looking N. W. you discern plainly the
Coast of South Wales; and particularly, a little nearer hand, the Shore of
Monmouthshire. Then, as you go on, the Shores begin to draw toward one
another, and the Coasts to lie parallel; so that the Severn appears to be a
plain River, or an Aestuarium, somewhat like the Humber, or as the Thames is at
the Nore, being 4 to 5 and 6 Miles over; and is indeed a most raging and
furious kind of Sea. This is occasioned by those violent Tides called the Bore,
which flow here sometimes 6 or 7 Feet at once, rolling forward like a mighty
Wave: so that the Stern of a Vessel shall on a sudden be lifted up 6 or 7 Feet
upon the Water, when the Head of it is fast a-ground.

After Coasting the Shore about 4 Miles farther, the Road being by the low Salt
Marshes kept at a Distance from the River; we came to Aust Ferry, from a little
dirty Village called Aust; near which you come to take Boat.

This Ferry lands you at Beachly in Monmouthshire, so that on the Outside it is
called Aust Passage, and on the other Side Beachly Passage. From whence you go
by Land two little Miles to Chepstow, a large Port Town on the River Wye. But
of that Part I shall say more in its Place.

Here is a good neat Chapel, with an high Tower at the West End, adorned with
Pinacles.

This Place is memorable from a Circumstance in the Reign of King Edw. I. who
being here, invited Lewellin Prince of Wales, who was on the other Side, to
come over and confer with him, and settle some Matters in Dispute between them;
but the Prince refused, and the King thereupon crossed over to him, who, in a
Rapture of Generosity, leaped into the Water, to receive the King in his Boat,
telling him, His Humility had conquered his Pride, and his Wisdom triumphed
over his Folly.

When we came to Aust, the hither Side of the Passage, the Sea was so broad,
the Fame of the Bore of the Tide so formidable, the Wind also made the Water so
rough, and, which was worse, the Boats to carry over both Man and Horse
appeared so very mean, that, in short, none of us cared to venture: so we came
back, and resolved to keep on the Road to Gloucester.

Thornbury is a Market Town, and has a Customary Mayor and 12 Aldermen, and
was given in the Conqueror's Time to the famous Fitz-Hammon. Here are the
Foundations of a large Castle, designed but never finished, by the Duke of
Buckingham in King Henry VIII.'s Time. Here is a spacious Church built
Cathedral-wise, it has fine wide Ails, and 3 Chancels, with a high and
beautiful Tower. Here is a Free School and 4 small Almshouses.

On the right lies Wotton, a pretty Market Town, governed by a Mayor elected
annually at the Court Leet. It Is famous for its Clothing Trade. The Church,
which is a Vicarage, is large, and has Two wide Ails, and an high handsome
Tower, adorned with Battlements and Pinacles. There are in it diverse Tombs,
Monuments, and Inscriptions, chiefly for the Family of Berkley. Here is a
Free School and some Charity-houses.

Directly North of this Town lies Dursley, a good Clothing and Market Town,
governed by a Bailiff and 4 Constables, and has been formerly noted for sharp,
overreaching People, from whence arose a Proverbial Saying of a sharp Man, He
is a Man of Dursley. The Church is good, has 2 Ails, and an handsome Spire.

Turning North-west, we came to Berkley, a noted Town, so called from Berk, a
Beech, and Leas, Pasture. It is the largest Parish in the County, and consists
of rich Meadow-grounds, and above 30 Parishes depend on this Manor, for which a
Feefarm Rent was paid, in King Henry II.'s Time, of 500 l. 17 s. 2 d. which
shows the vast Extent and Value of this Estate. It belongs to the present Earl
of Berkley, who is also Baron of Dursley. Adjoining to this Town is the strong
Castle of Berkley, a magnificent, though antique Building, and the ancient Seat
of this noble Family, from whence it derives its Name as well as Title, ever
since the Time of King Henry II. who gave it to Robert Fitzharding, who assumed
the Name of Berkley, and from whom the present Earl is lineally descended. King
Edw. II. of England, as all our learned Writers agree, was murdered in this
Castle; as King Richard II. was in that of Pontefract, in Yorkshire; but I
refer to our Histories for these horrid Facts. They show the Apartments, where
they say that King was kept a Prisoner: but they do not admit that he was
killed there. The Place is rather ancient, than pleasant or healthful, lying
low, and near the Water. Here is a large spacious Church, with an Ayle on each
Side, and a Chapel adjoining, which is the Burial-place of the Family, a neat
Vestry, and a strong high Tower.

On the Right of the Road is Stanley, a little Market Town, where was formerly
a Priory, the Ruins whereof appear still. The Church is built in the Form of a
Cross, with a Tower in the middle.

A great Improvement has been lately made in these Parts; for the Earl of
Berkley has just finished (1740) a great Bulwark at Frampton upon Severn, near
this Place, called Hock-Crib, the Design of which is to enforce the River
Severn, by Art's-Point, into its former Chanel. It is said his Lordship intends
to build another, four Miles below the former, by which he will undoubtedly
gain a large Tract of Land, contiguous to what is called the New Grounds,
inferior to none in England for the Richness of its Soil.

From hence we saw, across the River, the ancient Forest of Dean, which once
contained 30000 Acres of Land, being Twenty Miles long, and so full of Wood,
that it was very dangerous to travel through it. Its Oak was famous for
Shipping, the Glory of our own, and so much the Envy of other Nations, that the
famous Spanish Armada had it in special Charge to burn it. The great Number of
Iron Forges near it has greatly lessened, though not consumed the Wood, which is
still preserved with great Care. It is subject to Forest-Laws, and the
Iron-Miners have here a Court also.

From hence to Gloucester, we see nothing considerable, but a most fertile,
rich Country, and a fine River, but narrower, as you go Northward, till, a
little before we come to Gloucester, it ceases to be navigable by Ships of
Burden, but continues to be so, by large Barges, above an hundred Miles
farther, not reckoning the Turnings and Windings of the River: besides that it
receives several large and navigable Rivers into it.

Gloucester (called by the Britons, Caer-glow, i. e. Fine City, and in
Imitation of it Glevum by the Romans) abounds much with Crosses and Statues of
the Kings of England, and has an handsome Prospect of Steeples, some without a
Church; for in the late Civil Wars, when it held out vigorously against King
Charles I. and was then very strong, it suffered much; for its Eleven Churches
were then reduced to Five, and all its Walls and Works were demolished. The
City is still tolerably built; and here is a large Stone Bridge over the
Severn, the first next the Sea. Here are several Market-houses supported with
Pillars, one a very old one of Stone, in Gothic Architecture, ancient and
uncommon, now turned into a Cistern for Water.

The old Proverb, As sure as God's at Gloucester, certainly alluded to the vast
Number of Churches and religious Foundations here; for you can scarce walk past
10 Doors, but somewhat of that sort occurs.

The Cathedral is an old venerable Pile. The Western Part is old and mean; but
from the Tower, which is very handsome, you have a most glorious Prospect
Eastward, through the Choir finely vaulted at top; and the Ladies Chapel to the
East Window, which is very magnificent. On the North-side lies that unfortunate
King Edw. II. in an Alabaster Tomb, and, out of the Abundance of pious
Offerings to his Remains, the Religious built this Choir; and the Votaries to
his Shrine, for some time after his Death, could hardly find Room in the Town.
So changeable are the Tempers of Men! and so little a Space is required to
dispose the Minds of the fluctuating Many, to Hosannah or Crucify!

Before the High Altar in the Middle of the Church, lies the equally
unfortunate Prince Robert, eldest Son of the Conqueror, after a miserable Life
for many Years before his Death. But his Monument remains, and his Bones are at
Rest; which is more than can be said of the Monument of his younger Brother,
King Henry I. who, as the second Brother William Rufus had done, robbed him of
his Right, and no Traces of his Monument are left at Reading-Abbey, where he
was buried with his Queen. He lies in a wooden Tomb, with his Coat of Arms
painted, and upon it his Effigies in Irish Oak, crosslegg'd like a Jerusalem
Knight. The famous Strongbow, who subdued Ireland, lies buried in the
Chapter House.

The Cloisters in this Cathedral are exquisitely beautiful, in the Style of the
Chapel of King's-College, Cambridge. There are large Remains in the City of
Abbeys of Black and White Friars. A Mile or two distant is Robin Hood's Hill,
as it is called, which affords now a pleasant Walk for the Citizens, and from
which they are attempting to supply the City with Water, which it much wants.
By this City, the Rickning Way runs from the Severn's Mouth into Yorkshire.

The Inhabitants boast much of the Antiquity of their first Cathedral, which
they pretend had Bishops and Preachers here Anno 189: The first Cathedral, we
say; for, it has been, as reported, thrice destroyed by Fire.

William the Conqueror gave this City and Castle to the famous Robert
Fitz-Hammon, afterward Lord of Glamorgan. Edol, one of the British Nobles, who
attended King Vortigern to the Congress appointed by Hengist, was Earl of this
Place. He was a Man of great personal Strength, and seeing the Saxons drawing
forth their concealed Weapons, he disarmed one of them, and fought valiantly;
but being overpowered by Numbers, he escaped to this City, after having killed
70 Saxons with his own Hands. Afterward, in a Battle fought against the Saxons
near the River Don, he fixed his Eye upon Hengist, and never quitted him, till
he took him Prisoner, and struck off his Head.

In the little Isle of Alney, near this Town, the famous single Combat was
fought between Edmund Ironside and Canute the Dane, for the whole Kingdom, in
Sight of both their Armies.

The City is governed by a Mayor, 12 Aldermen, and 24 Common-council-men. It
has also an High-Steward, (who is usually a Nobleman) and a Recorder. They are
allowed the highest Marks of magistratical Honor, Scarlet Gowns, the Sword,
and Cap of Maintenance, and 4 Sergeants at Mace. Here are 12 Companies, the
Masters whereof attend the Mayor on all public Occasions in their Gowns, and
with Streamers. It has a large Quay and Wharf on the River for Trade, and a
Custom-house. Here is also a Town Hall for the Assizes and public Business,
which they call the Booth-hall, and great Part of the Castle is still standing.

The first Protestant Bishop of this Church was that truly Reverend and
Religious Divine, Dr. John Hooper, who was burnt to Death in the Cemetery of
his own Cathedral, in the Reign of Queen Mary.

The Whispering-place in this Cathedral formerly passed for a kind of Wonder
among the Vulgar; but since, Experience has taught the easily-comprehended
Reason of the Thing; and there is now the like in the Church of St. Paul,
London.

Here is great Provision for the Poor by Hospitals; particularly Bartholomew's
Hospital maintains 54 Men and Women, to whom belong a Minister, Physician and
Surgeon. And Sir Thomas Rich, Bart. a Native of this Place, gave 6000 l. by
Will, for a Blue-Coat Hospital, wherein are educated 20 poor Boys; and 10 poor
Men and 10 Women are maintained, and clothed annually. Besides these and three
more, there are many Benefactions to encourage young Tradesmen, and place out
Boys Apprentices. And they have lately erected an Infirmary here, after the
laudable Example of that of Winchester, etc.

At Lassington, near Gloucester, are found certain Stones about the Breadth of
a Silver Penny, and Thickness of a Half-crown, called Astroites or Star-stones,
being fine-pointed like a Star, and flat. They are of a greyish Color, and the
flat Sides are naturally finely engraven, as it were. But I have taken Notice
of these before.

From Gloucester we kept Eastward, and soon came to Cheltenham, a Market Town,
where is still a pretty good Trade carried on in Malt, but not so considerable
as formerly. Here is a good Church in the Form of a Cross, with Ails on each
Side, and a Spire rising in the Middle, noted for a good Ring of Bells. But
what is more remarkable is, that the Minister is to be nominated by, and must
be a Fellow of, Jesus-College, Oxon, (though the Vicarage is but 40 l. a Year)
but approved of by the Earl of Gainsborough; and he cannot hold it more than six
Years. Here is a Free School, an Hospital, and some other Charities.

The Mineral Waters lately discovered at Cheltenham, which are of the
Scarborough Kind, are what will make this Place still more and more remarkable,
and frequented. An eminent Physician has obliged me with the following Account
of their Nature, and Qualities.

These Waters, he observes, were first found out by the Flocks of all the
neighboring Pigeons going constantly thither to provoke their Appetites, as
well as to quench the uncommon Thirst of these salacious hot Birds. I have been
informed, says he, by a Physician of Credit and Experience, who had made all
the common Trials on them, and observed their Effects on many Persons of
various Constitutions, and in different Distempers, who had drank them, That,
on Evaporation, they were found to contain, in a Gallon, eight Drachms of a
nitrous Salt, with two Drachms of an alcalious Earth: That they were compounded
of a large Quantity of Nitre, to which they owed their purgative Virtue; a
light Sulphur, which the fetid Dejections manifested; and a volatile Steel,
discoverable by a transparent blue Color, when mixed with an Infusion of
Nut-galls. Alcalious Spirits have no Effect on them; but they ferment with
Acids. He further adds, That there might be found some other Materials in their
Composition, perhaps, if more minutely examined and tortured: but that these
mentioned Principles were evident and incontestable, and were sufficient to
account for all their Effects and Operation; the others (if there be any) being
of little Efficacy. In the Operation they empty the Bowels according to their
Dose, but gently, mildly, and easily, without Sickness, Nausea, Gripes, or
causing great Lowness, far beyond any artificial Purges whatsoever. They give a
good Appetite, an easy Digestion, and quiet Nights, in all Nephritick and Gouty
Cases, when not under the Fit; in all Rheumatick, Scrophulous, Scorbutic, or
Leprous Cases; but especially in Spermatic, Urinary, or Haemorrhoidal Cases, he
thinks them sovereign, and not to be matched. In a Word, in all Inflammatory
Cases of whatever Kind, and whatever Part, he thinks them one of the most
salutary Means which can be used. Those of pretty strong Nerves, and firm
Constitutions, bear them with high Spirits, great Pleasure, and Profit; but
they do not at all suit with those of weak Nerves, Paralytick, Hypochondriack,
or Hysteric Disorders, or those who are subject to any kind of Fits, Cramps,
or Convulsions: they ruffle such too much, as generally all Purgatives do. He
thinks they have a great Affinity to the Scarborough Waters, and might do great
Cures in most Chronical Distempers, if Exercise, and a proper Regimen, were
directed with them.

Following the Road toward Warwick directly, we arrived at Winchcomb, a small
Market Town, situate in a Bottom, in the midst of good Pasture and Arable
Lands, but of no great Account. The Church is a good Building, has two Ails,
a large Chancel, and a lofty Tower adorned with Battlements and Pinacles. It is
remarkable, that it is a Curacy worth no more than 10 l. a Year, though the
Impropriation is worth 300 l. annually. Here was formerly a very rich Abbey,
whereof the Abbot was Mitred, founded by Offa King of Mercia.

Here we turned from the Road, and struck N.W. to Tewksbury, encompassed with 4
Rivers; the Avon and Carran on the N. the Severn on the W. and the Swyliate on
the S. It Is governed by 2 Bailiffs, and 24 Burgesses; and its Neighborhood to
Cotswold-Downs makes the Clothing Trade flourish here. It is a large and very
populous Town, situate upon the Warwickshire River Avon, so called to
distinguish it from the Bristol Avon, and others. The Town was long famous for
its Mustard-balls, as also for a great Manufacture of Stockens; as are also
Campden in this County, and Pershore in Worcestershire.

The great old Church at Tewksbury may be called one of the largest Churches in
England, that is not Collegiate or Cathedral. It is very high, has two spacious
Ails, a stately Tower, and a large Chancel. The Communion Table is one entire
Marble Stone near 14 Feet long, and 3 and broad.

The Town is famous for the decisive Battle fought between the Houses of
Lancaster and York, in the Reign of King Edward IV. of the latter House, who
was Conqueror.

As Tewksbury lies on the Borders of Worcestershire, we soon entered that
County, and came to Upton, an ancient Market Town of some Note upon the Severn,
over which it has a good Bridge. Roman Coins are frequently dug up here.

On the Left, Westward of this Town, and which parts this County from that of
Hereford, are Malvern Hills, which consist of large Mountains, prodigiously
high and lofty, gradually rising one above another for about 7 Miles together.
On these Hills are two Villages, called Great Malvern and Little Malvern, at
the Distance of about Two Miles from each other, each having had formerly an
Abbey of Benedictines, the last lying in a dismal Cavity between the Hills. On
the very Top of these Hills may be seen the Ruins of a prodigious Ditch, which
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester dug, to separate his Possessions from those of the
Church of Hereford. On these Hills are 2 Medicinal Springs, called Holy Wells:
one is good for the Eyes, and putrid fetid Livers; and the other for Cancers.

From Upton we traveled North-east, and came to Pershore, which lies on the
lower London Road to Worcester: it is said to be so called from the great
Number of Pear Trees, which thrive plentifully here. It is a pleasant
Market Town lying on the Avon, and famous for the Stocken Trade, as I have
mentioned before.

Eastward of this Town stands Evesham, situate on a gentle Ascent from the same
River, over which it has a Bridge of 7 stately Arches. It is an ancient
Mayor-town, and has the Privilege to try Felons. It is memorable for the
decisive Battle, wherein Simon Montfort and the Barons were defeated by Prince
Edward, afterward King Edward I. who thereby released his Father out of
Captivity. Here are 2 Churches, with small Spire Steeples; but neither of them
has any Bells, which have been removed to a famous Tower built by Abbot
Litchfield, and stands near these Churches.

All around this Town lies that fruitful and plentiful Country, called from
this Place, The Vale of Evesham, which runs all along the Banks of the Avon,
from Tewksbury to Pershore, and to Stratford upon Avon, in the South Part of
Warwickshire; which River is so far navigable.

The Parish Church of Stratford is very old. In it we saw the Monument of the
inimitable Shakespeare, whose Dramatick Performances set him at the Head of the
British Theater, and will make him renowned to the End of Time. His Busto is in
the Wall on the North-side of the Church, and a flat Gravestone covers the
Body, in the Ayle just under him; on which Gravestone these Lines are written:
Good Friend, for Jesus' sake, forbear
To move the Dust that rests here.
Blessed be the Man that spares these Stones;
And cursed be he, that moves my Bones!


Over the Avon at Stratford is built a fair Stone Bridge of 14 Arches, with a
long Causeway at the West End of it, walled on both Sides.

The Navigation of this River Avon is an exceeding Advantage to all this Part
of the Country, and also to the Commerce of the City of Bristol. For by this
River they drive a very great Trade for Sugar, Oil, Wine, Tobacco, Iron, Lead,
and, in a Word, all heavy, Goods which are usually carried by Water almost as
far as Warwick; and in Return, the Corn, and especially Cheese, are carried
back from Gloucestershire and Warwickshire, to Bristol; for Gloucester Cheese
is excellent of the kind, and this County drives a great Trade in it.

This Vale extending itself in Warwickshire, and under the Ridge of little
Mountains called Edgehill, is there called the Vale of Red-horse. All the
Grounds, put together, make a most pleasant Corn Country, especially remarkable
for the Goodness of the Air, and Fertility of the Soil.

Not far from Stretford, on the Borders of this County of Worcester, is
Alcester, a Market Town, much frequented by Dealers in Corn: it is of great
Antiquity; as appears by old Foundations of Buildings made of Roman Brick, and
Gold, Silver and Brass Coins found here. The old Roman Way, called
Ikenild-street, passes through the Town.

Gloucestershire must not be passed over, without some Account of another
pleasant and fruitful Vale, which crosses part of the Country, from East to
West, on that Side of the Cotswold, and which is called Stroud-water; famous
not only for the finest Cloths, but for dying those Cloths of the beautifulest
Scarlets, and other grand Colors, that are anywhere in England, perhaps in any
Part of the World. Here I saw Two Pieces of Broad-cloth made, one Scarlet, the
other Crimson in Grain, which were sent as Presents, the one to the late King
George, whilst Elector, and the other to his present Majesty, which were very
graciously accepted. The Cloth was valued at 45 s. per Yard, and was well worth
it; for nothing so rich of that kind had been ever made in England before, as I
was informed.

The Clothiers lie all along the Banks of this River, for near 20 Miles, and in
the Town of Stroud, which lies in the middle of it, as also at Paynswick, which
I have mentioned before. The River makes its Way to the Severn, about Five
Miles below Gloucester.

From Tewksbury, North, it is 12 Miles to Worcester, along the Banks of the
Severn, where I was wonderfully delighted with the Hedge-rows, lined all the
Way with Apple and Pear Trees, full of Fruit, and those so common, that any
Passengers, as they travel the Road, may gather and eat what they please. Here
also, as well as in Gloucestershire, you meet with Cider in the Publick-houses,
sold as Beer and Ale is in other Parts of England, and as cheap.

We saw at a Distance, in a most agreeable Situation, the Seat of Sir Herbert
Perrot Pakington, a Baronet of a very ancient Family.

On the other Side of the Severn, at Whitley-court, five Miles from Bewdly, and
seven from Worcester, the Lord Foley has a Seat, situate in a large Park.

Worcester, the Branonium of the Romans, seems to have been built by them to
curb the Silures on the other Side of the Severn, and in Imitation of the Roman
Name the Britons called it Caer Wrangon. It is situate in a Valley on the
Severn, which though generally rapid elsewhere, glides on here very gently. It is
a large, populous, ancient, well built City, and the best paved in England. The
Foregate-street is the most regular and beautiful that can be seen out of
London. The Guild Hall is a very fine Building; but the Statues on the Outside
disgrace it.

There is a good old Stone Bridge over the Severn, which stands exceeding high
from the Surface of the Water, and has a Tower upon it, said to be built by the
Romans. But as the Stream of the Severn is contracted here by the Buildings on
either Side, there is evident Occasion sometimes for the Height of the Bridge,
the Waters rising to an incredible Degree in the Wintertime.

The Commandery here formerly belonging to St. John's of Jerusalem, is now
possessed by Mr. Wild, and is a fine old House of Timber, in the Form of a
Court. The Hall, roof'd with Irish Oak, makes one Side of it, built for the
Reception of Pilgrims. The Windows are adorned with Imagery, and Coats Armorial
of stained Glass. It stands just without the South Gate of the City in the
London Road, where the Heat of the famous Battle happened between King Charles
II. and Oliver Cromwell; and they frequently find Bones of the Slain, on
digging in the Garden. Above in the Park is to be seen a great Work of Four
Bastions, called the Royal Mount, whence a Vallum and Ditch run both ways to
incompass this Side of the City. Here, it is probable, the Storm began, when the
Royalists were driven back into the City with great Slaughter, and the King
escaped being made a Prisoner in the narrow Street at this Gate, by a loaded
Cart of Hay purposely overthrown, which gave him time to retire at the opposite
Gate to Boscobel, or White Lady's.

A Mile and half above the South Gate, on the Top of the Hall, is the
celebrated Perrywood, where Cromwell's Army lay, and which affords a fine
Prospect over the County.

The Cathedral is an ancient Building. The Body of the Church makes no
extraordinary Appearance on the Outside. The Tower is low, without any Spire,
only four very small Pinacles on the Corners; and yet it has some little Beauty
in it, more than the Church itself. The upper Part has some Images in it, but
decayed by Time. In it is buried the restless King John; not where now his
Monument stands, which is in the Choir, before the high Altar; but under a
little Stone before the Altar of the Eastermost Wall of the Church. On each
Side of him, on the Ground, lie the Effigies of the two Bishops, his chief
Saints, Wolston and Oswald, from whose Neighborhood he hoped to be safe. The
Image of the King probably lay here also upon the Ground, now elevated upon a
Tomb in the said Choir.

On the South Side of the High Altar is a large and handsome Stone Chapel over
the Monument of Prince Arthur, eldest Son of Henry VII. who died at Ludlow, as
his Tombstone specifies, Anno 1502; and whose Relict Catharine Infanta of
Spain, his Brother Henry VIII. marrying, after 20 Years Wedlock, was divorced
from, to make way for Anna Bolen. The Choir of this Chapel is exquisite
Workmanship; but suffered much in the late Civil Wars.

Here is also, among other noted Monuments, one for that famous Countess of
Salisbury, who dancing before Edward III. in his great Hall at Windsor, dropped
her Garter, which the King taking up, honored it so much (as the idle Story
goes) as to make it the denominating Ensign of The most Noble Order of the
Garter; but this I have refuted under my Account of Windsor. Though, that the
Countess did drop her Garter, is Fact; and the King might gallantly, to silence
the Jests and Railleries of the Court, wear it during the Entertainment,
instead of his Garter of the Order. But the Motto was given in Allusion to the
Order of Knighthood, and not of the Garter.

The Monument is very fine, and there is this remarkable in it; that there are
several Angels cut in Stone about it, strewing Garters over the Tomb.

There are several other ancient Monuments in this Church, which I have not
Room to mention.

The Cloisters are very perfect, and the Chapter House is large, supported, as
to its arched Roof, by one umbilical Pillar. It Is now become a Library, is well
furnished, and has many good ancient MSS.

There is a large old Gatehouse standing, and near it the Castle with a very
high artificial Mount or Keep, nigh the River.

The Bridge I have mentioned has six Arches, and the Banks of the Severn look
very beautiful on each Side, being enriched with pleasant Meadows.

This City is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen. It has Two Chamberlains, a
Recorder, a Town Clerk, Two Coroners, a Sword Bearer, Four Sergeants at Mace,
and a Sheriff; being, like Gloucester, a County of itself, divided into Seven
Wards, in which are Twelve Parish Churches.

The Inhabitants are generally esteemed rich, being full of Business,
occasioned chiefly by the Cloathing-trade, of which the City and the Country
round carries on a great Share, as well for the Turkey as the Home Trade. The
Number of Hands, which it imploys in this Town and adjoin^ng Villages, in
Spinning, Carding, Rowing, Fulling, Weaving, etc. is almost incredible. One
Part of the Town is wholly possessed by Welsh People, who speak their own
Language, and are employed in this Manufacture. So that this City, which was
formerly so great a Grievance to the great ones of that Principality, now
administers Subsistence to a vast Number of the meaner ones.

It is adorned by a capacious and beautiful Structure, called the Public
Workhouse; in which Children of both Sexes are trained up to the Knowledge of
Trade, and the Practice of Religion and Virtue; by whose Labor also the Aged
and Decrepid are supported. This laudable Institution continued several Years
to the great Benefit of the City, till at last the Guardians of it having
contracted a Debt of upwards of 300 l. they returned the Poor back to their
respective Parishes; and the whole Charity being frustrated, and put an End to,
the Corporation let out the Building for a Hop-market, Warehouses, etc. to pay
the incurred Debt, either Principal or Interest.

Hereupon their worthy Representative Samuel Sandys, Esquire and other Gentlemen,
procured an Act of Parliament for restoring it to its first laudable End; which
Act took place from June 1730, and will be a lasting Monument to the Honor of
the disinterested and publick-spirited Gentleman, to whose unwearied
Application, and inflexible Resolution, it was owing: for it must be observed,
that alienated Charities are some of the hardest things in the World to be
restored.

Opposite to this Workhouse, Robert Berkley, of Spetchley, Esquire erected a fine
Hospital for Twelve poor Men, and gave 2000 l. to build it, and 4000 l. to
endow it.

Here are besides Three Grammar-schools, and Seven Almshouses, all liberally
endowed. St. Nicolas Church, in this City, has been lately rebuilt, and is a
neat and commodious Edifice.

And the Church of All Saints in this Town being in so ruinous a Condition,
that Part of it actually fell down; and the rest being ready to fall, an Act
passed, Sess. 1737-8, for taking down and rebuilding the same.

From Worcester I made some Excursions, to visit the Towns and Country
Northward; and first came to Droitwych, a corporate Bailiwick-town, which has
Four Churches, and is pretty wealthy. It Is famous for excellent White Salt,
which is made here from the Summer to the Winter Solstice; no^ but they may
make Salt all the Year long, but they fear to over-stock the Market. It
appears, by Doomsday-book, they made Salt here before the Conquest. The Salt
Springs are very good, and productive of Plenty of Brine; and the Town lies on
the River Salwarp.

Proceeding directly on, in the Road, we arrived at Broomsgrove, a large
Bailiwick-town, likewise on the River Salwarp, where the Clothing-trade is
pretty briskly carried on. It is the Center of Four Roads; one leads to
Coventry, and Leicester; another to Warwick, and so to London; a Third to
Worcester; and the Fourth to Shrewsbury.

Between Worcester and Spetchley was St. Oswald's Hospital, demolished in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. But Dr. Fell, Bishop of Oxford, after the
Restoration, recovered much of the Possessions, and erected a fair and large
Hospital, which comfortably maintains Twelve poor Men.

Kidderminster is a Town in this County of Worcester, very considerable for its
Woollen Trade, particularly the Weaving of what they call Lindsey-woolsey, in
which the Inhabitants are almost wholly employed. It is a large, but yet
compact and populous Town, situated on the Stour, and governed by a Bailiff,
Twelve Capital Burgesses, Twenty-five Common-council-men, etc. In its Church is
a cross-legg'd Monument of Sir Thomas Acton.

Stourbridge is also situate upon the River Stour, over which it has a very
good Bridge, whence its Name. This Town deals greatly in Glass Manufacture of
all Sorts, and also in Iron Works of all Sorts; and is vastly improved of late
Years, both in Houses and Inhabitants. At Swinford, near Stourbridge, is a
noble Hospital for Sixty Boys, erected by the First Founder of the noble Family
of Foley, which deserves the Attention of a Traveller, and the Praise of all
Men. At Stourbridge also fine Stone Pots are made for Glass-makers to melt
their Metal in, also Crucibles, etc. the Clay, of which these Things are made,
being almost peculiar to the Place.

Birmingham is a very populous Town, and full of Iron Manufactories, especially
of the smaller Sorts; in which the Inhabitants so greatly excel, that their
Works are carried to all Parts of the World in great Quantities. The Town is,
of late Years, greatly improved and enlarged by many new Buildings both public
and private; particularly a new Church built by virtue of an Act of Parliament
passed in the 7th of Queen Anne, which is dedicated to St. Philip. This Town is
in Warwickshire, on the Borders of this County, situated on the Side of a Hill,
and has a most plentiful Market.

A little below Worcester, Westward, the Severn receives a River of a long deep
Course, which comes from Shropshire, called the Teme, on which stands a small
Market Town called Tenbury, but of little Note. I passed this River formerly in
my Way to Ludlow, at Broadway, a little Village; but now I went by the Way of
Bewdley, on the Side of Shropshire.

In this Course we saw Two fine Seats not very far from the Severn, viz. the
Lord Foley's, and the Earl of Bradford's, as we did before a most delicious
House, belonging to the Lord Conway. Indeed this Part of the County, and all
the County of Salop, is filled with fine Seats of the Nobility and Gentry,
which we have not Room to describe.

Bewdley or Beau-lieu, i. e. fine Place, said to be so called from its pleasant
and delightful Situation upon the Side of a Hill declining to the Severn, is a
small Bailiff Market Town, well supplied with Corn, Malt, Leather, and Caps,
which the Dutch Seamen buy, called Monmouth Caps, and noted for the Palace
which King Henry VII. built here for his Son Prince Arthur, called Tickenhall.
It had a very fine Park about it, which, with the House, was destroyed by the
furious Enthusiasts in the Civil War.

A Mile off is Ribsford, the Seat of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, pleasantly
surrounded with Woods. Here is a good Picture of William the First Earl of
Pembroke.

The Ends of the Hills toward the River are generally Rocks: and
Blackston-hill has an Hermitage cut out of it, with a Chapel, and several
Apartments. Near it is a pretty Rock upon the Edge of the Water, covered with
Oaks, and many curious Plants.

Not far from Cherbury Park is the Parish of Roch, where the famous Augustine's
Oak stood, so called from a Conference held under it by Augustine and the
British Bishops, about the Celebration of Easter, and preaching God's Word, and
administering Baptism after the Rites of the Church of Rome, which the British
Bishops refused.

I thought once to have returned to Worcester, and so proceeded to
Herefordshire, and down to Monmouth, and so round the Coast of Wales. But being
desirous to take in, first, the South Part of Shropshire, I followed the Severn
up North, and came to Bridgenorth, a very ancient and noted Town, said to be
built by Queen Aethelfleda, in the Time of the Heptarchy: it consists of Two
Towns, the High and the Low, which are separated by the Severn, but united by a
fair Stone Bridge of Seven Arches, which has a Gate and Gate House. The
Situation is pleasant, the Air healthy, the Prospect delightful and commodious
for Trade. It has been fortified with Walls and a Castle, which are now in
Ruins; and the Area in the last is converted to a fine Bowling-green. The
Streets are many, and well paved. It is governed by a Bailiff, Twenty-four
Aldermen, and other inferior Officers. It is noted for good Gun-makers and its
Stocken Manufacture. It has a well-replenished Market, and Five Fairs annually,
Two whereof hold Three Days, which are much resorted to, and abound with
Horses, Black Cattle, Sheep, Butter, Cheese, Bacon, Linen Cloth, and Hops, in
great Plenty. Here are Two Churches, and though the Parishes are large, and the
Town very populous, are very indifferently endowed, and so is the Free School.
There is a hollow Way cut through the Rock, leading from the high Town to the
Bridge, of the Depth of 20 Feet, in some Parts of it, and likewise many Vaults
and Dwellings are hewn out of the Rock.

From hence we advanced in the direct Road to Shrewsbury, and came to Great
Wenlock, an ancient incorporated Town, governed by a Bailiff and Burgesses; but
noted for nothing extraordinary.

Leaving Shrewsbury for my Observation at my Return from Wales through Cheshire,
we turned short here, and fell down Southward to Ludlow, famed more for its
Beauty than Antiquity; for it seems, the Castle, which was so truly
magnificent, was built by Roger de Montgomery in the Conqueror's Time.

But before I speak more of this Castle, I shall observe, that on the Extremity
of this County, in a kind of Promontory, which runs in between Montgomeryshire
and Radnorshire, upon the Clun, lies.

Bishops Castle, a small Market Bailiwick Town; and not very far from it, just
at the Entrance into Montgomeryshire, is a noted Place called Bishops^ott;
where is an Acre of Ground surrounded with an Intrenchment. The Clun meets the
Teme at Ludlow, and both, united, run to Clebury, a small Town on the Borders
of Worcestershire, where it falls, as I mentioned before, into the Severn.

The Castle of Ludlow shows plainly in its Decay, what it was in its
flourishing Estate: it is the Palace of the Prince of Wales, in Right of his
Principality.

Its Situation is indeed most beautiful; there is a most spacious Plain or Lawn
in its Front, which formerly continued near Two Miles; but much of it is now
enclosed. The Country round it is exceeding pleasant, fertile, populous, and
the Soil rich; nothing can be added by Nature, to make it a Place fit for a
Royal Palace. It is built in the North-west Angle of the Town upon a Rock,
commanding a delightful Prospect Northward; and on the West is shaded by a
lofty Hill, and washed by the River. The Battlements are of great Height and
Thickness, with Towers at convenient Distances. That Half which is within the
Walls of the Town, is secured with a deep Ditch; the other is founded on a
solid Rock. A Chapel here has abundance of Coats of Arms upon the Panels, as
has the Hall, together with Lances, Spears, Firelocks, and old Armor.

It will be no Wonder, that this noble Castle is in the very Perfection of
Decay, when we acquaint our Readers, that the present Inhabitants live upon the
Sale of the ancient Materials. All the fine Courts, the Royal Apartments,
Halls, and Rooms of State, lie open, abandoned, and some of them falling down;
for since the Courts of the President and Marches are taken away, here is
nothing that requires the Attendance of any public People; so that Time, the
great Devourer of the Works of Men, begins to eat into the very Stone Walls,
and to spread the Face of Ruin upon the whole Fabric. Over several of the
Stable-doors are the Arms of Queen Elizabeth, the Earls of Pembroke, etc.

The Town of Ludlow is likewise fortified with Walls, through which are Seven
Gates. It is well built, and a Place of good Trade; but, to be sure, it is not
the better for the ruinous State of the Castle, and the abolishing of the Court
held there for the Marches. It stands on the Edge of the two Counties,
Shropshire and Worcestershire, but is itself in the first.

On the South Side of the Town runs the Teme, over which is a good Bridge. The
River has several Dams across it, in the Nature of Cataracts, whereby abundance
of Mills are turned; and great is the Roar of the superfluous Waters.

Ludlow has a very good Church with an handsome Tower, and a pleasant Ring of
Six Bells. The Windows are full of painted Glass pretty entire.

There are some old Monuments of the Lords Presidents, etc. and an Inscription
upon the North Wall of the Choir, relating to Prince Arthur, elder Brother to
King Henry VIII. who died here, and in this Spot his Bowels were deposited. It
is said, That his Heart was taken up some time ago in a leaden Box.

In the Eastern Angle of the Choir is a Closet, anciently called The Godhouse,
where the Priests secured their consecrated Utensils. The Window is strongly
barred on the Outside. The Church is dedicated to St. Laurence: and in the
Marketplace is a Cistern or Conduit, on the Top of which is a long Stone
Cross, bearing a Niche, in which is the Image of that Saint.

West of the Church was a College, now converted to a private House. There was
a rich Priory out of the Town, on the North Side of which are but few Ruins to
be seen, except a small Church, which formerly belonged to it. The Welsh call
this Town Lie Twysoy, i. e. the Prince's Court. Mr. Camden calls the River Teme
the Tem'd, and another River which joins it just at this Town, the Corve,
whence the rich flat Country below the Town is called Corvesdale. It is
governed by Two Bailiffs, Twelve Aldermen, a Recorder, Twenty-five
Common-council-men, and other inferior Officers; and has the particular
Privilege of trying and executing Criminals. It has an Almshouse for 30 poor
People.

King Henry VIII. established here the Court of the President and Council of
the Marches, beforementioned, and all Causes of Nisi prius, or of Civil Right,
were tried here, before the Lord President and Council; but this Court, being
grown a great Grievance to the Public, was entirely taken away by Act of
Parliament, in the first Year of King William and Queen Mary.

From Ludlow, we took our Course still due South to Lemster, or Leominster, a
large Market Town on the River Lug, over which it has several Bridges. It Is
governed by a Bailiff. The Church, which is very large, has been in a manner
rebuilt, and is now very beautiful. This Town is noted for its fine Wool, and
the best Wheat, and consequently the finest Bread; and also for the best
Barley, whence Lemster Bread, and Weobly Ale, are become a proverbial Saying.

It is a Town of brisk Trade in Wool, Hat-making, Leather, etc. and lies in a
Valley exceedingly luxuriant. Three Rivers of a very swift Current go through the
Town, besides others very near. The Inhabitants make great use of these by
Mills, and other Machinery in the various Branches of their Trade. On the
North-side of the Church was a considerable Priory, Two Ails of which belong
now to the Church, and Two others of more lightsome Work have been added. The
Mayor has a long black Rod to walk with, tipped with Silver. There are some poor
Remains of the Priory, chiefly a little Chapel, which probably belonged to the
Prior's Family. Underneath it runs a pretty Rivulet, which used to grind his
Corn, now converted to a Fulling-mill. Near it are very large Ponds for Fish,
which used to furnish the Monks on fasting Days. There was a fine Gate House,
pulled down not long ago, near the Ambry or Almery Close, where they gave their
Scraps away to the Poor.

Pembridge, Weobly, and Kyneton lie South-west of Lemster, and form in their
Situation a kind of Triangle. They are all Market Towns, and the first is
pretty considerable for the Clothing Trade; the second for Ale; but the third
for nothing that I know of.

The County on our right, as we came from Ludlow, is very fruitful and
pleasant, and is called the Hundred of Wigmore, from which the Earl of Oxford
takes the Title of Baron. Here we saw the two ancient Castles of Brampton
Brian, and Wigmore, both belonging to the late Earl's Grandfather, Sir Edward
Harley. Brampton is a stately Pile, but not kept in full Repair. The Parks are
fine, and full of large Timber.

We were now on the Borders of Wales, properly so called; for from the Windows
of Brampton-Castle, you have a fair Prospect into the County of Radnor, which
is, as it were, under its Walls; nay, even this whole County of Hereford was a
Part of Wales, and so deemed for many Ages. The People of this County too
boast, that they were a Part of the ancient Silures, who for so many Ages
withstood the Roman Arms, and could never be entirely conquered. They are a
diligent and laborious People, chiefly addicted to Husbandry; and they boast,
that they have the finest Wool, the best Hops, and the richest Cider in all
Britain; and possibly with some Reason; for the Wool about Leominster, and in
the Hundred of Wigmore, and the Golden Vale, as it is called for its Richness,
on the Banks of the River Dove, (all in this County) is as fine as any in
England, the South-down Wool not excepted. As for Hops, they plant abundance
all over this County, and they are very good. And for Cider, it is the common
Drink of the County, and is so very good, and so cheap, that we never found
fault, though we could get no other Drink for Twenty Miles together. Great
Quantities of this Cider are sent to London, even by Land-Carriage, though so
very remote, which is an Evidence in its Favor beyond Contradiction.

One would hardly expect so pleasant and fruitful a Country as this, so near
the barren Mountains of Wales; but it is certain, that not any of our Southern
Counties, the Neighborhood of London excepted, come up to the Fertility of
this County.

From Lemster it is Ten Miles to Hereford, the chief City, not of this County
only, but of all the Counties West of the Severn. In the time of the late Civil
Wars it was very strong, and being well fortified, and as well defended,
supported a tedious and very severe Siege; for besides the Parliament's Forces,
who could never reduce it, the Scots Army was called to the Work, who lay
before it, till they laid above 4000 of their Bones there, and at last it was
rather surrendered by the fatal Issue of the War, than by the Attack of the
Besiegers.

It had before this Six Parish-churches; but Two of them were demolished at
that time. It has an Hospital liberally endowed for 12 poor People.

The City of Hereford probably sprung from the Ruins of the Roman Ariconium,
now Kenchester, three Miles off, higher up the River Wye, but not very near it,
which may be a Reason for its Decay.

Kenchester stands upon a little Brook, called the Ine, which thence
encompassing the Walls of Hereford, falls into the Wye.

Archenfield seems to retain the Name of Ariconium. Nothing remains of its
Splendour, but a Piece of a Temple, probably, with a Nich which is Five Feet
high, and Three broad within, built of Brick, Stone, and indissoluble Mortar.
There are many large Foundations near it. A very fine Mosaic Floor, a few
Years ago, was found entire, which was soon torn to Pieces by the ignorant
Country People. A Bath was here found by Sir John Hoskyns about Seven Feet
square, the Pipes of Lead entire: those of Brick were a Foot long, Three Inches
square, let artificially into one another; over these, I suppose, was a
Pavement.

This, as Dr. Stukeley observes, is an excellent Invention for heating a Room,
and might well be introduced among us in Wintertime.

In another Place is a Hollow, where burnt Wheat has been taken up. All around
the City you may easily trace the Walls, some Stones being left everywhere,
though overgrown by Hedges and Timbertrees. The Situation of the Place is a
gentle Eminence of a squarish Form; the Earth black and rich, overgrown with
Brambles, Oak-trees, full of Stones, Foundations, and Cavities, where they have
been digging, and found many Coins, etc. Colonel Dantsey has paved a Cellar
with square Bricks dug up here. The Earl of Coningsby has adorned the Floor of
his Evidence-room with them.

This City is overlooked and sheltered toward the North with a prodigious
Mountain of steep Ascent; on the Top stands a vast Camp, with Works altogeter
inaccessible, which is called Credon-hill. At the Summit, you are presented
with the most glorious and extensive Prospect, as far as St. Michael's Mount,
in Monmouthshire; crowned with Two Tops, and of considerable Resort among
Zealots of the Romish Persuasion, who believe this holy Hill was sent hither by
St. Patrick out of Ireland, and that it works Wonders in several Cases.

On the other side, is the vast Black Mountain, which separates Brecknockshire
from this County. The Town underneath appears like a little Copse. Dinder-hill,
whereon is a Roman Camp, stands on the contrary Bank of the Wye.

And upon the Lug are Sutton-walls, another vast Roman Camp upon a Hill
overlooking a beautiful Vale, which was the regal Residence of the powerful
King Offa; but chiefly remarkable for the Murder of young King Ethelbert, whom
he allured thither under Pretext of courting his Daughter, and who was buried
in the neighboring Church of Marden, situate in a Marsh by the Riverside.
Hence his Body was afterward conveyed to Hereford, and enshrined; but the
particular Place cannot be found.

In the North Wing of the Cathedral of Hereford, is the Shrine, where the Body
of Cantilupe, the great Miracle-monger in the West of England, was deposited;
which Wing was built by himself, and on the Wall his Picture is painted. All
round are the Marks of Hooks, where the Banners, Lamps, Relics, and the like
Presents were hung up. And the Riches of this Place were doubtless very
considerable; for it is well guarded against the Assaults of Thieves. The
Shrine is of Stone, carved round with Knights in Armor.

The Church is very old and stately. The Spire is not high, but handsome, and
there is a fine Tower at the West End. The Roof, Ails, and Chapel, have been
added to the more ancient Part by successive Bishops, as also the Towers,
Cloisters, etc. The Choir, though plain, is handsome, and there is a very good
Organ.

The Chapter House, which was very beautiful, was destroyed in the Civil Wars.
About Four Windows are left standing; and the Springing of the Stone Arches
between, are of fine Ribwork, which composed the Roof, of that Sort of
Architecture, wherewith King's-college-chapel was built. Two Windows were
pulled down by Bishop Bisse, which he used in new fitting up the Episcopal
Palace. Under the Windows, in every Compartiment, was painted a King, Bishop,
Saint, Virgin, or the like; some of which were distinct enough, though so long
exposed to the Weather.

Here are a great Number of Monuments of Bishops, and many valuable Brasses and
Tombs.

Between the Cathedral and Palace, is a most venerable Pile, built and roof'd
with Stone, consisting of Two Chapels, one above the other; the upper dedicated
to St. Magdalen; the lower, which is some Steps underground, to St. Catharine.

The Castle was a noble Work, built by one of the Edwards before the Conquest,
strongly walled and ditch'd. There is a very lofty artificial Keep, having a
Well faced with good Stone: and by the Side of the Ditch a Spring consecrated
to St. Ethelbert, with an old Stone Arch.

Without the Walls are the Ruins of Blackfriars Monastery, and a pretty Stone
Cross entire; round which the Cloisters were originally built, as now the
Cloisters of the Cathedral enclose another such. These Crosses were in the
nature of a Pulpit, whence a Monk preached to the People in the open Air, as
now practiced in the Cloisters of some Colleges in the Universities once a Year.

The neighboring Hill, called Dynmaur, or The great Hill, makes amends for the
Tediousness of climbing it, by the Pleasure we receive from its woody Crest,
and extensive Prospect.

At the City of Hereford, we could not but inquire into the Truth of the Story
so famous, that the Right Reverend Bishop Gibson has mentioned it in his
Continuation of Camden, of the removing the Two great Stones near Sutton; which
the People confirmed to us. The Story is thus:

Between Sutton and Hereford, in a common Meadow called the Wergins, were
placed Two large Stones for a Water-mark; one erected upright, and the other
laid athwart. In the late Civil Wars, about the Year 1652, they removed to
about twelvescore Paces Distance, and nobody knew how; which gave occasion to a
vulgar Notion, That they were carried thither by the Devil. When they were set
in their Places again, one of them required nine Yoke of Oxen to draw it.

Lidbury lies Eastward of Hereford, near the South End of the Malvern Hills. It
is a fine, well built Market Town, situate in rich clayey Grounds, and much
inhabited by Clothiers. Here is an Hospital for the Poor, well endowed.

Not far from Lidbury, is Colwal; near which, upon the Waste, as a Countryman
was digging a Ditch about his Cottage, he found a Crown or a Coronet of Gold,
with Gems set deep in it. It was of a Size large enough to be drawn over the
Arm with the Sleeve. The Stones of it are said to have been so valuable, as to
be sold by a Jeweller for One thousand Five hundred Pounds.

Hereford, though a large and populous City, may yet be said to be old,
mean-built, and very dirty, lying low, and on the Bank of the Wye, which
sometimes incommodes them very much, by the violent Freshes that come down from
the Mountains of Wales; for all the Rivers of this County, except the
Diffrin-Doe, come out of Wales.

One thing remarkable, which we must not omit, is, that the College still
retains its Foundation Laws, and the Residentiaries are obliged to Celibacy;
but otherwise, they live a very happy, easy, and plentiful Life; being
furnished upon the Foot of the Foundation, besides their Ecclesiastical
Stipends.

In the Beginning of the Year 1738, they began to pull down the old Gothic
Chapel belonging to the Bishop's Palace at Hereford, in order to erect a Pile
in a politer Taste, for the public Service. The demolished Chapel was said to
be as old as the Conquest.

Between Leominster and this City, is another Hampton Court, the Seat of the
late Earl of Coningsby. That Lord was, from an Irish Peer, made an English one,
by his late Majesty King George I. And having no Son, his Daughter was created
by the same Prince in the Lifetime of her Father, Baroness and Viscountess
Coningsby of Hampton Court, in order that her Descendants might be entitled to
a Peerage. She married Sir Michael Newton, Bart. and Knight of the Bath. This
is a fine Seat built by Henry Bolinbroke Duke of Lancaster, afterward King
Henry IV. in the Form of a Castle, situate in a Valley upon a rapid River,
under Coverture of Dynmaur. The Gardens are very pleasant, terminated by vast
Woods covering all the sloping Side of the Hill. There is a plentiful Supply of
Water, on all Sides of the House, for Fountains, Basins, and Canals. Within,
are excellent Pictures of the Earl's Ancestors and others, by Holben, Dobson,
Vandyke, Sir P. Lully, etc. an Original of the Founder King Henry IV. of Queen
Elizabeth, the Duchess of Portsmouth, etc.

The Windows of the Chapel are well painted: there are some Statues of the
Coningsbies.

Here are two new Stone Stair-cases, after a Geometrical Method. The
Record-room is at-top of a Tower arched with Stone, paved with Roman Brick, and
has an Iron Door. From the Top of the House goes a Staircase, which, they say,
has a subterraneous Conveyance into Dynmaur Wood.

The Park is very fine, Eight Miles in Circumference, and contains about 1200
Head of Deer. There are extensive Prospects on one Side reaching into
Wiltshire, on the other over the Welsh Mountains; Lawns, Groves, Canals, Hills
and Plains. There is a Pool Three Quarters of a Mile long, very broad, and
included between Two great Woods. The Dam, which forms it, and is made over a
Valley, cost, 800 l. and was finished in a Fortnight by 200 Hands. A new River
is cut quite through the Park, the Chanel of which, for a long way together, is
hewn out of the Rock. This serves to enrich vast Tracts of Lands, which before
were barren. Here also are new Gardens and Canals laid out, and new Plantations
of Timber in proper Places.

Warrens, Decoys, Sheepwalks, Pastures for Cattle, etc. supply the House with
all Sorts of Conveniences and Necessaries, without having recourse to a Market.

Westward of Hereford the Golden Vale beforementioned, extends itself along
the River Door, which runs through the midst of it, and is called by the Britons,
Duffrin Door: it is called the Golden Vale, from its pleasant Fertility in the
Spring, when it is covered over with a yellow Livery of Flowers. It is
encompassed with Hills, which are crowned with Woods.

From Hereford, keeping the Bank of Wye as near as we could, we came to Ross, a
good old Town, famous for Cider, a great Manufacture of Iron-ware, and its
Trade on the River Wye.

From hence we came at about Eight Miles more into Monmouthshire, formerly a
Welsh, but now an English County, and to the Town of Monmouth. It is a Place of
great Antiquity, and is fair, large, and well built, situate at the Conflux of
the Wye and Munnow, whence the Town has its Name; it stands in the Angle where
the Rivers join, and has a Bridge over each River, and a third over the River
Trothy, which comes in just below the other.

This Town shows Marks of great Antiquity, and, by the Remains of Walls, Lines,
Curtains, and Bastions, that it has been very strong, and, by its Situation,
that it may be made so again. It is a Borough-town, governed by Two Bailiffs,
Common-councilmen, and Town Clerk. It has a very considerable Corn-market. It
was famed for the Strength of the Castle in the Time of William I.; and is the
Birthplace of our renowned King Henry V. Conqueror of France; and likewise of
one of our ancient Historians, Jeoffry of Monmouth, a fabulous Writer. At
present it is not very flourishing; yet it drives a considerable Trade with the
City of Bristol, by the Navigation of the Wye.

This River having received Two large Streams, the Munnow, and the Trother,
becomes a very noble River; and with a deep Chanel, and a full Current, hurries
away toward the Sea, carrying also Vessels of a considerable Burden hereabouts.

Near Monmouth, the Duke of Beaufort has a fine Seat, called Troy-house.

Lower down, upon the Wye in this Shire, stands Chepstow, the Seaport for all
the Towns seated on this River and the Lug, and where their Commerce seems to
center. Hither Ships of good Burden may come up, and the Tide runs with the
same impetuous Current as at Bristol; the Flood rising ordinarily from Six
Fathom, to Six and a half at Chepstow Bridge, which is a noble one indeed,
built of Timber, and no less than 70 Feet high from the Surface of the Water,
when the Tide is out. And that this was not a needless Height, was evident in
January 1738, when the Water rose at the Bridge upwards of 70 Feet, and very
much damaged it: one Man lost above 130 Head of Cattle, which, with other
Damages it did there, and in the adjacent Places, were computed at 7 or 8000 l.
Chepstow has a well frequented Market, especially for Corn. The Bridge, as half
of it is in Gloucestershire, is maintained at the Expense of both Counties.

Two Miles from this Town is the famous Passage over the Severn, on this Side
called Bleachly, and on the other Aust, as I have mentioned before. Here Offa's
Dyke begins, and passing through Radnorshire, extends itself up to Flintshire,
and so to the River Dee, which parts Wales from Cheshire.

We turned Northwards, and arrived at Abergavenny, which is a large well built
and well-inhabited Market Town, situate at the Mouth of the Gavenny running
into the Usk. It carries on a considerable Trade in Flanels, which the Country
People manufacture at home, and bring hither to sell. It is a great
Thorough-fare from the Western Parts of Wales to Bristol and Bath by Chepstow,
and to Gloucester by Monmouth; and so crossing the River through Colford and the
Forest of Dean.

The Fuel in this County is Pit-coal, and is very cheap, insomuch that they
sell a Horse-load for Twopence, at the Pit-mouth; and it is common, in the
meanest Cot to see a good Fire.

Great Quantities of Corn are exported out of this County; and it is frequent,
that the Bristol Merchants send their Ships hither to load for Portugal, and
other foreign Countries. And indeed it is noted for producing as good Wheat and
other Grain, as any County in the Kingdom; and yet it is very surpriseing, that
Lands here never sell for more than 20 or 21 Years Purchase. The current
Language of the County is Welsh among the Vulgar, but the Gentlemen speak
English generally.

As I am now just upon entering Wales, I will conclude this Letter with
assuring you, that I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.

LETTER VI. CONTAINING A Description of the greatest Part of the Principality
of Wales.
SIR,
I Thought I should not pay the Principality the Respect it so well deserves,
if I did not begin a Letter with the Description of it; it being the Country of
that brave People, who had an original Right to the whole Island, and made so
noble a Stand in Defense of their Liberties and Independency; and at last,
rather than submit to a foreign Yoke, chose to be free in this remote and
inaccessible Part of it.

The two first Counties which border West upon Monmouthshire, are Brecknock and
Glamorgan, and are very mountainous on the East Side, which gives a Traveller a
terrible Apprehension of the Country he is this way entering into, and an
Expectation of meeting with nothing that is agreeable; but he is not long
before he is undeceived, and finds the Reward of his Trouble. In that Part of
Monmouthshire which joins the Two Counties, begins the rising of the Hills.
Kyrton-Beacon, Tumberlow, Blorench, Penvail, and Skirridan, are some of the
Names of these horrid Mountains, and are all in this Shire; and I could not but
fansy myself in View of Mount Brennus, Little-Barnard, and Great-Barnard, among
the Alps.

We now entered South Wales; which contains the Shires of Glamorgan, Brecknock,
Radnor, Caermarthen, Pembroke, and Cardigan.

Brecknockshire is a mere inland County, as Radnor is; the English jestingly
(and I think not very improperly) call it Break-neck-shire: it is mountainous to
an Extremity, except on the Side of Radnor, where it is something more low and
level. It is well watered by the Wye, and the Uske, two Rivers mentioned
before. Upon the latter stands the Town of Brecknock, the Capital of the
County, well built, and the Assizes are kept at it. It is very ancient, and
indeed, to mention it here once for all, there are more Tokens of Antiquity to
be seen everywhere in Wales, than in any particular Part of England, except
the Counties of Cumberland and Northumberland. Here we saw Brecknock-mere, a
large or long Lake of Water, Two or Three Miles over; of which they have a
great many Fables, not worth relating: the best of them is, that a certain
River, called the Lheweni, runs through it, and keeps its Color in Midchanel,
distinguished from the Water of the Lake, and, as they say, never mingles with
it. They take abundance of good Fish in this Lake, so that, like the River
Theisse, in Hungary, they say it is Two-thirds Water, and One-third Fish. The
Country People affirm, that once a City stood here, but, that by the Judgment
of Heaven, for the Sins of its Inhabitants, it sunk into the Earth, and the
Water rose up in the Place of it. I observe the same Story is mentioned by Mr.
Camden, with some Difference in the Particulars: I believe my Share of it, but
it is remarkable, that Mr. Camden, having lost the old City Loventium, mentioned
by Ptolemy to be hereabouts, is willing to account for it by this odd Story.

It was among the Mountains of this County that the famous Glendower sheltered
himself, and taking Arms on the deposing Richard II. proclaimed himself Prince
of Wales; they show us several little Refuges of his in the Mountains, whither
he retreated; and from whence, again, he made such bold Excursions into
England, as to have put Henry IV. to very great Difficulties.

Though this County be so mountainous, Provisions are exceeding plentiful, and
also very good all over the Country; nor are these Mountains useless, even to
the City of London, as I have noted of other Counties; for from hence they send
yearly great Herds of Black Cattle to England, and which are known to fill our
Fairs and Markets, even that of Smithfield itself.

The yellow Mountains of Radnorshire are the same, and their Product of Cattle
is the same; nor did I meet with any thing worth noticing, except Monuments of
Antiquity. The Stories of Vortigern, and Roger of Mortimer, are in every old
Woman's Mouth here. There is here a great Cataract or Water-fall of the River
Wye, at a Place called Rhajadr Gwy in Welsh, which signifies the Cataract or
Water-fall of the Wye; but we did not go to see it, by reason there was a great
Flood out at that time, which made the Way dangerous. There seemed to us a kind
of Desert too, on that Side, which is scarce passable by Strangers; so we made
it our North Boundary for this Part of our Journey.

We shall only add; That Radnor is the Shire Town, and has a Castle; that
Presteigne in Radnorshire is a well built Town, and the Assizes are held there.

Entering Glamorganshire, from Radnor and Brecknock, we beheld Monuchdenny-hill
on our Left, and the Black Mountains on the Right, and all a Ridge of horrid
Rocks and Precipices between, over which, if we had not had good Guides, we
should never have found our Way; and indeed, we began to repent our Curiosity,
in going out of the common Road, as not having met with any thing worth the
Trouble; and the Country looking so full of Horror, we thought to have given
over the Enterprise, and have left Wales out of our Circuit: But after a Day
and a Night engaging thus with Rocks and Mountains, our Guide brought us down
into a most agreeable Vale, opening to the South, and a pleasant River running
through it, called the Taaffe; and following its Course, we came in the Evening
to the ancient City of Landaff, and Town of Caerdiff, standing almost together.

Landaff in Glamorganshire, is the Seat of the Episcopal See, and a City; but
so small, that it has not a Market; but Caerdiff, which is lower on the River,
is the Port and Town of Trade; and has a very good Harbor opening into the
Severn Sea, about four Miles below the Town.

The Cathedral is a neat Building, and very ancient; they boast that this
Church was a House of Religious Worship many Years before any other was founded
in the Island, and that the Christian Religion flourished in its primitive
Purity, from the Year 186, till the Pelagian Heresy overspread this Country;
which being afterward rooted out, they placed St. Dobricius, as the first
Bishop, in this Town of Landaff, then called Launt^n: The Bishop of Landaff had
formerly the Title of Archbishop; the three first Bishops were afterward
sainted for their eminent Holiness of Life, and the Miracles they are said to
have wrought. It Is observable the Cathedral was anciently but 20 Foot long, and
10 broad, and had neither Steeple nor Bells, nor had they any other Cathedral
from the Year 386, to the Year 1107, when Bishop Urban built the present
Church, with some Houses for the Clergy adjoining, in the Nature of a Cloister.

Though the Church is ancient, yet the Building is good, and the Choir neat, and
pretty well kept.

The South Part of Glamorganshire is pleasant, agreeable, and very populous,
insomuch that it is called The Garden of Wales. Its Soil is fertile and rich,
and the low Grounds are so well covered with Grass, and stocked with Cattle,
that they supply the City of Bristol with Butter in very great Quantities
salted and barrel'd up, just as Suffolk does the City of London.

Caerphyli-Castle in Glamorganshire, is one of the noblest Pieces of Ruins in
the whole Island. It was larger than any Castle in England, that of Windsor
excepted; and from what remains of it, was as beautiful in its Architecture, as
it is remarkable in its Ruins.

Neath is a Port where the Coal-Trade is pretty considerable, though it stands up
within Land.

Swanzy is also a Seaport, and a very considerable Town for Trade, with a very
good Harbor: Here is also a very great Trade for Coals, and Culm, which they
export to all the Ports of Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, and even to Ireland;
so that sometimes may be seen a hundred Sail of Ships at a time loading Coals
here; which greatly enriches the Country, and particularly this Town; it stands
on the River Twye, or Taw: It Is very remarkable, that most of the Rivers in
this County chime upon the Letters T and Y, as Taaf, Tawy, Tuy, Towy, Tyevy.

There are lately Mineral Waters found out at Swanzy, which are reported to be
of great Efficacy in Fluxes and Haemorrhages of all Sorts. Consumptions, if not
too far gone, Diabetes, Palsies, Rheumatisms, Dropsies, and other Distempers,
are said to fall before these Styptick and Restorative Waters. They may
certainly have very good Effects in many difficult Cases; but it is doing an
Injury to the Reputation of any Medicine in the World, to make it a Catholicon,
and good for every thing.

Kynfig-Castle, is now the Seat and Estate of the Lord Mansel, who has here
also a very noble Income from the Collieries; which formerly denominated Sir
Edward Mansel, one of the richest Commoners in Wales. The Family was innobled
by her late Majesty Queen Anne.

In this Neighborhood, near Margan Mynydd, we saw the famous Monument
mentioned by Mr. Camden, on a Hill, with the Inscription, which the Vulgar are
so terrified at, that nobody cares to read it; for they have a Tradition from
Father to Son, that whoever ventures to read it, will die within a Month. We
did not scruple the Adventure, but when we came to try, the Letters were so
defaced by Time, that we were effectually secured from the Danger; the
Inscription not being any thing near so legible, as it seems it was in Mr.
Camden's time.

The Stone Pillar is about 4 or 5 Feet high, and one Foot thick, standing on
the Top of this Hill; there are several other such Monuments in Radnorshire,
and other Counties in Wales, as likewise in Scotland.

Having thus touched on what is most curious on this Coast, we passed through the
Land of Gowre; and going still West, we came to Caermarthen, or Kaer-Vyrdhin,
as the Welsh call it, the Capital of the County of Kaermardhinshire.

This is an ancient and a very handsome Town, pleasantly situated on the River
Towy, which is navigable up to the Town, for Vessels of a moderate Burden, and
over which is a large Bridge. The Town is well built, and populous; it is
lately much increased, and is still increasing; and the County round it is the
most fruitful of any Part of Wales, and continues to be so through all the Middle
of the County, and a great Way into the next; nor is this County so mountainous
and wild, as the rest of this Part of Wales: But it abounds in Corn, and in
fine flourishing Meadows, as good as most are in Britain, and in which are fed
a very great Number of good Cattle.

The Chancery, and Exchequer, for the South Part of the Principality, were
usually kept at this Town, till the Jurisdiction of the Court and Marches of
Wales was taken away. This Town was also famous for the Birth of the old
British Prophet, Merlin, of whom so many things are fabled, and who flourished
in the Year 480: And here also the old Britons often kept their Parliaments, or
Assemblies of their wise Men, and made their Laws. The Town was fortified in
former times, but the Walls are not to be seen now, and scarcely the Ruins of
them. The People in this Town and Country are reckoned the wealthiest and
politest in Wales.

Here we saw near Kily-Maen Llwyd, on a great Mountain, a Circle of mighty
Stones, very much like Stone-henge in Wiltshire, or rather like the Roll-rich
Stones in Oxfordshire; and though the People call it Bruarth Arthur, or King
Arthur's Throne, we see no reason to believe, that it had any relation to him.

The next County West, is Pembrokeshire, the most extreme Part of Wales on this
Side. It is a rich, fertile, and plentiful Country, lying on the Seacoast,
where it has the Benefit of Milford-Haven, one of the greatest and best Ports
in Britain. Mr. Camden says, it contains 16 Creeks, 5 great Bays, and 13 good
Roads for Shipping, all distinguished as such by their Names; and some say, a
thousand Sail of Ships may ride in it.

Part of Pembrokeshire is inhabited by the Descendants of the Flemings, placed
there by King Henry I. and that County is called, Little England beyond Wales.

Before we quitted the Coast, we saw Tenbigk, the most agreeable Town on all
the Seacoast of South Wales, except Pembroke, being a very good Road for
Shipping, and well frequented. Here is a great Fishery for Herring in its
Season, a great Colliery, or rather Export of Coals, and they also drive a very
considerable Trade to Ireland.

From hence, the Land, bearing far into the Sea, makes a Promontory, called St.
Goven's-Head, or Point. But as we found nothing of Moment there, we crossed
over the Isthmus to Pembroke, which stands on the East Shore of the great Haven
of Milford.

This is the largest and richest, and at this Time the most flourishing Town of
South Wales, except Carmarthen. Here are a great many Gentlemen and Merchants,
and some of the latter are Men of good Business; and they told us, there were
near 200 Sail of Ships belonged to the Town, small and great; in a Word, all
this Part of Wales is a rich and flourishing Country, very pleasant, fertile,
and well cultivated.

This is the Place also made particularly famous for the Landing of King Henry
VII. then Earl of Richmond.

From hence, being resolved to see the utmost Extent of the County, West, we
ferry'd over the Haven, and went to Haverford, by some called Haverford-West, a
County in itself; and from thence to St. David's. Haverford is a good Town,
strong, well built, clean, and populous.

From hence to St. David's, the Country begins to look dry, barren, and
mountainous.

St. David's is now a Bishop's See only, but was formerly an Archbishop's,
which was transferred to Dole in Britany, where it still remains.

The venerable Aspect of this Cathedral Church shows, that it has been a
beautiful Building. The West End or Body of the Church is tolerable; the Choir
is kept neat; the South Isle without the Choir, and the Virgin Mary's Chapel,
which makes the Eastend of the Church, are in a manner demolished, and the
Roofs of both fallen in.

There have been a great many eminent Persons buried here, besides such whose
Monuments are defaced by Time. Here is St. David's Monument, to whom the Church
is dedicated, the Monument of the Earl of Richmond, as also of the famous Owen
Tudor; Here are also four ancient Monuments of Knights-Templars, known by their
Figures lying cross-legg'd; but their Names are not known, and there are six
several Monuments of Bishops, who presided over this Church, besides St. David.

This Saint, they tell us, was Uncle to King Arthur, that he lived to 146 Years
of Age, that he was Bishop of this Church sixty-five Years, being born in the
Year 496, and died Anno 642; that he built twelve Monasteries, and performed
abundance of Miracles.

There was a very handsome House for the Bishop, with a College, all built in a
Close by themselves; but they are now in Ruins.

Here, the Weather being very clear, we had a full View of Ireland, though at a
very great Distance. The Land here is called St. David's-Head. They reckon up
114 Bishops of this See, since it began, to the Year 1740.

A late Bishop of this See was Dr. Thomas Watson, of whom the World has heard
so much, being deprived, after a long Debate, on a Charge of Simony. I shall
not inquire into the Merits of the Case; but he bestowed great Sums on
charitable Designs.

From hence we turned North, keeping the Sea in our West Prospect, and a rugged
mountainous Country on the East, where the Hills even darkened the Air with
their Height. As we went on, we past by Newport, on the River Nevern, a Town
having a good Harbor, and consequently a good Trade with Ireland.

Here we left Pembrokeshire, and after about 22 Miles came to Cardigan, a
well-inhabited Town, on the River Tyvy, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge:
It Is a very noble River indeed, and famous for its Plenty of the best and
largest Salmon in Britain.

The Country People told us, that they had formerly Beavers here, which bred in
the Lakes among the Mountains, and coming down the Stream of Tyvy, destroyed
the young Frye of Salmon, and therefore the Country People destroyed 'em. We
thought they only meant the Otter, till I found afterward, that Mr. Camden
mentions also, that there had been Beavers seen here formerly.

This Town of Cardigan was once possessed by the great Robert Fitz-Stephen, who
was the first Briton that ever attempted the Conquest of Ireland; and had such
Success with a Handful of Men, as afterward gave the English a Footing there,
which they never quitted afterward, till they quite reduced the Country, and
made it, as it were, a Province to England.

The Town is large and populous, has a fair Church, and is walled about, and
fortified with a Castle, but that Part is now not much minded. It has a good
Trade with Ireland, and is enriched very much, as is all this Part of the
Country, by the famous Lead Mines, formerly discovered by Sir Carbery Price,
which are the greatest, and perhaps the richest in England; and particularly as
they require so little Labor and Charge to come at the Ore, which in many
Places lies within a Fathom or two of the Surface, and in some, even bare to
the very Top. There are also Silver Mines in this County.

Going North from the Tyvy about 25 Miles, we came to Aberystwith, that is to
say, the Town at the Mouth of the River Ystwith. It is a populous, but a dark,
smoaky Place; and we fansy'd the People looked as if they had lived continually
in Coal or Lead Mines. However, they are rich.

The County of Cardigan is in no wise comparable to either of those Welsh
Counties which we have already passed through, there being a great deal of
barren Lands in it. However, it is so full of Cattle, that it is said to be the
Nursery, or Breeding-Place for the whole Kingdom of England, South by Trent;
but this is not a Proof of its Fertility; for though the feeding of Cattle indeed
requires a rich Soil, the breeding them does not, the Mountains and Moors being
as proper for that Purpose as richer Land.

Now we entered North Wales; only I should add, that as we passed, we had a
Sight of the famous Plymlymon-Hill, out of the East Side of which, rise the
Severn, and the Wye; and out of the West Side of it, rise the Rydall and the
Ystwyth. This Mountain is exceeding high, and though it is hard to say which is
the highest Hill in Wales, yet I think this bids fair for it; nor is the
County, for 20 Miles round it, any thing but a continued Ridge of Mountains: So
that for a few Days we seemed to be conversing in the upper Regions; for we
were often above the Clouds a great way, and the Names of some of these Hills
seemed as barbarous to us, who spoke no Welsh, as the Hills themselves.

Passing these Mountains North, we entered North Wales, which contains the
Counties of Montgomery, Merioneth, Caernarvon, Denbeigh, and Flint Shires, and
the Isle of Anglesea.

In passing Montgomeryshire, we were so tired with Hills and Mountains, that we
wished heartily we had kept close to the Sea Shore; but we had not much mended
the matter, if we had, as I understood afterward. The River Severn is the
principal Beauty of this County, which rising out of the Plymlymon Mountain, as
I have said, receives in a short Course so many other Rivers into its Bosom,
that it becomes navigable before it gets out of the County, at Welsh-Pool, on
the Edge of Shropshire.

Montgomery is a fashionable Place, and has many fair Dwellings in it, and some
very good Families.

The Vales and Meadows upon the Banks of the Severn are exceedingly ornamental
and profitable, and it is said, that the Water of the Severn, like that of Nile,
when it overflows, impregnates the Valleys by the Slime it leaves behind it;
all the Country is very fruitful, wherever this River runs. The Town of
Montgomery lies not far from this River, on the outer Edge of the County, next
to Herefordshire. This was, it seems, a great Frontier Town in the Wars between
the English and the Welsh, and was beautified and fortified by King Henry III.
but it is not now so very considerable, though a good Town still, pleasantly
situated, and has a Castle.

This County has been long noted for an excellent Breed of Welsh Horses, which,
though not very large, are exceeding valuable, and much esteemed all over
England. All the North and West Part of the County is mountainous and stony. We
saw a great many old Monuments in this Country, and Roman Camps, wherever we
came; and especially, if we met any Persons curious in such things, we found
they had many Roman Coins.

Merionethshire, or Merionydshire, lies West from Montgomeryshire, on the Irish
Sea, or rather the Ocean; for St. George's Chanel does not begin till further
North; and it is extended on the Coast, for near 35 Miles in Length, all still
mountainous and craggy. The principal River is the Tovy, which rises among the
unpassable Mountains, which range along the Center of this Part of Wales, and
which we look at with Astonishment, for their prodigious Height. Some of the
Hills have particular Names, but otherwise we called them all, The Black
Mountains, and they well deserve the Name. Some think it is from the unpassable
Mountains of this County, that we have an old Saying, That the Devil lives in
the Middle of Wales, though I know there is another Meaning given to it; in a
word, Mr. Camden calls these Parts the Alps of Wales.

There are but few large Towns in all this Part, nor is it very populous; much
of it being scarce habitable, but it is said, there are more Sheep in it, than
in all the rest of Wales. On the Sea Shore however, we saw Harleigh, or
Harlech-Castle, which is still a Garrison, and kept for the Guard of the Coast;
but it is of no other Strength, than what its Situation gives it.

In the middle of these vast Mountains (and forming a very large Lake, viz.
near its first Sources) rises the River Dee, of which I shall speak again in
its proper Place.

Here, among almost innumerable Summits, and rising Peaks of nameless Hills, we
saw the famous Kader-Idricks, which, some are of Opinion, is the highest
Mountain in Britain, another called Rarauvaur, another called Mowywynda; and
still every Hill we saw, we thought higher than all that ever we saw before.

We inquired here after that strange Phenomenon, which was not only seen, but
fatally experienced, by the Country round this Place, namely of a livid Fire,
coming off from the Sea, and setting on Fire Houses, Barns, Stacks of Hay and
Corn, and poisoning the Herbage in the Field; of which there is a full Account
given in the Philosophical Transactions: And as we had it confirmed by the
general Voice of the People, I shall take notice, That the Transactions
particularly observe, that the Eclipses of the Sun in Aries have been very
fatal to this Place; and that the Years 1542, and 1567, when the Sun was
eclipsed in that Sign, it suffered very much by Fire; and after the latter
Eclipse of the two, the Fire spread so far, that about 200 Houses in the Town
and Suburbs of Caernarvon, were consumed.

This mountainous Country runs away North through Merionethshire, and almost
through Caernarvonshire, where Snowden-hill, of a monstrous Height, according to
its Name, had Snow on the Top in the Beginning of June; but it does not
continue the Year round, as some have asserted.

These unpassable Heights were doubtless the Refuges of the Britons, when, in
their continual Wars with the Romans and Saxons, they were overpowered.

That Side of the County of Caernarvon, which borders on the Sea, is not so
mountainous, and is both more fertile, and more populous. The principal Place
in this Part is Caernarvon, a good Town, with a Castle built by Edward I. to
curb and reduce the wild People of the Mountains, and secure the Passage into
Anglesea. That Prince also kept his Court often here; and here his eldest Son
and Successor, Edward II. was born, who was therefore called Edward of
Caernarvon. This Edward was the first of the Sons of the Kings of England,
vested with the Title of Prince of Wales: And here were kept the Chancery and
Exchequer of the Princes of Wales, for the North Part of the Principality, as
it was at Caermarthen for the South Part. It is a small, but strong Town,
clean, and well built; and, considering the Place, the People are very
courteous and obliging to Strangers. It is seated on the Firth or Inlet called
Meneu, parting the Isle of Anglesea, or Mona, from the main Land; and here is a
Ferry over to the Island, called Abermenai-Ferry* And from thence a direct Road
to Holyhead, whithe^ we went for no other Purpose, than to have another View of
Ireland; though we were disappointed, the Weather being bad and stormy.

Whoever travels critically over these Mountains of South Wales and
Merionethshire, will think Stonehenge in Wiltshire, and Roll-rich Stones in
Oxforashire, no more Wonders, seeing there are so many such in these Provinces,
that they are not thought strange of at all, nor is it doubted, but they were
generally Monuments of the Dead; as also are the single Stones of immense Bulk,
of which we saw so many, that we gave over remarking 'em. Some measured from 7,
8, to 10, and one 16 Feet high, being a whole Stone, but so great, that the
most of the Wonder is, where they were found, and how dragged to the Place;
since, besides the steep Ascents to some of the Hills, on which they stand, it
would be hardly possible to move some of them, now, with 50 Yoke of Oxen. And
yet a great many of these Stones are found confusedly lying one upon another on
the utmost Summit or Top of the Glyder, and other Hills in Merioneth, or
Caernarvonshire; to which it is next to impossible, that all the Power of Art,
and Strength of Man and Beast, could carry them, and the Vulgar make no
Difficulty of saying, The Devil set them up there.

One of these monumental Stones is to be seen a little way from
Harleigh-Castle: It is a large Stone lying flat, supported by three other
Stones at three of the four Angles, though the Stone is rather oval than square;
it is almost 11 Feet long, the Breadth unequal; but in some Places it is from 7
to 8 Feet broad, and it may be supposed has been both longer and broader; it is
in some Places about two Feet thick, but in others, it is worn almost to an Edge
by Time. The three Stones that support it, are about 20 Inches square; it is
supposed there have been four, two of which, that support the thickest End, are
near 8 Feet high, the other not above three Feet, being supposed to be settled
in the Ground, so that the Stone lies sloping, like the Roof of a Barn. There
is another of these to be seen in the Isle of Anglesea; the flat Stone is much
larger and thicker than this; but we did not go to see it. There are also two
Circles of Stones in that Island, such as Stone-henge, but larger.

This is a particular kind of Monument, and therefore I took Notice of it; but
the others are generally single Stones of vast Magnitude, set up on one End,
Column-wise, which being so very large, are likely to remain till the End of
Time: but are generally without any Inscription, or regular Shape, or any Mark,
to intimate for whom, or for what, they were so placed.

These Mountains are indeed so like the Alps, that except the Language of the
People, one could hardly avoid thinking he is passing from Grenoble to Susa, or
rather through the Country of the Grisons. The Lakes also, which are so numerous
here, make the Similitude the greater: nor are the Fables which the Country
People tell of these Lakes, much unlike the Stories which we meet with among
the Switzers, of the famous Lakes in their Country. Mr. Camden's Continuator
tells us of 50 or 60 Lakes in Caernarvonshire only. We did not count 'em, but I
believe, if we had, we should have found them to be more, rather than less.

Here we met with the Char Fish, the same kind which we saw in Lancashire, and
also in the Lakes of Switzerland, and nowhere else, that I have heard of, in
Europe. The Welsh call it the Torg^ch.

There is nothing of Note to be seen in the Isle of Anglesea, but the Town and
the Castle of Beaumaris, which was also built by King Edward I. and called
Beau-marsh, or the Fine Plain; for here the Country is very level and plain,
and the Land is fruitful and pleasant. The Castle was very large, as may be
seen by its Remains; and that it was strong, the Situation will tell also; but
it is now of no Use.

As we went to Holyhead, by the South Part of the Island from Newborough, and
came back through the Middle to Beaumaris, we saw the whole Extent of it; and
indeed, it is a much pleasanter Country than any Part of North Wales, that we
had yet seen; and particularly is very fruitful in Corn and Cattle.

Here we crossed the Straight of Meneu again, and came to Bangor, at the Place
where King Edward I. intended to have built a great Stone Bridge: It would
indeed have been a Work fit for so great a King: But the Bottom being doubtful,
and the Sea in that Place sometimes very raging and strong, the Workmen thought
it impracticable; and though the King was very positive in his Design for a
great while, yet he was prevailed with at last to decline it.

Bangor is a Town noted for its Antiquity. It is a Bishop's See, but has an
old, mean-looking, and almost despicable Cathedral Church.

This Church boasts of being one of the most ancient in Britain, the People
say, the most ancient; and that St. Daniel (to whom it was dedicated) was first
Bishop here, in the Year 512. They allow that the Pagans, perhaps of Anglesea,
ruined the Church, and possessed the Bishopric after it was built, for above
one hundred Years; nor is there any Account of it from the Year 512 to 1009:
After this, the Bishopric was ruined again by one of its own Bishops, whose
Name was Bulkeley, who, as the Monasticon says, not only sold the Revenues, but
even the very Bells; for which Sacrilege it is said he was struck blind.

It is certainly at present no rich Bishopric; yet the Bishops are generally
allowed to hold some other good Benefice in Commendam, and the Preferment seems
to be a grateful Introduction to the Clergy, as the Bishops are generally
translated from hence to a more profitable one; and very few Gentlemen of the
Function have died Bishops of Bangor; so that, in some Sense, a Bishop of this
See may be said to be immortal.

From Bangor we went North, (keeping the Sea on our Left Hand) to Conway. This
is the poorest, but pleasantest Town in all this County for the Bigness of it;
it is seated on the Bank of a fine River, which is not only pleasant and
beautiful, but is a noble Harbor for Ships, had they any Occasion for them
there; the Stream is deep and safe, and the River broad, as the Thames at
Deptford: It only wants a Trade suitable to so good a Port; for it infinitely
outdoes Chester, and Liverpool too.

In this Passage, we went over the famous Precipice called Penmaen-maur, which
I think Fame has made abundance more frightful than it is; for though the Rock is
indeed very high, and, if any one should fall from it, he would be dashed in
Pieces, yet, on the other hand, there is no Danger of it, a Wall being built
all the Way, on the Edge of the Precipice, to secure Passengers: Those who have
been at the Hill or Pass of Enterkin in Scotland, know very well, the Danger
there is much greater than here; and the frequent Loss of Lives, both of Man
and Horse, will testify the same.

We have but little remarkable in the Road from Conway to Holywell, but Craggs
and Rocks all along the North Shore of Denbeigh, till we came to Denbeigh the
County Town, which has a Castle of great Strength; it is a large, populous
Place, and has a good Trade carried on by Tanners and Glovers. This Town
carries something in its Countenance of its Neighborhood to England; but that
which was most surprising, after such a tiresome and fatiguing Journey, over
the inhospitable Mountains of Merioneth and Caernarvonshire, was, that
descending now from the Hills, we came into a most pleasant, fruitful,
populous, and delicious Vale, full o^ Villages and Towns, the Fields shining
with Corn* just ready for the Reapers, the Meadows green and flowery, and a
fine River, of a mild and gentle Stream, running through it: Nor is it a small or
casua^ Intermission, but we had a Prospect of the Country open before us for
above 20 Miles in Length, and from 5 to 7 Miles in Breadth, all smiling with
the same kind of Complexion; which made us think ourselves in England again,
all on a sudden.

In this pleasant Vale, turning North from Denbeigh, and following the Stream
of the River, we came to St. Asaph, in Flintshire, a small City, with a
Cathedral, being a Bishopric of tolerable good Value, though the Church is
old: It is but a poor Place, and ill-built, although the Country is so pleasant
and rich all round it. There are some old Monuments in this Church, but none of
any Note, nor could we read the Welsh Inscriptions.

From hence we came to Holywell: The Story of it is, that the pious Virgin, St.
Winifred, being ravished and murdered, this healing Water sprung out of her
Body when buried. The Romanists believe it, as it is evident, from their
thronging hither to receive Benefit from the healing Virtue of the Water, which
they do not hope for as medicinal, but as miraculous, and think it heals them
by virtue of the Intercession and Influence of this famous Virgin, St. Winifrid.

The Chapel dedicated to this Holy Virgin, is cut out of a solid Rock, and
Numbers of Pilgrims resort to it, with great Devotion. Under this Chapel, the
Water gushes out into a great Stream, and the Place where it breaks out, is
formed like a Basin or Cistern, in which they bathe: The Water is intensly
cold, and indeed there is no great Miracle in that Point, considering the Rocks
it flows from, where it is impregnated by diverse Minerals; the Virtue of which,
and not of the Saint, I suppose, work the greatest Part of the Cures, that may
be supposed to be effected there.

There is a little Town near the Well, which may, indeed, be said to have risen
from the Confluence of People thither; for almost all the Houses are either
Public Houses, or let into Lodgings; and the Priests who attend here, and are
very numerous, appear in Disguise: Sometimes they are Physicians, sometimes
Surgeons, sometimes Gentlemen, and sometimes Patients, or any thing, as
Occasion presents. Nobody takes notice of them, as to their Religion, though
they are well known, no not the Roman Catholics themselves; but in private
they have their proper Oratories in certain Places, whither the Votaries
resort; and good Manners has prevailed so far, that no Protestant, let him know
what he will, takes Notice of it, or inquires where one goes, or has been gone.

The principal Towns in Flintshire, are, 1. Flint, the Shire Town, but so
small, that it has not a Market. 2. St. Asaph, beforementioned. 3. Caerwys,
the chief Market Town of the County.

From hence we passed by Flint-Castle, a known Place, but of no Consequence
now; and directly to Wrexham, deemed the largest Town in North Wales, having
heard much of a fine Church there, but we were greatly disappointed: There is
indeed a very large Tower or Steeple, as some call it, adorned with Imagery;
but far from fine: The Work is mean, the Statues without any Fancy or Spirit;
and as the Stone is of a reddish crumbling Kind, like the Cathedral at Chester,
Time has made it look gross and rough.

There are a great many ancient Monuments in this Church, and in the
Churchyard also; but none of Note, and almost all the Inscriptions are in
Welsh. The Church is large; but they must be much mistaken, who tell us it is
one of the finest in England; for it falls short in that respect, of even those
Churches which are as old as itself.

This Town is large, well built and populous; and besides the Church, there are
two large Meeting Houses, in one of which, we were told they preach in Welsh
one Part of the Day, and in English the other. Here is a great Market for
Flannel, which the Factors buy up of the poor Welsh People, who manufacture it;
and thence it is sent to London; and is a considerable Manufacture through all
this Part of the Country, by which the Poor are very profitably employed.

We could not omit seeing the once famous Banchor, which Malmsbury confounds
with the Episcopal Bangor; and were pleased to see there a fine Stone Bridge
over the Dee. This was once a City, and the Monastery was so famous, that in
the Time of the British Kings it was said to contain 2400 Monks, who in their
Turns ( viz. 100 each Hour of the 24) reading Prayers and singing Psalms
continually, Divine Service was performed Day and Night without Intermission.
But now not so much as the Ruins are to be seen, and as all the People in the
little Village, that takes place of it, spoke Welsh, we could find no body that
could give us any Intelligence. So effectually had Time eras'd the very
Foundations of the Place.

This is said to be the Birthplace of that Arch-heretick Pelagius, who from
hence began to broach his heretical Opinions, which afterward so terribly
overspread the Church. Camden observes, that this Bangor is situated in the
County of Flint.

But before I have entirely done with the Principality, give me leave to
observe briefly a few things with relation to this Journey, and the Gentlemen
of Wales.

Though this Journey, and especially over such monstrous Hills and Precipices, as
those in Merioneth and some other Shires, was a little heavy to us, yet were we
well supported through it, for we generally found their Provisions very good
and cheap, and pretty good Accommodations in the Inns.

The Welsh Gentlemen are very hospitable; and the People in general very
obliging and conversable, especially to Strangers. When we let them know, we
traveled merely in Curiosity to view the Country, their Civility was
heightened to such a Degree, that nothing could be more friendly, and they were
willing to tell us every thing that belonged to their Country, and to show us
all that we desired to see.

They value themselves much upon their ancient Heroes, as Caractacus, Owen ap
Tudor, Prince Lewellin; and particularly upon the Antiquity of their Families,
and laugh at a Pedigree, that cannot be traced higher than the Conquest. It must
be owned, that the Gentlemen, justly claim a very ancient Descent, and have
preserved their Families entire, for many Ages: They receive you well into
their Houses, treat you very handsomely, are very generous; and indeed, nothing
is wanting within Doors; and, what is more, they have generally very good
Estates to support their Hospitality; but they are very jealous of Affronts,
and soon provoked to Anger, which is seldom allayed without Satisfaction; and
then become as soon reconciled again.

I will now put an End to this Letter, with assureing you, that

I am, etc.

LETTER VII. CONTAINING A Description of Part of Cheshire, Northamptonshire,
and Leicestershire.
SIR,
I Continued at Chester for some time, except that I made two or three
Excursions into the neighboring Country, and particularly into that Part of
Shropshire which I had not viewed as I went; as also into the North, and
North-west Parts of Cheshire. But I should first acquaint you, that Malpas,
through which I came from Wales, is situate on a high Hill, and was formerly
strengthened by a Castle, which is now in Ruins. The Church is a stately
Building, and stands on the most eminent Part of the Town: It has 2 Rectors,
who do Duty alternately. The Town consists of 3 Streets, and is well paved; has
a good Market, a Grammar School, and an Hospital.

The first Trip I made, was into the Cestria Chersonesus, as I think we may
properly call it: It is bounded by the two great Firths, or Arms of the Sea,
the one called the Mouth of the Dee, and the other of the two Rivers Mersey and
Weaver, which form it into a Peninsula. It is about 16 Miles long, 6 or 7 over,
and has not one Market Town in it, though it is exceeding rich and fertile;
occasioned possibly by the Neighborhood of two such great Towns, as Chester
and Liverpool.

Going down from Chester, by the Rhoodee, as they call it, that is, the Marshes
of the River Dee, and coasting the River after it is grown broader than the
Marshes, the first Place of any Note which we come to, is Nesson, where, in the
late Irish War, most of the Troops embarked for that grand Expedition: From
hence the Vessels go away to High-lake, where they ride safe in their Way, as
the Ships from London lie in the Downs, till the Wind presents for their
respective Voyages.

But to return to Chester. It is a fine old City and Colony of the Romans; and
many Antiquities have been found in it. It has four Churches beside the
Cathedral, which is a Pile venerable for Antiquity, but in no extraordinary
Condition. There are Shadows of many Pictures on the Wall, but defaced. At the
West End, in Niches are some Images of the Earls Palatine of Chester. The
adjoining Abbey is quite ruined. The Walls round the City are kept in very good
Repair, at the Charge of the Corporation, and afford a pleasant, airy Walk. The
Exchange is a neat Building, supported by Columns 13 Feet high, of one Stone
each. Over it is the City-hall, a well-contrived Court of Judicature. The
Castle was formerly the Palace, where the Earls assembled their Parliaments,
and enacted Laws independent of the Kings of England, determining all Causes
themselves. It has always a Garrison kept in it. The Piazza's or Rows, as they
call them, do not in my Opinion, add any thing to the Beauty of the City; but,
on the contrary, serve to make it look both old and indifferent. These Rows are
certain long Galleries, up one Pair of Stairs, which run along the Side of the
Streets, before all the Houses, though joined to them, and, as is pretended, they
are to keep the People dry in walking along. This they do indeed effectually,
but then they take away all the View of the Houses from the Street, nor can a
Stranger, that was to ride through Chester, see any Shops in the City; besides,
they make the Shops themselves dark, and the Way in them is dark, dirty, and
uneven.

The best Ornament of the City is, that the Streets are very broad and fair,
and run through the whole City in strait Lines, crossing in the middle of it as
at Chichester: The Walls afford a very pleasant Walk, as I have said, round the
City, and within the Battlements, from whence you may see the circumjacent
Country, and particularly on the Side of the Rhoodee, which is a fine large low
Green, on the Bank of the Dee, which in Winter is often under Water by the
Inundations of the River. Beyond the Rhoodee, may be seen from the Walls of
Chester the County of Flint, and the Mountains of Wales.

The Castle is a good firm Building, and strong, though not fortified with many
Outworks: There is always a good Garrison kept in it. It Is said this Castle was
built, or at least repaired, by Hugh Lupus, the famous Earl of Chester, Nephew
to William the Conqueror, as was also the Church; the Body of whom was lately (
Anno 1723) discovered, as is supposed, in an old ruinous Building called, The
Chapter House.

It was first wrapped in Leather, and then enclosed in a Stone Coffin. The
Skull and all the Bones were very fresh, and in their proper Position; and,
what is more remarkable, the String which tied the Ankles together, was whole
and entire, although it was then upwards of 650 Years since the Interrment.

Chester is but a modern Bishopric, being so made in the Year 1541. when King
Henry VIII. divided it from Lichfield. They tell us, that King Edgar, who
conquered all this Part of Britain, and was rowed up the Dee in his Royal Barge
by Seven, or, as some say, Eight Kings, himself steering the Helm, founded the
great Church, which Lupus finished and endowed.

Here is a noble Stone Bridge over the Dee, very high and strong built, and
it is needful it should be so; for the Dee is a most furious Stream at some
Seasons, and brings a vast Weight of Water with it from the Mountains of Wales.

Chester has long given Title of Earl to the Prince of Wales, eldest Son of the
King.

Chester was formerly an Harbor for Shipping; but the Sea had long ago
withdrawn itself; and the River Dee was so choked up, that Vessels of Burden
could not come within some Miles of it; so that an Act of Parliament passed in
the Year 1732, for rendering it navigable. And in Pursuance thereof, the
Undertakers, raised a Sum of 47,830 l. which they have expended in cutting and
perfecting a new Chanel for the River Dee, of near Ten Miles in Length, and in
making proper Dams and Sluices, into which they have turned the said River; so
that it is actually navigable at this Time for Ships and Vessels of
considerable Burdens to the Quay, or Key, of Chester, where they load and
unload Goods and Merchandise. This Success encouraged the Undertakers to apply
to Parliament (1740-1), for further Powers to complete the same, and for
uniting the said Undertakers into a Company for that laudable Purpose.

This County, though so remote from London, is one of those which contributes
much to its Support, as well as to that of several other Parts of England, by
its excellent Cheese, which they make here in such Quantities, that, as I am
told from very good Authority, the City of London only takes off 14000 Tons
every Year; besides vast Quantities which they send to Bristol and York, and
also to Scotland and Ireland; so that the Quantity of Cheese made here, must be
prodigiously great. Indeed, the whole County is employed in it, and Part of its
Neighborhood too; for though it goes by the Name of Cheshire Cheese, yet great
Quantities of it are made in such Parts of Shropshire, Staffordshire, and
Lancashire, as border upon Cheshire.

The Soil is extraordinarily good, and the Grass has a peculiar Richness in it,
which disposes the Kine to give a great Quantity of Milk, which is very sweet
and good; and this Cheese Manufacture increases every Day, raises the Value of
the Lands, and encourages the Farmers to keep vast Stocks of Cows; which of
themselves contribute to improve and enrich the Land.

While we were station'd, as I may say, at Chester, I made a Trip to several
Places round about it. And particularly to the fine old Seat of the Lord
Delamere, and the spacious Forest which gives Title to that noble Family. They
say here was formerly an old City, now called the Chamber on the Forest,
probably some Fort or Camp to secure the Road. From hence is so fine a Prospect
of the Welsh Mountains, that I never before beheld such a noble Scene of
Nature. Beeston-Castle is on our left, built upon a Precipice. This Forest is
noted for great Plenty of Red and Fallow Deer, and is a great Relief for Fish,
Fowl, and Turf, to the neighboring Towns, whereof there are a great many small
ones about this Forest, and through the upper Part of it the Weaver takes its
Course. The chief Town hereabout is Fr^desham, famous formerly for a Castle,
and the Seat of the Family of the Savages, which however is but a mean
Market Town. Near this Place is also the famous Seat of Rock-Savage, built on
the Ascent of an Hill belonging to the same Family, whereof the last was the
late Earl Rivers.

On the South Side of the Park stands Beeston-Castle, upon an Hill environed
with Mountains, and yet overlooks almost the whole County. It is very strong,
covers a great Extent of Ground, and is adorned with many Towers. It gives Name
to an ancient Family in this County.

From Chester we kept directly on East to Middlewich, a large Market Town, with
a spacious Church, but chiefly noted for making Salt; where are Two excellent
Brine-seeths.

We followed the Weaver directly North to Northwich also famous for
Brine-springs, and for making great Quantities of the finest Salt by boiling
the Water in large iron Pans of small Depth. As fast as the Salt crystallizes,
they rake it out, and dry it in wicker Baskets of a conick Form. The Duty it
brings in is very considerable.

Within these Fifty Years, on the South Side of the Town, they discovered a
great many Mines of Rock-salt, which they continually dig up, and send in great
Lumps to the maritime Ports, where it is dissolved, and made into eating Salt.
We were let down by a Bucket 150 Feet deep to the Bottom of the Salt Quarry, a
most pleasant subterraneous Prospect, looking like a Cathedral supported by
Rows of Pillars, and Roof of Crystal, all of the same Rock, transparent and
glittering from the numerous Candles of the Workmen, laboring with their Steel
Pick-axes in digging it away. This Rock-work extends to several Acres.

There is a good Church at Northwich, with a fine Roof, and semicircular Choir.

At Lawton-yates they bore 60 Yards deep for the Salt Spring; at Hassal 47; at
Wheelock 18; about Middlewich less; at Northwich it rises to open Day; which
seems to intimate, that the salt Spring runs between Layers of the Earth in an
horizontal Line. Upon Boring, it rises with great Impetuosity, so that the
Workmen have scarce Time to get out of the Wells. This is all along the Side of
a Brook that comes from a remarkable Hill called Mawcop, upon the Edge of
Staffordshire; so that the Ground rises above the true Level in the mentioned
Proportion.

From Northwich we traveled North-east, and came to Knutsford, a good Town,
and finely situated. A Brook runs through it, and divides it into two. It has a
Market and Townhouse, and a pretty good Parochial Church.

Altringham and Stockport, Two small Market Towns, lie higher up Northward, the
first near, and the other upon the Borders of Lancashire; and hearing of
nothing remarkable in them, we turned South-east from Knutsford to
Macclesfield, which they call in this County Maxfield.

Macclesfield is situate in the Forest of the same Name, a Town of great
Antiquity, and very fair and spacious. It Is under the Government of a Mayor,
and enjoys many particular Privileges by virtue of the Court and Liberties of
the Forest. It has a good Church with a high Spire Steeple, and a College
adjoining to it, in which are buried a great many of the Savages: and here is
also a good Free School, and a thriving Manufacture of Buttons.

From hence we veer'd about, and came South-west to Congleton, near the Borders
of Staffordshire, a fair Mayor-town and well-water'd on all Sides. It has Two
Churches, and is noted for a good Trade in Gloves.

We then came to the Market Town of Sandbach, which is delightfully situated on
a Branch of the Weaver. It has a fair Church, and in the Marketplace stand Two
Crosses of Stone, with the History of Christ's Passion engraven on them. The
Ale here is deservedly famed.

From Sandbach we went on Southward, and came to the great London Road at
Namptwich, which stands upon it. This Town is well built, and the Streets look
fair, having a great many Gentlemen's Houses in them. The Church is a noble
Edifice in the Form of a Cross, with the Steeple rising from the Middle; but
the Maintenance of the Minister is mean and pitiful. The Inhabitants are rich,
and carry on a good Trade in most sort of Commodities, but principally in
making Salt and Cheese, the latter exceeding all that is made in the County, as
the Soil this Way is esteemed the best, and, as it is said, was called by King
Edward I. the Vale Royal.

Thus having made my Circuit round the County, I shall go from hence South to
Whitchurch in Shropshire. But I must first note two things of Cheshire: 1. That
there is no Part of England, where there are equal Numbers of Gentry, of such
ancient and noble Extraction: Mr. Camden is very particular in their Names and
Descents, to whom therefore I must refer. 2. That it is a County Palatine, and
has been so for many Ages, and its Government is distinct from any other, and
very particular; it is administered by a Chamberlain, a Judge Special, who is
called Chief Justice of Chester, two Barons of the Exchequer, three Sergeants
at Law, a Sheriff, an Attorney, an Escheator, and all proper and usual
subordinate Officers; and the Jurisdiction of all these Offices is kept up, and
preserved very strictly; only we are to note, that the Judge Special, as he is
called, tries only civil Causes, not criminal, which are left to the ordinary
Judges of England, who go the Circuits here, as in other Places.

Whitchurch is a pleasant, large, and populous Town, and has a very good
Church, in which is the famous Monument of the great Talbot, first E. of
Shrewsbury, who was called in his Time the English ACHILLES, and who was so
renowned in the Wars of France, that no Man in that Kingdom dared to encounter
him single-handed. He had engraven on one Side of his Sword, Sum Talboti, and
on the Reverse, Pro vincere inimicos meos. His Epitaph is as follows, in
capital Letters: ORATE PRO ANIMA PRAENOBILIS DOMINI, DOMINI IOHANNIS TALBOTT,
QUONDAM COMITIS SALOPIAE, DOMINI TALBOTT, DOMINI FURNIVALL, DOMINI VERDON,
DOMINI STRANGE DE BLACKMERE, ET MARESCHALLI FRANCIAE, QUI OBIIT IN BELLO APVD
BVRDEWS VII. IVLII MCCCCLIII.

This Town has a good Market, and a great many Gentry near it, whereof some are
Roman Catholics. They tell us, that this Town, when King Charles I. removed
his Standard from Nottingham to Shrewsbury, raised a whole Regiment for his
Service.

From hence we turned South, and passing by Wem, the Title given by King James
II. to his Lord Chancellor Jefferies, thence we came to Elsmere, which gives
Title of Baron to the Duke of Bridgwater, and is famous for a great Lake or
Mere, which gives the Town its Name, and which the People pretend has in some
Places no Bottom. This Place is remarkable for good Fish.

And further on West, on the Confines of Denbighshire, stands Oswestry, a
Bailiwick Market Town, famous formerly for the Sale of Welsh Cottons and
Flanels, but now only for the last. It is enclosed with a Wall, and a Ditch,
and fortified with a Castle, and has a good Church without the Gate covered
with Lead. From hence we came the same Night to Shrewsbury.

Shrewsbury is supposed to have been built out of the Ruins of the ancient
Uriconium. In the Reign of William the Conqueror, Roger Earl of Montgomery
built a Castle here, on the North Side, and a stately Abbey, some Ruins of
which are still to be seen. It is a beautiful, large, pleasant, populous, and
rich Town; full of Gentry, and yet full of Trade too; for here likewise is a
great Manufacture, as well of Flanel, as also of white Broad-cloth, which
inriches all the Country round it.

The Severn in part surrounds this Town, just as the Thames does the Isle of
Dogs; so that it makes the Form of an Horse-shoe. Over it are two fine Stone
Bridges, upon one of which is built a very noble Gate, and, over the Arch of
the Gate, the Statue of the great Llewellin, the Idol of the Welsh, and their
last Prince of Wales.

This is really a Town of Mirth and Gallantry, something like Bury in Suffolk,
or Durham in the North, but much bigger than either of them, or indeed than
both together.

Over the Market-house is kept a kind of Hall for the Manufactures, which are
sold here weekly in very great Quantities; they speak all English in the Town,
but on a Market Day you would think you were in Wales.

Here is the greatest Market, the greatest Plenty of good Provisions, and the
cheapest that is to be met with in all the Western Part of England. The Severn
supplies them here with excellent Salmon, but it is also brought in great Plenty
from the Dee, which is not far off, and abounds with a very good Kind, and is
generally larger than in the Severn. As an Example of the Cheapness of
Provisions, we paid here, in a public Inn, but a Groat a Night for Hay, and
Sixpence a Peck for Oats, for our Horses, which is cheaper than we found it in
the cheapest Part of the North of England; all our other Provisions were in
Proportion; and there is no doubt but the Cheapness of Provisions, joined to
the Pleasantness and Healthiness of the Place, draws a great many Families
hither, who love to live within the Compass of their Estates.

Mr. Camden calls it a City: and it is indeed equal to several good Cities in
England, and superior to some. Near this Place was fought the bloody Battle
between Henry Hotspur, and Henry IV. King of England, in which the former was
killed, and all his Army overthrown, and the Place is called Battlefield to
this Day.

Here are Five Churches, Two of them with lofty Spires. St. Chad's, and St.
Mary's, are said to be anciently collegiate. There are abundance of ancient
Monuments in them all, which I have not room to mention.

This Town will for ever be famous for the Reception it gave to King Charles I.
who, after setting up his Standard at Nottingham, and finding no Encouragement
there, removed to Shrewsbury, being invited by the Gentry of the Town and
Country round, where he was received with such a general Affection, and hearty
Zeal, that his Majesty recovered himself from the Discouragement of his first
Step at Nottingham, and raised and completed a strong Army in less Time than
could be imagined; insomuch that, to the Surprise of the Parliament, and indeed
of all the World, he was in the Field before them, and advanced upon them so
fast, that he met them Two-thirds onward of his Way to London, and gave them
Battle at Edgehill, near Banbury.

But the Fate of the War turning afterward against the King, the Weight of it
fell heavy upon this Town, and almost ruined it.

But they are now fully recovered, and it is one of the most flourishing Towns
in England. The Walls and Gates are yet standing, but useless; and the old
Castle is gone to Ruin, as is the Case of almost all the old Castles in England.

It should not be forgotten, that notwithstanding the Healthiness of the Place,
here broke out first that unaccountable Plague, called, The Sweating Sickness,
Anno 1551; which spread itself through the whole Kingdom, and afterward into
several foreign Nations.

Here is a good Free School, the most considerable in this Part of England;
built and endowed by Q. Elizabeth, with a very sufficient Maintenance for a
Chief or Head-Master, and Three Under-Masters or Ushers. The Buildings are very
spacious, and particularly the Library, which has a great many Books in it. The
Schoolmasters have also very handsome Houses to dwell in; so that the whole
has the Face of a College.

There was a fine School here before, erected by the Town's-people, and
maintained several Years by their Contribution. But the Queen took the Matter
into her own Hands, and built the whole Fabric new from the Ground, endowing
it liberally out of her own Royal Bounty.

Here I was showed a very visible and remarkable Appearance of the great
ancient Road or Way called Watling-street, which comes from London to this
Town, and goes on from hence to the utmost Coast of Wales. Remains of a Stone
Bridge are to be seen in the Bottom of the River, when the Water is low. This
Road is raised a good Height above the Soil, and so strait, that upon an
Eminence you may see it Ten or Fifteen Miles before you, and as much behind,
over many Hill-tops answering one the other as a Vista of Trees.

We lodged at an Inn called Ivesey-bank, on the Borders between Staffordshire
and Shropshire. About a Mile off in a large Wood stands Boscobel-house, or
White-Ladies, as some call it, where the Pendrils lived, who preserved King
Charles II. after Worcester Battle, and famous for the Royal Oak. The
Granddaughter of that William Pendril still lived in the House, when I was
there. The Floor of the Garret, which is a Popish Chapel, (formerly a Nunnery
in Possession of the Family of Cooksey) being matted, prevents any Suspicion of
a little Cavity with a Trapdoor over the Staircase where the King was hid. His
Bed was artfully placed behind some Wainscot, that shut up very close. A
Descendant of the Cookseys still keeps the Gloves and Garters, which his
Majesty left behind him.

The said Chapel is still standing, and has some painted Saints upon the Wall
at one End.

A Bow-shot from the House, just by a Horsetrack passing through the Wood, stood
the Royal Oak, into which the King and Col. Carlos climbed, by means of the
Hen-roost Ladder, when they thought it no longer safe to stay in the House, the
Family reaching them Victuals with the Nut-hook. It happened, as the People
related it to us, that whilst the King and Colonel were in the Tree, a Party of
the Enemy's Horse, sent to search the House, came whistling and talking along
this Road; and when they were just under the Tree, an Owl flew out of a
neighboring Tree, and hovered along the Ground, as if her Wings were broken,
which the Soldiers merrily pursued.

The Tree is now enclosed within a Brick Wall, the Inside whereof is covered
with Laurel, of which we may say, as Ovid did of that of the Augustan Palace,
-- Mediamque tuebere quercum. For the Oak is in the Middle, almost cut away by
Travelers, whose Curiosity leads them to see it. Close by the Side grows a
young thriving Plant from one of its Acorns.

After the Restoration, the King, reviewing the Place, no doubt, with very
different Emotions to what he had when he was in it, gathered some of the
Acorns, and set them in St. James's Park or Garden, and used to water them
himself. If we may judge of the Value the King put upon his Preservation, and
Royal Person, it was worth 200 l. per Annum, and one should think a King, if
worth any thing, worth that; for so much he gave to Pendril, and it now remains
in the Family. Over the Door of the Enclosure is this Inscription cut in
Marble: Felicissimam arborem, quam in asylum potentissimi regis Caroli II. Deus
O. M. per quem reges regnant, hic crescere voluit, tam in perpetuam rei tantae
memoriam, quam specimen firmae in reges fidei, muro cinctam posteris commendant
Basilius and Jana Fitzherbert. Quercus amica Jovi.
That is, Basil and Jane Fitzherbert recommend to Posterity this most fortunate
Tree, which the Allgacious and Almighty God, by whom Kings reign, ordained here
to grow, to be the Asylum of the most potent Prince, King Charles II. and have
begirt it with a Wall, as well in perpetual Remembrance of so great an Event,
as a Testimony of their firm Allegiance to Kings. -- The Oak beloved by Jove.


Ten Miles South-east of Shrewsbury stands Great Wenlock, an ancient Borough
and good Market Town. The noted Wreken-hill stands higher up, North of it,
between the Watlingstreet and the Severn, and within a Mile of Wroxeter, the
famous Roman Station. It ascends gradually from a pleasant level Ground,
strikes out a pretty great Length, and is well adorned with Trees. It Is the
highest Ground in all the County, and gives a fine Prospect all around it.

Following the Watling street North, we came to a small Market Town called
Wellington, of very little Note; and still keeping the Street, we arrived at
Newport on the Borders of Staffordshire, a little Market Town, where is one of
the noblest Foundations for a School in the whole Kingdom, endowed by one
Adams, an Haberdasher of London, to the Value of 7000 l. The School is 70 Feet
long, 22 wide, and the same in Height, a Library, a House for both the Master
and Usher, 60 l. a Year to the first, and 30 l. to the other, and a Garden to
each House of an Acre, and Two Acres for the Boys to play in. Near it he has
likewise built an Almshouse, and gave 550 l. toward building the Townhouse.
Over the School-door is this Distich: Scripsisti haeredem patriam, tibi quae
dedit ortum:
Scriberis ergo tuae, jure, pater patriae.
That is, Thy Country is thy Heir: and therefore we
Justly esteem thy Country's Parent Thee.


Between this Town and Drayton, a small Market Town, higher up Northward, and
likewise on the Borders of Staffordshire, is Bloreheath, famous for a Battle
fought between the House of York and that of Lancaster, wherein Nevil Earl of
Salisbury for the former, with 5000 Men only, beat Lord Audley with 10000 Men,
after a most bloody Engagement.

Entering Staffordshire, we quitted the said Streetway, a little to the left,
to see Stafford the County-town, and the most considerable, except Litchfield,
in the County. In the Way we passed through a small, but ancient Town, called
Penkrige, vulgarly Pankrage, probably the Penn^erucium of the Romans, where
happened to be a Fair. We were surprised to see the prodigious Number of the
finest and most beautiful Horses that can any-where be seen, brought hither
from Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Durham, and all the Horse-breeding Counties
in England: we were told there were not less than an hundred Jockeys or
Horse-kopers, as they call them there, from London, to buy Horses for Sale.
Also an incredible Number of Gentlemen attended with their Grooms, to buy
Hunters and good Road Horses. In a Word, I believe I may mark it for the
greatest Horse-Fair in the World, for Horses of Value, and especially those we
call Saddle-Horses; though there were great Numbers of fine large Stone-Horses
for Coach and Draught too.

From hence we came in Two Hours easy Riding to Stafford, on the River Sow.
It Is an ancient Town, and gives Name to the County; but we thought to have
found in it something more worth going so much out of the Way for. It is
however neat and well built, and pleasantly seated in low Grounds, and is
lately much increased, and grown rich by the Clothing-trade. It is governed by
a Mayor, and other inferior Officers, consists of Two Parishes, and has a good
Free School. It Is said this Town retains the ancient Custom of Borough English,
which is, that the youngest Sons inherit the Lands of their Fathers within the
Town. Here is likewise a fine square Marketplace, where stands the Shire-Hall,
and the Streets are well paved.

We tarried here a few Days, in order to visit the Towns lying on each Side of
it, with more Attention and Convenience.

Eccleshall lies North-west of Stafford, and is a pretty Market Town noted for
Pedlery-wares; and a little Market Town called Stone, lies upon the Trent.

(...) Line stands still further North, (...) Trent. It Is govern^d by a Mayor,
Two Justices, Two Bailiffs, and Common Council, and holds Pleas under 40 s. The
Streets are large, broad, and paved; but the Houses are low, and generally
thatched: the Clothing-trade flourishes here, and the Town is surrounded with
Coal-pits. Here are the Ruins of an old Castle. The Coals here are cut out in
Slices, and shine with all the various Colors of a Peacock's Tail, and
therefore are called Peacock-Coals.

Dr. Plot, as an Instance of the Growth of Stones, mentions, that near this
Place was found a Stone, with a Man's Skull, Teeth and all, enclosed in it. And
here is an excellent Device for the Taming of Shrews: they put a Bridle into
the Scold's Mouth, which deprives her of the Power of Speech, by which she is
led about the Town, and exposed to public Shame, till she promises Amendment.

Betley, a little Market Town, lies West of Newcastle, upon the Borders of
Cheshire.

Breewood is a pretty Market Town, lying South-west of Stafford. And due South
stands

Wolverhampton, a very ancient Town, situate on an Hill, which is well built,
paved, and inhabited. Here the Trade of Lock-making is carried on to great
Perfection. In its Church are several old Monuments, and a Brass Statue of Sir
Richard Leveson, who engaged the Spaniards under Sir Francis Drake. The Pulpit
is very old, and of Stone; and in the Churchyard is a very old Stone Cross.
From the Hill, on which the Town is situated, run Four weak Springs of
different Qualities, which is the only Water they have to supply this large and
populous Town.

Walsal, East of Wolverhampton, is a good, pleasant Corporate-town, governed by
a Mayor, and situate on the Top of an Hill. This Place is famous for Ironmines
and Iron-works; such as Spurs, Bridle-bits, Stirrups, Buckles, etc. in which
there is a considerable Trade carried on.

Upon the Extremity of the County, South, just on the Borders of
Worcestershire, is situate upon a high Mountain, the famous ancient Castle of
Dudley, a Building of great Extent with Trenches about it, cut out of a Rock,
and has a high Tower upon it, on the South Side. It was built by Dodo a Saxon,
in 700. Great Part of it is in Ruins, and the rest is converted into a noble
Seat, where the Lord Dudley and Ward resides. The Castle over-tops all the
Trees that surround it, and has a most extensive Prospect over Five Shires, and
into part of Wales. In the Hall of this Castle is a Table all of one entire
Plank, which, before it was fitted up there, was 25 Yards long, and 1 Yard in
Breadth; but being too long for the Hall, 7 Yards and 9 Inches of it was cut
off, and made a Table for the Hall of a neighboring Gentleman. What a
prodigious Oak must this have been, that had a Length of 25 Yards, and a
Diameter of one Yard from one End to the other!

The Town of Dudley lies near it, but in Worcestershire; and is only remarkable
for being in a different County from the Castle.

The People in this County have been more particularly famous than any other
for good Footmanship; and there have been, and still are among them, some of
the fleetest Runners in England; which must be owing to their exercising
themselves to it from their Childhood; for running Foot-races seems to be the
general Sport or Diversion of the Country.

Near Stafford we saw Ingestre, where the late Walter Chetwynd, Esquire built, or
rather rebuilt, a very fine Church at his own Charge, and where the late Lord
Chetwynd has, with a Profusion of Expense, laid out the finest Park and Gardens
that are in this Part of England.

I am now at the utmost Extent of my proposed Limits for this Circuit; for
Ingestre Parks reach to the very Banks of the Trent. So I turned to the Right,
and intending for Litchfield, in the Way we saw Beaudesert, a famous old Seat,
said to be built by Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester. The Name indeed intimates it
to be of Norman or French Original; at present it is in the noble Family of
Paget, Earl of Uxbridge, who is styled Baron of Beaudesert. The Park is very
fine, and its Situation exceeding pleasant, but the House is ancient. In the
Park is a famous Piece of Antiquity, viz. a large Camp or Fortification,
surrounded with a double Trench, very large and deep.

From hence it is about four or five Miles to the City of Litchfield, the
principal, next to Chester, of all the North-west Part of England; nor indeed
is there any other, but this and Coventry, in the whole Road from London to
Carlisle, which is on the Edge of Scotland.

At Rugely, which is an handsome well built Town, finely situated near the
Trent, we came into the great Lancashire and Cheshire Road, or the North-west
Road from London, which passing through this City from Warrington-bridge in
Cheshire, falls into the Watling-street, mentioned before, about Three Miles
South-east from the Town, and crosses another ancient Causeway or Road, called
Icknild-street, about a Mile out of the City; so that Litchfield lies, as it
were, at the joining of all those great Roads. But instead of going directly to
Litchfield, we struck out of the Road, and went North-east to Bromley, a pretty
Market Town; and from thence East to Tutbury on the Skirts of Derbyshire: It
has a small Market Town with a Castle in it.

Some Miles Southward stands Burton upon Trent, where the Clothing-trade is
carried on with great Advantage. It is famous for its noble Bridge over the
Trent, consisting of 34 Arches, and of the Length of 515 Yards. It is built of
Freestone cut and squared.

From hence we returned South-west to Litchfield, which is a fine, neat,
well built, and pretty large City. It rose from the Ruins of the Roman Etocetum
a Mile off, now called Chesterfield-wall, from some Relics of its
Fortifications. There is a kind of slow, sluggish Water which runs, or rather
glides heavily, through it, and so on for Four or Five Miles farther into the
Trent, but takes a swifter Motion as soon as it is out of the Town. This Water
parts the City into Two: one Part is called the Town, and the other the Close;
in the first is the Marketplace, a fine School, and a very handsome Hospital
well endowed. This Part is much the largest and most populous: but the other is
the fairest, has the best Buildings in it, and, among the rest, the Cathedral
Church, one of the finest and most beautiful in England.

There are Two fine Causeways, which join the City and the Close, with Sluices
to let the Water pass; but those were cut through in the Time of the late
intestine Wars in England; and the Close, which is walled about, and was then
fortified for the King, was very strong, and stood out several Attacks against
Cromwell's Men, and was not at last taken without great Loss of Blood on both
Sides, being gallantly defended, and at last taken by Storm.

There are in the Close, besides the Houses of the Clergy Residentiaries, a
great many very well built, and well-inhabited Houses, which made Litchfield a
Place of good Company, above all the Towns in this or the neighboring Counties
of Warwickshire or Derbyshire.

The Sea is very ancient, and was once Archiepiscopal, made so by King Offa;
and Eadulph the Archbishop was Metropolitan of all the Kingdom of the Mercians,
and East Angles; but it did not hold it; then it suffered another Diminution,
by having the Sea of Chester taken away, which was once Part of this.

They told us here a long Story of St. Chad, formerly Bishop of this Church,
and how he lived an Eremitical Life here, by the Spring near Stow Church, in a
little Hovel or Cell. But the Bishops, since that Time, fare better, and make
shift with a very fine Palace in the Close, and the Residentiaries live in
Proportion to them.

They have another Legendary Story also at Litchfield; namely, that a thousand
poor People, being instructed in the Christian Faith by the Care of Offa King
of the Mercians, were all martyred here in one Field by the Pagans; and that in
the Field where they were so murdered, King Oswy of Northumberland caused a
great Church to be built; and from thence the City bears for its Device an open
Field, with mangled Carcasses lying dispersed about in it, as if murdered, and
left unburied.

The Church, for the Elegancy and Regularity of the Building, may be esteemed
one of the most complete in England. The West End is richly decorated with the
Statues of all the Kings who reigned in Jerusalem, from David to the Captivity.
But it is too flat, and wants Projection, or, as Architects call it, Relief, to
give it Boldness. The Two Towers are much too low for their Breadth, and look
very heavy for want of Windows, especially where the Bells hang. The circular
Stair-cases projecting octagonally at one Angle only of each, without any of
the other Three Angles answering, is a great Irregularity. But the Spires above
them are carried up in an exceeding beautiful Taste, much beyond any other
Gothic Spires that I have seen. The middle Tower and Spire of this Church are
much higher than those at the West End, and are equally beautiful.

The Spire designed for the Middle of Westminster-Abbey, is an Imitation of the
middle Spire of this Church.

The great Window over the middle Door is very large, and its Pediment finely
adorned, a large Cross finishing the Top of it.

The Imagery and carved Work on the Front, as above, suffered much in the late
unhappy Times; and they told us, the Cross over the West Window was frequently
shot at by the rude Soldiers; but that they could not shoot it down.

The Saints of those Days also entirely ruined all the Ornaments of the Inside,
with the Brass Inscriptions, Tombs, etc. It is built in the midst of a Bog for
Security, and held out some fierce Attacks for King Charles I. and what the
Outside suffered, has been very well repaired since the Restoration, as well by
the famous Bishop Hacket, as by the Bounty of several noble and generous
Benefactors.

The Monasticon makes Mention of a Shrine given here for the Holy St. Chad, or
St. Cedda, which cost 200,000 l. but I conceive that to smell as much of the
Legend, as the Miracles of St. Chad himself; since such a Gift at that Time
must be equal to Two Millions of our Money.

Ancient Camps are found in the Neighborhood of Litchfield.

From Litchfield we came to Tamworth, a fine pleasant trading Town, eminent for
good Ale, and good Company, of the middling Sort; and also for a fine Charity
of the famous Bookseller, Mr. Guy, who built and endowed the noble Hospital in
Southwark, called by his Name. The Town stands on the River Tame, which runs
through it, and divides it into Two Parts, one Part whereof is in this County,
and the other in Warwickshire. It is a Bailiwick Town, and a Place of good
Account, though it has been much more considerable. Here was anciently a Palace
of the Mercian Kings, and there is still remaining a square Trench, called the
King's Dyke. This Town was given by the Conqueror to the Marmyons, who built
the Castle here, and were hereditary Champions of England, from whom that
Office descended to the Dymokes of Lincolnshire.

From Tamworth we came to Sutton-Colefield, a little Town situated in an
excellent Air, and among pleasant Woods, though but in a barren Soil; and then we
came into the great Road again at Coleshill in Warwickshire, a small, but very
handsome Market Town; from whence we came to Coventry, the Sister City to
Litchfield, and joined in the Title of See, which was for some little Time
seated here, but afterward returned to Litchfield.

Coventry is a City of large Extent and populous, and drives a very great
Trade: the Manufacture of Tammies is their chief Employ, and next to that,
weaving of Ribbons of the meanest kind, chiefly black. The Buildings are very
old, and in some Places very much decayed; the Timber-built Houses project
forwards into the Street toward one another, insomuch that in the narrow
Streets they almost touch at the Top; a Method of Building formerly much
practiced in London.

The Tale of the Lady Godiva, who rode naked through the High Street of this
City, to purchase its Exemption from oppressive Taxes, is held for so certain a
Truth, that they will not have it questioned upon any Account whatsoever; and
in Memory of it, the Inhabitants make a Procession yearly with a naked Figure
of a Woman riding on Horseback through the City; and the Picture of the poor
Fellow who peeped out of the Window to see her, is still kept up, looking out
of a Garret in the High Street of the City: but Mr. Camden says positively,
nobody looked at her at all. Two Parliaments have been held in this City, both
remarkably denominated; one in the 6th of King Henry IV. called Parliamentum
Indoctorum; the other in the 38th of King Henry VI. called Parliamentum
Diabolicum, because of the Attainder passed in it against the House of York and
its Partisans.

At the Restoration of King Charles II. the Walls and Towers of the City were
demolished, by that Prince's Command, and only the Gates of it left standing;
by which the Beauty and Strength of the rest may be guessed at.

This City is a County incorporate of itself, and has a great many Towns within
its Liberties, holds Pleas, and is governed by a Mayor, 10 Aldermen, and
Sub-officers; but it had only Two Parish Churches, that of the Holy Trinity,
and the Church of St. Michael, which were unable to hold half the Inhabitants,
till the Year 1734, when an Act passed for making the Church of Bablack in
Coventry a Parish Church, and for appointing a District or Parish thereto, and
for enabling the Master and Usher of the Free Grammar School within the said
City, to be the Rector and Lecturer of the said Parish Church, for all time to
come. This is called in the Act the Parish Church of St. John the Baptist in
the City of Coventry. Besides these Three Churches and Parishes, it has Four
Steeples; and the Cross is notedly one of its greatest Ornaments. The Roads are
kept well paved to it for a Mile round. Here is a good Free School, founded by
John Hales, Esquire by the Name of the School of King Henry VIII. the Master of
which is to be, for the future, the Minister of the new Parish Church, as I
have mentioned. It has a good Library; and there is also an Hospital for the
Poor. But here is no Cathedral, as some have falsely said; neither is the great
Church, so called, either Collegiate or Conventual; but only a Monastery or
Priory.

Yet this City contended a great while for thi^ Honor, but could not carry it.
In King Henry VIII.'s Time, the Priory being dissolved, the Church, which they
would have called a Cathedral, was reduced to a private Parish Church, and
continues so to this Day: it is also an Archdeaconry, and the Bishop is styled
Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry.

The Spire of the great Church is however very beautiful, and 100 Yards high.
There is another good Church in the same Yard; the Cross, a fine Gothic Work,
66 Feet high; and in Niches are the Statues of several of the English Kings. At
the South-end of the Town stands a tall Spire by itself, being what is left of
the Gray Friars Conventual Church. The Townhouse is worth seeing; the Windows
of it are painted Glass, representing some of the old Kings, Earls, etc. who
have been Benefactors to the Town.

And a Copy of Latin Verses are there to be read, in Praise of their Royal
Benefactors, in which are named the Edwards, the Henry's, the Black Prince,
Queen Elizabeth, the Duke of Northumberland, and the great Earl of Leicester.

From Coventry we could by no means pass the Town of Warwick, the Distance too
being but about Six Miles, and a very pleasant Way on the Banks of the River
Avon: It Is famous for being the Residence of the great Guy, Earl of Warwick, of
whom Tradition has delivered down to us so many hyperbolical Accounts, that it
is hardly possible to distinguish his real Actions from what are fabulous. He
flourished in the Reign of Athelstane, and decided the Fate of the Kingdom by
Compact, in single Combat with Colbrond the Dane, a Man of gigantick Stature,
whom he slew, and afterward led a Hermit's Life, till his Death. They show us
here his Castle, his Helmet, his Sword, and tell abundance of things of him,
which have some Appearance of History, though not much Authority to support them.
So I leave that Part to the curious Searchers into Antiquity, who may consult
Mr. Camden, Rous, Dugdale, and other Antiquaries on that Subject, who tell us
the Castle was built before our Savior's Time, and has been a Place of great
Consideration ever since.

As to Warwick, it is really a fine Town, pleasantly situated on the Bank of
the Avon, over which is a large and stately Bridge, the Avon being now grown a
pretty large River. Warwick has suffered much from all Quarters. It was once
destroyed by the Picts and Scots; after which the famous Caractacus (who at the
Head of the Silures opposed the Romans so long) rebuilt it, erecting there also
a Palace for himself. Then the Romans under Ostorius, and after them the
Saxons, greatly damaged it; and lastly, the ravaging Danes ruined it.

Though it was a Corporation by Prescription, yet it took a Charter from Philip
and Mary, and since from James I. and is now governed by a Bailiff, and 12
Burgesses. It has a handsome Stone-built Market-house upheld by Pillars; and
here is a good Free School, and a well-endow'd Hospital for decayed Gentlemen.
Though it has been always accounted a handsome well built Town, yet the Face of
it is now quite altered and improved; for having been almost wholly reduced to
a Heap of Rubbish, by a terrible Fire, which happened the Fifth Day of
September 1694, by the mere Accident of a Spark being blown from a Stick, as it
was carried cross a Lane, to the Damage of 96,000 l. it was rebuilt by Act of
Parliament, and that in so noble and beautiful a manner, that few Towns in
England make so fine an Appearance.

The Church and lofty Tower is new-built, except the East End, which is old,
and very good Work. There are many fine Brass Monuments of the Earls of
Warwick, and others; also one of the Earl of Essex, Queen Elizabeth's unhappy
Favorite; and many Chapels and Confessionaries. In the Chapter House on the
North-side is a Tomb of the Lord Brook. The Castle stands upon the River Avon
on a solid Rock, from whose Bowels that and the whole Town may be said to have
been dug. The Terrace of the Castle, like that of Windsor, overlooks a
beautiful Country, and sees the Avon running at the Foot of the Precipice, from
above 50 Feet perpendicular Height; for the solid Rock, from the River on which
it stands, it 40 Feet high, but on the North-side it is even with the Town. The
Building is old, but has been often repaired and beautified; and it is now a
very agreeable Structure both within and without. The Apartments are very
nicely contrived, and the Communication of the remotest Parts of the Building,
one with another, is so well preserved by Galleries, and by the great Hall,
which is very magnificent, that one finds no Irregularity in the whole
Building, notwithstanding its ancient Plan, as it was a Castle, built for
Strength rather than a Palace to dwell in for Pleasure.

A Stone Bridge with a Dozen Arches is at the Castle; across is a Stone-work
Dam, where the Water falls over it as a Cascade under the Castle Wall. It is
fenced with a deep Mound, and strong embattled double Walls and lofty Towers.
On one Side the Area is a very high Mount. There are good Apartments and
Lodgings next the River, the Residence of the Lord Brook. The Priory, on the
North-east of the Town overlooks a pleasant woody Vale. There are a great many
curious original Pictures in the Castle, by Vandyke and other good Hands, of
Kings, Queens, and other noble Personages, both English and Foreign.

A Mile out of Town, on the Side of a Hill, is a pretty retired Cell, called
Guy-cliff. In an old Chapel is Guy's Statue, Eight Feet high. The Fence of the
Court is entire Rock, in which are cut Stables and Outhouses. They showed us
the rough Cave, where they say the famous Guy died an Hermit.

While I was station'd, as I may say, at Warwick, I took a Turn about the
Country, to view such Places of Note, as lay something out of my intended Rout.
And first, passing a Rivulet, I came to the ancient Tripontium, placed in a
pleasant little Valley, the Sides of which are pretty steep. The Road on the
opposite Hill looks perfectly like a Perspective-scene at the Theater. This is
a Roman Station, rightly placed at Dovebridge upon the Avon, running by Rugby
to Warwick. The Stream here divides into two, with a Bridge over each. Upon one
is a short Inscription in Stone, showing the three Counties which repair it.

Near this Place, at Legers-Ashby in Northamptonshire, has been an old Town, as
they say, destroyed by the Danes. Catesby, who hatched the Powder Plot, owned
the Town.

We went on to Daventry, a considerable Market Town, governed by a Mayor,
Aldermen, Steward, and 12 Freemen. It lies on the great Road to Chester, and is
consequently a great Thorough-fare, and well furnished with good Inns; for it
subsists chiefly by the great Concourse of Travelers that pass that way. It
lies also on the old Watling-street Way. The Road was turned to pass through
the Town, and runs on to Dunsmore-heath, where it crosses the Fosse, and one
Branch goes on to Coventry, and the other joins the Fosse, and goes on to a
Place called High-cross, of which further anon, where it falls into the old
Watling-street, and both meet again near Litchfield.

It is a most pleasant Curiosity to observe the Course of these old famous
Highways, the Ikenild Way, the Watling-street, and the Fosse; in which one sees
so lively a Representatation of the ancient British, Roman and Saxon
Governments, that one cannot help recalling those Times to the Imagination; and
though I am confined to such narrow Limits in this Work, yet a Circuit or Tour
through England would be very imperfect, if I should take no Notice of these
Ways, seeing in tracing them we necessarily come to the principal Towns, either
that are or have been in every County; and likewise in mentioning their
Remains, we give some Account of them as in their present State, which falls
directly in with my Design.

From Daventry we went a little out of the Road, to see a great Camp, called
Burrow-hill, upon the North End of an Eminence, covered over with Fern and and
Goss. Here used to be kept a Horse-race. They say this was a Danish Camp, and
every thing hereabouts is attributed to the Danes, because of the neighboring
Daventry, which they suppose to be built by them. The Road hereabouts too being
overgrown with Daneweed, they fansy it sprung from the Blood of the Danes,
slain in Battle; and that if upon a certain Day in the Year you cut it, it
bleeds. Originally, it seems to have been Roman, but perhaps new-modell'd by
the Danes.

In Norton Town Road a Cornu Ammonis lies neglected, too big to bring away.

At Weedon is shown the Site of King Wolfhere's Palace; the Saxon Kings of
this Province residing here. The Pastures called, The Ashes are the Roman Camp.
St. Werberg, Daughter of King Wolfhere, and Abbess to the Nunnery in this
Place, had here a Chapel. Abundance of very fine Stone, and many Roman Coins,
have been dug up. Weedon now contains two Parishes, and has been a Market Town.

Towcester is a considerable Town between two Rivulets, which encompass it
almost round.

Old Stretford stands on the opposite Side of the Owse to Stony-Stratford; in
the Fields thereabouts are found many Roman Coins.

A little North of the Horseshoe-inn stood Queen Eleanor's Cross, which was
pulled down in the Civil Wars.

To the West of Stretford stands Whaddon-hall, upon very high Ground, affording
a most beautiful Prospect. This Manor formerly belonged to the Lords Gray; one
of whom, a Knight of the Garter, is buried in the Church. Here is the original
Picture of Dr. Willis, the Progenitor of the present Possessor, with many of
his MSS. Letters, Consultations, Lectures, and other Works unpublish'd. The
Poets Spencer and the Duke of Bucks honored this Place with their Residence.
Still higher stands Stukely: The Church is very entire, though built before the
Conquest, in the plain ancient manner.

I now come to Northampton, the handsomest Town in all this Part of England;
but here, as at Warwick, the Beauty of it is owing to its Disaster; for it was
so effectually burnt down, that very few Houses were left standing; and, although
the Fire began in the Daytime, the Flame spread itself with such Fury, and
Speed, that they tell us, a Townsman being two Miles off, upon a Hill, on the
South Side of the Town, saw the Fire at one End of it, just as it began; and
before he could reach the Town, with all the Speed he could, the other End was
in Flames also. It Is now finely rebuilt with Brick and Stone, and the Streets
made spacious and wide. It has four Churches, two Hospitals, and a
Charity-school well endowed. The Marketplace is square and spacious; the
Assize-house is built after the Corinthian Order. Allhallows Church is a pretty
Edifice, with a Cupola, and a noble Portico, before it, of 8 lofty Ionick
Columns. Upon the Balustrade is a Statue of King Charles II. It is situate on
the River Nine, over which there are two handsome Bridges, and is walled in;
and on the West side are the Remains of an old Castle, upon an Eminence. It Is
governed by a Mayor, two Bailiffs, a Recorder, etc. All Saints Church
beforementioned stands in a Center, where four large spacious Streets
terminate. The public Buildings are esteemed the finest that can be seen in
any County-town in England, being all new-built. But that Writer took very
little Notice of Northampton, or rather had never seen it, who told us of a
Cathedral, a Chapter House, and a Cloister.

The great Inn called the George, at the Corner of the High Street, looks more
like a Palace than an Inn, and cost above 2000 l. building; and so generous was
the Owner, that, as we were told, when he had built it, he gave it to the Poor
of the Town.

This is counted the Center of all the Horse-Markets, and Horse-Fairs in
England, there being here no less than four Fairs in a Year. And indeed
Northampton is reckoned the Navel of England. Here they buy Horses of all
Sorts, as well for the Saddle as for the Coach and Cart; and hither^^ll the
Jockeys from London resort to purchase Horses.

Near Northampton is the ancient Royal House of Holmeby, which was formerly in
great Esteem, and by its Situation is capable of being made a truly Royal
Palace. But the melancholy Reflection of the Imprisonment of King Charles I. in
this House, and his being violently taken hence again by the Rebels, has cast a
kind of Disgrace upon the Place, so that it has been forsaken. The House and
Estate was purchased by the Duchess of Marlborough, and became Part of the
Jointure which was settled on the Marchioness of Blandford. It is at present
possessed by a Farmer, who has pulled down Part of the Outhouses, and
converted the remaining Part into Barns, Stables, etc.

A little way off of Northampton is Naseby, where the bloody and fatal Battle
was fought between the Royalists and Parliamentarians, upon a fine Plain, where
at present stands a Windmill; and on it, are the Marks of several great Holes,
where the Slain were buried; and near this is Guildsborough, so named from a
Roman Camp, of a square Form, and deep Ditch, called The Burrows.

The Town of Towcester is of large Extent, and very populous; and having but
one Parish Church, which is two Miles distant from the Hamlet of Althorpe and
Foxcoate, in which there was a Chapel of ^ase, but officiated in only once a
Month, by the Vicar of Towcester, though it is computed there are 400 Souls in
the said Hamlet, who in the Wintertime cannot attend Divine Service at
Towcester; and several Benefactions having been given, in case the said Hamlet
should be erected into a Parish: For all these Reasons, an Act passed, Sess.
1737. for making the Chapel in the Hamlet of Althorpe and Foxc^^te a Parish
Church, and for appointing a District or Parish thereto; and, according to the
Condition of one of the Benefactions, enabling the Master of the Free
Grammar School, within the said Hamlet, to be Vicar of the new Parish Church.

The Seat of the Earl of Pomfret, near Towcester, is a stately Building, and
stands pleasantly amidst good Plantations of Wood, Vista's, and fine Prospects.
In the grand View to the back Front, beyond the Garden, is a large and long
Canal. Several curious Pictures are in the House. But what inhances the Glory
of this Seat is, the vast Number of Greek and Roman Marbles, Statues, Busto's,
Bas-reliefs, Urns, Altars, etc. Part of the invaluable Collection of the great
Earl of Arundel, and which are worthy of a Journey through half the Globe to
behold. The Hall is a fine lofty Room, and the great Stairs are painted in
Fresco by Sir James Thornhill.

Towcester is a pretty Town of Roman Antiquity; through which, in a strait
Line, runs the Watling-street. The Inhabitants of all Ages are here employed in
a silken Manufacture, and Lace-making. The Town consists of one long Street,
and is almost entirely encompassed with Water.

The House late the Earl of Sunderland's, at Althorpe, now belonging to the
Hon. John Spencer, Esquire Brother to his Grace the present Duke of Marlborough,
who is Earl of Sunderland, has within these few Years changed its Face to much
Advantage. This ancient Seat was rebuilt with great Improvement, by Robert Earl
of Sunderland, Grandfather to the present Duke of Marlborough; and is
particularly noted for a magnificent Gallery, furnished with a large Collection
of curious Paintings, by the best Hands.

The Park is laid out and planted, after the Manner of that at Greenwich, and
was designed by Le Notre, the same Person who planted St. James's Park, and
Cassioberry; as also several other Parks and Gardens in England.

There is a noble Piece of Water here, on which is lately built a fine Vessel,
completely equipped; as his Grace the Duke of Bedford has also at his Seat at
Woburn-Abbey. There is likewise on this Water a fine Venetian Gondola, Canoes,
etc. But this Water is situated too near the House, and occasions so great a
Damp, that some of the Pictures in the Gallery are mildew'd thereby.

At a convenient Distance from the House, is lately built a handsome Square of
Offices, and near these is a large Kitchen-Garden finely walled and planted, in
which is a handsome Building, for the Residence of the Gardener, which is a
Model of an Italian Villa.

From hence we went North toward Harborough, and in the Way, in the Midst of
deep dismal Roads, the dirtiest and worst in all that Part of the Country, we
saw Boughton, the noble Seat of the Duke of Montagu, a House built by the first
Duke, very much after the Model of the Palace of Versailles; the treble Wings
projecting and expanded, forming a Court or Space wider and wider, in proper
Stades, answerable to the Wings, the Body of the House closing the whole View.

The Hall is a very noble Room; on the Ceiling is a Convocation of the Gods,
admirably painted, as are many Suites of Rooms, Stair-cases, Galleries, etc.
beside the great Number of Portraits and other curious Pictures. The Gardens
contain 90 Acres, adorned with Statues, Flower-pots, Urns of Marble and Metal,
many very large Basins, with Variety of Fountains playing, Aviaries,
Reservoirs, Fish Ponds, Canals, Wildernesses, Terraces, etc. The Cascade is
very fine, and a whole River running through the Length of the Gardens, is
diversified most agreeably to complete its Beauty.

The Park is walled round with Brick, and so finely planted with Trees, and in
such an excellent Order, that I saw nothing more beautiful, no not in Italy
itself, except that the Walks of Trees were not Orange and Lemon, and Citron,
as it is in Naples, and the Abruzzo, and other Southern Parts of Italy.

A Mile off is Geddington, where, in a Trivium, stands one of the Stone
Crosses, built by King Edward I. in Memory of his Queen Eleanor. These are said
to be the Places where the Corpse of that Princess rested, and Crosses erected,
viz. Lincoln, Newark, Leicester, Geddington, Northampton, Stony-Stratford,
Dunstable, St. Albans, Waltham, Cheapside, Charing Cross.

On Willoughby Side of the Road is an Hillock, called Cross-hill, where the
Country People observe an anniversary Festival. Willoughby Brook plays in
delightful Meanders along a Valley between Cornfields, with a moderate Water,
unless raised by Rains. Here several brass and silver Coins have been found,
and some of Gold. The People have a Notion of great Riches being hid
underground; and there is a vulgar Report, that under one Balk or Mere, that
is, Division, between the ploughed Fields, there is as much Money, as would
purchase the whole Lordship; but they dare not dig, they pretend, for fear of
Spirits. Mosaic Pavements, Coins, Pot-hooks, Fire-shovels, etc. have been also
found.

In Willoughby Town is an handsome Cross of one Stone, five Yards long. The
Parliament Soldiers had tied Ropes about it to pull it down; but the Vicar
quenched their Zeal with some strong Beer, after having harangued them
concerning its Innocence.

At Cossington, near the River Wrek, is a vast Barrow, 350 Feet long, 120
broad, 40 high, or near it, very handsomely worked up on the Sides, and very
steep. It is called Shipley-hill, from a great Captain of that Name, who, they
say, was here buried. On the Top are several oblong doubled Trenches cut in the
Turf, where the Lads and Lasses of the adjacent Villages meet on Easter-monday
to recreate themselves with Cakes and Ale.

At Erdborough is a strong Roman Camp, 800 Feet long, of a delightful Prospect.
Near it is a petrifying Spring.

But I must not omit, as I had like to have done, the Town of Wellingborough in
the County of Northampton.

It was a large, well built, and well-inhabited Town, with a fine Church, and
Free School. A dreadful Fire which happened here in July 1738, has made the
Town still more beautiful, though the Occasion was too melancholy to be wished
for. It began at a Dyer's House in the Town, about two in the Afternoon, and in
the Space of Six Hours consumed near 220 Houses, besides Outhouses, Barns,
Stables, etc. amounting in the Whole to upwards of 800, mostly in the South and
East Parts of the Town. The Wind being high, and but little Water to be had,
the Fire was so fierce and violent, that it seemed to break out at twenty
Places at once, and the Inhabitants were in such Confusion, that but few of
them had Time to save any Goods, and many only the Clothes on their Backs. As
it happened chiefly among the Trading Men and Farmers, the Loss upon them was
very heavy. But it was a good deal alleviated by the signal Charity of the
neighboring Gentlemen and others, which saved many of the poor Sufferers from
perishing for Want.

In the Month of March, following this dreadful Fire, another happened at
Findon, two Miles from Wellingborough, which consumed 16 Houses.

From Boughton we went on to Harborough, a good Market Town, and great
Thorough-fare, intending to go forward to Leicester; but Curiosity turned us
West a little, to see an old Town called Lutterworth, famous for being the
Birthplace of John Wickliff, the first Preacher of the Reformation in England,
whose Disciples were afterward called Lollards.

The Church was lately beautified, and paved with a costly Pavement of
checkered Stone; and the Pews are new, and every thing in it both in Church and
Chancel, except the Pulpit, of thick Oak-Planks, six-square, which is preserved
on account of its being Wickliff's Pulpit.

Being thus got a little out of our Way, we turned West into the Watling-street
Way, at High-cross, where the Fosse crosses it, and which, I suppose, occasioned
the Name, leaving Rugby in Warwickshire, a small Town, noted only for a great
Number of Butchers, on the South-west of us. At this Cross we seemed to be in
the Center, and highest Ground of England; for from hence Rivers run every way.
The Fosse went across the Backside of our Inn, and so toward Bath. Here are
diverse Roman Antiquities: its ancient Appellation was Benonis. The late Earl of
Denbigh, and the Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, erected here a Cross of an
handsome Design, but of mouldering Stone, through the Deceit of the Architect. It
consists of four Dorick Columns, regarding the four Roads, with a gilded Globe
and Cross at-top, upon a Sun-dial. On two Sides, between the four Tuscan
Pillars, which compose a sort of Pedestal, are these Inscriptions: Vicinarum
provinciarum, Vervicensis scilicet and Leicestrensis, ornamenta, proceres
patriciique, auspiciis illustrissimi Basilii comitis de Denbigh, hanc columnam
statuendam curaverunt, in gratam pariter and perpetuam memoriam Jani tandem a
serenissima Anna clausi, A. D. M.DCC.XII. Thus translated: The Noblemen and
Gentry, Ornaments of the neighboring Counties of Warwick and Leicester, at the
Instances of the Right Honorable Basil Earl of Denbigh, have caused this
Pillar to be erected, in grateful as well as perpetual Remembrance of Peace at
length restored by her Majesty Queen Anne, in the Year of our Lord M.DCC.XII.

The Inscription on the other Side runs thus: Si veterum Romanorum vestigia
quaeras, hic cernas, viator. Hic enim celeberrimae illorum viae militares sese
mutuo secantes ad extremos usque Britanniae limits pr^currunt: hic stativa sua
habuerunt Vennones; and ad primum abhinc lapidem castra sua ad Stratam, and ad
Fossam tumulum, Claudius quidam cohortis praefectus habuisse videtur. Which may
be thus rendered: If, Traveller, you search for the Footsteps of the ancient
Romans, here you may behold them. For here their most celebrated military Ways,
crossing one another, extend to the utmost Boundaries of Britain: Here the
Vennones kept their Quarters; and at the Distance of one Mile from hence,
Claudius, a certain Commander of a Cohort, seems to have had a Camp toward the
The Watling-street, simply called The Street, by way of Eminence.
Street, and toward the Fosse a Tomb.

The Watling-street, measuring from Chester through London and Dover, makes a
strait Line with Rome. Which seems to have been so contrived by the great
Founders, that in traveling upon it they might have the Satisfaction of
reflecting, that they were going upon the Line which led to the Capital of the
Empire.

To proceed, we kept the Street-way till we came into the Leicester Road, which
we followed East to Hinkley, a Market Town, situate on a Hill very pleasantly.
This Town is noted for a large handsome Church, and a high Spire-Steeple all of
Stone, in which is a Chime of excellent Bells.

From hence we turned North-west, and came to Nun-Eaton, an ordinary
manufacturing Town, on the River Anchor, and then Northward to Atherston; and so
made a kind of serpentizing Tour of it along the Borders of the two Counties of
Warwick and Leicester, sometimes in one and sometimes in the other.

Atherston is a Market Town famous for a great Cheese-Fair, on the 8th of
September, from whence the Cheese-Factors carry the vast Quantities of Cheese
they buy to Sturbridge Fair, which begins about the same Time, but holds much
longer; and here it is sold again for the Supply of the Counties of Essex,
Suffolk, and Norfolk.

A little North-west of Atherston stands Polesworth, formerly a Market Town;
but since the Dissolution of a famous Nunnery, which was there, the Market was
discontinued.

From Atherston we turned East again, into Leicestershire, to see
Bosworth-field, famous for the great Battle which put an End to the Reign of
Richard III. and to the long and bloody Contention between the Red Rose and the
White, or the two Royal Houses of York and Lancaster; which, as Fame tells us,
had cost the Lives of 11 Princes, 23 Earls and Dukes, 3000 Noblemen, Knights,
and Gentlemen, and 200,000 of the common People. We viewed the Spot of Ground
where the Battle was fought; and at the Town they showed us several Pieces of
Swords, Heads of Lances, Barbs of Arrows, Pieces of Pole-Axes, and suchlike
Instruments of Death, which they said were found by the Country People in the
several Grounds near the Place of Battle, as they had occasion to dig, or
trench, or plough up the Ground.

Within three Miles of this Place is an ancient Market Town, of the same Name,
lying on a Hill, in a very healthy and pleasant Air. The Soil all round it is
fruitful, both for Tillage and Pasture.

Hence I passed directly North to Ashby de la Zouch, on the Skirts of
Derbyshire, a very pleasant Town, lying between two Parks. It consists but of
one Street, in which stands a pretty Stone Cross; the Church is large and
handsome, and it is famous for four good Horse-Fairs in the Year.

We then passed South-east into Leicestershire. The Earl of Stamford has a good
old Hunting-seat on this Side of the Country, called Bradgate, and a fine Park
at Grooby; but they were too much out of our Way: so we came on through a fine
Forest to Leicester.

Leicester is an ancient large and populous Town, containing five Parishes;
it is the Capital of the County of that Name, and stands on the River Soar,
which rises not far from High-cross, just mentioned: It is a Borough and
Corporation Town, whereof the chief Magistrate is a Mayor, who is assisted by a
Recorder, Aldermen, and Common Council. Here are three Markets weekly, well
supplied with Provisions. A considerable Manufacture is carried on here, and in
several of the Market Towns around, for weaving of Stockens by Frames; and one
would scarce think it possible so small an Article of Trade could employ such
Multitudes of People as it does; for the whole County seems to be busied in it:
as also Nottingham and Derby, of which hereafter.

The County of Leicester is in part also taken up in Country Business, more
particularly in breeding and feeding Cattle. Most of the Gentlemen are
Grasiers, and in some Places the Grasiers are so rich, that they grow
Gentlemen; it is not an uncommon thing for Grasiers here to rent Farms from 500
l. to 2000 l. a Year.

The Sheep bred in this County and Lincolnshire, which joins to it, are,
without Comparison, the largest, and bear not only the greatest Weight of Flesh
on their Bones, but also the greatest Fleeces of Wool on their Backs, of any
Sheep in England: and hence it is, that these Counties becomes vast Magazines
of Wool for the rest of the Nation. Nor is the Wool less fine because of the
great Quantity; but as it is the longest Staple, as the Clothiers call it, so it
is the finest Wool in the whole Island, some few Places excepted; such as
Leominster in Herefordshire, the South Downs in Sussex, and such little Places,
where the Quantity is small and insignificant, compared to this Part of the
Country; for the Sheep-breeding Country reaches from the River Anchor, on the
Border of Warwickshire, to the Humber, at the farthest End of Lincolnshire,
which is near 100 Miles in Length; and from the Bank of Trent, in Lincolnshire
and Leicestershire, to the Bank of Ouse, bordering on Bucks, Bedford,
Cambridge, and Huntingdon Shires, above 60 Miles in Breadth.

These are the Funds of Sheep which furnish the City of London with their large
Mutton, in such prodigious Quantities. There are indeed a few Sheep of a large
Breed, which are brought up from Romney Marsh, and the adjoining low Grounds in
Kent and Sussex; but they are few, and indeed scarce worth naming, compared to
what are produced in these Counties.

The Horses bred, or rather fed here, are the largest in England, being
generally the great black Coach and Dray-horses; of which so great a Number are
continually sent up to London, that one would think so little a Spot as this of
Leicestershire, could not possibly produce so many. But the adjoining Counties
of Northampton and Bedford have of late come into the same Business. The chief
Supply, however, is from this County, from whence the other Counties rather buy
them, and feed them up as Jockeys and Chapmen, than breed them up from their
Beginning.

In the South-west Part of the Country rise four considerable Second-rate
Rivers, which run every one a directly contrary Course in a most remarkable
Manner.

1. The Avon, which runs by Rugby, and goes away to Warwick South-west.

Of this River the Poet elegantly sings: Yet rolling Avon still maintains its
Stream,
Swelled with the Glories of the Roman Name.
Strange Power of Fate! Unshaken Moles must waste,
While Things that ever move, for ever last.


2. The Soar, which runs by Leicester, and goes away to the Trent, North-west.

3. The Anchor, which runs by Nun-Eaton, and goes away to Atherston, North; and
so on to Tamworth, West.

4. The Welland, which runs by Harborough, and goes away to Stamford,
North-east.

I ought not to omit observing, that as the Town of Leicester was formerly very
strong and well fortified, being advantageously situated for that Purpose, the
River covering it half way about, so it was again fortified in the late unhappy
Wars, and being garrisoned by the Parliament Forces, was assaulted by the
Royalists, who, after an obstinate Defense, took it Sword in Hand, which
occasioned a terrible Slaughter. They preserve here a most remarkable Piece of
Antiquity, being a Piece of Mosaic Work at the Bottom of a Cellar; it is the
Story of Acteon, and his being killed by his own Hounds, wrought as a Pavement,
in a most exquisite Manner; the Stones are only of two Colors, White, and
Brown, and very small.

The Castle here, before it was dismantled, was a prodigious Building. It was
the Court of the great Henry Duke of Lancaster, who added to it 26 Acres of
Ground; which he enclosed with a very strong Wall of square Stone, 18 Feet
high, and called it his Novum opus, vulgarly now the Newark, where the best
Houses in or near Leicester are, and do still continue extra-parochial. The
Hall and Kitchen of this Place remain still entire, as Testimonies of the
Grandeur of the Whole; the former being so lofty and spacious, that the Courts
of Justice, which in Assize-time are held there, are at such a Distance, as to
give no Disturbance to one another. There are several Gate-ways to enter this
Palace; and that which faces the East, has an Arch that is deemed a curious
Piece of Architecture; over which in the Tower is kept the Magazine for the
Militia of the County.

Beneath this Castle was a very fair Collegiate Hospital, in the Church
whereof, Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Henry his Son the first Duke of it, were
buried; the Hospital was built by the Duke in his old Age, and appropriated for
the Maintenance of 100 poor People, in which also he placed a Dean and twelve
Canons, Prebendaries, with as many Vicars and other Ministers, and ten able
Women to serve and assist the Poor and Weak. This, with Divine Service therein,
does in some measure still subsist by certain Stipends paid out of the Duchy of
Lancaster. Another Hospital built by Sir William Wigston, in the Reign of King
Henry VIII. is in a very flourishing Condition there.

Leicester is the Ratae Coritanorum of the Romans. The Trace of the Roman Wall
is discoverable without Difficulty, especially in the Gardens about Senvygate,
with a Ditch, which is very visible. This was repaired by Edelfleda, a noble
Saxon Lady, in the Year 914. The old Work called Jewry-wall is composed of
Rag-stone, and Roman Brick.

Not far off is a Place called Holy-bones, where abundance of Bones of Oxen
have been dug up, which were the Remains of the Roman Sacrifices.

At Leicester many Roman Coins are found; a Pot full of them was dug up at the
Entrance into Whitefriers. There are also many great Foundations. At St. Mary
de Pree's Abbey a Body was dug up, supposed to be Cardinal Wolsey's.

Since its Dissolution it has been made a Dwelling House, which has nothing
left but the naked Walls, and the Spot of the Abbey is turned into a Garden.
The only thing worth seeing in it, is a pleasant Terrace-walk, supported by an
embattled Wall, with Lunets hanging over the River, and shaded with Trees.

In the Time of the Saxons, St. Margaret's Church was an episcopal See, and was
very fine. Here, say some, King Richard III. was buried.

Half a Mile Southward from Leicester, upon the Edge of the Meadows, is a long
Ditch, called Rawdikes; on the Banks of which, according to Tradition, King
Charles I. stood to behold the Storm of the Town. That Prince lay at the
Vicarage-house at Elston.

South-east of Leicester lies Billesden, a Market Town of no Note: and further
South still, is Hallaton, another Town noted for its Poverty, in the midst of a
rich Soil.

The Fosse-way leads from hence through the North-west Part of this County; but
entering Nottinghamshire, it inclines North-east, through the Vale of Belvoir,
or, as it is commonly called, of Bever, to Newark. In all this long Tract, we
pass through a rich and fertile Country, having in our Coast North-eastward the
noble River Trent, for twenty Miles together, often in our View.

But some Miles North of Leicester the River Wrek, which comes from the
North-east, and the Stour, which runs North-west, form a kind of Y; the Stour
from Leicester Southward making the Tail. In the Course last-mentioned we
passed through Montsorrel and Loughborough, both Market Towns, lying on the
Fosse, which runs nearly parallel with the Stour, and makes one Side of the Y.
The first is situate under a great Eminence, and has a good Stone Bridge over
the Stour; and the other is seated among rich Meadow-ground, and is a fine
agreeable Town. And on the Wrek, which makes the other Side of the Y, stand
Melton Mowbray, a large well built considerable Market Town, situate in a
fertile Soil, almost surrounded with a little River, called the Eye, over which
it has two fine Bridges; and also Waltham on the Would, ( i. e. on the Downs)
which is but a mean Market Town.

Belvoir-castle, standing within Lincolnshire, but on the Edge of
Leicestershire, is a truly noble Situation, though on a very high Precipice; it is
the ancient Seat of the Dukes of Rutland, a Family risen by just Degrees to an
immense Height both of Honor and Wealth. I shall mention the House again in my
Return out of Lincolnshire.

Bingham in Nottinghamshire lying in our Way to Newark, we passed through it.
It is but a small Market Town, but is noted for a Parsonage of great Value.

At Newark one can hardly see, without Regret, the Ruins of that famous Castle,
which through all the civil War in England, kept a strong Garrison for the King
to the last, and so cut off the greatest Pass into the North that is in the
whole Kingdom; nor was it ever taken, 'till the King, pressed by the Calamity
of his Affairs, put himself into the Hands of the Scots Army, which lay before
it, and then commanded the Governor to deliver it up; after which it was
demolished, that the great Road might lie open and free; and it remains in
Rubbish to this Day.

The Castle was built here by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, in the Reign of King
Stephen; and the Town took its Name from that New Work.

This Town was certainly raised from the neighboring Roman Cities, and has
been walled about with their Remains. The Northern Gate is composed of Stones
seemingly of a Roman Cut: and perhaps they had a Town here; for many
Antiquities are found about it. Here are two fine Stone Crosses. A Gentleman,
digging to plant some Tree by the Fosse Road Side, discovered four Urns in a
strait Line, and at equal Distances, in one of which was a brass Lar, or
Houshold-God, an Inch and half long, but much consumed by Rust.

Newark is a very handsome well built Town, situate on the Trent, under the
Government of a Mayor and 12 Aldermen. The Marketplace is a noble Square, and
the Church is large and spacious, with a curious Spire, which, were not
Grantham so near, might pass for the finest and highest in all this Part of
England. The Trent divides itself here, and makes an Island, and the Bridges
lead just to the Foot of the Castle Wall; so that, while this Place was in the
Hands of any Party, as I have before hinted, there was no Traveling but by
their Leave; but all the Traveling into the North at that Time was by
Nottingham Bridge.

I am, Sir, yours, etc.

The END of the SECOND VOLUME.
INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.
A
ABbot of Glastenbury, his prodigious State and Riches Page 29, 30. His Inn 33
Abbots Langley 167 Abergavenny 311 Abermenai Ferry 326 Aberystwith 322 Abingdon
61, 62, 63 Abury 51 Acteon, Mosaic Work representing that Fable 375 Acton, Sir
Thomas 295 Adam of Scott, his Monument 54 Adams, Mr. his noble Benefactions 348
Adrian IV. Pope, his Pride, and shameful Avarice 167 Aethelfleda, Queen 297
Alabaster, where found 21 St. Alban 174. Inscription on his Shrine 176 St.
Alban, Robert, gives Name to Alban-hall p. 222 St. Albans 174 to 178 Albemarle,
Earl of 164 Alcester 289 Aldbury 172 Aldchester 207 Aldely 251 Aldrich, Dr. 217
Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln 378 Alfred, King 47, 61, 209, 231 Allen, Mr. his
Generosity and Public Spirit, an Honor to Bath 263, 265, 266 Alney, Isle 283
Althorpe 365, 366 Altringham 340 Alwinus, Bishop of Winchester 243 Amersham 203
Amsty 192 Amwell 199 Anderson, Sir Richard 171 Anglesey, Isle 325, 327, 328
Anchor, River 371, 373, 375 St. Anne 's Hill 51 Anne, Queen, improves Kensington
159. Dies there 160. Her Statue, and Character by the Duchess of Marlborough
180, 181. Another Statue 209. Frighted at Lansdown-hill 263 Arbury Banks 190
Archenfield 303 Ariconium ibid. Arthur, King 4. His Well 27. Where buried 28,
29. Nephew to St. David 320 Arthur, Prince 292, 300 Arundel, Earl of, his
Marbles 228, 365 Arundel, Trerice 3 Arundel, Wardour ibid. As sure as God's at
Gloucester, whence deduced 282 St. Asaph 330, 331 Ash, the Stream 199 Ashbury
62 Ashby de la Zouch 372 The Ashes 362 Ashridge 172 Ashwell 189, 190 Astal 243
Astroites 251 Athelstane, King 43, 44 Atherston 371 Atherstone 252 Audley,
Lord, defeated 348 Augustine 's Oak 297 Avon, River 37, 38, 44, 47, 250, 251,
265, 275, 277, 286, 287, 288, 289, 358, 359, 360, 361, 374 Aust Ferry p. 277,
278, 279, 310 Axbridge 34 Axe River ibid. Axtel, Col. a Parliament Officer 169
Aylesbury 203
B
Bacon, Lord, his Monument and Inscription 178, 179 Badmington 51, 267
Badminton 25 Baldock 187, 188 Baliol, John 209 Bampton 243, 244 Banbury 206,
207 Banbury, Earl of 207 Banchor 332 Bangor 328, 329. Its Bishops, how immortal
329 Barker, Mr. his Seat 161 Barkhamsted 168 to 170 Barkway 191, 192 Barnstable
Town, Haven, and Bay 9, 10, 11, 12 Barnstable Water 13 Bath 253 to 265 Bath
Waters, their Virtues 256 to 258 Battle-edge 242 Battlefield 344 Beachwood
Manor 173 Beacon-ash 27 Beaconsfield 202 Bean, River 184, 185 Beaudesert 352
Beaufort, Duke of 267, 310 Beaumaris 327, 328 Beaumonds 230 Becket, Archbishop
p. 205 Bedford, Duke of 366 Beeston-castle 338, 339 Bel-size 156 Belvoir-castle
377, 378 Benington-place 185 Benonis 370 Bensford 43 Berkeley 280 Berkeley,
Earl of ibid. Berkeley, Robert, Esquire his Hospital 294 Beryslade 187 Betley 350
Bewdley 296 Bicester 207 Bidiford 9, 10, 11, 12 Billesden 377 Bingham 378
Birmingham 296 Bisham 68 Bishop, Mr. Richard, discovers a Roman Work 247
Bishops-castle 298 Bishops-mott ibid. Bishop-Stortford, and its famous School
194 to 196 Bisse, Bishop 305 Blackdown Hills 18 Black Mountains 315, 324
Blackston-hill 297 Bladud, King 253 Blake, Admiral 22 Blake's-ware 199
Blathwait, Mr. his Seat 267 Bleachly 278, 310 Blenheim-house 232 to 239
Bloreheath 348 Blorench 313 Bloxham 240 Blundel, Peter, the Clothier, founds
Tiverton Freeschool p. 15 Blunt, Sir Henry Pope, his Seat 182 Boadicea, Queen
174 The Boar, what 23, 278, 298 Bodley, Sir Thomas 228 Bodmyn 4 Boreman,
Richard, Abbot of St. Albans 175 Boscobel-house 346 Bossiney 4 Bosworth-field
372 Botelers, their Seat 184 Boughton 366, 367 Bow 154 Bowditch 268 Brackley
205, 206 Bradford 36, 38, 47 Bradford, Earl of, his Seat 161, 296 Bradgate 372
Brampton-Brian 302 Mrs. Branch, and her Daughter executed 26 Branonium 290
Brass-mills 68 Braughing 191, 193, 194 Bray, Vicar of 69 Brecknock 313
Brecknock-mere ibid. Brecknockshire described 312, 313, 314 Breewood 350
Brentford 162 Brews, River 43 Bridge from Fulham to Putney 159 Bridgenorth 297,
298 Bridgwater 22, 28 Bridgwater, Duke of p. 172, 342 Brightwell 240 Bristol
268 to 277 Bristol Stones 251 Bristol Waters, their Virtues p. 272, 273
Broadway 296 Brockly-hill 165 Bromley 154, 352 Brook, Lord 360 Broomsgrove 295
Broxbourn 200 Broxbournbury ibid. Bruce, Lord 51, 52, 161 Bruton 27, 43
Buckingham 205 Buckingham, Sir Owen 65 Bucks, Duke of 363 Bulborn, Rivulet 172
Bulkeley, Bishop of Bangor, his Sacrilege 328 Buntingford 193 Burford 242
Burlington, Earl of, the English Vitruvius 52. his Seat 161. See also Vol. III.
Page 287 Burrow-hill 362 The Burrows 365 Burton upon Trent 352 Bush-draining,
what 163 Bushy-heath 158 Bide, Thomas, Esquire his Seat 198
C
Cadbury-castle 26, 27 Cadby, William, the Gardener, his Collection of Gods p.
49 Cadogan, Earl 66 Caer Bladdon, a British Prince 43 Caerdiff 315 Caermarthen
p. 317, 318 325 Caernarvon 325 Caernarvonshire described 325, 327
Caerphyli-castle 316 Caerwys 331 Caesar Family 185 Caesar, Julius, takes
Verulam 174 Calne 49 Camalet 26 Camel, River 3, 4 Camelford ibid. Campden 287
Cannings, Mr. William, his Monument 273 Cantilupe, the Miracle-monger 305
Capels, Earls of Essex 196 Caractacus rebuilds Warwick 359 Cardigan 321
Cardiganshire described 322 Carey, Edward, Esquire 168 Carlos, Col. 346 Caroline,
Queen, adorns Kensington 159. Her Munificence, and Statue 212 Carran, River 287
Cassibelan, King 174 Cassioberry 165, 166 Castellum Danis 3 Castle-Carey 43
Castle Inn 70 Castlecomb p. 47 Catesby, the Traitor 361 Catharine, Infanta of
Spain 292 Cavesham 66 Cawley Wood p. 17 Cestria Chersonesus, 334, 335 St. Chad
's Shrine 355 Chamber on the Forest 338 Chandos, Duke of. 157, 158, 164 Charles
I. engages the Parliament Army twice at Newbury 58. Where buried 82. A
Benefactor to Queen's College in Oxford 211. His and his Queen's Statues 219.
His Picture 232. His Imprisonment 364 Charles II. his Equestrian Statue 75. His
Jest on the Visible Church 202. His Escape after Worcester Fight 291, 346. His
Royal Gratitude 347. Charwell, River 206 Chaucer, Sir Geoffrey 60. Commends
John de Gadesden 172 Chauncy, Sir Harry, commits Jane Wenman 185
Cheaping-Barnet 164 Chedder 34 Cheese Trade 40 to 42 Chelsea 160 Cheltenham 284
to 286 Cheltenham Waters, their Virtues 285, 286 Chepstow p. 310 Chesham 203
Cheshire described 337, 338, 341 Cheshunt Common 197 Chester 334 to 337
Chester, Robert, Esquire his Seat 197 Chesterfield-wall p. 353 Chetwynd, Lord 351
Chetwynd, Walter, Esquire ibid. Chichley, Henry, Archbishop of Canterbury 214, 218,
219, Chiltern 188 Chilton 204 Chippenham 47 Chipping-Norton 239, 267,
Chipping-S^dbury 252 Chisbury 54 Chiswicke 161 Chu Parish 268 Churn, River 241,
247, 249 Cirencester 247 to 249 Cissa, the Viceroy 54, 247 Clarke, Dr. George,
his Benefactions to All Souls College 214, 215, 221. Abstract of his Will 225
to 227 Clarks, their Seat 184 Clebury 298 Cliefden 69 Clothing Trade 38 to 40
Clun, River 298 Cobham, Bishop of Winchester 228 Codicote Parish 185
Codrington, Col. Christopher, his Library and Statue p. 214, 215 Coinage Towns
4 Colbrond, the Giant 358 Colbrook 162 Colebrook 83 Colerain, Earl of, his Seat
155 Coleshill 356 Colne, River 165, 241, 244 Colney 180 Colston, Mr. Edward,
his Charities 275, 276 Columb, River 17 Columb-Davids ibid. St. Columbs 3
Columbstock 17 Columbton ibid. Colwal 307 Combemerton 14 Congleton 340
Coningsby, Earl of 304, 308 Conway 329 Conway, Lord 296 Cook, Sir Thomas,
endows Worcester College 221 Copse-castle 53 Corinium 247 Cornbury-house 241
Cornu Ammonis, a neglected one 362 Corve, River 300 Corvesdale ibid. Cossington
368 Cotswold 240, 241 Cotton, Sir Francis, where born 48 Coventry 356 to 358
Cowper, Earl, his Seat 184 Cranme, Archbishop, where martyred p. 229 Craven,
Earl of, seeks to marry the Queen of Bohemia 60 Credon-hill 304 Creeklade 244,
249 Crew, George, Esquire and Mrs. 228 Crew, Lord, Bishop of Durham 213, 229
Cromwell, Oliver, his Benefaction to the Bodleian Library 228 Cromwell,
Richard, his Retirement 201 Crook, Lord Chief Justice 204 Cropredry Bridge,
Action there 206 Cross-hill 367 Culling, Mrs. Elizabeth, her Tomb 184 Cunetia
50 Cuthred, King, beats Ethelbald 242
D
Danby, Earl of 44 Daneweed, Tradition concerning it 362 St. Daniel, first
Bishop of Bangor 328 Danish King, the Skin of of one 191 Danesey, Col. 304
Dantsey Manor and Barony 44 to 47 Daventry 361, 362 St David, his Monument 320
St. David's 319, 320 Dean Forest p. 281 Deddington 207 Dee, River 311, 324, 332,
335, 336, 337 Delamere, Lord, his Seat 338 Denbeigh 329 Denbeigh, Earl of, his
Cross 370 Denbeighshire described 329, 330 Deptford 85, 88 Devizes 37, 48
Devonshire described 8 Devorguilla, Wife to John Baliol 209 Diamonds, Cornish 5
Diffrin-Doe, River 307, 309 Digby, his Benefaction to the Bodleian Library 228
Dinder-hill 304 Ditchley-house 241 St. Dobricius 315 Dodo, the Saxon 351 Don,
River 283 Donnington-castle 58, 60 Dorchester 204 Dove, River 302 Dovebridge
361 Drayton 348 Droitwych 295 Druids, a Temple of theirs 51 Dudley 351 Dudley
and Ward, Lord, his Seat ibid. Du^smore Heath 361 Du^wallo Malmusius 250 Duppa,
Dr. Bryan 217 Du^er, Albert, the Painter 245 Durhams p. 164 Durobrivae 168
Dursley 279 Dymokes, Champions of England 356 Dynmaur 306
E
Eadulph, Archbishop 353 Ealing 162 East-Barnet 163 Eaton, Mrs. her Legacy 221
Eaton, Dr. Birom ibid. Eccleshall 349 Echo, a remarkable one 232 Edelfleda, a
Saxon Lady 376 Edgar, King 31, 337 Edgehill 206, 289 Edgworth 157, 162 Edmonton
155 Edmund, Proprietor of Edmund-hall 223 Edmund Ironsides, his Duel with
Canute 283 Edol, Earl of Gloucester, His Valor 282 Edward the Confessor 207
Edward I. 80, 172, 201, 205, 210, 278, 279, 288, 325, 329, 335, 341, 367 Edward
II. Founder of Oriel College 211. Grants St. Mary-hall to it 223. Murdered 280.
His Shrine 282. First English Prince of Wales 325 Edward III. improves Windsor
73 to 75. His Apartments 76. Institutes the Order of the Garter p. 78, 292.
Where baptized 80. Favors Buntingford 193. Inlarges the Revenue of Oriel
College 211. And a Benefactor to Queens ibid. Edward IV. transfers several
Manors from Eton to Windsor 71. Where buried 82 Edward VI. his Residence 182.
Grants a License to turn Durham College, in Oxford, into Trinity College 218
Egbert, King, overthrows the Danes and Britons 5 Eglesfield, Robert, Founder of
Queen's College in Oxford 211 Elbridge, John, Esquire his Legacy 276 Eleanor,
Queen, several Crosses built in Honor of her 201, 205, 363, 367 Elizabeth,
Queen, her peculiar Aversion and Fancy 75. Her Invention to avoid the Wind 76.
Her Free School 164. Her Residence 182. Styled Foundress of Jesus College in
Oxford 219. Completes Wadham College 220. Builds a Free School at Shrewsbury
345 Elsmere 342 Elston 377 Elstre 165 Emma, Queen, passes the Fire Ordeal p.
243 Enfield 155, 156, 162 Erdborough 368 Ermine-street 192 Essex, Earl of, his
Seat 165. His Monument 360 Ethelbald, King 242 Ethelbert, King, murdered 175,
305. His Spring 306 Ethelred, King 231 Ethelwolf, King 67 Etocetum 353 Eton 70
to 73 Evesham 288 Eustace, Earl of Bologne 192 Ex, River 14, 19 Exmore ibid.
F
Fairfax, General, defeats Goring 25 Fairford 244 to 247 St. Faith 's Well 187
Farmer, the Honorable Mrs. 245 Farringdon 61, 62 Fell, Dr. John, Bishop of
Oxford 217, 295 Fell, Dr. Samuel 217 Findon 369 Fire, livid, a dangerous
Phenomenon 324, 325 Fitzharding, Lord 27 Fitzstephen, Robert, Conqueror of
Ireland 321 Flamstead Parish 179 Flat-Holmes, Isle 22 Fleming, Richard, Bishop
of Lincoln p. 213 Flint 331 Flint-castle ibid. Flodden-field Fight 59 Foley,
Lord 290, 296, 377 Fosse Road 27, 241, 362, 369 Four Shire Stones 240 Fox,
Richard, Bishop of Winchester 216 Foxcoate 365 Frampton 280 Francis, Bishop of
Ely 191 Frederick, Prince of Wales, Inscription to his Honor 258. His Present
to the Corporation of Bath 260. His and the Princess's Benefactions to the
Hospital there 263 Friend, Dr. 171 Friar Bacon 's Study 229 Frodesham 338
Frome-Sellwood 37, 43 Froxfield 54 to 57 Fuller, Elizabeth, her Freeschool 165
G
Gadesden 172 Gadesden, John de ibid. Gadesden-Little 171 Gainsborough, Earl of
285 Gardener Family 198 Garter, List of the first Knights 79. Foreign Princes
invested with it 81 Gavenny, River 311 Geddington p. 367 George I. 290 George
II. ibid. George, Prince of Denmark 160 Gilbert, Earl of Gloucester 287
Glamorganshire described 312, 316 Glastenbury 27 to 32 Glendower, Prince of
Wales 314 Gloucester 281 to 284 Gloucester, Robert, Earl of 62 Glyder 326
Gobions 184 Godiva, Lady, her Story 356 Godolphin, Dr. his Statue 70 Godstow
Nunnery 230 Golden Vale 302, 309 Gore, Sir William, and his Lady's Monument 171
Gore, William, Esquire his Seat ibid. Gorhambury 178 St. Goven 's Head 319 Gowre
317 Granville, Sir Bevil 267 Grasiers, the richest 373 Great Banington 251, 252
Great Barkhamsted 168 to 170 Great Bedwin 53 Great Malvern 287 Great Marlow 67,
68 Great Wenlock 298, 347 The Green 49 Gregory, Sir William 55 Greville,
Doddington, Esquire 214 Gray Weathers, what p. 49, 50 Greys, Lords 363 Grimston,
Lord 148 Grindall, Archbishop 211 Grismund 's Mount 248 Grooby 372
Guildsborough 365 Guy, Earl of Warwick 358. His Statue 360. His Cave 361 Guy,
Mr. his Charity 355 Guy-cliff 360
H
Hacket, Bishop 355 Hackney 154, 155 Hadham Parva 196 Hadsley Family 198
Hadstock 191 Hale, Richard, Esquire his Grammar School at Hertford 183 Hales, John,
Esquire his Freeschool at Coventry 357 Halifax, Earl of, his Seat 161 Hallaton 377
Hamersmith 161, 162 Hampden Family 204 Hampton Court 308 Hamstead 155, 156, 157
Harborough 369 Harelane-field 199 Harleigh-castle 324, 327 Harley, Sir Edward
302 Harri^on, Governor, his Seat 183 Harrow 202 Hartford, Elias, Owner of
Hart-hall p. 222 Hartland 9 Hastings, Lord, executed 47, 57 Hatfield 182
Hatfield-house ibid. Hatfield, Thomas, Bishop of Durham 218 Hathorp-house 241
Haverford 319 Havisdike 53 Heane founds an Abbey 63 Heightsbury 48
Hengeston-hill 5 Hengist, a Cornish General ibid. Hengist, the Saxon, put to
Death 283 Henley upon Thames 63, 64, 65 Henry I. where educated 63. Where
buried 66, 282. Rebuilds Woodstock 231. Incloses the Park there 232. Settles
the Flemings in Pembrokeshire 319 Henry II. searches for King Arthur 's Tomb
28. His Court at Barkhamstead 169. Adorns Woodstock 231. Grants Burford a
Charter 242. Grants Robert Fitzharding Berkley-castle 280 Henry III. his Palace
at Kings-Langley 167. Causes a Fortification to be demolished 192. Fortifies
Montgomery 323 Henry IV. builds Hampton Court in Herefordshire p. 308. Defeats
Hotspur 344 Henry V. where born 310. Henry VI. his noble Foundation 70 Henry
VII. where he landed 319 Henry VIII. his Nuptials with Lady Jane Seymour 53.
With Anna Bolen 178. His Statue ibid. Puts Sir Thomas More to Death 184.
Residence of his Children 197. Names Christ-church in Oxford 216, 217. His
conscientious Divorce 292. Establishes the Court of the Marches at Ludlow 301.
Makes Chester a Bishop's See 337 H^rbert, Lord, of Cherbury 297 Hercules 's
Promontory 9 Hereford 303 to 307 Hereford, Marquis of 52 Herefordshire
described 302, 303 Herman-street 188, 189 Hertford 183 Hertford, Lord, his Seat
50 Hertfordshire described 162, 163 Hertingfordbury 184 Hexton 186 Heylin, Dr.
242 High-cross 361, 369 Highgate 155 Highlake 335 Highways, ancient ones p.
361, 362 High-Wickham 67, 68 Hindon 48 Hinkley 371 Hitchin 186 Hobart, Sir John
195 Hobbes, Mr. 44 Hobbes, the Family 68, 69 Hock-Crib 280 Hoddesden 200
Holland-house 161 Holmeby-house 364 Holy-bones 376 Holyhead 326 Holywell 330,
331 Holy Wells 288 Honesdon 196, 197 Hooper, Bishop, martyred 284 Hopton, Lord,
disbands his Army 5. Defeats the Parliament Forces, and takes General Chudleigh
Prisoner 6 Horses, the largest 373 Hoskins, Sir John 304 Hubba, King, slain 13
Hubbestow 14 Hudson, Dr. John, Principal of St. Mary Hall 223 Humber, River 23
Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, his Monument and Inscription 176, 177. Founder of
the Divinity-schools in Oxford 228 Hungerford Family 47, 57 Hurlers, Stones so
called 6, 7 Hurling Match 7, 8
I
Jack of Newbury p. 59 James I. converts Mr. Salkeld 18. His Residence 155. His
Childrens Nursery 169. Exchanges Hatfield Manor 182, 201. Promotes the N^w
River Project 199 Icleford 188 Idlestrey 165 Jefferies, Judge, his Cruelty 268
Jekyll, the late Sir Joseph, his Seat 183 Jennings Family 182 Jeoffry of
Monmouth 310 Ikenild-street 289 Ilfordcomb 12, 13 Ilfordcomb Harbor 13
Ilminster 18 Ina, King, his Palace 26. Builds Glastenbury Church 29 Incent,
Dean of St. Paul 's 170 Ine, the Brook 303 Ingestre 351, 352 Inglefield 67
John, King, surrenders Barkhamsted-castle 169. Demolishes and restores
Bishop-Storford 194. His Palace 206. His Tomb 292 John, King of France, where
imprisoned 26 Johnson, Secretary, his Seat 161 Johnson, Sir Henry 69 Joseph of
Arimathea, Tradition concerning him 28 Irish, general Alarm concerning them p.
66, 67 Isabel, Duchess of York 167 Isca, River 14 Isis, River 163, 204, 230,
241 Islington 86 Islip 61, 207 Ivel, River 26 Ivelchester ibid. St. Ives 1, 2
St. Ives Bay 1 Ivingo 204
K
Kader-Idricks 324 Kemish, Rectory of 55 Kenchester 303 Kendale Wood 165
Kennet, River 50, 51, 58, 60, 64 Kennith castle 146 Kenrick, Mr. his Will 59,
65 Kensington 159, 160 Keynton 206 Kidderminster 295 Kily-Maen Llwyd 318
King-Road 277 Kingsbury 180 Kingsdown 267 Kings-Langley 167 Knutsford 340
Kyneton 27, 302 Kynfig-castle 317 Kyrton-Beacon 313
L
La Guerre, the Painter 232 Lambourn 60 Lambourn, River 60, 61 Lancaster,
Henry, Duke and Earl of p. 375, 376 Lancaster, Dr. William 211 Landaff 315, 316
Lands, Method of improving them 42, 43 Landsdown, Lord 267 Landsdown-hill 263,
267 Langley, Edmund de, Duke of York 167 Langleybury 166 Langport 25 Lanhidrock
2 Lar, a Brass one, found 378 Lassington 251, 284 Laud, Archbishop 65, 228
Lavington 48 Launceston 4, 5, 6 Lea, River 163 Lech, River 241, 242, 244
Lechlade 241, 249 Lee, River 182, 198, 200 Leeds, Duke of 171, 172, 183
Legers-Ashby 361 Leicester 372, 373, 375, 376 Leicestershire described 373, 374
Leigh, Reverend Mr. Thomas 196 Lemingt^n 240 Le Notre 166, 366 Lenthal, the
Speaker 242 Leominster 301, 302 Leucomagus 53 Leveson, Sir Richard 350
Lewellin, Prince of Wales, his generous Compliment to Edward I. 278, 279. His
Statue 343 Lheweni, River p. 313 Lidbury 307 Liliho 187 Litchfield 352, 353 to
355 Litchfield, Abbot 288 Little Malvern 287 Loddon, River 68 Loman, River 14
LONDON 84 to 153. Measurement of it 87 to 93, Number of Inhabitants 93, 94.
Government 94. 95. Considered more particularly in Sixteen Articles: I. A brief
Account of what the City was before the Fire, and how improved when rebuilt,
and within a few Years after it 96 to 98 II. Of the prodigious Increase of
Buildings within our own Memory, down to the Year 1740. 99 to 102 III. Of the
Public Offices, and City Corporations 102 to 106 IV. Of the Mansion House, and
other most noted Edifices, Squares and Public Structures, in and about London
106 to 112 V. Of the principal Hospitals, and other charitable Institutions in
and about the City of London 113 to 119 VI. Of the Churches of London,
Westminster, and Southwark p. 119 to 128 VII. Of St. James 's Palace, the
Parliament House, Westminster Hall, etc. 129 to 131 VIII. Of the Statues, and
other public Ornaments in and about the Cities of London and Westminster 131
to 135 IX. Of the Gates of London and Westminster 135 to 137 X. Of the public
and private Prisons 137, 138 XI. Of the Markets of London 138 to 143 XII. Of
the public Schools and Libraries 143 to 145 XIII. Of the Shipping in the
Thames, and the Trade carried on by means of that noble River 145 to 147 XIV.
Of the Manner by which the City is supplied with Water 147 to 150 XV. Of the
Christenings and Burials in London, etc. Of the Importance of the City of
London to the whole Kingdom. Of its comparative Proportion to the public
Expense of the Kingdom, and the disproportionate Number of Members it returns
150 to 152 XVI. The Benefit to the Public of a good Understanding between the
Court and City 152, 153
Long-leat p. 27 Lovelace, Lord 69 Loventium 314 Loughborough 377 Lovibond,
Nicolas, Vicar of Wadbridge, builds a Bridge there 3 Louis XIV. his Marble
Busto 233 Lower-way 23 Ludlow 298, 299 to 301 Ludlow-castle 298, 299 Lug, River
277, 301, 305, 310 Lumley, General, his Monument 197 Lundy, Island 17 Lupus,
Hugh, Earl of Chester 336, 337, 352 Lutterworth 369 Lyteford 27
M
Macclesfield 340 Madern-hills 2 Maidenhead 69 Maimar 207 Maitland, Mr. his
History of London 84 Make-king, Earl of Warwick 164, 206 Malmsbury 43, 44
Malpas 334 Malvern-hills 287 Mansel, Lord 317 Mansel, Sir Edward ibid.
Maphesden, Edward, Monument over his Seven Children 195 Marden p. 305 Mare,
ridiculous Burying of one 199 Margan Mynydd, delusory Prophecy concerning a
Monument near it 317 Margaret, Queen, overcomes the Yorkists 175 Margaret,
Mother of Henry VII. 12 Market-cell 173 Marlborough 50 Marlborough, Duchess of,
her Seat 180. Her Character of Queen Anne 180, 181. Purchases Holmeby-house 364
Marlborough, Duke of, his Palace, Obelisk, and elegant Inscription 232 to 239
Marmyons, Champions of England 356 Marsbury-Field 268 Marsh, Dr. Narcissus,
Archbishop of Armagh 210 Marshfield 252 Mary, Queen of Scots, her Needle Work
77 Mary II. designs the Gardens at Kensington 159 Mary Magdalen, her Image 6
St. Mary de Pree 's Abbey 376 Maud, Empress, Inscription on her Monument 66.
Takes King Stephen Prisoner 268 Maudlin Meadow 250 Maurice, Prince, routs Sir
William Waller 51 Mawcop 340 Meautys, Sir Thomas p. 179 Melton-Mowbray 377
Mendip-hills 23, 33, 34, 35 Menen Firth 325, 328 Merchants of London and
Bristol compared 269, 270 Mere 48 Merionethshire described 323 Merlin, where
born 318 Mersey, River 10, 335 St. Michael 's ^ St. Michael 's Church upon the
Torr 27, 28 Middlesex described 162 Middleton, Sir Hugh 199 Middlewick 339
Milbourn 26 Mile-end 86 Milford-haven 318, 319 Minching Hampton 249, 250
Minehead 20 Modishole 3 Moncke, Duke of Albemarle 201 Monmouth 309, 310
Monmouth, Duke of, his Rebellion 19. Defeated 34. His House 167. His Advantage
over James II. 268 Monmouthshire described 311, 312, 313 Monson, Lord 200
Montagu, Duke of, his Seat 366, 367 Montfort, Simon, defeated 288 Montgomery
323 Montgomery, Roger de 298 Montgomeryshire described 322, 323 Montsorrel p.
377 Monuchdenny-hill 315 Moore-Park 166, 167 Mordaunt, Lieutenant General Lewis
47 Mordred, King Arthur 's Nephew 4 More, Sir Thomas 184 Moreton, Earl of
Cornwall 168 Moretonhenmarsh 240 Morland, Sir Samuel 75 Mowywynda 324
Muniborough-hill 172 Munnow, River 309, 310
N
Namptwich 341 Naseby 364, 365 Neath 316 Neson 335 Netlebed 63 Nevern, River
321 Nevil, Earl of Salisbury, his Victory 348 New River 199, 200, 201 Newark
375, 378, 379 Newbury 58 to 60 Newcastle under Line 349, 350 Newington 155
Newington-butts 86 Newport 5, 321, 348 Newport-pagnell 205 Newton, Dr. Richard,
Principal of Hertford College 221 Newton, Sir Michael 308 Norfolk, Howard, Duke
of 47 Northampton 363, 364 North-Cadbury p. 26 Northleche 242 North-Mymms 183
Northwich 339 Norton 382 Novum opus, what 375 Nun-Eaton 371 Nine, River 363
O
Oak, Royal, the Inscription on it 346, 347 Och, River 61 Offa, King, murders
Ethelbert, and is absolved 175, 305. Inscription under his Picture 176. Founds
an Abbey 286. Makes Litchfield an Archbishopric 353. Causes 1000 Persons to be
made Christians 354 Offa 's Dyke 310, 311 Okehampton 12 Old Stretford 362
Oldham, Hugh, Bishop of Exeter 216 Oldworth, Mr. preserves the Glass of
Fairford Church 245 Onslow, Arthur, Esquire 212 Orange, Prince of, Inscription in
Memory of his Cure 259 Oseny Abbey 229 Oswald, Bishop 292 St. Oswald 's
Hospital 295 Oswestry 342 Oswy, King of Northumberland 354 Oulney 205 Ouse,
River p. 23, 205, 206 Owen Tudor 's Monument 320 Oxford 207 to 231 Oxford, Earl
of 191, 302
P
Padstow 3 Parliamentum Diabolicum 357 Parliamentum Indoctorum 357 Parr, River
25 Parrat, River 22 St. Patrick removes a Hill 304 Paynswick 249, 290
Peacock-Coals, what 350 Pebbles, their Use 21 Pelagius, the Arch-heretick 332
Pembridge 302 Pembroke 319 Pembroke, Earl of 228 Pembrokeshire described 318,
319 Pendril Family 346, 347 Penkrige 348 Penley-lodge 172 Penmaen-maur 329
Penn, Sir William 273 Pennocrucium 349 Pennywel 165 Penton, Mr. Stephen,
Principal of Edmund-hall 223 Penvail 313 Peris, the Priest, his Picture and
Inscription 53 Perrywood 291 Pershore 287, 288 Peterborough, late Earl of, how
cheated by his Tenants at Dantsey p. 45, 46. His Seat 161 St. Peter 's Hospital
276 Petre, Sir William 220 Petrifying Spring 250. Accounted for 251 Philippa,
Queen 211 Philips-Norton 43 Philpot, Mr. finds some Antiquities 165 Pictures,
profane ones of the Deity in Barkway Church 191, 192 Pill-Road 277 Pirton
Church 187 Pishobury Manor-house 198 Plot, Dr. 350 Plummer, William, Esquire his
Seat 199 Plymouth Sound 8 Plynlymon-hill 322 Polehampton, Captain, his Gift at
St. Albans 178 Polesworth 372 Polydore Virgil 78 Pomfret, Earl of, his Seat 365
Pope, Sir Thomas 218 Popham, Lord Chief Justice 18 Popish and Protestant Times
compared 230, 231 Porlock 14, 20 Portland, Earl and Duke of 201 Portman, Henry,
Esquire 214 Pot-walloners, what 19 Powell, Judge, his Opinion concerning Witches
185 Presteigne p. 314 Price, Hugh, Founder of Jesus College 219 Price, Sir
Carbery, his Lead Mines at Cardigan 321 Prideaux-house 3 Prophecy, a punning
one 31 Puckeridge 191, 194 Puff-stone 251
Q
Quantock 22 Quern 248
R
Radcliffe, Dr. 209. Abstract of his Will 224, 225 Radnor 314 Radnor, Earl of 2
Radnorshire described 314 Ranelagh, Earl of, his House 160 Raranvaur 324 Ratae
Coritanorum 376 Ravensborough-castle 186, 187 Ravenscroft, James, Esquire his
Almshouse 164 Rawdikes 377 Raymond, Lord 166 Reading 64 to 67 Red-horse, Vale
of 289 Reeves, Lord Chief Justice 70, 72, 73 Ree, River 249 Remigius 204 Rhee,
River 189, 190 Rhoodee 335, 336 Rib, the Stream 198 Ribsford p. 297 Rich, Sir
Thomas, his Hospital 284 Richard I. where born 230. Sends Sheep into Spain 240
Richard III. 372. Where buried 376 Richard, Bishop of Durham 227, 228 Richmond,
Earl of, his Monument 320 Rickmersworth 165, 166, 167 Rickning Way 283 Ridley,
Bishop, where martyred 229 Rivers, Earl of 339 Robert, Son of the Conqueror,
his Tomb 282 Robin Hood 's Hill 283 Roch, Parish 297 Rock-Savage 339 Roe, Sir
Thomas, his Collection of Coins 228 Roger, Bishop of Salisbury 48 Roisia, her
Religious House 191 Roman Antiquities 189 Roman Camps 62, 187, 368 Roman Coin
204 Roman Highways 361, 362 Roper Family 169 Rosamond, Concubine to Henry II.
230, 231 Ross 309 Rotherham, Thomas de, Archbishop of York 213 Rotherhith 85,
86 Roundway Down 51 Rowldrich Stones p. 239 Royston 190, 191, 198 Rubens, the
Painter 232 Rugby 361, 369 Rugely 352 Ruleigh Abbey 230 Rumball executed 196
Runway 48 Rutland, Dukes of 378 Rydall, River 322 Rye Manor 196 Rye-house Plot
ibid.
S
Salisbury, Countess of, her Garter 78. Her Tomb 292 Salisbury, Earl of, his
Seat 182 Salisbury Plain 42 Salkeld, the Royal Convert 18 Salt upon Salt, what
10 Salwarp, River 295 Sambroke, Sir Jeremy 184 Sanbach 340 Sandys, Samuel, Esquire
294 Sarney 244 Savage Family 338, 339, 340 Savernack Forest 51, 52 Saunders
Family, Inscription on the Monument of one of them 173, 174 Saundridge 182
Sawbridgeworth 197 Sebright, Sir Thomas Saunders, his Seat 173 Sedgmore 34
Seldom, Mr. 228 Selwood Forest 43, 48 Senvy-gate p. 370 Severn, River 23, 250,
266, 277, 278, 280, 281, 287, 290, 296, 310, 315, 322, 323, 343 Seymour, Sir
John 53, 54 Shakespeare, his Tomb 288, 289 Sheep, the best 373, 374 Sheldon,
Archbishop 227 Sherard, Dr. 219 Shipley-hill 368 Shipton 206 Shipton-Mallet 43
Shore, Jane, solicits in favor of Eton College 71 Shrews, a Method of Taming
them 350 Shrewsbury 343 to 345 Shrewsbury, Earl of, his Seat 161 Siffivernes
185, 186 Silures 302 Skirridan 313 Sloane, Sir Hans, his Statue 160 Slough 70
Smyth, William, Bishop of Lincoln 216 Snowden-hill 325 Sour, River 373, 374
Summers, Lord, his modest Interrment 183 Somerset, Duchess Dowager of, her
Almshouse at Froxfield 55 to 57 Somersetshire described 18, 23 to 25, 35, 36
Somerton 26 Somerville, Philip 209 Sopwell Nunnery 178 South, Dr. p. 207 South
Petherton 26 Sow, River 349 Spencer, the Poet 363 Spencer, John, Esquire his Seat
366 Spine 59, 60 Spinham-lands 59 Stafford 348, 349 Stafford, Edmund, Bishop of
Exeter 210 Stamford, Earl of 372 Stamford, a London Merchant, builds a Bridge
at Barnstable 11, 12 Standon 194 Stanes 162 Stanley 280 Stansted-Abbots Parish
196 Stapledon, Walter, Bishop of Exeter 210, 222 Starbury Mount 248
Steep-Holmes, Isle 22 Stephen, King 268 Stevenage 184, 185 Styles, Mr. 166, 167
Stockport 340 Stone 349 Stones, curious ones 21, 22. Monumental 326, 327
Stony-Stratford 205 Stort, River 195, 196, 197, 198 Stour, River 295, 377
Stourbridge 295, 296 Stow-house 6 Stow on the Would 241, 242 Strafford, Earl
of, his Seat 161 Stratford upon Avon 288, 289 Stratton p. 6 Strongbow,
Conqueror of Ireland 282 Stroud 249, 290 Stroud, River 249, 251, 289, 290, 297
Stukeley 363 Suellaniacis 165 Suffolk, Duke of 80 Sunderland, Earl of 366
Sutton 27 Sutton-Colefield 356 Sutton-court 161 Sutton-walls 305 Swanzy 316,
317 Swinford 295 Swyliate, River 287 Sylvester, the Poet 61
T
Taaffe, River 315 Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; his Monument 341, 342 Tamar,
River 8 Tame 204 Tame, John, Esquire builds Fairford Church 245, 247 Tame River 355
Tamworth ibid. Tanner, Dr. Bishop of St. Asaph 2^8 Tavistock 12 Taunton 18, 19,
22 Taunton-dean 18 Tavy, River 12 Taw, River 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 Teme, River 296,
300 Temple-Mills 68 Tenbigh 319 Tenbury p. 296 Tenure, one demonstrative of the
Moderation of our ancient Kings 203 Terrible-castle 5 Tesdale, Thomas, Esquire
Founder of Pembroke College in Oxford 220 Tetbury 250 Tewksbury 286, 287 Them,
River 204 THAMES 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 77, 163, 165, 204 Thatcham 60, 64
Theal 64, 67 Theobalds 155, 200, 201 Therfield 191 Thornbury 279 Thornhill, Sir
James 214, 232 Tickenhall 297, 298 Tidmerton Parish 240 Titian 232 Tiverton,
and its famous School 14 to 17 Tone, River 18, 22 Topham, Richard, Esquire Keeper
of the Records in the Tower 70 Torr, the Hill 27, 30, 31 Torrington 12
Tottenham 52, 155 Totteridge 163, 164 Towcester 362, 365 Towridge, River 9, 10,
11, 14 Towy, River 317 Trefusis-house 2 Trent, River 23, 349, 352, 353, 374,
377, 379 Trevena p. 4 Trillecks, Brethren, Bishops 223 Tring 170, 171
Tripontium 361 Trothy, River 309, 310 Troy-house 310 Trubridge 36, 38, 47
Tumberlow 313 Turner, Dr. Thomas, President of Corpus Christi College in Oxford
216 Tutbury 352 Twickenham 161 Twye, River 316 Twyford 67 Twyfordton 268 Tyvy,
River 321
V.
Vale of Aylesbury 203, 204 Vale-Royal 341 Vandyke, the Painter 232, 360 Vaux,
Lord 207 Ubourn 204 Verlam, River 180 Verulam 174, 178 Ufcolumb 17 St. Vincent
's Rock and Well 271, 272 Mr. Vipand 's Long-room, and Assembly-room 156, 157
Upper-way 23 Upton 287 Urban, Bishop 316 Uriconium 343 Usk, River 311, 313
Uxbri^ge 162 Uxbridge, Earl of p. 352
W
Wadbridge 3 Waddington, Bishop of Chichester 70 Wade, General 259, 260 Wadham,
Nicolas and Dorothy 18, 220 Wake, Archbishop 218 Walcot 267 Wales described 312
to 333 Walkern 185 Walking-stick, the Tree so called 184 Waller, Edmund 202
Wallingford 63 Walnut-tree, a prodigious one 185, 186 Walpole, Sir Robert, now
Earl of Orford, his House 160 Walsal 350 Walter of Merton, Bishop of Rochester
210 Waltham-cross 201 Waltham on the Would 377 Wansdyke 54 Wantage 61 Ward,
Bishop of Salisbury 193 Ware 198, 199 Warminster 47 Warmlington 206 Warner,
John, Bishop of Rochester 209 Warwick 358 to 360 Warwick Earls of, their
Monuments 359 Watchet 20, 21, 251 Watford p. 165 Watlington 63 Watling-street
345, 361, 371 Watson, Dr. Thomas, Bp. of St. David 's 320 Weaver, River 335,
338, 340 Weddings, Provision for those of poor People 191, 194 Weedon 362
Welland, River 375 Wellingborough 368, 369 Wellington 17, 18, 348 Wells 33
Welsh Gentlemen, their Character 333 Welsh-Pool 323 Wem 342 Wendover 203 Wendy,
Sir Thomas 210 Wenman, Jane, the supposed Witch 185 Weobly 302 St. Werburgh 362
Wergins, the Stones, removed 306, 307 Westbury 47 Whaddon-hall 363 Wharton,
Duke of, his Seats 204 Whetham, General, his House 161 Whitchurch 341, 342
White, Sir Thomas 166, 218, 220 White-friers Palace 230 White-horse-hill 60, 62
White-horse-vale 61, 62 Whiteshole-hill 48 White-thorn, the supposed miraculous
Blowing of one p. 28 Whiting, Abbot, his fatal Bravery 30, 31 Whitley-court 290
Wickham 203 Wickliff, John 369 Wickwar 252 Wightred, King 168 Wigmore 302
Wigston, Sir William, his Hospital 376 Wilbury-hill 188 William I. improves
Windsor 73, 80. His Interview with the English Nobility 170. Gives
Bishop-Stortford to the Bp. of London 194. Gives Gloucester City and Castle to
Robert Fitz-Hammon 283 William III. his Equestrian Picture 77. Purchases
Kensington Palace 159. Dies there 160. His Statue 270 William of Durham 209
William of Malmsbury 44 William of Wickham, his artful Vanity 74. Founds New
College 212 William Patten, alias Wainfleet, Bishop of Winchester 215, 223
Williams, Archbishop 213 Williamson, Sir Joseph 211 Willis, Dr. 53. His
Picture, etc. 363 Willoughby Brook p. 367. And Town 368 Wilmington, Earl of,
his Seat 161 Wilmot, Lord 51 Wilts described 38 to 43 Wimple 191 Wincaunton 27,
43 Winchcomb 286 Winchelsea, Lord 27, 49, 267 Winchenden 204 Windrush, River
243 Windsor 73 to 83 St. Winifrid, her Story 330 Winslow 205 Witney 243 Woden,
the Saxon Idol 54 Wokey-hole 34 Wolf-hall 53 Wolfhere, King 362 Wolsey,
Cardinal, Abbot of St. Albans 175. Founds Christ-church in Oxford 216. His Body
where found 376 Wolston, Bishop 292 Wolverhampton 350 Wood, Family, Warning
preceding their Deaths 244 Woodstock 231, 239 Woolhampton 64 Worcester 290 to
294 Wotton 184, 279 Wreck, River 368, 377 Wreken-hill 347 Wren, Sir Christopher
160, 227 Wrestling, the Cornishmen eminent for that Exercise p. 8 Wrexham 331,
332 Wrey, Sir Bourchier 13 Wrightwicke, Richard, B.D. Founder of Pembroke
College in Oxford 220 Wroxeter 347 Wye, River p. 269, 277, 278, 303, 304, 307,
309, 310, 313, 314, 322 Wild, Mr. his Seat 291
Y
Ystwith, River 322
BOOKS printed for S. BIRT, at the Bible and Ball in Ave-Maria-lane.
1. A New Voyage to Italy, with curious Observations on several other
Countries; as Germany, Switzerland, Savoy, Geneva, Flanders, and Holland:
Together with useful Instructions for those who shall Travel thither. The fifth
Edition, with large Additions throughout the Whole, and adorned with several
new Figures. By Mr. Misson. In 4 Vols. 8 vo. 2. A New Set of Maps both of
ancient and present Geography; wherein not only the Latitude of Places is
corrected according to the latest Observations, but also the most remarkable
Differences of ancient and modern Geography may quickly be discerned by a bare
Inspection, on comparing of correspondent Maps; which seems the most natural
and easy Method to lead young Students (for whose Use this Work is principally
intended) unto a competent Knowledge of Geography. 3. Together with a
Geographical Treatise particularly adapted to the Use and Design of these Maps.
By Edward Wells, D. D. sometime Student of Christ-church, Oxon, and Rector of
Colesbatch in Leicestershire. 4. The Whole Comical Works of Mons. Scarron, in
Two Volumes. Vol. I. containing his Comical Romance of a Company of Stage
Players, in Three Parts complete. Vol. II. All his Novels and Histories, his
Letters, Characters, etc. a great part of which never before in English.
Translated by Mr. Brown, Mr. Savage, and others. 5. Poems on several Occasions,
by Stephen Duck, 8 vo. and 12 mo. With very great Additions. 6. Poems on
several Occasions, by the late Matthew Prior, Esquire. The third and last Volume,
adorned with Cuts. To which is added, The Life of Mr. Prior, by Samuel
Humphreys, Esquire. 7. The Adventures of Telemachus, the Son of Ulysses, written by
the Archbishop and Duke of Cambray. With the Adventures of Aristonous, by
another Hand. The Whole translated into English, from the best Paris Edition,
by Mr. Ozell, who has added, (never before Englished by any other) from the
Paris Edition, many short, but curious Notes, Historical, Critical, Political,
and Moral; and not a few Grammatical and Classical Annotations from the Dutch,
etc. Also, to complete the Work, a Key to the Characters alluded to in this
Poem, viz. Lewis XIV. and his Ministers, Generals, Mistresses, etc. Which Key
was dedicated to the Prince of Orange, and justified by a Preface, (here
likewise translated) against the Chevalier Ramsey's Assertion to the contrary.
To the Whole is prefixed, a short Account of the Author's Life and Writings;
and the Chevalier Ramsey's fine Discourse on Epic Poetry in general, and this
of Telemachus in particular. Likewise the Genealogy of Telemachus, and an Ode
by the Author, in French and English. In 2 Vols. With an Index to each Volume.
N.B. The Errors charged on Mr. Ozell, by the Proprietors of the other
Translation, have been corrected above these 20 Years.

8. A Treatise of the Sphere: Showing how it is derived from that Theory, which
justly asserts the Motion of the Earth; as also of the Projections of it, both
Orthographical and Stereographical; demonstrating their Properties from
fundamental Propositions, and showing their Uses. With the Resolution of
Astronomical and Chorological Problems; by the Reverend John Witty, M. A. and
Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Devonshire. The second Edition, revised and
improved by J. Hodgson, F. R. S. and Master of the Royal Mathematical School.
9. Romae Antiquae Notitia; or, The Antiquities of Rome, in Two Parts. 1. A
short History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the Commonwealth. 2. A
Description of the City: An Account of the Religion, Civil Government, and Art
of War; with the remarkable Customs and Ceremonies, public and private; with
Copper Cuts of the principal Buildings, etc. To which are prefixed, Two Essays,
concerning Roman Learning and Education, by Basil Kennet, of C. C. C. Oxon. 10.
Archaeologia Graeca; or, The Antiquities of Greece. By John Potter, D. D. Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury: Containing; First, The Civil Government of Greece.
Secondly, The Religion of Greece. Thirdly, The Military Affairs of the
Grecians. Fourthly, Some of their Miscellany, etc. 11. Geography Anatomized;
or, The Geographical Grammar. Being a short and exact Analysis of the whole
Body of Modern Geography, after a new and curious Method; comprehending, First,
A General View of the Terraqueous Globe; being a compendious System of the
Fundamentals of Geography, digested into various Definitions, Problems,
Theorems, and Paradoxes; with a Survey of the Earthly Ball, as it consists of
Land and Water. Secondly, A Particular View of the Terraqueous Globe; being a
clear and pleasant Prospect of all the remarkable Countries upon the Face of
the whole Earth: Showing their Situation, Extent, Division, Subdivision,
Cities, Towns, Name, Air, Soil, Commodities, Rarities, Archbishopricks,
Bishoprics, Universities, Manners, Languages, Governments, Armaments,
Religions, etc. collected from the best Authors. The Seventeenth Edition,
corrected and enlarged; and a new Set of Maps by Mr. Senex. By Patrick Gordon,
M. A. F. R. S. Price 5 s. 12. Epictetus's Morals, with Simplicius's Comment;
made English from the Greek by George Stanhope, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. With the Life of Epictetus, from Mons.
Boileau. 13. The New Years Gift complete. In Six Parts. Composed of Meditations
and Prayers for every Day in the Week; with Devotions for Sacrament, Lent, and
other Occasions. N.B. The first Part is sold single. Price 6 d. or 40 s. per
Hundred.

14. Terence's Comedies made English; with his Life, and some Remarks at the
End, by Mr. Laurence Eachard and others. By Dr. Eachard, and Sir Roger
L'Estrange, Knight.

