A TOUR Through the Whole ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. Divided into CIRCUITS or
JOURNEYS. GIVING A Particular and Entertaining ACCOUNT of whatever is Curious,
and worth Observation; VIZ. I. A DESCRIPTION of the Principal Cities and Towns,
their Situation, Government, and Commerce. II. The Customs, Manners, Exercises,
Diversions, and Employment of the People. III. The Produce and Improvement of
the Lands, the Trade, and Manufactures. IV. The Sea Ports and Fortifications,
the Course of Rivers and the Inland Navigation. V. The Public Edifices, Seats,
and Palaces of the NOBILITY and GENTRY. VI. The Isles of Wight, Portland,
Jersey, Guernsey, and the other English and Scottish Isles of most Note.
Interspersed with Useful OBSERVATIONS. Particularly fitted for the Perusal of
such as desire to Travel over the ISLAND.

By a GENTLEMAN.

The THIRD EDITION. With very great Additions, Improvements, and Corrections;
which bring it down to the Year 1742.

In FOUR VOLUMES.

With a Copious INDEX to each Volume.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for J. OSBORN, S. BIRT, D. BROWN, J. HODGES, A. MILLAR, J.
WHISTON, and J. ROBINSON. M.DCC.XLII.

PREFACE.
THE kind Reception which the last Edition of this Work has met with,
determined the Proprietors to spare no Expense to make the present as complete
as the Nature of the Work would admit; and the Editor, in pursuance of their
Intention, has (besides his own Observations and Experience) been favored with
such ample Materials by several curious Gentlemen, as have made it impossible
to comprize the Whole in Three Volumes, as before; although he omitted all that
could be spared, and abstracted whatever would bear it. He was therefore
obliged to add a Fourth Volume.

And this he found himself under the greater Necessity of doing; because, when
he came to compare the former Edition with his own Notes and the Maps, he
discovered many very material Omissions; particularly that the whole County of
Hertford was omitted, excepting St. Albans, and one or two Villages, as also
the Isles of Wight, Portland, Guernsey, Jersey, Alderney, and Sarke; together
with that of Man, and the Scots Isles: That the Description of the Northern
Counties of England, which abound with great Numbers of Remarkables, was also
very defective: and, That the first Author had directed his Tour in several
Places in such a manner, as to pass wholly by several of the best Towns, and
most remarkable Places, and quite out of any Geographical Course or Order.

Then the Materials which the Editor was supplied with for Scotland, he found
would swell that Part of the United Kingdom to one entire Volume; which before
made not half a one; and he was glad of the Opportunity of doing some further
Justice to that Country, which has generally been slightly considered by those
who know little of it.

It must also be observed, that the first Author had, in many Places,
disclaimed Antiquities, as a Subject out of his Province: Whereas we have
thought ourselves obliged, so far as our Limits would permit, to take Notice of
such, as (still remaining) may be considered as a Part of the Present State of
the Counties and Places where, at this Day, they continue visible; and which
may, moreover, merit the Attention of a curious Traveller; and particularly of
such Antiquities as have been brought to Light since the last Edition of
Camden's Britannia.

For the above Reason, we have been pretty ample in our Accounts of the famous
Stonehenge, and the Barrows in Wilts; and confess our Obligations on this Head,
to the Learned Dr. Stukeley in his late Work on that Subject, to whom we are
also beholden in several other Places.

We have likewise thought ourselves obliged to take Notice of the Benefits
which several Port and Trading Towns in this Kingdom, as well in its Northern
as Southern Parts, have of late Years received from Acts of Parliament for
enlarging and restoring of Piers and Harbors, Repairs of Roads, and for making
Rivers navigable, where the Face of Affairs in their particular Neighbourhoods
have been any way altered or effected by those laudable Works.

We have, moreover, subjoined to this Edition, Lists of the Cities and Boroughs
which return Members to the Parliament of Great Britain; the Lists of such
Gentlemen's Seats in each County, as we had not room to describe; likewise a
brief Account of the English Bishoprics, and Lists of the Peers of England and
Scotland, in such a manner as will not be subject to any other Variations than
that of the total Extinction of Families; for our Intention was to carry this
Piece, as much as the Nature of the Work would admit, beyond the Reach of
temporary Fluctuations and Changes.

By what we have said, it will appear, that this will have the Face of a new
Work, and indeed more than the Face, as will be seen by any who will take the
Pains to compare the different Editions; and that therefore it was impossible
to print by themselves, for the Use of the Purchasers of the last Edition,
those new Observations, Descriptions and Corrections which are incorporated in
the present; as the Proprietors were very desirous to have done, had it been
practicable. But this we may venture to promise, that though the Nature of this
Work is such, that there must be always Room for Additions, etc. as new
Discoveries may be made, or Alterations happen by Time; yet, that all such
necessary Alterations and Additions shall, for the future, be printed by
themselves, (after the manner of the Appendix to VOL. III. of this Edition)
that the Reader may not be under the Necessity of repurchasing the whole Work.

But lest it should be imagined, from any thing we have said above, that we
have been so ungenerous, as to endeavor to raise a Merit to the present
Edition, at the Expense of the former, we shall observe, That the good
Reception which the Labors of the Original Author met with in his first
Edition, (and which also attended the second, which was printed with very great
Additions and Improvements) is no bad Argument of the Value of his Performance.
And indeed He well deserved that Success, who could with Justice give such an
Account of his Abilities for the Undertaking, as is contained in the following
Paragraphs.

'The Preparations for this Work, says he, have been suitable to the Author's
earnest Concern for its Usefulness. Seventeen very large Circuits, or Journeys,
have been taken through diverse Parts separately, and Three general Tours over
almost the whole English Part of the Island; in all which the Author has not
been wanting to treasure up just Remarks upon particular Places and Things; so
that he is very little in Debt to other Men's Labors, and gives but very few
Accounts of Things but what he has been an Eyewitness of himself.

'Besides these several Journeys in England, he has also lived some time in
Scotland, and has traveled critically over great Part of it: He has viewed the
North Part of England, and the South Part of Scotland, Five several times over.
All which is hinted here, to let the Readers know, what Reason they have to be
satisfied with the Authority of the Relation; and that the Accounts here given
are not the Produce of a cursory View, or raised upon the borrowed Lights of
other Observers.'



We shall only add, That if the First Edition had all these Advantages, we may
very safely submit the Merit of the present to the Judgment of the candid
Reader.

A TOUR Through the ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN.
LETTER I. A DESCRIPTION of Part of the County of ESSEX, and of the County of
SUFFOLK, etc.
SIR,
I SET out from London on my first Journey, Eastward; and took a Circuit down
by the Coast of the Thames through the Marshes or Hundreds, on the South side of
the County of Essex, to Malden, Colchester, and Harwich, thence continuing on
the Coast of Suffolk to Yarmouth; thence round by the Edge of the Sea, on the
North and West Side of Norfolk, to Lynn, Wisbich, and the Wash; thence back
again on the North-side of Suffolk; thence into the County of Cambridge; and so
to the West-part of Essex, ending it in Middlesex, near the Place where I
began: reserving the Middle or Center of the several Counties to some little
Excursions, which I made by themselves.

Passing Bow-Bridge, where the County of Essex begins, I came first to the
Village of Stratford, which is greatly increased of late Years in Houses and
Inhabitants, every Vacancy being filled up, in a manner, with the Addition of
two little new-built Hamlets, as they may be called, on the Forest-side of the
Town; namely, Maryland-Point, and the Gravel-Pits, one facing the Road to
Woodford and Epping, and the other that to Ilford. As for the Hither-part, it
is almost joined to Bow, in spite of Rivers, Canals, Marshy-grounds, etc.

The same Increase of Buildings may be seen proportionally in the other
Villages adjacent, especially on the Forest-side; as at Low-Layton,
Layton-stone, Walthamstow, Woodford, Wansted, and the Towns of West-Ham,
Plaistow, Upton, etc. and this, generally speaking, of handsome large Houses,
from 20 l. to 50 l. a Year; being chiefly the Habitations of the richest
Citizens, such as are able to keep a Country, as well as a Town House, or such
as have left off Trade altogether. This is so apparent, that they tell me,
there are no less than Two hundred Coaches kept by the Inhabitants within the
Circumference of the few Villages named above, besides such as are kept by
accidental Lodgers: the Cause of which I shall enlarge upon, when I come to
speak of the like in the Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, etc. where there will
be still more Occasion to take notice of it.

There have been discerned within these few Years, in the Bottom of
Hackney-Marsh, between Old-ford and the Wyck, the Remains of a great Stone
Causeway, which is supposed to have been the Highway, or great Road, from
London to Essex, instead of that which now leads over the Bridge between Bow
and Stratford.

That the great Road lay this Way, and that the great Causeway continued just
over the River, where now the Temple-Mills stand, and passed by Sir Henry
Hickes's House at Ruckholls, is not at all doubted; and that it was one of
those famous Highways made by the Romans, there is undeniable Proof, by the
several Marks of Roman Work, and by Roman Coins, and other Antiquities found
there, some of which were collected by the late Reverend Mr. Strype, Vicar of
Low-Layton.

From hence the great Road passed up to Laytonstone, a Place by some known now
as much by the Sign of the Green-Man, formerly a Lodge upon the Edge of the
Forest; and crossing by Wansted-house, the noble Seat of Earl Tilney, (of which
hereafter) went over the same River, which we now cross at Ilford; and passing
that Part of the great Forest, called Henault-Forest, came into the present
great Road, a little on this side the Whalebone, a Place so called because a
Rib-bone of a large Whale, taken in the River of Thames the Year that Oliver
Cromwell died, 1658. was fixed there.

According to my first Intention, of effectually viewing the Seacoasts of
Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, I went from Stratford to Barking, a large
Market Town, but chiefly inhabited by Fishermen, whose Smacks ride in the
Thames, at the Mouth of Barking Creek; from whence their Fish are sent up to
London, to the Market at Billingsgate, in small Boats.

These Fishing-Smacks are very useful Vessels to the Public upon many
Occasions; as particularly in time of War they are used as Press-smacks,
running to all the Northern and Western Coasts to pick up Seamen to man the
Navy, when any Expedition is at hand, that requires a sudden Equipment. At
other times, being excellent Sailors, they are Tenders to particular Men of
War; and on an Expedition, they have been made use of as Machines, for the
blowing up fortified Ports; as formerly at St. Malo, and other Places.

The Parish of Barking is very large; and by the Improvement of Lands recovered
out of the Thames, and out of the River which runs by the Town, the great and
small Tithes, as the Townsmen assured me, are worth above 600 l. per Annum.
This Parish has two Chapels of Ease, viz. one at Ilford, and one on the side of
the Forest, called New-chapel.

A little beyond the Town, on the Road to Dagenham, stood a great old House,
where, Tradition says, the Gunpowder-Treason was contrived, and where all the
first Consultations about it were held.

This Side of the County is rather rich from the Nature of its Land, than from
the Number of its Inhabitants, which is occasioned by the Unhealthiness of the
Air; for these low Marsh Grounds, which, with all the South Side of the County,
have been gained, as it were, out of the River Thames, and the Sea, where the
River is wide enough to be called so, begin here, or rather at West-Ham, by
Stratford, and extend themselves from hence Eastward; growing wider, till we
come beyond Tilbury, when the flat Country lies six, seven, or eight Miles in
Breadth, and is both unhealthy and unpleasant.

However, it is very good Farming in the Marshes, because the Landlords let
good Peny-worths, though the Land is rich; for it being a Place where every body
cannot live, those that venture it, will have Encouragement; and it is but
reasonable they should.

In passing from Barking to Dagenham, we saw the Place where was the famous
Breach, that laid near 5000 Acres of Land under Water; but which, after near
ten Years Inundation, and the Works being several times blown up, was at last
effectually stopped by Captain Perry, who for several Years had been employed
in the Czar of Muscovy's Works, at Veronitza, on the River Don.

Great Part of the Lands in these Levels, especially those on this side
East-Tilbury, are held by the Farmers, Cow-keepers, and Grasing-butchers, who
live in and near London, who generally stock them with Lincolnshire and
Leicestershire Wethers, (which they buy in Smithfield, in September and
October, when the Grasiers sell off their Stocks) and feed here till Christmas
or Candlemas; and though they are not made much the fatter here, than when bought
in, yet very good Advantage accrues by the Difference of the Price of Mutton
between Michaelmas, when cheapest, and Candlemas, when dearest; and this is
what the Butchers call, by way of Excellence, right Marsh Mutton.

At the End of these Marshes, close to the Edge of the River, stands
Tilbury-fort, which may justly be looked upon as the Key of the City of London:
It is a regular Fortification, the Design of it was a a Pentagon, but the
Water-bastion, as it would have been called, was never built; the Plan was laid
out by Sir Martin Beckman, chief Engineer to King Charles II. who also designed
the Works at Sheerness. The Esplanade of the Fort is very large, and the
Bastions the largest of any in England. The Foundation is laid upon Piles
driven down two an end of one another, so far, till they were assured they were
below the Chanel of the River, and that the Piles, which were pointed with
Iron, entered into the solid Chalk-rock adjoining to the Chalk-hills on the
other side.

The Works to the Land-side are complete; the Bastions are faced with Brick.
There is a double Ditch, or Moat, the innermost of which is 180 Feet broad; a
good Counterscarp, and a Covered Way marked out, with Ravelins and Tenailles;
but they have not been completed.

On the Land-side there are also two small Redoubts of Brick, but the chief
Strength of this Fort on the Land-side consists in being able to lay the whole
Level under Water, and so to make it impossible for an Enemy to carry on
Approaches that way.

On the Side next the River, is a very strong Curtain, with a noble Gate called
the Watergate in the Middle, and the Ditch is palisado'd. At the Place where
the Water-bastion was designed to be built, and which by the Plan should run
wholly out into the River, so to flank the two Curtains, on each side, stands a
high Tower, which they tell us was built in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and was
called the Block-house; the Side next the Water is vacant.

Before this Curtain, above and below the said Vacancy, is a Platform in the
place of a Counterscarp, on which are planted 106 Cannon, generally carrying
from 24 to 46 Pound Ball; a Battery so terrible, as well imports the
Consequence of that Place: besides which, there are smaller Pieces planted
between, and the Bastions and Curtain also are planted with Guns; so that they
must be bold Fellows who will venture in the biggest Ships to pass such a
Battery, if the Men appointed to serve the Guns, do their Duty, as becomes them.

From hence there is nothing for many Miles together remarkable, but a
continued Level of unhealthy Marshes, called The three Hundreds, till we come
before Leigh, and to the Mouth of the Rivers Chelmer and Black-water, saving
that the Towns of Horndon, Rayley and Rochford, lie near the Seacoast,
extending in the order I have named; but are of no Note. The above Rivers,
united, make a large Firth, or Inlet of the Sea, which our Fishermen and
Seamen, who use it as a Port, call Malden-water.

In this Inlet is Osey or Osyth Island, so well known by our London Men of
Pleasure, for producing such vast Numbers of Wild-Ducks, Mallards, Teals and
Wigeons, that the Island seems covered with them, at certain Times of the Year,
and they go from London for the Pleasure of Shooting; and often come home very
well laden with Game; and sometimes too with an Essex Ague on their Backs,
which they find a heavier Load than the Fowls they have shot.

On the Shore, beginning a little below Candy Island, or Leigh Road, lies a
great Shoal or Sand, called the Black Tail, which runs out near three Leagues
into the Sea due East; at the End of it stands a Pole or Mast, set up by the
Trinity-house of London, as a Sea-mark: this is called Shoe-beacon, from the
Point of Land, where this Sand begins, which is called Shoeberry-ness, from a
Town of that Name, which stands by it. From this Sand, and on the Edge of
Shoeberry, before it, or South-west of it, all along, to the Mouth of
Colchester-water, the Shore is full of Shoals and Sands, with some deep Channels
between; all which are so full of Fish, that the Barking Smacks are well
employed here, and the Shore swarms, besides, with small Fisher-boats,
belonging to the Villages and Towns on the Coast, which come in every Tide with
what they take: and selling the smaller Fish in the Country, send the best and
largest upon Horses, which travel Night and Day to London Market.

On this Shore also are taken the best and most relishing, though not the
largest, Oysters in England: The Spot from whence they have their Appellation
is a little Bank called Woelfleet, in the Mouth of the River Crouch, called
Crooksea-water; but the chief Place where these Oysters are now had, is from
Wyvenhoe, and the Shores adjacent, whither they are brought by the Fishermen,
who take them at the Mouth of Colchester-water, and about the Sand they call
the Spits, and carry them up to Wyvenhoe, where they are laid in Beds or Pits
on the Shore to feed, as they call it; and then being barrelled up, and carried
to Colchester, which is but three Miles off, they are sent to London by Land,
and are from thence called Colchester Oysters.

They take also here fine Soals, which generally yield a good Price at London
Market: also sometimes middling Turbut, with Whitings, Codling, and large
Flounders.

In the several Creeks and Openings, on this Shore, are also other Islands, but
of no great Note, except Mersey, which lies between the two Openings of
Malden-water and Colchester-water; and is a Place of such difficult Access,
that it is thought a thousand Men might keep Possession of it against a great
Force, whether by Land or Sea. On this account, and because if possessed by an
Enemy, it would shut up all the Navigation and Fishery on that Side, a Fort was
built on the South-east Point of it; and generally, in a Dutch War, a strong
Garrison is kept there to defend it.

At this Place may be said to end, what we call the Three Hundreds of Essex,
which include the marshy Country, viz. Barstable Hundred, Rochester Hundred,
and Dengy Hundred.

One thing deserves mention here; which is, That all along this County it is
very frequent to meet with Men that have had from Five or Six, to Fourteen or
Fifteen Wives; and I was informed, that in the Marshes, over against Candy
Island, was a Farmer, who was then living with the five-and-twentieth; and that
his Son, who was but Thirty-five Years old, had already had about Fourteen.
Indeed, this Part of the Story I only had by Report, though from good Hands: but
the other is well known, and will be attested, about Fobbing, Curringham,
Thundersly, Benfleet, Prittlewell, Wakering, Great Stambridge, Cricksea,
Burnham, Dengy, and other Towns of the like Situation: the Reason, as a merry
Fellow told me, who said he had had about a Dozen, was this, That they being
bred in the Marshes themselves, and seasoned to the Place, did pretty well; but
that they generally chose to leave their own Lasses to their Neighbors out of
the Marshes, and went into the Uplands for a Wife: That when they took the
young Women out of the wholesome fresh Air, they were clear and healthy; but
when they came into the Marshes among the Fogs and Damps, they presently
changed Complexion, got an Ague or two, and seldom held it above half a Year,
or a Year at most: And then, said he, we go to the Uplands again, and fetch
another. So that marrying of Wives was reckoned a kind of good Farm to them.
Nor do the Men in these Parts hold it out, as in other Countries; for we seldom
meet with very ancient People among the Poor; insomuch, that hardly one half of
the Inhabitants are Natives of the Place; but such as come from other Parts for
the Advantage of good Farms.

From the Marshes and low Grounds, being not able to travel without many
Windings and Indentures, by reason of the Creeks and Waters, I came up to the
ancient Town of Malden, situate at the Conflux of two principal Rivers, the
Chelmer and the Black-water, where they enter into the Sea. It is built in the
Form of a Cross, is a Liberty in itself, and has a convenient Haven for Ships;
it consists of one Street near a Mile long, besides Lanes, etc. It is governed
by Two Bailiffs, Aldermen, Steward, Recorder, etc. Here is a good public
Library, for the Use of the Minister and the Clergy of the Hundreds adjoining
to the Sea, and any Gentleman may borrow a Book, upon depositing the Value of
it.

The Chanel called Malden-water is navigable to the Town; where, by that means,
is a great Trade for carrying Corn by Water to London; the County of Essex
being (especially on that Side) a great Corn Country. King Edward the Elder
resided here whilst he built the Town and Castle of Witham in this County, and
also Hertford Castle.

Malden was a Roman Colony, which Camden diffidently conjectures to be the
ancient Camalodunum. But Mr. Salmon will have it to be the Villa Faustini,
which has been so long attributed to St. Edmund's-bury: but however that be, it
was here the Britons, under the valiant Queen Boadicea, cut in Pieces the tenth
Legion, killed above 80,000 Romans, and destroyed the Colony; but she was
afterward overthrown herself in a great Battle, 60,000 Britons slain, and
herself and Daughters most inhumanly treated and disgraced, by those great
Reformers of the World, who, in her Case, forgot not only the Honor due to the
Sex, but that which the truly Brave show to the Brave in Misfortune.

Being obliged to come thus far into the Uplands, I made it my Road to pass
through Witham, built, as I mentioned, by Edward the Elder. It Is a pleasant,
well-situated Market Town, in which, and in its Neighborhood, are many
Gentlemen of good Fortunes and Families.

Nearer Chelmsford, hard by Boreham, is the famous Seat of Beaulieu, in which
King Henry VIII. very much delighted. It is the largest Edifice in the County
next Audley-end, where lived the late Lord Viscount Barrington, who had the
Advantage to be twice made Heir to the Estates of Gentlemen not at all related
to him, at least one of them, as is mentioned in his Patent of Creation. He
changed the Name of Shute for that of Barrington, by an Act of Parliament, and
had the Dignities of a Baron and Viscount of Ireland conferred on him by K.
Geo. I.

The Product of all this Part of the Country is Corn, as that of the marshy
feeding Grounds is Grass, where their chief Business is breeding of Calves,
which I need not say are the best and fattest, and the largest Veal in England,
if not in the World.

Kelvedon, or, as it is commonly called, Keldon, lies within three Miles of
Witham; which, as it is said, derives its Name from Kill-Dane, the Massacre of
the Danes being begun here by the Women; but as neither Mr. Camden nor any
Author of Credit mentions it, I think the Story is not to be heeded.

Colchester, the Iciani of the Romans, according to Mr. Salmon, is pleasantly
situated upon an Eminence above the River Coln. It is a large and populous
Town, adorned with handsome Streets, and, though it cannot be said to be finely
built, yet there are abundance of good Houses in it. In the Conclusion of the
late Civil War it suffered a severe Siege; which, as it made a resolute
Defense, was turned into a Blockade, wherein the Garrison, and Inhabitants also,
suffered the utmost Extremity of Hunger, and were at last obliged to surrender
at Discretion; when their two chief Officers, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George
Lisle, were shot to Death under the Castle-wall.

The battered Walls, the Breaches in the Turrets, and the ruined Churches,
still show Marks of this Siege, except that the Church of St. Mary (where they
had the Royal Fort) is rebuilt; but the Steeple, which was Two-thirds battered
down, (the Besieged having a large Culverin upon it, which did much Execution)
remains still in that Condition.

The Lines of Contravallation, which surrounded the whole Town, and the Forts
of the Besiegers, remain very visible in many Places.

The River Coln, which passes through the Town, encompasses it on the North and
East; and served, in Times of War, for a complete Defense on those Sides. There
are three Bridges over it, and it is navigable within three Miles of the Town,
for Ships of large Burden; a little lower it may receive even a Royal Navy: and
up to that Part called the Hithe, close to the Houses, it is navigable for Hoys
and small Barks; for which it is indebted to three Acts of Parliament passed
for that purpose, one in the Reign of King William III. one in that of King
George I. and the other in that of King George II.

This Hithe is a long Street, passing from West to East, on the South Side of
the Town, and is so populous toward the River, that it may be called, The
Wapping of Colchester. There is one Church in that Part of the Town, a large
Quay by the River, and a good Custom-house.

The Town chiefly subsists by the Trade of making Bays, though indeed all the
Towns around carry on the same Trade; as Kelvedon, Witham, Coggshall,
Braintree, Bocking, etc. and the whole County, large as it is, may be said to
be employed, and in Part maintained, by the Spinning of Wool, for the Bay-Trade
of Colchester, and its adjacent Towns.

The Town of Colchester has been supposed to contain about 40,000 People,
including the Out-villages within its Liberty, of which there are a great many,
the Liberty of the Town being of a large Extent. The Government is by a Mayor,
High-Steward, a Recorder or his Deputy, Eleven Aldermen, a Chamberlain, a
Town Clerk, Assistants, and Eighteen Common-council-men.

There are in Colchester Eight Churches, besides those which are damaged, and
Five Meeting Houses, whereof two for Quakers; besides one Dutch, and one French
Church. Its other public Edifices are,

1. Bay-hall, where the Goodness of the Manufacture of Bays made in this Town
is ascertained by a Corporation established for this Purpose, consisting of a
Set of Men, called Governors of the Dutch Bay-hall.

2. The Guild Hall of the Town, called by them the Moot-hall; contiguous to
which is the Town-gaol.

3. The Workhouse for the Poor, which has been enlarged of late Years.

4. A Grammar Free School; which has good Allowance to the Master, who is
chosen by the Town.

5. The Castle of Colchester is a Monument of the Antiquity of the Place, it
being built, as the Walls of the Town also are, with Roman Bricks; and the
Roman Coins dug up here, and ploughed up in the Fields adjoining, confirm it.
The Inhabitants boast much, that Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great,
first Christian Emperor of the Romans, was born there: but it would be hard to
make it out; and indeed, were it our Business, we could produce strong Proofs
to the contrary. Mr. Camden says, That this Castle was, in his Time, ready to
fall with Age; and yet it has stood above 120 Years since, and perhaps is not
much worse than it was then, although it received several Cannon Shot in the last
Siege of the Town, which made no Impression upon it, as the Besiegers found,
and therefore left off firing against it, and the rather, as the Garrison made
no great Use of it against them. The Queen's Head in the Marketplace, and the
Stable, are also Roman Buildings. There was likewise a Roman Military Way from
Colchester, by Braintree, Dunmow, and farther that Way.

There are two CHARITY-SCHOOLS set up here, and carried on by a generous
Subscription, with very good Success.

From Colchester I took a Turn down to the Coast. The Land running out a great
way into the Sea, South, and South-east, makes that Promontory of Land, called
the Nase, well-known to Seamen who use the Northern Trade. Here one sees a Sea
open as an Ocean, without any opposite Shore, though it be no more than the Mouth
of the Thames. This Point, called the Nase, and the North-east Point of Kent,
near Margate, called the North-Foreland, make the Mouth of the River, and the
Port of London, though it be here above 60 Miles over.

But as it is pretended by some, that according to the present Usage of the
Custom-house, the Port of London is not allowed to extend so far; it is thought
proper to insert the Clause taken from the Act of Parliament, establishing the
Extent of that Port.

"To prevent all future Differences and Disputes, touching the Extent and
Limits of the Port of London, the said Port is declared to extend, and be
accounted from the Promontory, or Point, called the North-Foreland, in the Isle
of Thanet, and from thence Northward, in a right Line, to the Point called the
NASE, beyond the Gunfleet, upon the Coast of Essex; and so continued Westward
throughout the River Thames, and the several Channels, Streams and Rivers
falling into it, to London Bridge; saving the usual and known Rights, Liberties
and Privileges of the Ports of Sandwich and Ipswich, and either of them, and
the known Members thereof, and of the Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and
their Deputies, of and within the said Ports of Sandwich, and Ipswich, and the
several Creeks, Harbors and Havens, to them, or either of them, respectively
belonging, within the Counties of Kent and Essex."

Notwithstanding which, the Port of London, as in Use since the said Order, is
understood to reach no farther than Gravesend in Kent, and Tilbury-point in
Essex; and the Ports of Rochester, Milton, and Feversham, belong to the Port of
Sandwich.

In like manner the Ports of Harwich, Colchester, Wyvenhoe, Malden, Leigh, etc.
are said to be Members of the Port of Ipswich.

This Observation may suffice for what is needful to be said upon the same
Subject, when I come to speak of the Port of Sandwich, and its Members, and
their Privileges with respect to Rochester, Milton, Feversham, etc. in my
Circuit through the County of Kent.

At Walton, under the Nase, they find on the Shore Copperas-stones in great
Quantities; and there are several large Works called Copperas-houses, where
it is made with great Expense.

On the North-Foreland is a new Mark, erected by the Trinity-house Men, at the
public Expense, being a round Brick Tower, near 80 Feet high. The Sea gains so
much upon the Land here, by the continual Winds at South-west, that within the
Memory of some of the Inhabitants, above 30 Acres of Land have been lost in one
Place.

From hence we go back into the County about four Miles, because of the Creeks
which lie between; and turning East again, come to Harwich, on the utmost
Eastern Point of this large County.

Harwich is a Town, strong by Situation, and may be made more so by Art. The
Harbor or Road is one of the securest in England, and covered at the Entrance
by Landguard-fort, and a Battery of Guns to the Seaward, just as at Tilbury,
and which sufficiently defend the Mouth of the River. Though the Entrance or
Opening of the River into the Sea is very wide, especially at High Water, at
least two Miles, if not three, over; yet the Chanel, in which the Ships must
keep and come to the Harbor, is deep, narrow, and lies only on the Side of the
Fort; so that all the Ships which come in, or go out, must come within Gunshot
of the Fort.

The Fort is on the Suffolk Side of the Bay, but stands so far into the Sea,
upon the Point of a Sand or Shoal running out toward the Essex Side, that, in
a manner, it covers the Mouth of the Haven; and our Surveyors of the Country
affirm it to be in the County of Essex. The making this Place, which was
formerly no other than a Sand in the Sea, solid enough for the Foundation of so
good a Fortification, cost many Years Labor, frequent Repairs, and a
prodigious Expense; but it is now so firm, that neither Storms nor Tides affect
it.

The Harbor is of a vast Extent; for the River Stour from Maningtree, and
River Orwel from Ipswich, empty themselves here; and the Channels of both are
large and deep, and safe for all Weathers; and where they join, they make a
large Bay, or Road, able to receive the biggest Ships of War, and the greatest
Number that ever the World saw together. In the Dutch War, great Use was made
of this Harbor; and there have been 100 Sail of Men of War with their
Attendants, and between 3 and 400 Sail of Colliers, all riding in it at a time,
with great Safety and Convenience.

Harwich is the Port where the Packet-boats between England and Holland, go out
and come in: the Inhabitants are far from being famed for good Usage to
Strangers, but on the contrary, are esteemed a little extravagant in their
Reckonings, in the Publick-houses; this has encouraged the setting up of
Sloops, which they now call Passage-boats, to go directly from the River of
Thames to Holland: though the Passage may be something longer, yet the Masters of
the Sloops are said to be more obliging to Passengers, and more reasonable in
the Expense, and the Vessels good Sea-boats. Harwich has been a Sufferer on
this Account.

The People of Harwich boast, that their Town is walled, and their Streets
paved with Clay, and yet that one is as strong, and the other as clean, as
those that are built or paved with Stone. The Fact is indeed true; for there is
a sort of Clay in the Cliff, between the Town and the Beacon-hill adjoining,
which, when it falls down into the Sea, where it is beaten with the Waves and
the Weather, turns gradually into Stone. But the chief Reason assigned is from
the Water of a certain Spring or Well, which rising in the Cliff, runs down
into the Sea among those Pieces of Clay, and petrifies them as it runs; and the
Force of the Sea often stirring, and perhaps turning the Lumps of Clay, when
Storms of Wind may give Force enough to the Water, causes them to harden
everywhere alike; otherwise those which were not quite sunk in the Water of
the Spring, would be petrified but in part. These Stones are gathered up to
pave the Streets, and build the Houses, and are indeed very hard. It Is also
remarkable, that some of them, taken up before they are thoroughly petrified,
will, upon breaking them, appear to be hard as a Stone without, and soft as
Clay in the Middle; whereas others, that have lain a due time, shall be
thorough Stone to the Center, and full as hard within as without. The same
Spring is said to turn Wood into Iron: but this I take to be no more or less
than the Quality, which (as I mentioned of the Shore at the Ness) is found to
be in much of the Stone along this Shore, of the Copperas Kind: and it is
certain, that the Copperas-stone (so called) is found in all that Cliff, and
even where the Water of this Spring has run; and I presume, that those who call
the hardened Pieces of Wood, which they take out of this Well, by the Name of
Iron, never tried the Quality of it with the Fire or Hammer; if they had, it is
not unlikely, that they would have given some other Account of it.

On the Promontory of Land, which they call Beacon-hill, which lies beyond or
behind the Town, toward the Sea, is a Light-house, to give the Ships Direction
in their sailing by, as well as their coming into the Harbor at Night.

This Town was formerly fortified; but in the Reign of King Charles I. the
Fortifications were demolished. It has since been ordered to be fortified
again, and Ground has been bought accordingly, to the King's Use, by Act of
Parliament: but there is nothing more done in it yet; and indeed it is many
Years since the Government, having a better Security in the British Shipping,
have had Occasion to fortify Towns to the Landward.

It was incorporated in the 13th of Edward II. The Harwich Men pretended a
Grant from Edw. III. to take Custom-duties for Goods coming into the Haven,
till on a Complaint made by the Town of Ipswich, that it was an Infringement
upon their Liberties, an Inquisition was appointed by that Prince at Ipswich in
the 14th of his Reign, by which it was determined against Harwich, in favor of
Ipswich.

Harwich, after all, may be said to be a neat, clean, well built Town, enjoys a
good Maritime Trade, is governed by a Mayor, etc. has a Market every Tuesday
and Friday, and two annual Fairs, one on May Day, the other on October the 18th.

Landguard-fort was built in the Reign of King James I. and was a much more
considerable Fortification than at present; having had four Bastions, named the
King's, the Queen's, Holland's, and Warwick's, mounted with 60 very large Guns,
particularly those on the Royal Bastion, where the King's Standard was
displayed, which would throw a 28 Pound Ball over Harwich; and it had a
constant Garrison, with a Chapel and many Houses, for the Governor, Gunners, and
other Officers. But it has been demolished, and a small Platform made instead
of it by the Waterside; but yet, as the particular Current of the Chanel,
which Ships must keep in, as I have said, obliges them to pass just by the
Fort, the Harbor is sufficiently defended on the Seaside from sudden Invasion.

And now, being at the Extremity of the County of Essex, of which I have given
you some View, as to that Side next the Sea only; I shall conclude this Part of
my Circuit, by telling you, that I will take the Towns which lie more toward
the Center of the County, in my Return by the North and West Part, that I may
give you a few Hints of some Towns which were near me in my Rout this way.

On the Road from London to Colchester, before I came into it at Witham, lie
four good Market Towns at near equal Distance from one another; viz. Rumford,
Brentwood, Ingatstone, and Chelmsford. Rumford stands first, and is noted for
two Markets, one for Calves and Hogs, the other for Corn and other Provisions,
mostly bought up for London Market.

At the farther End of this Town, in the Middle of a stately Park, stood
Guldy-hall, vulgarly Giddy-hall, an ancient Seat of one Sir Thomas Coke,
Lord Mayor of London Anno 1462. in the Reign of Edward IV. whose great Riches
being his principal Crime, exposed him in bad Times to so great Sufferings,
that though he was acquitted, by the Integrity of his Judge, of the Crimes laid
to his Charge, yet he was fined to the Value very nearly of his whole Estate.
It is since pulled down to the Ground, and there now stands a stately
Mansion House, built upon the Spot by Sir John Eyles, lately Lord Mayor of
London.

Brentwood and Ingatstone are two others, and are large thorough-fare Towns,
full of good Inns, chiefly maintained by the Multitude of Carriers and
Passengers, constantly passing this Way to London, with Droves of Cattle,
Provisions and Manufactures.

Chelmsford is the 4th, chiefly supported by the fame Business. It is the
County-town, where the Assizes are often held, and stands on the Conflux of two
Rivers, the Chelmer, whence the Town derives its Name, and the Cann; and has a
good Free School belonging to it.

South-east of Brentwood lies Billiricay, a pretty considerable Market Town.

Near Chelmsford stands a Seat of the Right Honorable the Earl of Fitzwalter,
which is seen on the Left Hand of the Road, just before you enter the Town. The
House is large, and has been lately new fronted, so that it makes a handsome
Appearance. There are also several new Plantations about it, and in time, if
his Lordship continues his Design of improving it, it will become a fine Seat.

I shall take notice, in my Return through these Parts, of the noble Seat of
the Lord Petre, and his Lordship's great Improvements in this County.

At Lees, or Lee's-Priory, as some call it, is to be seen an ancient House, in
the Middle of a beautiful Park, formerly the Seat of the Duke of Manchester;
but after the Death of the Duke it was sold to the Duchess Dowager of
Buckinghamshire, and since purchased by Mr. Hoare.

Five Market Towns fill up the rest of this Part of the Country; Dunmow,
Braintree, Thaxted, Halsted, and Coggshall; all noted for the Manufacture of
Bays. But Dunmow I must particularly mention, on account of its famous old
Story of its Flitch of Bacon; which is this:

One Robert Fitzwalter, a powerful Baron in this County, in the Time of Henry
III. instituted a Custom in the Priory here; That whatever married Man did not
repent of his being married, or differ and dispute with his Wife within a Year
and a Day after his Marriage, and would swear to the Truth of it, kneeling upon
two hard pointed Stones in the Priory Churchyard, set up for that Purpose, in
Presence of the Prior and Convent, such Person should have a Flitch of Bacon.

This has been actually claimed and received, as appears by Record there; but
the Priory being dissolved, there is an End of the Flitch; and it were well, if
no worse Consequence had attended the Dissolution of Religious Houses. For as
there was no Danger of many Claimants, there were the fewer to regret the Loss.

Of Braintree and Bocking I shall take notice in my Return to London.

Formerly, it is thought, the Forests of Epping and Henault took up all the
South Part of the County; but particularly we are assured, that it reached to
the River Chelmer, and into Dengy Hundred; and from thence again West to Epping
and Waltham, where it continues to be a Forest still.

Probably that of Epping has been a Weald or Forest ever since this Island has
been inhabited, and may show us, in some Parts of it, where Enclosures and
Tillage have not broke in upon it, what the general Face of this Island was,
before the Romans landed in Britain.

The Constitution of this Forest is best seen, as to its Antiquity, by the
pleasant Grant of it from Edward the Confessor, before the Norman Conquest, to
Randolph Peperking, one of his Favorites, who was after called Peverell, and
whose Name remains still in several Villages in this County; as particularly
that of Hatfield Peverell, in the Road from Chelmsford to Witham, which is
supposed to be originally a Park (called a Field in those Days); and Hartfield
may be as much as to say, a Park for Deer; for the Stags were in those Days
called Hearts; so that this was neither more nor less than Randolph Peperking's
Hart-field, or Deer-park.

This Randolph or Ralph Peverell had, it seems, a beautiful Lady to his Wife,
who was Daughter of Ingelrick, one of Edward the Confessor's Noblemen: He had
two Sons by her, William Peverell, a famed Soldier, and Lord or Governor of
Dover-castle; which he surrendered to William the Conqueror, after the Battle
in Sussex; and Pain Peverell, his youngest, who was Lord of Cambridge. When the
eldest Son delivered up the Castle, the Lady abovenamed was there; and the
Conqueror fell in Love with her, and had a Son by her, who was called William,
after the Conqueror's Christian Name, but retained the Name of Peverell, and
was afterward, as History acquaints us, created by the Conqueror Lord of
Nottingham.

This Lady, as is supposed, by way of Penance for her Frailty, founded a
Nunnery at the Village of Hatfield-Peverell, mentioned above, where she lies
buried in the Parish Church, and her Memory is preserved by a Tombstone under
one of the Windows. The Grant I have mentioned being to be found in Camden, I
shall not transcribe it here.

I shall now, in pursuance of my first Design, proceed to the County of Suffolk.

From Harwich therefore, having a mind to view the Harbor, I sent my Horses
round by Maning-tree, a good, but dirty Market Town, where there is a
Timber-bridge over the Stour, or, as it is more usually called,
Maningtree-water; and took a Boat for Ipswich up the River Orwel, known best by
the Name of Ipswich-water, by which Passage from Harwich to Ipswich, it is
about twelve Miles.

In a Creek in this River called Lavington-creek, we saw at low Water such
Shoals of Muscles, tha^ great Boats might have loaded with them and the
Quantity scarce diminished to the Eye. Near this Creek Sir Samuel Barnardiston
had a fine Seat, as also a Decoy for wild Ducks, and a very noble Estate; but
it is divided into many Branches since his Death.

Ipswich is seated at the Distance of 12 Miles from Harwich, upon the Edge of
the River, which taking a short Turn to the West, the Town forms there a kind
of Semicircle, or Half Moon, upon the Bank of the River. It is very
remarkable, that though Ships of 500 Tuns may upon a Springtide come up very
near this Town, and many Ships of that Burden have been built there; yet the
River is scarce navigable above the Town, not even for the smallest Boats; nor
does the Tide, which rises sometimes 13 or 14 Feet, and gives them 24 Feet
Water very near the Town, flow much farther up the River than the Town.

No Place in Britain is qualified like Ipswich, for carrying on the Greenland
Fishery; whether we respect the Cheapness of building and fitting out their
Ships and Shalloops; furnishing, victualling, and providing them with all kind
of Stores; Convenience for laying up the Ships after the Voyage; Room for
erecting their Magazines, Warehouses, Roap-walks, Cooperages, ande. on the
easiest Terms; and especially for the noisome Cookery, which attends the
boiling their Blubber, which may be on this River, remote from any Places of
Resort: then the Nearness to the Market for the Oil, when it is made, and,
which above all ought to be regarded, the Convenience that arises from this
Consideration, that the same Wind which carries them from the Mouth of the
Haven, is fair to the very Seas of Greenland.

Ipswich was formerly much more considerable for Trade than at present; but yet
it may be accounted a very neat and well built Town, and much larger than many
Cities; carries on still a considerable Maritime Trade; and though it is but
thinly inhabited, to what it has been, yet whoever looks into the Churches and
Meeting Houses of a Sunday, will not, even in this Particular, think so meanly
of it as some have done.

It has a very spacious Marketplace; in the midst of that is a fair Cross, in
which is the Corn-market. Adjoining is the Shambles or Butchery, very
commodious, and vulgarly, but erroneously, supposed to have been built by
Cardinal Wolsey; for it owes its Original to a much later Date, viz. to the
40th Year of Queen Elizabeth. Behind this is the Herb-market, and in a spacious
Street a little distant, is a Market for Butter, Poultry, and other Country
Provisions, and another for Fish, with which the Town is served in great
Plenty. It has five Market-days weekly; Tuesday and Thursday for small Meat;
Wednesday and Friday for Fish; and Saturday for all sorts of Provisions. It has
also five annual Fairs; one on April 23. one on May 7. and 8. one on July 25.
one on the 11th and 12th of August for Cattle also; and the fifth on September
14. which is a very considerable one for Butter and Cheese, to which the whole
Country round resort, to furnish themselves with Winter Stores; as do also many
of the London Dealers in those Commodities, who, however, are not suffered to
buy till after the first three Days of the Fair.

There are even now in this Town 12 Parish-churches, out of 14, which there
once were; and two Chapels in the Corporation-liberty, out of several which
have been demolished, besides Meeting Houses, etc. and it once abounded with
Religious Houses, which have yielded to the Fate of the Times.

Here is also a fair Town Hall, with a spacious Council Chamger, and other
commodious Apartments; a Shire-hall, where the County Sessions are held for the
Division of Ipswich; a large public Library, adjoining to a noble Hospital
founded by the Town, called Christ's Hospital, for the Maintenance of Poor
Children, old Persons, Maniacks; and in it Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars, are kept to hard Labor. Also adjoining to this is a good Free School;
and there is likewise the noble Foundation of Mr. Henry Tooly, Anno 1556, for
poor old Men and Women.

It is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, a Recorder, 12 Portmen, four
of which, besides the Bailiffs, are Justices of the Peace, two Coroners, 24
Common-council-men, who are also High-constables, and 12 of them Headboroughs,
and 15 Petty Constables.

Its Privileges are extraordinary; for the Bailiffs pass Fines and Recoveries,
hear and determine Causes, as well Criminal as Civil, arising in the Town, and
even Crown Causes, preferably to any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster.
They appoint the Assize of Bread, Wine, Beer, etc. No Freeman can be obliged to
serve on Juries out of the Town, or bear any Offices for the King, without his
own Consent, Sheriffs for the County excepted. Nor are they obliged to pay any
Tolls or Duties in any other Parts of the Kingdom, having cast the City of
London in a Trial at Law for Duties demanded by the City of Freemens Ships, in
the River Thames. They are entitled to all Waifs, Estrays, etc. to all Goods
cast on Shore within their Admiralty-Jurisdiction, which extends on the Coast
of Essex beyond Harwich, and on both Sides the Suffolk Coast; and their
Bailiffs even hold their Admiralty-court beyond Landguard Fort, etc. And by a
solemn Decision in their Favor by an Inquisition taken at Ipswich, in the 14th
of Edward III. they carried the Point, which Harwich contested with them, of
taking Custom-duties for Goods coming into Harwich Haven, which was determined
to belong solely to the Bailiffs and Burgesses of Ipswich, as I before hinted.
In King John's Reign, there was a Mint in this Town.

I shall just mention, in this Place, though it be generally known, that the
famous Cardinal Wolsey, Archbishop of York, was born in this Town, his Father
being a Butcher in it, though, according to Dr. Fiddes, who published his Will,
he seems to have been a Man of Substance for those Times. This Prelate rose to
the highest Pitch of Honor and Grandeur, that it was possible for a Subject to
attain to, and was suddenly stripped of all, having been cast in a Praemunire,
whereby he incurred a Forfeiture of all his Effects and Preferments; and being
afterward pardoned and restored to some Part thereof, particularly to the
Archbishopric of York, he was arrested for High Treason at his Archiepiscopal
Palace at Cawood in Yorkshire; and died at Leicester Abbey, as he was carrying
to London, where he was buried.

The French Refugees, when they first came over to England began a little to
take to this Place; and some Merchants attempted to set up a Linen Manufacture
in their Favor; but it did not meet with the expected Success, and at present
I find very little of it. The poor People are however employed, as they are all
over those Counties, in spinning Wool for other Towns where Manufactures are
settled.

The Country round Ipswich, as are all the Counties so near the Coast, is
applied chiefly to Corn, of which a very great Quantity is continually shipped
off for London; and sometimes they load Corn here for Holland, especially if
the Market abroad is encouraging.

There is a great deal of very good Company in this Town; and though here are not
so many of the Gentry as at Bury, yet it has more than any other Town in the
County.

I take this Town to be one of the most agreeable Places in England, for
Families who have lived well, but may be reduced to live within a narrow
Compass; for 1. Here are good Houses, at very easy Rents. 2. An airy, clean,
and well-governed Town. 3. Very agreeable and improving Company, almost of
every Kind. 4. Plenty of all Manner of Provisions, whether Fish or Flesh, very
good of the Kind, and very cheap. 5. Easy Passage to London, either by Land or
Water, the Coach going through to London in a Day.


The Lord Viscount Hereford had a very fine Seat and Park in this Town; the
House indeed was built in the ancient Taste, but very commodious; it is called
Christ-church, and had been a Priory, or Religious House, in former Times. The
Green and Park is a great Addition to the Pleasantness of this Town, the
Inhabitants being allowed to divert themselves there with Walking, Bowling,
etc. This Seat has been lately purchased by, and is now in the Possession of
Claude Fonnereau, Esquire

The Country round Ipswich, is an inexhaustible Storehouse of Timber; of
which, now their Trade of building Ships is abated, they send very great
Quantities to the King's Building-yards at Chatham; which by Water is so little
a Way, that they often run to it from the Mouth of the River at Harwich in one
Tide.

I cannot omit in this Place the following Account of an excellent Charity for
the Relief and Support of the Widows and Orphans of poor Clergymen of the
County of Suffolk, which was begun in the Year 1704. by a voluntary
Subscription of a small Number of Gentlemen and Clergy, in and about Ipswich
and Woodbridge, and has since that Time been carried on with such great
Success, that the yearly Collection, which in 1704. was but 6 l. by gradual
Advances every Year, amounted in the Year 1740. to 312 l. 2 s. 6 d. and in the
Whole 37 Years to the Sum of 4416 l. 9 s. 9 d.

Besides the yearly Subscriptions, there have been diverse Gifts and Legacies
given to the said Society, to the Uses abovementioned, to the Amount of 554 l.
17 s. So much of which is laid out in South Sea Annuities, and kept for raising
a capital Stock for the general Benefit of the Charity; and the Interest
arising from it has been, and still is, every Year applied to the Relief and
Support of the said Widows and Orphans, that they may not mourn without a
Comforter, and that the Sons and Daughters of the poor Clergy entitled to this
Relief, may not be suffered to wander as Vagabonds up and down the Earth,
exposed to those Miseries and Temptations which attend upon extreme Poverty.

From Ipswich I took a Turn to Hadley, famous for the Martyrdom of Dr. Rowland
Tailor, who was burnt at Aldham Common, Anno 1555. On the Place where he was
martyred, I observed a Stone, with this Inscription: Anno 1555. Dr. Tailor, for
defending what was good,
In this Place shed his Blood.


It has been a Town Corporate, governed by a Mayor, etc. But a Quo Warranto
being brought against their Charter, in the Reign of King James II. it has not
been renewed since. Here are two weekly Markets, and two annual Fairs. It deals
much in Corn, and abounds with all manner of Provisions. The Town is large, and
tolerably well built; but being in a Bottom, is generally dirty. Its Church is
a very handsome Building, graced with a Spire Steeple, and being near the
Middle of the Town, is an Ornament to it. It Is of some Note still for the
Manufacture of Woollen Cloths, but not so much as formerly.

A little to the South-west lies Neyland, a large Market Town, in a Bottom;
upon the Stour; over which is a very good Bridge. The Bays-trade is carried on
here too.

Higher up to the North-west, upon the same River, stands Sudbury, situate on
the Stour; which is now made navigable for Barges from Maningtree hither, and
gives a great Addition to their Trade. It is a very ancient Town, governed by a
Mayor, and at present consists of three distinct Parishes, which have each a
handsome and large Church; the Names of which are St. Gregory's, St. Peter's,
and All Saints; though St. Peter's is rather a Chapel of Ease to St. Gregory's.
This Town is pretty well built, but the Streets, being unpaved, are dirty. It
has an handsome Bridge over the Stour, leading into Essex. This Town was one of
the first Places where King Edward III. placed the Flemings, whom he allured
hither to teach the English the Art of manufacturing their own Wool, of which
before they knew nothing; and here the Woollen Trade has continued ever since
in a flourishing Way. The Inhabitants at present employ themselves in making
Says, Perpetuanas, etc.

Simon Theobald, surnamed Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, translated thither
from London Anno 1375. was a Native of this Town. He was murdered at the
Instigation of one John Ball, a seditious and fanatical Preacher in Wat Tyler's
Rebellion. He was a Prelate of very good Character for Learning and Charity. He
built the Upper-end of St. Gregory's Church in Sudbury, where his Head is still
shown: it was, not long since, entire, covered with the Flesh and Skin dried by
Art, the Mouth wide open, occasioned by Convulsions through the hard Death he
died, having suffered eight Blows before his Head was cut off. He founded in
the Place where his Father's House stood, a neat College, which he furnished
with Secular Priests, and other Ministers, and likewise endowed it bountifully.

Near Sudbury is Melford, a pleasant Village, and perhaps the largest in
England, being about a Mile in Length. The Church is a very fine Edifice, and
stands at the North-end of it. There were two Chantries in it. Weaver says,
That on some Part of the Outside of the Church are these Words: Pray for the
Souls of John Clopton, and Richard Boteler, of whose Goodys this Chapel was
built; and that several of the ancient Family of Clopton are there buried. This
Town has given two Lord Mayors to London, Sir John Milburn, Draper, in 1521.
and Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, in 1567. It has an annual Fair, diverse good Inns,
many handsome Houses, and creditable Inhabitants. Here lived the unhappy Mr.
Drew, who in the Year 1739. was barbarously murdered; and his Son, Mr. Charles
Drew, executed for it, who effected it either with his own Hands, or by those
of another Person, whom he procured to do it, for the sake of enjoying his
Estate. The Parricide was attended with Circumstances of great Horror; but the
Particulars being well known, and the Fact so recent, I shall not say any more
of it here.

In my Way from hence to St. Edmond's-bury, I passed due North through Lavenham,
or Lanham, a pretty good Town, standing upon a Branch of the River Breton. It
has a spacious Marketplace, which was formerly of much better Account than at
present. It had many Years ago great Advantage from its Trade in Blue Cloths;
but though this is lost, yet it has a good Trade for Serges, Shalloons, Says,
etc. made here; spins a great deal of fine Yarn for London, and has of late
flourished much, by setting up a Hall for selling Wool, the Town being
conveniently situated for that Purpose.

The Church and Steeple here are justly accounted the finest in the County. It
is situate on a Hill on the West Side of the Town, the Steeple being 137 Feet
high. It has Six tuneable Bells in it, and the Inhabitants boast much of their
Tenor, which, they say, out-does all the Bells in England for its deep Note;
and though it weighs but 23 Hundred Weight, they say it sounds like a Bell of 40
Hundred. This Town is also remarkable for the many charitable Bequests made to
its Poor; and gave London a Lord Mayor in 1462. in the Person of Sir Thomas
Cook, Draper, the Son of Robert Cook of this Town.

East of Lavenham, and pretty near it, is Bildeston, a Market Town, noted for
the Cloathing-trade, its good Church, its mean Buildings, and Dirtiness.

Bury St. Edmunds is situate on the West Side of the River Lach, which within
these few Years has been made navigable from Lynn to Fornham, a Mile North of
the Town. It is so regularly built, that almost all the Streets cut one another
at Right Angles. It stands on an easy Ascent, and overlooks a most fruitful
enclosed Country on the South and South-west; on the North and North-west the
most delightful champain Fields, which extend themselves to Lynn, and that Part
of the Norfolk Coast; and on the East the Country is partly enclosed, and
partly open. No wonder then that it is called the Montpellier of Suffolk, and
even of England: and indeed a certain ancient Author says no more than it
deserves; "That the Sun shines not upon a Town more agreeable in its Situation."

It is governed by an Alderman, which is their chief Magistrate, a Recorder, 12
capital Burgesses, and 24 common Burgesses.

It has two plentiful weekly Markets on Wednesdays and Saturdays; and three
annual Fairs; one three Days before and three Days after the Feast of St.
Matthew; and it is generally protracted to an uncertain Length, for the
Diversion of the Nobility and Gentry that resort to it, in great Numbers.

The Abbey, once so famous, was first built of Wood by Sigebert King of the
East Angles, soon after Christianity was planted here; and when finished, about
the Year 638, that King retired into it, and shut himself up from the World.

King Edmund, from whom the Town takes its Name, began to reign over the
East Angles Anno 855, in the 14th Year of his Age, and reigned 15 Years; being
killed Anno 870, as supposed, at Hoxne, at 29 Years old, and his Corpse was 33
Years after removed to Bury. The Abbey being much enriched thereby, the Monks,
who were of the Benedictine Order, found means, about the Year 1020, to get it
entirely to themselves, excluding the Seculars; and King Canute, in the 4th
Year of his Reign, founded a more magnificent Church, in Honor of St. Edmund,
which was finished in 12 Years, and dedicated to Christ, St. Mary, and St.
Edmund.

Uvius, Prior of Hulm, who was consecrated the first Abbot, Anno 1020, got the
Abbey exempted from Episcopal Jurisdiction, and encompassed that and the Town
with a Wall and Ditch; the Ruins of which, in several Places, are still to be
seen: and the Abbots afterward were made Parliamentary Barons. But in the
Reign of King Henry VIII. it run the common Fate of all Religious Houses, and
that Prince put an End to all its Glory.

When the Abbey was in its Prosperity, there was a Chapel at every one of the
five Gates, and the Town abounded with Chapels and Oratories. It Is possible
these might be Hospitals; for there was an Hospital of St. Peter's without
Rishy gate; an Hospital of St. Savior's without North-gate; an Hospital of St.
Nicolas at or near Eastgate; and God's-house, or St. John's, at the
South-gate; a College of Priests with a Gild to the Holy or Sweet Name of
Jesus, the Situation of which I could not find; and an House of Gray Friars at
Babwell, or the Toll-gate. But at this time there are only two Churches, which
indeed are very beautiful and stately, and stand in the same Churchyard; the
one dedicated to St. Mary, the other, built in the Reign of Edward VI. to St.
James. The latter has a convenient Library; and at the West End of the South
Isle are interred James Reynolds, Esquire late Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
and his Lady, to whose Memories two large Monuments are erected. The Church of
St. Mary has, on the North-side of the Altar, (to which we approach by a fine
Ascent of Six Steps) the Tomb of Mary Queen of France, Sister to Henry VIII.
and Wife to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk. Her Coffin is of Lead, and has
this Inscription on it; Mary Queen, 1533. of France. Edmund H -- --. There are
other handsome Monuments in this Church.

The other most remarkable public Buildings are the Abbey-gate, which is still
a fine Monument of what the Abbey once was; the Guild hall; the Wool-hall; the
Shire-house; the Market-cross; and the Grammar School, endowed by King Edward
VI.

Such as is the Town for Situation, is the Neighborhood and Gentry about it
for Politeness; and no Place glories in brighter Ladies, or better Families.

In the Pathway between the two Churches it was that Arundel Coke, Esquire a
Barrister at Law, in the Year 1721. attempted (with the Assistance of one
Woodbourne, a barbarous Assassin) an unheard of Outrage on his Brother-in-law,
Edward Cris, Esquire for the sake of possessing what he had. He had invited him,
his Wife and Family, to Supper with him; and in the Night, on Pretense of going
to see a Friend to them both, he led him into the Churchyard, when, on a Signal
he gave, the Assassin made at Mr. Crisp with a Hedge-bill, and in a most
terrible manner mangled his Head and Face; and supposing him dead, there left
him; and Coke returned, as if he knew nothing of the Matter, to the Company.
But it happening that Mr. Crisp was not killed, and coming back to Coke's House
to the Company all bloody, and cruelly mangled, the shocking Sight amazed and
confounded them all; Coke, that he was not dead; the rest, that he had met with
so strange a Disaster. Mr. Crisp has survived this Outrage many Years, and Coke
and Woodburne, the hired Assassin, were justly executed for a Villainy so
detestable, that it hardly had its Parallel. The Gentleman being not killed,
the Assassins were tried and condemned on the Statute for defacing and
dismembring, called The Coventry Act: And Coke was so good a Lawyer, and so
hardened a Wretch, that he thought to have saved himself, by pleading that he
intended not to deface, but to kill. Some nice People say, the Law was a little
strained in their Punishment, as the Gentleman recovered; but, surely, if in
any Case the Letter might be dispensed with, and the Spirit be brought in Aid
of it, it was right in this: and it would have been next to a national
Disgrace, not to have a Law that would reach so flagrant and complicated a
Wickedness.

There is very little or no Manufacturing in this Town, except Spinning; the
chief Business of the Place depending upon the neighboring Gentry, who cannot
fail to cause Trade enough by the Expense of their Families and Equipages,
among the People of a Country Town. Our Monarchs, Edward I. and II. had a Mint
at Bury, and some of their Pennies coined there, are yet remaining. Stow, in
his Survey of London, p. 83. says, That here was also a Mint in King John's
Time.

This Town is famous for two great Events: One, That a Parliament was held here
in the Year 1447. in the 25th Year of Henry VI. The other, That at the Meeting
of this Parliament, the good Humphry, Duke of Gloucester, Regent of the
Kingdom, during the Absence of King Henry V. and in the Minority of his Son
Henry VI. and, to his last Hour, the Safeguard of the whole Nation, and Darling
of the People, was basely murdered here; by whose Death the Gate was opened to
that dreadful War between the Houses of Lancaster and York, which ended in the
Confusion of the very Race, who are supposed to have contrived that Murder.

As I made some Stay at Ipswich and Bury, being obliged to wait the Leisure of
a Gentleman who accompanied me Part of this Journey, I made several Excursions
more Inland than I had at first intended when I set out, and visited the
following Towns:

As, first, Boxford, which is about Seven Miles from Sudbury, and is a neat and
well built Village, and carries on a considerable Traffic.

At Bures on the Stour King Edward was crowned, and not at Bury. It has a good
Bridge on that River. Anno 1733. the Spire of the Steeple of the handsome
Church here was burnt by Lightning, the Bell-frames destroyed, and the Bells
melted.

Clare is situate on the Stour, about 14 Miles from Bury, and is but a poor
Town, and dirty, the Streets being unpaved. But yet the Civil and Spiritual
Courts are held at it, and it has a good Church; and shows still the Ruins of a
strong Castle, and an old Monastery. It gives Title of Earl to his Grace the
Duke of Newcastle of the Pelham Family, as it did to that of Holles before.

Not far from Clare is Honedon, where, in the Year 1687. the Sexton, digging a
Grave, found a large Quantity of Saxon Coins.

Cavendish upon the Stour deserves Mention, for giving Name to the Noble Family
of the Dukes of Devonshire.

Haverhill stands partly in Essex, and partly in Suffolk. By the Ruins of a
Church and Castle still to be seen here, it appears to have been of greater
Consequence formerly, than at present. Now I am at this Place, I shall just
mention

Ledgate, on account of its giving Birth and Name to the famous Poet, Orator,
Mathematician and Philosopher, John Ledgate, who died in 1440. Here are to be
seen the Ruins of a strong Castle.

Stoke juxta Neyland gave a Lord Mayor to London in 1503. viz. Sir William
Capel, of the Drapers Company, from whom is descended the present Earl of
Essex. It has a fair Church and Steeple. Giffard's- hall in this Parish is a
noble old Seat belonging to Sir Francis Mannock, Bart. And Pendering-hall is
the new-built fair Seat of Sir John Williams, Alderman of London.

Stratford is a thorough-fare Village of great Traffic, and is employed in the
Woollen Manufactures.

Easterbergholt, near four Miles from Stratford, and half a Mile North of the
Stour, is a large and handsome Village, employed in the Woollen Way, but not to
so great a Degree as formerly. It has a good Church, but the Steeple is in
Ruins, and the Bells are rung by Hand, in a kind of Cage set up in the
Churchyard. A little South of the Church is an elegant House of Sir Joseph
Hankey, Alderman of London.

Hemingston may bear the Mention for the merry Tenure by which that Manor was
held, according to Camden, by Serjeanty, the Possessor being obliged every
Christmas Day to perform before the King one Saltus, one Sufflatus, and one
Bombulus: or, as is read elsewhere, it was held by a Saltus, a Sufflatus, and a
Pet; that is, as Camden interprets the Words, he was to dance, make a Noise
with his Cheeks puffed out, and let a F -- t.

Needham is a thorough-fare Town, about nine Miles North-west from Ipswich. It
is tolerably well built, has several considerable Dealers in it, and formerly
carried on a large Trade in the Woollen Manufactures, which it has lost for
some Years.

Bildeston is a meanly built, dirty Town, but has a good Church.

Stow-market, about three Miles from Needham, is a tolerable Town, with a
spacious Church and Spire-Steeple.

And five Miles further, being eight from Bury, is Wulpit, famous for the white
Bricks made there. It has a handsome Church and Spire-Steeple.

At Norton, near Wulpit, King Henry VIII. was induced to dig for Gold. He was
disappointed, but the Diggings are visible at this Day.

Ixworth, about seven Miles from Bury, is a dirty, ill-built Town, with a mean
Market; but is a thorough-fare Town, and has two annual Fairs.

Botesdale is a long, mean-built, dirty, thorough-fare Town; yet it is
remarkable for a Grammar Free School founded by Sir Nicolas Bacon, and
established by Queen Elizabeth. The Master and Usher are to be elected out of
Bennet College Cambridge, where Sir Nicolas was educated. The Master enjoys a
Salary of 20 Pounds per Annum, besides the Benefit of the School-house, and the
Usher eight Pounds, with a House and Yard. The School-house is now in the Gift
of Edmund Britiffe, Esquire Sir Nicolas also bequeathed 20 l. a Year to the said
College for six Scholars out of this School, to whom likewise Archbishop
Tenison was said to have given six Pounds annually. There is a mean Market here
every Thursday, and an annual Fair on Holy Thursday.

Milden-hall, about 12 Miles from Bury, is situate on the River Lark; it is a
Town of very extensive Limits, pleasant and well built, and has a noble Church,
and lofty Steeple. It has a plentiful Friday Market, and a very considerable
annual Fair, which lasts four Days. A little North of the Church is the
Mansion House of Sir Thomas Hanmer, Bart. who in the Reign of Queen Anne was
Speaker of the House of Commons. In the Year 1507. a great Part of this Town
was consumed by Fire. It furnished the City of London with two Lord Mayors, Sir
Henry Barton, Skinner, Anno 1428. and Sir William Gregory, of the same Company,
Anno 1451.

Ickworth was once a Parish, but now is a noble Park, in which is the Seat of
the Earl of Bristol. It is a Place of great Antiquity, and what confirms it is,
what that learned Antiquarian Dr. Battley, Archdeacon of Canterbury, writes,
That in his Memory a large Pot of Roman Money was found here.

Debenham is a tolerably clean, though mean-built Town, and among very dirty and
heavy Roads, being seated on a Hill. The Church is a good Building, the
Marketplace tolerable, and there is a Free School founded by Appointment of
Sir Robert Hitcham.

Crows-hall, about a Mile South-east of this Town, was formerly the Seat of the
Gawdies; till Sir Charles Gaudy, Bart. conveyed it to John Pit, Esquire in a
Descendant of whose Family it still remains.

Mendlesham is a dirty and poor Town, but has a handsome Church, and a small
Tuesday's Market.

Eye is a Town Corporate, governed by two Bailiffs, ten principal Burgesses,
and 24 Common-councilmen, and gives Title of Baron to the Lord Cornwallis. It
is situate in a Bottom between two Rivers, is meanly built, and the Streets
dirty. Near the West End of the Church are still to be seen some of the ruinous
Walls of the Castle.

My Friend having finished his Business in those Parts of Suffolk, which lie
round the Towns of Bury and Ipswich, gave me an Opportunity of resuming my
Journey according to the Plan I laid down at the Beginning of the Letter; and
so from the former of these Towns I returned by Stow-market, and Needham, to
Ipswich, that I might keep as near the Coast as was proper to my designed
Circuit; having determined to take the Opportunity, which he told me his
Affairs would give me, of making two or three Excursions from Woodbridge,
Aldborough, and Southwould, to make my Observations on that Part of Suffolk,
which I have not yet touched upon. From Ipswich therefore I went to visit the
Sea again, and so to Woodbridge, and from thence to Orford on the Sea Coast.

Woodbridge is a Market Town, situate on the River Deben, about 11 Miles from
the Sea. This River being navigable to the Town for Ships of considerable
Burden, it drives a pretty good Trade with Holland, Newcastle, and London, and
has Passage Hoys, that go to and return from London weekly. It has a fine
Church and Steeple, and traded formerly in Sackcloth, and now in refining Salt.
The Shire-hall is a handsome Pile of Building, where the Quarter Sessions for
this Part of the County are held, and under it is the Corn-cross. One Street in
it, called Stone-street, is well built and paved, but the rest are dirty. The
Marketplace and Thoroughfare are also well enough built; but the rest of the
Town is mean. The Quays and Warehouses are very commodious, and here is a
Grammar School, and an Almshouse, erected in 1587. by Thomas Seckford, Master
of the Requests, for Thirteen Men and Three Women, which is well endowed. It
has a pretty good Market on Wednesdays, and two annual Fairs.

Walton has been an ancient Market Town, and though the Market is now disused,
the Cross is still remaining. In the neighboring Parish of Felixstow, on the
Cliff by the Sea, and about a Mile from the Colne Side of Woodbridge-haven, are
discerned the Ruins of a quadrangular Castle advantageously situated; of which
nothing now remains but the Foundation of one Side of the Wall. The rest has
been devoured by the Sea; and in all Probability these Remains must in a few
Years undergo the same Fate. It was built principally of Rock-stones; but the
many Roman Bricks still to be seen, and Roman Coins, which have been discovered
among the Ruins of the Side Walls, as they have been washed away by the Sea in
the present Age, are an undeniable Evidence, that it was a Place of
considerable Antiquity, probably a Roman Colony, which might give Name to the
Hundred of Colnies, in which it stood.

Now begins that Part which is ordinarily called High-Suffolk; which being a
rich Soil, is, for a long Way wholly employed in Dairies; and famous for the
best Butter, and perhaps the worst Cheese in England: the Butter is barrelled,
and sometimes pickled up in small Casks, in which it keeps so well, that I have
know a Firkin of Suffolk Butter sent to the West Indies, and brought back to
England again, perfectly good and sweet, as at first.

From hence turning down to the Shore, we see Orfordness, a noted Point of Land
for the Guide of the Colliers and Coasters, and a good Shelter for them to ride
under, when a strong North-east Wind blows, and makes a foul Shore on the Coast.

Orford is situate on the North-west Side of the River Ore, whence it had its
Name. It was formerly a Town of good Account, having a strong Castle of reddish
Stone for its Defense, of which, and of a Benedictine Nunnery near the Quay,
there are still to be seen considerable Ruins. The Sea has so much withdrawn
itself from this Town, that it is robbed of its chief Advantage, and deserves
not the Name of a Harbor. The Town is mean, and no one contends for an
Interest in it, but such as want to make themselves a Merit in the Choice of
the two Members which it returns to Parliament. It is a Town Corporate, and is
governed by a Mayor, eight Portmen, and twelve Burgesses; it has also a mean
Monday Market, and an annual Fair. It had the Honor to give Title of Earl to
the brave Admiral Russel: but that is now extinct.

About three Miles from Orford, is Aldburgh, a Town pleasantly situated in a
Valley. It has two Streets, each near a Mile long; but its Breadth, which was
more considerable formerly, is not proportionable, and the Sea has of late
Years swallowed up one whole Street. The Town, though meanly built, is clean and
well peopled in the Seafaring way. The Sea washes the East Side of it, and the
River Ald runs not far from the South-end of it, affording a good Quay. In the
adjacent Seas, Sprats, Soles, and Lobsters, are caught in abundance. The Town
trades to Newcastle for Coals; and from hence Corn is transported. The Manor of
Aldburgh, as also the Manors of Scots and Taskards in the Neighborhood,
formerly belonged to the Monastery of Snape, and were first granted with that
Monastery, to Cardinal Wolsey, and soon after to Thomas Duke of Norfolk.
Aldburgh is pretty well situated for Strength, and has several Pieces of Cannon
for its Defense. The Church, which is a good Edifice, stands on a Hill, a
little West of the Town. It is a Town Corporate, governed by Two Bailiffs, Ten
capital Burgesses, and Twenty-four inferior Officers.

From Aldburgh, I passed through Saxminden, a little dirty Market Town, to
Dunwich, a very ancient Town, which, by Roman Coins dug up there, is supposed
to have been a Roman Station. In the Reign of the Conqueror, it was so
considerable a Place, that it had 130 Burgesses, and was valued to that King at
50 l. and 60,000 Herrings. We read that in the Reign of Henry II. it was a very
famous Village, well stored with Riches, and fortified with a Rampart, some
Remains of which still appear.

Before these Times, in the Reign of King Sigebert, Anno 630. Dunwich was a
Bishop's See; and so continued, till the Conqueror made his Chaplain Bishop of
it, and translated the Sea to Thetford, which was afterward translated from
thence to Norwich.

There were several Religious Houses in Dunwich, and, some pretend, no less
than fifty Churches: but there is a certain Account of six Parish-churches, and
three Chapels, besides the several Religious Houses. Four of these
Parish-churches, and the three Chapels, have been long devoured by the Sea; and
one of the others met with the same Fate in this Age, so that there is only one
now standing; and what remains of this once famous Place, is but a pitiful
Parcel of sorry Cottages.

Hereabouts they begin to talk of Herrings, and the Fishery. And here also, and
at Swole or Southwould, the next Seaport, they cure Sprats in the same manner
as they do Herrings at Yarmouth.

From Dunwich we went to Southwould, pleasantly situated on a Hill, and almost
surrounded with the Sea, and the River Biyth, over which it has a Bridge. It
drives a considerable Trade in Salt and old Beer, and in Herrings, Sprats, etc.
The Church is large, and very strong. The Bay, called corruptly Sowl or
Sole-bay, is a commodious Place for Anchorage, and occasions a great Resort of
Mariners to it, which adds greatly to its Trade and Commerce.

The Traffic of my Friend at Woodbridge, Aldburgh, and this Place, gave me the
Opportunity I hinted at, of making Excursions into the main-inland Parts of
Suffolk, adjacent to those Towns, which I shall transcribe from my
Memorandum-book, in the Order I set them down.

Ufford is at present of no great Remark; but has the Ruins of a Chapel, called
Sogenhoc Chapel. Richard Lufkin was Rector of this Parish 57 Years, and was
buried September 23. 1678. in the 111th Year of his Age. He performed all the
Offices of his Function to the last, and preached the Sunday before his Death.
He was plundered in the grand Rebellion, and lost all that he had except a
Silver Spoon, which he preserved by hiding it in his Sleeve.

In the Hundred of Hartsmere stands Broom, a noble old Mansion, which for many
Ages has been the Seat of the noble Family of Cornwallis. In this Parish of
Broom is an Almshouse for poor Widows, fronting the Hall; but not endowed.

Wickham Market is situated about four Miles from Woodbridge. The Church is
built on a Hill, and though but 23 Yards high, affords the best Prospect of any
in Suffolk; for in a clear Day, near 50 Parish-churches may be seen from it. It
is now only a Village, but has some Trade, and the Civil and Spiritual Courts
are held in it.

Snape was once noted for a famous Monastery, few Remains of which are to be
seen. It has a considerable annual Fair for Horses, which lasts four Days,
beginning August 11. to which the London Jockeys resort.

At Sudbourne is a fine Seat of the Lord Viscount Hereford.

At Easton is the Seat of the Earl of Rochford, formerly belonging to the
Wingfield Family.

Letheringham was of Note for a little Priory, which was obtained at the
Dissolution by Sir Antony Wingfield; and Sir Henry Spelman tells us, that, as a
Judgment for the Sacrilege, he died without Issue Male. It was converted into a
Mansion House, and is now the Seat of the ancient Family of the Nauntons. Sir
Roger Naunton was in the Reign of King James I. Secretary of State, and Master
of the Court of Wards and Liveries. He died Anno 1630. In the Abbey is a long
Gallery, adorned with several valuable Pictures: And in Letheringham Church
are, some elegant and magnificent Monuments of the Wingfields and Nauntons.

Rendelsham was anciently famous for being the Royal Residence of Redwald, King
of the East Angles. Hugh Fitz-Otho procured a Market and Fair for this Town,
from King Edward I. Digging here about 50 Years ago, an ancient Silver Crown
was found weighing about 60 Ounces, supposed to have belonged to Redwald, or
some other King of the East Angles; which was sold and melted down for the sake
of the Metal.

At Butley was a Priory of Canons Regular; founded by Ranulph de Glanville,
chief Justice of England, to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin. The Ruins of the
Abbey, which are still to be seen, show it to have been very large; and the
Gate House is a magnificent Building: it remains entire, and is embellished in
the Front with many Coats of Arms, finely cut in Stone.

Framlingham is situate North of Aldburgh, a large Town, well built, and
pleasantly seated near the Head of the River Ore; it has a spacious
Marketplace; the Church is built of black Flint, and is a very stately and
noble Edifice, wherein several of the Mowbrays Dukes of Norfolk lie buried. The
Castle is a fair Piece of Antiquity, being a large, beautiful and strong
Building; and contains within the Walls now standing an Acre 1 Rood 11 Perches,
and was formerly much larger. Its Walls are 44 Feet high, and thick, and are
standing pretty entire; and it has 13 Towers, 14 Feet higher than the Walls,
two of which are Watch-towers. It was both by Art and Nature formerly very
strong. There are two good Almshouses, and a Free School, founded by Sir
Robert Hitcham, (who is interred in the Church) for 40 poor Boys, who are
taught to read, write, and cast Accounts, and 10 l. is given to settle each of
them Apprentice. This Gentleman bought of the Duke of Norfolk the Castle,
Manor, etc. and gave them to Pembroke-hall in Cambridge. To this Castle Queen
Mary I. retired, when the Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen by the Northumberland
Faction.

Blithburg was formerly a Place of good Note, but now has nothing to recommend
it but its Church, which is a fine old Building, and kept in good Repair.

At Chediston, is the fine Seat of Walter Plumer, Esquire who bought it lately, and
rebuilt the Hall in a beautiful manner.

Halesworth is North-east of Framlingham, a large and good Market Town,
situated upon the River Blyth, which runs through it. The Streets are clean, and
partly paved. It has a very neat Church, beautifully decorated within, and is
noted for Linen-yarn, which is spun in the Neighborhood, and sold here.

Hoxne is the Place where Edmund King of the East Angles was murdered by the
Pagan Danes, because he would not renounce his Faith, Anno 870. and his Body
was removed to Bury, as abovementioned.

Bungay is a well-frequented Market Town, pleasantly situate upon and almost
surrounded with the Waveney, which is navigable thither for Barges. It lies
North-east of Halesworth. Its Streets are mostly unpaved; but the Town is
handsome and well built since the great Fire, which broke out about Sunrising
on March 1. 1688-9. in a small uninhabited House; and in four Hours time
consumed the whole Town, except one small Street. The whole Loss was computed
at 29,896 l. and upwards. It has two Parish-churches, one of which is a very
noble one; and has a beautiful Steeple. The Ruins of a Benedictine Nunnery, and
a very strong Castle, are still to be seen here. The latter was so strong, that
Hugh Bigod, its Owner, in the Wars between the Empress Maud and King Stephen,
with the latter of whom he sided, made this Boast upon it: Were I in my Castle
of Bungay,
Upon the River Waveney,
I would not care for the King of Cockney.


But yet he was forced afterward to compound with King Henry II. for its
Preservation. It has a Grammar School with 10 Scholarships, for Emanuel College
Cambridge.

In this Excursion I stretched to Beccles, still further North-east; a large
ill-built Market Town, situate on the Waveney, which is navigable hence from
Yarmouth to Bungay, as I have said. It has a noble Church and Steeple, and a
Grammar and English School, well endowed. It has a plentiful Market, and a
Common of above 1000 Acres. The Streets are well paved and clean, but the
Houses are but ordinary. The Ruins of another Church, called Ingate Church are
to be seen here, which was formerly the Parish Church to the Town.

Burgh-castle situate at the Mouth of the Waveney, was a Place of considerable
Note in the Time of the Romans. The Walls on the East, North, and South Sides,
are still standing, pretty entire; and the River being a Defense on the West,
no Wall was wanting there.

I returned from these Excursions to Southwould, in order to proceed on my
Journey, according to my first Plan. But it may not be amiss to mention, before
I proceed, That this Town is made famous by an Engagement at Sea, in the Year
1672, between the English and Dutch Fleets, in the Bay opposite to the Town; in
which the brave Montague Earl of Sandwich, Admiral under the Duke of York, lost
his Life: his Ship, Royal Prince, carrying 100 Guns, which was under him
commanded by Sir Edward Spragg, was burnt, and several other Ships lost, and
about 600 Seamen.

At this Town in particular, and so at all the Towns on this Coast, from
Orfordness to Yarmouth, is the ordinary Place where our Summer Friends the
Swallows first land when they come to visit us; and here they may be said to
begin their Voyage, when they go back into warmer Climates. I was some Years
before at this Place, about the Beginning of October; and lodging in a House
that looked into the Churchyard, I observed in the Evening an unusual
Multitude of Swallows sitting on the Leads of the Church, and covering the Tops
of several Houses round about. This led me to inquire what was the Meaning of
such a prodigious Multitude of Swallows sitting there: I was answered, That
this was the Season when the Swallows, their Food failing here, began to leave
us, and return to the Country, wherever it be, from whence they came; and
that this being the nearest Land to the opposite Coast, and the Wind contrary,
they were waiting for a Gale, and might be said to be Wind-bound.

This was more evident to me, when in the Morning I found the Wind had come
about to the Northwest in the Night, and there was not one Swallow to be seen.

Certain it is, that the Swallows neither come hither merely for warm Weather,
nor retire merely from Cold: they, like the Shoals of Fish in the Sea, pursue
their Prey; being a voracious Creature, and feeding as they fly; for their Food
is the Insects, of which, in our Summer Evenings, in damp and moist Places, the
Air is full; and when cold Weather comes in, and kills the Insects, then
Necessity compels the Swallows to quit us, and follow their Food to some other
Climate.

This passing and repassing of the Swallows is observed nowhere so much as on
this Eastern Coast; namely from above Harwich to the East Point of Norfolk,
called Wintertonness, North; which is opposite to Holland. We know nothing of
them any farther North; the Passage of the Sea being, as I suppose, too broad
from Flambro' Head, and the Shore of Holderness in Yorkshire, etc.

This Part of England is remarkable for being the first where the Feeding and
Fattening of Sheep and other Cattle, with Turnips, was first practiced in
England, which is made a very great Part of the Improvement of their Lands to
this Day; and from whence the Practice is spread over most of the East and
South Part of England, to the great enriching of the Farmers, and Increase of
fat Cattle: and though some have objected against the Goodness of the Flesh thus
fed with Turnips, and have fansied it would taste of the Root; yet upon
Experience it is found, that there is no Reason for this Fancy.

The County of Suffolk is particularly famous for furnishing the City of
London, and all the Counties round, with Turkeys; insomuch that more Turkeys
are bred in this County, and the Part of Norfolk that joins to it, for Sale,
than in all the rest of England.

Nor will this be found an inconsiderable Article, if it be true, that 300
Droves of Turkeys have passed, in one Season, over Stratford-bridge on the
River Stour, on the Road from Ipswich to London; each Drove generally
containing from 300 to 1000 Turkeys, which at 500, one with another, will be
150,000 in all; and yet the Numbers which are driven by New Market-heath, and
the open Country, and the Forest, and also those by Sudbury and Clare, are much
greater.

For the further Supplies of the Markets of London with Poultry, in which these
Countries particularly abound, they have within these few Years found it
practicable to make the Geese travel on foot too, and prodigious Numbers are
brought up to London in like Droves from the farthest Parts of Norfolk, even
from the Fen-Country, about Lynn, Downham, Wisbich, and the Washes; as also
from all the East Side of Norfolk and Suffolk; and it is very frequent now to
meet 1000, or 2000, in a Drove. They begin to drive them generally in August,
when the Harvest is almost over, that the Geese may feed on the Stubble as they
go. Thus they hold on to the End of October, when the Roads begin to be too
stiff and deep for their broad Feet and short Legs to march in.

Besides such Methods of driving these Creatures on Foot, they have of late
invented a new kind of Carriage, being Carts formed on purpose, with four
Stories or Stages, to put the Poultry in, one above another, whereby one Cart
will carry a very great Number; and for the smoother going, they drive with two
Horses abreast, like a Coach; thus quartering the Road for the Ease of the
Poultry, and changing Horses, they travel Night and Day; so that they bring the
Fowls 70, 80, or 100 Miles in two Days and one Night: The Horses are fastened
together by a Piece of Wood lying cross-wise upon their Necks, by which they
are kept even and together, and the Driver sits on the Top of the Cart, as in
the public Carriages for the Army, etc.

In this manner vast Numbers of Turkey-poults and Chickens are carried to
London every Year, which yield a good Price at Market; and more out of this
County than any other Part of England, which is the Reason of my speaking of it
here.

In this Part, which we call High Suffolk, there are not so many Families of
Gentry or Nobility, as in the other Side of the Country: But it is observed,
that though their Seats are not here, their Estates are; and the Pleasure of West
Suffolk is much of it supported by the Wealth of High Suffolk: For the Richness
of the Lands, and Application of the People to all Kinds of Improvement, are
scarce credible. The Farmers also are so very considerable, and their Farms and
Dairies so large, that it is very frequent for a Farmer to have 1000 l. Stock
upon his Farm in Cows only.

From Southwould, Coast-wise, I proceeded to Leostoff, a considerable
Market Town, standing near the Sea. It is indifferently well built. The Church,
which is situate near a Mile on the West Side of the Town, is a good Building;
but for the Ease of its Inhabitants, there is a Chapel in the Town, wherein
divine Service is sometimes celebrated. The Ness below the North-end of the
Town is (since the washing away of Eastonness) the most Eastern Point of Land
in Great Britain. Its principal Trade is Fishing for Herrings and Maycril. It
has a noted Market weekly on Wednesdays; and two small Fairs yearly, the one on
the 1st Day of May, and the other on the 29th of September. Besides the present
Chapel, here was formerly, at the South-end of the Town, a Chapel called
Good-cross-chapel, which has long since been destroyed by the Sea. This Town,
having been Part of the ancient Demesnes of the Crown, has a Charter, and a
Town-seal: But the greatest Privilege they now enjoy from their Charter, is,
that of not serving on Juries, either at the Sessions or Assizes.

From High Suffolk, I passed the Waveney, near Schole-Inn, and so came into
NORFOLK.

But, I believe, Sir, you will allow, that I have written enough in all
Conscience for one Letter. I will therefore only further add, that I am,

Your humble Servant.

LETTER II. CONTAINING A Description of the Counties of NORFOLK and CAMBRIDGE,
and that Part of ESSEX not touched on in the former.
SIR,
IN my Journey from High Suffolk, to Norfolk, I saw at Redgrave (the Seat of
the Family) a beautiful Monument of that excellent Judge Sir John Holt, with
the following Inscription upon it. M. S. D. Johannis Holt, Equitis Aur. Totius
Angliae in Banco Regis per 21 Annos continuos Regi, Annaeque Reginae,
Consiliarii perpetui; Libertatis ac Legum Anglicarum Assertoris, Vindicis,
Custodis, Vigilis, Acris, and Intrepidi. Frater Unicus and Haeres Optime de se
Merito Posuit. Die Martii Vto. 1709. sublatus est ex Oculis nostris. Natus 30
Decembris, Anno 1640. In English thus: Sacred to the Memory of Sir John Holt,
Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, for the Space of 21 Years
successively, and of the Privy Council to King William and Queen Anne. A
vigilant, penetrating and intrepid Assertor, Vindicator and Guardian of the
Liberty and Laws of England.

Rowland, his only Brother and Heir, erected this Monument to him, who deserved
all things at his Hands. He departed this Life the fifth Day of March, Anno
1709. And was born the 30th of December, Anno 1642.



When we come into Norfolk, we see a Face of Diligence spread over the whole
Country; the vast Manufactures carried on chiefly by the Norwich Weavers,
employ all the Country round in spinning Yarn for them; and also use many
thousand Packs of Yarn, which they receive from other Countries, even from as
far as Yorkshire and Westmorland, of which I shall speak in its Place.

This Side of Norfolk is very populous, and filled with a great Number of
considerable Market Towns; insomuch that between the Borders of Suffolk and the
City of Norwich on this Side, which is not above 22 Miles in Breadth, are the
following Market Towns, viz. Thetford, Dis, Harling, Bucknam, Hingham, West
Deerham, Attleboro', Windham, Harleston, East Deerham, Watton, Loddon, etc.
Most of these Towns are very populous and large; but that which is most
remarkable is, that the whole Country round them is interspersed with Villages
so large, and so full of People, that they are equal to Market Towns in other
Counties.

An eminent Weaver of Norwich gave me a Scheme of their Trade on this Occasion,
by which, calculating from the Number of Looms at that time employed in the
City of Norwich only, he made it appear very plain, that there were 120,000
People busied in the Woollen and Silk Manufactures of that City only; not that
the People all lived in the City, though Norwich is very large and populous; but
they were employed for spinning the Yarn used for such Goods as were all made
in that City.

This shows the wonderful Extent of the Norwich Manufacture, or Stuff-weaving
Trade, by which so many thousand Families are maintained.

This Throng of Villages continues through all the East Part of the Country,
which is of the greatest Extent, and where the Manufacture is chiefly carried
on: If any Part of it be thin of Inhabitants, it is the West Part, drawing a
Line from about Brandon, South, to Walsingham, North. This Part of the Country
indeed is full of open Plains, and somewhat sandy and barren, but yet feeds
great Flocks of good Sheep.

NORWICH is the Capital of the County, and the Center of all the Trade and
Manufactures which I have just mentioned; an ancient, large, rich, and populous
City: If a Stranger was only to ride through or view the City of Norwich on
ordinary Days, he would be induced to think it a Town without Inhabitants; but
on the contrary, if he was to view the City, either on a Sabbath Day, or on any
public Occasion, he would wonder where all the People could dwell, the
Multitude is so great: But the Case is this; the Inhabitants being all busy at
their Manufactures, dwell in their Garrets at their Looms, and in their
Combing-shops, as they call them, Twisting-mills, and other Workhouses; almost
all the Works they are employed in, being done within Doors. There are in this
City 32 Parishes, besides the Cathedral, and a great many Meeting Houses of
Dissenters of all Denominations. The Castle is ancient and decayed, and now for
many Years past made use of for a Gaol.

This City, as it is said, was built by the Saxons out of the Ruins of Venta
Icenorum, now called Caster, where some Years since were found several Roman
Urns. In the Time of the Saxons it was the principal Seat of the East Angles,
and was reduced to Ashes by Sueno the Dane. It was re-edified, and Famine only
compelled it to yield to William the Conqueror.

The famous Rebellion of Kett, the Tanner of Windham, in the Reign of Edward
VI. reduced it again to a ruinous State; but it was happily restored by Queen
Elizabeth, who sent hither Part of the Flemings, that came over from the cruel
Persecution of the Duke of Alva; to whose Industry and Example is owing the
rich Manufacture of Stuffs, for which this City is so famous.

The Walls of this City are reckoned three Miles in Circumference, taking in
more Ground than the City of London, within the Walls; but much of that Ground
lies open in Pasture-fields and Gardens; nor does it seem to be, like some
ancient Places, a decayed declining Town, the Walls only marking out its
ancient Dimensions; for we do not see room to suppose, that it was ever larger
or more populous than it is now. But the Walls seem to be placed, as if it was
expected, that the City would in time increase sufficiently to fill them up
with Buildings. There are 12 large Gates, which give Entrance to the City.

The Cathedral is a fine Fabric, and the Spire-Steeple beautiful, and, next
Salisbury, the highest in England. It is not ancient, the Bishop's See having
been first at Thetford, from whence it was not translated hither till the 12th
Century; yet the Church has so many Antiquities in it, that our late great
Scholar and Physician, Sir Thomas Brown, thought it worth his while to write a
whole Book to collect the Monuments and Inscriptions in this Church, to which I
refer the Reader. It has an Hospital in it, for 100 poor Men and Women, and a
fine Market-cross. That called Bridewell is a large and most beautiful Building
of square Flint.

The River Yare runs through it, and is navigable thus far without the Help of
Locks or Stops; and being increased by other Waters, passes afterward through
a long Track of the richest Meadows, and the largest, take them all together,
that are anywhere in England, lying for 30 Miles in Length, from this City to
Yarmouth, including the Return of the said Meadows on the Bank of the Waveney,
South, and on the River Thyrn, North.

There are Six large Bridges over the River running through the City, called
Hellesden, Coslany, Blackfriars, Tye-bridge, White-friers, and Bishopsgate
Bridges; and to repair these Bridges, as also the Walls and Gates, and the City
Wastes, Stathes and Wharfs, (which were become so ruinous, that the ordinary
Revenue of the City was insufficient for that Purpose) an Act of Parliament
passed in the Year 1725-6. which laid diverse Tolls and Imposts on particular
Goods and Merchandises brought into the City; the Produce of which were also to
repair the great Roads leading from Norwich toward London; by which means
these Roads, Bridges, Walls, etc. were put into good Condition, and kept so.

One thing is proper to be mentioned here, which History accounts not for. It
is this: The River Waveney is a considerable River, and of a deep and full
Chanel, navigable for large Barges as high as Beccles and Bungay; it runs for a
Course of about 50 Miles, between the two Counties of Suffolk and Norfolk, as a
Boundary to both; and pushing forward, though with a gentle Stream, no one would
doubt, when they see the River growing broader and deeper, and going directly
toward the Sea, even to the Edge of the Beach, and within a Mile of the main
Ocean, but that it would make its Entrance into the Sea at that Place, and
afford a noble Harbor for Ships at the Mouth of it; when, on a sudden, the
Land rising high by the Seaside, crosses the Head of the River, like a Dam,
checks the whole Course of it, and it returns, bending its Course West, for two
Miles, or thereabouts; and then turning North, through another long Course of
Meadows, (joining to those just now mentioned) seeks out the River Yare, joins
its Water with hers, and both find their Way to the Sea together.

Some of our Historians tell a long fabulous Story of this River's being once
open, and a famous Harbor for Ships belonging to the Town of Leostof
adjoining; but that Yarmouth envying the Prosperity of Leostof, made War upon
them; and that after many bloody Battles, as well by Sea as by Land, they came
at last to a decisive Action at Sea with their respective Fleets; but the
Leostof Fleet being overthrown, and utterly destroyed, the Yarmouth Men either
actually stopped up the Mouth of the said River, or obliged the vanquished
Leostof Men to do it themselves, and bound them never to attempt to open it
again.

I see no Authority for this Relation, neither do the Relators agree either in
the Time or in the Particulars of the Fact.

In this vast Tract of Meadows are fed a prodigious Number of Black Cattle,
which are said to produce the fattest Beef, though not the largest, in England;
and the Quantity is so great, as that they not only supply the City of Norwich,
the Town of Yarmouth, and the County adjacent, but send great Quantities of
them weekly, in all the Winter Season, to London.

And this in particular is worthy Remark, That the gross of all the Scots
Cattle, which come yearly into England, are brought to a small Village lying
North of the City of Norwich, called St. Faith's, where the Norfolk Grasiers go
and buy them.

These Scots Runts, as they call them, coming out of the cold and barren
Mountains of the Highlands in Scotland, feed so eagerly on the rich Pasture in
these Marshes, that they thrive in an unusual manner, and grow very fat; and
the Beef is so delicious for Taste, that the Inhabitants prefer them to the
English Cattle, which are much larger and fairer to look at. Some have told me,
and I believe with Truth, that there are above 40,000 of these Scots Cattle fed
in this County every Year, and most of them in the Marshes between Norwich,
Beccles, and Yarmouth.

Yarmouth is an ancient Town, much older than Norwich; and though not extending
over so much Ground, yet better built, and more complete, and not much inferior
in Number of Inhabitants; and for Wealth, Traffic, and Advantage of its
Situation, infinitely superior to Norwich.

It is situated on a Peninsula between the River Yare and the Sea; the two last
lying parallel to one another, and the Town in the Middle: The River lies on
the West Side of the Town, and being grown very large and deep, by the
Receiving of all the Rivers on this side the County, forms the Haven: and the
Town facing to the West also, and open to the River, makes the finest Quay in
England, if not in Europe, at least equalling that of Marseilles itself.

The Ships ride here so close, as it were, keeping up one another, with their
Head-fasts on Shore, that for half a Mile together, they go cross the Stream
with their Boltsprits over the Land, their Bows or Heads touching the very
Wharf; so that one may walk from Ship to Ship as on a floating Bridge, all
along by the Shore-side. The Quay reaching from the Drawbridge almost to the
South-gate, is so spacious and wide, that in some Places it is near 100 Yards
from the Houses to the Wharf. In this pleasant and agreeable Range of Houses
are some very magnificent Buildings, and, among the rest, the Custom-house and
Town Hall, and some Merchants Houses, which look like little Palaces, rather
than the Dwelling-houses of private Men.

The greatest Defect of this beautiful Town seems to be, that though it is very
rich, and increasing in Wealth and Trade, and consequently in People, there is
not Room to enlarge it by new Buildings; being precluded on the West and
South-sides by the River, and on the East Side by the Sea, so that there is no
Room but on the North-end without the Gate; and there the Land is not very
agreeable: but had they had a larger Space within the Gates, there would before
now, have been many spacious Streets of Buildings erected, as we see is done in
some other thriving Towns in England.

During the Fishing-fair, as they call it, one sees the Land covered with
People, and the River with Barks and Boats, busy Day and Night, landing and
carrying off the Herrings, which they catch here in almost incredible
Quantities. I happened to be there during their Fishing-fair, when I told, in
one Tide, One hundred and ten Barks and fishing Vessels coming up the River,
all laden with Herrings, taken the Night before; and this, over and above what
was brought on Shore on the Dean (that is the Seaside of the Town) by open
Boats, which they call The Cobles are open Boats, which come from the North,
from Scarbro', Whitby, etc. and come to Yarmouth to let themselves out to fish
for the Merchants during the Fair-time.
Cobles, and which often bring in two or three A Last is ten Barrels, each
Barrel containing a thousand Herrings.
Lasts of Fish at a Time. The The Barks come from the Coast of Kent and Sussex,
as from Folkston, Dover, and Rye in Kent, and from Brighthelmston in Sussex,
and let themselves out to fish for the Merchants during the said Fair, as the
Cobles do from the North.
Barks often bring ten Lasts apiece.

This Fishing-fair began on Michaelmas-day, and lasts all the Month of October,
by which time the Herrings draw off to Sea, shoot their Spawn, and are no more
fit for the Merchants Business; at least not those that are taken hereabouts.

We have very different Accounts of the Quantity of Herrings caught here, in
this Season; some have said, that the Towns of Yarmouth and Leostoff only, have
taken 40,000 Lasts in a Season: I will not venture to confirm that Report; but
I have heard the Merchants themselves say, that they have cured 40,000 Barrels
of merchantable red Herrings in one Season, which (though far short of the other)
is a very considerable Article; and it is to be added, that these are over and
above all the Herrings consumed in the Country Towns of both those populous
Counties, for 30 Miles from the Sea, whither very great Quantities are carried
every Tide during the whole Season.

But this is only one Branch of the great Trade carried on in this Town;
another Part of its Commerce is in the exporting these Herrings after they are
cured; and for this its Merchants have a great Trade to Genoa, Leghorn, Naples,
Messina, and Venice, as also to Spain and Portugal; exporting likewise with
their Herrings great Quantities of Worsted Stuffs, and Stuffs made of Silk and
Worsted; Camblets, etc. the Manufactures of the neighboring City of Norwich,
and of the Places adjacent.

Besides this, they carry on a very considerable Trade with Holland, exporting
a vast Quantity of Woollen Manufactures every Year. Also they have a
Fishing-trade to the North Seas for white Fish, which from the Place are called
the North Sea Cod.

They have likewise a considerable Trade to Norway, and to the Baltic, from
whence they bring back Deals, and Fir Timber, Oaken Plank, Baulks, Spars, Oars,
Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, Canvas, and Sail-cloth; with all manner of Naval
Stores, for which they generally have a Consumption in their own Port, where
they build a very great Number of Ships every Year, besides refitting and
repairing the old.

Add to this the Coal-trade between Newcastle and the River of Thames, in which
they are so improved of late Years, that they have now a greater Share of it
than any other Town in England; and have quite worked the Ipswich Men out of
it, who had formerly the chief Share of the Colliery in their Hands.

For the carrying on all these Trades, they have a very great Number of Ships,
either of their own, or employed by them; and it may in some measure be judged
of by this, That in the Year 1697. I had an Account from the Town Register,
that there were then 1123 Sail of Ships using the Sea, belonging to the Town,
besides such Ships as the Merchants of Yarmouth might be concerned in, and be
Part-owners of, belonging to any other Ports.

To all this I must add, without Compliment to the Town, that the Merchants,
and even the generality of Traders of Yarmouth, have a very good Reputation in
Trade, as well Abroad as at Home, for fair and honorable Dealing; and their
Seamen, as well Masters as Mariners, are justly esteemed among the ablest and
most expert Navigators in England.

This Town, however populous and large, had till lately but one Parish Church,
dedicated to St. Nicolas, though it is very large. It has a high Spire, which is
an useful Sea-mark. It was built by that famous Bishop of Norwich, William
Herbert, who flourished in the Reign of William II. and Henry I. William of
Malmsbury calls him Vir pecuniosus, from the Works of Charity and Munificence,
which he has left as Witnesses of his immense Riches; for he built the
Cathedral Church, the Priory for 60 Monks, the Bishop's Palace, and the
Parish Church of St. Leonard, all in Norwich; this great Church at Yarmouth,
the Church of St. Margaret at Lynn, and of St. Mary at Elmham. He removed the
Episcopal See from Thetford to Norwich, and instituted the Cluniack Monks at
Thetford, and gave them, or built them, a House.

But in the Reigns of Queen Anne, and the late King George I. two Acts passed
for Building a new Church or Chapel of Ease in Yarmouth, and for enlightening
the Streets of the Town, and other Purposes, all which is performed in so
complete a manner as is worthy of the Place.

Also in the Year 1723. an Act passed for Clearing, Depthening, Repairing,
Extending, Maintaining and Improving the Haven and Piers of Yarmouth, and for
depthening and making more navigable the several Rivers emptying themselves at
that Town; and also for preserving of Ships wintering in the Haven from
Accidents by Fire: This Provision was a very necessary one; for the Haven is so
very commodious for the secure and safe lying of Ships in the Winter Season,
that several hundred Sail are yearly laid up and winter in it, which lie so
contiguous to one another, and so near the Houses, that in case of Fire, not
only the Ships, but the Town, would be in Danger of being totally destroyed.

Here is one of the finest Marketplaces, and the best served with Provisions
in England, London excepted. The Streets are all exactly strait from North to
South, from Lanes or Alleys, which they call Rows, crossing them in strait
Lines also from East to West; so that it is the most regular-built Town in
England, and seems as if it had been erected all at once upon one uniform Plan.

They have particular Privileges in this Town, and a Jurisdiction by which they
can try, condemn, and execute in especial Cases, without waiting for a Warrant
from Above; and this they exerted once very smartly, in executing a Captain of
one of the King's Ships of War in the Reign of King Charles II. for a Murder
committed in the Street; the Circumstance of which did indeed call for Justice:
but some thought they would not have ventured to exert their Power as they did;
however, I never heard that the Government resented it, or blamed them for it.

It is a very well governed Town; and I have nowhere in England observed the
Sabbath Day so exactly kept, or the Breach of it so constantly punished, as in
this Place, which I mention to their Honor.

From Yarmouth I resolved to pursue my first Design, viz. To view the Seaside
on this Coast, which is particularly noted for being one of the most dangerous
and most fatal to the Sailors in all Britain; and the more so, because of the
great Number of Ships which are continually going and coming this Way, in their
Passage between London and all the Northern Coasts of Great Britain.

The Reason of which is, that the Shore from the Mouth of the River of Thames
to Yarmouth Road, lies in a strait Line from South-south-east to
North-north-west, the Land being on the West or Larboard Side. From
Wintertonness, which is the utmost easterly Point of Land in the County of
Norfolk, and about four Miles beyond Yarmouth, the Shore falls off for near 60
Miles to the West, as far as Lynn and Boston, till the Shore of Lincolnshire
tends North again for about 60 Miles more, as far as the Humber; whence the
Coast of Yorkshire, or Holderness, which is the East Riding, shoots out again
into the Sea, to the Spurn, and to Flambro' Head, as far East almost as the
Shore of Norfolk had given back at Winterton, making a very deep Gulf, or Bay,
between those two Points of Winterton and the Spurn Head; so that the Ships
going North are obliged to stretch away to Sea from Wintertonness; and leaving
the Sight of Land in the deep Bay I have mentioned, that reaches to Lynn, and
the Shore of Lincolnshire, they go, as I observed, North or still
North-north-west, to meet the Shore of Holderness, which, as I said, runs out
into the Sea again at the Spurn; this they leave also, and the first Land they
make, is called as above, Flambro' Head; so that Wintertonness and Flambro'
Head are the two Extremes of this Course. There is, indeed, the Spurn Head
between; but as it lies too far in toward the Humber, they keep out to the
North to avoid coming near it.

In like manner the Ships which come from the North, leave the Shore at
Flambro' Head, and stretch away South-south-east for Yarmouth Roads; and the
first Land they make is Wintertonness, as above. Now, the Danger of the Place
is this: If the Ships coming from the North are taken with a hard Gale of Wind
from the South-east, or from any Point between North-east and South-east, so
that they cannot weather Wintertonness, they are thereby kept within that deep
Bay; and if the Wind blows hard, are often in Danger of running on Shore upon
the Rocks about Cromere, on the North-coast of Norfolk, or stranding upon the
flat Shore between Cromere and Wells. All the Relief they have, is good
Ground-tackle to ride it out, which is very hard to do there, the Sea coming
very high upon them; or if they cannot ride it out, then to run into the Bottom
of the great Bay, to Lynn or Boston, which is a very difficult and desperate
Push: so that sometimes in this Distress whole Fleets have been lost here all
together.

In the same Danger are Ships going Northward; for if, after passing by
Winterton, they are taken short with a North-east Wind, and cannot put back
into the Roads, which very often happens, they are driven upon the same Coast,
and embay'd just as the latter. The Danger on the North-part of this Bay is not
the same, because if Ships going or coming should be taken short on this side
Flambro', there is the River Humber open to them, and several good Roads to
have recourse to; as Burlington Bay, Grimsby Road, the Spurn Head, and others,
where they ride under Shelter.

The Dangers of this Place being thus considered, it is no wonder, that upon the
Shore beyond Yarmouth, there are no less than Four Light-houses kept flaming
every Night, besides the Lights at Castor, North of the Town, and at Goulston,
South. All which are to direct the Sailors to keep a good Offing, in case of
bad Weather, and to prevent their running into Cromere-bay, which the Seamen
call the Devil's Throat.

As I went by Land from Yarmouth North-west, along the Shore toward Cromere
aforesaid, and was not then fully Master of the Reason of these things, I was
surprised to see, in all the Way from Winterton, that the Farmers, and Country
People had scarce a Barn, Shed, Stable, or Pales to their Yards and Gardens, or
a Hog-stye, or Necessary-house, but what was built of old Planks, Beams, Wales
and Timber, etc. the deplorable Wrecks of Ships, and Ruins of Mariners and
Merchants Fortunes; and in some Places were whole Yards filled, and piled up
very high, with the same Stuff laid up for the like building Purposes.

About the Year 1692. there was a melancholy Example of what I have said of
this Place: A Fleet of 200 Sail of light Colliers went out of Yarmouth Roads
with a fair Wind, to pursue their Voyage, and were taken short with a Storm of
Wind at North-east. After they were past Wintertonness, a few Leagues, some of
them, whose Masters made a better Judgment of Things, or who were not so far
out as the rest, tacked and put back in time, and got safe into the Roads; but
the rest, pushing on, in hopes to keep out to Sea, and weather it, were by the
Violence of the Storm driven back, when they were too far embay'd to weather
Wintertonness, a above; and so were forced to run West, every one shifting for
themselves, as well as they could; some run away for Lynn Deeps, but few of
them (the Night being so dark) could find their Way thither; some, but very
few, rid it out, at a Distance; the rest, being above 140 Sail, were all driven
on Shore, and dashed to Pieces, and very few of the People on Board were saved.
At the very same unhappy Juncture, a Fleet of laden Ships were coming from the
North, and being just crossing the same Bay, were forcibly driven into it, not
able to weather the Ness, and so were involved in the same Ruin as the light
Fleet was; also some coasting Vessels laden with Corn from Lynn and Wells, and
bound for Holland, were with the same unhappy Luck just come out, to begin
their Voyage, and some of them lay at Anchor: these also met with the same
Misfortune, so that in the whole, above 200 Sail of Ships, and above 1000
People, were lost in the Disaster of that one miserable Night, very few
escaping.

Cromere is a Market Town close to the Shore of this dangerous Coast: I know
nothing it is famous for (besides its being thus the Terror of the Sailors)
except good Lobsters, which are taken on that Coast in great Numbers, and
carried to Norwich, and in such Quantities sometimes too, as to be conveyed by
Sea to London.

Farther within the Land, and between this Place and Norwich, are several good
Market Towns, and a great many Villages, all diligently applying to the Woollen
Manufacture, and the Country is exceeding fertile, as well in Corn as Pasture;
particularly, (which was very pleasant to see) the Pheasants were in such great
Plenty, as to be seen in the Stubble like Cocks and Hens; a Testimony though (by
the way) that the County had more Tradesmen than Gentlemen in it. Indeed this
Part is so entirely given up to Industry, that what with the Seafaring-men on
the one Side, and the Manufactures on the other, we saw no idle Hands here, but
every Man busy. Some of the principal of these Towns are; 1. Hickling and
North-Waltham, noted only for a Market each. 2. Alsham, a poor Town, noted for
Knitters. 3. Worsted, for the Invention and twisting of Yarn, so called; also
famed for Stockens and Stuffs. 4. Catton, noted for a brazen Hand being carried
before the Steward of the Demesne, instead of a Mace, and for a Bridge over the
Duze. 5. Reepham, for a good Malt-market; having no Church at all out of three:
for there are only the Ruins of one of them standing. 6. Holt, for giving two
Lord Mayors of the Name of Gresham (who were Brothers) to London, in 1537. and
1547. 7. Fakenham, noted for nothing at all, but formerly for having Salt Pits;
and, 8. St. Faiths, whither the Drovers bring their Black Cattle to sell to the
Norfolk Graziers, as I observed above.


Not far from Cromere is Gresham, the Birthplace of the generous Founder of
the Royal Exchange and Gresham Col^^ge, London.

From Cromere we rode on the Strand or open Shore to Weyburn Hope, the Shore so
flat, that in some Places the Tide ebbs out near two Miles From Weyburn West
lies Clye, where there are large Salt-works, and very good Salt made, which is
sold all over the County, and sometimes sent to Holland and (...) ^^^ick. From
Clye we go to Marham and to Wells, all Towns on the Coast, in each whereof
there is a very considerable Trade carried on with Holland for Corn, which that
Part of the County is very full of, besides the great Trade driver here from
Holland, back again; which I take to be a Trade carried on with much less
Honesty than Advantage, especially while the Art of Smuggling was so much in
Practice, which the Laws have of late rendered more difficult than it was; though
far from suppressing it.

The Seven Burnhams, which are so many small Towns called by the same Name, and
each employed in the same Holland Trade as Marham and Wells, lie on and near
the Seacoast to the North-west of Walsingham.

From the Seacoast we turned to the South-west, through Snetham, a small
Market Town, to Castle-Rising, an old decayed Borough Town, with hardly Ten
Families in it, which yet sends Two Members to Parliament; but shows a great
many Marks of Roman, Saxon, and Danish Antiquities in and about it.

On our Left we saw Walsingham, an ancient Town, famous for the old Ruins of a
Monastery there, and the Shrine of our Lady, as noted as that of St.
Thomas-a-Becket at Canterbury; hence called, Our Lady of Walsingham. Two Wells
here are still called by the Name of the Blessed Virgin.

Near this Place, at Raynham, is the Seat of the Lord Viscount Townshend; and
not far distant, at Houghton, that noble new-built one of Sir Robert Walpole;
the Gardens and Plantations of which are very large and beautiful.

The general Plan and Front of the House and Offices extend to 450 Feet; the
great Hall is a Circle of 40 Feet; the Salon 40 by 30 Feet; and all the other
Rooms in the four great Apartments are 18 Feet high; the Attick Story is 12
Feet high, and the Rustic Story the same, all above Ground, under which is an
entire Story of Cellars all arched. The Front to the great Entrance extends to
166 Feet, lying open to the Park. The Building is finished with two Towers,
dressed with two Rustic Venetian Windows. The Section of the great Hall all in
Stone, the most beautiful in England. The whole Building is of Stone, and
without pretending to excuse any seeming or real Defect, it may be truly said
to be a House of State and Convenience worthy of a Prince's Residence.

This stately Structure, begun in the Year 1722. was completely finished,
Inside and Outside, in the Year 1735. the noble Founder having had the singular
Felicity all the time to continue at the Helm of Affairs, as he does still,
Anno 1741.

On the Foundation-stone, placed in the South-east Angle, is this Inscription:
Hic me posuit ille WALPOLE, Quem tu non nescies, Posteritas; Fandamen ut essem
Demus In Agro Natali extruendae, die Maii, A. D. MDCCXXII. Faxit Deus, Postquam
nea urus aevi Dominus Diu laetatu fuerit, ab^luta, Incolumens tueantur
incolumes, Ad summam Diem, Et Nati Natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis. Which
may be Englished thus. Here that Sir ROBERT WALPOLE, with whom, O Posterity!
thou shall not be unacquainted, has fixed me to stand as the Foundation of a
Seat designed to be built in his native County, the 24th Day of May in the Year
1722. God grant, that after its Master, to a mature Old Age, shall have long
enjoyed it in Perfection, his latest Descendants may safely and securely
possess it to the End of Time.

The noble Founder had doubtless in his Thoughts, in this Inscription, the
uncertain State of Prime Ministers, and of the superb Structures built by them
in the Height of their Power in all Ages and Countries; and we hope the Merits
of him and his Descendants to their native Country may induce the Almighty to
give a Fiat to his Prayer.

We proceeded hence to Lynn, another rich and populous Port-town, well built,
and well situated, at the Mouth of the River Ouse; which has the greatest
Extent of inland Navigation, of any Port in England, London excepted. The
Reason whereof is, that more navigable Rivers empty themselves here into the
Sea, including the Washes, which are Branches of the same Port, than at any one
Mouth of Waters in England, except the Thames and the Humber. By these
navigable Rivers the Merchants of Lynn supply about six Counties wholly, and
three Counties in Part, with their Goods, especially Wine and Coals; viz. By
the little Ouse, they send their Goods to Brandon and Thetford; by the Lake, to
Mildenhall, Barton-Mills, and St. Edmundsbury; by the River Grant to Cambridge;
by the great Ouse itself, to Ely, to St. Ives, to St. Neots, to Barford-bridge,
and to Bedford; by the River Nine, to Peterboro'; by the Drains and Washes to
Wisbich, to Spalding, Market-deeping, and Stamford; besides the several
Counties, into which these Goods are carried by Land Carriage, from the Places
where the Navigation of those Rivers ends; which has given Rise to this
Observation on the Town of Lynn, That they bring in more Coals, than any
Seaport between London and Newcastle, and import more Wines than any Port in
England, except London and Bristol; their Trade to Norway, and to the Baltic
Sea, is also great in Proportion, and of late Years they have extended it
farther to the Southward.

There are many Gentry, and consequently more Gayety, in this Town than in
Yarmouth, or even Norwich, the Place abounding in very good Company; and indeed
it is so considerable, that it merits as particular a Description as the Nature
of this Work will admit; and which, therefore, I will give as succinctly as I
can.

To begin then: This Town was first called Lynn-Episcopi, as the Property of
the Bishop of Norwich, till the Dissolution of Monasteries by King Henry VIII.
when that Prince, becoming its Possessor, conferred on it the Name of Lynn
Regis.

It is situated toward the Mouth of the Great Ouse, encompassed with a deep
Trench, walled almost all round, containing about 2400 Houses, and divided by
four Rivulets arched over with about 15 Bridges. It extends along the East Side
of the River; which in high Spring-tides flows above 20 Feet perpendicular, and
is about the Breadth of the Thames above Bridge, for the Length of a Mile, and
is divided into nine Wards. On the North-end, toward the Sea, stands St.
Anne's Fort, with a Platform of 12 large Guns, commanding all Ships which pass
by the Harbor; and toward the Land, besides the Wall, there are nine regular
Bastions and a Ditch, nearly in the Form of a Semicircle, which make it above
half a Mile in Breadth. The Town is so ancient as to be supposed the same with
Maiden-Bower, according to several old Historians.

It has many remarkable Places, which deserve a more particular Description
than I have Room for: however, I shall touch upon them briefly; as, St.
Margaret's Church, the Town Hall, Bridewell, the Custom-house and Exchange, the
Market-cross, St. Nicolas's Chapel, All Saints Church, the Free School, the
Hospitals, the Statue of King James II. King John's Sword and Cup, the common
Stath-yard, the Lady's Mount, the public Libraries, the King's Stath-yard, and
other Remarkables, of which in their Order; and first of St. Margarets Church.

This Church, which was formerly an Abbey, and is one of the largest Parochial
Churches in England, is adorned with a very fair and high Lanthorn, covered
with Lead, containing the Clock-bell, lately cast, which may be heard all over
the Town. Its Height is 132 Feet. At the West End stands a Stone Tower, 82 Feet
high; and facing the Street a Moon-dial, designed to tell the Increase and
Decrease of that Planet, with the exact Hour of the Day* It moves by
Clock-work. Over the Tower is a Spire 193 Feet high in form of a Pyramid; near
to which is the Bell-tower built of Freestone, 86 Feet high, containing a Ring
of eight Bells. In this Church is kept the Bishop's Court, when he comes hither
on his Visitation.

The Townhouse, called Trinity-hall, is an ancient and noble Building, which
makes a fine Appearance.

Adjoining to it is the House of Correction called Bridewell, with Apartments
proper for the Reception of such as are put there; who beat and dress Hemp
during their Confinement.

The Exchange is a fair Structure of Freestone, with two Orders of Columns,
situated in the Middle of the Town, and built at the Expense of Sir John
Turner, Knight; and within it is the Custom-house, containing several
commodious Apartments.

The Market-house is a new Edifice of Freestone, in the modern Taste, 70 Feet
high, erected on four Steps, neatly adorned with Statues, and other
Embellishments; with an Inscription giving an Account of its former Condition,
and present Rebuilding.

St. Nicolas's Chapel is very ancient, and stands at the North-end of the Town.
It is an Appendage to St. Margaret's, and is esteemed one of the fairest and
largest religious Fabrics in England; it has a Bell-tower of Freestone, and a
pyramidical octangular Spire over it, both which together are 170 Feet from the
Ground.

All Saints Church, in South-Lynn, belonged formerly to the Carmelite and White
Friars, on the Ruins of whose Monastery it is built. Though not large, it is
neat, solid and regular, in form of a Cross, within a Churchyard well walled
in.

On the North-side of St. Margaret's Churchyard is the Free School, a strong
and beautiful Building.

The only Fabric formerly belonging to any religious Order, now standing, is
the Grey-Fryers Steeple, a noted Sea-mark; which was repaired and amended out
of the Ruins of a demolished Chapel in the Year 1539. It may not be amiss to
mention here a remarkable and laudable Order, that was made in the Year 1588.
That on every first Monday in the Month there should be a Meeting of the Mayor,
Aldermen, some of the Common Council, and the Preachers, in order to settle
Peace and Quietness between Man and Man, and to decide all manner of
Controversies: this was called The Feast of Reconciliation.

In the Parish of All Saints is a small Hospital for four poor Men to live
rent-free. St. Mary Magdalen's Hospital, founded in the Reign of King Stephen,
for a Prior, and 12 Brethren and Sisters, continued in a flourishing Condition
about 400 Years; and devolved to the Crown at the making the Statute for
Dissolution of religious Houses in the Reign of Edward VI. in whose Time it was
robbed, and almost levelled with the Ground, by Kett's Mutineers, at their
Return from their frustrated Attempt to surprise Lynn: so that it remained
destitute of Brethren and Sisters, except some poor People, whom the Mayor and
Burgesses maintained with Design to support the ancient Hospital, till King
James I. upon Petition restored them their Lands, granted them many Privileges,
and incorporated them: but in the Year 1643. it was a second time destroyed by
Fire by the Earl of Manchester's Forces, when they besieged Lynn, then standing
out for the King. In the Year 1649. the Corportation rebuilt it very
commodiously, as at present, with two Courts, a Chapel, and convenient
Apartments for the Master, Brethren, and Sisters, and several Inscriptions
commemorating the late Disaster. It is now committed to the Care of Two of the
Elder Aldermen, chosen for that Purpose by the other Governors.

There is in the great Marketplace a Statue erected in the Year 1686. to the
Honor of King James II. with an Inscription that may serve for a Satire on the
undue Compliments which are frequently paid to Princes, during the Time of
their Prosperity. It stands on a Pedestal, which has several Embellishments,
and is enclosed within a Palisade of Iron. The Inscription is as follows: Non
immemor Quantum Divinis invictiss. Principis Virtutibus debeat, Hanc Regiae
Majestatis Effigiem, Aeternum Fidei et Obsequii Monumentum, erexit S. P. Q. L.
Anno Salutis 1686. In English, thus: The Aldermen and Common Council of Lynn,
not forgetting how much they owe to the divine Virtues of the invincible King
James II. as a lasting Monument of their Faith and Loyalty, have erected this
Statue of his Royal Majesty, Anno 1686.

In 1682. an old ruinous Building, which was once a Chapel, was, by the
Corporation, and other Inhabitants, made a public Receptacle for poor Children
to learn to spin Wool: here they are also taught to read. It is now, by Act of
Parliament, settled and vested in the Guardians of the Poor.

There was a Church formerly in the Town, dedicated to St. John, and belonging
to the Hospital of that Name, both which are alike extinct.

The Corporation boasts of having been presented by King John with a very rich
double-gilt Cup and Cover, weighing 73 Ounces, which is preserved to this Day,
and used on public Occasions; and at the same time a large Sword, with a
Silver Mounting, from his own Side, as is engraven on the Inscription on the
Hilt.

The Entrance into the common Stath-yard from the Tuesday Market is by two
large Gate-ways with habitable Rooms over them. It is a beautiful large square
Area, with a commodious Quay or Wharf, surrounded with Warehouses and
Granaries for all sorts of Merchandise with spacious Vaults.

At a small Distance from the Town, stands a ruinous Pile, called The Lady's
Mount, or Red Mount; wherein formerly was a Chapel dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin, which served as a Receptacle for Pilgrims traveling this Way toward
the celebrated Convent of Our Lady at Walsingham.

The Library at St. Nicolas was erected by a voluntary Subscription of several
Hundred Pounds; to which the late Lord Townshend, (who took his Title of Baron
from this Town) Sir Robert Walpole, Sir Charles Turner, and Robert Britiffe,
Esquire deceased, were considerable Benefactors. There is also another Library at
St. Margaret's, to which the late Thomas Thurlin, D. D. President of St. John's
in Cambridge, bequeathed all his Books; and also left an Exhibition of Six
Pounds a Year to a poor Scholar, who should go from the Grammar School to St.
John's College in Cambridge; and forty Shillings yearly toward the Clothing
three of the poorest Inhabitants of Gaywood, etc.

The Inhabitants of Lynn suffer great Inconvenience from the want of
fresh water Springs within the Town; with which Element, however, they are
supplied from a River running by Gaywood, and by leaden Pipes from Middleton
and Mintling.

The Church of St. Edmund, in North-Lynn, was long ago entirely swallowed up by
the Sea.

The King's Stath-yard is a very handsome Square, with Brick Buildings fronting
each Way; in the Center of which stands the Statue of James I. in a Nich
fronting the West. Here the greatest Part of imported Wines are landed, as it
has a convenient Quay, and large Wine-vaults.

At the South-end of the Town stood an Oil-mill, framed in Holland, and brought
over hither near 100 Years ago. It gave a pleasant Prospect to every Part of
the Town; but in the Year 1737. was consumed by Fire

From what has been said, it will be observed, that the Situation of this Town
renders it capable of being made very strong; and in the late Wars it was so, a
Line of Fortification being drawn round it at a Distance from the Walls; the
Ruins, or rather Remains of which Works appear to this Day; nor would it be a
hard Matter to restore the Bastions, with the Ravelins and Counterscarp, upon
any sudden Emergency, to a good State of Defense; especially because they are
able to fill all their Ditches with Water from the Sea, in such a manner as
that it cannot be drawn off.

They pass over here in Boats into the Fen Country, and over the famous Washes
into Lincolnshire; but the Passage is very dangerous and uneasy; for here
Passengers often miscarry, and are lost; but then it is usually on their
venturing at improper times, and without the Guides, which if they would be
persuaded not to do, they would very rarely fail of going or coming safe.

From Lynn, I bent my Course Southward to Downham, where is an ugly wooden
Bridge over the Ouse; at which, as Hollingshead informs us, in October 1568.
were taken 17 monstrous Fishes, from 20 to 27 Feet long.

When we were at Downham, we took a Turn to the ancient Town of Thetford,
situated partly in Norfolk, and partly in Suffolk. It was raised on the Ruins
of the ancient Sitomagus, which was destroyed by the Danes. It is at present
but meanly built; but by the Ruins of Churches and Monasteries still remaining,
appears to have been formerly of great Account; and even so far back as the
Time of King Edward the Confessor, it had 947 Burgesses, and in that of William
the Conqueror 720 Mansions. On the Suffolk Side there now remain the Ruins of
six Churches and Monasteries, and there were several others in the Town; but
now there are but three Parish Churches standing entire, one on the Suffolk,
and two on the Norfolk Side. It is, however, a Town Corporate, governed by a
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council; has three annual Fairs, a plentiful weekly
Market, and is a kind of See suffragan to that of Norwich. In the 7th Year of
King James I. an Act passed for the Founding of an Hospital, a Grammar School,
and Maintenance of a Preacher in this Town for ever, according to the last Will
of Sir Richard Fulmarston: And Sir Joseph Williamson, Secretary of State to
King Charles II. built here a new Council-house, and was otherwise a good
Benefactor to the Place. The Lent Assizes are usually held here.

From Thetford we crossed the Ouse, to Brandon, which gives the Title of an
English Duke to Duke Hamilton of Scotland. This is no ill-built Town, and has a
good Church belonging to it. It gave a Lord Mayor to London, Anno 1445; viz.
Sir Simon Air, Draper, who built Leadenhall for the Use of the City, and left
5000 Marks, a very great Sum in those Days, to charitable Uses. Brandon has
lost its Market, but stands conveniently upon the Ouse, over which it has a
Bridge, and a Ferry, to convey Goods to and from the Isle of Ely, to which we
directly bent our Course.

We made an Excursion from Ely Northwards up to the Fens; but we saw nothing
that Way worth our Curiosity, or remarking, but deep Roads, vast Drains and
Dykes of Water, which are all navigable; but with all this, a very rich Soil,
bearing a great Quantity of Hemp, but a bad unwholesome Air.

Wisbich, however, which lies on the Northern Extremity of the County, has not
only been of Note in the Conqueror's Time, who built a Castle here; but is now
a well built Market Town, has a good Town Hall, and is esteemed the best
Trading-town in the Isle, as having the Convenience of good Water-carriage to
London, whither they send great Quantities of Oil and Butter, and bring back
all sorts of Commodities, with which the whole Isle is furnished; for it has a
plentiful Market.

A good way lower down, to the South, are the two Market Towns of Mersh and
Thorney; the first is very inconsiderable, the other is delightfully situated;
and the Land about it very fruitful in Grass and Trees.

The Isle of Ely is encompassed with the Ouse, and other Waters. The City is
situated on a Hill, in the Middle of a great Plain. It is full of Springs,
insomuch that in the principal Street, in the East Part of the Town, there are
Wells bricked up Knee-high almost at every hundred Yards, which the whole Year
generally overflow from one to another, all the way down the Declivity of the
Hill on which the Town stands. The Soil is exceeding rich, and the City is
encompassed with Gardens, the Produce of which is so excellent, that it
furnishes all the County for 20 Miles round, even as far as Cambridge, and St.
Ives; the former of which has almost all its Garden-stuff from hence. Great
Quantities of Strawberries are cultivated here, particularly of the white Wood
sort.

The most remarkable thing that I observed of the Minster was, that it is seen
for many Miles round; but is so old, that it seems to totter with every high
Gust of Wind.

On the East Side of the Came, a little below Ely, stands Soham, a little
Market Town toward the Borders of Suffolk, near the Marshes, which were
formerly dangerous to pass; but now there is a Causey made, which leads very
securely over them. Here are the Remains of an ancient Church, which was ruined
by the Danes.

We proceeded from hence to Newmarket. Near Snaybell, as we went, we saw a
noble Seat of Admiral Russel, created Earl of Orford, for the glorious Victory
obtained under his Command over the French Fleet, and the burning their Ships
at La Hogue.

The Situation of this House is low, and on the Edge of the Fen Country; but
the Building is fine, the Apartments noble, and the Gardens well-finished. On
the Earl's Death it devolved to Samuel Sandys, Esquire in Right of his Wife, one of
the Earl's Heirs, who now possesses it.

Arriving at Newmarket in the Month of October, I had the Opportunity to see
the Horse-races, and a great Concourse of the Nobility and Gentry, as well from
London, as from all Parts of England; but they were all so intent, so eager, so
busy upon what is called the sharping Part of the Sport, of Wagers and Bets,
that to me they seemed rather like so many Horse-coursers in Smithfield, than
Persons of Dignity and Quality, who descend so low as even to circumvent one
another; and, if I may speak it, pick one another's Pockets. To see a Person of
Distinction who, perhaps, being ennobled, his Word of Honor, by the Laws of
the Land, is to be esteemed and received with equal Sanction as an Oath in our
Courts of Justice, level himself with a Groom, or a Riding-boy, and put his
Credit and Honor in his Hands with a Bribe, to betray his Master and his
Trust, is a thing scarce credible among those who are really Men of Honor; and
yet it is too often the Case, to the indelible Shame of Men of Rank and Quality
be it spoken in particular, and to the Reproach of the Nation in general! How
different is this Conduct from that of those in the Circus at Rome? How much
more different from those who gained so much Honor in the Grecian Races? What
Pindar could be found in these Days to celebrate them? What must his Subject
be, Tricks and Circumventions! Alas! How degenerate! And yet these Races were
instituted with a very good Intent, to raise an Emulation in our Nobility and
Gentry, to keep up and preserve a Race of good Horses, in Honor of the Nation
in general; but as the Institution is debased, it is not the best Horse that
wins the Race; but that which is destined for it by a Combination.

Before I was let into the Secret, as it is called, which is indeed nothing but
the knavish Part of the Sport, I was much diverted with these Races; but when I
was, I rejoiced not a little at the Regulation that it has met with from the
Power that only had Authority to make it. For this Diversion becoming a public
Nuisance, by spreading itself in little Matches all over the Kingdom, the
Legislature took Cognizance of it, and in the 13th of King George II. a Law
passed, which injoins as follows; viz. That none but the Owners of Horses shall
enter them, and but one Horse at a Time. That no Plate under 50 l. Value shall
be run for, on Penalty of 200 l. -- and 100 l. to such as shall advertise,
print, or publish any Advertisement of a Plate to be run for of less Value than
50 l. Five Years old Horses to carry 10 Stone; Six, 11; Seven, 12; on the
Forfeiture of the Horse, and 200 l. The Race to be begun and ended in one Day.
Matches to be at Newmarket; and Black-Hambleton, Yorkshire, only; on Penalty of
200 l. But Gifts left for annual Races not to be altered. Somersetshire
Penalties to go to Bath Hospital. Entrance Money to be paid to the second-best
Horse.


I went in the Intervals of the Sport to see the fine Seats of the Gentlemen in
the neighboring County; for this Part of Suffolk, being an open champain
Country, and in a healthy Air, is formed for Pleasure, and all kinds of rural
Diversion; Nature, as it were, inviting the Gentlemen to visit her, where she
is plentifully furnished to receive them; and the Country is accordingly in a
manner covered with fine Palaces of the Nobility, and pleasant Seats of the
Gentry.

Euston-hall, the Seat of the Duke of Grafton, lies in the open Country toward
the Side of Norfolk, not far from Thetford; a Place capable of all that is
pleasant and delightful in Nature, and greatly improved by Art.

From thence I went to Rushbrook, formerly the Seat of the noble Family of
Jermyns, lately Lord Dover, and now of the House of Davers. Then we saw
Brently, the Seat of the Earl of Dysert, and the ancient Palace of my Lord
Cornwallis, with several others most agreeably situated, and adorned with the
Beauties-both of Art and Nature.

Newmarket is a handsome well built Town, and being a Thorough-fare, reaps no
small Advantage by that means as well as from the Races. It consists chiefly of
one long Street, the North-side of which is in Suffolk, and the South in
Cambridgeshire. The King has a House of his own, where he resides when he
thinks fit to come to the Races. The Town has two Churches belonging to it, and
a Free School endowed by King Charles II.

We entered Cambridgeshire out of Suffolk with all the Advantage that can be
imagined; just upon those pleasant and agreeable Plains, called
Newmarket-Heath. Across which extends a Fortification, or Ditch, with a
Rampart, commonly called The Devil's Dyke, as Works of an extraordinary Nature
are generally, by the Vulgar, attributed to that Prince of Darkness through the
Nation; but among the Gentry it is best known by the Name of Rech Dyke, from
Rech, a small Market Town lying near the Heath. It is supposed to have been the
Boundary of the Kingdom of the East Angles.

Passing this Ditch, we see from the Hills called Gogmagog, or rather Hogmagog,
a rich and pleasant Vale Westward, covered with Cornfieldsd, Gentlemen's Seats,
Villages; and at a Distance, to crown all the rest, that ancient and truly
famous Town and University of Cambridge, Capital of the County.

Cambridgeshire, except the Fen Country, is almost wholly a Corn Country; and
of that Corn five Parts in six of all they sow, is Barley, which is generally
sold to Ware and Royston, and other great Malting-towns in Hertfordshire, and
is the Fund from whence that vast Quantity of Malt, called Hertfordshire Malt,
is made, which is esteemed the best in England. As Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk,
are taken up in Manufactures, and famed for Industry, this County has no
Manufacture at all; nor are the Poor, except the Husbandmen, noted for any
thing so much as Idleness and Sloth, to their Scandal be it spoken! What the
Reason of it is, I know not.

On the Top of Hogmagog Hills appears an ancient Camp, or Fortification, with a
treble Rampart and Ditch, which most of our Writers say was neither Roman nor
Saxon, but British. King James II. caused a spacious Stable to be built in the
Area of this Camp, for his Running-horses, and made old Mr. Frampton Master or
Inspector of them: The Stables remain still there, though they are not often made
use of. The Earl Godolphin has here a fine House on the very Summit of the
Hill, to which his Lordship frequently resorts, especially in the Racing-season.

As we descended Westward, we saw the Fen Country on our Right, almost all
covered with Water like a Sea. The Michaelmas Rains, having been very great
that Year, sent down vast Floods of Water from the Upland Countries; and those
Fens being the Sink of no less than 13 Counties, they are often thus
overflowed. The Rivers which thus empty themselves into these Fens, and carry
off the Water, are the Came or Grant, the Great Ouse, and Little Ouse, the Nene,
the Welland, and the River which runs from Bury to Milden-hall. The Counties
which these Rivers drain, as above, are those of Lincoln, * Cambridge, *
Huntingdon, * Bedford, Warwick, Oxford, Leicester, * Northampton. Rutland,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex. Those marked with (*) empty all their Waters this
Way, the rest but in Part.
In a Word, all the Water of the Middle Part of England, which does not run
into the Thames or the Trent, comes down into these Fens.

In these Fens are abundance of those admirable Pieces of Art called Duckoys,
and it is incredible what Quantities of Wild-fowl of all sorts, Duck, Mallard,
Teal, Wigeon, etc. they take in them every Week during the Season: It may
indeed be guessed at in some measure by this, that there is a Duckoy not far
from Ely, which yields the Landlord 500 l. a Year clear of the Charge of
maintaining a great Number of Servants for the Management; from whence alone
they assured me at St. Ives, (a Town on the Ouse, whither the Fowls are always
brought to be conveyed to London) that they generally sent up 3000 Couples a
Week.

There are more of these about Peterborough, from whence Wagon Loads are sent
up twice a Week to London. I have seen these Wagons, before the Act of
Parliament to regulate Carriers, drawn by ten or twelve Horses apiece, they
were laden so heavy.

As these Fens appear overwhelmed with Water, I observed that they generally at
this latter Part of the Year appear also covered with Fogs; so that, when the
Downs and higher Grounds of the adjacent Country glistered with the Beams of
the Sun, the Isle of Ely seemed wrapped up in Mist and Darkness, so that
nothing could be discerned but now and then the Cupola of Ely Minster.

One could hardly see this from the Hills, without Concern for the many
thousand Families confined to those Fogs, who had no other Breath to draw, than
what must be mixed with the choking Vapors, which spread over all the
Country: but notwithstanding this, the People, especially those that are used
to it, live as healthy as those in a clearer Air, except now-and-then an Ague,
which they make light of; and there are great Numbers of very ancient People
among them. An Act passed a few Years ago for the effectual Draining and
Preservation of Haddenham Level in the Isle of Ely, which contains 6500 Acres,
which were overflowed chiefly through the Neglect of preserving and clearing the
Out-falls into the Sea; and as these Grounds are naturally very rich and
fertile, it may be imagined what a Benefit must accrue to the Public by this
means, when the Draining and Recovery of them can be completed.

Having been at Sturbridge-fair, when it was in its Height in the Month of
September, the Year before I was at Newmarket, I must say, that it is not only
the greatest in the whole Nation, but I think in Europe; nor is the Fair at
Leipsick in Saxony, the Mart at Frankfort on the Main, or the Fairs at
Nuremberg, or Ausburg, reputed any way comparable to this at Sturbridge This
Fair is pretty much dwindled since this Account of it; though it is still very
considerable.
.

It is kept in a large Corn-field, near Casterton, extending from the Side of
the River Came, toward the Road, for about half a Mile square.

If the Field be not cleared of the Corn before a certain Day in August, the
Fair-keepers may trample it under-foot, to build their Booths or Tents. On the
other hand, to balance that Severity, if the Fair-keepers have not cleared the
Field by another certain Day in September, the Plowmen may re-enter with Plow
and Cart, and overthrow all into the Dirt; and as for the Filth, Dung, Straw,
etc. left behind by the Fair-keepers, which is very considerable, these become
the Farmers Fees, and make them full Amends for the trampling, riding, carting
upon, and hardening the Ground.

It is impossible to describe all the Parts and Circumstances of this Fair
exactly; the Shops are placed in Rows like Streets, whereof one is called
Cheap Side; and here, as in several other Streets, are all Sorts of Traders,
who sell by Retale, and come chiefly from London. Here may be seen Goldsmiths,
Toymen, Brasiers, Turners, Milaners, Haberdashers, Hatters, Mercers, Drapers,
Pewterers, China-ware-houses, and, in a Word, all Trades that can be found in
London; with Coffee-houses, Taverns, and Eating-houses in great Numbers and all
kept in Tents and Booths.

This great Street reaches from the Road, which, as I said, goes from Cambridge
to Newmarket, turning short out of it to the Right toward the River, and holds
in a Line near half a Mile quite down to the Riverside. In another Street
parallel with the Road are the like Rows of Booths, but somewhat larger, and
more intermingled with Wholesale Dealers; and one Side, passing out of this
last Street to the Left Hand, is a great Square, formed of the largest Booths,
called the Duddery; but whence so called, I could not learn. The Area of this
Square is from 80 to 100 Yards, where the Dealers have room before every Booth
to take down and open their Packs, and to bring in Wagons to load and unload.

This Place being peculiar to the Wholesale Dealers in the Woollen Manufacture,
the Booths, or Tents are of a vast Extent, have different Apartments, and the
Quantities of Goods they bring are so great, that the Insides of them look like
so many Blackwell-halls, and are vast Warehouses piled up with Goods to the
Top. In this Duddery, as I have been informed, have been sold 100,000
Pounds-worth of Woollen Manufactures in less than a Week's time; besides the
prodigious Trade carried on here by Wholesale-men from London, and all Parts of
England, who transact their Business wholly in their Pocket-books, and meeting
their Chapmen from all Parts, make up their Accounts, receive Money chiefly in
Bills, and take Orders. These, they say, exceed by far the Sales of Goods
actually brought to the Fair, and delivered in Kind; it being frequent for the
London Wholesale-men to carry back Orders from their Dealers, for 10,000
Pounds-worth of Goods a Man, and some much more. This especially respects those
People, who deal in heavy Goods, as Wholesale Grocers, Salters, Brasiers,
Iron-merchants, Wine-merchants, and the like; but does not exclude the Dealers
in Woollen Manufactures, and especially in Mercery Goods of all sorts, who
generally manage their Business in this manner.

Here are Clothiers from Halifax, Leeds, Wakefield and Huthersfield in
Yorkshire, and from Rochdale, Bury, etc. in Lancashire, with vast Quantities of
Yorkshire Cloths, Kerseys, Pennistons, Cottons, etc. with all sorts of
Manchester Ware, Fustians, and Things made of Cotton Wool; of which the
Quantity is so great, that they told me there were near 1000 Horse-packs of
such Goods from that Side of the Country, and these took up a Side and Half of
the Duddery at least; also a Part of a Street of Booths were taken up with
Upholsters Ware; such as Tickens, Sackens, Kidderminster Stuffs, Blankets,
Rugs, Quilts, etc.

In the Duddery I saw one Warehouse, or Booth, consisting of six Apartments all
belonging to a Dealer in Norwich Stuffs only, who, they said, had there above
20,000 l. Value in those Goods.

Western Goods had their Share here also, and several Booths were filled with
Serges, Duroys, Druggets, Shalloons, Cantaloons, Devonshire Kersies, etc. from
Exeter, Taunton, Bristol, and other Parts West, and some from London also.

But all this is still outdone, at least in Appearance, by two Articles, which
are the Peculiars of this Fair, and are not exhibited till the other Part of
the Fair, for the Woollen Manufacture, begins to close up: These are the WOOL,
and the HOPS. There is scarce any Price fixed for Hops in England, till they
know how they sell at Sturbridge-fair; the Quantity that appears in the Fair is
indeed prodigious, and they take up a large Part of the Field, on which the
Fair is kept, to themselves; they are brought directly from Chelmsford in
Essex, from Canterbury and Maidstone in Kent, and from Farnham in Surrey;
besides what are brought from London, of the Growth of those and other Places.

Inquiring why this Fair should be thus, of all other Places in England, the
Center of that Trade, and so great a Quantity of so bulky a Commodity be
carried thither so far; I was informed by one thoroughly acquainted with that
Matter, That Hops, for this Part of England, grow principally in the two
Counties of Surrey and Kent, with an Exception only to the Town of Chelmsford
in Essex, and there are very few planted any-where else.

There are indeed in the West of England some Hops growing; as at Wilton, near
Salisbury; at Hereford and Broomsgrove, near Wales, and the like; but the
Quantity is inconsiderable, and the Places so remote, that none of them come to
London.

Formerly in the North of England, few Hops were used, their Drink being
chiefly pale smooth Ale, which required but little Hops; and consequently they
planted none North of Trent. But as for some Years past, they not only brew
great Quantities of Beer in the North, but also use Hops in the Brewing their
Ale much more than they did before, so they all come South of Trent to buy
their Hops; and here being vast Quantities brought, it is great Part of their
back Carriage into Yorkshire, and Northamptonshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire, and
all those Counties; nay, of late, since the Union, even so far as Scotland; for
I must not omit here also to mention, that the River Grant, or Came, which runs
close by the North-west Side of the Fair, in its Course from Cambridge to Ely,
is navigable; and that by this means, all heavy Goods are brought to the
Fair-field, by Water-carriage from London, and other Parts; first to the Port
of Lynn, and then in Barges up the Ouse, from the Ouse into the Came, and so to
the very Edge of the Fair.

In like manner great Quantities of heavy Goods, and Hops among the rest, are
sent from the Fair to Lynn by Water, and shipped there for the Humber, to Hull,
York, etc. and for Newcastle upon Tyne, and by Newcastle, to Scotland. Now, as
they do not yet plant Hops in the North, though the Consumption there is great
and increasing daily, this is one Reason why at Sturbridge-fair there is so
great a Demand for them: besides, there were very few Hops, if any worth
naming, growing in all the Counties even on this side Trent, above 40 Miles
from London, those Counties depending on Sturbridge-fair for their Supply; so
the Counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Northampton, Lincoln,
Leicester, Rutland, and even to Stafford, Warwick and Worcestershire, bought
most of, if not all, their Hops at Sturbridge-fair.

This is a Testimony of the prodigious Resort of the trading People of all
Parts of England to this Fair; where surprising Quantities of Hops formerly
have been sold.

The Article of Wool is of several Sorts; but principally Fleece Wool, out of
Lincolnshire, where the longest Staple is found, the Sheep of those Parts being
of the largest Breed.

The Buyers are chiefly the Manufacturers of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex, and
it is a prodigious Quantity they buy.

Here I saw what I have not observed in any other County of England, a Pocket
of Wool, which seems to have been at first called so in Mockery, this Pocket
being so big, that it loads a whole Wagon, and reaches beyond the most extreme
Parts of it, hanging over both before and behind; and these ordinarily weigh a
Ton or 2500 lb. Weight of Wool, all in one Bag.

The Quantity of Wool only, which has been sold at this Place at one Fair, has
been said to amount to 50 or 60,000 l. in Value; some say, a great deal more.

By these Articles a Stranger may make some Guess at the immense Trade which is
carried on at this Place; what prodigious Quantities of Goods are bought and
sold, and what a vast Concourse of People are seen here from all Parts of
England.

I might proceed to speak of several other Sorts of English Manufactures, which
are brought hither to be sold; as all Sorts of wrought Iron, and Brass Ware
from Birmingham; edged Tools, Knives, etc. from Sheffield, Glass Wares, and
Stockens, from Nottingham and Leicester; and unaccountable Quantities of other
Things of smaller Value every Morning.

To attend this Fair, and the prodigious Crowds of People which resort to it,
there are sometimes no less than 50 Hackney Coaches, which come from London,
and ply Night and Morning to carry the People to and from Cambridge; for there
the Gross of them lodge; nay, which is still more strange, there are Wherries
brought from London on Wagons, to ply upon the little River Came, and to row
People up and down, from the Town, and from the Fair, as Occasion presents.

It is not to be wondered at, if the Town of Cambridge cannot receive or
entertain the Numbers of People that come to this Fair; for not Cambridge only,
but all the Towns round are full; nay, the very Barns and Stables are turned
into Inns, to lodge the meaner Sort of People: As for the Fair People, they all
eat, drink, and sleep in their Booths, which are so intermingled with Taverns,
Coffee-houses, Drinking-houses, Eating-houses, Cooks Shops, etc. and so many
Butchers and Higglers from all the neighboring Counties come in every Morning
with Beef, Mutton, Fowls, Butter, Bread, Cheese, Eggs, and such Things, and go
with them from Tent to Tent, from Door to Door, that there is no Want of
Provisions of any Kind, either dressed, or undressed.

In a Word, the Fair is like a well-governed City, and there is the least
Disorder and Confusion (I believe) that can be seen any-where, with so great a
Concourse of People.

Toward the latter End of the Fair, and when the great Hurry of Wholesale
Business begins to be over, the Gentry come in, from all Parts of the County
round; and though they come for their Diversion, yet it is not a little Money they
lay out, which generally falls to the Share of the Retalers; such as the
Toy-shops, Goldsmiths, Brasiers, Ironmongers, Turners, Milaners, Mercers, etc.
and some loose Corns they reserve for the Puppet-shews, Drolls, Rope-dancers,
and suchlike; of which there is no Want. The last Day of the Fair is the
Horse-fair, where the Whole is closed both with Horse and Foot-races, to divert
the meaner Sort of People only; for nothing considerable is offered of that
Kind, and the late Act, I presume, must have put an End to the former. Thus
ends the whole Fair, and in less than a Week more, scarce any Sign is left,
that such a thing has been there, except by the Heaps of Dung and Straw, and
other Rubbish which is left behind, trod into the Earth, and is as good as a
Summer's Fallow for the Land; and as I have said above, pays the Husbandman
well for the Use of it.

I should have mentioned, that here is a Court of Justice always open, and held
every Day in a Shed built on purpose in the Fair: this is for keeping the
Peace, and deciding Controversies in Matters arising from the Business of the
Fair. The Magistrates of the Town of Cambridge are Judges in this Court, as
being in their Jurisdiction, or they holding it by special Privilege. Here they
determine Matters in a summary way, as is practiced in those we call Pye-Powder
Courts in other Places, or as a Court of Conscience; and they have a final
Authority without Appeal.

Having just mentioned the Puppet-shews, Drolls, etc. with which the People are
entertained during the Time of this Fair, I cannot but relate a deplorable
Accident that happened on this Occasion, at Barnwelt in this Neighborhood, as
follows.

On the 8th of September, 1727. about Eight at Night, a Puppet-shew being to be
acted in a Barn built of Barnwell Stone, and thatched with Straw, a Fellow
attempted to thrust himself in without paying; but being refused, and the Door
locked, and, as some report, nailed, to keep out Intruders, the Villain
threatened he would set the Barn on Fire over their Heads, in Revenge. There
was a Place adjoining to the Barn, where were Hay and Straw; and a Boy setting
down a wooden Lantern with a short Candle in it at a little Distance, whilst he
was looking through a Hole at the Sight, the villainous Fellow aforesaid beat the
Lantern about, till the Fire took the Straw, which he left burning, and run
away. There was a Floor above them, and the Flame, getting into the false Roof,
spread like Wildfire. The People, in the utmost Consternation, all making to
the Door, which opened inwards, fell upon one another, and became, as it were,
so many Barricadoes to hinder its being opened: and just at this fatal Crisis,
the Fire having seized some, and dreadful Shrieks and Cries resounding from
all, the Floor fell in, and smothered almost all; for not above five or six
escaped of the Whole, and about 120 Men, Women, and Children, miserably
perished. The next Day it was one of the most shocking Sights that ever was
beheld, to see the Relations of the unhappy Persons flocking thither, to find
and own the Bodies, some of their Brothers, some of their Children, some of
their Wives and Husbands, which they found Difficulty enough to discover; for
some of them had their Heads burnt off, some their Legs, some their Hands and
Arms, and others, in a manner, consumed to Ashes. And at last, most of the
mangled Bodies were carried in Carts, and put promiscuously into a large Hole
dug in the Churchyard for that Purpose. Among the unfortunate Sufferers were
several young Gentlewomen of considerable Fortunes. About four Years after
this, another terrible Fire happened, which almost consumed the whole Town of
Barnwell.

Within these few Years, a fine Road, of about four Miles in Length, is
completed, from the Town of Cambridge to Hogmagog-hills; which, by reason of
the Badness of the Way in that Place, is an exceeding useful Benefaction to the
Town; which generous Work was done in pursuance of the Will of William Wortes,
Esquire of Cambridge, as I think they told me the Gentleman's Name was.

The Two Universities of Cambridge and Oxford are so much the Glory of this
Nation, that it would be an almost unpardonable Defect in me, not to take
particular Notice of them. I shall refer that of Oxford to its proper Place;
and here give as brief an Account as I can of this of Cambridge, and of the
Originals and Founders of the several Colleges, together with the Favors and
Advantages that have been within these few Years conferred upon it by his late
Majesty, and other Benefactors.

The Town is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen; but with regard to the
Government of the University, that has a Chancellor, eligible every three
Years, aut manner in eodem Officio durante tacito consensu Senatus Cantabr. He
has under him a Commissary, who holds a Court of Record of Civil Causes for
all privileged Persons and Scholars, under the Degree of Master of Arts.

They have also a High Steward, chosen by the Senate, and holding by Patent
from the University.

The Vice Chancellor is annually chosen on the 4th of November, by the Body of
the University, out of Two Persons nominated by the Heads of Colleges.

Two Proctors are also annually chosen, as at Oxford; as also are Two Taxers,
who, with the Proctors, have Cognizance of Weights and Measures, as Clerks of
the Market.

The University has also a Custos Archivorum, or Register; Three Esquire
Beadles, One Yeoman Beadle, and a Library Keeper.

The Vice Chancellor sometimes visits the Taverns and other Publick-houses in
his own Person: but the Proctors do it very frequently, and have Power to
punish offending Scholars, and to fine the Publick-houses who entertain them
after Eight at Night in the Winter, or Nine in Summer.

As to the Antiquity of the University of Cambridge; the Story goes, That
Cantaber, a Spaniard, 270 Years before Christ, first founded it; and that
Sebert, King of the East Angles, restored it, Anno Christi 630. Afterward, as
the learned Camden observes, it lay a long time neglected, and was overthrown
by the Danish Storms, till all Things revived under the Norman Government. Soon
after Inns, Hostels, and Halls were built for Students, though without
Endowments. There are now 16 Colleges and Halls, which differ only in Name,
being equally endowed and privileged; 16 Masters, 406 Fellowships; about 662
Scholarships, 236 Exhibitions; and the whole Number of Masters, Fellows,
Scholars, Exhibitioners, and other Students, are about 1500.

I shall now give a brief Account of the Colleges, and begin with

1. PETER-HOUSE. Which was founded by Hugh Balsham, Bishop of Ely, Anno 1257,
when only Prior of Ely. But at first the Scholars had no other Conveniences
than Chambers, which exempted them from the high Rates imposed on them by the
Townsmen for Lodgings. The Endowment was settled by the same Hugh when Bishop,
Anno 1284, for a Master, 14 Fellows, etc. Which Number might be increased or
diminished according to the Improvement or Diminution of their Revenues. It
seems to have taken its Name from the Church of St. Peter, in its Neighborhood.

2. CLARE-HALL Was founded in the Year 1340, by Richard Badew, Chancellor of
the University, with the Assistance of the Lady Elizabeth Clare, Countess of
Ulster. He had before built a House called University-hall, wherein the
Scholars lived upon their own Expense for 16 Years, till it was accidentally
destroyed by Fire. The Founder, finding the Charge of Rebuilding would exceed
his Abilities, had the kind Assistance of the said Lady, through whose Liberality
it was not only rebuilt, but endowed. It has been lately new-built, all of
Freestone, and is one of the neatest and most uniform Houses in the
University, and delightfully situated on the Banks of the River, which forms
for it a Kind of natural Canal.

3. PEMBROKE-HALL Was founded in the Year 1347, by the Lady Mary St. Paul,
Countess of Pembroke, third Wife to Audomare de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke; who
having been unhappily slain at a Tilting on his Wedding Day, she entirely
sequestered herself from all worldly Delights, and, amongst other pious Acts,
built this College, which has been much augmented since by the Benefactions of
others.

4. ST. BENNET's, or CORPUS-CHRISTI COLLEGE, Was founded by the Society of
Friars in Corpus-Christi, in the Year 1346. This arose out of Two Guilds or
Fraternities, one of Corpus Christi, and the other of the Blessed Virgin, which
after a long Emulation, being united into one Body, by a joint Interest built
this College, which took its Name from the adjoining Church of St. Benedict.
Their greatest modern Benefactor was Dr. Matthew Parker, once Master of the
College, and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, who by his prudent Management
recovered several Rights of the College; and, besides Two Fellowships, and Five
Scholarships, gave a great Number of excellent MSS. to their Library, which
were mostly collected out of the Remains of the old Abbey-Libraries, Colleges,
and Cathedrals, and chiefly relate to the History of England.

5. TRINITY-HALL Was founded about the Year 1353, by William Bateman, Bishop of
Norwich. It was built upon a Place which once belonged to the Monks of Ely, and
was a House for Students before the Time of Bishop Bateman, who by Exchange for
the Advowsons of certain Rectories, got it into his own Possession. He was a
great Master of Civil and Canon Law; whereupon the Master, two Fellows, and
three Scholars, (the Number appointed by him at the first Foundation) were
obliged to follow those two Studies. It has been since much augmented by
Benefactors, and the Number of its Members is proportionably increased.

6. GONEVIL AND CAIUS COLLEGE. Anno 1348, Edmund Gonevil founded a Hall, called
after his Name, upon the Place where now are the Orchard and Tennis-court of
Bennet-college. But within Five Years after it was removed into the Place where
it now stands, by Bishop Bateman, Founder of Trinity-hall. Anno 1607, John
Caius, Doctor of Physic, improved this Hall into a new College, since chiefly
called by his Name; and it has of late Years received considerable
Embellishments, etc.

7. KING'S COLLEGE Was founded in the Year 1451, by King Henry VI. It was at
first but small, being built by that Prince for a Rector and 12 Scholars only.
Near it was a little Hostel for Grammarians, built by William Bingham, which
was granted by the Founder to King Henry, for the Enlargement of his College.
Whereupon he united these two, and having enlarged them by adding the Church of
St. John Zachary, founded a College for a Provost, 70 Fellows and Scholars,
three Chaplains, etc. The Chapel belonging to this College is deservedly
reckoned one of the finest Buildings of its Kind in the World. It is 304 Feet
long, 73 broad, and 91 high to the Battlements, and has not one Pillar in it.
It has 12 large Windows on each Side, finely painted, and the Carving, and
other Workmanship of the numerous Stalls, surpasses any thing of the Kind. It
constitutes one Side of a large Square; for the Royal Founder designed, that
the College should be a Quadrangle, all of equal Beauty: but the Civil Wars in
which he was involved with the House of York, prevented his accomplishing it;
and the Prosecution of his good Design was reserved to our own Time; for what
has been added within these few Years past, is not only an Ornament to the
College, but to the whole University: and it is to be hoped, that the College
will be enabled, in Time, to finish the noble Work. This new Part runs from the
West End of the Chapel, a little detached from it to the Southward, and makes
another Side of the Square, and contains spacious Chambers and Apartments,
being 236 Feet in Length, and 46 in Breadth, built with great Regularity, and
modern Beauty.

Febr. 1734, the Workmen digging for the Foundation of the new Buildings of
this College, found a great Number of Broad Pieces of Gold, of the Coin of King
Henry V. exceeding fair. As soon as it was known, the Governors of the College
got out of the Workmens Hands a considerable Number, which they made Presents
of to their particular Benefactors, and divided among themselves, and the
Fellows of the College; but it is supposed, that the Workmen secreted many; for
this Coin was very scarce before, but after this was much easier to be met with.

8. QUEEN'S COLLEGE Was founded by Queen Margaret of Anjou, Wife of King Henry
VI. in the Year 1448; but the troublesome Times that followed, would not give
her leave to complete the Fabric. The first Master of it, Andrew Ducket,
procured great Sums of Money from well-disposed Persons, toward finishing of
this Work, and so far prevailed with Queen Elizabeth, Wife of King Edward IV.
that she perfected what her professed Enemy had begun. The Reverend Mr.
Ferdinando Smithes, Senior Fellow of Queen's College, who died in November
1725. gave 1500 l. to the same, to be appropriated to the Use of three
Batchelors of Art, till the Time of their taking their Masters Degree.

9. CATHARINE-HALL Was founded in the Year 1459 by Robert Woodlark, third
Provost of King's College, and the Hall was built over against the Carmelites
House, for one Master and three Fellows; and the Numbers have been since
greatly increased, as well as the Revenues. A great Part of it is lately
new-built, and may be said to be a beautiful and regular Fabric.

10. JESUS COLLEGE Was founded Anno 1497 by John Alcocke, Bishop of Ely, out of
an old Nunnery dedicated to St. Radegund, given him by King Henry VII. and Pope
Julius II. on account of the scandalous Incontinence of the Nuns, in order to
be by him converted to this Use. And this Prelate established in it, a Master,
Six Fellows, and Six Scholars. But their Numbers have been much increased by
great Benefactions.

11. CHRIST'S COLLEGE Was founded by the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond,
Mother to King Henry VII. Anno 1506. upon the Place where God's House formerly
stood. She settled there a Master and 12 Fellows, etc. which Number in King
Edward VI's Time being complained of as favoring of Superstition, by alluding
to our Savior and his 12 Disciples, that Prince added a 13th Fellowship, with
some new Scholarships. This College has been within these few Years past
adorned with a very fine new Building.

12. ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE Was founded about the Year 1506 by the same Lady, upon
the Place where, Anno 1134, Nigel or Neal second Bishop of Ely founded an
Hospital for Canons Regular; which by Hugh de Balsham was converted into a
Priory dedicated to St. John, and by the Executors of the said Countess of
Richmond, into a College, under the Name of the same Saint. For she died before
it was finished, which retarded the Work for some Time; but it was afterward
carried on by her said Executors: And in the Beginning of the Reign of King
James I. was greatly enlarged with fair new Buildings. This College, pleasantly
situated by the River, is no less remarkable for its Number of Students, and
its beautiful Groves and Gardens, than for its strict and regular Discipline.
It has a noble Library, which has been of late Years greatly augmented, by the
Accession of the Library of Dr. Gunning, late Bishop of Ely, who bequeathed the
same to it.

13. MAGDALEN COLLEGE Was founded Anno 1542 by Thomas Audley, Lord Chancellor
of England, and was afterward enlarged and endowed by Sir Christopher Wrey,
Lord Chief Justice of England. This College stands by itself on the North-west
Side of the River, and has been of late Years improved and adorned by a
handsome Piece of Building. A Fellowship of a considerable Value has been
lately founded at this College, which is appropriated to Gentlemen of the
County of Norfolk, and called The Traveling Norfolk Fellowship.

To the Library of this College was left a valuable Collection of Pamphlets, by
-- -- -- Pepys, Esquire as also great Numbers of Papers relating to the Navy and
Admiralty. The Benefactor bequeathed the Presses as well as the Books and
Papers, and they are kept in the manner he left them.

14. TRINITY COLLEGE. Was founded Anno 1546 by King Henry VIII. out of three
others: St. Michael's College built by Hervie of Stanton, in the Time of Edward
II. King's-hall, founded by Edward III. and Fishwick's Hostel. Its worthy
Master, T. Nevil, Dean of Canterbury, repaired or rather new-built this
College, with that Splendour and Magnificence, that for Spaciousness, and the
Beauty and Uniformity of its Buildings, it is hardly to be outdone. All which
has been since still further improved, by a most noble and stately Library,
begun by the late famous Dr. Isaac Barrow: A Building, for the Bigness and
Design of it, says a Right Reverend Prelate, perhaps not to be matched in these
Kingdoms. Nor is the Learning of the present Master easily to be paralleled,
any more than the Troubles given to the College by the Contention between him
on the one Side, and the College and Bishops of Ely, its Visitors, on the
other: which, take them all together, in their Causes, Progress, and invalid
Decision against him, as it hitherto proves, is one of the most extraordinary
Affairs that ever happened in the University.

15. EMANUEL COLLEGE Was founded Anno 1584 by Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of
the Exchequer to Queen Elizabeth, in a Place where was formerly a Convent of
Dominicans, founded in the Year 1280. by the Lady Alice, Countess of Oxford.
After the Suppression of Monasteries it came into the Possession of Mr.
Sherwood, of whom Sir Walter seems to have bought it. It has a very near
Chapel, built not many Years ago, by the Bounty of Dr. William Sancroft,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others. And the Library belonging to it has
received of late Years a fine Addition, by the valuable Collection of Books of
the same Archbishop, given to it on the Decease of that Prelate.

16. SIDNEY-SUSSEX COLLEGE Was founded by virtue of the Will of the Lady
Frances Sidney, Countess of Sussex, who died Anno 1589, and by her Will left
5000 l. for the founding of a College, to be called Sidney-Sussex. It was
erected on the Place where formerly the Monastery of Gray Friars built by King
Edward I. had flourished. But though this College owes its Rise to the Bequest of
this Lady, and the Care of her Executors, it is exceedingly improved by the
Benefactions of Sir Francis Clerk, who besides erecting a Set of new Buildings,
augmented the Scholarships, and founded four Fellowships with eight
Scholarships more; and moreover Sir John Brereton left to it above 2000 l.

These are the Sixteen Colleges or Halls in this University.

The New Senate House is a fine Edifice, and with the Schools, the
University-Library, and some other Buildings intended to be erected opposite to
it, will form a stately Quadrangle. It is in Length 101 Feet, and in Breadth
42; and is adorned with fluted Pillars, a triangular Pediment, and other
beautiful Decorations.

The Schools of this University were at first in private Houses, hired from Ten
Years to Ten Years for that Purpose, by the University, in which Time they
might not be put to any other Use. Afterward Public Schools were built at the
Charge of the University, in or near the Place where they now stand; but the
present Fabric, as it is now built of Brick and rough Stone, was erected
partly at the Expense of the University, and partly by the Contributions of
several Benefactors.

The University Library was first built by Rotheram Archbishop of York, who,
with Tonstal Bishop of Durham, furnished it with choice Books; few whereof are
to be found at present. But it contained nevertheless about 14000 Books, when
his late Majesty King George I. was graciously pleased, in the Beginning of his
Reign, to purchase the large and curious Library of Dr. John Moor, Bishop of
Ely, who died July 30. 1714; and as a Mark of his Royal Favor, to bestow it
upon this University.

There have been very lately great Additions and Alterations made in the
Library, for the better Disposition of this valuable Royal Present, which
consisted of upwards of 30,000 Volumes, and cost the King 6000 Guineas. And we
cannot but observe, in this Place, That the late Lord Viscount Townsbend,
having understood that the University, to show their Gratitude, and do Honor
to the Memory of his late Majesty King George I. intended to erect a Statue of
that Prince in the said Library, was pleased to offer to cause the same to be
carved and set up at his own Expense; which generous Tender was received by the
University in the Manner it deserved, and with Circumstances equally to their
own and his Lordship's Honor. And in the Month of October 1739. in pursuance
thereof, a fine Marble Statue of this great Prince was accordingly erected in
the Senate-hall of King's College; on which are the following Inscriptions;
viz. On the Front: GEORGIO Optimo Principi, Magnae Britanniae Regi, Ob insignia
ejus in banc Academiam Merita, Senatus Cantabrigiensis In perpetuum Grati Animo
Testimonium Statuam Mortuo ponendam Decrovit. That is, The Senate of Cambridge
has decreed, That this Statue should be erected to his late most excellent
Majesty George I. King of Great Britain, as a perpetual Monument of their
Gratitude, for his signal Benefits to this University. On the Left: CAROLUS
Vicecomes Townshend, Summum tum Academiae, tum Reipublicae Decus, Pro Eximia,
qua Regem Coluerat, Pietate, Preque singulari, Qua Academiam feverat, Caritate,
Statuam A Senatu Academito Decretam Sumptibus suis e Marmore Faciendam Locavit.
That is, Charles Lord Viscount Townshend, a principal Ornament both of the
University and the State, agreeably to his singular Loyalty toward his Prince,
and the particular Affection, wherewith he had cherished the University,
engaged to have the Statue, which was decreed by the Senate of Cambridge, made
of Marble at his own Expense. CAROLUS Filius Vicecomes Townshend, Virtutum
aeque ac Honorum Paternorum Haeres, Statuam, Quam Pater Morte subita abreptus
Imperfectam reliquerat, Perficiendam, Atque in hoc ornatissimo Academiae Loco
collocandam, Curavit. That is, Charles the Son, Lord Viscount Townshend, Heir
alike to the Virtues and Dignities of his Father, has caused the Statue, which
his Father, seized by sudden Death, had left imperfect, to be finished, and
erected in this most honorable Place of the University.

This great King was not contented with having given this noble Instance of his
Royal Bounty to the University of Cambridge, but in the Year 1724 was
graciously pleased to confer another Mark of his Favor upon them, and which
extended not only to that, but to the University of Oxford; in creating a new
Establishment in a most useful Branch of Learning, which was much wanted, and
for which till then there had been no Provision: which was to appoint two
Persons not under the Degree of Master of Arts, or Bachelor of Laws, skilled
in Modern History, and in the Knowledge of Modern Languages, to be nominated
King's Professors of Modern History, one for the University of Cambridge, and
the other for that of Oxford; who are obliged to read Lectures in the Public
Schools, at particular Times, each of which Professors to have a Stipend of 400
l. per Annum; out of which each Professor is obliged to maintain, with
sufficient Salaries, Two Persons at least, well qualified to teach and instruct
in writing and speaking the said Languages gratis, Twenty Scholars of each
University, to be nominated by the King, each of which is obliged to learn Two,
at least, of the said Languages.

The same excellent Prince also was pleased to appoint Twelve Persons, chosen
out of each of the Universities, to be Preachers in the Royal Chapel of
Whitehall, at stated Times, with handsome Salaries; and declared that he would
cause a particular Regard to be had to the Members of the Two Universities in
the Dispositions of those Benefices which fell in the Royal Gift.

Some other Benefactions to this University, within these few Years past, are
as follow.

Dr. John Woodward, who died April 25. 1728, left to the University of
Cambridge a Sum of Money, for erecting a Professorship for Natural Philosophy,
with a Provision of 150 l. per Annum for the Support and Maintenance of the
same for ever. He likewise bequeathed to the said University his Collection of
Fossils, and other natural Curiosities, and such a Part of his Library
moreover, as was necessary to illustrate his said Collection.

On the Death of Mrs. Addenbroke (Mar. 1720) Widow of an eminent Physician of
that Name, the Sum of about 4000 l. devolved to this University; which, by the
Doctor's Will, is to be applied to the Building and Furnishing a Physical
Hospital in Cambridge, in which poor diseased People are to be admitted for
Cure, gratis. The Master and Fellows of Catharine-hall are appointed Trustees
of this Charity.

I shall not here enter into the puerile Dispute, (which has so much engaged
several learned Pens, that might have been better employed) whether this
University, or that of Oxford, is the most ancient. Their Emulation ought to be
more worthily founded; and indeed they have so much to boast, as to the great
and shining Ornaments they have respectively produced to Church and State, and
the Figure they make in the Commonwealth of Learning, that it is strange so
trifling a Contention should have been so warmly maintained.

Cambridge-castle was built by William the Conqueror, as one of those many
which he erected in diverse Parts, to curb his newly conquered People. It was
strong and stately, and had in it, among other spacious Apartments, a most
magnificent Hall. This being neglected, the Stones and Timber of it were
afterward begged of Henry IV. by the Master and Fellows of King's-hall,
toward the Building of their Chapel. Nothing is now standing but the
Gatehouse, which is the Prison, and an artificial high Hill of a steep Ascent,
and level at Top.

The Town of Cambridge is very large, most of its Streets are narrow, the
Houses very ill-built, and the greatest Part of them much out of Repair; so
that, were it not for the Colleges, and other public Edifices, it would make a
very mean Appearance.

From Cambridge the Road lies North-west, on the Edge of the Fens, to
Huntingdon; on which stands the little Market Town of Caxton, remarkable for
the Birthplace of Caxton, the first Printer in England. The Roman Way passes
from Arington S. E. through Holm into this Town, and so on to Papworth, higher up
on the same Road; which three last-mentioned Places are Villages only. On this
Side, it is all an agreeable Corn Country, adorned with several Seats of
Gentleman; but the chief is Wimple-Hall, formerly built at a vast Expense, by
the late Earl of Radnor. It was afterward bought by his Grace John Holles
Cavendish, late Duke of Newcastle; in a Partition of whose vast Estate, it fell
to Edward late Earl of Oxford and Mortimer, in Right of his Lady, the only
Daughter of the said Duke; who brought the Earl this Estate, and many others,
sufficient to denominate her one of the richest Heiresses in Great Britain; but
his Lordship parted with, it a little before his Death, to the Right Hon. the
Lord Chancellor Hardwick, who now possesses it. It is situated in a very dirty
Country; and notwithstanding the Cost bestowed upon it from its first Owner to
this Time, the Gardens and Buildings are both in a very bad Taste.

From Cambridge, my Design obliging me, and the direct Road in part concurring,
I came back through the West Side of the County of Essex, to Saffron-Walden,
passing by Linton, a small Markettown of no Note, saying that a Roman Military
Way falls into the Ikening here.

Saffron-Walden is a fair Town, with a good Church, where stands a Monument of
the Lord Audley, Chancellor to King Henry VIII. who made him a Grant of certain
Lands belonging to a dissolved Monastery near this Town, which takes its Name
from the great Quantities of Saffron which formerly grew in the Grounds, and
were cultivated hereabouts, and answered exceeding well in the Manufacturing;
but how it came into Decay, nobody could account to me, though there may be
still seen a great many Acres of Saffron-ground about this Town. This Commodity
was never known to grow in England, till the Reign of Edward III. This Town
gives Title of Baron to the Earl of Suffolk, whose eldest Son is by Courtesy
called Lord Walden.

Near this Town, on the Side of Cambridge Road, stands the noble and stately
Palace of Audley-Inn, on Audley-end, formerly the largest Palace of any in
England; and though a great Part of it has been pulled down, is still one of the
most magnificent Structures in the whole Kingdom. It was built out of the Ruins
of the abovementioned Monastery, by Thomas second Son of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, who married the only Daughter and Heir of the aforementioned Lord Audley.
This Thomas was summoned into Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's Time, as Lord
Audley of Walden; and was afterward created Earl of Suffolk by King James I.
to whom he was first Chamberlain, and afterward Lord High-Treasurer. It was
designed for a Royal Palace for that King, and when it was finished with all
the Elegance and Politeness of Taste of the Times, the King was invited to see
it; and as he passed to Newmarket, he took up a Night's Lodging there. And
after having viewed it with great Surprise and Astonishment, the Earl asked
him, How he approved of it? Who answered, Very well. But troth, Man, said he,
it is too much for a King; but it may do for a Lord High-Treasurer; and so left
it upon the Earl's Hands, who is reported to have had then an Estate of 50,000
l. a Year, which has been gradually decaying ever since, and is now reduced to
about 3000 l. a Year with Encumbrances upon it. King Charles II. purchased this
House, and so it became, what it was originally designed for, a Royal Palace.
The King mortgaged the Hearth-tax to the Earl, to answer the Purchase-money;
and appointed James, then Earl of Suffolk, Housekeeper thereof, with a Salary
of 1000 l. a Year; which Office continued in the Family till the Revolution,
when the Hearth-tax was abolished. And the Exigence of the State being such as
it could not afford to pay the Purchase-money, King William III. regranted the
said House to the Family; upon which Henry, Earl of Suffolk, (who in his
Father's Lifetime was created Earl of Bindon, to qualify him to hold the
Marshal's Staff) pulled down a great Part of this noble Edifice, and reduced it
considerably. And yet it is still very large, and makes a grand Appearance. You
enter in at a large wide Pair of Iron Gates into a most spacious Courtyard, on
each Side of which was formerly a Row of Cloisters, in which stood the
Out-offices belonging to the House; which have been all pulled down, and
supplied with a Stone Wall. You pass in at the Forefront, through Part of the
House, into a large open Quadrangle, enclosed by four different Parts of the
House, and almost surrounded with Cloisters. The Apartments above and below are
very lofty and spacious; and there is a very long wide Gallery, which extends
the whole Length of the Back-front of the House. The Gardens are very
indifferent, but very capable of Improvement. Behind the House is a fine Park,
extending to Saffron-Walden, well stored with Deer, but not over-burdened with
Timber; in which there is a rising Spot of Ground, whereon if the House had
been erected, it would have had a much better Effect as to Prospect; for its
present Situation is low, neither are the Grounds about it very fertile, or, I
think, healthy.

But however great and magnificent this noble House appears, it bears an
indelible Stain, if what is said be true, That it was built with Spanish Gold,
upon the Ruin of the Great and Learned Ralegh, who fell by the Revenge of
Spain, the Arts of Gundamor, the Avarice of Suffolk, and the unpardonable
Weakness of his own King. But the present Earl's Mind is more nobly endowed
than that of his great Ancestor, as being a generous and truly charitable
Nobleman, which he has testified by many beneficent Acts among his poor
Neighbors, especially during the great Frost in the Winter of 1739.

At a little Town called Littlebury, not far from Audley-Inn, is a House which
was erected by the famous Mr. Winstanley, who built Eddy-stone Light-house, and
perished in it, as I shall mention in its Place. Here he had made many odd
Contrivances of Chairs running on Springs, etc. which usually much surprised
Strangers, who came to see the House. The Person appointed to show it generally
placed the greatest Stranger into a particular Chair, which, on touching the
Spring, ran backward through the House into the Garden. The same Gentleman was
famous also for his Waterworks, full of whimsical, but ingenious Contrivances.

But I ought not to omit, that near Icleton and Strethal, upon the River Came,
lies Chesterford; where, in the Year 1719, were discovered the Vestigia of a
Roman City. The Foundation of the Walls is very apparent quite round, though
level with the Ground, including about 50 Acres. Great Part of it serves for a
Causeway to the public Cambridge Road from London. The Crown Inn is built upon
it. In the North-west End of the Town is the Foundation of a Roman Temple. Many
Roman Coins have been found in the Borough-field, as they term the ancient
City, whose Name was Camboritum, according to Dr. Stukely. In this Parish, they
say, has been a Royal Manor. Not far off, by Audley-Inn, is a great Roman Camp,
upon an Eminence, where now stands an Hunting-tower of Brick.

A little North of this Part of the Country rises the River Stour, which, for a
Course of fifty Miles or more, parts the two Counties of Suffolk and Essex;
passing through or near Haveril, Clare, Cavendish, Halsted, Sudbury, Buers,
Nayland, Stretford, Dedham, Manningtree, and into the Sea at Harwich.

As we came on this Side, we saw at a Distance Braintree and Bocking, two large
and populous Towns, which join together, being parted by a little Stream of
Water. These were formerly very rich and flourishing, occasioned by the great
Trade for Bays, which were manufactured in such Quantities in these two Towns,
as to send weekly to London Four, Five, or Six Wagons laden with them; but
this Trade having greatly decreased in a few Years, the Inhabitants are in a
very miserable Condition at present; for by an Increase of their Poor, their
Parish Rates are risen so high, as in the Year 1738 the Poors Rate in Bocking
Parish was Nine Shillings in the Pound; which, together with their other Rates
and Taxes, rendered it very burdensome to all the Inhabitants: and at the same
time, the Small Pox having infested both the Towns, their Markets were almost
deserted by the Country People. The Parish of Bocking is a Deanery, and the
living is valued at upwards of 500 l. per Annum.

Near Braintree is the Parish of Black Notely, in which are a few scattered
Houses, scarcely worth noticing, except for the Memory of the late learned Mr.
Ray, who resided many Years in this Place, and was buried in the Churchyard,
over whose Grave a Monument was erected, with an Inscription in Latin; which
being long, we shall refer the Learned to the Original, and content ourselves
with giving the English, for the sake of our common Readers, and in regard to
so great a Man, who was an Honor to his Country. It may be thus rendered:

"The mortal Part of the most learned John Ray, A. M. is deposited in this
narrow Tomb; but his Writings are not confined to one Nation; and his Fame,
everywhere most illustrious, renders them immortal. Formerly he was Fellow of
Trinity-College in Cambridge, and of the Royal Society in London, a singular
Ornament of both. In every kind of Science, as well divine as human, most
expert. And, like a second Solomon, (to whom alone, perhaps, he was inferior)
from the Cedar to the Hyssop, from the largest of Animals to the smallest
Insects, he arrived at a consummate Knowledge. And not only did he most
accurately discourse of Plants spread over the Face of the whole Earth; but,
making a most strict Search, even into its inmost Bowels, whatever deserved
Discussion throughout all Nature, he described. While on his Travels abroad, he
diligently discovered what had escaped the Observation of others, and first
brought to Light many things most worthy of Remark. Further than this, he was
endowed with so unaffected a manner of Behavior, that he was learned without
Pedantry; of a sublime Genius, and at the same time (which is rarely known) of
an humble and modest Disposition. Not distinguished by an illustrious
Extraction; but (what is greater) by his own Virtue. Little solicitous about
obtaining Wealth and Titles, he chose rather to deserve than to possess them.
Content with his own Lot, he grew old in a private Station, worthy a more ample
Fortune. In every other respect he readily observed Moderation; in Study, none.

"To conclude: To all these Perfections he added a Piety free from Artifice;
bearing an entire and hearty Veneration for the Church of England, which he
confirmed with his last Breath. Thus, happily, in a virtuous Retirement, lived
he, whom the present Age reveres, and Posterity will admire."



N.B. This Monument beginning to want Repair, by standing exposed in the
Churchyard, has been lately removed, and set up in the Chancel of Black
Notely Church. To the former Epitaph is added, on the Table on the East Side, a
Latin Inscription, which may be thus rendered:

"This Cenotaph, formerly exposed to the open Air in the Churchyard, defaced
by the Injuries of the Weather, and just falling into Ruins, was by J. Leg,
M. D. repaired, and removed under Shelter, March 17. 1737."

The Country hereabout is very pleasant, having many Risings and Falls, with
great Plenty of Water. The Fields are well cultivated, so as to render the
whole Face of the Country like a Garden. But what is often very surprising to
Strangers, is, the Nakedness of most of the large Trees growing in their Hedge
Rows, and on the Sides of the Road, even in the Month of May; at which time few
of them have put out any Leaves; but, upon Inquiry, I found they were a
peculiar Sort of Elm, which rarely puts out Leaves before the Middle of May;
and this is one of the most common Trees of this Country.

Near Braintree is Felsted, a small Place, but noted for a flourishing
Free School, of an ancient Foundation.

Near to this is the Priory of Lees, which I mentioned before ( P. 20.); and
hence keeping the London Road, I came to Chelmsford, mentioned also before, and
Ingatestone, five Miles West, which I mention again, as I promised, ( Page 20.)
to have an Opportunity to speak of the noble Family of Lord Petre, and of the
Improvements making at his Seat near this Place, by the present Lord, who is a
Nobleman of fine Taste, and great Qualities.

Ingatestone-hall, one of his Lordship's Seats, lies at a small Distance from
the public Road, on the Right Hand, about a Quarter of a Mile short of
Ingatestone Town.

The House is situated very low, so as not to be seen at a small Distance. It
is a very large, irregular Building, and the Gardens are old; though there were
many Alterations made in them for the better, by the present Lord, before he
came of Age; but as this was not the Seat where he intended to reside, so his
Lordship did not employ his fine Genius in modelling of these Gardens; but his
whole Thoughts were bent to embellish his noble Seat at Thorndon, which is
situated on a rising Ground, about three Miles on the Right Hand of Brentwood
in Essex: where his Lordship has been some Years laying of a Plan for a House
and Gardens, which when executed, will be an Honor to the Nation.

The House, when finished, will be 265 Feet in Front, exclusive of the Offices.
The principal Front is to the South-east Aspect, where is designed a spacious
Court. Before this is designed a Terrace-walk near 200 Feet broad, and of a
great Length; on the other Side of this, will be a Lawn of Grass, containing
near 200 Acres of Land, which is bounded by Plantations of Trees, and handsome
Farms.

On the Back-front of the House is a noble Range of Stoves, for tender Exotic
Plants; which when finished will far exceed whatever has been done of this
Nature, even by the greatest Princes in Europe.

The Park, which lies on the North-east and North-west Side of the House, is
very large, and well stocked with Timber, which, fully grown, adds greatly to
the Beauty of the Place. In many Parts of this Park are large Enclosures, which
have been made by the present Lord, and are converted to Nurseries, which are
completely stored with all Trees and Shrubs, that will live in the open Air in
this Climate; so that when these Trees are planted out, according to his
Lordship's Design, it will be the most beautiful and complete Plantation
perhaps in Europe.

Through the Park there is already an Avenue cut, leading from Brentwood to the
House, three Miles in Length; on each Side of it are designed Plantations of
Trees, in regular Clumps, which, when finished, will have a noble Effect, as
People pass through, up to the House.

The Kitchen-garden is already finished, and laid out with equal Elegance and
Usefulness. This is situated behind the Offices, so that it does not appear in
Sight from the House, and is detached from the other Gardens; and thereby is
not exposed to Strangers, who may have Admittance to walk through the
Pleasure-garden and Plantations.

In short, the whole Plan is the most extensive and grand of any yet executed
in this Kingdom.

In the Parish Church of Ingatestone are to be seen the Monuments of his
Lordship's Ancestors, who by a constant Series of beneficent Actions to the
Poor, and Bounty upon all charitable Occasions, gained to themselves an
affectionate Esteem through all that Part of the Country, such as no Prejudice
arising from a Difference in Religion could or ought to impair; for great and
good Actions command our Respect, whatever the Opinions of the Donors may be.

From hence we crossed the Country to the great Forest, called Epping Forest,
reaching almost to London. The Country on that Side of Essex is called the
Roodings, I suppose because there are no less than ten Towns almost together,
called by the Name of Roding; and is famous for good Land, good Malt, and dirty
Roads; the latter being in the Winter hardly passable for Horse or Man. In the
Midst of this we see Chipping Onger, Hatfield Broad-Oak, Epping, and many
Forest-towns, famed also for Husbandry, and good Malt. On the South Side of the
County is Waltham-abbey, which was formerly a Monastery, built by Harold Son to
Earl Godwin, in Honor of the Cross. The Town is said to be built and peopled
by one Tovius toward the Latter-end of the Saxons Reign. This Town is seated
on the River Lee, where the Streams, being divided, enclose several small
Islands, which in times of great Floods are commonly overflowed: but these
Meadows produce great Plenty of Grass in Summer, so that here are many Dairy
Farms which turn to good Account.

The Abbey is turned into a Seat, which is now in the Possession of -- --
Jones, Esquire The Gardens belonging to this House, were, some Years since, in
great Repute; but since the Taste for enclosed Gardens has been condemned, they
have been little frequented, unless by some curious Persons, to see the
Tulip-tree, which grows on a Grass-plat near the House, and is one of the
finest and most flourishing of the Kind in England, producing annually a great
Quantity of Flowers in the Month of July.

At this Abbey was buried the Body of King Harold, slain in the great Battle in
Sussex against William the Conqueror, whose Mother begged that Favor of the
Conqueror; but no Monument was built for him, only a flat Gravestone, on which
was significantly engraven, Harold Infelix!

From hence I came again over the Lower or Western Part of the Forest, where it
is bespangled with Villages, filled with fine Seats, most of them built by
Citizens of London; but the Luster of them seems to be entirely eclipsed by the
magnificent Palace of Earl Tilney, which I barely mentioned, ( Page 3.) and
intimated that I would touch upon it again; as I shall now briefly do. This
noble Seat was prepared by his Lordship's Father Sir Josiah Child, in his
Lifetime, who added to the Advantage of its Situation a vast Number of Rows of
Trees, planted in curious Order for Avenues and Vista's, all leading up to the
Spot of Ground where the old House stood.

In the Place adjoining, the present Lord, before he was ennobled, and some
Years before he began the Foundation of his new House, laid out the most
spacious Pieces of fine Ground in Gardens, that are to be seen in this Part of
England. The Green-house is an excellent Building, fit to entertain a Prince;
it is furnished with Stoves, and artificial Places for Heat, from an Apartment
which has a Bagnio, and other Conveniences, which render it both useful and
pleasant; and these Gardens have been so much the Admiration of the Public,
that it has been the general Diversion of the Citizens to go out to see them,
till the Crowds grew so great, that his Lordship was obliged to restrain the
showing them to particular and stated Times.

The House was built since these Gardens were finished. It is all of Portland
Stone in the Front, which gives it a most magnificent Effect at a Distance; as
the Nature of that Stone, except in London, where it is tinged with Smoke, is
to grow whiter and whiter, the longer it stands in the open Air.

As the Forefront of the House looks through a long Row of Trees, reaching to
the great Road at Leighton-stone; so the Back-front respects the Gardens, from
which you fall down an easy Descent, which lands you upon the Terrace, and
gives a most beautiful Prospect to the River, which is all formed into Canals
and Openings, to answer the Views from above; and beyond the River, the Walks
and Wildernesses go on to such a Distance, and in such a Manner, up the Hill,
as they before went down, that the Sight is lost in the Woods adjoining, and it
looks all like one continued planted Garden, as far as the Eye can see.

I have not Room in this Letter to say half what might be said of this truly
noble Palace, nor for a particular Description of the beautiful House and
Gardens erected at Low-Layton, by the late Sir Fisher Tench; which the Duke
d'Aumont, Ambassador from France, about the Year 1711, said was one of the
neatest Boxes he had seen in England; and so shall hasten to conclude this
Letter.

From Earl Tilney's House, and the rest of the fine Dwellings on that Side of
the Forest, (for there are several very good Houses at Wanstead, only that they
seem, as I have said, all lost in the Luster of his Lordship's Palace) I went
South, toward the great Road over that Part of the Forest called the Flats:
And by this Turn came necessarily on to Stratford, where I set out. And here I
shall conclude my second Letter, with assuring you, that I am

Your most Humble Servant.

LETTER III. CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION of the County of KENT, etc.
SIR,
I SHALL begin my Account of the famous County of Kent at Deptford. It was
anciently called West-Greenwich, and is a very large Town, and of late so very
much improved, that a handsome new Church has been built there, dedicated to
St. Paul.

Here was built, by King Henry VIII. a Storehouse, who also incorporated
certain Officers by the Name of Master and Wardens of the Holy Trinity: These
were to take care of the Building, Keeping and Conducting of the Royal Navy.
Their Hall or House was adjoining to the Church: and the Treasurer of the Navy
had also a convenient House at the Dock for his Residence.

Here is a Foundation belonging to the said Corporation of Trinity-house, by
whom it was built at different Times, and in two Places, not quite contiguous.
The old Part contains 21 Houses, the new 38, for decayed Pilots or Masters of
Ships, or the Widows of such; the Men are allowed 20 s. the Women 16 s. per
Month.

But what Deptford is most noted for, is its noble Dock, where the Royal Navy
was used to be built and repaired, till it was found more convenient to build
the larger Ships at Woolwich, as I shall mention in its Place: notwithstanding
which, the whole Area of the Yard is now enlarged to more than double what it
formerly was: it has a wet Dock of Two Acres, for Ships, and another of an Acre
and half, for Masts; besides an Enlargement of its Storehouses,
Dwelling-houses, Launches, etc. suitable to it.

Near the Dock is a Seat belonging to Sir John Evelyn, which is called
Say's-court. This was originally in the Family of the Magmenots, who were
Normans, one of whom was Lord Warden of the Ports, and Governor of Dover-castle.

The Red House at Deptford was a noted Collection of Warehouses, and
Storehouses for many Sorts of Merchandises, and particularly Hemp, Flax, Pitch,
Tar, etc. But on Thursday the 5th of July 1739, a dreadful Fire broke out
there, which consumed the same. The Loss was incredible; for the Materials were
so combustible, that nothing could be saved, nor could the Flames be
extinguished, till they had nothing to prey upon.

From Deptford I proceeded to Greenwich, one of the most delightful Spots of
Great Britain. The Park, in which is the fine Observatory called
Flamstead-house, from the late famous Mathematician of that Name, the Royal
House, but more especially the noble Hospital, deserve particular Notice.

The Ground on which Part of this Hospital now stands, is the same on which was
formerly situated the Royal Palace of our Kings. Here Henry VIII. held his
Feasts with Jousts and Tournaments; and the Ground, which was called the
Tilt-yard, is the Spot on which the East Wing of the Hospital is built.

The Park was enlarged, walled about, and planted, by King Charles II. soon
after the Restoration; and the Design or Plan of a Royal Palace was then laid
out, one Wing of which was finished in a magnificent Manner, and makes now the
First Wing of the Hospital, toward London.

The Royal Palace now remaining was originally built by Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, surnamed the Good, Brother of Henry VI. and called by him
Placentia. King Henry VII. much enlarged it, added to it a small House of
Friers-Mendicant, and finished a Tower begun by Duke Humphrey on the Top of the
Hill, where now stands the Royal Observatory; from which is a most pleasant
Prospect down to the winding River, and the green Meadows. It was completed by
King Henry VIII. and afterward much enlarged and beautified by Henry Howard,
Earl of Northampton, who dwelt in it. Here Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth were
born, and here died King Edward VI.

The Hospital was founded by King William and Queen Mary, in the Year 1694, for
the Relief of Seamen, their Widows, and Children, and Encouragement of
Navigation. Three Tables are hung up at the Entrance into the Hall, which
record the Names of several generous Benefactors to this noble Charity,
amounting in the Whole to the Sum of 58,209 l. And in the Year 1732, the
forfeited Estate of the late Earl of Derwentwater, (being, by means of the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Gage, a Peer of Ireland, recovered out of
the Hands of certain private Persons, who had purchased the same at a Rate
vastly disproportioned to the Value) amounting to near 6000 l. per Annum, was
given by Parliament to carry on and complete this Work; which will enable them
to prosecute it with Vigor and Success; and accordingly they have made a great
Progress since that time in the second Wing, and other Parts of this sumptuous
Edifice.

The Hall is very noble, and finely painted by the late Sir James Thornhill. At
the Upper-end of it, in an Alcove, are represented the present Royal Family,
the late Princess Sophia, King George I. King George II. and Queen Caroline,
the Queen Dowager of Prussia, the Prince of Wales, the Duke, and the five
Princesses. On the Ceiling, over the Alcove, are her late Majesty Queen Anne,
and Prince George of Denmark. And on the Ceiling of the Hall, are King William,
and Queen Mary, with several fine emblematical Figures.

On a Pedestal in the Middle of the Area of the Hospital, fronting the Thames,
is a Statue of his Majesty King George II.

Anno 1705, 100 disabled Seamen were the first that were received into this
Hospital; but the present Number was made up in December 1737, a complete 1000.
To each 100 Pensioners Six Nurses are allowed, who are to be Seamens Widows, at
10 l. per Annum, and 2 s. per Week more to those who attend in the Infirmary.
Their common Clothing is Blue, with Brass Buttons.

The Church of Greenwich is a very handsome new-built Edifice, dedicated to St.
Alphage, Archbishop of Canterbury, who is said to have been killed by the Danes
on the Spot where the Church stands, Anno 1012.

There are two Free-Schools in this Parish, one founded by Sir William Boreman,
Knight. The other was set up by Mr. John Roan, who left his Estate for Teaching
Boys in Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic; allowing 2 l. per Annum for each
Boy's Clothes: their Number is Twenty.

There is also a handsome College in this Town, which fronts the River, for the
Maintenance of Twenty poor Men and a Master, founded and well endowed by Henry
Earl of Northampton, and committed by him to the Care of the Mercers Company of
London. A Chapel belongs to this College, where the Earl's Body is laid, which,
as well as his Monument, was removed hither a few Years ago, from the Chapel of
Dover Castle, whereof he was Constable.

This Town may be said to be one of the genteelest, as well as pleasantest, in
England; the Inhabitants are many of them Persons of Note and Fashion, who have
served abroad in the Fleets or Armies, and here pass the Remainder of their
Days in Ease and Delight, having the Pleasure to reflect upon the Dangers they
have gone through, and the faithful and honorable Parts they have acted on the
public Stage of Life, in their Country's Cause.

A Market was erected in the Year 1737, at this Town, the Direction of which is
in the Governors of the Hospital; and the Profits which shall arise from it,
are to be carried to the Use of that fine Foundation.

The River of Thames is here very broad, and the Chanel deep, and the Water at
some very high Spring-tides is salt; but in ordinary Tides, sweet and fresh.

The Country behind Greenwich adds to the Pleasure of the Place: Black Heath,
both for Beauty of Situation, and an excellent Air, is not outdone by any Spot
of Ground in England.

Near this is a vast Hill, used as a Butt for Archers, and in great Request
among the neighboring People, till King Henry VIII's Time; whence it took the
Name of Shooters-hill.

On the East Side of Black Heath stands the Hospital built by Sir John Morden,
Bart. a Turkey Merchant. Several Years before his Death, which happened in
1708, he erected this spacious Structure, in form of a College, solely at his
own Charge, in a Field called Great Stone Field, not far from his own
Habitation, for the Reception of poor, decayed, honest Merchants, whereof in
his Lifetime he placed Twelve there. But by reason of great Losses, they were
reduced to Four in the Lady Morden's Time, who was forced to retrench the
Expenses of the House, because the Share allotted her by the last Will of Sir
John, and some Parts of his Estate, did not answer so well as was expected.

When she died, Sir John's whole Estate coming to the College, the Number was
again increased, and there are at this Time 35 poor Gentlemen in the House; and
the Number not being limited, they are to be increased as the Estate will
afford; for the Building was designed for, and will conveniently hold 40.

Seven Turkey Merchants have the Direction and Visitation of this Hospital, and
the Nomination of the Persons to be admitted into it; and as often as any of
these Seven die, the Survivors are to choose others to fill up that Number.

Every Treasurer of this Hospital has 40 l. per Annum. There is also a
Chaplain, who is to read Prayers twice a Day in the Chapel, and to preach twice
every Sunday. His Salary at first was 30 l. a Year; but the Lady Morden doubled
it at her Death. She was in other respects a Benefactress to the College; and
as she put up her Husband's Statue in a Niche over the Gate of the College, the
Trustees have also put up hers in another Niche adjoining to that of her
Husband.

The Pension is 20 l. per Annum each. At first they wore Gowns, with the
Founder's Badge; which they have not done for some Years.

The Chapel within the College is neatly wain-scotted, and has a costly
Altar-piece, and it has a Burying-place adjoining, for the Members of the
College. The Founder, according to his own Desire, was buried in a Vault under
the Communion Table of this Chapel.

The Chaplain, the Treasurer, the Merchants, are all indispensably obliged to
be resident there; and unless in case of Sickness, no other Persons are to
reside, live, or lodge there; and no Person is to be admitted as a Pensioner,
who cannot bring a Certificate to prove himself upwards of 60 Years of Age.

In a Word, as the Situation of the Place is pleasant, the Air very good, and
the Endowment very sufficient, this may be said to be one of the most
comfortable and elegant Pieces of Charity in England.

Near this College is the noble House, or rather Palace, of Sir Gregory Page,
Bart. whose Father was a Brewer at Greenwich, a few Years ago. It is one of the
finest Seats in England, belonging to a private Gentleman; and the Park,
Gardens, and Country round it, contribute to make it a most delightful and
truly noble Habitation.

It was begun and entirely raised and covered in the Space of Eleven Months,
which shows how soon a large Building may be finished, where Money, the Sinews
of Building, etc. is not wanting.

Over this Heath the famous Roman Watling-street ran, toward Shooters-hill;
and so on to Rochester, Canterbury, and Dover. Here are great Numbers of small
Tumuli, with some large and eminent ones, out of which Bones have been dug by
the late learned Dr. Gale, (who resided many Years on this Heath) which show
that many Persons of Eminence have been formerly buried here.

On this Heath the Danish Army lay a great while encamped, A. D. 1011; and many
Trenches, and other Remains of the Lines of Camps, are still visible.

On the other Side of the Heath, North, is Charlton, a well built pleasant
Village. The Church was beautified and repaired by Order of Sir Edward Newton,
Bart. who was Tutor to King James the First's Son, Prince Henry; and it is one
of the finest Churches in this County.

At the Entrance of this Village, fronting Black Heath, stands the ancient
House built by Sir Edward Newton, who had this Manor granted to him by King
James I. It is a long Pile of Building in a Gothic Taste, having Four Turrets
on the Top: the Court before the House is spacious, at the Entrance of which
are too large Gothic Piers to the Gates, and in a Line on the Outside of the
Wall is a long Row of Cypress Trees, which are some of the oldest in England.
On the Back of the House are large Gardens, remaining in the same Taste in
which they were formerly laid out; and behind these is a small Park, which
joins to Woolwich Common. This House is now in the Possession of the Earl of
Egmont.

Near the Church are two fine Houses, one of which was built by the late Lord
Romney, who married a Daughter of Sir Cloudesly Shovel; the other was in the
Possession of the late Governor Hunter, before he went to Jamaica.

These Houses stand on the Edge of the Hill, having their Gardens sloping down
toward the River, which, though it renders the Prospect to the River very
delightful in the Heat of Summer, yet as it exposes their Gardens to the North
Winds, their Fruit Trees are generally blighted; and in the Spring, when the
Wind usually blows from the North, and East, these Gardens are so much exposed
to them, that it is very few Days, during that Season, that Persons can walk
with any Pleasure in them.

It is true, that in these Gardens you have a large Reach of the River in View,
so that every Tide of Flood, a great Number of Ships are generally sailing by
to London; as in the Tide of Ebb, many are passing toward Gravesend; which
affords a very delightful Sight, as it shows the great Trade carried on by the
Metropolis: yet as the Country on the other Side of the Water is a dead Flat
for a great Number of Miles, and this often covered with Water in Winter, so
the Winds not only come very cold over this Flat, but also bring Fogs, Damps,
and a very unwholesome Air with them, which greatly diminishes the Pleasure of
these Seats.

Charlton is noted for the Fair held in its Neighborhood on St. Luke's- day,
October. 18. called Horn-fair; the Rudeness of which, in a civilized,
well-governed Nation, may well be said to be unsufferable. The Mob at that Time
take all Kinds of Liberties, and the Women are especially impudent that Day; as
if it was a Day that justified the giving themselves a Loose to all manner of
Indecency without any Reproach, or without incurring the Censure which such
Behavior would deserve at another time.

And this in a Circumstance, which (far from being to be gloried in) ought to
be discountenanced by the Sex, as fixing the Brand of Incontinence on too many
of them, which they have little Reason to be proud of.

A vulgar Tradition gives the following Origin to this disorderly Fair: It
pretends to say, that one of the Kings of England, some say, King John, who had
a Palace in this Neighborhood, at Eltham, being a hunting near Charlton, then
a pitiful Hamlet only, and separated from his Attendants, entered into a
Cottage, and found the Mistress of it alone; and she being handsome, the King
took a Liking to her, and having prevailed over her Modesty, just in the
critical Moment, her Husband came in; and vowing to kill them both, the King
was forced to discover himself, and to compound with Gold for his Safety,
giving him moreover all the Land from thence as far as the Place now called
Cuckold's Point; and making him Master of the whole Hamlet, established a Fair
in favor of his new Demesne; and in Memory thereof, Horns, and Wares, and Toys
of all Sorts made of Horn, are sold at this Fair.

Through this Town lies the Road to Woolwich, a Town situated on the Bank of the
River, and wholly taken up by, and in a manner raised from, the Yards and Works
erected there for the Naval Service. For here, when the Business of the Royal
Navy increased, and Queen Elizabeth built larger and greater Ships of War than
were usually employed before, new Docks and Launches were erected, and Places
prepared for the Building and Repairing Ships of the largest Size; because here
was a greater Depth of Water, and a freer Chanel, than at Deptford.

The Docks, Yards, and all the Buildings belonging to it, are encompassed with
a high Wall, and are exceeding spacious and convenient; and so prodigiously
full of all Sorts of Stores of Timber, Plank, Masts, Pitch, Tar, and other
Naval Provisions, as can hardly be calculated.

Besides the Building-yards, here is a large Ropewalk, where the biggest Cables
are made for the Men of War; and on the East, or Lower-part of the Town, is the
Gun-yard, commonly called the Park, or the Gun-park; where is a prodigious
Quantity of Cannon of all Sorts for the Ships of War, every Ship's Guns apart;
heavy Cannon for Batteries, and Mortars of all Sorts and Sizes; insomuch that,
as I was informed, here have been sometimes laid up, at one Time, between seven
and eight Thousand Pieces of Ordnance, besides Mortars and Shells almost beyond
Number.

Here also is the House where the Firemen and Engineers prepare their
Fireworks, charge Bombs, Carcasses, and Grenades for the public Service.

Here is usually a Guard-ship riding, especially in time of War. The Town of
late Years is much enlarged and beautified, several fine Docks, Ropeyards, and
capacious Magazines added; and the Royal Foundery for Cannon repaired and
improved. The Thames is here at high Water near a Mile over, and the Water salt
upon the Flood; and as the Chanel lies strait East and West for about three
Miles, the Tide runs very strong, and the River is entirely free from Shoals
and Sands, and has seven or eight Fathom Water; so that the biggest Ships may
ride here with Safety, even at low Water.

The Parish Church of Woolwich has been lately rebuilt as one of the Fifty new
Churches, in a very handsome manner.

From this Town, till we come to Gravesend, the whole Shore is low, and spread
with Marshes and unhealthy Grounds, except some few Intervals, where the Land
bends inward, as at Erith, Greenhythe, North-fleet, etc. in which Places the
Chalk Hills almost join the River; and from thence the City of London, the
adjacent Countries, and even Holland and Flanders, are supplied with Lime, or
with Chalk to make it.

From these Cliffs on the Riverside, the Rubbish of the Chalk, which they must
be otherwise at the Charge of removing, is bought and fetched away by Lighters
and Hoys, and carried to all the Forts and Creeks in the opposite County of
Essex, and even to Suffolk and Norfolk, and sold there to the Farmers to lay
upon their Land, which they do in prodigious Quantities; and are glad to give
from 2 s. 6 d. to 4 s. a Load for it, according to the Distance.

This is the Practice in all the Creeks and Rivers in Essex, even to Malden,
Colchester, the Nase, and into Harwich Harbor up to Maningtree, and Ipswich;
as also in Suffolk, to Aldborough, Orford, Dunwich, Swold, and as high as
Yarmouth in Norfolk.

Thus the barren Soil of Kent (for such the chalky Grounds are esteemed) make
the strong clayey Lands of Essex rich and fruitful; and the Mixture of Earth
forms a Composition, which out of two barren Extremes, makes one prolifick
Medium.

Behind these marshy Grounds in Kent, at a small Distance, lies the Road from
London to Dover, on which, or near it, are several good Towns; for Example,
Eltham, formerly a Royal Palace, when the Court was kept at Greenwich; and
Queen Elizabeth, who (as before said) was born at Greenwich, was often carried
to Eltham by her Nurses, to draw in the wholesome Air of that agreeable Place;
but at present there are few or no Signs of the old Palace to be seen.

It is now however a pleasant Town, very handsomely built, full of good Houses;
and many Families of rich Citizens inhabit there, who bring a great deal of
good Company with them.

Near Eltham lies Chesilhurst, where is the Burying-place of the Family of the
Walsinghams, who resided in this Parish for several Generations.

In this Parish is an ancient Seat called Frog-pool, or Fragnall, which in the
Reign of King Henry III. was in the Possession of Thomas le Barbur, who in the
38th Year of the late King's Reign, had a Charter of Free Warren for his Lands
here. This Seat is now in the Possession of Mr. Tryon, a Merchant of London.

This Village is famous for the Retirement of the famous Mr. Camden, who
resided here for several Years, and here composed the greatest Part of his
Annals of Queen Elizabeth.

Near this are several other Towns and Villages, as Bexley, Crayford,
Wilmington, Foots-cray, North-cray, etc. which being Places of little Note, I
shall pass over with only observing, that about these Villages are many Woods,
chiefly of Birch, from whence the Broom-makers in Kent-street, Southwark, are
supplied with their Birch, which bring in a considerable Profit to the
Land-owners.

From this Side of the Country, all pleasant and gay, we go over
Shooter's-hill, where the Face of Things seems quite altered; for here we have
but a chalky Soil, and far from rich; much overgrown with Coppice-wood, which
is cut for Faggots and Bavins, and sent up by Water to London. Here they make
those Faggots which the Wood-mongers call Ostrey-wood, and in particular those
small light Bavins which are used in Taverns in London to light their Faggots,
and are called in the Taverns a Brush, and by the Wood-men Pimps. It Is
incredible what vast Quantities of these used to be laid up at Woolwich, Erith,
and Dartford; but since the Taverns in London are come to make Coal-fires in
their upper Rooms, that Trade declines; and though that Article would seem to be
trifling in itself, it is not immaterial to observe what an Alteration it makes
in the Value of those Woods in Kent, and how many more of them than usual are
yearly grubbed up, and the Land made fit for the Plough.

In July 1739, a very good Design was begun to be put in Execution on
Shooters-hill, a Number of Hands being employed in cutting a new Road, wide
enough for three Carriages to pass abreast on the Eastern Descent of the Hill,
which was formerly so narrow that it was impossible for a Passenger, if
waylaid, to escape falling into a Ruffian's Hands, and which gave Occasion to
many Robberies being committed here.

Dartford is a handsome large Town, having many good Houses in it, and is
finely watered by two or three very good Springs; the River goes through the
Town, and discharges itself into the Thames. On this River the first Paper-mill
in England was built, by Sir John Spillman, in the Reign of King Charles I. who
granted him a Patent, with a Salary of 200 l. per Annum for his Encouragement.

The first Mill also for Slitting of Bars of Iron for making of Wire, was on
this River.

There are two Churchyards here, one about the Church, and the other on the
Top of the Hill toward North-fleet; in the latter of which you may look over
the Tower of the Church, the Ground rising suddenly so very high.

Here is a very good Market for Corn on Saturdays, and an annual Fair on the
22d of July.

January 31. 1737-8, the Powder-mill at Dartford blew up, with this remarkable
Circumstance, That though all the Servants were about their respective
Employments, not one of them received any Hurt. And it is further remarkable,
that within eight Years, this is the fourth Time that this Mill has been blown
up, and no Damage done by the Disaster to the Persons of the People belonging
to it.

Gravesend lies on the North-side of Kent, on the River Thames, about six Miles
North-east from Dartford, and about the same Distance from Rochester. The Town
of Gravesend and Milton were incorporated in the 10th Year of Queen Elizabeth,
by the Name of the Port-Reeve, Jurats and Inhabitants of the Towns of Gravesend
and Milton. As this Place is the most frequented Passage of taking Boat for
London, by Persons who come from Dover, Rochester, etc. or through any Part of
Kent, from foreign Parts, so Queen Elizabeth ordered the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Companies of the City of London, to receive all eminent Strangers and
Ambassadors here, in their Formalities, and so to attend them to London in
their Barges, if they came up by Water: and if they came by Land, they were
ordered to meet them on Black Heath, on Horseback, in their Gowns. So much did
that wise Queen consult the Honor and Grandeur of the City!

King Henry VIII. raised here a Platform of Guns, and another at Milton, as
well as two others over against them on the Essex Side, for the Security of the
River. But since the Erection of Tilbury-fort, these have been demolished.

In the Year 1380, this Town was burnt by the French and Spanish Galleys, and
the Enemies carried away most of the Inhabitants Prisoners.

Here is a very handsome Charity, given by one Mr. Henry Pinnock, in the Year
1624, of 21 Dwellings, and a House for a Master Weaver to employ the Poor: And
a good Estate is also settled for the Repairs.

In this Town, on the East Side, is still standing the Body of an ancient
Chapel, which seems to have belonged to some Religious House, for Places in the
Walls of the Vault remain still for Holy Water. A Market is kept here on
Wednesdays and Saturdays, and an annual Fair on the 13th of October, which
lasts a Week.

There have been very great Improvements made of the Lands near this Town
within a few Years past, by turning them into Kitchen-gardens, the Land being
fresh for this Purpose, as also pretty moist, and the Town having good Quantity
of Dung made in it, with which they manure the Land: it produces very good
Garden-stuff in great Plenty, wherewith they not only supply the Towns for
several Miles round, but also send great Quantities to the London Markets;
particularly Asparagus, which is so much esteemed, that the Name of Gravesend
will bring a better Price than what is brought from any other Place, this
having obtained a much greater Reputation than Battersea, which was some Years
since famous for Asparagus.

As Gravesend is the great Ferry (as they call it) between London and
East-Kent. It is hardly credible what Numbers of People pass here every Tide,
as well by Night as by Day, between this Town and London. Almost all the People
of East-Kent, when they go for London, go no farther by Land than this Town;
and then for 6 d. in the Tilt-boat, or 1 s. in a small Boat or Wherry, are
carried to London by Water.

Another Thing for which this Town is worth notice, is, that all the Ships
which go to Sea from London, take, as we say, their Departure from hence; for
here all outward-bound Ships must stop, come to an Anchor, and suffer what they
call a second Clearing; (viz.) here a Searcher of the Customs comes on board,
looks over all the Coquets or Entries of the Cargo, and may, if he pleases,
romage the whole Lading, to see if there are any more Goods than are entered;
which however they seldom do, though they forget not to take a Compliment for
their Civility, and besides being well treated on board, have generally Three
or Five Guns fired in Honor to them, when they go off.

The Method of causing all Ships to stop here is worth observing, and is as
follows:

When a Merchant-ship comes down from London, (if they have the Tide of Ebb
under Foot, or a fresh Gale of Wind from the West, so that they have what they
call Fresh-way, and the Ships come down apace) they generally hand some of
their Sails, haul up a Fore-sail or Main-sail, or lower the Foretop-sail, so to
slacken her Way, as soon as they come to the Old Man's Head; when they open the
Reach, which they call Gravesend Reach, which begins about a Mile and half
above the Town, they do the like, to signify that they intend to bring to, as
the Sailors call it, and come to an Anchor.

As soon as they come among the Ships that are in the Road, (as there are
always a great many) the Sentinel at the Block-house on Gravesend Side fires
his Musket, which is to tell the Pilot he must bring to; if he comes on, as
soon as the Ship passes Broadside with the Block-house, the Sentinel fires
again, which is as much as to say, Why don't you bring to? If he drives a
little farther, he fires a third time, and the Language of that is, Bring to
immediately, and let go your Anchor, or we will make you.

If the Ship continues to drive down, and does not let go her Anchor, the
Gunner of the Fort is called; and he fires a Piece of Cannon, though without
Ball; and that is still a Threat, though with some Patience, and is to say, Will
you come to an Anchor, or will you not? If he still ventures to go on, by which
he gives them to understand he intends to run for it, then the Gunner fires
again, and with a Shot; and that Shot is a Signal to the Fortress over the
River, viz. Tilbury Fort, (which I described in my Account of Essex, p. 5.) and
they immediately let fly at the Ship from the Guns on the East Bastion, and
after from all the Guns they can bring to bear upon her: It is very seldom that
a Ship will venture their Shot, because they can reach her all the Way to the
Hope, and round the Hope-Point almost to Hole-Haven; though it is said, this has
been done once or twice: but the Occasion must be very extraordinary to make a
Ship run the Risque. As for Ships coming in, they all go by here without any
Notice taken of them, unless it be to put Waiters on board, if they are not
supplied before.

On the 24th of August 1727, a dreadful Fire happened here, which burnt down
and destroyed the Church, and the greatest Part of the Town; and in 1731, an
Act of Parliament passed for rebuilding the Church, as one of the Fifty new
ones; and the Town too, being mostly rebuilt, makes a better Appearance for the
Calamity it underwent.

The Passage to and from Gravesend to London is now made more commodious and
safe for Passengers than before, by Act of Parliament passed in 1736-7, for
regulating the Company of Watermen, etc. between Gravesend and Windsor; which
limits the Number of Passengers to Forty at the most, on board the Tilt-boats,
and Ten at most by the Wherries; directs the Burden of the said Boats;
prohibits close Decks and Bails nailed down in the Wherries; prescribes the
Times of Departure of the Tilt-boats and Wherries, and the Age of the Watermen
navigating the said Boats, and directs a Punishment against such Watermen as
wilfully lose their Tide, or set the Passengers on Shore two Miles short of the
Place to which they are bound. And the Rulers of the Watermens Company are
thereby obliged to provide Officers at Billinsgate, and at Gravesend, who, as
near as is possible, Night and Day, at every Time of High Water, and first of
Flood, are, at the respective Places, to ring publicly a Bell set up for that
Purpose, for Fifteen Minutes, to give Notice to the Tiltboats and Wherries to
put off, and make the best of their Way, without lying by, or putting on Shore,
being within two Miles of their respective Ports. Which excellent Provisions
must be a great Ease and Safety to all Persons who are obliged to use this
Passage.

A remarkable Occurrence happening the last Time I was at Gravesend, deserves
to be mentioned here in Honor to a brave and excellent English Mariner. The
Case was thus:

On Saturday, December 16. 1738, the Ship Anne and Thomas, Captain Ogilvie,
Commander, outward-bound for Africa, lying at Gravesend, was, by the boiling
over of a Kettle of Pitch, set on Fire: to extinguish which, the Crew at first
made an Attempt; but finding the Flames increase upon them, they were all upon
the Point of leaving her, for Fear of 100 Barrels of Gunpowder which were on
board: when happily the Mate, returning from a Visit he had been making to a
Brother Officer of a neighboring Ship, stopped their Design, and with a noble
Resolution, cutting the Boats clear of the Ship, told them they had no Means
left to escape perishing, either by Fire or Water, but by heartily joining
their Endeavors to extinguish the Flames. When they found themselves in so bad
a Dilemma, they unanimously attempted it, and after some time providentially
got it under, to the no small Joy of the Town of Gravesend, as well as of all
the Ships near them, who were in the utmost Consternation for Fear of the
Gunpowder, and every Moment in Expectation of the terrible Blow.

We see nothing remarkable on the Road hereabouts but Gad's- Hill, a noted
Place for robbing of Seamen, after they have received their Pay at Chatham.
Here it was that a famous Robbery was committed in or about the Year 1676,
which deserves to be mentioned: It was about Four o'Clock in the Morning, when
a Gentleman was robbed by one Nicks on a Bay Mare, just on the Declivity of the
Hill, on the West Side. Nicks came away to Gravesend, and, as he said, was
stopped by the Difficulty of getting the Boat, near an Hour, which was a great
Discouragement to him; but he made the best Use of it, as a kind of Bait to his
Horse: from thence he rode cross the County of Essex, to Chelmsford: here he
stopped about half an Hour to refresh his Horse, and gave him some Balls; from
thence to Braintree, Bocking, Wethersfield; then over the Downs to Cambridge,
and from thence, keeping still the cross Roads, he went by Fenny Stratford to
Godmanchester and Huntingdon, where he baited himself and his Mare about an
Hour; and, as he said himself, slept about half an Hour; then holding on the
North Road, and keeping a full Gallop most of the Way, he came to York the same
Afternoon; put off his Boots and riding Clothes, and went dressed as if he had
been an Inhabitant of the Place, to the Bowling-green, where, among other
Gentlemen, was the Lord Mayor of the City. He, singling out his Lordship,
studied to do something particular, that the Mayor might remember him by; and
then takes Occasion to ask his Lordship what o'Clock it was, who pulling out
his Watch, told him the Hour, which was a Quarter before, or a Quarter after
Eight at Night.

Upon a Prosecution for this Robbery, the whole Merit of the Case turned upon
this single Point; the Person robbed swore to the Man, to the Place, and to the
Time, in which the Fact was committed; but Nicks, proving by the Lord Mayor,
that he was as far off as Yorkshire at that Time, the Jury acquitted him on a
bare Supposition, that it was impossible the Man could be at two Places so
remote, on one and the same Day.

On the Road from Gad's- Hill to Rochester, are very large Cherry-Orchards,
especially on the Righthand of the Road: these Cherries are sent up to London
in Hoys, and were formerly a great Branch of Trade to the Land-owners of this
Country; but of late Years there has been such Plenty of this Fruit, that they
have scarce paid for gathering and sending to London, which has occasioned many
of the Owners of these Orchards to destroy them.

From Gad's- Hill we come to Rochester-Bridge, the longest, highest, and the
strongest built of all the Bridges in England, except that of London. Some
indeed say, the Bridge of Newcastle upon Tyne exceeds all the Bridges in
England for Strength; but then it is neither so high, nor so long, as this at
Rochester. It is supported by eleven Arches, and was built by Sir Robert
Knowles in the Reign of Henry IV. and railed in with Iron at the Charge of
Archbishop Warham.

The River Medway, at this Place, is very broad and rapid, foaming most
violently. Rochester was the Roman City Durobrivis, and was very strong, being
walled about and ditch'd. Many Antiquities have been found hereabouts. This
City stands in an Angle of the River, and seems to have been of a square Form,
the Watling-street running directly through it. Most of the Walls still remain;
and a large Piece of the Roman Wall, made of Rubble-stone laid sloping
side-ways, is to be seen near that Angle below the Bridge, encompassed by the
River with Roman Bricks in several Places.

Rochester, Stroud, and Chatham, are three distinct Places, but in a manner
contiguous.

Rochester has suffered very much by Fire and War. It consists chiefly of a
large ill-built broad Street. Stroud is separated from it only by a Bridge, and
may alone pass for a small City, and is well built, but has nothing very
remarkable in it.

The Castle of Rochester was erected by King William I. out of one Angle of the
River. The Walls of the great Tower now left, are four Yards thick. The Body of
the Cathedral is of the original Structure before the Conquest, and repaired by
Bishop Gundulph, an Architect, who likewise built the Castle. The great Tower
is called Gundulph's Tower. The chalky Cliff under the Castle Wall, next the
River, is a romantic Sight. The Rapidity of the Stream wastes it away, and
then huge Tracts of the Wall fall down. On the North Side of the North-west
Tower of the Church is Gundulph's Effigies. The Front of the Church is of the
old Work, but a new Window put in the Middle. The Eastern Gate of the City was
pulled down not very long ago, the Stones of which were of a Roman Cut. The
Townhouse and Charity-school are two of the best public Buildings in
Rochester and Stroud, except the Churches.

But Chatham being the chief Arsenal of the Royal Navy of Great Britain, is the
most considerable of the Kind in the World. The private Buildings, as the
Houses of the Sea-Officers, Directors, Inspectors, and Workmen belonging to the
Royal Navy, are well built, and many of them stately. But the public Edifices
there are indeed, like the Ships themselves, surprisingly large, and in their
several Kinds beautiful. The Warehouses, or rather Streets of Warehouses, and
Storehouses for laying up the Naval Treasure, are the largest in Dimension,
and the most in Number, that are any-where to be seen in the World. The
Rope-walks for making Cables, and the Forges for Anchors and other Iron-work,
bear a Proportion to the rest; as also the Wet-dock, Canals, and Ditches, for
keeping Masts and Yards of the greatest Size, where they lie sunk in the Water
to preserve them: The Boat-yard, Rope-yards, the Anchor-yard, Forges,
Founderies, all not easy to be described.

We come next to the Stores themselves, for which all this Provision is made;
and first, to begin with the Ships that are laid up there: The Sails, the
Rigging, the Ammunition, Guns, great and small Shot, small Arms, Swords,
Cutlasses, Half-pikes, with all the other Furniture belonging to the Ships that
ride at their Moorings in the River Medway, Powder excepted, which is generally
carried to particular Magazines, to avoid Disaster, all these Stores are
reposited in separate Buildings and Storehouses appropriated for the Furniture
of every Ship, and may be taken out on the most emergent Occasion, without
Confusion.

Besides these, are Warehouses for laying up the Furniture, and Stores for
Ships in general, and for the furnishing other Ships to be built, or for
repairing and supplying the Ships already there, as Occasion may require.

For this Purpose there are separate and respective Magazines of Pitch, Tar,
Hemp, Flax, Tow, Resin, Oil, Tallow; also of Sail-cloth, Canvas, Cables,
standing and running Rigging, ready fitted, and Cordage not fitted; with all
Kinds of Ship-chandlery Necessaries, such as Blocks, Tackles, Runners, etc.
with the Cooks, Boatswains, and Gunners Stores, and also Anchors of all Sizes,
Grapnells, Chains, Bolts, and Spikes, wrought and unwrought Iron, Cast-Iron
Work, such as Pots, Caldrons, Furnaces, etc. also Boats, spare Masts and Yards,
with a great Quantity of Lead and Nails, and other Necessaries, too many to be
enumerated.

To observe these Things deliberately, one would almost wonder what Ships they
were, and where they should be found, which could either for Building or
Repairing, Fitting or Refitting, call for such a Quantity of all these Things;
but when, on the other hand, one sees the Ships, and considers their
Dimensions, and consequently the Dimensions of all Things which belong to them;
how large, how strong every thing must be; how much of the Materials must go to
the making every thing proportionable to the Occasion, the Wonder would change
its Prospect, and one would be as much amazed to think how and where they
should be supplied.

The particular Government of these Yards is very remarkable, the
Commissioners, Clerks, Accomptants, etc. within Doors; the Store-keepers,
Yard-keepers, Dock-keepers, Watchmen, and all other Officers without Doors,
with the Subordination of all Officers one to another respectively, as their
Degrees and Offices require. The Watchmen are set duly every Night at stated
and certain Places within the several Yards, with every one a Bell over his
Head, which they ring or toll every Hour, giving so many Strokes as the Hour
reckons; and then one taking it from another through every Part of the Yard,
and of all the Yards, makes the Watch be performed in a very exact and regular
manner. In the River is a Guard-boat, which, like the Main-guard in a Garrison,
rows the Grand Rounds at certain Times, by every Ship in the River, to see that
the People on board are at their Post: If the Man placed to look out in each
Ship, does not call, Who comes there? the Guard-boat boards it immediately, to
examine into the Defect of Duty.

The Expedition that has been sometimes used here in fitting out Men of War, is
scarce credible; for the Workmen told us, That the Royal Sovereign, a First
Rate of 106 Guns, was riding at her Moorings, entirely unrigg'd, and nothing
but her three Masts standing, as is usual when a Ship is laid up; and that she
was completely rigged, all her Masts up, her Yards put to, her Sails bent,
Anchors and Cables on board, and the Ship sailed down to Black-Stakes in Three
Days, Sir Cloudesly Shovell being then her Captain.

I do not vouch the Thing; but when I consider, first, that every thing lay
ready in her Storehouses, and wanted nothing but to be brought out and carried
on Board; a Thousand or Fifteen hundred Men to be employed in it, and more, if
they were wanted; and every Man knowing his Business perfectly well; Boats,
Carriages, Pullies, Tackles, Cranes, and Hulk all ready; I do not know but it
might be done in one Day, if it was tried. Certain it is, the Dexterity of the
English Sailors in those things is not to be matched by any in the World.

The Building-yards, Docks, Timber-yard, Deal-yard, Mast-yard, Gun-yard,
Rope-walks, and all the other Yards and Places set apart for the Works
belonging to the Navy, are like a well-ordered City; and though you see the whole
Place, as it were, in the utmost Hurry, yet you see no Confusion; every Man
knows his own Business; the Master Builders appoint the Working or Converting,
as they call it, of every Piece of Timber, and give to the other Head-workmen
or Foremen, their Moulds for the squaring and cutting out of every Piece, and
placing it in its proper Birth (so they call it) in the Ship that is in
Building; and every Hand is busy in pursuing those Directions, and so in all
the other Works.

Rochester has a Market on Fridays, and it has, by Grant from King Henry I.
two annual Fairs, viz. May the 19th, and Nov. the 30th. The Ground on that Side
of the Town next the River is very low and marshy, being overflowed by every
high Tide, which renders the Situation unpleasant, and the Air unwholesome, from
the Vapors which arise from these salt Marshes.

It may not be amiss in this Place to take Notice, that there is in the River
Medway, at Rochester, and in several of its Creeks and Branches within the
Jurisdiction of the City, an Oyster-Fishery, which is free to every one who has
served Seven Years Apprenticeship to any Fisherman or Dredger, who is free of
the said Fishery; and the Mayor and Citizens of Rochester hold a Court,
commonly called An Admiralty-Court, once a Year, or oftener, when Occasions
have required it, for the regulating of the said Fishery, and to prevent Abuses
committed in it. In these Courts they appoint, from Time to Time, when Oysters
shall and shall not be dredged and taken, which they call Opening and Shutting
the Grounds; after the Quantity each Dredgerman shall take in a Day, which is
usually called Setting the Stint. They have a Power to go on board, and enforce
these Orders; and when they have found them not duly observed, or that the
Brood or Spat has been taken which should have been preserved, they seize and
throw into the River and Creeks the Brood, or such Oysters as have exceeded the
prescribed Quantity.

Persons who dredge or fish for Oysters, not being Free of the Fishery, are
called Cable-hangers, and are presented and punished by the Court. Every
licensed Dredger pays six Shillings and Eight-pence yearly to the Support of
the Courts. But several licentious Persons having, in Process of Time,
contested the Authority of this Court, and great Inconveniences arising from
it, to the endangering the Fishery, and to the Destruction of all good Order
and Rule, the Corporation and Free Dredgermen applied to Parliament, and an Act
passed, Anno 1729, establishing the Jurisdiction of the City of Rochester, and
enforcing the Authority of the said Courts; and since that another Act
explaining and supplying Defects; so that at present this Fishery is in a
flourishing Condition, and all the fair Dealers in this Commodity find their
Account in it.

It is about sixteen or eighteen Miles from Rochester Bridge to Sheerness Fort
by Water, on the River Medway; of this it is about fourteen Miles to
Black-stakes; the Chanel is so deep all the Way, the Banks so soft, and the
Reaches of the River so short, that, in a Word, it is the safest and best
Harbor in the World; and we saw two Ships of eighty Guns, each riding afloat
at Low Water, within Musket Shot of Rochester Bridge. The Ships ride as in a
Mill-pond, or a Wet-dock, except that being moored at the Chains, they swing up
and down with the Tide; but as there is Room enough, they are moored in such
manner, that they cannot swing foul of one another; nor did I ever hear of any
Accident that befell any of the King's Ships here by Storms and Weather, except
in that dreadful Tempest in 1703, when the Royal Catharine was driven on Shore,
and, receiving some Damage, sunk; and the Ship also being old, could not be
weighed again.

There are Two Castles on the Shore of this River, the one at Upnor, where is a
good Platform of Guns, and which guards Two Reaches of the River, and is
supposed to defend all the Ships which ride above, between that and the Bridge;
also on the other Shore is Gillingham Castle, formed for the same Purpose, and
well furnished with Guns which command the River; besides which there is a Fort
or Platform of Guns at a Place called The Swamp, and another at Cockham Wood.
But these are principally added since the Time that the Dutch made that
memorable Attempt upon the Royal Navy in this River on the 22d of June, in the
Year 1667; for at that Time all was left unguarded, and there were but Four
Guns that could be used at Upnor, and scarce so many at Gillingham, the
Carriages being rotten and broken; and, in a Word, every thing concurring to
invite the Enemy. There were about Twelve Guns at the Isle of Shepey, where now
Sheerness Fort is built; but the Dutch soon dismounted most of them; after
which they went boldly up to Black-stakes with their whole Squadron; and after
that Seven of their biggest Men of War went up as high as Upnor, where they did
what Mischief they could, and went away again, carrying off the Royal Charles,
a First-rate Ship of 100 Guns, and burning the London, and several others,
besides damaging most of the Ships that were within their Reach; and, all
things considered, it was a Wonder, that they went away without ruining all the
rest of the Navy that was in that River.

This Alarm gave England such a Sense of the Consequence of the River Medway,
and of the Docks, and Yards at Chatham, and of the Danger the Royal Navy lay
exposed to there, that all these Doors, which were open then, are locked up and
sufficiently barred since; and it is not now in the Power of any Nation, unless
they were Masters at Land as well as Sea, to give us such another Affront; for
besides all these Castles, Lines of Guns, and Platforms on each Side the River
Medway, as we go up, there is now a Royal Fort built at the Point of the Isle
of Shepey, called Sheerness, which guards that Entrance into the River. This is
a regular Fortification, and has such a Line of heavy Cannon commanding the
Mouth of the River, that no Fleet of Men of War could attempt to pass by, as
the Dutch did, without hazarding being torn to pieces. I took a View, while I
was in these Parts, of Cobham-hall, six Miles from Chatham, the Seat of the
Earl of Darnley, a handsome Brick-house, remarkable for the excellent Marble
Chimney-pieces in most of the Rooms.

At Raynham Church near Rochester, we saw several Monuments of the Family of
the Earl of Thanet; and the Steeple is reckoned a Sea-mark.

SHEERNESS is not only a Fortress, but a good Town with several Streets in it,
and Inhabitants of several Sorts, but chiefly such whose Business obliges them
to reside here. The Officers of the Ordnance have here an Office; they being
often obliged to be at this Place many Days together, especially in Time of
War, when the Rendezvous of the Fleet is at the Nore, to see to the furnishing
every Ship with military Stores, as Need requires, and to cheque the Officers
of the Ships in their Demands of those Stores, and the like.

Here is also a Yard for building Ships, with a Dock, intended chiefly for
repairing Ships that may meet with any sudden Accident. But then it is to
observed, that those are generally but for Fifth and Sixth-rate Ships, small
Frigates, Yachts, and such Vessels; though once, when I was there, I saw one upon
the Stocks of Sixty-four Guns. This Yard is a late Thing also, and built many
Years since the Fort.

Shepey-Isle is supposed to be so called from its being one of the first Places
in England, where Sheep were kept, or from its affording a great Plenty of
those useful Animals. This Island is encompassed with the mixed Waters of the
Thames, and the Medway on the West; with the Swalle on the South, and with the
main Ocean on the North and East. It has great Plenty of good Corn, but wants
Wood. It is about twenty-one Miles in Compass.

Here are several Tumuli in the marshy Parts all over the Island, some of which
the Inhabitants call Coterels; these are supposed to have been cast up in
Memory of some of the Danish Leaders, who were buried here; for the Danes have
often made this Island the Scene of their Ravages and Plunder.

There was anciently a Bridge and Causeway, between this Isle and Hearty: this
was called Thrembethe-bridge, as afterward the Ferry was called Tremod-Ferry:
The common Way into this Island, from the main Land of Kent, is by
King's-Ferry, where a long Cable of about a hundred and forty Fathom, being
fastened at each End across the Water, serves to get over the Boat by hand.

On the main Side of the Ferry is a small Stone-building, which will hold Nine
or Ten Persons: this is said to have been erected by one George Fox, who
staying once there a long while in the Cold, waiting for the Ferry-boat, and
being much affected with it, he built this Place to shelter others from the
like Inconvenience. For the Maintenance of this Ferry, and keeping up the
Highway leading to it, through the Marshes for above a Mile in length, the Land
Occupiers tax themselves one Penny per Acre for fresh Marsh-land, and one Penny
for every Ten Acres of salt Marsh-land per Ann. This Tax, together with some
Lands belonging to the Ferry, has from time to time kept the said Ferry and
Causeway, with a Wall against the Sea, in good Repair; as also the Boats,
Cables, and a House for the Ferry-keeper, who is obliged to tow all Travelers
over free, except on four Days yearly, viz. Palm-monday, Whit-monday, St.
James's-day and Michaelmas, when a Horseman pays Twopence, and a Footman one
Penny: But on Sundays, or after Eight o'Clock at Night, there is no Passage
gratis; so that at such Times, the Ferry-keeper will demand Sixpence of every
Horseman, and Twopence of every Footman; and in these Cases the Land Occupiers
pay as well as Strangers. The Keeper of this Ferry is allowed 24 l. per Ann. by
the Land Occupiers, beside what he makes in carrying over Passengers in the
Nightime, and on Sundays: And to this he has another Perquisite added; which
is to dredge for Oysters within the Compass of his Ferry-loop, which extends
one Tow's Length, (as they term it) i. e. sixty Fathoms on each Side of the
Castle.

In the upper Grounds of this Island, is great Plenty of good Corn; but equal
Scarcity of fresh Water, most of their Springs being brackish; though within a
few Years past, a Well was sunk so deep as to lie below the Bed of the Sea,
which has furnished the Garrison at Sheerness with fresh Water: but before this
the People of the Garrison had a Yacht, which was employed in bringing fresh
Water from Deptford.

A great Number of Marine Plants grow in the salt Marshes, which occasions the
Curious in Botany to visit this Island frequently in the midst of Summer, when
the Plants are in their Perfection.

At the South-west Point of the Isle of Shepey, where the East Swale parts from
the West, and passes on as above, stands Queenborough; so called by King Edward
III. in Honor of his Queen Philippa, Daughter to William Earl of Hainault and
Holland. Here was a Castle erected by King Edward, as a Defense of the Mouth of
the River Medway. In the Building of this Castle that Prince was assisted by
William of Wickham, who was then Surveyor of the King's Works, and afterward
made Bishop of Winchester. This Castle was afterward repaired in the Year
1536, by King Henry VIII. who at the same time built others at Deal, Walmer,
etc. for the Defense of the Seacoasts. The Governors of Queen-borough Castle
were formerly honored with the Title of Constable; and by the List of them, it
appears, that many of them were Men of great Consideration.

This Castle was standing in the Year 1629; for Mr. Johnston, in his little
Book, entitled, Iter Plantarum Investigationis ergo susceptum, tells us, That
he saw there a noble large Dining Room, or Hall, round the Top of which were
placed the Arms of the Nobility and Gentry of Kent; and, in the Middle, those
of Queen Elizabeth, with the following Latin Verses under, in great Letters:
Lilia virgineum pectus regale leonis
Significant; vivas virgo, regasque leo:
Umbra placet vultus, vultus quia mentis imago;
Mentis imago placet, men's quia plena Deo:
Virgo Deum vita, regina imitata regendo,
Viva mihi vivi fiat imago Dei.
Qui Leo de Juda est, et Flos de Jesse, leones
Protegat et flores, Elizabetha, tuos.
A. D. 1593. In English thus: Lilies the Lion's Virgin Breast explain;
Then live a Virgin, and a Lion reign.
Pictures are pleasing; for the Mind they show;
And in the Mind the Deity we view.
May she, who God in Life and Empire shows,
To me the eternal Deity disclose!
May Jesse's Flower, and Judah's Lion, deign
Thy Flowers and Lions to protect, O Queen!
A. D. 1593.

At present there are not any Remains of this Castle to be seen; the Ground
where it stood is moated round; and there is a Well about 40 Fathom deep, still
remaining. By the several Ordinances which were made by King Edward III.
relating to Naval Affairs, it appears this Place was then very famous; but at
present it is a miserable dirty Fishing-town; yet has a Mayor, Aldermen, etc.
and sends Two Burgesses to Parliament; although the chief Traders of this Town
seem to be Ale-house-keepers, and Oyster-catchers, and their Votes at an
Election for Parliament Men are the principal Branch of their scandalous
Traffic. A pernicious Practice! too much followed in better Towns, and which
may one Day be of fatal Consequence to the Liberties of Britain.

Here we took Boat, and went up the East Swale, to Milton, or Middleton, as
formerly called, which lies, as it were, hid among the Creeks; for it is almost
out of Sight as well by Water as by Land, and yet it is a large Town, has a
considerable Saturday Market, for Corn, Fruit, and other Provisions; and the
Oysters taken in the Grounds about this Town, are the most famous of any in
Kent. This Town is governed by an Officer, who is called by the old Saxon Name
Port-reve; he is chosen annually on St. James's- day, and he supervises the
Weights and Measures all over the Hundred of Milton. It had anciently a Royal
Palace for the Kentish Kings.

From hence, keeping the Coast, and the great Road together, for they are still
within View of one another, we come to Sittingburn, formerly a Market Town, but
still a considerable Thorough-fare, and full of good Inns.

Just by the Town are the Ruins of a Fortification raised by King Alfred, when
in Pursuit of the Danes, called Bavord-castle. They boast here much, of one
Norwood having entertained King Henry V. on his triumphant Return from France;
and though the Entertainment was, according to the Times, very elegant, yet the
whole Expense of it amounted to no more than 9 s. and 9 d.

From Sittingburn we came to Feversham; which is a large fair Town, having one
long and broad Street: it has a very good Market-house, where the Market is
kept on Wednesdays and Saturdays; and there are Two annual Fairs in this Town,
of Ten Days each; viz. on February the 14th, and on August the 1st. This Town
is well peopled, and in a very flourishing State, being in the Neighborhood of
one of the best Parts of Kent, and having a very commodious Creek to bring in,
or carry out their Goods; but many of the Inhabitants have carried on the
Smuggling Trade for Years, for which this Creek lies very convenient. Brandy,
and often French Wines, are sold here at very low Rates, especially at such
times as the Smugglers have been apprehensive of Discovery; to prevent which
they have been known to sell their Wines to any Persons who would venture to
purchase them, for 2 d. per Quart.

The Fishermen here have a very good Custom: They will admit no one to take out
his Freedom, unless he be a married Man. The Trade for Oysters here with the
Dutch is so large, as to bring in between 2 and 3000 l. per Annum, ready Money,
from Holland, for this Commodity only.

At Feversham are the Remains of a Monastery founded by King Stephen, where he
was buried with his Family. At present nothing is left but two Gate-houses, of
mean Structure. At the Dissolution, they say, the Coffin of Lead, which held
the Royal Body, was taken up and sold; but the Corpse was thrown into the
Thames, and taken up by some Fishermen. Here, in the Year 903, King Ethelstan
enacted Laws.

It was at the Mouth of this Swale, namely, at Shellness, so called from the
Abundance of Oyster-shells always lying there, that the Smack in which the late
King James II. embarked for his Escape into France, ran on Shore, and being
boarded by the Fishermen, the King was taken Prisoner; and I must mention it to
the Reproach of the People of Feversham, whatever the Conduct of that
unfortunate Prince had been, that the Fishermen and Rabble treated him, even
after they were told who he was, with the utmost Indecency, using his Majesty
with such personal Indignity, and giving him such opprobrious and abusive
Language, and searching him in so rude a manner, that the King himself said, he
was never more apprehensive of losing his Life than at that Time. He was
afterward carried by them up to the Town, where he was not much better treated
for some time, till some neighboring Gentlemen of the County came in, who
understood their Duty better, by whom he was preserved from farther Violence,
till Coaches and a Guard came from London, by the Prince of Orange's Order, to
conduct him with Safety and Freedom to London; where he was much better
received.

While I was near this Town some Years before, a terrible Accident happened;
namely, the blowing up of a Powder-mill, which stood upon the River, close to
the Town; the Blast shattered the whole Town, broke the Windows, blew down
Chimneys, and Gable-ends; and several People were killed at the Powder-house
itself, though not any, as I remember, in the Town. But what was most remarkable
in it all, was, that the eldest Son of the Master of the Powder-mill, a Youth
of about Fifteen Years of Age, who was not in the Mill, or near it, when it
blew up, but in a Boat upon the River, rowing cross for his Diversion, was
killed by a Piece of the Materials of the Mill, which were blown up into the
Air, and fell down upon him in the Boat.

After I have mentioned the Tombs of King Stephen and his Queen, in Feversham,
I know nothing else this Town is remarkable for, except the most notorious
Smuggling Trade, which I have mentioned, and which is carried on partly by the
Assistance of the Dutch, in their Oyster-boats; nay, even the Owling Trade, or
clandestine Exporting of Wool, seems removed from Romney Marsh, to this Coast;
and a great deal of it has been carried on between the Mouth of the East-Swale
and the North Foreland.

From this East-Swale, and particularly from these last Three Towns,
Queenborough, Milton, and Feversham, the Fish-market at Billinsgate is supplied
with several Sorts of Fish; but particularly with the best and largest Oysters,
such as some call Stewing, others, Milton Oysters; as they are from the Essex
Side with a smaller and greater Sort, called Wallfleet.

I shall now cross the Hills from Milton to Maidstone, on the River Medway,
near 10 Miles distant from Rochester to the South-east.

Maidstone is a very ancient Town: the River Medway, over which it has a
Bridge, is navigable up to it by large Hoys, of 50 or 60 Tons Burden, the Tide
flowing quite up to the Town. In 1739, an Act passed for making it further
navigable, of which I shall take proper Notice, when I come to speak of the
Timber in Sussex.

Here is carried on a Manufacture of Linen-thread, and likewise, in the
Neighborhood, are great Plantations of Hops, which were supposed to be first
planted here at the Beginning of the Reformation, which gave Occasion to that
old Distich, Hops, Reformation, Bays, and Beer,
Came into England all in a Year.


Maidstone is eminent for Plenty of Provisions, for Richness of Lands, and for
the best Market in the County, not excepting either Rochester or Canterbury. It
has also a handsome Bridge, which, in the Opinion of some, is inferior only in
Length to that of Rochester.

From this Town, and the neighboring Parts, London is supplied with more
Particulars than from any single Market Town in England; which I mention in
pursuance of my first Resolution of observing how every Part of England
furnishes something to the City of London. 1. From the Weald of Kent, which
begins but about Six Miles off, and particularly from that Part which lies this
Way, they being the large Kentish Bullocks. 2. From hence are brought great
Quantities of the largest Timber for Supply of the King's Yards at Chatham, and
often to London; most of which is at present brought by Land-carriage to
Maidstone. 3. From the Country adjoining, great Quantities of Corn are brought
up to London; also Hops, Apples, and Cherries. 4. A Kind of Paving Stone, about
Eight or Ten Inches square, exceeding durable, used to pave Court-yards, etc.
5. Fine white Sand for the Glass-houses, esteemed the best in England for
melting into Flint-glass, and Looking-glass Plates; and for the Stationers Use
also, vulgarly called Writing-sand.


All that Side of the County which I have mentioned, as it is marshy and
unhealthy, by its Situation among the Waters, is chiefly inhabited by
Ship-builders, Fishermen, Seafaring-men, and Husbandmen, and such as depend
upon them; and very few Families of Note are found among them. But as soon as
we come down Boxley-hill from Rochester, or Hollingbourn-hill from Milton, to
the well-watered Plain on the Banks of the Medway, we find the Country
everywhere bespangled with populous Villages, and delicious Seats of the
Nobility and Gentry; and especially on the North-side of the River, beginning
at Aylesford on the Medway, the Seat of the Earl of that Name, and looking East
toward the Sea, to Eastwell near Ashford, the Seat of the Earl of Winchelsea.

Among these are the ancient Families of Fane, Colepeper, Deerham, Honywood,
Wotton, Roberts, Hales, etc.

This genteel Neighborhood makes Maidstone a very agreeable Place to live in;
for here is what is not often found, namely, a Town of very great Business and
Trade, and yet full of Gentry, and good Company.

There is not much Manufacturing in this County: what is left is chiefly at
Canterbury, and in this Town of Maidstone, and its Neighborhood. The
Manufacture of this Town is principally Linen-thread, as I have said, which
they make to pretty good Perfection, though not extraordinary fine. At Cranbrook,
Tenterden, Goudhurst, and other Villages in the Neighborhood of this Place,
was once a considerable Cloathing-trade carried on; and the Yeomen of Kent, of
whom so much has been famed, and who inhabited these Parts, were generally much
enriched by it; but that Trade is now quite decayed, and scarce Ten Clothiers
left in all the County.

The Farmers, and Descendents of these Clothiers, upon the Elections of Members
for the County, show themselves still there; for there are ordinarily 14 or
1500 Freeholders brought from this Side of the County, who for the Plainness of
their Appearance are called the Gray Coats of Kent; but are so considerable,
that whoever they vote for, is sure to carry it; and therefore the Gentlemen
are very careful to preserve their Interest among them.

This Town of Maidstone is a Peculiar of the Archbishop of Canterbury, who is
the proper Incumbent, and puts in a Curate to officiate for him. The Archbishop
has a Palace here, which is esteemed very ancient, to which there is a Chapel
belonging. The Architecture is Gothic, but good of the Kind; and some Parts of
it have been repaired after the modern Manner. Maidstone is a Roman Station,
named Vagniacis or Madviacis, from the British Word Maedwaeg the Meadows on the
River Vaga, which are here beautiful. The Archiepiscopal Palace was founded by
John Ufford, and finished by Simon Islep. The College or Hospital was erected
by Archbishop Boniface, and a Chantry by Thomas Anindel, now the Free School.
About the Year 1720, several Canoes were dug up, made of hollowed Trees, in the
Marshes of the River Medway above Maidstone, one of which is used for a Boat to
this Day. In the Hands of Dr. Dodd at Addington, near Malling, in the Year
1720, a British Coin of Amber was found, in the Foundation of a Stone Wall. The
unequal Side was plain; on the Concave was a British Horse, rude enough. The
Assizes are generally held here, and always the County Elections; and it is
governed by a Mayor, and Twelve Jurats.

Charing, not far off, was the ancient Durolenum, situated upon a Spring of the
River Len. Here the Archbishops of Canterbury had a castellated Palace, given
them by some of the first Saxon Kings, of which there are large Ruins.

In my Way to Maidstone, on a former Journey, I saw Mareworth Castle, a pretty
Fabric, belonging to the Earl of Westmorland and on a rising Ground, within a
Mile of Aylesford, viewed an Antiquity, vulgarly called Ketts-cotty-house,
which are three great Stones piled on each other, and deemed the Tombs of
Kentigern and Horbus, two Danish Princes, slain in Battle, and there buried.

In prosecuting my Journey from Maidstone to Canterbury, I cannot help
mentioning Lenham, a Town about 17 Miles distant from that City; in relation to
which the Rt. Rev. Continuator of Camden records the following extraordinary
Circumstance.

"At Lenham, says he, is a thing exceeding remarkable, mentioned on the Tomb of
Robert Thompson, Esquire in the Church there, who was Grandchild to that truly
religious Matron, Mary Honeywood, Wife of Robert Honeywood, of Charing, Esquire She
had at her Decease, lawfully descended from her, 367 Children; 16 of her own
Body; 114 Grandchildren; 228 in the third Generation; and 9 in the fourth. Her
Renown lives with her Posterity: her Body lies in this Church, and her
Monument may be seen in Marks-hall, in Essex, where she died."

From hence I pursued my Journey to Canterbury, which all Writers agree was
called, by the Britons, Kent, and is the Duroverno^ of the Romans; of which
Town, and its Antiquities, so much has been said, and so accurately, that I
need do no more than mention it briefly. However, I observe here.

1. That Augustine, the Monk, the first Christian Preacher that came from Rome
into this Island, settled in this Place: but that he was the first that
preached Christianity in the Island (as some have suggested) is a Mistake; as
the famous Conference between him and the Monks of Banchor in Wales,
sufficiently testify.

2. That Seven Bishops of Canterbury, including that Augustine; lie buried here
in one Vault.

3. That Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of this See, insulted the King his
Sovereign in an unsufferable Manner; insomuch that in the Reign of Henry II. he
was here murdered by the Connivance, as some say, of the King; and they show
what they call his Blood upon the Pavement at this Day.

4. That they show the Stone-steps ascending to his Shrine, (he being
afterward canonized) worn away to a Slope, by the Knees of the Pilgrims, who
visited it.

5. That the Bodies of King Henry IV. and of Edward the Black Prince, are
buried here, and the magnificent Effigies of the latter, very curiously carved,
lies on his Tomb or Monument. Here is a pretty Chapel, originally designed for
the Celebration of Masses for the Soul of King Henry IV.

6. That the immense Wealth offered by Votaries and Pilgrims, for several Ages,
to the Shrine of Becket, was such, that the famous Erasmus, who saw it, says of
it thus: "All shone, sparkled, glittered with rare and very large Jewels; and
even in the whole Church appeared a Profuseness above that of Kings." In short,
Gold was one of the meanest Treasures of his Shrine: and at the Dissolution, as
Dugdale observes, the Plate and Jewels filled Two great Chests, each whereof
required Eight Men to carry out of the Church. And Camden says, the Name of
Christ, to whom it was dedicated, was almost laid aside for that of St. Thomas.

7. That all this immense Treasure, with the Lands and Revenues of the whole
Monastery, were seized upon by King Henry VIII. at the general Suppression of
Religious Houses, except such as are annexed to the Deanery and Chapter, and to
the Revenue of the Archbishopric, which are not very considerable. There is an
old Picture of Becket's Martyrdom, and an ancient Painting upon the Wall, of
the Siege of Jerusalem, in the Habits of our Ancestors.

8. Here are also to be seen the Monuments of Cardinal Courticello, Cardinal
Pole, Archbishop Chichley; Bp. Peckham's, carved in Wood upwards of 450 Years
ago; Bishop Wharton, the Duke of Clarence, Archbishop Langton; with many others
of less Account.

The Cathedral is a large and noble Pile of Building: very curious Remnants of
painted Glass are still to be seen in the Windows. It is entirely vaulted with
Stone, and of a very pretty Model; but much too high for its Breadth, as all
Gothic Buildings were. The Metropolitan Chair is of gray Marble, standing
behind the High Altar. The Cloisters are pretty good, and near them a very
large Chapel, called the Sermon-house, wainscotted with Irish Oak. Under it is
a large Protestant French Church, given first by Queen Elizabeth to the
Walloons, who fled hither from the Persecution of the Duke d'Alva. The Number
of these Refugees has been since very much increased by French Protestants
obliged to leave their native Country, through the Cruelty of Louis XIV.

The Close where the Houses of the Prebendaries stand, is very spacious and
fair, and a great many very good Houses are built in it, and some with good
Gardens.

Here are many Remains of Roman and Saxon Buildings. The City is strongly
walled about, and many Towers at due Intervals, a deep Ditch close underneath,
and a great Rampart of Earth within. The Materials of the Walls are chiefly
Flint.

The Castle was built in the Reign of King William I. of the same Form, and the
Walls of the same Thickness, with that of Rochester. Dungeonhill, a very high
Mount, seems to have been Part of the old Castle. Opposite to it, without the
Walls, is an Hill, seeming to have been raised by the Danes, when they besieged
the City. The Top of Dungeon-hill is equal to the Top of the Castle, and
exhibits a fine Prospect over the City and Country.

Of Augustine's Monastery, two Gates remain next the City, and both very
stately. Perhaps one belonged to King Ethelbert's Palace, the other to the
Monastery, which doubtless was very splendid; for it covers a great Compass of
Ground, and is surrounded with a very high Wall. There were continual Quarrels
between the Monks of Augustine and of Thomas a Becket, both very rich, and very
contentious.

Near this Monastery is a vast angular Piece of a Tower, (besides half of
another) about 30 Feet high, which has been undermined by digging away a Course
at Bottom, in order to be thrown down; but it happened only to disjoint itself
from the Foundation, and lodged itself in the Ground in the present inclining
State. Thus being equally poised, it presents a View of Terror, and forbids a
too near Access.

The adjacent Close is full of religious Ruins, and in a Corner of it are the
Walls of a Chapel, said to have been a Christian Temple before Augustine's
Time, and reconsecrated by him to St. Pancras. Near it is a little Room, said
to have been King Ethelbert's Pagan Chapel. The Vulgar say, here are the Marks
of the Devil's Claws.

Eastward of this, and farther out of the City, is St. Martin's Church, said to
be Augustine's first See, and the Place whither King Ethelbert's Queen used to
repair to divine Service. It is built mostly of Roman Brick. In the Middle is a
very large old fashioned Font, supposed to be that where the King was baptized.

North of the City is a very small Remainder of St. Gregory's Chapel, founded
probably by Augustine to the Honor of that Pope, his Patron.

The City has been much advantaged by the Settlement in it of Two or Three
thousand French Protestants, Men, Women, and Children, owing to the
abovementioned Expulsion of the Protestants under Louis XIV.

The Employment of those Refugees was chiefly Broad Silk Weaving, which has
suffered several Changes and Alterations; but is still carried on here to some
Account.

But what has added most to the Advantage of Canterbury, is the Hop-grounds all
round the Place, to the Amount of several Thousand Acres, insomuch that
Canterbury was, for some time, the greatest Plantation of Hops in the whole
Island; but now they have a Rival, if not an Over-match, about Farnham, as I
shall observe in its Place.

In January 1738, were found in a Shave belonging to the Estate of Sir John
Hales, who lives in this Neighborhood, and within his Manor of Tunstall near
Sittingbourn, several Hundreds of broad Pieces of Gold, which were thought to
be concealed in the Time of the late Civil Wars by an Ancestor of Sir John.
They were found by a poor Boy, who was rambling in the Coppice; and not knowing
what to make of them, was playing with some of them at a Farmer's in the
Neighborhood of Canterbury, and the Farmer got Possession of them; but not
being able to keep the Secret, he refunded 624 of the Broad-pieces for the Use
of the Crown: Though Sir John laid Claim to the Whole.

The Shore from Whitstable, and the East-Swale, affords nothing remarkable but
Sea-marks, and small Towns on the Coast, till we came to Margate, noted for
King William's frequently Landing here in his Returns from Holland, and for
shipping a vast Quantity of Corn for London Market, most, if not all of it, the
Product of the Isle of Thanet, in which it stands. There is lately erected here
a Salt Water Bath, which has performed great Cures in nervous and paralytick
Cases, and in Numbness of the Limbs; and seems every Day to become more and
more in Request.

But it may not be unacceptable to transcribe a few Lines from Camden, in
Honor to the Industry of the Inhabitants in this Part of the Isle of Thanet,
which I recommend to the Admiration, for I doubt it would be too much to say
Imitation, of the rest of Britain, both North and South. It is as follows:

"Nor must I here omit the mention of a Thing very much to the Honor of the
Inhabitants of Thanet, those especially who live near the Roads or Harbors of
Margate, Ramsgate, and Brodstear; namely, that they are exceeding industrious,
and are, as it were, amphibious Creatures, and get their Living both by Sea and
Land: they deal in both Elements, are both Fishers and Ploughmen, both
Husbandmen and Mariners; and the self-same Hand that holds the Plough, steers
the Ship. According to the several Seasons, they make Nets, fish for Cod,
Herring, Mackarel, etc. go to Sea themselves, and export their own Commodities.
And those very Men also dung their Ground, plough, sow, harrow, reap, inn,
being quick and active in both Employments; and so the Course of their Labors
runs round. And when there happen any Shipwrecks, as there do here now and
then, (for those Shallows and Shelves so much dreaded by Seamen lie
over against it; namely, the Godwin, the Brakes, the Four-foot, the Whitdick,
etc.) they are extremely industrious to save the Lading." I shall only add,
That it is highly to the Reputation of those People, if they continue to
deserve this excellent Character; but I have heard of some late Instances, that
are not at all to their Honor in this latter Particular.

At Stanar in the Isle of Thanet, the Rutupiae of the Romans, is to be seen the
Sepulcher of Vortimer, King of the ancient Britons, who having vanquished the
Saxons in many Battles, and at last driven them out of the Island, ordered,
before his Death, that he should be buried here, on a fond Conceit that his
Corpse would fright them from landing any more upon this Coast. Like the great
Scipio, who having subdued the Carthaginians, ordered his Tomb to be turned
toward Africa, to fright them from the Coast of Italy. But the poor Britons
soon found the Difference between a King in the Field, and one in the Grave.

On the North-east Point of this Land, is the Promontory, or Head-land, which I
have often mentioned, called the North-Foreland; which, by a Line drawn due
North to the Nase in Essex, about Six Miles short of Harwich, makes the Mouth
of the River of Thames, and the Port of London. As soon as any Vessels pass
this Foreland from London, they are properly said to be in the open Sea; if to
the North, they enter the German Ocean; if to the South, the Chanel, as it is
called, that is, the narrow Seas between England and France; and all the Towns
or Harbors before we come this Length, whether on the Kentish or Essex Shore,
are called Members of the Port of London.

From this Point Westward, the first Town of Note is Ramsgate, a small Port;
the Inhabitants are mighty fond of having us call it Romans-gate; pretending
that the Romans, under Julius Caesar, made their first Attempt to land here,
and that, being driven back by a Storm, he soon returned, and coming on Shore
with a good Body of Troops, beat back the Britons, and fortified his Camp, just
at the Entrance of the Creek, where the Town now stands; while others as
positively assert, that that great Commander first landed at Deal; as I shall
observe anon.

Richborough-castle is a Mile distant from Stanar and Sandwich. At the Foot of
it runs the River coming from Canterbury. This River at first discharged itself
into the Sea by Ebbesflete, North of the Roman City Rutupiae, now Stanar; till
the Sand pouring so directly upon it, obliged the Stream to slide under the
Cliff by Richborough-castle, and so by Sandwich. The Castle is a most noble
Remnant of Roman Antiquity. The Walls on Three Sides are pretty entire, and in
some Places still about 25 or 30 Feet high, without any Ditch. The Side next
the Sea being upon a kind of Cliff, the Top of the Wall is but level with the
Ground. Here, in the latter Times of the Empire, the Legio II. Aug. was
quartered. And from the Condition of the Walls it must have been destroyed with
great Violence, probably by the Saxons. In the Way to Sandwich, upon an
Eminence, is the Remainder of an Amphitheatre made of Turf, probably for the
Exercise and Diversion of the Garrison. Before Sandwich Gates are two Roman
Tumuli, on one of which stands a Windmill. And South of Sandwich, on the
Seashore, are Six large and broad Celtic Tumuli, at equal Distances. This flat
Coast is fenced against the Ocean by the Sand-downs. From Sandwich as far as
Hythe, the Coast of France was visible all the Way as we rode. The Reverend Mr.
Lewis has published, within these few Years, a curious History of the Isle of
Thanet, to which I shall refer for several Particulars, which deserve the
Attention of a Traveller.

Sandwich, one of the Cinque Ports, lies in the Bottom of a Bay, at the Mouth
of the River Stour, formerly a Town of great Repute and Trade. It decayed in
the Saxons Time, and was utterly ruined by the Danes. Being raised again, it
had the Misfortune to be reduced to Ashes in King John's Reign; after which it
was rebuilt. But in the Reign of Q. Mary, the Mouth of its Harbor was so
choked up by a Ship of great Burden, which sunk in it, and gave Opportunity to
the Sands and Beach so to fill it up, that it was incurable: the Town of
consequence fell to Decay, and it is now a very poor Place.

Sandwich is noted for Carrots, which are brought to London during the Winter
Season; and from hence it is that most of the Markets are supplied with these
Roots, which are esteemed the sweetest, as they are also the largest which are
produced in England, or perhaps in Europe.

From this Place also the Seedsmen in London are furnished with the greatest
Quantity of their Seeds: the Land being light, sandy, and fresh, is very good
for producing most Sorts of Seeds, and the Ground being pretty low, the Seeds
do not so often receive a Blight, as in many other Places.

Not far from hence is Wingham, which gives Title of Baron to Earl Cowper. From
hence I went to Deal, called by Caesar Dola, having landed not far from this
Place. It is the famous Road for Shipping, so well known all over the trading
World by the Name of the Downs, and where almost all Ships which arrive from
Foreign Parts for London, or go from London to Foreign Parts, and pass the
Chanel, generally stop; the Homeward-bound, to dispatch Letters, send their
Merchants and Owners the good News of their Arrival, and set their Passengers
on Shore; and the Outward-bound, to take in fresh Provisions, to receive their
last Orders, Letters, and Farewels from Owners, and Friends, etc. Sometimes,
when the Wind presents fair, Ships come in here, and pass through at once,
without coming to an Anchor; for they are not obliged to stop, but for their
own Convenience.

The Downs would be a very wild and dangerous Road for Ships, were it not for
the South-Foreland, a Head of Land forming the East Point of the Kentish Shore;
and is called the South, as its Situation respects the North-Foreland; and
which breaks the Sea off, which would otherwise come rolling up from the West,
to the Flats or Bank of Sands, which for Three Leagues together, and at about a
League, or League and half Distance, run parallel with the Shore, and are dry
at low Water; so that these two, breaking all the Force of the Sea, on the
East, South, and South-west, make the Downs accounted a very good Road.

And yet on some particular Winds, and especially, if they over-blow, the Downs
proves such a wild Road, that Ships are driven from their Anchors, and often
run on Shore, or are forced on the said Sands, or into Sandwich-bay, or
Ramsgate-pier, in great Distress; this is particularly when the Wind blows hard
at South-east, or at East-by-north, or East-north-east, and some other Points;
and terrible Havoc has been made in the Downs at such times.

But the most unhappy Instance that can be given of any Disaster in the Downs,
was in the time of that terrible Tempest, which we call, by way of Distinction,
The Great Storm, being on the 27th of Nov. 1703: Unhappy in particular, for
that there chanced at that time to be a great Part of the Royal Navy come into
the Downs, in their way to Chatham, to be laid up.

Five of the biggest Ships had the good Fortune to push through the Downs the Day
before, finding the Wind then blew very hard, and were come to an Anchor at the
Gunfleet; and had they had but one fair Day more, they had been all safe at the
Nore, or in the River Medway at Black-stakes.

There remained in the Downs about 12 Sail, when this terrible Tempest began,
at which time England may be said to have received the greatest Loss that ever
happened to the Royal Navy at one time, either by Weather, by Enemies, or by
any Accident whatsoever. The short Account of it is as follows:

The Northumberland, a Third Rate, carrying 70 Guns, and 353 Men; the
Restoration, a Second Rate, carrying 76 Guns, and 386 Men; the Sterling Castle,
a Second Rate, carrying 80 Guns, and 400 Men, but had only 349 Men on board;
and the Mary, a Third Rate, of 64 Guns, having 273 Men on board; these were all
lost, with all their Men, except one Man out of the Mary, and 70 Men out of the
Sterling-Castle, who were taken up by Boats from Deal.

All this is besides the Loss of Merchants Ships, which was exceeding great,
not here only, but in almost all the Ports in the South and West of England,
and also in Ireland.

The Town of Deal carries on some Foreign Trade, and is very much improved of
late Years, to which the great Resort of Seamen to it from the Ships in the
Downs has not a little contributed.

I took a Niew of Sandown-castle, Deal and Walmer-castles.

Sandown-castle is composed of four Lunets of very thick arched Work of Stone,
with many Port-holes for great Guns. In the Middle is a great round Tower, with
a Cistern at-top; and underneath, an arched Cavern Bomb-proof. A Fosse
encompasses the Whole, to which is a Passage over a Drawbridge.

Deal-castle and Walmer-castle are, like the former, all built, as I have said,
by K. Henry VIII. to guard this Coast. Between Walmer-castle and Deal was
probably the Spot where Caesar landed in his first Expedition, because it is
the first Place where the Shore can be ascended North of Dover; and exactly
answers his assigned Distance of eight Miles. In his second Expedition, with
many more Ships, and upon a perfect Knowledge of the Country, he might land at
Deal.

Dover stands in a most romantic Situation: it is a great Valley, and the only
one about this Coast, where Water is admitted inwards of the Cliff, which is
here very high. The Sea formerly came a good way higher up, and made a large
Port. Anchors have been found above the Town. The Roman City Dubris was to the
South of the River. The Watling street enters it as Bigin-gate, coming very
strait from Canterbury over Barham-down, where it is very perfect. Some of the
Walls are left. The Churches are of a very antique Make: that of St. Martin is
Collegiate, founded by Wightred King of Kent, and is a venerable Ruin. It was
built in Form of a Cross. Of the Priory, now a Farm-house, are large Remains.
The Hospital overagainst it is made a Storehouse. Here the Knights Hospitalers
or Templers lodged, as they came into, or went out of the Kingdom. The Piers
which form the Haven or large Basin, are costly and great Works. Above is a
Fort with four Bastions of modern Date. The broad Beach, which lies at the
Mouth of this great Valley, and was the Harbor in Caesar's Time, is very
delightful. One long Street here is named Snaregate, from the most tremendous
Rocks of Chalk, which project directly over the Houses.

Dover Castle is very large, and situated upon a Rock rugged and steep on every
Side; but toward the Sea it rises to an extraordinary Height. Though of late
Years neglected, it was once so well fortified, and of such Importance, as to
be accounted the Key of England. And William the Conqueror, when he had an Eye
upon the Kingdom, took an Oath of Harold, that he should deliver into his Hands
this Castle with the Well, which is Sixty Fathoms deep, and said to be the Work
of Julius Caesar. In short it was the strongest old Fortification in the World;
and takes up thirty Acres of Ground.

In the late War with France, 1500 Prisoners were confined in the great Castle.
The Brass Gun, called Queen Elizabeth 's Pocket-Pistol, is a great Curiosity,
twenty-two Feet long. It is excellently well wrought, requires Fifteen Pounds
of Powder, and carries a Ball Seven Miles. Here are Two very old Keys, and a
brass Horn, which seem to be the Ensigns of Authority belonging to the
Constable of the Castle, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. One Part of the
Fortifications consists of a circular Work, in which stands an old Church, said
to have been built by Lucius, the first Christian King in Britain, out of some
of the Roman Ruins; for there are huge Quantities of Roman Brick laid into the
Work; and the Remainder is of Stone, originally cut by the Romans. It is in
Form of a Cross, and has a square Tower in the Middle. The Stone Windows are of
much later Date than the Building: but the greatest Curiosity is the Pharos or
Roman Watchtower, standing at the West End of the Church. This Building was
made use of as a Steeple, and had a pleasant Ring of Bells, which Sir George
Rooke procured to be carried away to Portsmouth. Since when, the Lead which
covered it, has been taken away by Order of the Officers of Ordnance; so that
this rare Piece of Architecture is left exposed to the Sea and Weather. Here
was found a Coin of Dioclesian. The Erpinghams Arms are patched up against one
Side of the Pharos; so that it seems to have been repaired in the Days of King
Henry V. when the Lord Erpingham was Warden of Dover-castle.

Upon another Rock over against that on which the Castle is situated, and
almost as high, are the Remains of an old Watchtower, now vulgarly called
Bredenstone, otherwise Devil's-drop, from the Strength of the Mortar. Here the
new Constable of the Castle is sworn. Under this Place King Henry VIII. built
the Mole or Pile called the Pier, that Ships might ride therein with great
Safety. But though it was done with vast Labor and Expense, by large Beams
fastened in the Sea, bound together with Iron, and great Piles of Wood and
Stone heaped upon all; yet the Fury of the Sea was soon too hard for the Work,
and the Timbers beginning to disjoint, Queen Elizabeth expended great Sums upon
it. And several Acts have passed to repair and restore the same; which also
including the Restoration and Preservation of the Harbor of Rye, I shall take
Notice of both, when I mention that of Rye.

Dover, the Portus Dubris of the Romans, is one of the Cinque Ports, and was
formerly bound to send twenty-one Ships for the Wars. It affords a See to the
Suffragan of the Archbishop of Canterbury, as often as any such is appointed.
Most of the Business relating to these Ports in general is done, and all the
Courts kept here. The other Cinque Ports are Hastings, Hythe, Romney and
Sandwich. Hastings has two Appendages, namely, Winchelsea and Rye, which, as
well as Hastings, are in Sussex, and the others in Kent; they have all great
Privileges: their Burgesses are called Barons; who on the Coronations of our
Sovereigns, support the Canopies over their Heads, have a Table at the King's
Right Hand, the Canopy for their Fee, and enjoy other Privileges. The Lord
Warden of these Five Ports is generally one of the first Noblemen in the
Kingdom.

The Packets for France go off here, as also those for Ostend, with the Mails
for Flanders, and all those Ships which carry Freights from New York to
Holland, and from Virginia to Holland, come generally hither, and unlade their
Goods, enter them with the Custom-house Officers, pay the Duties, and then
enter them again by Certificate, reload them, and draw back the Duty by
Debenture, and so they go away for Holland.

As we pass from Dover to the smaller Cinque Ports of Hythe, Romney, and Rye,
we see Folkstone, a little Village now, which the Sea has made great Inroads
upon; but which formerly made a greater Figure. A copious Spring went through the
Town. Two Pieces of old Wall, seemingly Roman, hang frightfully over the Cliff.
Here are some old Guns, one of Iron of a very odd Cast, doubtless as old as the
Time of King Henry VIII. Many Roman Coins have also been found. And here a
Nunnery was built by Eanswide, Daughter of Eadbald, King of Kent. This Place is
now principally of Note for a Multitude of Fishing-boats belonging to it, which
are one Part of the Year employed in catching Mackarel for the City of London.
The Folkstone Men catch them, and the London and Barking Mackarel-Smacks, of
which I have spoken at large in Essex, come down and buy them, and whisk away
to Market under such a Crowd of Sails, that one would wonder they could bear
them. About Michaelmas these Folkstone Barks, among others from Shoreham,
Brighthelmston and Rye, go away to Yarmouth and Leostoff, on the Coast of
Suffolk and Norfolk, and catch Herrings for the Merchants there. It has been
observed of some Hills in the Neighborhood of Folkstone, as the Right Rev.
Continuator of Camden takes Notice, that they have visibly sunk and grown
lower, within the Memory of Man.

Sandgate Castle, situated in the Bottom of Two Hills, on the Seashore, has
about Sixteen Guns to defend the Fishing-craft from the Insults of Privateers,
in Time of War: it has several good Houses about it, and was built by King
Henry VIII.

After we have passed this Castle, we enter upon the Beach. Here are many
Springs, which descending from the higher Ground, sink immediately into this
Beach, rendering it a little boggy.

Hythe, one of the Cinque Ports, stands on the Edge of the less Ridge; but the
Marsh has intercepted it from the Sea.

Hythe in Saxon signifies a Port or Station; but at present it hardly answers
the Name; for the Sands have so choked it up, that the Sea is shut out from it
to a great Distance. This Town, as also West-Hythe, from which the Sea retired
above 200 Years ago, owe their Original to Lemanis, or Limne, a Roman Port, of
which more anon, now a little Village adjoining, which was formerly a very
famous Port, before it was shut up with Sands, thrown in by the Sea, which gave
Rise to the two Hythes beforementioned, which, in their Turns, have met with
the same Fate. A particular Providence happened at Hythe, April 24. 1739. About
Eleven o'Clock the Steeple of their Church, in which were Six Bells, fell down.
About Ten Persons were present when it fell, waiting in the Church Porch for
the Keys to go up into the Steeple for a View; but some Delay being made in
bringing them, they happily received no other Damage than being terribly
frightened. In a Vault under the Church we saw a vast Heap of human Bones, some
of an extraordinary Size, said to be gathered up after a bloody Battle fought
between the Britons and Danes.

About a Mile distant from it is Saltwood-Castle, a very strong Seat of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. The outer Wall has Towers and Battlements, and a deep
Ditch. Within, and on one Side, stands the main Body of the Palace. There are
two great and high Towers at the Gate of this, over which are the Arms of
Archbishop Courtney, the Founder. This inner Work has a stronger and higher
Wall, with a broad embattled Parapet at top. Within is a Court, but the
Lodgings are all demolished. The Floor of the ruinous Chapel is strongly
vaulted. In the Middle of the Court is a large square Well, seemingly Roman.
They say that Anchors have been dug up hereabouts, which makes it likely that
the Romans had here an Iron Forge; and some will have it, that the Sea came up
formerly to it, and ground this Opinion on these Anchors found here.

A little Way further, at the End of the Stane-street, the Roman Road from
Canterbury, is the Port of Lemanis or Limne mentioned above. At Limne Church,
from the Brow of the Hill, may be discerned the ruinous Roman Walls, situate
almost at the Bottom of the Marshes. A pretty Brook, which rises from the Rock,
West of the Church, runs for some Space on the East Side of the Wall; then
passes through it, and so along its lowermost Edge, by the Farm-house at Bottom:
here Coins have been found. Once the Sea-bank broke, and admitted the Ocean
into all the adjacent Marshes. The Port is now called Shipway, where the Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports was formerly sworn, the Courts kept, and all the
Pleas relating thereto, till Dover superseded it. The People of Limne had a
Horn and Mace, the remaining Ensigns of their Authority.

Romney is a large fine Village, and likewise a Cinque Port; it is the chief
Town of the Marsh-Grounds, which were anciently part of the Sea, called Romney
Marsh, and has Old Romney and Lech for its Members. It is seated on a high Hill
of Gravel and Sand, and on the West Side of it, had a pretty large Harbor
guarded against most of the Winds, before the Sea retired from it. In the Year
1287, when the Town was at its Height, it was divided into Twelve Wards, had
Five Parish Churches, a Priory, and an Hospital for the Sick. But it has been
dwindling till it came to its present low Condition, ever since the Reign of
Edward I. when an Inundation of the Sea destroyed Men, Cattle and Houses, threw
down a whole populous Village called Prom-Hill, and removed the Rother, (in
British Yz Odz) which used to empty itself into the Sea at Romney, out of its
Chanel, stopping up its Mouth, and opening it a nearer Passage into the Sea by
Rye; leaving here only a little Bay for Fishing-boats.

From Romney-Marsh the Shore extends itself a great way into the Sea, and makes
that Point of Land called Dengyness. Just by the River Rother, stands the
little Town of Appledore, which, by Disuse, has lost its Market, and is of no
Note now. The Sea formerly came up to it.

Tenterden, a Mayor Market Town, lies a little to the N. W. of Appledore, near
the Weald. It has a very good and high Steeple, which they say was the Cause of
the Godwin-Sands, which was an Estate that belonged to Earl Godwin, and was
guarded from the Sea by a Wall; but they were so intent on building the
Steeple, that the Wall was neglected, and the Land overflowed, which they could
never afterward recover.

Ashford, also a Mayor-town, stands on the great Road, upon the River Stour. It
is a pretty well built Market Town. The Church is large, and was formerly
Collegiate: they hold Pleas for any thing not exceeding twenty Marks.

Newenden deserves to be mentioned for what it once was, having been formerly a
fine City, which Camden calls Anderida. It was destroyed by the Saxons, but
rebuilt in the Reign of Edward I. and called Newenden, as much as to say,
according to Camden's Etymology, a new City in a little Valley. It had then an
Harbor much frequented; but it is now a most miserable Village, with a few
poor Houses in it; the best an Alehouse, and the Church is ill-built, and out
of Repair. It has a very indifferent Bridge over the Rother, a rapid River,
which divides at this Place Kent from Sussex, and about Nine Miles off empties
itself into the Harbor of Rye. Roman Coins have been dug up here.

North-west of Newenden is Cranbrook, a large Market Town, noted for having
been one of the first Places where the Cloth-manufacture was set up in England,
which is now very much in its Wane here. But here I will conclude my Third
Letter; and am, Sir,

Yours, etc.

LETTER IV. CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION of the County of SUSSEX, other Parts of
KENT, and Part of HANTS, SURREY, etc.
SIR,
I NOW enter the County of Sussex, and shall begin my Letter with the Account
of Rye.

It is situated in the most Eastern Part of Sussex, upon an Hill, which is
encompassed with Rocks, that are inaccessible on the Seaside. There is nothing
now but some Remains of its old Walls to be seen, and the Ditches are almost
filled up. Its Trade is in Hops, Wool, Timber, Kettles, Cannon, Chimney-backs,
etc. which are cast at the Iron-works at Bakely, about Four Miles from Rye, on
the North-west, and Breed, about Five Miles distant South-west. It is a very
great Misfortune, that its Harbor has been so much damaged by the Sea, and
neglected; for it is almost filled up in several Places, where it was formerly
the deepest, and most convenient. Some considerable Families, who have Lands
near, have taken Advantage of this, to extend them further upon those Sands,
which the Sea in Storms has thrown up against them; and by digging Ditches, and
making Drains, there are now Fields and Meadows, where anciently was nothing
but Water. By this means Ships only of a middle Size can come within any
convenient Distance of the Town, whereas formerly the largest Vessels, and even
whole Fleets together, could anchor just by the Rocks, on which the Town
stands; and as this Port lies over against Dieppe in France, and that there is
no other Port between Portsmouth and Dover, which can receive Ships of Burden,
not only the Danger of the Sea, but in Time of War, of the Enemy, were escaped
by the Convenience of this Harbor. But it being by the Means I have mentioned,
and by the Inning of the Chanel and waste Lands, (which prevented the Flux and
Reflux of the Tide) in Danger of being utterly lost, an Act of Parliament
passed in 1721, which enacts, That no new Walls, Banks, Dams, or Stops, shall
thereafter be erected on either Side of the Water, that might stop or alter the
Flux or Reflux of the Sea, between the Mouth of the Harbor, bounded by the
Camber and Castle-Points, and New Shutt near Craven Sluice.

In 1723 another Act passed for completing the Repairs of the Harbor of Dover,
and for restoreing the Harbor of Rye to its ancient Goodness, which still
continued to be choked up, and almost ruined, by the Shifting of the Beach
without, and Settling of the Sullage within, and stopping the Flux of the Tide,
which this Act proposed should have its free Course through the Scotch-flat and
Craven Sluices, or into such other Cut or Chanel as should be found most proper
and expedient.

And in 1724 another Act passed for making the last Act more effectual, so far
as it related to the Harbor of Rye, in which a Power was given to change the
Design of making a Passage by the abovenamed Sluices, and to open a new Cut
from the Winchelsea Chanel, right out to the Sea. And they actually began, in
pursuance of this Act, to cut a broad and deep Canal, which was to be carried
to the Sea on the Side of Winchelsea, for the Use of the two Boroughs. But
still these Provisions being found insufficient, another Act passed in 1737-8,
for continuing the Term and Powers granted by the former Acts, for repairing
the Harbor of Dover, and for restoring that of Rye to its ancient Goodness, to
which I must refer the Reader.

The Houses of Rye are well-enough built, and of Brick, though generally
old-fashioned; but there are some very neat ones of a modern Taste. There is a
small Settlement of French Refugees in this Town, mostly Fishermen; they have a
Minister of their own, who is paid by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Church
is handsome and large; but there are so many Dissenters in the Town, and so few
of the Established Church, that they have walled off, and converted the Western
Part of it into a Magazine for Planks. But there are two well built
Meeting Houses, one for the Presbyterians, and the other for the Quakers.
Another Church, which belonged to a Monastery now demolished, is also turned
into a kind of Storehouse for Planks, Hops, and other Merchandise. At the
North-east of Rye are the Remains of an old Fort, which commands the Town and
Harbor, and serves for the Town-gaol.

His late Majesty King George I. on his Return from Hanover, January 3. 1725-6,
was obliged to put in here, after a very dangerous and tempestuous Passage, the
Fleet being unable to make Dover; and it was then experienced, what a Benefit
it would have been to have had this only considerable Haven, as it formerly
was, between Portsmouth and Dover, restored to its pristine flourishing State;
for his Majesty was under great Difficulties to land there, and the larger
Ships were unable to follow him.

This Town was, as I have said, one of the Appendages, as Winchelsea was the
other, to Hastings, as a Cinque-port, and enjoyed the same Privileges.

Old Winchelsea stood upon the Seashore, about Two or Three Miles from the
Place where the New stands. It had formerly a large and spacious Harbor, was a
Place of great Trade, and had no less than Eighteen Churches in it. But it was
entirely destroyed by the Sea, and that small Part which is not buried in the
Sands, is now Marsh and Meadow-land. To the S. E. of Rye, and the N. W. of New
Winchelsea, is still to be seen, in the Midst of a large Plain, an old Tower,
which probably stood by the Sea.

New Winchelsea is said to have been built by King Edward I. partly on a Hill
about Two Miles from the Old, and the like Distance from Rye, and partly in a
little Valley, where it had an Harbor; but Anno 1250, the latter Part of this
met with the same Fate as the former. It never was comparable to the old Town,
having but three Parish Churches when it flourished, and now there only remains
the Chancel of one, which is more than large enough for the Inhabitants. But
yet the Town was everywhere accommodated with fine stone arched Vaults for
stowing of Merchandise, and was laid out with admirable Regularity, the Streets
being divided into 32 Quarters. Some of the Stone-work of the Three Gates are
still to be seen. The Sea is now above a Mile distant from it, the Harbor
being choked up with Sands; and Grass grows not only where the Harbor was,
but even in the Streets; and indeed there are only a few Houses remaining in
the upper Part of the Town. Among the Ruins of the Walls to the S. E. are the
Remains of a Castle, as some say; or of a Monastery, as others will have it.

Hastings is the Chief of the Five Cinque Ports, and with its Two Members
above, was obliged to furnish the King with Twenty Ships for any Naval
Expedition, in Recompense for the ample Immuninities it enjoyed, as one of the
Five Ports. It is about Eight Miles from Winchelsea. It consists of Two great
Streets, with a Parish Church in each, and has several good Houses; but its
Harbor, formerly so famous, is now a poor Road for small Vessels, having been
ruined by the Storms that from time to time have been so fatal to its
neighboring Ports of Rye and Winchelsea. We saw here the Ruins of an ancient
Castle; and about Three Miles off, Bull-hide Haven, where William the Conqueror
is said to have landed in his Invasion of England; though some say it was at
Hastings, and others at Pevensey, an Harbor more Westward, which has likewise
been destroyed by the Sea; but be that as it will, it was at Hastings that he
mustered his Army, after he had burnt his Ships, being determined to conquer or
perish in the Attempt; or rather, as another Author has observed, that he might
not be obliged to divide his Army, which must have been the Case, if he had
preserved his Ships; and probably, while he made an Advance into the Country,
at the Head of part of his Army, Harold might have stepped in between, and cut
off those who were left to guard the Ships, and then with more Ease have
attacked, and, perhaps, beat that Part commanded by the Norman himself.

The decisive Battle which he fought Anno 1066, with King Harold, was upon a
Plain called Heathfield, about Seven Miles from Hastings, for an Account of
which I shall refer to the Historians. In the Place where Harold's Body was
found, the Norman instituted an Abbey of Benedictine Monks, dedicating it to
St. Martin; and from the Fight aforesaid, it is called Battle-Abbey; and soon
drew to it, by a Fair held every Sunday and Holiday, such a Resort, that it
became a handsome Town. It still retains the Name of Battle, and some Remains
of the Abbey are yet to be seen, and make Part of the House of the Lord
Viscount Montacute, a Roman Catholic Peer; of which more in another Place.

A little beyond Hastings to Bourn, we ride upon the Sands in a strait Line for
Eighteen Miles, all upon the Coast of Sussex, passing by Pemsey, or Pevensey
Haven aforementioned, and the Mouth of the River, which comes from Battle,
without so much as knowing, that there was a River, the Tide being out, and all
the Water sinking away in the Sands. This Town of Battle is remarkable for
little now, but making the finest Gunpowder, and the best perhaps in Europe.
Near Battle they show us a Hill with a Beacon upon it, now called Beacon-hill,
but was formerly called Standard-hill; where the Norman set up his Great
Standard of Defiance, the Day before the decisive Battle with Harold and the
English.

From the Beginning of Romney-marsh, that is to say, at Sandgate, or Sandfoot
Castle, near Hythe, to this Place, the Country is a rich fertile Soil, full of
feeding Grounds; and an incredible Number of large Sheep are fed every Year
upon them, and sent up to London Market. These Romney-marsh Sheep are counted
rather larger than the Leicestershire and Lincolnshire Sheep, of which so much
is said elsewhere.

Besides the vast Flocks of Sheep, as above, abundance of large Bullocks are
fed in this Part of the Country; and especially those they call Stall'd or
House-fed Oxen, from their being kept within the Farmers Sheds or Yards all the
latter Season, where they are fed for the Winter-market, and generally deemed
the largest Beef in England.

In Romney-marsh, as in other Parts of England, are found great Timber Trees,
lying at Length under Ground, as black as Ebony, and fit for Use, when dried in
the Sun.

From hence it was that, turning North, and traversing the deep, dirty, but
rich Part of these Two Counties, my Curiosity led me to see the great
Founderies, or Iron-works, which are in this County, and where they are carried
on at such a prodigious Expense of Wood, that even in a Country almost all
overrun with Timber, they begin to complain of the great Consumption of it by
those Furnaces, and the Apprehension of leaving the next Age to want Timber for
building their Navies. I must own however, that I conceived that Complaint was
entirely groundless, the Three Counties of Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire, (all
which lie contiguous one to another) being an inexhaustible Storehouse of
Timber for this Purpose.

After I had been fatigued in passing this deep and heavy Part of the Country,
I thought it would not be foreign to my Design, if I refreshed myself with a
View of Tunbridge-wells, which were not then above 12 Miles out of my Way.

When I came to the Wells, which were Five Miles nearer to me than the Town,
supposing me then at Battle, to the Southward of them, I found a great deal of
good Company there; and particularly made an Observation, that those People who
have nothing to do any-where else, seem to be the busiest People at Tunbridge.

After the Appearance is over at the Wells, (where the Ladies are all in
Deshabile) and at the Chapel, the Company go home; and, as if it was another
Species of People, or a Collection from another Place, you are surprised to see
the Walks covered with Ladies completely dressed, and gay to Profusion; where
rich Clothes, Jewels, and Beauty, dazzle the Eyes from one End of the Range to
the other.

As for Gaming, Sharping, Intriguing, as also Fops, Beaux, and the like,
Tunbridge used to be as full of these as most other public Places; but the Act
lately passed against Gaming has, in a great measure, cured this Evil. Of this
Act I shall say more, when I come to Bath.

The Air here is excellent, and the Provisions of all Sorts very reasonable:
particularly they are supplied with excellent Fish, of almost all Sorts, from
Rye, and other Towns on the Seacoast; and I saw a Turbut of near twenty Pounds
Weight sold there for Three Shillings. In the Season of Mackarel, they have
them here from Hastings, within three Hours of their being taken out of the
Sea; and the Difference which that makes in their Goodness, I need not mention.

They have likewise here abundance of Wild-fowl, of the best Sorts; such as
Pheasants, Partridges, Woodcocks, Snipes, Quails, etc. particularly they have
from the South-downs the Bird called a Wheatear, or which I think I may call
the English Ortolan, -- the most delicious Taste for one Mouthful, (for it is
hardly more) that can be imagined; but these are very dear at Tunbridge: they
are much cheaper at Seaford, Jews, and that Side of the Country.

Tunbridge is situated upon the little River Tunn, which runs into the Medway
hard by. On the Southern Bank of the River are to be seen the Ruins of an old
Castle, built by a natural Son of Richard I. Duke of Normandy, who, as Mr.
Camden tells us, exchanged his Lordship of Bryany in that Duchy for Tunbridge.
The Church is a modern Building; the Houses in the Town are mostly ill-built,
and the Streets sorrily paved.

The Wells are about Four Miles from the Town, and the Rocks about Ten Miles
from them, and worth a Traveller's Curiosity to see, as they are several
prodigious Heaps of firm Stone Rocks, though some Miles distant from the Sea.

The Buildings at the Wells have much the Advantage of those in Tunbridge, and
may be said to constitute a large and populous Town themselves. There is a
Church, or rather Chapel of Ease, which is very neat. This new Town, as I may
call it, stands in a Bottom between Two Hills, one of which is called Mount
Sion, and the other Mount Ephraim, which are generally covered with good
Houses, fine Gardens, and Fruit Trees. The Wells might be more properly called
Spelhurst Wells; for the Water rises in a Parish of that Name. The Well which
contains them is well-paved, like a Cistern, and surrounded with a low Wall,
with a Pair of Stairs to go down. The Company walk upon the Two abovenamed
Hills, after they have drank the Waters, and divert themselves with Bowls,
Dancing, or other Exercises, as the Weather will permit, and the Physicians
prescribe. Near the Well is a long Gallery, paved and covered over, wherein to
walk in bad Weather, and while they are taking the Waters, and where likewise
the Band of Music have place. There are also Rooms to drink Chocolate or
Coffee, and to play at Cards, etc. likewise a Hall to dance in. Not far off the
Well is a Market well stored with Provisions of all Sorts.

A very eminent Physician is of Opinion, that the Waters of Bath, Tunbridge,
Chiltenham, (or Scarborough, which partake of the same Qualities) and Bristol,
make the general Kinds of most of the various Mineral Waters on the Globe; and
that he therefore who understands these, cannot be much at a Loss to determine
the Virtues and Efficacy of any new Kind. And as this learned Gentleman has
favored me with his Opinion of these several Waters, I shall communicate the
same in their respective Places.

And, first, this is what he says of the Nature, Efficacy and Qualities of
these of Tunbridge.

" Tunbridge Waters, says he, are nothing but an Impregnation of Rain, or
compressed Cloudwaters in some of the Eminencies of the neighboring Country.
And indeed all Hills, and conspicuous Elevations, are mere hollow Nests of some
Minerals. Iron and Sulphur are the most common and universal Minerals; and
almost all Kinds of Stone fit for making Fences or Edifices, have in their
Composition one or both of them. All the Varieties of hard, black, dark or
greyish Stones, abound with ferrugineous Particles; and Iron is so necessary,
especially in Countries between the Tropicks and the Poles, for Husbandry, that
there is scarce a Mile square within this Compass, where it may not be found
with its impregnated Waters. This is demonstrable by the Action of the
Loadstone on most Minerals, the Magnet itself seeming to be scarce any thing
but a purer Clod of Iron: and pure polished Iron, we know, with very simple
Management, becomes highly magnetic. Hence we account for the Frequency of
chalybeat Mineral Waters, of some Degree of Strength or other, so readily to be
found between the Poles and Tropicks. And this is a bountiful Provision of
Nature to those colder Climates, where animal Food, and fermented Liquors, are
so necessary for the Support, Comfort, and greater Proportion of animal Force
required in them, for their Defense from the Swarming of ravenous Animals, and
for hunting animal Food, where the Vegetable is neither so proper, nutritive,
nor abounding, as in these kindlier Climates between the Tropicks toward each
Side of the Equator. Mineral Chalybeat Waters brace the Solids, which animal
Food, and fermented Liquors, in any Plenty, are apt to relax; and wind up the
Springs of animal Motion, to keep the Blood fluid, which the just mentioned
Indulgencies are disposed to thicken. Soft Stone, Marl, alkalious Clay, and all
Kinds of bituminous Earths, have a larger Quantity of Sulphur in them; for
Sulphur, Oil, and Bitumen, always leave Earth brittle, spongy, and alkalious
(Alkalies being only an harder earthy Sponge); and when the watery Impregnations
meet, they naturally produce by Fermentation some Degree of Heat in the
Mixture. There is in Nature, as this learned Gentleman thinks, but one kind of
Salt, which is Nitre; and that the Variety arises from a Mixture of Sulphur,
Earth, or Iron, in different Proportions combined in their Composition. Nitre
however, and Seasalt, have their principal Efficacy from the predominant
Principle in their Texture: and thus Tunbridge Waters are only a finer Solution
of blue Vitriol, or natural Salt of Steel, or Rain-waters, inimitable by Art in
such salutary Effects as Nature always produces. For Example: Though Art may
imitate, in precious Stones, all the Varieties of Colors, Reflections,
Refractions, and Emissions of Light; yet there is always some one peculiar
Property, as of Hardness, Weight, or Water, which discovers the Sophistication.
In like manner, all the Wines on the Globe may be so imitated, that neither
Eye, nor Palate, nor the Perception of their Effects on Animal Bodies, can
discover the Fiction; and this without one Drop of the Juice of the Grape, from
the saccharine Quality only of almost all Fruits, Seeds, or Herbs: yet by
analyzing them in some proper Menstruum, the Cheat may be found out. Thus we
may imitate all the several Mineral Waters on the Earth, and pretty nearly
conciliate all their general or grosser salutary Virtues on diseased Animals:
yet there is an unaccountable Something in the Taste, Lightness on the Stomach,
Cheerfulness and Alacrity they give, which all our Skill can never bestow. The
Principle of Individuation, the Size of their last and least Particles, the
Proportion of the several Parts of the Composition to the watery Menstruum, and
the due Time of their Impregnation, are and ever will be unknown to us; as will
consequently the Degree required to wind up, strengthen and contract the
relaxed Solids of diseased human Bodies, to such a Height, that they may be
enabled to grind, dissolve, and thin the concreted Juices, as these active,
strong, and invigorating Waters of Tunbridge usually do: for in all robust
Constitutions but partially depraved, in the cold chronical Distempers of such
Habits, in nervous Disorders, and low Spirits, in weak Digestions, and gross
Habits, they are extremely successful, especially in the hotter Seasons of the
Year." Thus far this learned Gentleman.

During the time I was at Tunbridge formerly, I made an Excursion to
Knowl-house, about Seven Miles from Tunbridge, and One from Sevenoak, belonging
to the Duke of Dorset: it is situated in the Middle of a Park, and at that time
was an ancient Stone Fabric; but had nothing more remarkable in it, than some
excellent Pictures.

I left Tunbridge, and came to Jews, through the deepest, dirtiest, but in
many respects the richest, and most profitable Country in all that Part of
England.

The Timber I saw here was prodigious, as well for Size as Plenty, and seemed
in some Places suffered to grow, only because it was so far off of any
Navigation, that it was not worth carrying away. In dry Summers, indeed, a
great deal is carried away to Maidstone, and other Places on the Medway; and
sometimes I have seen one Tree on a Carriage, which they call there a Tug,
drawn by 22 Oxen; and even then it is carried so little a Way, (being thrown
down, and left for other Tugs to take up, and carry on) that sometimes it is Two
or Three Years before it gets to Chatham; for if once the Rains begin, it stirs
no more that Year, and sometimes a whole Summer is not dry enough to make the
Roads passable.

And here I shall observe, according to my Promise, p. 151. That in the Year
1739-40, an Act passed, entitled, An Act to revive, explain and amend an Act
made in the 16 th and 17 th Years of the Reign of his late Majesty K. Charles
II. entitled, An Act for making the River of Medway navigable, in the Counties
of Kent and Sussex: And which, when completed, must be of very great Use to the
Public, as well as to the Counties of Kent and Sussex in particular.

The Preamble to this Act will set this Matter in a proper Light, and it is to
this Effect; That the abovementioned Act of Parliament of the 16th and 17th of
Charles II. was never yet carried into Execution; although the making the said
River navigable was likely to be of great Utility to the Public, by reason of
great Quantities of Timber growing on the Wealds of Kent and Sussex, which is
allowed to be the best in the Kingdom, for the Use of the Royal Navy, and which
now, through the Badness of the Roads in those Parts, cannot be conveyed to any
Market but at a large Expense.

That therefore the present Undertakers, being desirous to begin, carry on and
complete the Navigation of such Part of the ancient River Medway and Streams
falling into it, as run from Forest-row in Sussex, to Maidstone in Kent, this
Act incorporates them for that Purpose, by the Name of The Company of
Proprietors of the Navigation of the River Medway.

We must refer to the Act itself for farther Particulars, and shall only
observe, That when this Work is completed, it will be of inconceivable
Advantage to the Public; not only for the excellent Timber which it will be a
Means of conveying to proper Markets, but for the easy and speedy Carriage of
Iron, Ordnance, Balls, and other Materials of War forged in or near the said
River, which at some times of the Year cannot be brought through the Wealds of
the Two Counties; and for the Carriage of Wood, Corn, Grain, Hay, Hops, Wool,
Leather, and all manner of Provisions, as also of Coals, Lime, Stone Wares, and
all other Necessaries and Commodities, to the great Improvement of Trade and
Commerce.

A few Miles North-west of Tunbridge lies Sevenoak, so called from Seven large
Oaks that grew near the Place. It is a Market Town, governed by a Warden and
Assistants; but is noted for nothing more than being a great Thorough-fare
Town. It has a good Hospital for maintaining and teaching poor Children,
erected by Sir William Sevenoak, Lord Mayor of London, who was a Foundling, and
took his Name from the Town.

Jews is a pleasant Town, large, well built, agreeably situated in the Middle
of an open Champain Country, and on the Edge of the South-downs, the most
delightful of their Kind in the Nation; it lies on the Bank of a little
wholesome fresh River, within 12 Miles of the Sea, and was formerly encompassed
with a Wall; but there are few Remains of it now to be seen. But what
contributes to the Advantage of this Town is, that both it and the Country
adjacent, are full of Gentlemen of good Families and Fortunes; of which the
Pelhams must be named with the first, whose Chief is his Grace the Duke of
Newcastle. Here are also the ancient Families of Gage, Shelly, etc. formerly
Roman Catholics, but now Protestants, with many others, Jews has Five
Churches in it. Near it is an old demolished Castle, in the Neighborhood of
which was fought that bloody Battle between King Henry III. and his Barons; the
Event of which constrained the King to accept of hard Conditions of Peace, and
to give his Son as an Hostage for Performance.

I ought not to forget, that Newhaven in this Neighborhood was formerly noted
for its safe and good Harbor for Ships of considerable Burden; but for want of
a Provision for maintaining the Timber Piers, which it had for Time immemorial,
it was quite neglected, and the Harbor choked up with Sand and Beach, and the
Piers were rotten and decayed. To remedy these Evils, an Act passed, Anno 1731,
for Repairing and Keeping in Repair the said Piers and Harbor. And when
brought to Effect, not only Jews, but the adjacent Parts, as well as the whole
Kingdom, will be the better for it.

From Jews, following still the Range of the South-Downs, West, we ride in
View of the Sea, and on a fine Carpet Ground, for about 12 Miles to
Brighthelmston, a poor Fishing-town, old-built, and on the very Shore of the
Sea. Hence again, as I mentioned at Folkstone and Dover, the Fishermen, having
large Barks, go away to Yarmouth, on the Coast of Norfolk, to the Fishing Fair
there, and hire themselves out for the Season to catch Herrings for the
Merchants; and they tell us, that these make a very good Business of it.

The Sea is very unkind to Brighthelmston, having by its continual
Encroachments, so gained upon the Town, that in a little time more the
Inhabitants may reasonably expect it will eat away the whole Place, above 100
Houses having been devoured by the Water in a few Years past.

From hence, still keeping the Coast on the Left, we come to Shoreham, a
Seafaring Town, chiefly inhabited by Ship-carpenters, Ship-chandlers, and all
the several Trades depending upon the Building and Fitting up of Ships, which
is their chief Business. They are indeed justly noted for good Sailors, and for
building neat and stout Sea-boats, which yet, in Strength and Duration, do not
come up to those of Yarmouth, Ipswich, and the North.

The Builders of Ships seem to have settled here chiefly because of the
exceeding Quantity and Cheapness of Timber in the Country behind them; being
the same wooded Country I mentioned above, which still continues through this
County and the next. The River this Town stands upon, though not navigable for
large Vessels, yet serves to bring down this large Timber in Floats from
Bramber, Steyning, and the Country adjacent; which is, in a manner, all covered
over with Timber.

Here in the Compass of about Six Miles are Three Borough Towns, sending
Members to Parliament, (viz.) Shoreham, Bramber, and Steyning. Shoreham and
Steyning are pretty little Market Towns; but Bramber, after I have mentioned
the Ruins of an old Castle, hardly deserves the Name of a Town, having not
above 20 Families in it, and of them but few above asking Alms, as you ride by.
The chief House in the Town, when I was there, was a Publick-house, the
Landlord whereof boasted, that upon an Election, just then over, he had made
300 l. of one Pipe of Canary.

This is not the only Town in this County, where the Elections have been
scandalously mercenary, insomuch that it has been said, there was in one King's
Reign more Money spent at Elections than all the Lands in the Parishes were
worth, at 20 Years Purchase. I shall name in particular but one more, and that
is Winchelsea, which is rather the Skeleton of an ancient City, than a real
Town, where the old Gates stand near Three Miles from one another over the
Fields, and the very Ruins are so buried, that they have made good Corn Fields
of the Streets, and the Plough goes over the Foundations, nay, over the first
Floors of the Houses, and where nothing of a Town seems to remain; yet at one
Election for Members, the Struggle was such, between Sir John Banks, and
Colonel Draper a neighboring Gentleman, that I was assured the latter spent
11,000 l. and lost it too. What the other spent, who opposed him, may be
guessed at, seeing he who spent most was always sure to carry it.

Near Steyning, the famous Baronet of the Name of Fagg has an ancient Seat.
And thence passing by the Seat of Sir John Shelly, prettily situated in the
Middle of a Grove, we come to Arundel, a decayed Town also. It stands near the
Mouth of the River Arun, which heretofore had a good Harbor called Arundel
Port, or the Harbor of Little Hampton, capable of receiving Ships and Vessels
of a considerable Burden; but a Beach being thrown up by the Sea, it was quite
choked up, and the Navigation of the Arun obstructed, so that the Harbor was
rendered in a manner useless. But in the Year 1733, an Act passed for erecting
Piers in, and for Repairing and Keeping in Repair the Harbor there, by cutting
a Chanel through the Beach and old Piers, and erecting Locks, etc.

One great Advantage to the Country from this River, is the Shipping off great
Quantities of large Timber here; which is carried up the Thames to Woolwich and
Deptford, and up the Medway to Chatham; as also Westward to Portsmouth, and
even to Plymouth, to the new Dock there, and indeed to all the King's Yards,
where the Business of the Navy is carried on. The Timber shipped off here is
esteemed the best and largest that is brought by Sea from any Part of England;
also great Quantities of Knee Timber are had here, the largest of which is
valuable in its kind above the strait Timber.

This River, and the old, decayed, once famous Castle at Arundel, which has the
Privilege to give to its Possessor the Title of an Earl and Peer of the Realm,
without Creation, and which belongs to the noble Family of Howard, Earls of
Arundel, and Dukes of Norfolk, is all that is remarkable here; except it be,
that in the Church are Four old and stately Monuments of the Earls of Arundel,
and that in this River are caught the best and largest Mullets in England, a
Fish very good in itself, and much valued by the Gentry round, and often sent
up to London.

From hence to the City of Chichester are 12 of the most pleasant and beautiful
Miles in England, whether we go by the Hill, or Downs, or by the Plain, or
enclosed Country.

To the North of Arundel, and at the Bottom of the Hills, and consequently in
the Weald, is the Town of Petworth, a large handsome Country Market Town, and
very populous; and as it stands upon an Ascent, and is dry and healthy, it is
full of Gentlemen's Families, and good well built Houses, both in the Town and
Neighborhood; but the Beauty of Petworth is the ancient Seat of the old Family
of Piercy, Earls of Northumberland, now extinct; whose Daughter, the sole
Heiress of all his vast Estates, married Charles Seymour Duke of Somerset; and
among other noble Seats brought his Grace this of Petworth.

The Duke pulled down the ancient House, and on the same Spot built from the
Ground one of the best-modell'd Houses then in Britain: it had the Misfortune
to be once almost demolished by Fire, but the Damage has been fully repaired.

The Apartments are very noble, well contrived, and richly furnished; but it
cannot be said, that the Situation of the House is chosen so happily, as to
boast of equal Judgment with the rest; the Avenues to the Front want Space, the
House stands, as it were, with its Elbow to the Town; its Front has no Vista
answerable, and the West Front looked not to the Parks or fine Gardens, but to
the old Stables.

To rectify this, when it was too late to order it any other way, the Duke was
obliged to pull down those noble Buildings; I mean the Meuse, or Stables, the
finest of their kind in all the South of England, and equal to some Noblemens
whole Houses: and yet even the demolishing the Pile has done no more than
opened a Prospect over the Country, whereas, had the House been set on the
rising Ground, on the Side of the Park, over against the North Wing of the
House, and a little more to the Westward, the Front had been South to the Town,
the back Front to the Parks; but now all these Advantages lie on one Angle, or
opposite to one Wing of the House. Nevertheless it is a noble Pile of Building,
and by far the finest in all this Part of Britain.

From Petworth West, the Country is a little less woody than the Weald; and a
great many fine Seats begin to show their Heads above the Trees; as the Duke of
Richmond's Seat at Godwood, near Chichester; the Seats of the late Earl of
Tankerville, and the Earl of Scarborough; and a great many others.

But the Seat of the Right Honorable the Lord Visc. Montacute, called Cowdrey,
near Midhurst, the Midae of the Romans, deserves a particular Mention. It is
situated in a Valley encompassed with Lawns, Hills, and Woods, thrown into a
Park, the River running underneath, which renders the Place very agreeable in
Summer, but makes it dampish in Winter. The House is square, and at each Corner
is a Gothic Tower, which have a very good Effect, when viewed from the rising
Grounds. The Hall is ceiled with Irish Oak, after the ancient manner. The Walls
are painted with Architecture by Roberti, the Statues by Goupe, the Staircase
by Pelegrini. The large Parlour or Room at the End of the Hall, is of Holbein's
Painting; where that great Artist has described the Exploits of King Henry
VIII. before Boloigne, Calais, his Landing at Portsmouth, his magnificent Entry
into London, etc. In the other Rooms are many excellent Pictures of the
Ancestors of the Family, and other History Paintings of Holbein, relating to
their Actions in War. The whole Circuit of Rooms are stately and
well-furnished, adorned with many Pictures. There is a long Gallery with the
Twelve Apostles as big as the Life; another very neat one, wainscotted with
Norway Oak, where are many ancient Whole-length Pictures of the Family, in
their proper Habits. There are four History-pieces, two Copies of Raphael's
Marriage of Cupid and Psyche; several old religious and military Paintings from
Battle-abbey.

The Park is very noble, having a great Variety of Grounds in it, and is well
wooded with Pines, Firs, and other Evergreen-trees, which are grown to a large
Size; and here are some of the largest Chesnut-trees perhaps in England. The
Valleys which run through the Park, are well supplied with Water, which keeps the
Grass in a constant Verdure.

Chichester is a neat and pretty large City walled round. The River Lavant runs
under Part of the Walls. Two principal Streets cross it at right Angles upon
the cardinal Points, where stands a curious Cross, and Market-house upon
Pillars, erected by Bishop Read. The Church takes up one of these Quadrants. It
is remarkable for Two Side-isles on both Sides, and the Pictures of all the
Kings and Queens of England since Cissa, (the South Saxon Monarch, who made
this his Royal Seat; and repaired the ancient Roman Castle or Walls, leaving
his Name to the Place) on the Southern Wall, as on the opposite Wall, all the
Bishops. The Spire is a Piece of excellent Workmanship, but it received such a
Shock some Years ago, that it was almost miraculous, that the Steeple did not
fall down; which, if it had, would probably have demolished the whole Church.

It was what the Inhabitants call a Fire-ball, or rather Lightning, which broke
upon the Steeple, with such irresistible Force, that it drove several great
Stones out of it, and carried them clear off, to a prodigious Distance from the
Steeple. One of these Stones, of at least a Ton Weight, was blown over the
South Side or Row of Houses in the West Street, and fell on the Ground in the
Street, at a Gentleman's Door, on the other Side of the Way: and another of
them, almost as big, was blown over both Sides of the said West Street, into
the same Gentleman's Garden, and no Hurt done by either of them. This Account I
relate from a Person of undoubted Credit, who was an Eyewitness, and saw the
Stones. The Breach made thereby in the Spire, though within about 45 Feet of the
Top, was incredibly large, and yet the Steeple stood fast, and is now very
substantially repaired; which shows, that it was originally an admirably sound
and well finished Piece of Workmanship. The Monuments of Bishop Carleton and
Bishop King are in this Church, whose Effigies are curiously done in Marble.

In the Year 1723, in digging a Foundation at Chichester, was found, pretty
deep in the Ground, a large Stone Six Feet long and Three broad, with a Roman
Inscription on it. In digging up the Stone, a few of the Letters were eras'd,
but they were easily supplied. Neptuno et Minervae Templum, pro salute domus
divinae, ex auctoritate Tiberii Claudii, Cogidubni regis, legati Augusti in
Britannia, Collegium fabrorum, et qui in eo a sacris, vel honorati sunt, de suo
dedicaverunt; donante aream Pudente Pudentini filio. That is, This Temple was
dedicated to Neptune and Minerva, for the Safety of the Imperial Family, by the
Authority of Tiberius Claudius. It was erected by the College of Artificers of
King Cogidubnus, Augustus's Lieutenant in Britain, and by those who officiated
as Priests, or were honored in it, at their own Expense; the Ground being
given by Pudens, the Son of Pudentinus.

This Stone was presented to his Grace the Duke of Richmond, who has placed it
in a Temple on a Mount in his Garden at Godwood, between two Statues of Neptune
and Minerva.

This City is not a Place of much Trade, nor is it very populous; but within
these few Years they are fallen into a new way of managing the Corn Trade here,
which turns very well to Account; for whereas the Farmers, generally speaking,
used to carry all their Wheat to Farnham Market, which is very near Forty Miles
by Land-carriage, and from some Parts of the Country more than that, some
moneyed Men of Chichester, Emsworth, and other Places adjacent, joined their
Stocks together, and built large Granaries near the Crook, where the Vessels
come up; and here they buy and lay up all the Corn which the Country on that
Side can spare; and having good Mills in the Neighborhood, they grind and
dress the Corn, and send it to London in the Meal, by long Sea.

This is a great lessening to Farnham Market; but if the Market at London is
supplied, the coming by Sea from Chichester is every whit as much a public
Good, as the encouraging of Farnham Market, which is of itself the greatest
Corn-market in England; Hempstead in Hertfordshire, and London, excepted. This
carrying of Meal by Sea is now practiced from several other Places on this
Coast, even as far as Southampton.

Chichester, besides the Cathedral, has Five small Churches. About Three Miles
from it, is a House of his Grace the Duke of Richmond, called Godwood. It was
the ancient Seat of the Earls of Northumberland, and in a very ruinous
Condition; but the Duke of Richmond has lately built some Offices, which are to
correspond with a Mansion House designed by Colin Campbel, and published by him
in his Vitruvius Britannicus.

His Grace has a noble Menagerie, where he keeps a great Variety of foreign
Animals and Birds; but the Park is small and ill-planted.

However, it has an easy Descent to the East, South and South-west, with the
Prospect of a rich and beautiful Landscape, bounded by the Sea for Thirty Miles
in Length. The Isle of Wight terminates the South-west Prospect, and the famous
St. Rookshill covers it from the North.

About Three Miles to the East of Godwood, lies Charlton, a small Village,
remarkable for being the Seat of Fox-hunters; here are many small
Hunting-houses built by Persons of Quality, who reside there during the Season
for Fox-hunting; but the most beautiful of these Buildings, is that of his
Grace the Duke of Richmond.

Here is also a large Room, which was designed by the Right Hon. the Earl of
Burlington, where the Gentlemen Fox-hunters dine every Day together, during
their Stay at the Village.

By the Side of this Village is a Forest, which was formerly in the Possession
of the Lumlies, but has been for some Years his Grace the Duke of Richmond's,
who has greatly beautified it, by cutting fine Ridings through the several Parts
of it, and making many new Plantations therein.

From Chichester, the Road lying still West, we pass in Sight of the Earl of
Scarborough's fine Seat at Stansted, a House surrounded with thick Woods, through
which there are the most agreeable Vista's cut, that are to be seen any-where
in England; and particularly at the West Opening, which is from the Front of
the House, they sit in the Dineing-room, and see the Town and Harbor of
Portsmouth, the Ships at Spithead, and also at St. Helen's; which, when the
Royal Navy happens to be there, is a most glorious Sight.

In our Passage to Portsmouth, we passed by Fareham, and by Portchester, a
Castle built out of a Roman City.

In Portsmouth Haven a Thousand Sail of the biggest Ships may ride secure. The
Mouth is not so broad as the Thames at Westminster, and that secured on Gosport
Side by Charles Fort, James Fort, Borough Fort, and Block-house Fort, which has
a Platform of above 20 great Guns level with the Water. On the other Side by
Portsmouth, stands South Sea Castle, built by King Henry VIII. The Government
has within these few Years bought more Ground for additional Works, and no
doubt it may be made impregnable; for a shallow Water may be brought quite
round it. The Yards, the Docks, the Storehouses, where all the Furniture is
laid up in the exactest Order, so that the Workmen can find any Implement in
the Dark, exceed Imagination; as do the immense Quantities of all sorts of
military and naval Stores. The Rope-house is 870 Feet long, one continued Room,
almost a Quarter of a Mile. I had the Pleasure of seeing a great Cable made
here: it requires 100 Men to work at it, and so hard is the Labor, that they
can work but Four Hours in the Day. The smallest Number of Men continually
employed in the Yard is 1000, and that but barely sufficient.

Here is also a good Counterscarp, and double Mote, with Ravelins in the Ditch,
and double Palisadoes, and advanced Works to cover the Place from any Approach,
where it may be practicable. The Strength of the Town is also considerably
augmented on the Land-side, by the Fortifications raised of late Years about
the Docks and Yards; and those Parts made a particular Strength by themselves;
and though they are indeed in some Sense independent one of another, yet they
cover and strengthen one another, so that they cannot be separately attacked on
that Side, while they are both in the same Hands.

Edw. IV. began these Fortifications; Henry VII. considerably augmented them;
Charles II. much improved them; and King James II. greatly added to them. I was
sorry to leave this amazing Scene of naval Grandeur, for the Sight of a
wretched Statue of King William III. gilt indeed in an extraordinary manner,
but the very worst of all the bad Works of this kind I have yet seen. I
observed the great Quantity of Water and Ditches hereabout is apt to render the
Place aguish.

These Docks and Yards are now like a Town by themselves, and are a kind of
Marine Corporation within themselves; there being particular large Rows of
Dwellings, built at the public Charge, within the new Works, for all the
principal Officers of the Place; especially the Commissioner, the Agent of the
Victualling, and suchlike.

The Town of Portsmouth is a well inhabited, thriving Corporation; and has
been greatly enriched of late by the Fleet's having so often and so long lain
there, as well as large Fleets of Merchantmen; besides, the constant fitting
out of Men of War here, and the often paying them at Portsmouth, has made a
great Resort of People to it. Mr. Camden, so long ago as the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, takes notice, that Portsmouth was populous in time of War, but not
so in time of Peace: but now the Business of the Navy is so much increased, and
so much of it always done here, that it may be said, that there is more to do
at Portsmouth now in time of Peace, than was then in time of War.

The Government of the Place is by a Mayor and Aldermen, etc. and the Civil
Government is no more interrupted by the Military, than if there was no Garrison
there: so that we have very seldom had any Complaint either of Want of
Discipline among the Soldiers, or Want of Prudence in the Magistrates.

Since the Increase of Business at this Place, the Confluence of People has
been so great, that the Town not admitting any Enlargement for Buildings, a
kind of Suburb, or rather a new Town, has been built on the heathy Ground
adjoining, which is so considerable, that it threatens to outdo, for Numbers of
Inhabitants, and Beauty of Buildings, even the Town itself; and the rather, as
it is unconfined by the Laws of the Garrison, and unincumber'd with the
Corporation Burdens, Freedoms, Town-duties, Services, and the like.

Next we arrived at the Portsdown Hills, which are of Chalk, and at a
reasonable Distance from the Shore extend themselves into Sussex.

Here we turned to admire the Face of the Ground we had passed. The Ports,
Creeks, Bays, Ocean, Castles and Ships, the Isle of Wight, Portchester, the
considerable Town of Gosport, Portsmouth, Southampton, Chichester, and all the
Coast from Portland Isle to Sussex, were comprehended under one View.

From Portsmouth, West, the Country lies low and flat, is full of Creeks and
Inlets of the Sea and Rivers, all the Way to Southampton, so that we ferry over
three times in about 18 Miles; besides going over the Bridge at Tichfield. The
first of these Ferries is at Portsmouth itself, (viz.) cross the Mouth of the
Harbor, from the Point abovementioned, to Gosport, a large Town, and of great
Trade, especially in time of War. From thence we ride to Tichfield as above,
where we pass the River Alre, which rises in the same County at Alresford, or
near it, which is not above Twenty-two Miles off; and yet it is a large River
here, and makes a good Road below, called Tichfield-bay. Thence at about Four
Miles we pass another River at Busselton, narrow in Breadth, but exceeding
deep, and eminent for its being able to carry the largest Ships: here is a
Building-yard for Ships of War; and in King William's Time, Two Eighty-gun
Ships were launched here. It seems, the Safety of the Creek, and the Plenty of
Timber in the Country behind it, is the Reason of Building so much in this
Place.

From hence, when we come opposite to Southampton, we pass another Creek, being
the Mouth of the River Alre, which comes down from Winchester, and is both very
broad and deep; and the Ferrymen having a very sorry Boat, we found it
dangerous enough passing it. On the opposite Bank stands the ancient Town of
Southampton, on the other Side of which comes down another large River, called
the Test, entering Southampton Water by Red-bridge; so that the Town of
Southampton stands upon a Point running out into the Sea, between Two very fine
Rivers, both navigable for some Way up the Country, and particularly useful for
the bringing down Timber out of one of the best wooded Counties in Britain; for
the River on the West Side of the Town comes by the Edge of New-forest: here we
saw a prodigious Quantity of Timber, of an uncommon Size, vastly large, lying
on the Shore of the River, for above Two Miles in Length, which they told us
was brought thither from the Forest, and left there to be fetched by the
Builders at Portsmouth-dock, as they had Occasion for it.

In riding over the South Part of Hampshire, I made this Observation, That
notwithstanding the very great Consumption of Timber since the Revolution, by
Building or Rebuilding almost the whole Navy; and notwithstanding so many of
the King's Ships were built hereabouts, besides abundance of large
Merchant-ships, which were about that time built at Southampton, at Red-bridge,
and at Busselton, etc. yet I saw the Gentlemen's Estates, within Six, Eight, or
Ten Miles of Southampton, so overgrown with Wood, and their Woods so full of
large wellgrown Timber, that it seemed as if they wanted Sale for it, and that
it was of little Worth to them. In one Estate at Hurseley in particular near
Winchester, formerly belonging to Mr. Cromwell, Grandson to Oliver Cromwell,
though the whole Estate was not above 800 l. per Ann. in Rent, they might have
cut Twenty thousand Pounds worth of Timber down, and yet have left the Woods in
a thriving Condition; in another Estate between that and Petersfield, of about
1000 l. per Ann. they told me they could fell a Thousand Pounds a Year in good
large Timber fit for Building, for Twenty Years together, and do the Woods no
Harm. The late Colonel Norton also, whose Seat at Southwick was within Six
Miles of Portsmouth, and within Three of the Water-carriage, had, as I was
told, at that time, an immense Quantity of Timber upon it, some growing within
Sight of the very Docks in Portsmouth. Farther West it is all the same, and as
I rode through Newforest, I saw the ancient Oaks of many hundred Years standing,
grown white with Age, and perishing with their withered Tops in the Air.

I shall give other Hints of the like, when I come to speak of Hertfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Berkshire, and the Counties which we call Inland, where the
Timber is but of small Value, for want of Water-carriage to bring it away;
likewise again of the Counties Northward, bordering upon the Humber, and upon
all the Northern Rivers, not to say a Word of Ireland; which is still a
Storehouse of Timber, more inexhaustible, if possible, than England.

But having mentioned the late Col. Norton, we cannot pass over in Silence his
extraordinary Will, which made so much Noise in the World.

This Gentleman died in Dec. 1732, and left his Real Estate of about 6000 l.
per Ann. and a Personal, said to be to the Value of 60,000 l. to the "Poor,
Hungry, and Thirsty, Naked and Strangers, Sick and Wounded, and Prisoners, to
the End of the World." And appointed the Parliament of Great Britain to be his
Executors; and in case of their Refusal, the Bishops; and left his Pictures,
and other Valuables to the King. But his Will has been since set aside on the
score of Insanity, strong Marks of which it carried in the Face of it.

This Gentleman was famous for acting several Parts in Plays with great
Propriety, particularly the Part of Falstaff in Shakespeare's Henry the Fourth,
and the Merry Wives of Windsor, at a neat Theater erected by himself, at his
House at Southwick, to which, in a Vacation, he often drew down and entertained
the most celebrated London Actors.

This Gentleman's Seat at Southwick was formerly an old Monastery, and many of
the Walls of it are yet remaining; the House being a Part of it: the Situation
is very low and wet, having a great deal of boggy Ground about it; but from the
House the Park rises to the highest Point of Portsdown, mentioned above, where
there are two very large Clumps of Scots Fir-trees, which were planted by the
late Col. Norton, and have thriven so well (though greatly exposed to the Sea
Winds) as to become a Landmark at a considerable Distance at Sea, and may be
seen near Twenty Miles at Land. Between these two Clumps of Trees, I was
informed, that Gentleman intended to have erected a lofty Building; which must
have had an exceeding good Effect: for from the level Ground on this Spot, you
have a full View of Portsmouth Town, Harbor and Docks, under the Eye; and St.
Helen's in the Isle of Wight, is another Point of View, with an unbounded
Prospect of the Sea to the South-east; and on the Land-side, a large extensive
Vale, well planted and cultivated, bounded with Hills spread with Woods, and
the South downs covered with Sheep, just under the Eye; so that this Prospect
may be justly esteemed one of the finest in England.

Southampton is a truly ancient Town, which having been many Years decaying in
its Trade, of late has very much improved in that of Portugal Wines, which are
imported here and sent into many Places inland, where formerly the London
Merchants used to deal; and that in great measure owing to the Duties being
easier at Southampton than at London. They also carry on some Trade with the
Isles of Jersey and Guernsey; and not a little, as their Enemies say, of the
Smuggling Trade. The Town is large and populous, has a fair High Street, a
spacious Key; and, if its Trade should thoroughly revive, is able to contain
great Numbers of People. There is a French Church, and no inconsiderable
Congregation belonging to it. Here are still some Merchants who trade to
Newfoundland for Fish, which they carry to the Streights, etc. and some
Ship-building also is carried on here, though not near so much as formerly.

This Town had formerly the sole Privilege from the Crown of importing Wines
from thence; which, though a vast Advantage to it, the Corporation either
wantonly or corruptly sold to London.

The Situation of Southampton between two Rivers was to its Advantage formerly,
in point of Strength; and is besides strongly walled with very large Stones,
full of those little white Shells, like Honey-combs, which grow upon the Back
of Oysters. This is a sort of Stone extremely hard, and seems to be gathered
near the Beach of the Sea. These Walls have many Lunets and Towers, in some
Places double ditch'd; but the Sea encompasses near half the Town. It was built
in the Reign of Edward III.

I observe they have a Method of breaking the Force of the Waves here, by
laying a Bank of Sea-ore, as they call it. It is composed of long, slender and
strong Filaments, like pill'd Hemp, very tough and durable; I suppose thrown up
by the Sea: and this performs its Work better than Walls of Stone, or natural
Cliff.

At the South-east Corner, near the Quay, is a Fort with some Guns upon it,
called the Tower. On one was an Inscription, denoting its being erected by King
Henry VIII. in the Year 1542. In the North-west Corner was a strong Castle,
with a Mount, walled about at-top as a Keep: upon this a round Stone Tower,
with a winding Ascent.

The Main of this Town consists of one broad Street, running through its Length.
There are many old religious Ruins, and great Warehouses, Cellars,
Storehouses, etc. The old Roman City called Trausantum, stood more Eastward
upon the Banks of the River Itching, coming from Winchester, where now is a
Hamlet named St. Mary's. There is a handsome new Church built upon the Ruins of
an old one, which, they say, was burnt in some French Wars. It is near the
present Ferry, and opposite to Bittern, where was an old Roman Castle,
surrounded with a Ditch, into which the Seawater flowed. It was ruined in the
Danish Wars, and Southampton arose from its Ashes. This Place is memorable for
the Experiment of King Canute, who to silence the vain Flattery of his
Courtiers, seated himself on the Banks of the River, with all his Regal
Apparatus, and commanded the Tide not to approach his Footstool.

About a Mile from this Town, on the Banks of the River Itching, is a vast
large Pile of Earth, which rises in the Form of a Cone, from a large wide
Foundation of great Extent and Circumference, which they call Bevis-Mount. It
is supposed to be an ancient Fortification, thrown up by the Saxons, under the
Command of Bevis, to oppose the Passage of the Danes over the River, who lay
encamped on the other Side. The River is not very large, but the Tide running
up into it a good Way beyond the Town, forms a kind of Bay just under this
great Mount, which being contiguous to an Estate belonging to the late Earl of
Peterborough, his Lordship purchased it, and converted it into a kind of
Wilderness; and as it is full of Trees and Brambles, he has cut through them
diverse circular Walks and Labyrinths, so very intricate, that it is hardly
possible to avoid being lost in them. His Lordship used frequently to divert
himself by dropping his Friends in the midst of this Wilderness, and, stealing
away, let them wander up and down, till they found their Way out of it. The
Mount terminates above, as is feigned of Parnassus, in a kind of Fork; and
between the two Spires is a Bowling-green or Parterre, adorned with fine
Italian Marble Statues, brought by his Lordship from abroad. It lies open on
the Side-facing the River, and when the Tide is in, gives a most agreeable
Prospect. On one Side of this Parterre, declining gradually from the Top of one
of the Spires to the Green, is planted a little Vineyard, exposed to the South;
and on the other Side, on the very Summit of the Spire, stands a fine
Summer House, very elegantly built and contrived, with a good Cellar under it,
where his Lordship kept his Wines, having no good Cellerage at his House, which
is near a quarter of a Mile from the Mount, from which his Lordship called it
Bevis-Mount. He intended to rebuild the House, and convert all the Grounds
lying between it and the Mount, into Gardens, had he lived a little longer. The
Beauty of the Improvements which his Lordship has made in this Mount, are
hardly to be conceived. He has adorned it with Statues, Grottoes and Alcoves,
and diversified it up and down with something new and surprising, at every
turn, peculiar to his own fine Taste and Genius in Gardening, wherein no
Nobleman excelled, and few equaled him in Europe. He left this little Seat,
and Lands about it, to his Lady, who now enjoys them.

There are as many things fabled here of Bevis, as there are in Wales and
Cornwall of King Arthur, both of whom have suffered much from Legendary Writers
and Tradition; for as King Arthur performed many brave and valiant Acts in War,
and was of great bodily Strength, so Bevis, who was a Saxon Lord, was a Man of
much military Courage and Conduct, as well as personally strong. He was a great
Opposer of the Normans, and followed them down to Wales, and gave them Battle,
near Caerdiff, in Glamorganshire, but was there defeated. It Is said his Sword
may be still seen at Arundel Castle; yet there are some who, from the Fables,
with which their Stories are mingled, doubt whether ever there were such
Persons as either of them.

I here took a Passage over to the Isle of Wight, and in Two Hours arrived at
Cowes, by the Way passing by Calshot Castle, where some Years ago were to be
seen the Main-top-mast Head of a Dutch Man of War, sunk in that Place, a very
dangerous Sand lying there in the middle of the Current.

Cowes is the chief Seaport Town in this Island; and in Time of War the
general Place of Rendezvous for Merchant-ships waiting for Convoys, being
secured, in some measure, by the Guns of the Castle, but more by the
Neighborhood of Portsmouth. We walked Four Miles, and came to

Newport, the principal Town in the Island; large and populous. At a pretty
strong Castle, about a Mile distant, resides the Governor.

The Island is very pleasant, and so fruitful, that one Year's Crop will serve
the Inhabitants for Seven Years; who therefore supply Portsmouth, and the Parts
adjacent, with the Surplus. It abounds particularly in Corn, Cattle, Hares,
Rabbets, Wildfowl, Fish, etc. It is Sixty Miles in Circumference: its Militia
is the best disciplined in England. Its Wool, in Fineness, is next to that of
Cotswold. Carisbrook Castle is famous for being the Place of Imprisonment of
King Charles I. Sanham, in this Island, has also a Castle; so has
South-Yarmouth, so called, to distinguish it from Great-Yarmouth, in Norfolk.
Spithead between Portsmouth and this Island, and St. Helen's, near to the Isle
of Wight, are famous for the Rendezvous of the Royal Navy of England.
Appledore-come is a very beautiful Seat in this Isle, belonging to Sir Robert
Worsley, B^rt.

This Island is also noted for having been once advanced to the Title of a
Kingdom, by King Henry VI. in behalf of Henry Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, his
great Favorite, who was crowned King of Wight, and of the Isles of Jersey and
Guernsey, in 1445, but dying Two Years after, the Isle lost the Title of a
Kingdom. For King Edward IV. who succeeded Henry, bestowed this Island upon his
Father-in-law, Richard Woodville, Earl Rivers, with the Title of Lord of Wight,
as the late Earl of Derby was Lord of the Isle of Man.

Returning to Southampton, I was at the Extent of my intended Journey West,
intending to look no farther this Way for the present. I went North-east,
leaving Winchester a little on the Left, and came into the Portsmouth Road at
Petersfield, a Town chiefly noted for good Inns, and standing in the Middle of
a Country overgrown with a prodigious Quantity of Oak-timber. From hence we
came to Alton, and in the Road thither began a little to taste the Pleasure of
the Western Downs, which reach from Winchester almost to that Place.

The Duke of Bolton has Two very noble Seats in this Country, one between Alton
and Alresford; and one at Basing, of which hereafter. Alton is a small
Market Town, of no Note, neither is there any considerable Manufacture in all
this Part of England, except a little Drugget and Shalloon-making; otherwise
the whole Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surrey and Hampshire, are not employed in
any considerable Woollen Manufacture.

From Alton we came to Farnham, a large populous Market Town, the farthest that
Way in the County of Surrey, from London; and, excepting Hempstead and London,
as we observed above, the greatest Corn-market in England, particularly for
Wheat, of which so vast a Quantity is brought hither every Market Day, that a
Gentleman told me, he once counted 1100 Teams of Horse, all drawing Wagons, or
Carts, laden with Wheat; every Team of which is supposed to bring a Load,
which is Forty Bushels, in the whole 44,000 Bushels; but I do not take upon me
to affirm this for Truth of my own Knowledge, though I know some have thought the
Quantity has been much more; but this also was, I suppose, before the People of
Chichester and Emsworth on one Side, and Southampton, Tichfield, and Redbridge
on the other, took to the Trade of sending their Wheat in Meal to London by
Sea, as I mentioned before.

The Toll-dish, some Market-days, used to amount to above a Load of Wheat; and
yet about 100 Years ago, it was so short of it, that one Busk, whose Property
it was, sold it for Forty Shillings; so greatly was this Manufacture increased
within that Period. But if Farnham has been a Loser by the Method lately fallen
upon by the People of Chichester and Southampton, it has made itself amends by
another Product, which it has taken to within these Twenty Years past, and that
is Hops, which it has so vastly improved in, that it may be said to outdo
Canterbury, Maidstone, and any of the Places in Kent, most noted for that
Commodity; and this not only in Quantity, but Goodness. In short, all the
Neighborhood about Farnham is one general Hop-ground; and to show the
Excellency of the Product, Farnham Hops now lead the Price at all the Markets
in England.

At this Town is a Castle built by a Bishop of Winchester, which has been in a
constant Succession possessed by the Bishops of the Diocese ever since King
Stephen's Time to this Day, and is their usual Place of Residence. This Palace
is a magnificent Structure, deeply moated, and strongly walled, with Towers at
proper Distances. It stands upon the Edge of an Hill, where is a fine Park. One
large and broad Street of the Town below-hill fronts the Castle. The Main of
the rest of the Town, consists of a long strait Street, crossing it at right
Angles. The River went parallel to it on the South.

About Two Miles from Farnham, is More-park, formerly the Seat of Sir William
Temple, who, by his Will, ordered his Heart to be put into a China-bason, and
buried under a Sun-dial in his Garden, which was accordingly performed. This
House is situated in a Valley, surrounded on every Side with Hills, having a
running Stream through the Gardens, which, with a small Expense, might be made to
serpent through all the adjoining Meadows, in a most delightful manner. At about
a Quarter of a Mile from the House, is a large Grotto in the Side of a Hill,
from whence you may command a Prospect of the Meadows and Woods which lie below
it; and these are bounded again by Hills, which makes the whole one of the most
romantic Places imaginable.

From Farnham, that I might take in the whole County of Surrey, I took the
Coach Road over Bagshot-heath, and that great Forest, as it is called, of
Windsor.

Bagshot-heath, which at present is a horrid barren Country, is capable of
great Improvement, as may be judged by the several Enclosures on the Borders of
it, and some in the Center also, which from being in the same Condition, (as we
at present see the whole Face of the Country thereabouts, very barren,
producing nothing but Heath and Whorts) now produces good Corn and Grass, and
in some Parts are good Plantations of Trees, which thrive well. On the Edge of
this Heath are several Seats of Noblemen; but those which require Notice are,
first, the Right Hon. the Earl of Arran's, which is a large Enclosure, the
Wood-walks and other Plantations being upward of Two Miles in Circumference;
and the Park, which runs on the other Side of the House, is upward of Three
Miles. The Plantations in this Enclosure have made good Progress, which is a
Proof, that the Soil thereabout is capable of great Improvement.

The next Seat is that of the Right Hon. the Earl of Anglesea, which is an
ancient House, situated very near the Church, and almost surrounded with large
Trees, so that only the Front appears to View.

The Duke of Roxborough has also a Seat in this Place, where his Grace used to
reside a great Part of the Summer and Autumn, for the Pleasure of Shooting,
being very fond of that Sport.

This Desert lies extended so much, that some say there is not less than
100,000 Acres of this barren Land that lies all together, reaching out every
Way in the Three Counties of Surrey, Hampshire, and Berkshire; besides a great
Quantity of Land, almost as bad as that between Godalmin and Petersfield, on
the Road to Portsmouth, including some Hills called the Hind-head, and others.

It may not be amiss to take notice of a common Mistake in relation to Bagshot
Mutton, so much valued by the Gentry, which they suppose to be fed there, and
from the Poorness of the Soil, rendered smaller than most other Mutton in
England, whereas I am credibly informed, that none of the Sheep are fed at
Bagshot, being brought from and fed upon Hampshire Downs, and all killed by the
Butchers of Bagshot, and sent to London.

Through this Desert, for I can call it no less, we come into the great Western
Road, leading from London to Salisbury, Exeter, etc. and pass the Thames at
Stanes.

The Bridge of Stanes, and Egham Causeway, which are part of the Highway from
London, to the West of England, having been, for some time, in a ruinous and
dangerous Condition, and the Tolls and Duties laid by an Act passed in the
Reign of Henry VIII. and another in that of Queen Elizabeth, amounting to no
more than the clear Sum of 45 l. per Annum, the Bridgemasters were obliged to
exact at the Ferry there exorbitant Rates for conveying Passengers over the
Thames, in order the better to support the said Bridge and Causeway; and yet
all proving insufficient, as well as burdensome, an Act passed in the Session
of 1739-40, for the more effectual Maintenance and well-keeping of them both;
and will be a great Benefit to Passengers, as also to the River, and the Towns
adjacent; and the Act provides, that in case of the Reparation of the Bridge,
or any other Accident which shall hinder Passengers or Carriages going over the
Bridge, the Ferry shall exact no higher Rate for conveying over such
Passengers, etc. than are laid for passing over the Bridge.

Here recollecting that I had yet left the Inland Towns of the Two Counties of
Kent and Sussex, and great Part of the County of Surrey, out of my Account; and
that having, as it were, taken a Circuit round the Coast only, I had a great
many Places worth viewing to give an Account of; I therefore left Windsor, on
one Side of the River, and Hampton Court on the other, to be the Subject of
another Letter; and resolved to finish my present Purpose in the Order I had
begun it, that is to say, to take in the whole Country as I came on; that I
might make as few Transitions as possible from one remote Part of England to
another.

From Stanes therefore I turned S. and S. E. to Chertsey, another Market Town,
and where there is a Bridge over the Thames: this Town is noted for the
Burial-place of Henry VI. whence his Bones were afterward removed to Windsor
by Henry VII. and also by its being the Retreat of the incomparable Cowley,
where he lived distant from the Hurries of the Court and Town, entirely taken
up in Country Business, Farming and Husbandry, for his Diversion, and where he
also died.

From this Town, wholly employed in Malting, and in Barge Carriages down the
River to London, I went away South to Working, a private Country Market Town,
so out of the Way, that it is very little heard of in England. It claims however
some Honor, from its being once the Residence of a Royal Branch of the Family
of Plantagenet, the old Countess of Richmond, Mother to King Henry VII. who
made her last Retreat here, where the King her Son built, or rather repaired,
an old Royal House, on purpose for her Residence, and where she ended her Days
in Honor and Peace; the former Part of her Life having been much exposed to
Storms and Dangers under the turbulent Reigns of the Two preceding Monarchs.

From hence we came to Guilford, a well known and considerable Market Town.
Here sometimes the Assizes are held, but always Elections for Parliament Men
for the County. The River, which, according to Mr. Camden, is called the Wey,
and which falls into the Thames at Oatlands, is made navigable to this Town,
which adds greatly to its Trade; and by this Navigation a very great Quantity
of Timber is brought down to London, not from the Neighborhood of this Town
only, but even from the woody Parts of Sussex and Hampshire above Thirty Miles
from it, the Country Carriages bringing it hither in the Summer by Land. This
Navigation is also a great Support to the Corn-market at Farnham: for as the
Meal-men, and other Dealers, buy the Corn at that Market, a good deal of it is
brought to the Mills on this River; which is not above Seven Miles distant, and
being first ground and dressed, is then sent down in the Meal by Barges to
London, at a small Expense.

Here is a small Remainder of an old Manufacture, in the Clothing-trade; and it
extends itself to Godalmin, Haselmere, and the Vale Country, on the Side of the
Holmwood, (of which I shall speak on another Occasion) quite to Darking. These
Cloths of a middling Price have formerly been in great Repute, but afterward
lost their Credit for some time, till, by the Application and Skill of the
Clothiers, of late they revived, whilst the Clothiers of Cranbrook and
Tenterden in Kent, whose Goods are of the same Kind, are almost sunk to
nothing, as I have already observed.

This Clothing-trade, however small, is yet very assisting to the Poor of this
Part of the Country, where the Lands, as I have noted, are but indifferent, the
Inhabitants generally Cottagers, living chiefly by the Commons and Heath Ground
thereabouts.

On Wednesday the 23d of April 1740, the Upper Church at Guilford in Surrey
fell down. It was an ancient Building, and, not long before, 750 l. was
expended upon it in Repairs; there was Preaching in it on the Sunday before,
and Workmen were employed in taking down the Bells, who providentially had
quitted the Spot about a Quarter of an Hour before the Accident happened, so
that not one Person received any Hurt, though great Numbers were Spectators:
Three Bells had been taken down, and the other Three fell with the Steeple,
which broke the Body of the Church to Pieces, though the Steeple received but
little Damage by the Fall.

From Guilford the Road to Farnham is very remarkable; for it runs along West
from Guilford, upon the Ridge of a high chalky Hill, no wider than the Road
itself, and the Declivity begins on either hand, at the very Hedge that bounds
the Highway, and is very steep and high. From this Hill is a Prospect either
way, so far, that it is surprising; insomuch that one sees to the North, or
North-west, over Bagshot-heath, one way, to the South-east into Sussex, the
other way, almost to the South-downs, and West to an unbounded Length, where
the Horizon only restrains the Eye. This Hill being all Chalk, a Traveller
feels the Effect of it in a hot Summer's Day, when the Reflection of the Sun
make the Heat almost insupportable. This Hill reaches from Guilford so far as
within a Mile and a half of Farnham.

The Hill, or rather the Ascent of it from Guilford, is called St.
Catharine's-hill; on the Summit whereof stands the Gallows, which is so placed,
that the Towns-people, from the High Street, may sit at their Shop-doors, and
see the Criminals executed.

Near Guilford, on the Left Hand Side of the Road leading to Godalmin, are the
Remains of an ancient Chapel, situated on the Summit of a Hill, so as to be
seen at a considerable Distance every way. This is called St. Catharine's
Chapel. The Materials with which this was built, are a sort of Tile, which when
broken, has the Appearance of Iron within; and the Cement which joins these
Titles, is now so hard, as scarcely to be penetrated with the strongest
Instrument. The only Remains of this Chapel, are the outside Walls, which being
built with these Materials, have resisted the Weather, and the common Fate of
Things.

The great Road from London to Chichester, and from London to Portsmouth, lying
through Guilford, it is consequently a Town very well furnished with Inns for
Accommodation of Travelers, as is Godalmin also, the next Town, within Three
Miles of it, noted likewise, of late Years, for the Place of Residence of the
Impostor Mary Tofts, who so long amused Statesmen, Physicians, Anatomists, and,
in short, all Degrees of Men, learned and unlearned, with her infamous
Rabbet-productions, etc.

From Guilford lies a Cross-road, as it may be called, to London, not
frequented by Coaches or Carriers, or the ordinary Passengers to London, though
it is by some reckoned the nearest Way, and is without Question much the
pleasanter Road, if not the pleasantest in this Part of England; viz. From this
Town to Leatherhead, 10 Miles; from Leatherhead to London, over Banstead-downs,
15 Miles; or, if you please, by Epsom, 17 Miles; which, though it is called the
farthest Way, makes Amends abundantly by the Advantage and Pleasantness of the
Road.

In the Road from Guilford to Epsom, being 15 Miles, you meet with a Town
almost at every Two Miles End, in or near which is a handsome Seat. The Road is
always good, being a very hard Gravel. On the Right Hand of the Road lie the
Downs, which have constantly a great Number of Sheep feeding on them; and on
the Left, the Parks, Gardens, and cultivated Fields, belonging to the several
Gentlemen who inhabit those Seats; all which render the Road very pleasant and
agreeable.

The Seat of the Lord Onslow, which is the first on the Road from Guilford, is
but indifferently situated; the Front which faces the Road, is obscured by the
Wood, so that it can be seen only in one Point of View; and the House standing
very low, does not command any Prospect from the neighboring Downs: the
Avenues to it are very narrow, and the Building, though very large, is executed
in a very bad Taste.

On the same Road lies an ancient Seat, now in the Possession of James Fox, Esquire
which though an old Building, yet having an open Situation, in Front, toward the
Downs, is rendered very pleasant; and the present Possessor, being a Person of
fine Taste, is beautifying the House within, and making pleasant Plantations
about it; which will be a great Embellishment to the Seat.

Near this Road also lies the Seat of the Honorable Sir Conyers Darcy; which
is situated on an Eminence, so as to be seen many Miles distant. The House is a
large new Edifice, having a Park behind it, and is pretty well timbered on
every Side. I ought not to omit mentioning the Seat of the late Arthur Moore,
Esquire at Fetcham, near Leatherhead, now in the Possession of Thomas Revel, Esquire
where no Cost has been spared to make a most beautiful Situation by Nature more
delightful by Art.

Two Miles from Guilford, on the Banks of the Wey, is a fine Seat, which
belonged, when I saw it, to the late Denzil Onslow, Esquire called Pyrford, and is
exceeding pleasant, especially for the beautiful Intermixture of Wood and Water
in the Park, Gardens, and Grounds adjoining; whereby that Gentleman, whose
Genius lay wonderfully in improving Lands, and rendering Things more profitable
and pleasant, brought Pyrford to such a Perfection, as to be inferior to very
few, if any, of the finest Houses in Surrey. Adjoining to the Park is a very
convenient and ingenious Decoy, the first of the Kind in this Part of England.

At the North-east End of this Range of fine Seats, is Leatherhead, a little
Thoroughfare-town, with a Stone Bridge over the Mole, a River so called, from
its remarkable Sinking into the Earth, at the Foot of Box-hill, near a Village
called Mickleham, and working its Way under Ground like a Mole, rising again at
or near this Town of Leatherhead; where its wandering Streams are united again,
and form a pretty large River, as they were before, running together under
Leatherhead Bridge, and from thence to Cobham, and so it pursues its Course to
the Thames, which it joins at Molesey, which doubtless takes its Name from the
River.

And here I cannot but take Notice of an unaccountable Error, into which all
the Writers I have met with have unwarily fallen, on account of this little
River hiding itself in the Earth, and finding its Way under Ground, from the
Foot of Beechworth, or Betsworth-castle, near Box-hill, and then rising again
at Leatherhead, as above; as if the Water had at once ingulph'd itself in a
Chasm of Earth, or sunk in a Whirlpit. The great Camden has not a little
contributed to this Error in his Account thereof; but as he is in some measure
set right by an Observation and Note in the last Edition of his Britannia, by
the Right Rev. Continuator, I shall have the less Occasion to insist upon the
Matter; and shall therefore refer to them, and only mention what I have myself
observed on this Occasion, having resided some time in the Neighborhood.

The Current of the River being much obstructed by the Interposition of
Box-hill, which, interrupting its free Course, forces the Waters to find their
Way through as well as they can; and in order to this, coming near that Part
called the Stomacher, the Waters sink insensibly away, lessening the Stream for
near Two Miles, and these Channels they call the Swallows; and the whole Ground
on the Bank of the River, where it is flat and low, is full of these
subterraneous Passages; so that if on any sudden Rain the River swells over the
Banks, it is observed not to go back into the Chanel again when the Flood
abates, but to sink away into the Earth in the Meadows, where it spreads.

These Swallows, for there are many, and not one called the Swallow, as is said
in Mr. Camden; though they diminish the Stream much, do not so drink it up, as to
make it disappear: but when it crosses the Roof near Mickleham, it runs very
sharp and broad, nor did I ever know it without Water in the driest Summer in
that Place. On the contrary, I have known it so deep, the Wagons and Carriages
have not dared to go through.

Below this Place the Hills rise again on the other Side very high, and
particularly on the Ridge, which the Country People call the Ashcomb-hills, and
they seem to force the River again West; so it surrounds most of the Park
formerly belonging to Sir Richard Studdolph, and has several Bridges upon it;
and by this time indeed, so much of it is sunk away, that sometimes the Chanel,
though full of Water in Pits and Holes, cannot be perceived to run; but this must
be in a very dry Season, and still the Chanel is visible, where it runs at
other times rapidly enough.

This Part, which has the least Water, continuing about half a Mile, we then
perceive the Stream very visibly to be increased; so that it takes Vent again,
now, in thousands of little Springs, till, in another half Mile, it is an ample
River again, and passes in full Streams under Leatherhead Bridge, as above.

A further Proof of the gradual sinking away of the Water, take as follows: In
October 1676, there happened a very sudden hasty Land-flood, which swelled the
River to a very great Height; and particularly so high, that at
Beechworth-castle, and at other Gentlemen's Seats, near the River, where they
had Fish Ponds that were fed by the River, it overflowed their Ponds, and
carried off all their Fish. Sir Adam Brown lived then at Beechworth-castle; and
his Son, and the young Gentlemen of the neighboring Families, disturbed at the
Loss of their Fish, came all down to Darking; where they raised a little Troop
of the young Fellows and Boys of the Town, and all went together, to that Part
of the River which runs by the Foot of the Stomacher of Box-hill.

There was a low flat Piece of Meadow-ground, lying close to the River on one
Side; just opposite to which, the Hill, lying also close to the River, made up
the Bank on the other: this Piece of Ground might contain about Four or Five
Acres, and lying hollow in the Middle, like the Shape of a Drippingpan, was by
the Overflowing of the River so full of Water, that the Bank, which lay close
to the River, though higher than the rest, was not to be seen.

The Gentlemen set themselves to raise this Bank, so as to separate the Water
in the hollow Part of the Field, from that in the River, and then made a Return
to it, at the Upper, or East End of the Field; so that no more Water could run
into the Field from any Part of the River. And the Event was, that in about Two
Nights and a Day, exclusive of the Time they took in making their Dams, the
Water sunk all away in the Field; and the Fish being surrounded, were caught,
as it were, in a Trap; and the Purchase fully recompensed their Labor; for the
like Quantity of Fish, great and small, I believe, was never taken at once in
this Kingdom, out of so small a River.

This Story I mention, as a Demonstration of the Manner of this River losing
itself under Ground, or being swallowed up, as they call it; for this Field,
where the Water sunk away is just at the Place, which Mr. Camden calls Swallow,
near the Village of Mickleham, and under the Precipice of the Hill; and yet the
Water was Two Nights and a Day sinking leisurely off. And in this manner, and
no other, does so much of the River as passes under Ground, sink away.

The Town of Darking is eminent for several little Things worth Observation;
as, first, for the great Roman Highway, called Stoney-street, which passes
through the Churchyard of this Town: Secondly, for a little Common or Heath,
called the Cottman Dean, or the Heath of Poor Cottages, (for so the Word
signifies) belonging to the Town; and where their Almshouse stands, which some
learned Physicians believe to be the best Air in England: Thirdly, for Mr.
Howard's House and Garden, called Deepden; which stand in a small Valley,
environed with steep Hills on every Side; the Level-ground about the House was
laid out into pleasant Walks and Gardens, which were planted with a great
Variety of Exotic Trees and Plants, and the Hills were planted with Trees on
every Side (excepting the South Aspect) which was planted with Vines; and
formerly there has been some tolerable good Wine made there, though the Hill is
so steep, that it is very difficult to walk up it. At present the Gardens and
Vineyard are neglected, and many of the Exotic Trees have been destroyed. On
the Summit of the Hill, above the Vineyard, is a Summer House, from which, in a
clear Day, you may discern the Sea over the South-downs, near Arundel.

The Market of Darking is the most famous in England, for Poultry; and
particularly for the fattest Geese, and the largest Capons. They are brought
hither from as far as Horsham in Sussex; and it is the Business of all the
Country, on that Side, for many Miles, to breed and fatten them up; and some
are so large, as to be little inferior to Turkeys; I have seen them sold for 4
s. to 4 s. 6 d. each, and weighing from 4 to 5 or 6 lb. a-piece.

On Holy Thursday, here is also a Fair, chiefly for Lambs, and the greatest in
England of that Kind: I have passed over the so much celebrated House of Mr.
Evelyn at Wotton, near Darking, not that it is not worth Notice; but because so
many others have said so much of it.

From Box-hill, and particularly from this Part of it, is a fair View, in clear
Weather, quite over the Weald of Sussex, to the South-downs; and by the Help of
Glasses, the Town of Horsham, Ashdown Forest, the Duke of Somerset's House at
Petworth, and the South-downs, as they range between Brighthelmston and
Arundel, may be plainly seen; besides an unbounded Prospect into Kent.

The Vale beneath this Hill is, for many Miles East and West, called the
Holmward, or Holmsdale; in the woody Part of which are often found Out-lying
Red Deer; and in the Days of King James II. or while he was Duke of York, they
have hunted the largest Stags here that have been seen in England. The Duke
took great Care to have them preserved for his own Sport; but they have, since
that, been most of them destroyed.

This Holmward is now chiefly overgrown with Furz; but was famous for producing
such Quantities of Strawberries, that they were carried to Market by
Horse-loads.

It is suggested, that this Place was in ancient Times the Retreat for many
Ages of the native Britons, whom the Romans could never drive out; and, after
that, it was the like to the Saxons, when the Danes harassed the Nation, and
ravaged the Country wherever they came. On this Account they retain here in
Memory the following Lines: This is Holmesdale,
Never conquered, never shall.


The Country, though wild still, and perhaps having the same Countenance now in
many Places, as it had a thousand Years ago; yet in other Places is cultivated,
and has Roads passable enough in the Summer quite through it, on every Side, and
the Woods are in a great measure cleared off.

Keeping along the Bottom of these Hills, and yet not entering into this Vale,
the Country is dry, sandy or gravelly, and full of Gentlemen's Houses, and good
Towns; though if we go but a little to the Right Hand South, into the wild Part,
it is a deep, strong, and, in the wet Season, an unpassable Clay.

In passing through Holmesdale (upon the Ridge of Mountains which extend from
Kent to the Land's-end) you come to Wotton, a small Village, near which is the
ancient Seat of the Evelyns, which is situated amongst Meadows, having pleasant
Streams of Water passing through them, and the neighboring Hills covered with
Woods, which renders the Situation pleasant in the Summer-season; but the Roads
about it being very bad in Winter, it is not so convenient an Habitation at
that Season.

Near this Place is situated Lith-hill, which rises gradually from hence, for
near Three Miles to the South; from the Top of which you have a full Prospect
of the whole Counties of Surrey and Sussex, Part of Hampshire, Berkshire,
Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, Kent, and Essex; the
whole Extent of this Prospect being thought near 200 Miles, and that without
the Help of Glasses.

Traveling East at the Foot of the Hills, we came to Rygate, a large
Market Town, situated in the Valley of Holmesdale; where are still to be seen
the Ruins of a Castle, with a long Vault, and a Room at the End of it; in which
it is said the Barons who were in Arms against King John, held their private
Meetings.

Near this also are two miserable Borough Towns, which nevertheless send each
of them Two Members to Parliament, to wit, Gatton under the Side of the Hill,
almost at Rygate; and Bleechingly more Eastward.

At Nutfield, between Rygate and Beechingly, is another Branch of the Family of
Evelyn, who have flourished there many Years.

From hence, crossing still all the Roads leading from London into Sussex, we
came again to a Village called Godstone, which lies on the Road from London to
Jews.

And keeping on East, we came to Westerham, a neat, handsome, well built
Market Town, the first in Kent on that Side. The late Earl of Jersey built (or
rather finished, for it was begun by a private Gentleman) a very noble House
here, called Squirries, which is now in the Possession of John Ward, Esquire Son
to Sir John Ward, who was Lord Mayor of London in the Year 1724. The House
stands on a small Eminence, regarding the Land in the Front; but on the Back of
the House, the Ground rises very high, and is divided into several steep
Slopes, which renders the Situation damp and cold. Near the House are some
Woods, through which the present Possessor has cut several Ridings; and on the
other Side of the Hill, behind the House, arise Nine considerable Springs,
which unite at a small Distance; and these form the River Dart, which runs
through Dartford, and afterward discharges itself into the Thames.

All this Part of the Country, from Guilford to this Place, is very agreeably
pleasant, healthy, and fruitful; and is overspread with good Towns, Gentlemen's
Houses, populous Villages, abundance of Fruit, with Hop-grounds and
Cherry-orchards, and the Lands well cultivated; but all on the Right Hand, that
is to say, South, is overgrown with Timber, has abundance of waste and wild
Grounds, and Forests, and Woods, with many large Iron-works, at which they cast
Iron-caldrons, Chimney-backs, Furnaces, Retorts, Boiling-pots, Iron Cannon,
Bomb-shells, Stink-pots, Hand-grenadoes, Cannon-ball, etc.

From hence going forward East, we come to Riverhead, a Town on the Road from
London to Tunbridge; and then having little to speak of in Kent, except some
petty Market Towns, such as Wrotham, commonly called Rootham, Town-Malling,
Cranbrook, and the like, of which I have taken some Notice before; I turned
North, and came to Bromley, a Market Town, made famous by an Hospital, or
College, built there by Dr. John Warner, Lord Bishop of Rochester, for the
Relief of 20 poor Widows of loyal and orthodox Clergymen, who are allowed each
20 l. per Annum, and a Chaplain 50 l. and has had many Gifts and Charities
bestowed on it since.

Near this Town we turned away by Beckenham, and through Norwood to Croyden; in
the Way we saw Dulwich or Sydenham-wells, where great Crowds of the lower Class
of People throng every Summer from London, to drink the Waters there and at
Stretham; and the rather, because it lies so near London, that they can walk to
it in the Morning, and return at Night.

Croydon has a great Corn-market, but chiefly for Oats and Oatmeal for the
Service of London. The Town is large, and full of Citizens from London: in it
is the ancient Palace of the Archbishops of Canterbury, and several of them lie
buried in the Church here; particularly Archbishop Whitgift, who not only
repaired the Palace, but built and endowed the famous Hospital, (which is for a
Warden and 28 Men and Women) and the Free School.

From hence we passed by Beddington, where is the Seat or Mansion House of the
ancient Family of the Carews. The House is noble, and the Gardens fine; yet
Architects say, that the two Wings are too deep for the Body of the House; that
they should either have been more asunder, or not so long. The Court before
them is extremely fine, as is the Canal in the Park, before the Court, having a
River running through it; the Gardens take up all the flat Part of the Park, with
Vista's, or Prospects, for Two or Three Miles. The Orange Trees continue, and
are the only ones in England that grow in the natural Ground: they have moving
Houses to shelter them in the Winter from the Inclemencies of our Climate, and
are loaded with Fruit in the Summer. They have stood in the Ground where they
now grow, above 100 Years.

From hence it is but a little Mile to Cashalton, a Country Village situate
among innumerable Springs of Water, which, all together, form a River in the
very Street of the Town, and joining the other Springs, which come from Croydon
and Beddington, make one Stream, called the Wandell. This Village, though lying
among such delightful Springs, is yet upon firm Chalk; and having the Downs
adjoining, makes the most agreeable Spot on this Side of London, as is
abundantly testified by its being crowded, as it were, with fine Houses of the
Citizens of London; some of which are built with such a Profusion of Expense,
that they look rather like Seats of the Nobility, than the Country-houses of
Citizens and Merchants. Mr. Scawen, Knight of the Shire for this County,
designed a noble House here; but it is not proceeded with. That which once
belonged to Sir John Fellows, Sub-governor of the South Sea Company in the
fatal Year 1720, was built by Dr. Ratcliff; but the Gardens were made by Sir
John. It was purchased by the Right Honorable Philip Lord Hardwick, Lord High
Chancellor of Great Britain, by whom it was lately sold to William Mitchel of
Huntingdon, who now possesses it. I cannot dwell on the Description of all the
fine Houses in this and the neighboring Villages: I shall speak of them again
in bulk with their Neighbors of Mitcham, Stretham, Tooting, Clapham, and
others; but I must take a Trip here cross the Downs to Epsom.

Banstead-downs need no Description other than this, that being so near London,
and surrounded as they are with pleasant Villages, the Ground smooth, soft,
level and dry, (even in but a few Hours after Rain) they conspire to make the
most delightful Spot of Ground of that Kind, in all this Part of Britain.

About four Miles over those delicious Downs bring us to Epsom, a well built,
large, and handsome Village, which abounds with fine Houses, the Retreats
principally of the London Merchants. It was very much frequented a few Years
ago, on account of its Mineral Waters, which issue from a rising Ground nearer
Ashted than Epsom: but they are now, though not impaired in their Virtues, yet
pretty much so in their Reputation; possibly owing, more than any thing else,
to the Place being too near London for a Journey for the Quality and Gentry;
according to the old Saying, Far-fetched and dearbought is fittest for the
Ladies. The Hall, Galleries, and other public Apartments, are run to Decay;
and there remains but one House on the Spot, which is inhabited by a Countryman
and his Wife, who carry the Waters in Bottles to the adjacent Places.

There are a great many fine Seats around this Place, which we have not Room to
describe: such as the Lord Baltimore's, Lady Fielding's, Mr. Mitchell's at
Cashalton, just mentioned, Mr. Scawen's, and many others; particularly that
formerly called Nonsuch, which was once a Royal Palace, and finely situated.
King Charles II. gave it to the Duchess of Cleveland, and she sold it to my
Lord Berkeley, who built a fine Seat with the Materials of it, near Epsom,
called Durdans. Nonsuch is now but a Farm-house, and Durdans is in the
Possession of the Lord North and Guilford; but his Royal Highness Frederick
Prince of Wales has lately taken it for a pleasurable Retreat, when he is not
disposed to go so far as Cliefden in Bucks.

From Epsom, that I might thoroughly visit the County of Surrey, I rode over
stiff Clays, and through very bad Roads, to Kingston; from whence I had a fine
View of Hampton Court, at a Distance; but that I reserve for another Journey.

Kingston is a good Market Town, remarkable for a Free School, erected and
endowed by Queen Elizabeth; an Almshouse built in 1670 by Alderman Cleaver of
London, and endowed with Lands of 80 l. a Year, a House were formerly resided
the great Earl of Warwick, surnamed Make-king, besides Coomb, which was
likewise his, but now in the Family of the Harveys; from whence the Waters of
certain Springs are said to be conveyed in leaden Pipes under the Road, and the
Thames, to Hampton Court, Three Miles in Length. Several of the old Saxon Kings
were not only crowned, but had their actual Residence here; whence it took its
Name of Kingstown. It had once the Privilege of sending Burgesses to
Parliament, but now that is lost.

From hence turning Southward, on the Road to Guilford, we come to Esher, where
was formerly a Seat built by Cardinal Wolsey, to which, during his Ministry, he
frequently retired for Amusement. The Gate to this Gothic Building remaining,
was turned into a Dwelling House, which was lately sold to the Right Honorable
Henry Pelham, Esquire who has beautified the old Part, and made additional
Buildings to it in the same Gothic Style, and laid out the Grounds about it in
so elegant a Taste, as makes it one of the finest Seats in the Neighborhood of
London: but the House stands so low, as not to be seen until you come very near
it; and the River Mole, running near the Back of the House, renders it very
damp, which greatly diminishes the Pleasure of the Place, though there has been
no Cost spared to render it elegant.

Near Esher, on the Left Hand of the great Road, lies Claremont, which was a
small House built under a Hill covered with Wood, by the late Sir John
Vanbrugh, and purchased by his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, who has been at a
great Expense in beautifying the Gardens, etc. and has added to the House a
great Extent of Buildings, in the same Style with the original House; and has
also built one large Room, in which his Grace entertains Foreign Ambassadors,
and where all the magnificent Dinners which the Duke makes in the Country, are
served up. The House is situated so near the Hill, that the Moisture issuing
from thence, occasions it to be very damp; and the Winds, being reverberated
back from the Woods on the House, cause most of the Chimneys to smoke, so that
this is a bad Habitation in Winter: but as it is the Place to which his Grace
usually retires from public Business, whenever his Leisure will permit, he has
not spared Expense to render it as agreeable as possible; though, as several
Persons have had the Contrivance of his Gardens and Buildings, there is not any
uniform Taste to be found in either, which is greatly to be regretted, since
the noble Owner has been so much intent on having it worthy of himself.

From hence, turning on the Right toward the River of Thames, we pass Walton,
and Weybridge, where are several fine Seats; but particularly those of the
Earls of Lincoln, and Portmore.

In the first of these is a noble Terrace-walk, elevated so high above the
Level of the neighboring Ground, as to afford a Prospect of the Country, as
also a View of the River.

The other Seat was beautified by the Countess of Dorchester, in the Reign of
King James II. Here is a Walk planted with Acacia Trees, which at that Time
were esteemed great Curiosities.

The Country hereabout is very low and flat, so that in Winter the Meadows are
generally flooded, which renders the Air damp and cold, and the Roads are
sometimes almost impassable; but in Summer the Meadows afford a good Quantity
of Hay, which sufficiently recompenses the Owner for the Disadvantage of
Situation.

Near Weybridge is a pleasant small Seat, now in the Possession of Philip
Southcoat, Esquire called Wobourn-farm. The House is situated low, but is not very
damp; and has the Advantage of being screen'd from the Violence of strong
Winds, by tall Trees in the Neighborhood. In the Front of the House is a small
Island, which in Summer is stocked with Sheep, who are constantly feeding in
View of the principal Rooms of the House. The Water surrounding this Island is
conducted in a serpentine Form, so as to have little Resemblance to Art. The
Fields above the House are kept very neat, being rolled and fed; so that there
is a fine Carpet of Grass, the Walks round them being made dry by Gravel, and,
on each Side, planted with sweet Shrubs and Flowers, in a rural manner. At the
Upper Part of these Fields, is a Spot of Ground laid out in Gardens, which,
being too regular, do not so well correspond with the other Parts, which are
laid out to answer the Name of a Farm, very properly: but this Part has
something of too much Stiffness and Regularity to agree with the rest.

From this Spot of Ground is a most delightful Prospect over a large Extent of
Meadows bounded by the River Thames, which winds in an agreeable manner; and
having frequently large West Country Barges floating in it, with their broad
Sails, appear as so many moving Objects in a Picture, and greatly enliven the
Prospect.

From hence also are seen Ten or Twelve Villages, and several fine Houses; and
Chertsey Bridge appears as if it were intended for a principal Object. Indeed
the whole Spot may justly be deemed one of the sweetest Retirements near London.

Keeping the River now on my Left, as I did before on my Right Hand, drawing
nearer to London, we came to Ham and Petersham, little Villages; the first,
famous for a most pleasant Palace of the late Duke of Lauderdale, close by the
River, now possessed by the Earl of Dysert; a House King Charles II. used to be
frequently at, and was exceedingly pleased with. The Avenues of this fine House
to the Land-side, lead up to the End of the Village of Petersham, where the
Wall of New Park comes also close to the Town, on the other Side; in an Angle
of which stood a most delicious House, built by the late Earl of Rochester,
Lord High Treasurer in King James II.'s Reign, as also in Part of Queen Anne's
Reign. This fine House was burnt down in the Year 1720, by an accidental Fire,
so sudden and furious, that the Family, who were all at home, had scarce time
to save their Lives.

Nor was the House, though so exquisitely finished, so beautiful within and
without, the greatest Loss sustained; the rich Furniture, the curious
Collection of Paintings, and the inestimable Library of the first Earl of
Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, and Author of that most excellent
History of the Rebellion, of which the World knows so much, were here wholly
consumed; a Loss irreparable, as the latter contained among other valuable
Things, several Manuscripts relating to those Times, and to Things transacted
by himself and by the King his Master, both at Home and Abroad, besides other
rare and curious Collections made by that noble and learned Author in foreign
Countries.

The Offices escaped the Fate the House met with: and on the same Spot of
Ground, where the House stood, the Right Honorable the Lord Harrington,
Secretary of State, erected another, after the Design of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Burlington; and when I have said this, I need not say it is equally
a convenient and elegant Edifice. The Front indeed next the Court, has not a
very striking Appearance, being very plain, and the Entrance into the House not
greatly to be praised: But the South Front next the Garden, though very plain,
yet is bold and regular. The Apartments next the Garden, which are chiefly
designed for State, are also very elegant, and beautifully finished.

The Gardens, which before were crowded with Pluntations near the House, are
now laid open in Lawns of Grass; and the Kitchen-garden, which was situated on
the East Side of the House, is removed out of Sight, and that Ground is now
converted to an open Slope of Grass, which leads up to a Terrace of great
Length; from which is a Prospect of the River Thames, the Town of Twickenham,
and all the beautiful Seats round about that Part of the Country, almost to
Kingston-bridge. On the other Side of the Terrace, on a rising Ground, is a
large Plantation of Wood; and on the Summit of the Hill is erected a fine
Pleasure-house, which commands a Prospect of the Country every Way, for many
Miles; so that by Foreigners this View is esteemed the most beautiful of any
near London.

From hence we came to Richmond, lately the delightful Retreat of his Majesty
and his Royal Consort the Queen, who took great Delight therein to the Time of
her Death; and made not only vast Improvements and Alterations there, but
purchased several fine Houses on Kew-green; as that of Lady Air, for his Royal
Highness the Duke; that of Sir Thomas Abney for the Princesses; and his Royal
Highness Prince Frederick, mean while, made considerable Improvements in the
fine House and Gardens belonging formerly to the Lady Capell; while her Majesty
was used to divert herself at her Royal Dairy-house, and in her beautiful
Hermitage, Merlin's Cave, and in other charming Improvements, which she made in
the Park and Gardens of this delightful Place. All which are so well known,
that we need not insist upon them.

The Court, being so near, must needs have filled Richmond, which was before a
most agreeable Retreat for the first and second-rate Gentry, with a great deal
of the best Company in England. And indeed this Town, and the Country all round
it, have much increased in Buildings lately.

The Lord Viscount Palmerston, the worthy Son and Successor to the Honor and
Estate of the great Sir William Temple, has a fine Seat and Gardens (hard by)
at Sheen: The Gardens were finished, as well as contrived, by the great Genius
of Sir William; and as they were his last Delight in Life, so they were every
way suited to be so, to a Man of his Sense and Capacity, who knew what kind of
Life was best fitted to make a Man's last Days happy.

It is not easy to describe the Beauty with which the Banks of the Thames shine
on either Side of the River, from hence to London, much more than our
Ancestors, even but one Age ago, knew any thing of. If for pleasant Villages,
great Houses, Palaces, Gardens, etc. it was true in Queen Elizabeth's Time,
according to the Poet, that The Thames with Royal Tyber may compare; What may
be said of it now? when, for One fine House to be seen then, there are, for
aught I know, an hundred, even as you sit in a Boat, and pass up and down the
River.

First, beginning from Ham-house, as above, Richmond Palace salutes the Eye,
being formerly no more than a Lodge in the Park, but now makes a Royal Figure.

From Richmond to London the River Sides abound with Villages, and those
Villages so full of beautiful Buildings, charming Gardens, and rich Habitations
of Gentlemen of Quality, that nothing can equal it; no, not the Country for 20
Miles round Paris, though that indeed is a kind of Prodigy.

It is impossible to view these Countries from any rising Ground. and not be
ravished with the delightful Prospect. For Example, Suppose you take your View
from the little rising Hills about Clapham, if you look to the East, there you
see the pleasant Villages of Peckham and Camberwell, with some of the finest
Dwellings about London: then turning South, we see Loughborough House near
Kennington; the Duchess of Bedford's at Stretham; other fine Seats about
Croydon; a whole Town of fine Houses at Cashalton; Sir Nicolas Carew's and
others, at Beddington; Sir Theodore Janssen's, and that lately built by the
Duchess Dowager of Marlborough, at Wimbleton; other fine Houses at Tooting;
besides a very great Number in Clapham itself. On the South-west also you have
Mr. Harvey's at Coomb, formerly the Palace of the aforementioned Make-king,
Earl of Warwick, and from him called Coombnevil; with all the Villages
mentioned above, and the Country adjoining, filled with the Palaces of the
British Nobility and Gentry already spoken of; looking North, behold, to crown
all, a fair Prospect of the City of London, the most glorious Sight, without
Exception, that the World at present can show, or perhaps could since the
Sacking of Rome.

It is impossible in one Journey to describe effectually this Part of the
County of Surrey, lying from Kingston to London and Greenwich, where I set out:
that is, including the Villages of Richmond, Petersham, Eastsheen, Mortlake,
Putney, Wandsworth, Barn-elms, Battersea, Wimbleton, Tooting, Clapham,
Camberwell, Peckham and Deptford; and I must therefore quit the ample Subject,
and come to Southwark, a Suburb to, rather than a Part of London: but of which
this may be said with Justice, that it would be A Royal City, were not London
by.

To give you a brief Description of Southwark, it might be called a long
Street, of about Nine Miles in Length, as it is now built on Eastward; reaching
from Vaux-hall to London Bridge, and from the Bridge to Deptford, and up to
Deptford Bridge, which parts it from Greenwich, all the Way winding and turning
as the River does; except only in that Part, which reaches from Cuckold's-point
to Deptford, which winds somewhat more than the River.

In the Center, which is opposite to the Bridge, it is thickened with
Buildings, and may be reckoned near a Mile broad; viz. from the Bridge to the
End of Kent-street and Blackman-street, and about the Mint.

The Borough of Southwark is exceeding populous. Take it as it was anciently
bounded, it contained Nine Parishes; but as it is now extended, and joins with
Deptford, it contains Eleven large Parishes.

The first Thing we meet with considerable, is at the Spring-garden, just at
the Corner, where the Road turns away to go from Vaux-hall Turnpike toward
Newington. There are the Remains of the Lines cast up in the Time of the
Romans, which were repaired in the Civil Wars, as a Fortification to this Part
of the Town; at the Corner was a very large Bastion, or Fort, which commanded
the Pass on that Side; and farther on, at the Corner of St. George's-fields, by
the Ducking Pond, was another; the Water of what is now called the Ducking
Pond, still appears to have been the Moat to the Fort; and the Lines are still
so high, and undemolished, that it would be no difficult Matter to repair and
perfect them again.

That this was formerly a Roman Camp or Station, is plain, from the many Roman
Urns and Coins, Opera Tessellata, and other Antiquities, which have been
frequently dug up hereabouts. And as there are pretty good Authorities of
ancient London lying on the South Side of the Thames, it is but a reasonable
Conjecture, that these Lines were cast up and fortified, to prevent the
Incursions of the Britons into Kent; for the Military Way crossed the River at
the Horse-ferry at Lambeth, from thence proceeded to Vaux-hall, then turned
round to the Ducking Pond, went on to the Windmill in St. George's-fields,
where it crossed the Road to the End of Kent-street; where there was a very
strong Fortification of Stone, the Foundations of which were dug up in the Year
1685; this ran cross a Garden about a Quarter of a Mile from the Stones-end. In
digging up of this Foundation there appeared two ancient Pillars of a large
Gate; upon each of them had been placed Heads with two Faces curiously cut in
Stone, one of which was taken up; but the other lying in a Quicksand, from
whence the Springs flowed out pretty freely, was rendered more difficult to be
taken up; and the Curiosity of the People being not very great, they contented
themselves with getting up one of the Heads; which was placed over the
Gardener's Door, where it remained for several Years, until it was known to the
Learned Dr. Woodward, who purchased it, and kept it in his valuable Collection
of Curiosities. These Lines were drawn from hence to the Grange near
Bermondsey-street; where you see another Fort so plain, and so undemolished,
(the Grass now growing over the Works, and though, on the Bastion itself, there
is frequently Corn sowed) that it is almost as visible as it was when it was
first thrown down. By the Direction of these Lines, it is very manifest, that
Southwark was once well fortified; for these Lines seem to have been thrown up
from the Thames at Lambeth, quite round to the Thames at Deptford; which takes
in the whole Extent, on the Land; and the Thames was a Barrier on the other
Side.

A farther Description of Southwark I refer till I come to speak of London, as
one general Appellation for the Two Cities of London and Westminster; for all
the Borough of Southwark, and all the Buildings and Villages included within
the Bills of Mortality, make but one LONDON, in the general Appellation. I am,
etc.

LETTER V. CONTAINING A Description of Part of the County of MIDDLESEX, Part of
HANTS, and the County of WILTS, etc.
SIR,
AS I came down from Kingston, in my last Circuit, by the South Bank of the
Thames, on the Surrey Side of the River; so I go up to Hampton Court, now, on
the North Bank, and on the Middlesex Side; which I mention, because, as the
Sides of the Country bordering on the River lie parallel, so the Beauty of the
Country, the pleasant Situations, the Splendour of innumerable fine Buildings,
Noblemens and Gentlemen's Houses, and Citizens Retreats, are so equal a Match to
what I had described on the other Side, that one knows not to which to give the
Preference: but as I must speak of them again, when I come to write of the
County of Middlesex, which I have now purposely omitted; I pass them over here,
except the Palace of Hampton only, which I mentioned in Middlesex, for the
Reasons above.

Hampton Court lies on the North Bank of the River Thames, about Two small
Miles from Kingston. It was built by Cardinal Wolsey, and fell to the Crown,
when the King seized his Effects and Estate, as did also Whitehall, another
House of the Cardinal's building.

Whoever knew Hampton Court before it was begun to be rebuilt, or altered, by
the late King William, must acknowledge, it was a very complete Palace then,
and fit for a King; and though it might not, according to the modern Method of
Building, or of Gardening, pass for a Thing exquisitely fine, yet it showed a
Situation exceedingly capable of Improvement, and of being made one of the most
delightful Palaces in Europe.

This her Majesty Queen Mary was so sensible of, that while the King had
ordered the pulling down the old Apartments, and building them up in that most
beautiful Form, which we see them now appear in, her Majesty, impatient of
enjoying so agreeable a Retreat, fixed upon a Building formerly made use of
chiefly for landing from the River, and therefore called the Water Gallery;
here she ordered all the little, neat, curious Things to be done, which suited
her own Convenience, and made it the pleasantest little Place within Doors,
that could possibly be made; though its Situation would not allow it to stand
after the great Building was finished.

The Queen had here her Gallery of Beauties, being the Pictures, at full
Length, of the principal Ladies in her Retinue. Her Majesty's Apartments for
her private Retreat only, were exquisitely furnished, and there were among the
Furniture several curious Pieces of her own Work.

The Ground on the South-west Side of the Building, has received many
Alterations since the pulling down of the Water-gallery (which stood before
this handsome Front of the House, and intercepted the Prospect of it from the
River). This Spot was then laid out into small Enclosures, surrounded with tall
Hedges, to break the Violence of the Winds, and render them proper for the
Reception of such Exotic Plants in Summer, as were removed out of the
Conservatories during that Season. In each of these Places is contrived a
Basin, which is constantly supplied with Water for the Support of these Plants
in dry Weather; and as these are situated near the great Apartments, most of
the Plants may be viewed from the Windows: and the lower Part of the House,
under the great Apartments, being contrived for a Greenhouse, the Plants need
not be carried far, when they are removed out or into the Conservatory, which
was very properly contrived by the Designers.

At the West End of this Spot was a large Hot-house, for the maintaining such
tender Exotic Plants, as require a large Share of Warmth to preserve them in
this Climate. Of all these Parts of Gardening Queen Mary was so very fond, that
she allowed a handsome Salary to Dr. Plukenet, a very learned Botanist, for
overlooking and registering the curious Collection of Plants, which were then
in that Garden; but, since the Death of that Queen, these Things have been so
much neglected, that very few of the most curious Plants are now in Being
there, which is much to be lamented; for, however the Taste for this Part of
Gardening may have with Reason been neglected by private Persons, yet, surely,
at a Royal Palace, all these Things should be kept up in the utmost
Magnificence, as an Encouragement to Ingenuity, and for the Honor of the
Kingdom. This Taste was, by Lewis XIV. of France, carried to a very great
Height; and had the Persons employed by that Prince been so well acquainted
with the Construction of these Conservatories, as many of the English are at
this Day, we might have expected, in his Royal Gardens, to have seen most of
the curious Plants in the known Parts of the World.

Here stand advanced, on Two Pedestals of Stone, Two Marble Vases, or
Flower-pots, of exquisite Workmanship; the one done by an Englishman, and the
other by a German. It Is hard to say which is the best Performance, though the
doing of it was a kind of Trial of Skill between them; but it gives us room,
without any Partiality, to say they were both Masters of their Art.

The Parterre on that Side descends from the Terrace-walk by Steps, and on the
Left a Terrace goes down to the Waterside, overlooking the Garden on the
Eastward Front, and affords a most pleasant Prospect.

This Part of the Garden was at first laid out in a Parterre of Scroll-work in
Box, which was not only very costly at first making, but was also very
expensive in keeping constantly clipped; which, together with the ill Scent,
which frequently reached to the Royal Apartments, occasioned its being
demolished, and the Ground disposed into another Form. And if at the same time
all the shorn ever-green Trees had been thrown out, and a finer Disposition
made of the Ground, it would have much better corresponded with the noble
Apartments which overlook it, than it does at present.

On the North Side of the House, where the Chapel, and some Part of the old
Buildings, required to be covered from View, the Ground was laid out in a
Wilderness, with a Labyrinth surrounded by high Espalier Hedges; and this was,
at that time, thought one of the finest disposed Parts of the Garden. But as
the whole Contrivance of the Plantations is in regular strait Walks, bounded on
each Side by tall clipped Hedges, which divide the whole Ground into angular
Quarters, to every Person of Taste it must be very far from affording any
Pleasure, since nothing can be more disagreeable than to be immured between
Hedges, so as to have the Eye confined to a strait Walk, and the Beauty of the
Trees growing in the Quarters, entirely secluded from the Eye. And at the same
time as you are walking in this unmeaning Plantation, you are denied the
Benefit of Shade, by being confined to these regular Walks, where it would be
deemed an unpardonable Fault, to suffer the neighboring Trees to diffuse their
Branches over these shorn Hedges; so that, in the midst of a Wood, a Person may
faint for Shade in a sultry Day, the Air being excluded from these Walks by the
taller Trees in the Quarters; and pent up Air is much more troublesome in hot
Weather, than the Heat of the Sun in the most open exposed Plain.

As this Wilderness lies opposite to Bushy-park, so there was designed a grand
Entrance through it to the Palace, fronting the Gates of the Park; where Two
large Pillars were erected, to support a magnificent Iron Gate, which was
designed to have been put up there; but how it came to be left unfinished, and
the pitiful low Gates (which by no means correspond with the Pillars) put in
the Place, I could never learn.

The House itself is every way answerable on the Outside to the beautiful
Prospect, and the Two Fronts are the largest, and, beyond Comparison, the
finest of the kind in England. The great Stairs go up from the second Court of
the Palace on the Righthand, and lead you to the South Prospect.

King William brought into England, and placed here in a Gallery, built
purposely for them, the famous Cartoons, as they are called, which are Five
Pieces of such Paintings, as are not to be matched in Europe. It is reported,
but with what Truth, I know not, that the late French King offered 100,000
Louis d'Ors for these Pictures. The King brought a great many other fine Pieces
to England, and from him the Love of fine Paintings so universally spread
itself among the Nobility and Persons of Figure all over the Kingdom, that it
is incredible what Collections have been made by English Gentlemen since that
Time; and how all Europe has been romaged, as we may say, for Pictures to bring
over hither, where, for Twenty Years together, they brought in vast Profit to
such as collected them for Sale. But the Rates are abated since, and we are now
glutted with the Copies and Frauds of the Dutch and Flemish Painters, who have
imposed grossly upon us.

Queen Mary lived not to see this Palace completely finished; and, it is said,
King William designed to have made it more capacious and noble, had he lived.

After the Death of King William, Hampton Court seemed in a manner neglected.
It is an Observation made by some, that Hampton Court has, ever since the Time
of King Charles I. been favored by every alternate Prince; King Charles I.
delighting in Country Retirements, took great Pleasure here, and, had he lived,
had purposed to improve it considerably; but it became at last one of his
Prisons.

King Charles II. may well be said to have a Dislike to the Place, for the
Treatment his Royal Father met with there; and particularly as Cromwell
afterward made it his Summer Residence. He therefore chose Windsor, and
bestowed a vast Sum in beautifying the Castle there, which brought it to the
Perfection we see it in at this Day, some few Alterations excepted, made in the
Time of King William.

King James took but little Delight in retired Palaces, his Bent and Taste
inclining another way. But King William fixed upon Hampton Court, and improved
it as beforementioned.

Queen Anne being taken up for one Part of her Reign, in her kind Regards to
the Prince her Spouse, was obliged to consult his Health, and reside where that
confined him, which for the most part was at Kensington, where he died; but her
Majesty always discovered her Delight for Windsor, where she chose the little
House, as 'twas called, opposite to the Castle, and frequently took the Air in
her Chaise in the Parks and Forest.

In the Reign of King George I. Hampton Court came into Request again.

From Hampton Court, I directed my Course for a Journey into the South-west
Part of England; and, to take up my Beginning where I concluded my last, I
crossed to Chertsey on the Thames, a Town I mentioned before; from whence
crossing the Black Desert of Bagshot, I took in my Way to Hampshire, Ockingham
in Berkshire, lying on the Skirts of Windsor Forest: it is a pretty large Town,
and has a well-frequented Market, and a good Market-house in the Middle. It is
governed by an Alderman, Recorder and Burgesses, has a Free School, and
likewise an Hospital, with a Chaplain belonging to it. It carries on a good
Trade in Silk Stockens and Cloth.

From hence I fell down toward Basingstoke, which is situate in the midst of
Woods, and rich fertile Pastures: the Country round about is spread with the
Houses of the Nobility and Gentry. A little before we came to the Town, we
passed by a House built out of the Ruins, and on the Site of Old Basing-house,
a famous Fortress in the Time of the Civil Wars, belonging to the then Marquis
of Winchester, Ancestor of the Duke of Bolton.

This House, garrisoned by a resolute Band of old Soldiers, under the Command of
the Marquis, was a great Curb to the Parliament Party throughout that whole
War; till, after a vigorous Defense, it was taken, and the brave Marquis in it,
by Cromwell, who, in Revenge for the obstinate Resistance it made, put almost
all the Garrison to the Sword, and burnt down the noble Fabric to the Ground,
which he said was fitter for the Residence of an Emperor than a Subject. The
present House is in no wise equal to the Magnificence which Fame gives to the
ancient House; whose Strength of Building was such as to resist the Battery of
Cannon in several Attacks. It Is incredible what Booty the Garrison of this Place
picked up, lying, as they did, just on the great Western Road, where they
intercepted the Carriers, plundered the Wagons, and suffered nothing to pass;
to the great Interruption of the Trade of the City of London.

Basingstoke is a Corporation, and a large populous Town: it has a good Market
for Corn, especially Barley, as there are a great many Maltsters there. Some
few Years ago a Manufacture of making Druggets and Shalloons, was set up here,
and as successfully carried on, which employs a great Number of poor People.

Near this Town a bloody Battle was fought in 871, between the Saxons and Danes.

From this Town the great Western Road goes on to Whitchurch, a mean Town,
which however has a Market, and is governed by a Mayor. North-east of which
lies Kingsclere, a pleasant Market Town on the Oxford Road from Basingstoke. It
was anciently famous for having been the Seat of the Saxon Kings, and from
thence takes its Name.

But I had like to have forgot the famous Vindomia, or Silchester, which is
situated in Hants, on the Borders of Berkshire, and is famous for its Antiquity.

Its Situation is very high, hid with Wood. Many were the Roman Roads which met
here, though now scarce any; which is one Reason why it is so little known:
another is its want of Inns for the Accommodation of Travelers; for
Aldermaston, a pretty neat Village, beautifully situated, which is Three Miles
distant, is the nearest Town where Lodging is to be found. The Walls of this
City are standing, more or less perfect, quite round; perhaps the most entire
in the Roman Empire, especially the Northside, which is a most agreeable Sight.
It is composed of Flint and Rag-stone. There was a broad Ditch quite round, and
now almost impassable, and full of Springs. Here-and-there Roman Bricks are
left in the Walls. Though on the Outside they are of a considerable Height, yet
the Ground within is so raised, as nearly to be equal to the Top, and that
quite round covered with Oaks, and other Timbertrees, of no mean Bulk.
Constantius, the Son of Constantine the Great, is said to have built it, and
sowed Corn in the Track of the Walls, as an Omen of their Perpetuity. Now
indeed the whole City is arable, and in the Fields Roman Bricks, and other
Relics, are scattered, and Coins daily found. It has only one Farm-house and
a Church. The Reverend and Learned Mr. Betham, late Minister of this Place, is
buried under the North Wall of the Chancel without-side; within is another
Monument of a Person of Quality. They both were drowned in Fleet-ditch. A
Spring rises from under the Wall of the Churchyard.

Five hundred Feet without the City, on the North-east Side, is a great
Curiosity, which the Vulgar think was a Castle, but in reality an Amphitheatre,
in all respects like that of Dorchester. This noble Antiquity has from Time
immemorial been a Yard for Cattle, and a Watering-pond; so that it is a Wonder
their Trampling has not defaced it much more than it has. My Resolution being
to take in my Way what I had passed by before, I was obliged to go off to the
Left Hand, to Alresford and Winchester.

Alresford was a flourishing Market Town, and though it had no great Trade, and
very little, if any, Manufactures, yet, what is very remarkable, there was no
Collection made in the Town for the Poor, nor any low enough to take Alms of
the Parish.

But this happy Circumstance, which so distinguished Alresford from all her
Neighbors, was brought to an End in 1710, when, by a sudden and surprising
Fire, the whole Town, with both the Church and Market-house, was reduced to a
Heap of Rubbish; and, except a few poor Huts at the remotest Ends of the Town,
not a House left standing. The Town is since very handsomely rebuilt, and the
neighboring Gentlemen contributed largely to the Relief of the People,
especially by sending in Timber toward their Building.

Here is a very large Pond, or Lake of Water, kept up to a Head by a strong
Battre d'eau, or Dam, which, it is said, was made by the Romans; and is part of
the great Roman Highway, which leads from Winchester to Alton, and, as
supposed, on to London, though we nowhere see any Remains of it, except between
Winchester and Alton, and chiefly between this Town and the last mentioned.

Near this Town, a little North-west, the Duke of Bolton has another Seat,
which though not large, is a very handsome beautiful Palace, and the Gardens not
only very exact, but very finely situate, the Prospect and Vista's noble and
great, and the Whole very well kept. His Grace has no less than Three Seats
almost within Sight of one another, viz. Abbotstone, Basing, and Hawkwood.

From hence at the End of Seven Miles over the Downs, we come to the very
ancient City of Winchester, called in British Caer Gwent, which signifies the
white Town, from the chalky Hills near it. Not only the great Church, which is
so famous all over Europe, and has been so much talked of, but even the whole
City, has, at a Distance, a venerable and ancient Face; and yet here are many
modern Buildings too, and some very handsome; as the College Schools, with the
Episcopal Palace, built by Bishop Morley, since the Civil Wars; the old Palace
of the Bishop having been ruined by that known Church-Incendiary, Sir William
Waller, and his Crew of Plunderers; who, if my Information is not wrong,
destroyed more Monuments of the Dead, and defaced more Churches, than all the
Roundheads in England beside.

This Church, and the Schools also, are accurately described by several
Writers, especially by the Monasticon, where their Antiquity and Original is
fully set forth: the Outside of the Church is as plain and coarse, as if the
Founders had abhorred Ornaments. There is neither Statue, nor a Niche for a
Statue, to be seen on all the Outside, no carved Work, no Spires, Towers,
Pinacles, Balustrades, or any thing but mere Walls, Buttresses, Windows, and
Quoins, necessary to the Support and Order of the Building: it has no Steeple,
but a short Tower covered flat, as if the Top of it had fallen down, and it had
been covered in haste to keep the Rain out, till they had Time to build it up
again.

But the Inside of the Church has many very good things in it, and worth
Observation; it was for some Ages the Burying-place of many English, Saxon, and
Norman Kings; whose Remains the impious Soldiers, in the Civil Wars, threw
against the painted Glass. The Relics of some of these, at the Repair of the
Church, were collected by Bishop Fox, and, being put together into Six large
wooden Chests, lined with Lead, were again interred at the Foot of the great
Wall in the Choir, Three on one Side, and Three on the other; with an Account
whose Bones are in each Chest, viz. Rufus, Egbert, Adulphus, Edredus, Edmundus,
Canutus, and those of Queen Emma. Queen Mary was here married to Philip of
Spain. The Chair used in that Ceremony is still preserved. In the Body of the
Church is a pretty Cross of Gothic Workmanship, but ill repaired. The Steps
ascending to the Choir make a fine Show, having the Statues of King James I.
and his Son Charles, in Copper, finely cast; the first on the Right Hand, and
the other on the Left, as you go up to the Choir.

The Choir is said to be the longest in England. The Ornaments of the Choir are
the Effects of the Bounty of several Bishops; the fine Altar (the noblest in
England by much) was given by Bishop Morley; the Roof, and the Coat of Arms of
the Saxon and Norman Kings, by Bishop Fox; and the fine Throne for the Bishop
in the Choir, was given by Bishop Mew in his Lifetime; and it was well it was;
for if he had ordered it by Will, there is Reason to believe it had never been
done: that Reverend Prelate, notwithstanding he enjoyed so rich a Bishopric,
scarce leaving Money enough behind him to pay for his Coffin.

There are a great many Persons of Rank buried in this Church, besides the
Saxon Kings mentioned above; particularly, here lies, as they told us, under a
gray Marble, Lucius, the first Christian King of this Island, who died 180
Years after Christ; and, as is pretended, founded the Church where the
Cathedral now stands. There are also the Monuments of Bishop Fox, Founder of
Corpus Christi College, Oxon; Bishop Wainfleet, Founder of Magdalen College, in
the same University; in Regard to whose Memory the said College keep his
Monument in neat Repair. He is represented lying at length with a Heart in his
Hand. The Tomb of William of Wickham, the magnificent Founder of this
Cathedral, very richly gilt. Just under the Altar lies a Son of William the
Conqueror, without any Monument; and behind the Altar, under a very fine
Monument, lies the famous Lord Treasurer Weston, Earl of Portland, Lord High
Treasurer of England in the Reign of King Charles I. His Effigies is in Copper
Armor, at full Length, with his Head raised on Three Cushions of the same, and
is a very magnificent Work. There is also a very fine Monument of Cardinal
Beaufort, in his Cardinal's Robes and Hat.

The Monument of Sir John Cloberry deserves Notice more for his Story, than for
any thing extraordinary in the Figure. This Gentleman was the Person solely
entrusted with the Secret of the Restoration of King Charles II. as the
Messenger that passed between General Monk on one hand, and Mr. Montague, and
others entrusted by King Cha. II. on the other; by which Service Sir John, then
a private Musqueteer only, raised himself to the Honor of a Knight, with the
Reward of a good Estate from the Bounty of the King.

It may not be amiss to say a Word or two of the famous William of Wickham, who
built the Body of the Church.

He was a Courtier before a Bishop; and though he had no large Share of Learning,
he was a great Promoter of it: his natural Genius was much beyond his acquired
Parts, and his Skill in Politics beyond his Ecclesiastic Knowledge. He is
said to have put his Master, King Edward III. to whom he was Secretary of
State, upon the Two great Projects which made his Reign so glorious; viz. (1.)
Upon setting up his Claim to the Crown of France, which brought on the War with
France, in which that Prince was three times victorious in Battle. (2.) Upon
instituting the Order of the Garter; in which he obtained the Honor for the
Bishops of Winchester to be always Prelates of the Order, as an Appendix to the
Bishopric; and he himself was the first: the Ensigns of that Honor are joined
with his Episcopal Ornaments, in the robing of his Effigies on the Monument
above.

To the great Honor of this Bishop there are other Foundations of his, as much
to his Fame as that of this Church, of which I shall speak in their Places, but
particularly the College in this City, which is a noble Foundation indeed. The
Building consists of Two large Courts, in which are the Lodgings for the
Masters and Seventy Scholars, and in the Center a very noble Chapel; beyond
that, in the second Court, are the Schools, with a large Cloister beyond them,
and some Enclosures laid open for the Diversion of the Scholars. There also is
a great Hall, where the Scholars dine. In the Chapel Window belonging to the
College is good painted Glass of Imagery. In the middle of the Cloisters is the
Library, a strong Stone Building, well contrived to prevent Fire.

In digging the Foundation of a House near the College, in a Stone Coffin, was
found a Stone set in a Gold Ring, with this Inscription in very odd Characters;
supposed to be about the Sixth Century, Domino Comite fidele meo, i. e. The
Lord being my Guide and faithful Companion.

Over the Door of the School stands a very good Statue of the Founder, made by
Cibber, whose Workmanship are the two excellent Figures over Bethlehem-gate,
the Father of that excellent Comedian Colley Cibber, Poet-Laureat.

The Scholars have Exhibitions at a certain time of Continuance here, if they
please to study, in the new College at Oxford, built by the same noble
Benefactor.

The Clergy here live very elegantly in the Close belonging to the Cathedral;
where, besides the Bishop's Palace, mentioned above, are very good Houses, and
very handsomely built, for the Prebendaries, Canons, and other Dignitaries of
this Church: The Deanery is a very pleasant Dwelling, the Gardens are large, and
the River runs through them; but the Floods in Winter sometimes much incommode
them.

This School has fully answered the End of the Founder, who, though he was no
great Scholar, resolved to erect a House for making the Ages to come more
learned than those that went before; and many learned and great Men have been
educated here.

As the City stands in a Vale on the Bank, and at the Conjunction of Two small
Rivers, so the Country rising every way, but just as the Course of the Water
keeps the Valley open, you must necessarily, as you go out of the Gates, go up
Hill every way: but when once ascended, you come to the most charming Plains,
and most pleasant Country of that Kind in England; which continues, with very
small Intersections of Rivers and Valleys, for above Fifty Miles, as I shall
observe more particularly in the Sequel of this Journey.

At the West Gate of this City was anciently a Castle, in which, it is said, the
Saxon Kings kept their Court, which however is doubtful, and must be meant of
the West Saxons only. As to the Tale of King Arthur's round Table, and his Two
Dozen of Knights, which Table being one Piece of Wood, supported by Marble
Pillars, they still show in the Town Hall, said to be Part of the said Castle,
as a Piece of Antiquity of 1200 Years standing, and has, as they pretend, the
Names of the said Knights in Saxon Characters, and yet such as no Man can read:
all this Story I see no Ground to give the least Credit to.

Where this Castle was said to stand, the late King Charles II. marked out a
very noble Design; which, had he lived, would certainly have made that Part of
the Country the Resort of the Quality and Gentry of all Parts of the Kingdom;
for the Country hereabout far exceeds that of Newmarket-heath, for all kinds of
Sport and Diversion.

The Building was so far prosecuted, that the Front next the City was carried
up to the Roof, and covered; but what was further intended was not proceeded
on. There was a Street of Houses designed from the Gate of the Palace down to
the Town, but it was never begun to be built; the Park marked out was exceeding
large, near Ten Miles in Circumference, and ended West upon the open Downs, in
View of Stockbridge.

This House, with a Royal Revenue, was afterward settled by Parliament, as an
Appenage upon Prince George of Denmark for his Life, in case he had outlived
the Queen: but his Royal Highness dying before her Majesty, all Hope of seeing
this Design perfected, or the House finished, is now vanished. And his late
Majesty King George I. made a Present to the Duke of Bolton of the fine Pillars
of Italian Marble, which were to have supported its Staircase.

There are several other public Edifices in this City, and in the
Neighborhood, which I have not Room to describe, as the Hospitals, and
Building adjoining near the Eastgate. Toward the North is a Piece of an old
Monastery undemolish'd, and which is still preserved to the Religion, being the
Residence of some private Roman Catholic Gentlemen, where they have an
Oratory, and, as they say, live still according to the Rules of St. Benedict.
This Building is called Hide-house; and as they live very usefully, and to the
highest Degree obliging among their Neighbors, they meet with no Obstruction
from any body.

Beyond the River Eastward is a high Hill called St. Giles's, from an Hospital
whose Ruins only are now visible; and a Churchyard seeming to have been a
Camp, besides the Marks of Bastions, and Works of Fortifications in the modern
Style. Here Waltheof, Earl of Northumberland and Huntingdon, was beheaded by
Order of King William I. whose Body was carried to Crowland, and said to work
Miracles.

Winchester is a Place of no Trade, other than is naturally occasioned by the
Inhabitants of the City, and neighboring Villages, one with another: here is
no Manufacture, no Navigation; there was indeed an Attempt to make the River
navigable from Southampton, and it was once made practicable; but it never
answered the Expense, so as to give Encouragement to the Undertakers to keep it
up.

Here is a great deal of good Company; and Abundance of Gentry being in the
Neighborhood, it adds to the Sociableness of the Place: the Clergy also here,
are, generally speaking, rich, and very numerous.

The magnificent Hospital called Holy-cross, on the South of this City, at a
Mile's Distance on the Road to Southampton, is worth Notice: it was founded by
Bishop Blois. The Church is in the Form of a Cross, and has a large square
Tower. Every Traveller, that knocks at the Door of this House, in his Way, and
asks for it, claims the Relief of a Piece of white Bread, and a Cup of Beer;
and this Donation is still continued. A Quantity of good Beer is set apart
every Day to be given away; and what is left is distributed to other Poor, but
none of it kept to next Day.

How the Revenues of this Hospital, which should maintain the Master, and
Thirty private Gentlemen, whom they call Fellows, but ought to call Brothers,
are now reduced to maintain only Fourteen, while the Master lives in a Figure
equal to the best Gentleman in the County, would be well worth the Inquiry of a
proper Visitor, if such can be named. It Is a Thing worthy of Notice, when
public Charities, designed for the Relief of the Poor, are imbezzled by the
Rich, and turned to the Support of Luxury and Pride.

An Infirmary is established lately in this Town, by voluntary Subscription,
after the laudable Examples of those of St. James's Westminster, and St.
George's at Hyde-Park Corner, and has met with great Success, being principally
owing to the Zeal and Pains of the Reverend Doctor Alured Clarke. I have not
room to say all that might be said on this Head, and so must refer you to the
Account given by the Doctor, of the Rise and Progress, Rules and Orders, of
this excellent Institution.

I made an Excursion from Winchester, to see the ancient Town of Romsey, noted
for its delightful Situation, having all round it Woods, Cornfieldsd, Meadows
and Pastures. The River, and Rivulets, which are many, have a rapid Course. The
Town was questionless Roman, and its Name declares as much. The Church is a
noble Pile of Architecture, arched with Stone, in Form of a Cross, with
Semi-circular Chapels in the upper Angles. The Churches hereabouts called
Minsters, as Wimburn-minster, in the neighboring County of Dorset, were built
by the Saxon Kings, as soon as they became Christian. At the West End is the
Piece of an old Wall, probably belonging to the Nunnery built here by King
Edgar.

Returning to Winchester we struck up North-west and came to Stokebridge, a
poor sorry Borough Town, noted for its Corruption in electing Members of
Parliament, and being a great Thorough-fare on the South-western Road: it has
however a great many good Inns, and as well provided as any on that Road, though
it has no Market.

The ingenious Sir Richard Steel once represented this Town in Parliament; and
though he was powerfully opposed, yet carried his Election by a Stratagem, which
made all the Women of his Side: Having made a great Entertainment for the
Burgesses and their Wives, and after having been very free and facetious among
them, he took up a large Apple, and stuck it full of Guineas, and declared it
the Prize of that Man, whose Wife should be first brought to-bed after that Day
Nine Months. This occasioned a great deal of Mirth, and what with the
Entertainment, and with the Hopes of getting the Prize, the good Women
prevailed on their Husbands to vote for Sir Richard, whom they to this Day
commemorate; and, as it is said, once made a strong Push to get a standing
Order of the Corporation made, that no Man should be received as a Candidate
for that Borough, who did not offer himself upon the same Terms.

Still rising Northward, we arrived at Andover, a Mayor, Market and Borough
Town, and also noted for being a great Thorough-fare on the direct Western
Road, as well from Newbury to Salisbury, as from London to Taunton, and all the
manufacturing Towns of Somersetshire, whereby it is greatly enriched, and is a
thriving, handsome, well built and populous Town. It is very healthy and
pleasantly situated just on the Borders of those Downs, which are commonly,
though not properly called Salisbury-plain. Near this Town is a Village called
Weyhill, where the open Down Country begins; and here upon these Downs is the
famous Weyhill, where the greatest Fair for Sheep in the Nation is kept; and
principally of Ewes for Store-sheep for the Farmers of the Counties of Berks,
Oxford, Bucks, Bedford, Hertford, Middlesex, Kent, Surrey and Sussex, who send
for them to this Place.

From Andover we bent our Way toward Wiltshire, by Quarley-hills, on the
West Side of which are the Remains of a great Fortification, consisting of two
outward Trenches, and other Works of great Strength; and then entering that
County, and leaving Luggershall (a small Hamlet-town, noted only for having
been formerly the Castle of Jeoffrey Fitzpiers, on the North of us, we came to
Ambresbury, a very ancient Town, pretty large, standing on the River Avon, and
having several good Inns, but its Market is much decayed, and almost
discontinued. It is said to have taken its Name from Ambrius, who founded here
a Monastery of Benedictines, long before the coming in of the Saxons, who
destroyed it, or from Aurelius Ambrose, a British Prince, who rebuilt it, and
filled it with 300 Monks, to pray for the Souls of those noble Britons who were
slain by the Treachery of the perfidious Hengist, the Saxon, who massacred here
300 of the ancient British Nobility, in cold Blood, whom he had invited with
their King Vortigern, to meet him there without Arms, to treat of a League of
Amity, and rejoice together.

The treacherous Saxon saved only the King, whom he obliged to give him near a
Third of his Kingdom Eastward, before he would set him at Liberty.

The Monastery at Ambresbury was converted into a Nunnery, and Eleanor, King
Henry III.'s Queen retired and died here; whose Example induced the Princess
Mary, King Edward's second Daughter, and Thirteen Noblemens Daughters, to take
the Veil together in this House.

The stupendous Piece of Antiquity called Stone-henge, deserves our particular
Notice; and I shall therefore borrow from Dr. Stukeley's Piece lately
published, entitled, Stone-henge, a Temple restored to the British Druids, the
following brief Account and Description of it, referring to that elaborate
Performance itself (which well deserves the Attention of the Learned and
Curious) for a more satisfactory Account, and for the Doctor's Reasons for his
Hypothesis, which we think he has made out with as much Certainty, as the
Nature of the Subject will admit.

The Wiltshire Downs, or Salisbury-Plain, as this Gentleman observes, is one of
the most delightful Spots in Britain; and Stone-henge, by the extravagant
Grandeur of the Work, has attracted the Admiration of all Ages. Mr. Camden
himself says of it, That he was grieved, that the Founders of it could not be
traced out: but Dr. Stukeley has very happily made it more than probable, that
it was a Temple of the British Druids, and (the Cathedral, as it may be called)
the chief of all their Temples in this Island.

The Stones of which it was composed are not factitious; for that would have
been a greater Wonder, than to bring them together to the Place where they are;
but undoubtedly were brought Fifteen or Sixteen Miles off, prodigious as they
are, from those called the Gray Weathers, near Abury on Marlborough Downs, all
the greater Stones, except the Altar, being of that sort; for that, being
designed to resist Fire, is of a still harder kind; it is a Composition of
Crystals of red, green, and white Colors, cemented by Nature with opaque
Granules, of flinty or stony Matter. The Stone at the upper End of the Cell,
which is fallen down and broken in half, the Doctor tells us, weighs above
Forty Tons, and would require above 140 Oxen to draw it, and yet is not the
heaviest Stone neither. Judge then what a stupendous Labor it was to bring
together, so many Miles, such a Number as were used here; and this has induced
many inconsiderate People to imagine, that the Founders had an Art of making
Stone, which has been lost for so many Ages.

The present Name is Saxon, though the Work is beyond all Comparison older,
signifying a hanging Rod or Pole, i. e. a Gallows, from the hanging Parts,
Architraves, or rather Imposts; and pendulous Rocks are still in Yorkshire
called Henges. But the ancient Name was most probably the Ambres, for which our
learned Author, to whom we refer, gives very satisfactory Reasons; and hence
the adjacent Town of Ambresbury, which I have taken Notice of, has its Name.

Stone-henge stands not upon the Summit of a Hill, but near it, however: at
half a Mile Distance the Appearance is awful; but as you come up the Avenue, in
the North-east of it, which Side is most perfect, the Greatness of its Contour
fills the Eye in an astonishing manner. It is enclosed in a circular Ditch,
which having passed, we ascend Thirty-five Yards before we come at the Work.
The Stones are chissell'd, and far from rude, though not cut to that Preciseness
as the Ruins in Old Rome, and the Inside of them had more Pains taken with them
then the Outside; for so, as our Author observes, the polite Architects of the
Eastern World were wont to do; not like our London Builders, who carve every
Moulding, and crowd every Ornament they borrow from Books, on the Outside of
the public Structures, that they may the more commodiously gather the Dust and
Smoke.

When you enter the Building, whether on Foot or Horseback, and cast your Eyes
around upon the yawning Ruins, you are struck into an ecstatick Reverie, which
no one can describe, and they only can be sensible of, who feel it. Other
Buildings fall by piecemeal, but here a single Stone is a Ruin. Yet is there
as much undemolish'd as enables us sufficiently to recover its Form when in its
most perfect State. When we advance farther, the dark Part of the ponderous
Imposts over our Heads, the Chasms of Sky between the Jambs of the Cell, the
odd Construction of the Whole, and the Greatness of every Part, surprises. If
you look upon the perfect Part, you fansy entire Quarries mounted up into the
Air; if upon the rude Havoc below, you see, as it were, the Bowels of a
Mountain turned inside out.

The whole Work, being of a circular Form, is about 108 Feet in Diameter, from
out to out. The Intention of the Founders was this: the whole Circle was to
consist of Thirty Stones, each Stone to be This Cubit is the old Hebrew,
Phoenician, or Egyptian Cubit, and what the Founders of Stone-benge went by,
and amounts to Twenty Inches Four-fifths English Measure.
Four Cubits broad, each Interval Two Cubits; Thirty times Four Cubits is twice
Sixty: Thirty times Two Cubits is Sixty; so that thrice Sixty Cubits completes
a Circle, whose Diameter is Sixty. A Stone being Four Cubits broad, and Two
thick, is double the Interval, which is a Square of Two Cubits. Change the
Places between the Stones and their Intervals, and it will make a good
Ground-plot for a circular Portico of Greek or Roman Work. Though these Bodies of
Stone, which are in the Nature of Imposts or Cornices, never had, or were
intended to have, any Mouldings upon them, like Greek and Roman Works, they are
wrought perfectly plain, and suitable to the Stones that support them; and the
Chisseling of the upright Stones is only above Ground; for the Four or Five
Feet in Length below Ground, is left in the original natural Form. The upright
Stones are made very judiciously to diminish a little every way; so that at-top
they are but Three Cubits and a half broad, and so much nearer as to suffer
their Imposts to meet a little over the Heads of the Uprights, both within-side
and without; by which means the Uprights are less liable to fall or swerve.

It is to be feared some indiscreet People have been digging about the great
Entrance, with ridiculous Hopes of finding Treasure, and so have loosened the
chalky Foundation; for the upper Edge of the Impost overhangs no less than Two
Feet Seven Inches, which is very considerable in a Height of Eighteen. The
whole Breadth at the Foundation is but Two Feet and an half; and this noble
Front is now chiefly kept up by the Masonry of the Mortaise, and Tendon of the
Imposts.

The Contrivance of the Founders in making Mortaises and Tenons between the
upright Stones and the Imposts, is admirable; but so contrary to any Practice
of the Romans, that it alone oversets their Claim to the Work. These Tenons and
Mortaifes of this outer Circle are round, and fit one another very aptly. They
are Ten Inches and one half in Diameter, and resemble half an Egg, rather than
an Hemisphere, and so effectually keep both Uprights and Imposts from Luxation,
that they must have been thrown down with great Difficulty and Labor. The
whole Height of Upright and Impost is Ten Cubits and an half; the Upright,
Nine; the Impost over the grand Entrance is in its middle Length Eleven Feet
Ten Inches, and so is larger than the rest, and it is also a little broader,
measuring on the Inside.

Of the outer Circle of Stone-henge, which in its Perfection consisted of Sixty
Stones, Thirty Uprights, and Thirty Imposts, there are Seventeen Uprights left
standing, Eleven of which remain continuous by the grand Entrance, Five Imposts
upon them. One Upright at the Back of the Temple, leans upon a Stone of the
inner Circle. There are Six more lying upon the Ground, whole or in Pieces, so
that Twenty-four out of Thirty are still visible at the Place. There is but one
Impost more in its proper Place, and but Two lying upon the Ground; so that
Twenty-two are carried off. Hence our Author infers, this Temple was not
defaced when Christianity prevailed; but that some rude Hands carried the
Stones away for other Uses. So much for the larger Circle of Stones with
Imposts.

As to the lesser Circle, which never had any Imposts, it is somewhat more than
Eight Feet from the Inside of the outward one, and consists of Forty lesser
Stones, forming, with the outward Circles, as it were, a circular Portico, a
most beautiful Work, and of a pretty Effect; they are flat Parallelograms, as
those of the outer Circle; and their general and designed Proportion is Two
Cubits, or Two and an half, as suitable Stones were found. They are a Cubit
thick, and Four and one half high, which is more than Seven Feet; this was
their stated Proportion, being every way the half of the upper Uprights. These
Stones are of a harder Composition than the rest, as the better to resist
Violence, as they are lesser, and they have sufficient Fastenings in the
Ground. There are but Nineteen of the Forty left; but Eleven of them are
standing in situ, Five in one Place contiguous, Three in another, Two in
another.

The Walk between these Two Circles, which is 300 Feet in Circumference, is
very noble, and very delightful.

The Adytum, or Cell, into which we may suppose none but the upper Order of
Druids were to enter, is composed of certain Compages of Stones, which our
Author calls Trilithons, because made each of two upright Stones, with an
Impost at top, and there are manifestly Five of these remaining; Three of which
are entire, Two are ruined, in some measure, but the Stones remain in situ. It
is a magnificent Niche Twenty-seven Cubits long, and as much broad, measuring
in the widest Place. The Stones that compose it, are really stupendous; their
Height, Breadth, and Thickness are enormous, and to see so many of them placed
together in a nice and critical Figure, with Exactness; to consider, as it
were, not a Pillar of one Stone, but a whole Wall, a Side, an End of a Temple,
of one Stone; to view them curiously, create such a Motion in the Mind as Words
cannot express. One very remarkable Particular in the Constitution of this
Adytum, has escaped all Observers before our Author, which is this: as this
Part is composed of Trilithons set two and two on each Side, and one right
before, they rise in Height and Beauty of the Stones, from the lower End of the
Adytum to the upper End. That is, the two hithermost Trilithons corresponding,
or those next the grand Entrance, on the Right Hand, and on the Left, are
exceeded in Height by the Two next in Order; and those are exceeded by that
behind the Altar, in the upper End of this Choir; and their Heights
respectively are Thirteen Cubits, Fourteen Cubits, Fifteen Cubits.

The Imposts of these are all of the same Height, and Ten Cubits may be
supposed their medium Measure in Length. The Artifice of the Tenons and
Mortaises of these Trilithons and their Imposts, what Conformity they bear to
that of the outer Circle, is exceedingly pretty, every thing being done very
geometrically, and as would best answer every Purpose from plain and simple
Principles; and it is wonderful, that in the Management of such prodigious
Stones as these are, fixed in the Ground, and ramm'd in like Posts, there is
not more Variation in the Height, Distance, etc.

Of these greater Stones of the Adytum, as is observed before, there are none
wanting, being all on the Spot, Ten Uprights, and Five Cornices. The Trilithon
first on the Left Hand is entire in situ, but vastly decayed, especially the
Cornice, in which such deep Holes are corroded, that in some Places the Daws
make their Nests in them. The next Trilithon on the Left is entire, composed of
three most beautiful Stones. The Cornice, happening to be of a very durable
English Marble, has not been much impaired by the Weather. Our Author took a
Walk on the Top of it, but thought it a frightful Situation. The Trilithon of
the upper End was an extraordinary Beauty; but probably, through the Indiscretion
of some body digging between them and the Altar, the noble Impost is dislodged
from its airy Seat, and fallen upon the Altar, where its huge Bulk lies
unfractur'd. The Two Uprights that supported it, are the most delicate Stones
of the whole Work. They were, our Author thinks, above Thirty Feet long, and
well chissell'd, finely taper'd and proportioned in their Dimensions. That
Southward is broken in two, lying upon the Altar. The other still stands
entire; but leans upon one of the Stones of the inward Oval; the Root-end, or
unhewn Part of both, is raised somewhat above Ground. The Trilithon toward the
West is entire, except that some of the End of the Impost is fallen clean off,
and all the upper Edge is very much diminished by time. The last Trilithon, on
the Right Hand of the Entrance into the Adytum, has suffered much. The outer
Upright, being the Jamb of the Entrance, is still standing; the other Upright
and Impost are both fallen forwards into the Adytum, and broke each into Three
Pieces, as supposed, from digging near it. That which is standing has a Cavity
in it, which Two or Three Persons may ^it in warm from the Weather.

Stone-henge is composed of Two Circles and Two Ovals, respectively
concentrick. The Stones that form these Ovals rise in Height as nearer the
upper End of the Adytum; and their mediate Measure is Four Cubits and Four
Palms. They are of a much harder Kind than the larger Stones in the lesser
Circle; the Founders no doubt intending, that their lesser Bulk should be
compensated by Solidity. Of these there are only Six remaining upright; the
Stumps of Two are left on the South Side by the Altar; one lies behind the
Altar dug up, or thrown down, by the Fall of the Upright there. One or Two were
probably thrown down by the Fall of the Upright of the first Trilithon on the
Right Hand; a Stump of another remains by the Upright there still standing.

The whole Number of Stones may be thus computed. The great Oval consists of
Ten Uprights; the inner with the Altar of Twenty; the great Circle of Thirty;
the inner of Forty, which are One hundred upright Stones; Five Imposts of the
great Oval; Thirty of the great Circle; the Two Stones on the Bank of the Area;
the Stone lying within the Entrance of the Area, and that standing without;
there seems to be another lying on the Ground, by the Vallum of the Court,
directly opposite to the Entrance of the Avenue: all added together make just
One hundred and forty Stones, the Number of which Stone-henge, a whole Temple,
is composed. Behold the Solution of the mighty Problem! the magical Spell,
which has so long perplexed the Vulgar, is broken! They think it an ominous
thing to count the true Number of the Stones, and whoever does so shall
certainly die after it!

As to the Altar, it is laid toward the upper End of the Adytum, at present
flat on the Ground, and squeezed into it, as it were, by the Weight of the
Ruins upon it. It Is a kind of blue coarse Marble, such as comes from
Derbyshire, and laid upon Tombs in our Churches and Churchyards. Our Author
believes its Breadth is Two Cubits Three Palms, and that its first intended
Length was Ten Cubits, equal to the Breadth of the Trilithon, before which it
lies. But it is very difficult to come at its true Length. It Is Twenty Inches
thick, a just Cubit, and has been squared. It lies between the two Centres,
that of the Compasses and that of the String; leaving a convenient Space quite
round it, no doubt as much as was necessary for this Ministration.

The Heads of Oxen, Deer, and other Beasts have been found upon digging in and
about Stone-henge, undoubted Relics of Sacrifices, together with Wood-ashes.
Mr. Camden says, Men's Bones have been found hereabouts; he means in the
adjacent Barrows, and such our Author saw thrown out by the Rabbets, which have
been brought hither of late Years, and by their burrowing threaten these noble
Ruins; as the greedy Plough more and more invades the neighboring Plain.

But eternally, as he observes, is to be lamented the Loss of that Tablet of
Tin, which was found at this Place in the Time of Henry VIII. inscribed with
many Letters; but in so strange a Character, that neither Sir Thomas Elliot, a
learned Antiquary, nor Mr. Lilly, First High Master of St. Paul's School, could
make any thing out of; and which, no doubt, was a Memorial of the Founders,
written by the Druids; and had it been preserved till now, would have been an
invaluable Curiosity.

In the Year 1635, as they were plowing by the Barrows about Normanton-Ditch,
they found so large a Quantity of excellent Pewter, as, at a low Price, they
sold for Five Pounds. There are several of these Ditches, being very narrow,
which run across the Downs, which perhaps are Boundaries of Hundreds, Parishes,
etc. These Pewter Plates might very possibly have been Tablets, with
Inscriptions; but falling into such rude Hands, they could no more discern the
Writing, than interpret it. No doubt, says Dr. Stukeley, this was some of the
old British Stannum, which the Tyrian Hercules, surnamed Melcarthus, first
brought ex Cassiteride Insula, or Britain: Which Hercules lived in Abraham's
Time, or soon after.

Mr. Webb tells us, the Duke of Buckingham dug about Stone-henge, perhaps much
to the Prejudice of the Work. Mr. Webb also did the like, and found what he
imagined was the Corner of a Thuribulum.

Mr. Hayward, late Owner of Stone-henge, likewise dug about it, and found Heads
of Oxen, and other Beasts Bones, and nothing else.

Dr. Stukeley himself, in 1723, dug on the Inside of the Altar, about the
middle, Four Feet along the Edge of the Stone, Six Feet forward toward the
middle of the Adytum: at a Foot deep he came to the solid Chalk, mixed with
Flints, which had never been stirred. The Altar was exactly a Cubit-thick, i.
e. Twenty Inches Four-fifths, but broken in Two or Three Pieces by the
ponderous Masses of the Imposts, and one upright Stone of that Trilithon, which
stood at the upper End of the Adytum, being fallen upon it. Hence appears the
Commodiousness of the Foundation for this huge Work! They dug Holes in the
solid Chalk, which would of itself keep up the Stones as firm as if a Wall was
built round them; and no doubt but they ramm'd up the Interstices with Flints.
But he says, he had too much Regard to the Work, to dig any-where near the
Stones. He took up an Ox's Tooth above Ground, without the Adytum, on the
Right Hand of the lowermost Trilithon Northward.

The Time our Author assigns for the building of Stone-henge is not long after
Cambyses's Invasion of Egypt; when he committed such horrid Outrages there, and
made such dismal Havoc with the Priests and Inhabitants in general, that they
dispersed themselves to all the Parts of the World; some as far as the
East Indies; and some, it is not questioned, as far Westward, into Britain, and
introduced some of their Learning, Arts and Religion among the Druids, and
perhaps had a Hand in this very Work, the only one where the Stones are
chissell'd; all other Works of theirs being of rude Stones, untouched of the
Tool, exactly after the Patriarchal and Jewish Mode, and therefore older than
this; and this Conjecture is the more probable, because, at the time mentioned,
the Phoenician Trade was at its Height, which afforded a readier Conveyance
hither. This was before the second Temple at Jerusalem was built; before the
Grecians had any History.

For farther Particulars of this stupendous Work, and other curious Matters
relating and adjacent to it (such as its Antiquity before the Time of the
Belgae, the Romans, the Saxons, and Danes; of the Wansdike; of Vespasian's Camp
at Ambresbury; the Introduction of the Druids into Britain, which he puts about
Abraham's Time; its ancient Name, [the Ambres]; the Water Vases of Stone-henge;
the Avenue to it; the Cursus); we must refer our Readers to the Work itself,
having already exceeded the narrow Bounds to which the Nature of our Design
confines us. But this we may add, that doubtless they had some Method in former
Days, in foreign Countries, as well as here, to move heavier Weights than we
now find practicable. How else did Solomon's Workmen build the Battlement, or
additional Wall, to support the Precipice of Mount-Moriah, on which the Temple
was erected; which was all built of Parian Marble, each Stone being Forty
Cubits long, Fourteen broad, and Eight Cubits thick. And so much for this
celebrated Temple of Stone-henge.

We shall now proceed to give some Account of the famous Barrows on these
Downs, and we shall borrow from the same learned Author, the following curious
Particulars relating to them.

The Tops of all the Hills, or rather easy Elevations, round Stone-henge, are
in a manner covered over with th^se Barrows, which make an agreeable
Appearance, adorning the bare Downs with their Figures. This Ring of Barrows,
however, reaches no farther, than till you lose Sight of the Temple, as we now
make no doubt to call Stone-henge, or thereabouts. Many, from the great Number
of these sepulchral Tumuli here, injudiciously conclude, that there have been
great Battles upon the Plain, and that the Slain are buried there; but they are
really no other than Family Burying-places set near this Temple, for the same
Reason as we bury in Churchyards, and consecrated Ground.

We may readily count Fifty at a time in Sight from the Place, especially in
the Evening, when the sloping Rays of the Sun shine on the Ground beyond them.
They are most of them of a very elegant Bell-like Form, and done with great
Nicety; in general they are always upon elevated Ground, and in Sight of the
Temple, as we have said; for they all regard it, and are assuredly the single
Sepulchers of Kings and great Personages buried, during a considerable Space of
Time, and in Peace. There are many Groups of them together, as if Family
Burial-places; and the Variety in them seems to indicate some Pre-eminence in
the Persons interred. Most of them have little Ditches around; in many is a
circular Ditch, 60 Cubits in Diameter, with a very small Tumulus in the Center.
Sixty, or even 100 Cubits, is a very common Diameter in the large Barrows.
Often they are set in Rows, and equidistant, so as to produce a regular and
pretty Appearance, and with some particular Regard to the Parts of the Temple,
the Avenues, or the Cursus. Upon every Range of Hills, quite round Stone-henge,
are successive Groups of Barrows for some Miles; and even that named
King-barrow, by Lord Pembroke's Park Wall at Wilton, which our Author calls the
Tomb of Carvilius, is set within View of Stone-henge.

In 1722, the late Lord Pembroke opened a Barrow, in order to find the Position
of the Body observed in those early Days. He pitched upon one of the double
Barrows, where two are enclosed in one Ditch. He made a Section from the Top to
the Bottom, an entire Segment from Center to Circumference. The Composition was
good Earth quite through, except a Coat of Chalk of about Two Feet thick,
covering it quite over, under the Turf. Hence it appears, that the Method of
making these Barrows, was to dig up the Turf for a great Space round, till the
Barrow was brought to its intended Bulk; then with the Chalk dug out of the
invironing Ditch, they powdered it all over. And the Notion of Sanctity annexed
to them, forbad People trampling on them till perfectly settled and turfed
over; whence the Neatness of their Form to this Day. At the Top or Center of
this Barrow, not above Three Feet under the Surface, my Lord found the Skeleton
of the Interred, perfect, of a reasonable Size, the Head lying Northward
toward Stone-henge.

The Year following, by my Lord's Order, Dr. Stukeley began upon another double
Barrow. He began upon the lesser, and made a large Cut on the Top from East to
West. After the Turf, he came to the Layer of Chalk, as before, then fine
Garden Mould. About Three Feet below the Surface, a Layer of Flints humouring
the Convexity of the Barrow, which are gathered from the Surface of the Downs
in some Places, especially where it has been ploughed. This being about a Foot
thick, rested on a Layer of soft Mould another Foot; in which was enclosed an
Urn full of Bones. The Urn was of unbaked Clay, of a dark reddish Color;
crumbled into pieces. It had been rudely wrought with small Mouldings round the
Verge, and other circular Channels on the Outside, with several Indentions
between, made with a pointed Tool. The Bones had been burnt, and crowded all
together in a little Heap, not so much as a Hat-crown would contain; the
Collar-bone, and one side of the Under-jaw remaining very entire. It appears to
have been a Girl of about Fourteen Years old, by their Bulk, and the great
Quantity of Female Ornaments mixed with the Bones; as great Numbers of glass
Beads of all Sorts, and of diverse Colors, most yellow, one black; many single,
many in long Pieces, notched between, so as to resemble a String of Beads, and
these were generally of a blue Color. There were many of Amber, of all Shapes
and Sizes, flat Squares, long Squares, round, oblong, little and great;
likewise many of Earth, of different Shapes, Magnitude and Color; some little
and white, many large and flattish, like a Button, others like a Pully; but all
had Holes to run a String through, either through their Diameter or Sides: Many of
the Button Sort seemed to have been covered with Metal, there being a Rim
worked in them, wherein to turn the Edge of the Covering. One of these was
covered with a thin Film of pure Gold. These were the young Lady's Ornaments,
and had all undergone Fire, so that what would easily consume, fell to-pieces
as soon as handled; much of the Amber burnt half through: this Person was a
Heroine; for we found the Head of her Javelin in Brass. At Bottom are two Holes
for the Pin that fastened it to the Staff; besides, there was a sharp Bodkin,
round at one End, square at the other, where it went into the Handle. Our
Author preserved whatever is permanent of these Trinkets; but recompos'd the
Ashes of the illustrious Defunct, and covered them with Earth, leaving visible
Marks at Top of the Barrow having been opened (to dissuade any other from again
disturbing them): and this was his Practice in all the rest.

He then opened the next Barrow to it, enclosed in the same Ditch, which he
supposed the Husband or Father of this Lady. At 14 Inches deep, the Mould ^^ng
mixed with Chalk, he came to the entire ^^^^ton of a Man, the Skull and all the
Bones ^^^^^ingly rotten and perished, through Length of Time: though this was a
Barrow of the latest Sort, as he ^^^^^ctured. The Body lay North and South, the
Head to the North, as that Lord Pembroke ^^^ed.

Next he went Westward to a Group of Barrows, (...) Stone-henge bears
East-north-east. Here is a large Barrow ditch'd about, but of an ancient Make.
On that Side next Stone-henge are Ten lesser, small, (...) were, crowded
together. South of the great (...) Barrow, larger than those of the Gr^up, but
not equalling the first: it would seem, that a Man and his Wife were buried in
the Two larger, and that the rest were of their Children or Dependents. One of
the small ones, 20 Cubits in Diameter, he cut through, with a Pit Nine Feet in
Diameter, to the Surface of the natural Chalk, in the Center of the Barrow,
where was a little Hole cut. A Child's Body, as it seems, had been burnt here,
and covered up in that Hole; but through Length of Time consumed. From Three Feet
deep he found much Wood-ashes, soft, and black as Ink, some little Bits of an
Urn, and black and red Earth very rotten; some small Lumps of Earth red as
Vermilion; some Flints burnt through; toward the Bottom, a great Quantity of
Ashes, and burnt Bones. From this Place he counted 128 Barrows in Sight.

Going from hence more Southerly, is a circular dish-like Cavity, 60 Cubits in
Diameter, dug in the Chalk, like a Barrow reversed. It Is near a great Barrow,
the least of the South-western Group. This Cavity is Seven Feet deep in the
Middle, extremely well turned; and out of it, no doubt, the adjacent Barrow is
dug. The Use of it seems to have been a Place for sacrificing and feasting in
Memory of the Dead, as was the ancient Custom. It Is all overgrown with that
pretty Shrub Erica Vulgaris, then in Flower, and smelling like Honey. He made a
large cross Section in its Center, upon the Cardinal Points, and found nothing
but a Bit of red earthen Pot.

He then dug up one of those he calls Druids Barrows, a small Tumulus, enclosed
in a large circular Ditch. Stone-henge bears hence North-east. He made a cross
Section Ten Feet each way, Three Feet broad over its Center upon the Cardinal
Points: At length he found a squarish Hole cut in the solid Chalk, in the
Center of the Tumulus; it was Three Feet and an half, i. e. Two Cubits long,
and near Two Feet broad, i. e. One Cubit, pointing to Stone-henge directly. It
was a Cubit and an half deep from the Surface. This was the Domus exilis
Plutonia, covered with artificial Earth, not above a Foot thick from the
Surface. In this little Grave he found all the burnt Bones of a Man, but no
Signs of an Urn. The Bank of the circular Ditch is on the Out^ide, and is 12
Cubits broad. The Ditch is Six Cubits broad, (the Druid's Staff); the Area is
70 Cubits in Diameter. The Whole 100.

He opened another of these of like Dimensions, next to that Lord Pembroke
first opened, South of Stone-henge; and found a burnt Body in a Hole in the
Chalk, as before.

In some other Barrows he opened, were found large burnt Bones of Horses and
Dogs, along with human; also of other Animals, as seemed of Fowl, Hares, Boars,
Deer, Goats, or the like; and in a great and very flat old-fashioned Barrow,
West from Stone-henge, among such Matters, he found Bits of red and blue
Marble, Chippings of the Stones of the Temple, so that probably the Interred
was one of the Builders. Homer tells of Achilles slaying Horses and Dogs at the
Funeral of his Friend Patroclus.

Lord Pembroke told the Doctor of a Brass Sword dug up in a Barrow here, which
was sent to Oxford. In that very old Barrow near Little Ambresbury, was found a
very large Brass Weapon of 20 Pounds Weight, like a Pole-ax, said to be given
to Colonel Wyndham. In the great long Barrow farthest North from Stone-henge,
which our Author supposes to be an Archdruid's, was found one of those Brass
Instruments called Celts, which he thinks belonged to the Druids, wherewith
they cut off the Misleto. Mr. Stallard of Ambresbury gave it to Lord
Burlington, now in Sir Hans Sloane's Cabinet, 13 Inches long. They dug a Cell
in a Barrow East of Ambresbury, and it was inhabited for some time. There they
saw all the Bones of a Horse. We find evidently, adds the Doctor, these ancient
Nations had the Custom of burning their dead Bodies, probably before the Name
of Rome. So Lacrymatories we read of in Scripture, antienter than Greek or
Roman Times. Psalm lvi.8.

Salisbury Plains are certainly the most charming that can any-where be seen.
The numerous Flocks of Sheep all around, which way soever we turn, are a fine
Sight; it is ordinary for these Flocks to contain from 3000 to 5000 each; and
several private Farmers hereabouts have Two or Three such Flocks.

But it is more remarkable still, how a great Part of these Downs comes, by a
new Method of Husbandry, not only to be made arable, but to bear plentiful
Crops of Wheat, though never known to our Ancestors to be capable of any such
Thing; nay, they would probably have laughed at any one that had gone about to
plough up the wild Downs and Hills, which they thought only fit for
Sheep-walks; but Experience has made the present Age wiser, and more skilful in
Husbandry; for by only folding the Sheep upon those Lands, after they are
turned up with the Plough, (which generally goes within Three or Four Inches of
the solid Rock of Chalk) they become abundantly fruitful, and bear very good
Wheat, as well as Rye and Barley. I shall say more of this, when I come to
speak of the same Practice farther in the Country.

This plain open Country continues in Length from Winchester to Salisbury 25
Miles, from thence to Dorchester 22 Miles, thence to Weymouth six Miles, so
that they lie near 50 Miles in Length and Breadth; they reach also in some
Places fron 35 to 40 Miles: Those who would make any practicable Guess at the
Number of Sheep which usually feed on these Downs, may take it from a
Calculation made, as I was told, at Dorchester, that there were 600,000 Sheep
fed within the Circumference of Six Miles around that Town.

As we passed this open plain Country, we saw the Ruins of a great many old
Roman and British Camps, and other Remains of the ancient Inhabitants of this
Kingdom, and of their Wars, Battles, Entrenchments, Encampments, Buildings, and
other Fortifications, which are indeed very agreeable to a Traveller, that has
read the History of the Country.

Old Sarum, which is the next Place we come to, is as remarkable as any of
these, where there is a double Entrenchment, with a deep Graff, or Ditch, to
either of them. It Is said it was a Roman Station, and the ancient Sorbiodunum.
It was deserted in King Henry III.'s Time, for want of Water, when the
Inhabitants founded New Sarum. The old City is of an orbicular Form, erected on
one of the most elegant Designs imaginable. It was, first, a Fortress of the
ancient Britons. The Prospect of this Place is at present very august, and
would have afforded us a most noble Sight, when in Perfection. In the Angle to
the North-west stood the Cathedral, and Episcopal Palace. The City fills up the
Summit of an high and steep Hill, near the Bottom of which runs the River Avon.
Here Synods and British Parliaments have formerly been held; and hither the
States of the Kingdom were summoned to swear Fealty to William I. In this City
was the Palace of the British and Saxon Kings, and of the Roman Emperors. Near
it is one Farm-house, and that is all which is left of this ancient City: yet
this is called the Borough of Old Sarum, and sends Two Members to Parliament,
who are chosen by the Proprietors of certain Lands. Whom those Members can
justly say they represent, would however be hard for them to answer.

Salisbury is a large, well built, and pleasant City; and the Founders of it
seemed to have run from one Extreme to another; for as the old City wanted
Water, this has rather too much, the Water running through the Middle of every
Street, which, I think, does not add to the Beauty of the Town, but just the
contrary; for it keeps the Streets always dirty, full of Wet and Filth, and
Weeds, even in the Middle of Summer.

The City lies at the Confluence of Two Rivers, the Avon, and the Willy, each
of them singly a considerable River, but very large, when joined together; and
yet much larger, when they receive the Nadder, a third River, which joins them
near Clarendon Park about Three Miles below the City; when, with a deep Chanel,
and a Current less rapid, they run down to Christ-church, where they empty
themselves into the Sea. From that Town upwards, to within Two Miles of
Salisbury, they are made navigable; but the Strength of the Stream would not
permit to make them so up to the City.

Salisbury, and all the County of Wilts, are full of a great Variety of
Manufactures; and those too of the most considerable in England; as the
Clothing Trade, and that of Flanels, Druggets, and also several other Sorts of
Manufactures, of which in their Place.

Salisbury has, in particular, Two remarkable Manufactures that flourish in it,
which employ the Poor all around; namely, fine Flanels, and Long Cloths for the
Turkey Trade, called Salisbury Whites.

The Close adjacent to the Cathedral, in which live the Canons and
Prebendaries, is so large and well built, that it looks like a fine City of
itself.

The Cathedral is famous for the Height of its Spire, which is without
Exception the highest and the handsomest in England, being from the Ground 410
Feet, and yet the Walls so exceeding thin, that at the Upper Part of the Spire,
upon a View made by the late Sir Christopher Wren, the Wall was found to be
less than five Inches thick; upon which a Consultation was had, whether the
Spire, or at least the Upper Part of it, should be taken down, it being
supposed to have received some Damage by the great Storm in the Year 1703; but
it was resolved in the Negative, and Sir Christopher ordered it to be
strengthened with Bands of Iron Plates, which have effectually secured it; and
I have heard some of the best Architects say, it is stronger now than when it
was first built.

They tell us here long Stories of the great Art used in laying the first
Foundation of this Church, the Ground being marshy and wet, occasioned by the
Channels of the Rivers; that it was laid upon Piles, according to some; and upon
Woolpacks, according to others: But this is not to be believed by those who
know, that the whole Country is one Rock of Chalk, even from the Tops of the
highest Hills, to the Bottom of the deepest Rivers. And the Foundation of
Woolpacks is, no doubt, allegorical, and has respect to the Woollen Trade.

This Church was begun by Bishop Poor, continued by Robert Bingham, and
William of York, and finished by Giles de Brideport, Bishop of this See, all in
the Space of 40 Years. The Model is after the Figure of a Cross; and it cost an
immense Sum of Money; but it must be acknowledged, that the Inside of the Work
is not answerable, in the Decoration of Things, to the Workmanship without. The
Painting in the Choir is mean, and more like the ordinary Method of a common
Drawingroom, or Tavern-painting, than that of a Church. The Carving is good,
but there is very little of it, and it is rather a fine Church, than finely set
off.

But it now makes a better Appearance than it has done, having very lately been
repaired by the Contributions of the Bishop and Prebendaries, set on foot by
Bishop Sherlock, who, it seems, thought that the Dignitaries ought to support
what supported them; and that all they got by the Church was not designed
merely to make or enrich their Families.

The ordinary Boast of this Building, in the following Verses, must not be
omitted: As many Days as in One Year there be,
So many Windows in One Church we see;
As many Marble Pillars there appear,
As there are Hours throughout the fleeting Year;
As many Gates as Moons One Year do view:
Strange Tale to tell, yet not more strange than true!


Some of the Windows which escaped the Fury of the Zealots of 1641, are well
painted.

There are some very fine Monuments in this Church; particularly in that they
call the Virgin Mary's Chapel, behind the Altar, is a noble Monument for a late
Duke and Duchess of Somerset, with their Pourtraits at full Length. The late
Duchess of Somerset, of the Piercy Family, also her Daughter the Marchioness of
Caermarthen, and a second Son of her Grace, both by the present Duke, are
likewise interred here.

The Figure of one Bennet, who endeavored to imitate our Savior in Fasting
Forty Days and Forty Nights, as is there represented, carried his Point so far,
that being reduced to a Skeleton, he fell a Victim to his presumptuous and
enthusiastic Folly. The Bodies of the Bishops Jewel, Uvall, Chest, were also
interred here. Here is likewise a Monument to the beneficent Dr. Seth Ward,
Bishop of this See, who founded (amidst other Benefactions, which we shall take
notice of in Hertfordshire) a handsome College for the Widows of Ten Ministers,
allowing to each 15 l. per Annum; and which has been since obliged to Dr.
Gilbert Burnet, Bishop of this See.

They show you also the Monument of the Lord Stourton, in the Reign of Philip
and Mary, which is made remarkable by a particular Incident; as follows:

This Lord Stourton, being guilty of a Murder, which was aggravated with very
bad Circumstances, could not obtain the usual Grace of the Crown, to be
beheaded; but Queen Mary positively ordered, that, like a common Malefactor, he
should die at the Gallows. After he was executed, his Friends desiring to have
him buried at Salisbury, the Bishop would not consent, that he should be buried
in the Cathedral, unless, as a farther Mark of Infamy, they would submit to
this Condition, ( viz.) That the silken Halter in which he was hanged, should
be placed over his Grave in the Church, as a Monument of his Crime; which was
accordingly done, and there it is to be seen at this Day.

The putting this Halter up here, was not so wonderful to me, as it was, that
the Posterity of that Lord, who remained in good Rank some Time after, should
never prevail to have that Mark of Infamy taken from the Tomb of their Ancestor.

The Cloister is 160 Feet square, the inner Cioister 30 Feet wide, with 10
Arches on each Side, the Top vaulted, and covered with Lead. Over the East Walk
of the Cloister, is a spacious Library, but not over-well stocked with Books.
The Chapter House is Octagon, and is 150 Feet in Circumference; the Roof
bearing all upon one small Marble Pillar in the Center, which seems so feeble,
that it is hardly to be imagined it can be any great Support to it, which makes
it the more curious; and indeed, I believe, it is hardly to be matched in
Europe.

The Corporation of Sarum have lately purchased a very fine Original Piece of
Painting of her late Majesty Queen Anne, drawn by the celebrated Dahl, and have
put it up in the Council Chamger of the City. This Picture formerly belonged to
the Society of Gentlemen (all Members of Parliament) known by the Name of the
October Club, and was set up in the great Room belonging to the Bell (now
Crown) Tavern in Westminster, where they used to meet till the Death of Queen
Anne.

In 1736-7, an Act passed for the better Repairing and Paving the Highways,
Streets, and Watercourse within this City, and for Enlightening the Streets,
Lanes, and Passages, and better regulating the Nightly Watch.

From hence directing my Course to the Seaside, in pursuit of my first Design
of viewing the whole Coast of England; I left the great Road, and went down the
East Side of the River toward New-Forest and Lymington; and here I saw the
ancient House and Seat of Clarendon, which gives Title to the Earl of that
Name. This Place should be called Clorendon, from the memorable Roman Camp,
half a Mile off the Park, near the Roman Road, made or repaired by Constantius
Chlorus, Father of Constantine. It is a beautiful Fortification, of a round
Form, upon a dry chalky Hill. Within is a circular Ditch, supposed to be a less
Sort of Camp for the Summer. The Park is a sweet and beautiful Spot. Here King
John built a Palace, where several Parliaments have been held. Part of the
Fabric is still left, though they have for many Years been pulling it down. The
Meterials are chiefly Flint, and it was built upon the Side of an Hill, but no
way fortified, though it took up much Ground. This Palace is called the Manor,
and from it lies a subterraneous Passage to the Queen's Manor. Between the Camp
and the Park, was a Roman Road, from Sorbiodunum, or Old Sarum, to Winchester.

But this being a large County, and full of memorable Branches of Antiquity,
and modern Curiosity, I made several little Excursions from this beautiful
Spot, to view the Northern Parts of the County.

I have mentioned, that this County is generally a vast continued Body of high
chalky Hills, whose Tops spread themselves into fruitful and pleasant Downs and
Plains, upon which great Flocks of Sheep are fed, etc. But the Reader is
desired to observe, these Hills and Plains are most beautifully intersected,
and cut through, by the Course of diverse pleasant and profitable Rivers; along,
and near the Banks of which, there always is a Chain of fruitful Meadows, and
rich Pastures, and those interspersed with a great many pleasant Towns,
Villages, and Houses, and among them many of considerable Magnitude; so that,
while you view the Downs, and think the Country wild and uninhabited, yet when
you come to descend into these Vales, you are surprised with the most pleasant
and fertile Country in England.

No less than Four of these Rivers meet all together, at or near the City of
Salisbury, the Waters of Three of which run through the Streets of the City; viz.
the Nadder, the Willy, and the Avon. 1. The Nadder rises near the End of the
Blow Mill Course, and passes by Chilmark, a pleasant Village, noted for its
Quarries of very good white Stone, which rises in many Dimensions, insomuch
that there is now a single Stone lying over the Mouth of the Quarry like an
Architrave, full 60 Feet long, 12 in Thickness, and perfectly without Flaw. 2.
The Willy rises about Warminster; runs by Yarnbury, a vast Roman Camp (where
some distinguish Vespasian's Name; a great semicircular Work at the Entrance;
over against which, on the other Side the Willy, is another Camp); then running
by Orchestra, remarkable for a Kind of Grass 25 Feet in Length, with which they
fatten Hogs, it gives Name to Wilton, and forms the Canal before the Front of
Wilton House; and then joining the Nadder, runs through the Gardens at the End of
the Avenue. 3. The Avon rises from under a great Ridge of Hills, which divide
Wiltshire into North and South, adorned with the Wansdike. It passes Southward
through a great Number of Villages to Ambresbury.

What is most worth a Man of Curiosity's seeing in this County, is Wilton
House. It is situated in a pleasant Vale, having Wilton Town on one Side, and a
spacious Park on the other.

The Building was begun in the Reign of Hen. VIII. The great Quadrangle was
finished in the Time of Edward VI. and the Porch was designed by Hans Holbein.
The Hall-side, being burnt down some Years ago, was rebuilt by the late Thomas
Earl of Pembroke, then Lord High-Admiral of England, in a very noble and
sumptuous manner. The other Parts, rebuilt by the first Philip Earl of
Pembroke, were all designed by the famous Inigo Jones, and finished by him in
the Year 1640.

The Canal before the House lies parallel with the Road, and receives into it
the whole River Willy, or at least is able to do so; it may indeed be said,
that the River is made into a Canal. When we come into the Court-yards before
the House, there are several Pieces of Antiquity to entertain the Curious; as
particularly a noble Column of Porphyry, with a Marble Statue of Venus on the
Top of it; which, as they told me, is 32 Feet high, and of excellent
Workmanship, and that it came last from Candia, but formerly from Alexandria.

As the late Earl of Pembroke was a Nobleman of great Learning, beyond most Men
of his high Rank, and a Master of Antiquity, he took Delight in collecting such
valuable Pieces of Painting and Sculpture, as made Wilton House a perfect
Museum, or Receptacle of Rarities; and we meet with several Things there, which
are to be found nowhere else in the World. I shall particularize but a few;
for a Volume might be employed in a full Description of them.

The Piece of our Savior's washing his Disciples Feet, which they show you in
one of the first Rooms you go into, is admirable. At the Foot of the great
Staircase is a Bacchus as large as the Life, done in fine Peloponnesian
Marble, carrying a young Bacchus on his Arm, the young one eating Grapes, and
showing by his Countenance, he is pleased with the Taste of them. One ought to
stop every Two Steps of this Staircase, as we go up, to contemplate the vast
Variety of Pictures that cover the Walls, and of some of the best Masters in
Europe; and yet this is but an Introduction to what is beyond them.

The great Geometrical Staircase itself is deservedly admired, and was the
first of this Kind in England; and the rich and magnificent Door-case can
hardly be paralleled.

It Is universally acknowledged, that the grand Apartment is one of the noblest
Pieces of Architecture that has been hitherto produced; particularly the Salon;
which is 60 Feet long, 30 high, and 30 broad; and when you are entered these
grand Apartments, such Variety strikes upon you every Way, that you scarce know
to which Hand to turn yourself first. On one Side you see several Rooms filled
with Paintings, all so curious, and various, that it is with Reluctance you
leave them; and looking another way, you are called off by a vast Collection of
Busts, and Pieces of the greatest Antiquity of the Kind, both Greek and Roman.

In one End of the grand Room is the celebrated Family-picture by Vandyke, 20
Feet long, and 12 Feet high, containing 13 Figures as big as the Life; which
rather appear as so many real Persons, than the Production of Art: and all the
other Pictures there are of the same incomparable Hand. It would be endless to
describe the whole Set of the Family-pictures, which take up this Room, unless
we would enter into the Roof-tree of the Family, and set down a Genealogical
Line of the whole House.

After this fine Range of Beauties are seen, we are far from being at an End of
our Surprise: there are three or four Rooms still upon the same Floor, filled
with Wonders: nothing can be finer than the Pictures themselves, nothing more
surprising than the Number of them. At length you descend the Backstairs, which
are large, though not like the other, where not a Hand's Breadth is left vacant
between the Pictures; and even the upper Rooms have some very good Pieces in
them.

In most of the Apartments are Marble Chimney-pieces of the most exquisite
Workmanship, all carved in Italy, with many curious Statues, Basso Relievo's,
and Pictures of the most famous Masters. The Loggio in the Bowling-green,
(which has Pillars beautifully rusticated, and is enriched with Niches and
Statues) the Grotto, (the Front of which is curiously carved without, as it is
all Marble within, and has black Pillars of the Ionic Order, with Capitals of
white Marble, and Four fine Basso Relievo's from Florence) the Stables, and
other Offices, are all Beauties in their Kind, which would tire Description.

The Collection of Head-pieces, Coats of Mail, and other Armor for both Horse
and Man, are also a Curiosity. They show those of King Henry VIII. Edward VI.
and of an Earl of Pembroke, nicknamed Black Jack, which he wore when he
besieged and took Bulloign in France, being the General who commanded in chief
under the King; they are very curious and imboss'd. Twelve other complete Suits
of Armor, of extraordinary Workmanship, are also there; the rest, being about
100, are only for common Horsemen.

The Garden Front is justly esteemed one of the best Pieces of the renowned
Inigo Jones, and is 194 Feet long.

The Gardens are on the South of the House, and extend themselves beyond the
River, a Branch of which runs through one Part of them; and still South of the
Gardens is the great Park, which reaches beyond the Vale; the View opens to the
great Down, which is properly called, by way of Distinction, Salisbury-plain,
and leads from the City of Salisbury, to Shaftsbury. Here also his Lordship has
a Harewarren, as it is called, though improperly. It has indeed been a Sanctuary
for the Hares for many Years; but the Gentlemen complain, that it mars their
Game; for that, as soon as they put up a Hare for their Sport, if it be
any-where within two or three Miles, away she runs for the Warren, and there is
an End of their Pursuit. On the other hand, it makes all the Countrymen turn
Poachers, and destroy the Hares, by what Means they can. The present Earl of
Pembroke, who, as his Father had, has also a fine Taste in Architecture, has
made a further Improvement with regard to Prospect, at this noble House,
throwing down the Walls of the Garden, and making instead of them the newly
introduced Haw-haw Walls, which afford a boundless View all around the Country
from every Quarter. His Lordship has also built a most magnificent Bridge over
the River in his Garden, which is esteemed the principal Ornament without Doors
of this noble Seat.

From this pleasant and agreeable Place I returned to Clarendon. The Road from
Wilton to Shaftsbury, called The Ten Mile Course, is a fine Ridge of Downs,
continued upon the Southern Bank of the River Nadder, with a sweet Prospect to
the Right and Left all the way over the Towns and the Country on both Sides.
The late Earl of Pembroke has placed a numbered Stone at every Mile, for the
Benefit of Travelers. Between the 5th and 6th Mile is a pretty large Camp,
called Chiselbury, probably Roman in the Decline of the Empire. At the End of
this Course are three or four Celtic Barrows. In this Hill is a Quarry of Stone
very full of Sea Shells. Not far off, in the Parish of Tisbury, near
Warder-castle, is a great Entrenchment in a Wood, which was probably a British
Town near the Nadder.

Returning, we see, upon the highest Eminence which overlooks Wilton, and the
fertile Valley at the Union of the Nadder and Willy, the noted Place called
King-barrow, mentioned p. 267. This is certainly Celtick, says Dr. Stukeley,
and, with great Probability, the very Tomb of that Carvilius, who attacked
Caesar's Sea-camp in order to divert his renowned Enemy from his close Pursuit
of Cassibelan. This Prince is supposed to have kept his Royal Residence at
Carvilium, now Wilton, near which Place King Edgar's Queen spent the latter
Part of her Life in a religious Retirement, and for that Purpose built a House
there.

The Downs and Plains in this Part of England being so open, and the Surface so
little subject to Alteration, there are more Remains of Antiquity to be seen
upon them, than in other Places; and, as they tell us, no less than
Three-and-fifty ancient Incampments, or Fortifications, in this one County;
some of which are very visible, and are of different Forms, and erected by
different Nations; as British, Danish, Saxon, and Roman; particularly at
Ebbdown, Burywood, Oldburgh-hill, Cummerford, Roundway-down, St. Anne's-hill,
Bratton-castle, Clay-hill, Stournton-park, Whitecole-hall, Battlebury,
Scrathbury, Yanesbury, Frippsbury, Suthbury-hill, Ambresbury, mentioned before;
Great Bodwyn, Easterley, Merdon, Aubery, Martenscil-hill, Barbury-castle, etc.
At Aubery, or Aukbury, in particular, on the East Side of the Avon, by Great
Dornford, is a very large Camp, covering the whole Top of a Hill. On the other
Side of the River, a little higher up, is Vespasian's Camp, called The Walls.
Near these are two other Camps, which seem Remains of Vespasian's Victories,
and intimate that he subdued the Country by Inches.

North of these is Martin's-hall-hill, a vast Stationary Roman Camp. On two
Sides the Precipice is dreadfully steep. The Earl of Winchelsea has a Brass
Alexander Severus found here; on the Reverse, Jupiter fulminans. On the West
Side, at Top of the Hill, without the Camp, is a round Pit full of good
Spring Water, always to the Brim (but never overflowing) in the dryest Summers;
which at those Seasons is of the greatest Service to the Country round; and
Thousands of Cattle are every Day driven thither, from a considerable Distance,
to drink. I am informed, there is such another upon the Top of Chute-hill,
South-east from hence, very high, and no other Water within some Miles of it.
The Prospect from Martin's-hall is exceeding fine.

At Farlo, not far from Clarendon-Park, was the Birthplace of Sir Stephen Fox,
and where the Town, sharing in his good Fortune, shows several Marks of his
Bounty; as particularly the building a New Church from the Foundation, and
getting an Act of Parliament passed, for making it Parochial, it being but a
Chapel of Ease before to an adjoining Parish: also Sir Stephen built and
endowed an Almshouse here for Six poor Women, with a Master and a Free School.
The Master is to be a Clergyman, and to officiate in the Church, which,
including the School, is a very good Maintenance.

I am now to pursue my first Design, and shall take the West Part of Wiltshire
in my Return, where are several Things to be still taken notice of. In the mean
time I went on to Langbro', a fine Seat of my Lord Colerain, which is very well
kept.

From hence in my Way to the Seaside I came to New-Forest, of which I have
said something already with relation to the great Extent of Ground; which lies
waste, and has a vast Quantity of large Timber.

This Part of the Country is a lasting Monument of the Conqueror's Tyranny and
Oppression, who laid it open and waste for a Forest, and for Game; for which
Purpose he unpeopled the Country, pulled down the Houses and the Churches of
several Parishes and Towns, and of abundance of Villages, turning the poor
People out of their Habitations and Possessions, for the sake of his Deer. The
same Histories likewise record, that Two of his own Sons, and particularly his
immediate Successor William Rufus, lost their Lives in this Forest; William
Rufus being shot with an Arrow directed at a Deer, which glancing on a Tree,
changed its Course, and striking the King full on the Breast, killed him. And
another Son, whilst in hot Pursuit of the Game, was caught up by the Boughs of
a Tree, and hanged like Absalom. These they relate as just Judgments of God on
the cruel Devastation made here by the Conqueror, and they still show the Tree
on which the Arrow glanced. In King Charles II's Time, the Tree was ordered to
be surrounded with a Pale, great Part of which is now fallen down; and whether
the Tree be really so old or not, is to me a great Question, the Action being
about 700 Years ago.

I cannot omit mentioning here a Proposal made some Years ago to the Lord
Treasurer Godolphin, for repeopling this Forest, which I can be more particular
in than any other Man, because I had the Honor to draw up the Scheme, and
argue it before that noble Lord, and some others who were principally concerned
at that time in bringing over, or rather providing for, when they were come
over, the poor Inhabitants of the Palatinate; a Thing in itself commendable;
but, as it was managed, made of no Benefit to England, and miserable to those
poor People.

Some Persons being ordered by the noble Lord abovementioned, to consider of
Measures how those poor People should be provided for, without Injury to the
Public, NEW FOREST in Hampshire was singled out to be the Place for them.

Here it was proposed to draw a great square Line, containing 4000 Acres of
Land, marking out Two large Highways or Roads through the Center, crossing both
Ways, so that there should be 1000 Acres in each Division, exclusive of the
Land contained in the said Cross-roads.

Then to single out 20 Men and their Families, who should be recommended as
honest industrious People, expert in, or at least capable of being instructed
in Husbandry. To each of these should be parcelled, but in equal Distributions,
200 Acres of this Land; so that the whole 4000 Acres should be distributed to
the said 20 Families, for which they should have no Rent to pay, and be liable
to no Taxes, but such as would provide for their own Sick or Poor, repairing
their own Roads, etc. This Exemption to continue for 20 Years, and then to pay
each 50 l. a Year to the Crown.

To each of these Families, it was proposed to advance 200 l. in ready Money,
as a Stock to set them to work, and to hire and pay Laborers, to enclose,
clear, and cure the Land; which it was supposed, the first Year, could not be
so much to their Advantage as following Years, allowing them Timber out of the
Forest to build themselves Houses and Barns, Sheds and Offices, as they should
have Occasion; also for Carts, Wagons, Ploughs, Harrows, and the like
necessary Things.

These 20 Families would, by the Consequence of their own Settlements, employ
and maintain such a Proportion of others of their own People, that the whole
Number of Palatines would have been provided for, had they been many more than
they were, and that without being any Burden upon, or Injury to the People of
England; on the contrary, they would have been an Advantage, and an Addition of
Wealth and Strength to the Nation, and to the Country in particular, where they
should be thus seated.

Two Things would have been answered by the Execution of this Scheme; viz. 1.
That the annual Rent to be received for all those Lands after 20 Years, would
abundantly pay the Public for the first Disburses, which would amount to
80,000 l. that Rent being then to amount to 40,000 l. per Annum. 2. More Money
than would have done this, was thrown away upon them here, to keep them in
Suspense, and afterward starve them; sending them a begging all over the
Nation, and shipping them off to perish in other Countries.


The Spot where the Design was laid out, was near Lindhurst, in the Road from
Rumsey to Lymington: whither I now directed my Course.

Lymington is a little, but populous Seaport, standing opposite to the Isle of
Wight, in the narrow Part of the Straight, which Ships sometimes pass through in
fair Weather, called the Needles; and right against the ancient Town of
South-Yarmouth, in that Isle which I have mentioned before. This Town of
Lymington is chiefly noted for making excellent Salt; from whence all these
South Parts of England are supplied, as well by Water as Land-carriage.

From hence are but few Towns on the Seacoast West, though several considerable
Rivers empty themselves into the Sea; nor are there any Harbors or Seaports
of Note, except Pool. As for Christ-church, though it stands at the Mouth of the
Avon, which, as I have said, comes down from Salisbury, and brings with it all
the Waters of South and East Parts of Wiltshire, and receives also the Stour
and Piddle, Two Dorsetshire Rivers, which bring with them all the Waters of the
North Part of Dorsetshire; yet it is a very inconsiderable poor Place, scarce
worth seeing, and less worth mentioning in this Account. But here I will close
this my fifth Letter, with assuring you, that I am

Yours, etc.

LETTER VI. CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION of the County of DORSET, Part of
SOMERSETSHIRE, DEVONSHIRE, CORNWALL, etc.
SIR,
^ NOW enter into the County of Dorset; and first I rode North-west into it, to
see the ancient Town of Wimburn, or Wimburnminster. It stands (...) large
extended fertile Vale, like a M^^^ow, with much Wood about it. (...) with Fish.
Here was a Nunnery (...) Year 712, by Cuthberga, Sister to King (...). The
Church is a very great one, ancient, and well built, with a very firm strong
square Tower, (...) high; but was, without doubt, much (...) it stood a most
ex^^^^^ (...) may be cre^^^^, (...) its Situation (...) question, (...).

In this Church are the Monuments of several noble Families, and of King
Etheldred, who was slain in Battle by the Danes. He was a Prince famed for
Piety and Religion, and, according to the Zeal of those Times, was esteemed a
Martyr; because he died fighting for his Religion and his Country, against the
Pagan Danes. The Inscription upon his Grave is preserved, and has been
carefully repaired so as easily to be read, and is as follows: In hoc loco
quiescit Corpus S. Etheldredi, Regis West Saxonum, Martyris, qui Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXII. xxiii. Aprilis, per Manus Danorum Paganorum Occubuit. That is, Here
rests the Body of St. Etheldred, King of the West Saxons, and Martyr, who fell
by the Hands of the Pagan Danes, in the Year of our Lord 872, the 23d of April.

Here also are the Monuments of the great Marchioness of Exeter, Mother of
Edward Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, and last of the Family of Courtneys, who
enjoyed that Honor; as also of John de Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, and his
Wife, Grandmother of King Henry VII. by her Daughter Margaret Countess of
Richmond.

This last Lady I mention, because she was Foundress of a very fine
Free School, which has since been enlarged, and had a new Benefactress in Queen
Elizabeth, who augmented the Stipend, and annexed it to the Foundation. The
famous Cardinal Pool was Dean of this Church before his Exaltation.

The Inhabitants of Wimburnminster are numerous, but poor, and chiefly
maintained by the Manufacture of knitting Stockens, which employs great Part of
the County of Dorset, of which this is the first Town Eastward.

Wimbourn St. Giles's, in this Neighborhood, is a very handsome Seat belonging
to the Earl of Shaftesbury.

From hence I went to Ringwood, upon the River Avon, over a deep sandy Moor.
It Is a large thriving Place, full of good new Brick Houses, seated by the Side
of a great watery Valley, the River dividing itself into several Streams, and
frequently overflowing large Quantities of the Meadow. Here they deal pretty
much in Leather, Stockens, Druggets, and narrow Cloth.

South of Wimburn, over a sandy, wild and barren Country, we came to Pool, a
considerable Seaport, and indeed the most considerable in all this Part of
England; for here I found some Ships, some Merchants, and some Trade;
especially here was a good Number of Ships fitted out every Year to the
Newfoundland Fishing, in which the Pool Men have been particularly successful
for many Years past.

The Town sits in the Bottom of a great Bay, or Inlet of the Sea, which,
entering at one narrow Mouth, opens to a great Breadth within the Entrance, and
comes up to the very Shore of this Town; it runs also West up almost to
Warcham, a little below which it receives the Froom and Piddle, the Two
principal Rivers of the County.

This Place is famous for the best and biggest Oysters in all this Part of
England, which the People of Pool pretend to be famous for pickling; and they
are barrell'd up here, and sent not only to London, but to the West Indies, and
to Spain, Italy, and other Parts. It Is observed, more Pearl are found in the
Pool Oysters, and larger, than in any others in England.

As the Entrance into this large Bay is narrow, so it is made narrower by an
Island called Branksey, which lying in the very Mouth of the Passage, divides
it into two, and where there is an old Castle, called Branksey Castle, built to
defend the Entrance, and was of no small Advantage to the Trade of this Port,
in the time of the late War with France.

Wareham has been a Roman Town. There has been a Castle by the Waterside, West
of the Bridge, built by King William I. perhaps upon the Roman. It Is an old
Corporation, now decayed, the Sands obstructing the Passage of the Vessels. And
Pool being better seated, from a Fisher-Town, has risen to be a rich Seaport.
They say here have been a Mint, and many Parish-Churches, of which Three
remain. I saw a ruinous Religious House, as I passed by the River From. This
Haven is of vast Extent, like a Sea, having a narrow Entry. Two Rocks about
Corf-Castle have an odd Appearance hence.

South of Wareham, and between the Bay I have mentioned, and the Sea, lies a
large Track of Land, which being surrounded by the Sea, except on one Side, is
called an Island, though it is really more properly a Peninsula. This Track of
Land is better inhabited than the Sea Coast of this West End of Dorsetshire
generally is, and the Manufacture of Stockens is carried on there also. It is
called The Isle of Purbeck, and has in the middle of it a large Market Town,
called Corf; and from the famous Castle there, the whole Town is now called
Corf-Castle.

This Part of the Country is eminent for vast Quarries of Stone, which is cut
out flat, and used in London in great Quantities, for paving Court-yards,
Alleys, Avenues to Houses, Kitchens, Foot-ways on the Sides of the
High-streets, and the like; and is very profitable to the Place, as also in the
Number of Shipping employed in bringing it to London. There are also several
Rocks of very good Marble, only that the Veins in the Stone are not black and
white, as the Italian, but gray, red, and other Colors. It is also noted for
excellent Tobacco-pipe Clay, sold at London for Thirty Shillings per Ton.

From hence to Weymouth we rode in View of the Sea. The Country is open, and in
some respects pleasant, but not like the Northern Parts of the Country, which
are all fine Carpet Ground, and the Herbage so sweet, that their Sheep are
esteemed the best in England, and their Wool extremely fine.

From hence we turned up to Dorchester, the County Town. It is regular and
clean. The Isening-s^reet enters it by the North of Winterburn at West-gate.
This is by the ignorant Country People referred to the Work of the Devil, who,
they say, cast it up in a Night's time. The Foundations of the ancient Roman
Wall appear qui^e round the Town; but Eastward a Street is built upon it, and
the Ditch filled up: it is still called The Walls; for that way the Town is
swelled out into a considerable Village, with a Church, and handsome Tower,
named Fordington or Farington. There are Three other Churches in the Town, and
the Streets are wide and handsome. On the South and West Side, without the
Walls, a handsome Walk of Trees is planted, looking pleasantly into the
Country; though being common S^camores, they are inconvenient by harboring
Flies. The Banks of the River here are steep; for the Town stands on high
Ground. Beyond the River are Meadows, and warm sandy Lands; on this Side, the
fine chalky Downs, pleasant for riding, and profitable in excellent Grain. The
Air must needs be wholesome, the Climate warm, and a sufficient Distance from
the Sea. The People of Fordington rose in Arms, and prevented the Farmers from
levelling a great Barrow. The late Rev. Mr. Place, known for his Philosophical
Works, lived here, and possessed a great Quantity of Roman Coins, called here
Dorn-money, or King Dor's Money. Near this Place is a noble Roman Amphitheatre.
The Vulgar call it Maumbury; but have no Notion of its Purpose, though it is a
common Excursion for the Inhabitants; and the Terrace on the Top is a noted
Place of Rendezvous, affording an agreeable circular Walk, a Prospect of the
Town, and wide Plains of Corn Fields all around.

Dorchester is a regular Town, with handsome wide Streets, but the Houses, though
built of Stone, are old and low. It is kept very clean, by reason of its high
Situation, and the River on which it is situated.

The Inhabitants Care in setting the able Poor to work, and relieving the Aged
and Impotent, is highly praiseworthy. And Sir Josiah Child, in his Treatise on
Trade, recommends their Example as worthy to be followed by other Places. It is
famous also for excellent Beer.

On the pleasant Downs round this Town, they told me, there were 600,000 Sheep
fed within Six Miles of the Town every way, which is 12 Miles in Diameter, and
36 Miles in Circumference; and when I viewed the Country round, I confess I
could not but incline to believe it.

It is observable of these Sheep, that they are exceedingly fruitful; and the
Ewes generally bringing Two Lambs, they are for that Reason bought by all the
Farmers through the East Part of England, who come to Burford Fair in this County
for that Purpose; and carry them into Kent and Surrey Eastward, and into
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Oxfordshire North. Even our Banstead-Downs
in Surrey, so famed for good Mut^on, is supplied from this Place. The Herbage
of these Downs is full of the most aromatic Plants, such as nourish the Sheep
to a great Degree, and the Sheeps Dung again nourishes that; so that the
Valleys are rendered extremely fruitful by the washing of the Water in hasty
Showers from off these Hills.

From Dorchester it is Six Miles to the Seaside South, and the Ocean in View
almost all the Way: The first Towns we come to are Weymouth and Melcomb, two
Towns lying at the Mouth of a little Rivulet, called The Wey, for it scarce
deserves the Name of a River: however, the Entrance makes a very good, though
small Harbor, and they are joined by a wooden Bridge, so that nothing but the
Harbor parts them; yet they are separate Corporations, and choose each of them
Two Members of Parliament.

Weymouth is a sweet, clean, agreeable Town, (considering its low Situation)
and close to the Sea: it is well built, and has a great many substantial
Merchants in it, who drive a considerable Trade, and have a great Number of
Ships belonging to the Town: they carry on, in time of Peace, a Trade with
France; but besides this, they trade also to Portugal, Spain, Newfoundland, and
Virginia; and have a large Correspondence up in the Country for the Consumption
of their Returns. The Wine and Newfoundland Trade are both considerable here;
and they have a Custom-house and good Key.

Without the Harbor is an old Castle, called Sandfoot Castle; and over against
them is Portland Castle, situated in the Isle of that Name, and the Road called
Portland Road, which affords a safe Harbor for Ships in bad Weather.

From this Isle of Portland comes our best and whitest Freestone, with which
the Cathedral of St. Paul's, the Monument, and all the public Edifices in the
City of London, are chiefly built; and the Quarries whence these Stones are
dug, are well worth the Observation of a Traveller.

The Island is indeed little more than one continued Rock of Freestone, about
Seven Miles in Compass, and the Height of the Land is such, that from this
Island they see, in clear Weather, above half over the Chanel to France, though
here it is very broad. The Sea off this Island, and especially to the West of
it, is counted the most dangerous Part of the British Chanel. Due South, there
is almost a continued Disturbance in the Waters, by reason of what they call
Two Tides meeting; which I take to be no more than the Sets of the Currents
from the French Coast, and from the English Shore: this they call Portland
Race; and several Ships, not aware of these Currents, have been embay'd to the
West of Portland, and driven on Shore on the Beach, (of which I shall speak
presently) where they have been lost.

To prevent this Danger, and guide the Mariner in these Distresses, they have
set up Two Light-houses on the Two Points of that Island, which are very useful
and serviceable to Ships.

This Island, though seemingly miserable, and thinly inhabited, yet the
Inhabitants being almost all Stone-cutters, we found there were no very poor
People among them; and when they collected Money for the rebuilding St. Paul's,
they got more in this Island than in the great Town of Dorchester.

Though Portland stands a League from the main Land of Britain, yet it is almost
joined by a prodigious Riff of Beach, that is to say, of small Stones cast up
by the Sea, which runs from the Island so near the Shore of England, that they
ferry over with a Boat and a Rope, the Water not being above half a
Stone's-throw over; and the said Riff of Beach ending, as it were, at that
Inlet of Water, turns away West, and runs parallel with the Shore quite to
Abbotsbury, a Town about Seven Miles beyond Weymouth.

I name this to explain what I said before, of Ships being embay'd and lost
here: this is when, coming from the Westward, they omit to keep a good Offing,
or are taken short by contrary Winds, and cannot weather the high Land of
Portland; but are driven between Portland and the main Land, and run on Shore
on that vast Beach.

On the Inside of this Beach, and between it and the Land, is the said Inlet of
Water, which they ferry over, as above, to pass and repass to and from
Portland. This Inlet opens at about Two Miles West, grows very broad, and makes
a kind of Lake within the Land of a Mile and a half broad, and near Three Miles
in Length, the Breadth unequal. At the farthest End West of this Water is a
large Decoy, and the Verge of the Water well grown with Wood, and proper Groves
of Trees for Cover for the Fowl. In the open Lake, or broad Part, is a
continual Assembly of Swans: here they live, feed and breed; and the Number of
them is such, that, I believe, I did not see so few as 7 or 8000. We saw
several of them upon the Wing, very high in the Air; whence we supposed, they
flew over the Riff of Beach, which parts the Lake from the Sea, to feed on the
Shores.

From this Decoy West, the Lake narrows, and at last almost closes, till the
Beach joins the Shore; and so Portland may be said not to be an Island, but
Part of the Continent. And now we came to Abbotsbury, a Town anciently famous
for a great Monastery, and now eminent for nothing but its Ruins.

From hence we went on to Bridport, a pretty large, but not well built
Corporation Town on the Sea Shore: here we saw Boats all the way on the Shore
fishing for Mackerel, which they take in the easiest manner imaginable, and in
such prodigious Plenty, that there has been a Watch set to prevent Farmers
dunging their Land with them, which, it was thought, might be apt to infect the
Air.

In the Year 1722 an Act passed for restoring and rebuilding the Haven and
Piers of Bridport, in order to bring it to its ancient flourishing State; for
heretofore it was a Place of great Trade and Commerce; but by reason of a great
Sickness, which formerly swept away the greatest Part of its most wealthy
Inhabitants, and by other Accidents, the Haven became neglected, and choked
with Sands; the Piers fell to Ruin, and the Town, of consequence, to Decay; so
that there was no Security for Ships that happened to be driven by Stress of
Weather into the deep and dangerous Bay, wherein the Haven formerly was, which
occasioned frequent Shipwrecks. The Act therefore authorizes the Bailiffs and
Burgesses of Bridport to levy certain Tolls and Duties on diverse Merchandises,
etc. in order to restore the said Piers and Harbor.

Bridport was formerly the only Place for twisting of Ropes for the Royal Navy:
and it is still used for that Purpose, the neighboring Lands yielding plenty
of Hemp.

From Bridport we came to Lyme, a Town particularly made famous by the Landing
of the Duke of Monmouth, June 11. 1685, in the Time of King James II. with only
Twelve Men. Many of his Party were afterward put to Death on the Spot, and
their Limbs hung up in the Town. Before that Time the Duke of Tuscany set
Footing here in his Tour to England.

This is called Lyme-Regis: it is a Town of good Figure, and has in it several
eminent Merchants, who carry on a considerable Trade to France, Spain,
Newfoundland, and the Streights; and though they have neither Creek or Bay, Road
or River, they have a good Harbor; and such as is not in all Britain besides,
if in the World.

It is a massy Pile of Building, consisting of high and thick Walls of Stone,
raised, at first, with all the Methods that Art could devise, and maintained
now with very little Difficulty: the Walls are raised in the main Sea, at a
good Distance from the Shore. It consists of one main and solid Wall of Stone,
large enough for Carts and Carriages to pass on the Top, and to admit Houses
and Warehouses to be built on it; so that it is broad as a Street. Opposite to
this, but farther into the Sea, is another Wall of the same Workmanship, which
crosses the End of the first, and comes about with a Tail, parallel to that.

Between the Point of the first or main Wall, is the Entrance into the Port;
and the second or opposite Wall breaking the Violence of the Sea from the
Entrance, the Ships go into the Basin, and ride there as secure as in a
Mill-pond, or Wet-dock.

This Work is called the Cobb: the Custom-house Officers have a Lodge and
Warehouse upon it. It might be strengthened with a Fort, and the Walls
themselves are firm enough to carry what Guns they please to plant upon it; but
they did not seem to think it needful: and as the Shore is convenient for
Batteries, they have some Guns planted in proper Places, for the Defense of the
Cobb, and the Town.

This Town is under the Government of a Mayor and Aldermen, and may pass for a
Place of Wealth, considering the Bigness of it. Here we found the Merchants
began to trade in the Pilchard Fishing, though not to so considerable a Degree as
they do farther West; the Pilchards seldom coming up so high Eastward as
Portland, and not very often so high as Lyme.

I visited from hence some of the Towns in the North-west Part of this Country,
as Blandford, on the River Stour, in the Road between Salisbury and Dorchester,
a handsome well built Town, pleasantly seated in a Flexure of the River, before
charming Meadows, and rich Lands. Wood thrives exceedingly here. Indeed this
County is a fine Variety of Downs, Woods, Lawns, Arable and Pasture Land, rich
Valleys, and an excellent Air. The dry Easterly Winds, the cold Northern, and
the Western Moisture, are tempered by the warm Southern saline Breezes, wasted
hither from the Ocean. But Blandford is chiefly famous for making the finest
Bonelace in England, where they showed me, in my first Visit to it, some so
exquisitely fine, as I think I never saw better in Flanders, France, or Italy,
and which they said they rated at above 30 l. Sterling a Yard.

This was the State and the Trade of the Town, when I was there in my first
Journey: but June 4. 1731, the whole Town, except Twenty-six Houses, was
consumed by Fire, together with the Church. The Consternation of the People was
so great, and the Fire so furious, that few saved any Goods.

An Act passed in 1732, for the better and more easy Rebuilding of this Town,
and for determining Differences touching Houses and Buildings burnt down or
demolished therein; and as several wise Regulations were made by it, Blandford
now makes a much better Appearance than ever.

From Blandford I went West to Stourbridge, which, and the Country round, is
employed in the Manufacture of Stockens; it was once famous for making the
finest, best, and highest-pric'd knit Stockens in England; but that Trade is
much decayed, by the Increase of the Knitting-stocken Engine, or Frame. which
has destroyed the Hand Knitting-trade for fine Stockens through the whole
Kingdom, of which I shall speak in another Place.

From hence I came to Shireburn, a large and populous Town, with One Collegiate
or Conventual Church, and may justly claim to have more Inhabitants in it than
any Town in Dorsetshire, though it is neither the County Town, nor sends Members
to Parliament. It was once a Bishop's See, which was removed to Salisbury. The
Church is still a Reverend Pile, and shows the Face of great Antiquity. Here
begins the Wiltshire Medley Clothing, though this Town be in Dorsetshire; of
which I shall speak at large in its Place.

Shaftesbury is also on the Edge of this County, adjoining to Wiltshire and
Dorsetshire, being Fourteen Miles from Salisbury, over that fine Down or Carpet
Ground, called Salisbury-plain. It is not an extraordinary Town; but situated
upon the Top of a high Hill, and which closes the Plain or Downs, and whence a
new Scene is presented, ( viz.) a Prospect of Somerset and Wiltshire, where
it is all enclosed, and grown with Woods, Forests, and planted Hedge-Rows; the
Country rich, fertile and populous, the Towns and Houses standing thick, and
being large and full of Inhabitants, and those Inhabitants fully employed in
the richest and most valuable Manufacture in the World, ( viz.) the English
Clothing, as well the Medley, or mixed Clothing, as Whites, both for the Home
and foreign Trade; on which I shall be more particular in my Return through the
West and North Part of Wiltshire.

Shaftesbury has however lately received some Improvements from the Generosity
of a neighboring Gentleman, and particularly in a fine Plantation on the Top
of Park-Hill; which he was so kind as to indulge the Inhabitants with for a
Place of Walking and Diversion; but attempting, on the Strength of his good
Offices to the Town, to prescribe to them in the Choice of a Member of
Parliament, he has not met with the grateful Return he might have expected,
Violence having been done to the very Plantation he had so generously devoted
to the public Service and Pleasure of the Inhabitants.

In my Return to my Western Progress, I passed some little Part of
Somersetshire, as through Evil, or Yeovil, upon the River Ivil; in going to which
we descend a long steep Hill, called Babylon-hill; but from what Original, I
could find none of the Country People able to inform me.

Northward upon an high sandy Hill, by the Bank of the River Ivel, is a Roman
Camp called Chesterton; under which lies the Town of Sandy, the Salinae of the
Romans, where abundance of Roman and British Antiquities have been found, and
immense Quantities of Coins.

Yeovil is a Market Town of good Resort, and some little Clothing is carried
on, in and near it. Its main Manufacture at this Time is Gloves. It deals also
in Corn, Cheese, Hemp, and all Sorts of Provisions.

It cannot pass my Observation here, that when we are come this Length from
London, the Dialect of the English Tongue, or the Country way of expressing
themselves, is not easily understood. It is true, that it is so in many Parts
of England besides, but in none in so gross a Degree as in this Part. As this
Way of boorish Speech is in Ireland called the Brogue upon the Tongue, so here
it is named Jouring. It is not possible to explain this fully by Writing,
because the Difference is not so much in the Orthography, as in the Tone and
Accent; their abridging the Speech, Cham, for I am; Chill, for I will; Don, for
do on, or put on; and Doff, for do off, or put off; and the like.

From Evil or Yeovil we came to Crookorn, thence to Chard, which immediately
brought me into Devonshire.

It may not be unacceptable here to insert a general Description of this large
County, which may convey to the Reader some Idea of the Nature of the Soil, its
Productions, and the Method of Improvement as well as the Manufactures, and
Merchandises, on which the Trading Part of the Inhabitants subsist.

To begin then: The Western Part of the County bordering on Cornwall, viz.
about Tavystock, Briddestow, Oakhampton, Holsworthy, Bideford, Great
Torrington, Chulmleigh, Chagford, Moreton, Hampsted, and all round the Skirts
of Dartmore, as well as that large Forest itself, consists of a very coarse,
moory, or fenny Soil, very barren in its Nature; in some Places productive of
nothing but a dwarf Kind of Furze of little or no Value. At other Places grow
nothing but Rushes, or a coarse, four Kind of Pasturage, which the Cattle will
not feed upon; and therefore it dries up and withers into a Sedge. The Soil
here is generally a stiff Clay, through which the Water cannot soak away: this
renders it very unhealthy, especially to Sheep, which in those Parts are of a
small Kind, and very subject to the Rot, which (in wet Seasons especially)
destroys them in great Numbers: and what adds to the Malady is, that neither
the Industry of the Husbandman (for which this County is deservely famous) nor
any Compost that has yet been found out, will to any purpose cure this
Sterility.

The principal, and indeed the only profitable Return that the Inhabitants can
make out of those Lands, is by breeding Black Cattle, for which they are very
well adapted; for here are bred those fine Oxen, in great Numbers, which, by
the Drovers of Somersetshire, and thereabouts, are brought up, and in their
flat Feeding Lands, betwixt Bridge-water and Wells, (which I have seen almost
covered with them) fattened fit for Smithfield Market, where they drive, and
sell them to the Londoners, who have not so good Beef from any other Part of
the Kingdom.

The Northern Parts of the County are of a quite different Nature from the
former; for this generally consists of a dry healthy Soil, especially about
Ilfordcombe, South Moulton, Dulverton, and all along the Brim of the Forest of
Exmore. Those Downs are far from being a luxuriant Feeding, but are very good
Grazing for Sheep; and being well dressed with Lime, (which is brought over
hither by Water from Wales) Dung, Sand, and other Compost, manured by the
indefatigable Labor of the Inhabitants, produce tolerable Crops of Corn. I say
tolerable ones; for though they far exceed the Productions in Dorset, Wilts,
Hants, etc. (where Sluggishness so far prevails as to leave Dame Nature
destitute of the least human Assistance) the Fertility is by no means
comparable to that of the Eastern and Middle Parts of the County, in the former
of which a rich Marl, in some Parts, and a fertile, sandy Soil in others; and
in the latter a fat, strong Soil, of a deep-red Color, intermixed with Veins
of different Kinds of Loam, produce very great Crops of Corn, and Pease of the
best Kind, not to be excelled in the whole Island. Neither does it fall behind
in Meadow Ground, and Pasturage, Clover, Eaver, and Trefoil Grass, and Turnips;
as is evident to a Person who goes through any of the Markets, and beholds the
fine, well-fed Beef and Mutton, with which they are plentifully stored.

About Teingmouth, Dartmouth, Totnes, Modbury, Plymouth, Ashburton, and all the
South Parts of the County, (called the South-Hams) the Lands are generally of a
different Kind from any of the former; in most Places very good for Arable and
Pasture, but especially for Cider Fruits. A great Part of this large Track lies
on a Stratum of Marble, which the Inhabitants break up, and burn into Lime; and
therewith dress their Lands, to their very great Improvement. Neither is this
all the Advantage they make of those Quarries; for in many of them is found
Stone, which for its Hardness, Soundness, and beautiful Veinings, rivals the
best Italian Marbles, and falls very little, if any thing, short of them in
Luster. Great Quantities of this Stone are sent to London, and other Places,
where they are wrought up for the noblest Purposes. At other Places on this
South-coast, are Quarries of Slate, for covering Houses, and this likewise of
the best Kind; which are not only fetched away by Land-carriage, to the
Distance of Ten, Twelve, and Sixteen Miles, but great Quantities of them are
sent Coast-wise, to all the Towns on the British Shore; and exported to
Holland, Flanders, and other Places beyond Sea.

The Reader will not, by this Description, conclude that the Lands in any Part
of the County are all one and the same Kind; Downs, Fens, Rocks, and
Wood-grounds, are interspersed among the best Lands; as there are also some
good Arable and Pasture, amongst the most desolate and barren; and whoever
looks round him in his own Situation, will know in what Sense to take this
general Description. To proceed:

At diverse Places are found large Quantities of very good Oak Timber, as well
as Ash, Elm, Beech, etc. and such of it as grows in Places whence it can be
conveyed either by Land or Water-carriage, to Plymouth Dock, are there served
in for the Use of his Majesty's Navy.

Coppice-wood is so very plenty, that although the Woollen Manufacturers take off
great Quantities in Charcoal, and yet greater Quantities are expended in common
Firing, (there being no Coal raised in this County) yet the Price is so low,
that the Lands where it thrives well, will not generally produce more than 5 s.
per Acre (communibus annis). The Lands in Devonshire, save only the Forest of
Dartmore, Hallden-hill, and some Heaths, Moors, and coarse Downs of no very
large Extent, (which, for the most part, are not capable of Improvement, not
even by Devonshire Husbandry) are divided into small Enclosures, and (in Places
where any Shrubs will grow) by quickset Hedges, banked up Four or Five Feet
high with Earth. And as the Enclosures are small, so are the Farms or Tenements
in these Parts, even to a very manifest Inconvenience: for the general Method
here is, for Gentlemen to lease out the Tenements of their Manors for 99 Years,
determinable on Three Lives; taking Fines for such Leases, and reserving no
more than about One Shilling in the Pound of the yearly Value.

By this means, Men of small Fortunes find an Opportunity to lay out the little
Money they have, in what they call Purchasing an Estate, which likewise serves
for a Settlement upon a Wife, for the Money she brings. Hence a Family comes
on, and craves a Maintenance out of a Farm of perhaps 20 l. a Year; which
surely can produce but a very poor one: whereas 2 or 300 l. sunk in this
Purchase, would have enabled him to manage a Farm of 200 l. a Year; out of
which, by Industry and good Management, the Family might not only live in a
more plentiful manner, the Children be better educated, and instructed to
understand the Business of the Farm; but Money likewise laid up every Year
toward setting them out in the same Method of living. This I take to be the
principal Cause of the Poverty and Hardship that appears in Country Places, and
of the Difficulty of getting a good Tenant at Rack-rent, for any Farm whose
Value exceeds 100 l. a Year.

I should have mentioned, that in my Way to Chard, I passed through Axminster, a
pretty considerable Market Town, and the first in the County of Devon. The
great Western Road to London goes through this Town. Here my Curiosity led me to
go into the Church, and view the Monuments of the Saxon Princes (or rather the
Bishop of Sherburne and Two Dukes) who were slain at the Battle of Brunaburgh
in that Neighborhood, fought by King Athelstane with Seven Danish Princes;
over whom he obtained the Victory, in a Field thence called King's-field to
this Day. The Monuments of those Saxon Worthies were under Arches in the Walls
of the Church, Two of which have been lately filled up.

Here, in Memory of the Victory, King Athelstane founded a Minster for Seven
Priests, which in After-ages were reduced to Two; for whom a Portion of Land
was allotted called Priest-aller, which, with the Parsonage, now belongs to Two
Prebendaries of the Church of York. The Manor continued in the Crown till the
Reign of King John, who gave it to the Lord Brewer, a Daughter and Coheir of
which Family (Alicia) brought it in Marriage to Lord Mobun of Dunstar, whose
Posterity, with Consent of King Henry III. Anno Gratiae, 1246. 8. Id. Jan.
regnant. H. Fill. Johann. Reginaldus Mohun filius Reginaldi and Aliciae Brewer
fundavit Abbatiam de Newnham in Manner. de Axminster in Com. Devon. Abbot Gill,
the 8th of March, 31 Hen. VIII. surrendered it to the King. The yearly Value,
at that time, was 227 l. 7 s. 7 d.

Ford Abbey is in this Neighborhood, heretofore a stately Fabric, lofty and
very magnificent, adorned with curious Carvings and Embellishments of the
Gothic kind, some of whose Beauties still remain, as may be seen in a modern
Print thereof, published by Mr. Buck. It was first founded by Adeliza, Daughter
of Baldwin de Brioniis, Baron of Oakhampton, Anno 1140, and dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, for Cistercian Monks: At the Surrender it was valued at 381 l. 10
s. 8 d. Halfpenny, yearly.

Near Axminster lies Kilmington, quasi Kill-men-town, from the great Slaughter
there made at the Battle beforementioned; and Membury, i. e. Maim-burgh,
whither the Maimed in that Battle were sent to be relieved; now famous for the
best Devonshire Cheese.

At Northleigh, or rather, at Uplime, (which Manor was formerly the Inheritance
of the Abbey of Glastonbury) was born Mr. Nathanael Carpenter, the Author of
the Treatise of Geography, and diverse others Tracts that bear his Name.

Cullyford, in this Neighborhood, was the Habitation of Sir Thomas Gates, who
in 1609, bound to Virginia, (of which Colony he was then made Governor) was in
a violent Tempest shipwrecked, and with Sir George Summers cast on Shore, by
which Accident they were made the first Possessors of the Island of Bermudas,
or Summer Island.

This Track abounds with Lands, which were formerly appropriated to Churches
and Religious Houses; viz. at Smallridge, Axmouth, Farwood, Salcombe,
Dunkerwell, (a Monastery of Cistercian Monks) Sidbury, Sidmouth, Branscombe,
Monketon, Luppit, Awlscombe, and at diverse other Places; which from the
Richness of the Soil makes good the Observation, That the Religious of those
Days, made it their chief Endeavor to possess themselves of the best Things of
this World.

At Tidwell, alias Tideswell, is a Pond or Pool, which boils up like that of
the same Name at Weeden, in Derbyshire. The same Road I was before in, brought
me from Axminster to Honiton.

This is a large and beautiful Market Town, very populous and well built; and
is so very remarkably paved with small Pebbles, that on both Sides the Way a
little Chanel is left shouldered up; so that it holds a small Stream of fine
clear running Water, with a little square Dipping-place left at every Door; so
that every Family in the Town has a clear clean running Rivulet (as it may be
called) just at their own Door; and this is much finer, pleasanter, and more
agreeable to look on, than that at Salisbury, which they so much boast of.

Here we see the first of the Serge-manufacture of Devonshire; a Trade too
great to be described in Miniature. It takes up this whole County, which is the
largest and most populous in England, Yorkshire excepted; but Devonshire is so
full of great Towns, and those Towns so full of People, and those People so
universally employed in Trade and Manufactures, that it cannot be equaled in
England, nor perhaps in Europe.

Honiton stands in the best and pleasantest Part of the whole County; and I
cannot but recommend it to Gentlemen who travel this Road, that if they observe
the Prospect at Honiton for half a Mile, till they come down the Hill, and to
the very Entrance into Honiton, the View of the Country is the most beautiful
Landscape in the World, and I do not remember the like in any one Place in
England. It Is observable, that the Market of this Town was kept originally on
the Sunday, till it was changed by the Direction of King John. This Town is now
much employed in the Trade of Lace-making.

On the Road from Honiton they have a beautiful Prospect almost all the Way to
Exeter, which is 12 Miles.

On the Left Hand of this Road lies the Town of St. Mary Ottery, so called, as
some say, from the River Otter, and that from the Otters found formerly in it.
This Town was given by King Edward the Confessor to the Church of St. Mary at
Roan in Normandy; but was afterward bought by Grandison, Bishop of Exeter, who
made of it a Quarter College in 10 Edward III. and therein placed secular
Priests, with other Ministers, to whom he gave the whole Manor, Parish, Tithes,
Fines, Spiritual Profits, etc. which amounted to 304 l. 2 s. 10 s. yearly.

Bicton, formerly Bicheton, was given by William the Conqueror, to one of his
Servants, called William Porto. It afterward reverted to the Crown, and by
Henry I. was given to one John Janitor, so called from his Office; for by his
Tenure, he was to keep the Prison for this County, by which Service it is held
to this Day, by the worthy Owner thereof Henry Roll, Esquire who is at this time
Knight of this Shire. His Ancestor, Sir Henry Roll, Esquire had it by Marriage
with Anne, the Daughter of Sir Thomas Dennis, to whose Family it came from the
beforementioned Janitor, through Ballister, Sackville, and Coplestone.

From hence we came to Exeter, the Capital of the County of Devon, a City which
has often changed its Name: for it was the Pen-Caer and Caer-Eske of the
Britons; the Augusta of the Romans; the Isca of Ptolemy; the Isca-Damnoniorum
of Antonine; the Exancester of the Saxons, which was afterward abreviated to
Excester and Exeter, from the great Number of Monks there. It had for some time
the Name of Monketon, but at length, from that large River which washes its
Walls, and bears the Name of Exe, (whether from the Forest of that Name where
it rises, or the Forest from it, I cannot determine) it retains that of Exeter,
which it seems now to be varying for Exon. It was first fortified with a Stone
Wall (which still remains entire) by King Athelstane; and was for some time the
Seat of the West Saxon Kings.

That the Romans were here, is highly probable, among other Proofs, from their
Coins, that have been dug up at diverse Places: in particular, a Gold one of
Nero at Exeter; one of Theodosius, near Barnstaple; several Silver ones of
Severus, and other Emperors; but especially from a great Quantity of them dug
up about Twenty Years since at Exeter, within the Close, together with the Urn
in which they were buried. I saw a great Number of those, some of which were of
Silver; but the greatest Part of them were a Mixture of Tin and Copper; they
had the Impression of Gordianus, Philippus, and other Emperors.

King Athelstane founded here a Monastery to St. Mary and St. Peter, for Monks
of the Order of St. Benedict. The Chapel of St. Mary now fitted up for a
Library, and furnished with a pretty great Number of Books, (which are but of
little Use, because placed in a very confused Order) is the very Eastermost
Part of the Cathedral, and was doubtless the first Beginning of that now
handsome Fabric. King Etheldred founded also, within the Close, a House for
Monks, and another for Nuns. Diverse other Religious Houses, as the Priories of
St. James, St. Nicolas, St. John Baptist; the Gray Friars, etc. were the Work
of After-ages.

The Walls are in pretty good Repair, and make a Walk round the City, with the
Pleasure of seeing a fine Country on opposite Hills, full of Wood, rich Ground,
Orchards, Villages, and Gentlemen's Houses. The Beauty of the Place consists of
one long Street, called High Street, broad and strait. The Houses are of a very
old, but good Model, spacious, commodious, and not inelegant. This Street is
full of Shops well furnished, and all sorts of Trades look brisk. The People
are industrious and courteous: the Fair Sex are truly such, as well as
numerous; their Complexion, and generally their Hair, of a fair Cast: they are
genteel, disengaged, of easy Carriage, and good Mien. There has been of late a
vast Increase of Buildings within and without the City. The Situation renders
it of Necessity clean, dry and airy. The Soil thither from Honyton is rather
sandy than stony; whence it must needs be very healthful. There are many
Booksellers. In Dr. Musgrave's Garden an Head of the Empress Julia Domna, of a
Colossean Size, was dug up. The Head-dress is suitable to those Times; and
neither the Manner nor Carving are despicable, though the Graver has not done it
Justice. It Is the noblest Relic of British Antiquity which we know of this
Sort: it is 21 Inches from the Top of the Attire to the Chin, and belonged to a
Statue of 12 Feet Proportion, originally set upon some Temple or Palace. There
is also an Inscription of Camillus.

This Country remarkably abounds with Persons afflicted with the Gout; which is
attributed to the Custom of marling the Lands with Lime, and the great Use of
poor, sweet Cider, especially among the meaner People.

In the Northern Angle of the City, and highest Ground, stands Rugemont-castle,
once the Residence of the West Saxon Monarchs, afterward of the Earls of
Cornwall. It Is of a squarish Figure, not very large, environed with a high
Wall, and deep Ditch. It has a Rampire of Earth parallel to the Top of the
Wall, forming a Terrace, which overlooks the City and Country. Here are the
Assize-house, and a Chapel.

The Bridge over the Exe is of great Length, and has Houses on both Sides, and
at both Ends, with a considerable Vacancy in the Middle. In the Guild Hall are
the Pictures of General Monk, and the Princess Henrietta-Maria.

The Bishop's See of this Western Diocese has had several Removes; for it was
first at Bodmyn for the County of Cornwall, and since that at Tawton for this
County. Afterward both were joined and placed at Crediton. And lastly, about
the Year 1050, King Edward the Confessor, and his Queen Edyth, inthroned
Leofricus (who had been Three Years Bishop of Crediton) into the Sea of Exeter,
in the following very solemn manner:

On the South Side of the high Altar, in the Cathedral, were erected (and are
there still to be seen perfect, as when first made) Three Seats, or Alcoves,
adorned with Gothic Carvings, to the Height of about 25 Feet, which are
supported with Brass Pillars; in the Middle of these was the Bishop installed,
by the King and Queen. The Form of Words thus:

I King Edward, taking Leofricke bye the Right ^aunde, and Edythe my Queen
bye the Least, do installe him the first and most famous Byschoppe of ^ron,
with a grate Desire of Abundance of Blessings to all such as shall further
and increase the same; but with a fearful and execrable Curse on all such as
shall diminish or take any thing from it. The Church was about 400 Years in
building, and very remarkable it is to behold the Uniformity with which it was
carried on; for nobody can discover the least Incongruity in the Parts; so much
is it like the Workmanship of one and the same Architect.

There are some ancient funeral Monuments in the Cathedral; but first, as
Matter of the greatest Antiquity, let me take notice of the Bishop's Throne in
the Choir, which, at the Dissolution of Episcopacy in King Charles I.'s Time
was (as a useless Thing) taken down; but whether the Workman employed to do it
were well affected to that Order, or else had some private Instructions from
somebody in Power, who foresaw that it would some time or other be of Use
again, certain it is, that a great deal of Care was taken of the Materials; for
it is now replaced, and every Part of it as sound and good as when first made.
The Gothic Carvings about the Canopy are at least 60 Feet high, and a vast
deal of good Workmanship (of that Kind) there is about it: it is, I believe,
coeval with the Sea.

The antique Monuments, as I before mentioned, to be seen here, are
particularly those of Humphry Bohun Earl of Hereford, Hugh Courtenay, Earl of
Devon, and his Lady; the Lord Chichester, Sir Peter Carew, Sir Thomas Speak,
Sir Richard Stapleton, Dowrich of Dowrich; the Bishops Leofricus, Stafford,
Branscombe, Oldham, Bradbridge, Lacy, Carry, and others, especially that of
Bishop Stapleton, the pious Founder of Exeter-college in Oxford; which Society,
in grateful Remembrance of their Benefactor, have lately repaired and
beautified his Monument, which in regard to some of the Carvings about it,
excess any thing I ever saw of so old a Date in the Gothic way.

The Altar-piece, done 100 Years ago, is a Representation of the Inside of the
Church in Perspective, an exquisitely fine Piece of Painting, and (excepting
only a little Injury it received from the Swords of the Saints Militant in the
great Rebellion) exceedingly well preserved. The fine painted Glass, of which
there is a great deal, underwent the Fury of the same pious Reformers, who
after they had made a forcible Entry, and "taken to themselves this House of
God in Possession," under the Umbrage of an Ordinance of Parliament of the 28th
of August 1643, broke out the best of those Paintings, and irretrievably ruined
all the Scripture History therein represented: neither was their Rage confined
to those brittle Materials; for the carved Figures of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Kings, etc. of which there were a great many, became Objects of their furious
Zeal and Ignorance; for there the maimed Bodies are now to be seen, some
without the Head; others have lost one or both Legs, or Arms, etc. all of them
some way or other mangled. And having by this means taken away what they feared
would draw them into (...), they divided this Cathedral by a Partition Wall
betwixt the Choir and the main Body of it, one of which Divisions was made use
of by an Independent, and the other by a Presbyterian Congregation.

And now, that I am taking notice of the Decorations of this magnificent Piece
of Antiquity, let me just mention, that in one of its Towers is a very large
Bell of about Sixty hundred Weight; and, in the other, a fine Ring of Ten large
ones. An Organ of very good Workmanship, and supported by a Tetra-style of very
beautiful Gothic Columns, stands where the beforementioned Partition Wall
did. The largest Pipes in this Instrument are of a great Length, and 15 Inches
in Diameter, which is said to be Two Inches more than those at Ulm, which is so
famed for its Largeness.

The well-finished Alcove of modern Work, for the Bishop, and the Pulpit, and
Pews of the like, in the Nave or Body of the Church, together with the neat
Marble Font, and the Two Suits of Hangings for the Choir, one of Tapestry, and
the other of Velvet, and the fine Suit of gilt Plate for the Communion Service,
is all that I shall further add about the grave and well-adapted Ornaments and
Furniture of this Temple, or House of God.

To complete this Description with a Circumstance which I think ought by no
means to be passed over: The Solemnity, Decency, and affecting Harmony, with
which the Service, and Music vocal and instrumental, is generally performed,
by the Choral-vicars, Organist, and Choristers; and (which is well worthy of
Imitation It Is no uncommon Thing to see 500 People here in a Morning, which is
at least five times as many as usually attend at St. Paul's, or any other Six
o'clock Chapel I was ever at: And it is commendable, that the Reader does not
here curtail the Morning Service, by leaving out any Part thereof, as in other
Places they do. Here are Two Morning Lectures preached weekly; viz. Tuesday and
Friday Mornings.
) the numerous Congregation, which, Winter and Summer, attend the daily Prayers
at Six in the Morning; and their grave and pious Behavior there; I say, all
this together, render this Cathedral a Glory to the Diocese, the Envy of other
Choirs, and the Admiration of Strangers.

Other antique Buildings of a public Nature are the Chapter House and
Cloisters, the Bishop's Palace, the Houses belonging to the Dean, the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and other Dignitaries of the Church; the Guildhall, the
Walls, and Gates of the City, with those of the Castle, and the Close; the
Hospital of St. John the Baptist, 20 Parish Churches within the City and
Liberties thereof, the Bridge over the River Exe, a large and very handsome
Conduit for Water, in the Center of the Four principal Streets; to which may be
added, some Chapels and Almshouses yet standing, and the Ruins of diverse
others; which are Monuments of the Piety of their Founders, and the Impiety of
those who neglect them.

Modern Buildings of a public Nature this City has not many to boast of: St.
Paul's, (one of the Twenty Churches beforementioned) the Chancellor's House, a
very handsome and well contrived Workhouse for the Poor, Three or Four
Meeting Houses, a Quay for landing Goods, and a Custom-house, include all that
have been erected within 40 Years past.

The Civil Government of this City is by a Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council;
a Recorder, Sheriff, Four Stewards, a Chamberlain, and Town Clerk, who are
attended by a Sword Bearer, who wears the Cap, and carries the Sword given by
King Henry VII. before them to Church, and on all public Processions; Four
Sergeants at Mace, and as many Staff-bearers; the former in Gowns, and the
latter in Liveries, with Badges; and, which adds not a little to their
Splendour, they keep a Band of Four Musicians in constant Pay.

There are, moreover, Twelve Companies of incorporated Trades, who, on public
Occasions, and on Gaudy-days, walk in the Mayor's Train, dressed in Gowns, each
Company having a Beadle, in a laced Cloak, bearing the Ensigns of their several
Professions, to usher them.

For supplying the Inhabitants with Water, there is brought-in a pretty large
Quantity by subterraneous Pipes, from some Springs in the Parish of St.
Sidwell, without Eastgate, Part of which is reposited for common Use in the
Conduit beforementioned, and another Part is conveyed to the Houses of the
Bishop, Dean, Canons, etc. within the Close, and to a common Pump, just at the
West Entrance of the Cathedral. But all this would be far short of a sufficient
Supply, and therefore an exceeding good Engine is fixed in the River, the great
Wheel of which working by the same Water, forces the River Water through
Elm-trees bored for that Purpose, into a large Reservoir, fixed about 20 Feet
above Ground, in the highest Part of the City adjoining to the Guildhall; from
whence, through other Pipes, it is dispersed to all Parts of the City in great
Plenty. The Expense of which, to each Housekeeper that will have it, is from
15 to 30 s. a Year, according to the Quantity their Occasions require.

The River Exe was, heretofore, in its main Stream navigable to the Walls of
the City; but, on a Difference between the Mayor, and the then Earl of Devon,
on a very trifling Occasion; viz. Which of their Purveyors should be first
served with a Pot of Fish in the Market, that Earl revenged himself by choking
the Mouth of the River, and by making Weirs with Timber, Sand, etc. thereby
entirely ruining the Navigation thereof farther up than Topsham. And so great
was the Power and Obstinacy of the Earl at that time, that though the Citizens
obtained a Decree in Equity for their Relief, it was never executed.

To remove this Inconvenience, the Inhabitants, about 40 Years since, by Aid of
an Act of Parliament, at a great Expense perfected a Work, which had been begun
above 100 Years before; they cut a new Chanel for the Water, cross which they
placed Sluices or Floodgates: through the lowermost of those Gates, they let in
the flowing Tide, the Ebb of which immediately shuts the Gate, and that keeps
up a Body of Water for about Two Miles, sufficient to carry up the Vessels so
far in their Way; at which Place another of those Gates shuts, after the Vessel
is past it, by Capsterns there fixed for that Purpose. It must be considered,
that the Floor of the Dyke is thus far on a Level, and consequently the Water
of an equal Depth, without the Inconvenience of any Current, the lower Sluice
being shut as before.

The whole Declivity from the Quay at Exeter, to the lowermost Flood-gate at
Topsham, which gives the River its Current, is about Eight or Ten Feet, all
which is sunk at once here, above this second Sluice; and therefore, in order
to bring up Ships over this Fall, it was necessary, that a third Floodgate
should be added; which is accordingly done, at about 200 Feet from the former.
And now, the Ship being between these two Floodgates, (the lower being kept
shut) the uppermost of the two is opened, and by this means the Water between
them raised to a Level with that of the Remainder of the Dyke above; and the
Ship, by this Contrivance, floats freely over the rising Ground; and thence, on
the fresh Water, (for the Tide is of no farther Use) for about Two Miles more,
which brings her to the Head of the Works, where there is another Flood-gate;
and this ponds the whole River, so as to throw the waste Water, over a strong
Stone Weir, into its natural Chanel. The Water so kept back by this
Upper-sluice, and the Weir, makes a stagnant Pool above; and here the Vessels
lie at their Moorings, and unload at a Quay adjoining to the City Walls.

Semper fidelis, is the Motto to the City Arms; and how just a Title they have
thereto, will appear from their Behavior, when they have been attacked by the
Enemies of their lawful Sovereign, of which take the following short Sketch:

1. When the Town was quitted by the Romans, the Citizens defended it against
the Saxons for their then lawful Masters, the Britons; and held it out for 300
Years, after the Eastern Parts of the Island had submitted.

2. When they had been compelled to admit the Saxons into a sort of Coordinate
Power with them, they courageously withstood the Danes, and though at last
overcome by them, they took the first Opportunity, and joined with King Alfred,
who with their Assistance routed the Danes.

3. After this, as long as they were able, they upheld a Share of Government
with the Saxons, until King Athelstane wholly subdued them, and (as
beforementioned) fortified the Town with a Wall and Gates. This generous
Prince was so well pleased with their Bravery, that he granted them many
Privileges and Immunities.

4. In the Year 875, the Citizens again defended themselves stoutly against the
Danes, who came upon them by Sea, but landed, and formed a Camp on the
North-side thereof, in a Place called Danes-castle to this Day, where their
Trenches are yet to be seen.

5. The Town held out for a Month, against Swain King of Denmark, and was at
last taken by Treachery.

6. When William the Conqueror came against it, the Citizens defended
themselves until a Part of the City Wall fell down.

7. The loyal Townsmen took Part with Maud (their undoubted Sovereign) against
King Stephen, and were at last reduced by Famine.

8. In 1469, the Earl of Devon came before it in behalf of the then rightful
Claimant King Edw. IV. and the Citizens delivered it up, sending away the Lords
and others of the Lancastrian Party to Calais.

9. They showed their Loyalty to King Henry VII. by defending the Town against
Perkin Warbeck, the Pretender of that Time. In Testimony whereof, that King
gave them the Sword and Cap; which Regalia are no small Part of their Pomp, to
this Day.

10. The rebellious Commons of Devon and Cornwall met with a very stout
Resistance here, and though grievously pinched with Famine, the Town held it out
until the 6th of August; when they were relieved by the Lord Russel. In Memory
of which that is still a Gaudy-day, and a Sermon is preached yearly on the
Occasion, by the Mayor's Chaplain.

11. In the grand Rebellion it was twice besieged, and held out for the Royal
Cause until the King's Affairs grew everywhere desperate. And as soon as
General Monk appeared in Opposition to the illegal Powers, the Citizens
assembled themselves, and declared for a free Parliament.

12. When the Prince of Orange landed at Torbay, and sent a Detachment to take
Possession of this City, the Inhabitants received them but coldly; and though
they knew themselves incapable of making any Resistance, and were as sensible
as other Parts of the Kingdom, of the Danger they were in from arbitrary Power;
yet were they very tender of joining in any Affair that might be construed a
Rebellion to their lawful Prince.

To the Account of Religious Houses, and Lands formerly appropriated thereto,
let me add here, the Priory of Polesloe, and that of Cowick, each of them but
one Mile from Exeter; at a greater Distance, (but must be mentioned here, or
not at all) Canons-leigh, Canons-Teing, Indio; and larger than either of these,
the Abbey of Buckfastleigh, Part of whose Ruins are yet to be seen, and not one
Instance is there amongst them all, that contradicts my former Observations in
relation to the Goodness of the Soil.

Near the Mouth of the River Exe, on the West Banks thereof, is
Powderham-castle, now, and for many Ages past, the Seat of a Family of
Courtenays, Descendants from the Earl of Devon of that Name. This Seat, built
in the manner of a Castle, is a very grand Piece of Antiquity; and was the Work
of Isabel, the Daughter of Baldwin de Rivers, and Widow of William de Fortibus,
in the Reign of King Henry III.

Halldown is a pretty large, dry, heathy Common of about Seven Miles in Length,
and about Three in Breadth, which, though separated by some enclosed Grounds of a
pretty good Nature, seems to be the same Vein of Land, of which the Forest of
Dartmore, and the downy Part of Ashburton, Ilsington, Bridford, etc. consist.

On the North, and quite home to the Brink of this Down, is that rich Track of
Land which I have already described, as Part of the most fertile Soil in this
County.

Though this Down is in itself a very flinty barren Soil; yet is its Situation so
delightful, the open Prospect, both by Sea and Land, so engaging, and the whole
Circuit thereof so adapted to rural Recreations, that the like Number of
Gentlemen's Seats as lie round the Skirts thereof within so little Compass of
Ground, are not to be met with at any Place that I know of, save only about
London; which is not only a Confirmation of what I have observed, but a very
great Addition to the Delight arising from the large Extent of the View.

And here it cannot be foreign to my Subject to insert the Names of those
genteel Habitations, and that of their several worthy Owners and Possessors.

1. Ugbrook, the Lord Clifford, Baron of Chudleigh; a Family of great Honor
and Worth, though of the Romish Persuasion. 2. Dawlish, the Country Seat of the
Right Reverend Dr. Weston, present Lord Bishop of Exon. 3. Powderham-castle,
the Honorable Sir William Courtnay, Bart. 4. Hallden, Sir Thomas Chudleigh. 5.
Lyndridge, the Reverend Dr. John Finney. 6. Mowlish, William Oxenham, Esquire 7.
Newhouse, William Oxenham, Esquire 8. Peamore, thr two Daughters and Heiresses of
the late Stephen Northleigh, Esquire 9. Canons-Teing, -- -- Hellyar, Esquire 10. Oxton,
William Martyn, Eq; 11. Trehill, Waltham Savery, Esquire 12. Kenbury, Samuel Cook,
Esquire 13. Kenn, John Short, Esquire 14. Holloway, -- -- -- Gear, Esquire 15. Whiteway,
Gilbert Yard, Esquire 16. Doddescombleigh, Richard Duck, Esquire 17. Maurhead, Thomas
Balle, Esquire 18. Wood, Thomas Comyns, Esquire 19. Place, formerly a House of the
Bishops of Exon, late Robert Woolcombe, Esquire 20. Indio, Caleb Juglett, Esquire 21.
Park-place, John Langdon, Esquire 22. Bellemarsh, James Shepherd, Esquire 23. Lowell,
James Shepherd, Esquire 24. Borough, -- -- -- Davenport, Esquire 25. Bowhay, formerly
the Seat of -- -- -- Petre, Ancestor of the present Lord Petre.
Exeter is particularly famous for two Things, which we seldom find united in
the same Town; viz. That it is full of Gentry, and yet full of Trade and
Manufactures.

The Serge-market held here every Week, is very well worth a Stranger's seeing,
and, next to the Brigg Market at Leeds in Yorkshire, is the greatest in
England. The People assured me, that at this Market is generally sold from 60
to 70 to 80, and sometimes a Hundred thousand Pounds Value in Serges in a Week.

The Exe, or Esk, is a very considerable River, and the principal in the whole
County, and by the Contrivance we have mentioned, Ships of 150 Tons now come up
to the City.

Exeter drives a very great Correspondence with Holland, as also directly to
Portugal, Spain and Italy; shipping off vast Quantities of their Woollen
Manufactures, especially to Holland, the Dutch giving very large Commissions
here for the buying of Serges, Perpetuanas, and such Goods; which are made not
only in and about Exeter, but at Crediton, Honiton, Culliton, St. Mary Ottery,
Newton-bushell, Ashburton, and especially at Tiverton, Cullumpton, Bampton, and
all the North-east Part of the County; which Part is, as it may be said, fully
employed, the People made rich, and the Poor well maintained by it. Some are of
Opinion, however, that Exeter has of late Years visibly diminished in its
Trade, some Part of which has, it is said, removed itself to other Quarters.

On the North-side of the Castle, (and which was formerly its Counterscarp) is
a very beautiful Terrace-walk, bounded by a double Row of fine Elms, and
extended round one Quarter of the City; viz. from the Eastgate to the
North-gate. This, for the Fineness of the Air, Length of the Walk, and the
Landschape in View, is not perhaps inferior to any thing of the kind in England.

This County, and this Part of it in particular, has been famous for the Birth
of several Persons, eminent as well for Learning and Arts, as for War:
Particularly, 1. Sir William Petre, who was Secretary of State, and
Privy-Counsellor to King Henry VIII. Edward VI. Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth; and Seven times sent Ambassador into foreign Countries.

2. Sir Thomas Bodley, famous, and of grateful Memory to all learned Men, and
Lovers of Letters, for his collecting and establishing the best Library in
Britain, which is now at Oxford, and is called after his Name the Bodleian
Library.

3. Sir Francis Drake, born at Plymouth.

4. Sir Walter Raleigh.

5. The learned Mr. Richard Hooker, Author of the Ecclesiastical Polity, etc.

6. Dr. Arthur Duck, a Civilian, well known by his Works among the learned
Advocates of Doctors Commons.

7. Dr. John Moreman of Southold, famous for being the first Clergyman in
England, who ventured to teach his Parishioners the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and
Ten Commandments in the English Tongue; and reading them publicly in the
Parish Church of Mayenhennet, in this County, of which he was Vicar.

8. Dr. John de Brampton, a Man of great Learning, who flourished in the Reign
of Henry VI. was famous for being the first that read Aristotle publicly in
the University of Cambridge, and for writing several learned Books, which are
now lost.

9. Peter Blundel, a Clothier, who built the Free School at Tiverton, and
endowed it very handsomely.

10. Sir John Glanvill, a noted Lawyer, and one of the Judges of the
Common Pleas.

11. Sergeant Glanvill, his Son, as great a Lawyer as his Father.

12. Sir John Maynard, an eminent Lawyer of later Years; one of the
Commissioners of the Great Seal under King William III. All these Three were
born at Tavistock.

13. Sir Peter King, Recorder of London, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, several Years Lord High-Chancellor of England, and created a Peer
of this Realm.

14. General Monk, the great Instrument in the Restoration of our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government, Laws and Liberty.

15. The great Duke of Marlborough, Captain General of the English Forces in Q.
Anne's Wars.

I shall take the North Part of this County in my Return from Cornwall; so I
must now lean to the South-coast, for in going on indeed we go South-west.

About 22 Miles from Exeter, and through Newtonbushel, a large, but meanly built
Market Town, we go into the ancient Town of Totness, on the River Dart. It was
formerly of great Note, and still is a pretty good Town, and has some Trade,
but has more Gentlemen in it than Tradesmen of Note: they have a very fine
Stone Bridge here over the River, which being within 7 or 8 Miles of the Sea,
is very large, and the Tide flows 10 or 12 Feet at the Bridge. Here we had the
Diversion of seeing them catch Fish, with the Assistance of a Dog; in this
manner: On the South Side of the River, and on a Slip, or narrow Cut or Chanel
made on purpose, stands a Corn-mill; the Mill-tail, or Floor for the Water
below the Wheels, is wharfed up on either Side with Stone, above High Water
Mark, and for above 20 or 30 Feet in Length below it, on that Part of the River
toward the Sea. At the End of this Wharfing is a Grating of Wood, the Cross
Bars of which stand bearing inward, sharp at the End, and pointing toward one
another, as the Wires of a Mouse-trap.

When the Tide flows up, the Fish can with Ease go in between the Points of
these Cross-bars, but the Mill being shut down, they can go no farther upwards;
and when the Water ebbs again, are left behind, not being able to pass the
Points of the Grating, which like a Mouse-trap keeps them in; so that they are
left at the Bottom with about a Foot, or a Foot and half Water. We were carried
hither at Low Water, where we saw about 50 or 60 small Salmon, from 17 to 20
Inches long, which the Country People call Salmon Peal; and to catch these,
they throw in a Net on a Hoop at the End of a Pole, the Pole going cross the
Hoop, which, in some Places, they call a Shove Net. The Net being fixed at one
End of the Place, they put in a Dog, who is taught his Trade beforehand, at
the other End, and he drives all the Fish into the Net; so that only holding
the Net still in its Place, the Man took up Two or Three-and-thirty Salmon Peal
at the first time.

Of these we had Six for our Dinner, for which they asked a Shilling only; and
for such sized Fish, and not so fresh, I have seen 6 s. 6 d. each given at a
London Fish-market, whither they are sometimes brought from Chichester by
Land-Carriage. They have also delicate Trouts here.

This excessive Plenty of so good Fish, (other Provisions being cheap in
Proportion) makes the Town of Totness a very good Place to live in; especially
for such as have large Families, and but small Estates; and many such are said
to come into those Parts on purpose for saving Money.

This Town made itself remarkable for the Address of the Inhabitants to King
George I. on the Union of the Emperor and King of Spain, by the Treaty of
Vienna: they professed their Zeal and Loyalty to his Person; and when the good
Town of Totness had but a very insignificant Share of Property, assured the
King of their Readiness to grant not only 4 s. a Pound Land Tax, but to give
into the Bargain the other 16 s. if his Majesty's Service required it; together
with several other extravagant Declarations of Zeal and Ostentation, which made
them the Subject of Ridicule all over the Kingdom, for being so lavish in their
Professions, when, as a Corporation, they had little or nothing to give.

About Ten Miles North of Totness, lies Ashburton, a good Market Town, and
Thoroughfare from Exeter to Plymouth. This is one of the Four Stannary Towns
for the County of Devon, and lies but a little Way in from the Forest of
Dartmore. The principal Trade of this Town, and indeed all the Towns and
Villages in the whole County, is in the Woollen Manufacture.

The Three other Stannary Towns are Tavistock, Plympton, and Chagford, the last
of which is a very poor inconsiderable Place, and neither that nor Plympton are
capable of entertaining the Suitors, if the Lord Warden should be ever inclined
to adjourn the Court thither.

And now having mentioned this Court of Stannary, it may not be improper to
give a further Description thereof.

By diverse Charters granted to the Tinners by King Edward I. etc. the Court is
to be held at Crockeren Torr, a noted Hill and Rock in the middle of the
Forest, far distant from any House: the Lord Warden of the Stannaries is the
Judge of this Court, on whose Summons the Jurors appear, who are generally
Gentlemen within the Jurisdiction. I had my Information from a Gentleman, who,
if I mistake not, told me he had served as a Juror; and that when the Earl of
Bath was Lord Warden, and held a Court there, he was attended by 300 Gentlemen
well mounted.

At this desolate Place (where no Refreshment is to be had, but what the
Company bring with them, no Shelter from the Weather, nor any thing to sit
upon, but a Moor-stone Bench) the Court is called: but then the next Act of the
Steward is to adjourn to one of the Stannary Towns, (usually Tavistock) and the
Company immediately makes the best of their Way thither.

At this Court, in former Times, when the Tin Mines in this County were in a
flourishing State, a great deal of Business was dispatched; the Price of the
Tin was fixed, Differences in relation to the Works adjusted, and Acts made for
Regulation of every thing relating thereto. Several Presentiments of the Jurors
are printed, and this Meeting is vulgarly called, The Parliament for the
Stannaries; the Place of Meeting in the Forest, The Parliament House; and the
Presentment of the Jurors, Acts of Parliament.

The Abbey of Tavistock, the Priory at Plympton, and the Monastery at Buckland
Monachorum, were very large Endowments; and their Site well establishes the
Observation I have several times before made, in relation to the Fertility of
the Soil where those Orders of Men generally seated themselves. An Observation,
I have made rather to confirm that of other Writers, than as Matter of Wonder
or Reflection; for would it not be strange, if the Ecclesiastics should not be
as capable of choosing for themselves as other People? or that they should choose
the worst, if they might have the best?

At Tavistock I saw some stately Remains of that grand Building; and among
other things, part of the Butments of the Arch of a Bridge over the Tavy, which
the Inhabitants call Guile-bridge, and relate the following Story; viz. That
one Child, Owner of the Manor of Plymstock, made his Will, and gave the said
Lands to the Church where his Body should be buried; and that afterward,
hunting in the Forest, he lost his Company and his Way, and though, as his last
Shift, he killed his Horse, and got into the warm Belly of him, he at length
died there with the Extremity of Cold. The Body, after some Search, was found
by the Tavistoch Men, (who had, by some means, come to the Knowledge of his
Will) and by them carried away toward their Abbey. The Plymstock Men, hearing
thereof, lay in Ambush for them at a Bridge, where they apprehended they must
pass: but in this they were deceived; for the Priests built a slight Bridge on
Purpose, over which they carried the Corpse; by which Statagem they obtained the
said Land; and hence, says the Tradition, this is called Guile-bridge.

From Totness we went still South about Seven Miles (all in View of the River)
to Dartmouth, a Town of Note, seated at the Mouth of the River Dart, where it
empties itself into the Sea, at a very narrow, but safe Entrance. The Opening
into Dartmouth Harbor is not broad, but the Chanel deep enough for the biggest
Ship in the Royal Navy: The Sides of the Entrance are high mounded with Rocks;
without which, just at the first Narrowing of the Passage, stands a good strong
Fort beyond a Platform of Guns, which commands the Port.

The narrow Entrance is not much above half a Mile, and then it opens and makes
a Basin, or Harbor, able to receive 500 Sail of Ships, where they may ride
with the greatest Safety, and the Entrance may be chained up on Occasion. I
went out in a Boat to view this Entrance, and the Castle or Fort that commands
it; and coming back with the Tide of Flood, I observed some small Fish to skip
and play upon the Surface of the Water; upon which I asked, What Fish they
were? Immediately one of the Rowers or Seamen started up in the Boat, and
throwing his Arms abroad, as if he had been mad, cries out as loud as he could
bawl, A Scool! a Scool! The Word was taken on the Shore as hastily as it would
have been on Land, if he had cried Fire; and by that Time we reached the Quays,
the Town was all in a kind of an Uproar.

The Matter was, that a great Shoal, or, as they call it, a Scool of Pilchards,
came swimming with the Tide, directly out of the Sea into the Harbor. The
Boat-owner lamented his being unprepared for them; for he said, that if he
could but have had a Day or two's Warning, he might have taken 200 Tun of them;
in short, nobody was ready for them, except a small Fishing-boat or Two; one of
which went into the Middle of the Harbor, and at Two or Three Hawls took about
40,000.

It was observed, that beyond the Mouth of the Harbor was a whole Army of
Porpoises, which, it seems, pursued these Pilchards, and, it is probable, drove
them into the Harbor. The Scool drove up the River a great Way, even as high
as Totness Bridge, as we heard afterward; so that the Country People, who had
Boats and Nets, caught as many as they knew what to do with.

Dartmouth is situated on the West Side of this Basin, or Harbor, in a kind of
a Semicircle, on the Ascent of a steep Hill, which, though large and populous, is
but meanly built; yet the Quay is large, and the Street before it spacious.
Here live some very flourishing Merchants, who trade very prosperously, and to
the most considerable trading Ports of Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the
Plantations; but especially to Newfoundland, and from thence to Spain and Italy
with Fish; and they drive a good Trade also in their own Fishery of Pilchards,
which is hereabouts carried on with the greatest Number of Vessels of any Port
in the West, except Falmouth.

Dartmouth, like other Towns in Devonshire, is full of Dissenters, who have
here a very large Meeting House. The French burnt it in Richard I.'s Time, and
attempted it afterward, but were bravely repulsed, and chiefly by the Women,
who fought desperately, and took Monsieur Castle, their General, Three Lords,
and Twenty-three Knights Prisoners, and made a great Slaughter among them
besides; but how this glorious Action fell to the Share of the Women, and
whether the Men were inactive, or absent, is not mentioned.

A little to the Southward of this Town, and to the East of the Port, is
Torbay, a very good Road for Ships, about Twelve Miles in Circuit, though
sometimes, especially with a Southerly or South-east Wind, Ships have been
obliged to quit the Bay, and put out to Sea, or run into Dartmouth for Shelter.

In the Bottom of this Bay is a beautiful, well built, and finely-situated
House, called Torr-Abbey, formerly a Religious House; but now the Inheritance
of -- Carry, Esquire. Vespasian is said to have landed here, when he came to attack
Arviragus, King of Britain. And here it was that King William III. entered with
a Fleet of 6000 Transports, and 50 Sail of Men of War, under the Conduct of
Admiral Herbert, since Lord Torrington.

About Three Miles to the West of Dartmouth, is a little Fishing-town, called
Brixham, remarkable for a Spring of Water, that ebbs and flows very sensibly; a
Description of which may not be unacceptable, especially as the Account I give
of it is the Result of my own Observations; for I had so much Patience as to
sit by it for Fourteen Hours together, and carefully observe its Periods, and
the Quantity of its ebbing and flowing.

The Situation of this Spring is pretty near the Foot of a large Ridge of
Hills, and the Quantity of Water that flows from it is considerable. It falls
into a large Basin, where it is very easy to observe (by lying in an inclining
Plain) the perpendicular Height of its Ebbing and Flowing, as well as the Time
between high and low Water.

By a careful Observation of a great Number of Fluxes and Refluxes, I find,
that when it proceeds regularly, (as it does sometimes for Eight Hours
together) it is Eleven times in an Hour: for thus the 10th of July 1733, I
observed it high Water at 8h. 31 in the Morning, and continued to observe it
until 3h. 3 in the Afternoon; in which Interval of Seven Hours it had ebbed and
flowed exactly Seventy-seven times.

There happens sometimes an Intermission of those Ebbings and Flowings; for in
the Morning of the same Day, I observed that from 6h. 37, to 6h. 58, it had no
Motion at all; and at another time I found it to intermit for an Hour, or more.

The Basin which receives the Water, contains, as I guess, about Twenty Feet in
Area; and the perpendicular Height of the Flowing, when I observed it, (which
was in the Middle of Summer, and at a dry Season) was various, viz. sometimes
an Inch and three Quarters, and at other times not above half an Inch; but
generally about one Inch and one Eighth.

The Reader will be rather pleased with this Description, as it may, in some
measure, confirm that ingenious, and very probable Hypothesis, which was read
by Dr. Atwell before the Royal Society, and is published in their Transactions,
touching reciprocating Springs; and of this (which is called Lay-well) in
particular.

From Dartmouth we went to Plympton beforementioned, as a poor Town, though it
was formerly of great Account, and the Glory of the ancient Earls of Devon,
where are Tenures at this Day, called Castle-guard, for defending and repairing
the Walls of the Castle, which however is now in Ruins. From thence the Road
lies to Plymouth, Distance about Six Miles.

Plymouth is indeed a Town of Consideration and Importance. The Situation of it
is between Two very large Inlets of the Sea, and in the Bottom of a large Sound
or Bay, which is encompassed on every Side with Hills, and the Shore generally
steep and rocky, though the Anchorage is good, and it is pretty safe Rideing. In
the Entrance to this Bay, lies a large and most dangerous Rock, which at
High Water is covered, but at Low-tide lies bare, where many a good Ship has
been lost, when they have thought all their Dangers at an End.

Upon this Rock, which was called the Eddystone, from its Situation, the
ingenious Mr. Winstanley, whom I have mentioned before, p. 107. undertook to
build a Light-house for the Direction of Sailors, and with great Art and
Expedition finished it: which Work, considering its Height, the Magnitude of
its Building, and the little Hold there was to fasten it to the Rock, stood to
Admiration, and bore out many a bitter Storm.

Mr. Winstanley often visited, and frequently strengthened the Building by new
Works; and was so confident of its Firmness and Stability, that he usually
said, to those who doubted its Standing in hard Weather, that he only desired
to be in it, when a Storm should happen.

But in the dreadful Tempest of Nov. 27. 1703, when he happened to be so
unhappy as to have his Wish, he would fain have been on Shore, making Signals
for Help; but no Boats durst go off to him; and in the Morning after the Storm,
nothing was to be seen but the bare Rock, the Light-house being gone, in which
Mr. Winstanley, and all that were with him, perished; and a few Days after, a
Merchant's Ship, called the Winchelsea, Homeward-bound from Virginia, not
knowing the Light-house was down, ran foul of the Rock, and was lost with all
her Ladeing, and most of her Men: but there is now another Light-house built on
the same Rock by the Corporation of Trinity-house, in Pursuance of an Act of
Parliament passed in the Fifth of Queen Anne.

As Plymouth lies in the Bottom of this Sound, in the Center between the Two
Waters, so there lies against it, in the same Position, an Island which they
call St. Nicolas, on which is a Castle that commands the Entrance into
Ham-Ouze, and indeed that also into Catwater in some Sort. On the Shore,
over against this Island, is the Citadel of Plymouth, a small, but regular
Fortification, inaccessible by Sea, but not exceeding strong by Land; except
that they say the Works are of a Stone hard as Marble, and would not soon yield
to the Batteries of an Enemy: but that is a Language our modern Engineers laugh
at. It is surrounded with a deep Trench, out of which was dug the Stone that
built the whole Citadel, which is about three Quarters of a Mile in
Circumference, and has 300 great Guns on its Walls, which stand thickest
toward the Sea. Several Guns are also planted on part of the old Fort, lying
almost level with the Water, all which gives the greatest Security to the Ships
in the Harbor.

The Town stands above the Citadel, upon the same Rock, and lies sloping on the
Side of it, toward the East, the Inlet of the Sea (which is called Catwater,
and is a Harbor capable of receiving any Number of Ships, and of any Size)
washing the Eastern Shore of the Town, where they have a kind of natural Mole,
or Haven, with a Quay, and all other Conveniences for bringing in Vessels for
loading and unloading; nor is the Trade carried on here inconsiderable in
itself.

The other Inlet of the Sea, as I term it, is on the other Side of the Town,
and is called Ham-Ouze, being the Mouth of the River Tamar, a considerable
River, which parts the Two Counties of Devon and Cornwall. Here the War with
France making it necessary, that the Ships of War should have a Retreat nearer
Hand than at Portsmouth, the late King William ordered a wet Dock, with Yards,
dry Docks, Launches, and Conveniences of all kinds for building and repairing
of Ships, to be built. These wet and dry Docks are about Two Miles up the
Ham-Ouze, and for the Neatness and Excellency of the Work, exceed all that were
ever built of the Kind, being hewn out of a Mine of Slate, and lined with
Portland Stone. The dry Dock is built after the Mould of a First-rate Man of
War, and the wet Dock will contain Five of the same Bigness. What followed
these, as it were of Course, was the Building of Storehouses and Warehouses
for the Rigging, Sails, naval and military Stores, etc. of such Ships as may be
appointed to be laid up there, with very handsome Houses for the Commissioners,
Clerks, and Officers of all kinds usual in the King's Yards, to dwell in. It
is, in short, now become as complete an Arsenal, or Yard, for building and
fitting out Men of War, as any the Government are Masters of; and perhaps much
more convenient than some of them, though not so large; and this has occasioned a
proportional Increase of Buildings to the Town.

Here are Two fine Churches, and Two or Three Meeting Houses for Dissenters,
and French Refugees; as also a Free School, and an Hospital for Blue-coat Boys.

Opposite to this Place, on the other Side Ham-Ouze, is situated Mount
Edgcumbe, the Seat of Richard Edgcumbe, Esquire deemed one of the noblest Prospects
in England; overlooking at once the Sea, the Harbor, Citadel, and Town of
Plymouth, and the County adjacent for a great Way.

From Plymouth we pass the Tamar, over a Ferry to Saltash, a little poor
shattered Town, the first we set Foot on in the County of Cornwall. The Tamar
here is very wide, and the Ferry-boats bad, so that I thought myself well off,
when I got safe on Shore in Cornwall.

Mr. Carew published, in the Reign of King James I. a very judicious Survey of
this County, dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh. The Reader may there inform
himself, in a very particular manner, of its Natural History, and the Produce,
Customs, and Rarities, which it abounds with. Among other Curiosities, he may
there find complete Lists of the Knights Fees, Barons, Knights, and Men at
Arms, together with the Survey of the Acres taken by Solomon de Roff, and his
Fellows, Justices itinerant, at Launceston, in the Reign of King Edward I. by
which Survey it appears, that this County contained, at that Time, 5555 Acres;
and the Author tells us, that a Cornish Acre, or one fourth Part of a Knight's
Fee, contained Nine Farthings Land, each of which was, as he thinks, about
Thirty of our Statute Acres. If all this be true, then that County contained,
at that time, One million and Five hundred thousand Acres, which is more, by
one Third, than it is now estimated to be, and does, in some measure,
strengthen the Conjecture, that a great Part of the Land on this Coast is
devoured by the Sea, and that the Scilly Rocks were formerly a Part of the
Land, though now Ten Leagues distant.

Among the natural Productions of this County, ought not to be omitted their
Slate, the best in Europe for covering of Houses; the Moor-stone, which, by a
very laborious Polishing, (a Matter very lately attempted) equals in Beauty the
Egyptian Granate. I take no Notice of the Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead; the
Marble, Agat, Coral, and even Diamonds, which are here found, because these
have been observed by all who mention the Productions of this Western County;
and for the same Reason shall omit the manner of their working their Mines, and
refining the Ore.

The Inhabitants have been remarkable for their Strength of Body; witness,
among numberless others, John Bray, who carried on his Back Six Bushels of
Meal, of Fifteen Gallons to the Bushel, and the Miller, a Man of Twenty-four
Years of Age, on the Top of it; also John Roman, who carried, at one time, the
whole Carcass of an Ox.

Saltash seems to be the Ruins of a larger Place, it is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen, has many Privileges, sends Members to Parliament, has the sole
Oyster-Fishing in the whole River, which is considerable. It has also
Jurisdiction upon the River Tamar, down to the Mouth of the Port, so that they
claim Anchorage of all small Ships, that enter the River: their Coroner sits
upon all Bodies that are found drowned in the River, and the like. Here is a
good Market, and it is very much benefited by the Increase of the Inhabitants
of Plymouth, as lying near the Dock at the Mouth of Ham-Oze; for those People
choose rather to go to Saltash to Market by Water, than to walk to Plymouth by
Land for their Provisions: because, first, as they go in the Town-boat, the
same Boat brings home what they buy, so that it is much less Trouble; secondly,
because Provisions are bought much cheaper at Saltash than at Plymouth: and of
late, they have some Ships that use the Newfoundland Fishery.

There is no other Town up the Tamar, till we come to Launceston, the County
Town, which I shall take in my Return, except Kellington, a pretty good Market
and Portreve Town, where is a good Market-house, and a neat Church, which, as
well as the other Buildings in the Town, are in good Condition; so I turned
West, keeping the South Shore of the County, to the Land's-end.

From Saltash I went to Leskard, about Seven Miles. This is a considerable
Town, well built, has People of Fashion in it, and a very great Market: it is
one of the Five Stannary Towns, and was once still more eminent, and had a good
Castle, and a large House, where the ancient Dukes of Cornwall kept their
Court: it also enjoyed several considerable Privileges, especially by the
Favor of the Black Prince, who, as Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall,
resided here: and in Return, they say, this Town, and the Country round it,
raised a great Body of stout young Fellows, who entered into his Service, and
followed his Fortunes in his Wars. But these Buildings are so decayed, that
there are now scarce any of the Ruins of the Castle, or of the Prince's Court,
remaining. Here was also anciently a Chapel, much resorted to by Pilgrims in
Popish Times; and in the Town is a Fountain of very clear Water, to which many
miraculous Cures were attributed.

It still boasts of its Guild, or Town Hall, on which is a Turret with a fine
Clock; a good Free School, well provided; a very fine Conduit in the
Marketplace; an ancient large Church, dedicated to St. Martin; and a large
new-built Meeting House for the Dissenters; which I name, because they assured
me there were but Three more, and those inconsiderable, in all the County of
Cornwall; whereas in Devonshire, which is the next County, there are reckoned
about 70, some of which are exceeding large and fine.

This Town is also remarkable for the Defeat of the Parliament Army by Sir
Ralph Hopton, and for a very great Trade in all Manfactures of Leather, such as
Boots, Shoes, Gloves, Purses, Breeches, etc. and some Spinning of late Years is
set up here, encouraged by the Woollen Manufacturers of Devonshire.

Between these Two Towns of Saltash and Leskard, is the Borough of St. Germans,
now a Village, decayed, and without any Market, but the largest Parish in the
whole County; in the Bounds of which are contained 17 Villages, and the Town of
Saltash among them; for Saltash Church, it seems, was but a Chapel of Ease to
St. Germans. It has been anciently a Bishop's See, which was translated from
Bodmyn hither, and afterward from St. Germans to Crediton, then one of the
best Towns in the County, and thence to Exeter. This Town takes its Name from
St. German, Bishop of Auxerre in Burgundy, who came over from France, to preach
against the Heresy of Pelagius, which then began to spread in England, and took
up his Residence here. The Ruins of the Episcopal Palace at Cuttenbeck, a Mile
and half from the Town, which afterward dwindled into a Farm-house, are still
visible. A Gentleman of the Name of Elliott was lately a great Benefactor to
this Town, having endowed a public School there, repaired the Sessions House,
and beautified the Church; where he was buried, and has a fine Italian
party-colored Marble Monument erected to his Memory by his Widow. There is
still an Episcopal Chair in the Church, and several other Seats belonging to
Canons. The Town stands on a rising Ground, and is built in the Form of an
Amphitheatre.

In the Neighborhood of these Towns are many pleasant Seats of Cornish Gentry,
who are indeed very numerous, and the most sociable, generous, and kind
Neighbors to one another that are to be found; and usually intermarry among
themselves; from whence, they say, the Proverb, That all the Cornish Gentlemen
are Cousins. It is the very same in Wales, where the greatest Compliment that
one Gentleman can make to another of the same County, is to call him Cousin.
There is a great Conformity of Manners, Customs, and Usages between the Welsh
and Cornish, who are accounted of the same Origin, and Descendants also of the
ancient Britons; and there is likewise a great Affinity between the old Cornish
and Welsh Language.

On the Hills North of Leskard, and in the Way between that Town and
Launceston, are many Tin Mines, and some of the richest Veins of that Metal in
the whole County; which when cast at the Blowing-houses into Blocks, are sent
to Leskard to be coined.

From Leskard, in our Course West, we are necessarily carried to the Seacoast,
because of the River Fowey, which empties itself into the Sea, at a very large
Mouth; and hereby, this River rising in the Middle of the Breadth of the
County, and running South, and the River Camel rising not far from it, and
running North, with a like large Chanel, the Land from Bodmyn to the Western
Part of the County, is almost made an Island, and in a manner cut off from the
Eastern; the Isthmus, or Neck of Land between, being not above Twelve Miles
over.

In the Parish of St. Clear is a Piece of Antiquity, which they call, The other
Half-stone, which are indeed Two Stones fixed in the Ground; and by Mortaises
in each, they seem to have been heretofore joined together. Both of them were
curiously wrought by Diaper-work-carvings; but one of them has an Inscription
in very antique Characters, as follows: inscription on stone Which seem to
express thus much; Doniert. Rogavit pro Anima; implying that Dungarth or
Doniert (King of Cornwall, who was drowned A. D. 872.) gave this Land for the
Good of his Soul.

Not far distant is a Heap of large Stones, under which lies a great Stone,
fashioned like a Cheese, and seems to the Eye, as if it were pressed into that
Form by the Weight that lies upon it; and hence they call it Wring-cheese.

On the South from Leskard we come to Foy, or Fowey, an ancient Borough-town,
and formerly very large and potent; for the Foyens, as they were then called,
were able to fit out large Fleets, not only for Merchants Ships, but even of
Men of War; and with these, not only fought with, but several times vanquished
and routed, the Squadron of the Cinqueport Men, who in those Days were very
powerful.

Mr. Camden observes, that the Town of Foy quarters some Part of the Arms of
every one of those Cinque Ports with their own; intimating, that they had at
several times triumphed over them all: and indeed they were once so powerful,
that they fitted out their Fleets against the French, and took several of their
Men of War, when they were at Variance with England, and enriching their Town
by the Spoil of their Enemies.

Edward IV. favored them much; and because the French threatened to come up
their River with a powerful Navy to burn their Town, he caused Two Forts to be
built at the public Charge, for its Security, the Ruins of which are still to
be seen: but the same King Edward was some time after so disgusted at the
Townsmen, for officiously falling upon the French, after a Truce was
proclaimed, that he effectually disarmed them, took away their whole Fleet,
Ships, Tackle, Apparel and Furniture; and since that time we do not read of any
of their Naval Exploits, nor that they ever attempted to recover their Strength
at Sea. However, Foy, at this time. is a very fair Town; it lies extended on
the East Sid, of the River, for above a Mile, the Buildings fair, and there are
a great many flourishing Merchants in it, who have a great Share in the
Fishing-trade, especially for Pilchards. In this Town, is also a Coinage for
the TIN, of which a great Quantity is dug up in the Country North and West of
the Town. The Church at Fowey is ancient, and very fine.

The River Fowey, which is very broad and deep here, was formerly very
navigable by Ships of good Burden as high as the Borough-town of Lestwithiel,
an ancient, and once a flourishing, but now a decayed Place, and as to Trade
and Navigation quite destitute; which is occasioned by the River being filled
up with Sand.

Lestwithiel was called, in the British Times, Pen Uehel Coed, i. e. an high
Place with Wood. It became since the ancient Residence of the Dukes of
Cornwall. The Ruins of a Castle belonging to them are still to be seen, on a
rising Ground, at a little Distance from the Town. The Church is an handsome
Edifice; but the Steeple carries the Marks of the Civil Wars in the Reign of
Charles I. when the great Hall and Exchequer of the said Dukes of Cornwall were
also utterly defaced. Some say this Town was formerly the County Town and still
retains several Advantages which supports its Figure; as, 1. That it is one of
the Coinage or Stannary Towns. 2. The common Gaol for the whole Stannary is
here, as are also the County Courts for Cornwall.

There is a mock Cavalcade kept up at this Town, which is very remarkable; the
Particulars, as they are related by Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, take
as follows:

"Upon little Easter Sunday, the Freeholders of this Town and Manor, by
themselves, or their Deputies, did there assemble: amongst whom, one, (as it
fell to his Lot by turn) bravely apparelled, gallantly mounted, with a Crown on
his Head, a Scepter in his Hand, and a Sword borne before him, and dutifully
attended by all the rest, also on Horseback, rode through the principal Street to
the Church: the Curate in his best Beseen solemnly received him at the
Churchyard Style, and conducted him to hear Divine Service. After which, he
repaired with the same Pomp to a House provided for that Purpose, made a Feast
to his Attendants, kept the Table's-end himself, and was served with kneeling
Assay, and all other Rights due to the Estate of a Prince: with which Dinner
the Ceremony ended, and every Man returned Home again. The Pedigree of this
Usage is derived from so many Descents of Ages, that the Cause and Author
out-reach Remembrance. Howbeit, these Circumstances afford a Conjecture, that
it should betoken Royalties appertaining to the Honor of Cornwall."

Behind Foy, and nearer to the Coast, at the Mouth of a small River, which some
call Lo, though without any Authority, stand Two Borough-towns opposite to one
another, bearing the Name of East Lo, and West Lo. These are both good
trading Towns, and especially for Fish; and, which is very particular, are,
like Weymouth and Melcomb in Dorsetshire, separated only by the Creek or River;
and yet each of them sends Members to Parliament. These Towns are joined
together by a very beautiful and stately Stone Bridge, having 15 Arches.

East Lo was the antienter Corporation of the Two, and some Ages ago the
greater and more considerable Town; but now they tell us West Lo is the
richest, and has the most Ships belonging to it; but has neither Church or
Chapel, nor Meeting House in it. Were they put together, they would make a very
handsome Seaport Town.

Passing from hence, and ferrying over Foy River, we come into a large Country
without many Towns in it of Note, but very well furnished with Gentlemen's
Seats, and a little higher up with Tin Works.

The Sea making several deep Bays here, they who travel by Land are obliged to
go higher into the Country, to pass above the Water, especially at
Trewardreth-bay, which lies very broad, above Ten Miles within the Country;
which passing at Trewardreth, a Town of no great Note, though the Bay takes its
Name from it, the next Inlet of the Sea is the famous Firth, or Inlet, called
Falmouth Haven. It is certainly, next to Milford Haven in South Wales, the
fairest and best Road for Shipping that is in the whole Isle of Britain;
whether we consider the Depth of Water for above 20 Miles within Land; the
Safety of Riding, sheltered from all kind of Winds or Storms; the good
Anchorage, and the many Creeks, all navigable, where Ships may run in and be
safe.

There are Six or Seven very considerable Places upon this Haven, and the
Rivers from it: viz. Grampound, Tregony, Truro, Penryn, Falmouth, St. Mawes,
and Pendennis. The Four first of these send Members to Parliament; although the
Town of Falmouth, as big as all of them together, (Truro excepted) and richer
than Ten such, sends none. But how so considerable a Seaport and Town, comes
to be debarred that Privilege, does not appear. It Is certain, that a great
Number of small inconsiderable Boroughs in this County do now enjoy it; but
until the 6th of Edward VI. none but Launceston, Leskard, Lestwithiel, Truro,
Bodmyn, Helston, and Bossiney, sent any. And whether it were then imposed on
the rest as a Punishment, or conferred as a Favor, is uncertain. I cannot
agree with those who think it was obtained at their Request, by the Interest of
their Duke, because they were invested with it by King Edward VI. and Queen
Elizabeth, when no Person bore that Title.

St. Mawes, and Pendennis or Pen-dinas, (which signifies in the old British,
the End or Head of a City) are Two Fortifications placed at the Points, or
Entrance, of this Haven, opposite to one another, though not with a Communication
or View. They are very strong; the former principally by Sea, having a good
Platform of Guns, pointing 'thwart the Chanel, and planted on a Level with the
Water; but Pendennis Castle is strong by Land as well as by Water, is regularly
fortified, has good Outworks, and generally a strong Garrison, and each of them
has a Governor.

St. Mawes, otherwise called St. Mary's, has a Town annexed to the Castle, and
is a Borough, sending Members to Parliament; but has neither Church, Chapel,
Meeting House, Fair, or Market, in it.

The Town of Falmouth is by much the richest, and best trading Town in this
County, though not so ancient as its Neighbor Town of Truro; and indeed, is in
some things obliged to acknowledge its Seigniority, and the Truro Men receive
several Duties collected in Falmouth; particularly Wharfage for the
Merchandises landed, or shipped off: but the Town of Falmouth has gotten the
Trade, at least the best Part of it, from the other, which is chiefly owing to
the Situation; for lying upon the Sea, but within the Entrance, Ships of the
greatest Burden come up to the very Quay, and the whole Royal Navy might ride
safely in the Road; whereas the Town of Truro, lying far within, and at the
Mouth of Two fresh Rivers, is not navigable for Vessels of above 150 Tons, or
thereabouts; the Trade at Truro being chiefly, if not altogether, for the
Shipping off of Block TIN and COPPER Ore, the latter being lately found in
large Quantities in some of the Mountains between Truro and St. Michael's, and
which is much improved since the several Mills are erected at Bristol, and
other Parts, for the Manufactures of Battery-ware, as it is called.

Falmouth is well built, has abundance of Shipping belonging to it, is full of
rich Merchants, and has an increasing Trade, because of the setting up of late
Years the English Packets between this Port and Lisbon, which occasions a new
Commerce between Portugal and this Town, amounting to a very great Value.

It is true, Part of this Trade was founded in a clandestine Commerce, carried
on by the said Packets at Lisbon; where being the King's Ships, and claiming
the Privilege of not being searched or visited by the Custom-house Officers,
they found Means to carry off great Quantities of British Manufactures, which
they sold on Board to the Portuguese Merchants, and they conveyed them on
Shore, as it is supposed, without paying Custom.

But the Government there getting Intelligence of it, and Complaint being made
in England also, where it was found to be prejudicial to the fair Merchant,
that Trade has been effectually stopped; but the Falmouth Merchants, having by
this means gotten a Taste of the Portuguese Trade, have maintained it ever
since in Ships of their own. These Packets bring over vast Quantities of Gold
in Specie, either in Moidores, or in Bars of Gold, on Account of the Merchants
at London.

The Custom-house for all the Towns in this Port, and the Head-collector, is
established at this Town, where the Duties, including those of the other Ports,
are very considerable. Here is also a very great Fishing for Pilchards, and the
Merchants of Falmouth have the chiefest Stroke in that gainful Trade.

Truro, though it gives Place to Falmouth, is however a considerable Town. It
stands up the Water North-and-by-east from Falmouth, in the utmost extended
Branch of the Haven, at the Conflux of Two Rivers, which, though not of any long
Course, have a very good Appearance for a Port, and make a large Wharf between
them in the Front of the Town; and the Water here makes a very good Port for
small Ships, though it be at the Influx, but not for Ships of Burden. There are
at least Three Churches in it, but no Dissenters Meeting House, that I could
hear of.

Tregony, or Tregenen, (which in British signifies the Mouth-town) is a
Borough-town upon the same Water North-east from Falmouth, distant about 16
Miles from it, but is a Town of very little Trade; nor indeed have any of the
Towns so far within the Shore, notwithstanding the Benefit of the Water, any
considerable Trade, but what is carried on under the Merchants of Falmouth or
Truro.

Grampound is a Market Town and Borough, about Four Miles farther up the Water.
This Place indeed has a Claim to Antiquity, and is an Appendix to the Duchy of
Cornwall, of which it holds at a Free-farm Rent, and pays to the Prince of
Wales, as Duke, 10 l. 11 s. 1 d. per Annum. It has no Parish Church, but only a
Chapel of Ease to an adjacent Parish. Here are some Remains to be seen of the
famous Coedfala, which, in the British, signifies Felon-wood, granted, with all
the Lands in it, to the Town, in King Edward III.'s Time.

Penryn, another Borough-town, is up the same Branch of the Haven as Falmouth,
but stands Four Miles higher toward the West, upon a Hill; yet Ships come to
it of as great a Size as can come to Truro. It is a very pleasant agreeable
Town, and for that Reason has many Merchants in it, who would perhaps otherwise
live at Falmouth. The chief Commerce of these Towns, as to their Sea-affairs,
is the Pilchards, and Newfoundland Fishing, which is very profitable to them
all. It had formerly a Conventual Church, with a Chantry, and a Religious
House, a Cell to Kirton; but they are all demolished, and scarce the Ruins of
them distinguishable enough to know one Part from another. This Town is full of
Orchards, and looks like a Town in a Wood. The Sea embraces it on each Side.
Its Name is British, as all those Words beginning with Pen, and Tree, and Lan,
(which occur often in this County) are.

Quitting Falmouth Haven, from Penryn West, we came to Helston, another
Borough-town, at about Seven Miles Distance: It stands upon the little River
Cober, which however admits the Sea so into its Bosom, as to make a tolerable
good Harbor for Ships, a little below the Town. It is the Fifth Town allowed
for the Coining TIN, and several of the Ships called Tin Ships are laden here.

This Town is large and populous, and has Four spacious Streets, an handsome
Church, and a good Trade. Beyond this is a Market Town, though of no Resort for
Trade, called Market-Jew: it lies indeed on the Seaside, but has no Harbor or
safe Road for Shipping.

At Helford is a small but good Harbor, between Falmouth and this Port, where
many times the TIN Ships go in to load for London; also here are a good Number
of Fishing Vessels for the Pilchard Trade, and abundance of skilful Fishermen.

Pensance, in British, Pensand, i. e. the Head, or End of the Sand, is the
farthest Town, of any Note, West, being 254 Miles from London, and within about
Ten Miles of the Promontory called the Land's-end; so that this Promontory is
from London 264 Miles, or thereabouts. This is a Market Town of good Business,
well built and populous, has a good Trade, and a great many Ships belonging to
it, notwithstanding it is so remote. Here are also a great many good Families
of Gentlemen, though in this utmost Angle of the Nation: and, which is yet more
strange, the Veins of Lead, Tin, and Copper Ore, are said to be seen, even to
the utmost Extent of Land at Low Water Mark, and in the very Sea. So rich, so
valuable a Treasure is contained in these Parts of Great Britain, though they are
supposed to be very poor, because so remote from London, which is the Center of
our Wealth.

Between this Town and St. Burien, a Town midway between it and the Land's-end,
stands a circular Temple of the Druids, consisting of 19 Stones, the Distance
between each being 12 Feet, and a 20th in the Center, much higher than the
rest; and are not unlike those at Stonehenge in Wiltshire. The Parish where
they stand is called Biscard-woune, from whence the ancient and now noble
Family of Boscawen derives its Name.

In Clear Parish in this County, Six or Eight Stones of prodigious Bigness
likewise stand up in a Circle; a Monument of the like Nature.

These are probably, as those at Stonehenge and Burien, Remains of Druids
Temples.

And we shall mention in this Place, that at Stantondrew, in Somersetshire, is
another Temple of the Druids, called The Weddings.

The Maen-amber, near this Town of Pensance, was also a very remarkable Stone,
which, as Mr. Camden tells us, though it be of a vast Bigness, yet might be moved
with one Finger, notwithstanding a great Number of Men could not remove it from
its Place. It was destroyed, as one of the same Sort was in Fifeshire,
Scotland, by one of Oliver's Governors: for these Reformers had a Notion of
these Works being of a superstitious kind.

Maen is a British Word for a great Stone: There is one of these Stones, as Dr.
Stukely tells us, in Derbyshire; and Mr. Toland acquaints us, that there are
also such in Ireland, as well as Wales; he gives the following Account of this
Piece of Antiquity.

"At a Place called Maen-amber, says he, is a Heap of Stones roundish, and of
vast Bulk; but so artificially pitched on flat Stones, sometimes more,
sometimes fewer in Number, that touching the great Stone lightly, it moves, and
seems to totter, to the great Amazement of the Ignorant; but stirs not, at
least not sensibly, when one uses his whole Strength."

Near Pensance, but open to the Sea, is that Gulf they call Mounts-bay, named
so from a high Hill standing in the Water, which they call St. Michael's Mount;
the Seamen call it only the Cornish Mount. It has been fortified, though the
Situation of it makes it so difficult of Access, that, like the Bass in
Scotland, there needs no Fortification. Like the Bass too, it was once made a
Gaol for Prisoners of State, but now it is wholly neglected. Here is a very
good Road for Shipping, which makes the Town of Pensance a Place of good Resort.

A little up in the Country toward the North-west is Godolchan, which though a
Hill, rather than a Town, gives Name to the ancient and now noble Family of
Godolphin; and nearer on the Northern Coast is Ryalton, which gives the second
Title to the Earl Godolphin. This Place also is infinitely rich in Tin Mines.

But I must not end this Account at the utmost Extent of the Island of Great
Britain West, without visiting those kind of Excrescences of the Island, the
Rocks of Scilly, where many good Ships are almost continually dashed in Pieces,
and many brave Lives lost, in spite of the Mariner's best Skill, or the
Light-houses and other Sea-marks best Notice.

These Isles, called in Latin, Silurum Insulae, are supposed by some to be the
Cassiterides of the Ancients: they lie about 60 Miles from the Land's-end, and
are a Cluster of small Islands, to the Number, as some reckon, of 145. Scilly
was once the chief in Estimation. But St. Mary being the fruitfullest and
largest, though but Nine Miles about, has now the Pre-eminence; and it has a very
good Harbor, fortified with a Castle built by Queen Elizabeth. These Isles
were conquered by Athelstane, one of the Saxon Kings, and from his Time they
are deemed a Part of the County of Cornwall.

These Islands lie so in the Middle between the Two vast Openings of the North
and South narrow Seas, or, as the Sailors call them, the Bristol Chanel, and
The Chanel, (so called by way of Eminence) that it cannot, or perhaps never
will be avoided, but that several Ships in the Dark of the Night, and in Stress
of Weather, may by being out in their Reckonings, or other unavoidable
Accidents, mistake; and if they do, they are sure, as the Sailors call it, to
run Bump ashore upon Scilly, where they find no Quarter among the Breakers; but
are beat to pieces, without any Possibility of Escape.

One can hardly mention the Rocks of Scilly, without letting fall a Tear to the
Memory of Sir Cloudesly Shovel, and all the gallant Spirits with him; who, in
the Admiral Ship, with Three Men of War, and all their Men, running upon these
Rocks, right before the Wind, in a dark Night, were lost, and not a Man saved,
in his Return from a fruitless Expedition against Toulon.

They tell us of Eleven Sail of Merchant Ships Homeward-bound, and richly laden
from the Southward, who had the like Fate, in the same Place, a great many
Years ago; and that some of them coming from Spain, and having a great Quantity
of Bullion or Pieces of Eight on board, the Money frequently drives on Shore
still, and that in good Quantities, especially after stormy Weather.

This may be the Reason why, as we observed during our short Stay here, several
Mornings after it had blown something hard in the Night, the Sands were covered
with Country People, running to and fro to see if the Sea had cast up any thing
of value. This the Seamen call going a shoring; and it seems they often find
good Purchase. Sometimes also dead Bodies are cast up here, the Consequence of
Shipwrecks among those fatal Rocks and Islands; as also broken Pieces of Ships,
Casks, Chests, and almost every thing that will float, or roll on Shore by the
Surges of the Sea.

Nor is it seldom that the savage Country People scuffle and fight about the
Right to what they find, and that in a desperate manner; so that this Part of
Cornwall may truly be said to be inhabited by a fierce and ravenous People,
like those on the Coast of Sussex; for they are so greedy and eager for Prey,
that they are charged with strange, bloody, and cruel Dealings, even sometimes
with one another; but especially with poor distressed Seamen, when they are
forced on Shore by Tempests, and seek Help for their Lives, and where they find
the Rocks themselves not more merciless, than the People who range about them
for their Prey.

Here also, as a farther Testimony of the immense Riches which have been lost
at times upon this Coast, we found several Engineers and Projectors with Diving
Engines, attempting to recover what had been lost, and that not always
unsuccessfully.

From the Tops of the Hills, on this Extremity of the Land, you may see out
into what they call the Chaps of the Chanel; which, as it is the greatest Inlet
of Commerce, and the most frequented by Merchant Ships of any Place in the
World; so one seldom looks out to Sea-ward, but something new presents of Ships
passing, or repassing, either on the great or lesser Chanel.

This Point of the Lizard, which runs out to the Southward, and the other
Promontory mentioned above, make the Two Angles, or Horns, as they are called,
from whence it is supposed this Country received its first Name of Cornwall, or,
as Mr. Camden says, Cornubia in the Latin, and in the British, Kerneu, as
running out in two vastly extended Horns.

The Lizard Point is still more useful (though not so far West) than the other,
which is more properly called the Land's-end, being more frequently first
discovered from the Sea; and is therefore the general Guide, and the Land which
the Ships choose to make first; being then sure, that they are past Scilly.

Nature has fortified this Part of the Island of Britain in a strange manner,
and so as is worth a Traveller's Observation.

First, there are the Islands of Scilly, and the Rocks about them; which are
placed like Outworks to resist the first Assaults of this Enemy the Ocean, and
so break the Force of it; as the Piles or Stirlings (as they are called) are
placed before the solid Stone-work of London Bridge, to fence off the Force,
either of the Water, or Ice, or any thing else that might be dangerous to the
Work.

Then there are a vast Number of sunk Rocks, (so the Seamen call them) besides
such as are visible, and above Water; which gradually lessen the Quantity of
Water, that would otherwise lie with an infinite Weight and Force upon the
Land. It Is observed, that these Rocks lie under Water for a great way off into
the Sea on every Side the said Two Horns or Points of Land; so breaking the
Force of the Water, and lessening the Weight of it.

But besides this, the whole Terra Firma, or Body of the Land, which makes this
Part of the Isle of Britain, seems to be one solid Rock, as if it was formed by
Nature to resist the otherwise irresistible Power of the Ocean. And indeed, if
one was to observe with what Fury the Sea comes on sometimes against the Shore
here, especially at the Lizard Point, where there are but few, if any
Outworks, (as I call them) to resist it; how high the Waves come rolling
forward, storming on the Back of one another, particularly when the Wind blows
off Sea, one would wonder, that even the strongest Rocks themselves should be
able to resist and repel them. But, as I said, the Country seems to be one
great Body of Stone, and prepared so on purpose.

And yet, as if all this was not enough, Nature has provided another strong
Fence, and that is, that these vast Rocks are, in a manner, cemented together
by the solid and weighty Ore of TIN and COPPER, especially the latter, which is
plentifully found upon the very outmost Edge of the Land, and with which the
Stones may be said to be solder'd together, lest the Force of the Sea should
separate and disjoint them, and, breaking in upon these Fortifications of the
Island, destroy its chief Security.

This is certain, that there is a more than ordinary Quantity of Tin, Copper,
and Lead also, fixed by the Great Author of Nature in these very remote Angles;
so that the Ore is found upon the very Surface of the Rocks a good way into the
Sea, and does not only lie, as it were, upon or between the Stones among the
Earth, which in that Case might be washed from it by the Sea; but is even
blended or mixed in with the Stones themselves, so that the Stones must be
split into Pieces to come at it. By this Mixture the Rocks are made exceedingly
weighty and solid, and thereby still the more qualified to repel the Force of
the Sea.

Upon this remote Part of the Island we saw great Numbers of that famous kind
of Crows, which is known by the Name of the Cornish Chough: they are the same
kind which are found in Switzerland among the Alps, and which, Pliny pretended,
were peculiar to those Mountains, and calls the Pyrrhocorax. The Body is Black,
the Legs, Feet, and Bill, of a Yellow, almost to a Red. I could not find, that
it was affected for any good Quality it had, nor is the Flesh good to eat, for
it feeds much on Fish and Carrion; it is counted little better than a Kite, for
it is of a ravenous Quality, and is very mischievous; it will steal and carry
away any think it finds about the House, that is not too heavy, though not fit
for its Food; as Knives, Forks, Spoons and Linen Cloths, or whatever it can fly
away with; sometimes, they say, it has stolen Bits of Firebrands, or lighted
Candles, and lodged them in the Stacks of Corn, and the Thatch of Barns and
Houses, and set them on Fire.

I might take up many Sheets in describing the valuable Curiosities of this
little Chersonese, called the Land's-end, in which lies an immense Treasure,
and many Things worth Notice, besides those to be found upon the Surface: but I
am too near the End of this Letter. If I have Opportunity, I shall take Notice
of some Part of what I omit here, in my Return by the Northern Shore of the
County. In the mean time,

I am, etc.

The END of VOL. I.
INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.
A
ABbotsbury Page 297, 298 Addenbroke, Dr. 103 Addington 154 Alcocke, Bishop of
Ely 97 Ald, River 41 Aldburgh ibid. Aldermaston 244 Aldham Common 28 Alexander
Severus, his Coin 285 Alfred, King, raises a Fortification 148. Routs the Danes
320 Alphage, St. Archbishop of Canterbury, killed 120 Alre, River 199 Alresford
245 Alsham 66 Alton 207 Alva, Duke de, his Persecution 157 Ambresbury 255
Ambrius founds a Monastery ibid. Amphitheatre 162. Another 294 Anderida 172
Andover 254 Anglesey, Earl of, his Seat 209 Anindel, Thomas 154 Anne and
Thomas, Accident which befell that Ship 134, 135 Anne, Queen, delights in
Windsor 242 St. Anne's Fort 70 Appledore 171 Appledore-come 206 Arington 104
Arran, Earl of, his Seat 209 Arthur, King, his round Table 250, 251 Arun, River
189 Arundel ibid. Arundel, Earl of, without the Royal Creation 190 Ashburton
328 Ashcomb-hills 217 Ashford 152, 172 Asparagus, the best p. 131 Athelstane,
King, where he enacted Laws 149. Founds a Minster 308. A Monastery 312. Subdues
Exeter 320. Conquers the Isles of Scilly 352 Aubery 285 Audley, Thomas, Lord
Chancellor 98. His Monument 105 Audley-end 105 Augustine, the Monk 155. His
Monastery 157. Chapel 158. Aumont, Duke de, his Opinion of Sir Fisher Tench 's
Seat 115 Avon, River 274, 280, 285, 292 Aurelius Ambrose, King, rebuilds a
Monastery 255 Axminster 307 Aylesford 152
B
Bacon, Sir Nicolas 37 Badew, Richard 93 Bagshot-heath 209, 210 Bakely 173
Ball, John, a seditious Preacher 29 Balsham, Hugh, Bishop of Ely 93. Institutes
a Priory 98 Banstead-downs 225 Barham-downs 165 Barking 3 to 7 Barnardiston,
Sir Samuel, his Seat 23 Barnwell 90, 91 Barrington, Lord Viscount 10 Barrow,
Dr. Isaac 99 Barrows described 266 to 272 Barnstable Hundred 8 Barton, Sir
Henry 38 Basingstoke 242, 243 Bateman, William, Bishop of Norwich 95
Battle-abbey 178 Battley, Archdeacon 38 Bavard-castle 148 Beacon-hill
Light-house 18, 178 Beaufort, Cardinal, his Monument 248 Beaulieu 10 Beccles 46
Beckenham 223 Becket, Thomas a 155, 156 Beckman, Sir Martin 5 Beddington, 124,
232, 233 Beechworth-castle 218 Bennet, his Enthusiasm 277 Bentley, Dr. Richard
99 Bevis-mount 204, 205 Bicton 311 Bigin-gate 165 Bigod, Hugh, his Boast 46
Bildeston 31 Billericay 20 Bingham, William 95 Birch Woods 128 Bittern 204
Black Heath 121 Black Jack, Earl of Pembroke 283 Black-Notely 109 Blackstakes
142 Black Tail, the Sand 7 Blackwater, River p. 6 Blandford 300, 301
Bleechingley 222 Blithbury 45 Blois, Bishop 252 Blow-mill-course 280 Blundel,
Peter 325 Blyth, River 42, 45 Boadicea, Queen 10 Bocking 108, 109 Bodley, Sir
Thomas 325 Bolton, Duke of, his Seats 207, 245 Boniface, Archbishop of
Canterbury 154 Boreman, Sir William 120 Boscawen, Family 350 Botesdale 37
Boxford 35 Box-hill 216 Boxley-hill 152 Braintree 108 Bramber 188 Brampton, Dr.
John de 325 Brandon 76 Branksey 292, 293 Bray, John, his Strength 338
Bredenstone 167 Breed 173 Brentley 80 Brentwood 19 Brereton, Sir John 100
Bridport 298, 299 Brighthelmston 187, 188 Bristol, Earl of, his Seat, 38
Britiffe, Edmund, Esquire 37 Britiffe, Robert, Esquire 74 British Camps 273 Brixham
332, 333 Bromley 223 Broom 43 Brown, Sir Thomas 54 Brunaburgh Battle 308
Buckfastleigh 322 Buckland Monachorum 329 Bull-hide Haven 177 Bungay 45 Bures
35 Burgh-castle 46 St. Burien 350 Burnet, Bishop 277 Bury St. Edmunds 31 to 35
Busselton 199 Butley 44
C.
Calshot-castle 205 Came, River 77, 82, 108 Camalodunum 10 Camberwell 232
Camboritum 108 Cambridge Town and University 92 to 104. Castle 104
Cambridgeshire, described 80, 81 Camden, the Place of his Retirement 128.
Quoted 159. Rectified 216, 217 Camel, River 341 Candy Island 7 Cann, River 20
Canons-leigh, and Canonsteing 322 Canterbury 155 to 158 Canute, King, founds a
Church 32. His Command to the Tide 204 Capel, Sir William 36 Carew, Mr. his
Survey of Cornwall p. 337 Carisbrook-castle 206 Carleton, Bishop, his Monument
193 Carrots, the best, where 162 Carvilium 285 Carvilius, his Tomb 268, 284
Cashalton 224, 225, 232 Cassiterides 352 Caster 53, 64 Castle-Rising 67 St.
Catharine's Hill 213, 214 Catton 66 Cawtater 335 Cavalcade, an extraordinary
one 344 Cavendish 36 Caxton, first English Printer 104 Chagford 328 Chanel 352
Chaps of the Chanel 354 Chard 303 Charing 154 Charlton in Kent 123, 124, in
Sussex 195 Chatham 137 to 141 Chediston 45 Chelmer, River 6, 20 Chelmsford 20,
111 Chertsey 211. Its Bridge 229 Chefilhurst 128 Chest, Bishop 277 Chesterford
108 Chesterton 303 Chichester 192 to 195 Chichley, Archbishop, his Monument 156
Child, Sir Josiah 141 Chilmark 280 Chipping-Onger 113 Chiselbury 284 Choughs,
Cornish ones 356 Christ-church, in Wilts 274, 289 Chute-hill 286 Cibber,
Statues made by him 249 Cinque Ports 168 Cissa, King 193 Clapham 232, 233 Clare
35 Clare, Lady Elizabeth 93 Claremont 227, 228 Clarence, Duke of, his Monument
156 Clarendon-house 278 Clarke, Dr. Alured 259 Cleaver, Alderman 226 St. Clear
341, 350 Clerk, Sir Francis 100 Cloberry, Sir John, his Monument 248 Clothing
Trade 212, 213 Clyde 66 Cobb 300 Cober, River 349 Cobham 216 Cobham-hall 144
Cobles, what 58 Cockham Wood 143 Coke, Arundel, Esquire condemned for a barbarous
Outrage 33, 34 Coke, Sir Thomas 19 Colchester 11 to 13 Colchester-water 7.
Oysters taken there 8 Coln, River 12 Colnies Hundred 40 Constantius builds
Silchester p. 244 Constantius Chlorus makes a Road 278, 279 Coombe 226, 233
Corse 293 Cornish Choughs 356 Cornwall described 337, 338 Cornwallis, Ld. his
Palace 80 Coterels, what 144 Cottman, Dean 219 Courticello, Cardinal, his
Monument 156 Courtney, Archbishop 170 Cowdrey 191, 192 Cows 205, 206 Cowick
Priory 322 Cowley, his Retirement 211 Cranbrook 153, 172 Crockhaven Torr 328,
329 Cromere 65 Cromere Bay, what called by the Sailors 64 Crook, River 194
Crookhorn 303 Crooksea-water 8 Crouch, River ibid. Cows-hall 38 Croydon 224,
232 Cuckold's Point 126 Cullyford 309 Cuthberga builds a Monastery 290
Cuttenbeck 340
D
Dagenham 5 Dahl, his fine Painting of Queen Anne 278 Darcy, Sir Conyers, his
Seat 215 Darking 219, 220 Dart, River 223, 326, 330 Dartford 129, 130 Dartmouth
330 to 332 Davers, their Seat 80 Deal 163 to 165 Deben, River 39 Debenham 38
Deepden 219 Dengy Hundred 8 Dengyness 171 Deptford 117, 118 Devil's-drop 167
Devil's-dyke 80 Devonshire described 307 Devonshire, Earl of, his violent
Resentment on a trifling Account 318 Dioclesian, his Coin 167 Dola 163
Dorchester 294, 295 Dorn-money, what ibid. Dover 165 to 168. Dover Castle 166
Downham 75 Downs 163 to 165 Drake, Sir Francis 325 Drew, Mr. murdered 30
Druids, one of their Temples 350 Dubris 165 Duck, Dr. Arthur 325 Ducket, Andrew
97 Duckoys 82 Dulwich-wells 223, 224 Dungarth, King of Cornwall, drowned 342
Dungeon-hill 157 Dunmow, the Flitch of Bacon in the Priory there p. 20 Dunwich
41 Durdans 226 Durobrivis 136 Durolenum 154 Duroverus 155 Dutch, their Attempt
on the Royal Navy 143 Duze, River 66 Dysert, Earl of, his Seat 80
E
Eanswide, Princess, builds a Nunnery 168 East Angles, the Boundary of that
Kingdom 80 Easterbergholt 36 East-Loe 344, 345 Easton 43 East-Tilbury 5
Eastwell 152 Ebbesflete 161 Eddystone 334 Edgar, King, builds a Nunnery 253
Edmund, King 32. Where murdered 45 Edward the Elder, King 10 Edward III. places
the Flemings at Sudbury 29. Founder of King's-hall 99. Builds Queenborough ana
the Castle 146. Makes several Ordinances relating to Sea Affairs 147 Edward the
Black Prince 155 Edward IV. begins Portsmouth Fortifications 197. His
capricious Conduct to the Foy-men 343 Edward VI. his Benefactions to
Christ's-college 97. His Armor 283 Egham Causway 210 Egmont, Earl of, his Seat
124 Eleanor, Consort of Henry III. 255 Elizabeth, Consort of Edward IV. 97
Elizabeth, Queen, sends the Flemings to Norwich 54. Builds larger Ships than
were used before 126. Her Care for the Grandeur of the City of London 130.
Inscription to her Honor 147. Gives the Walloons a Church 157. Her
Pocket-pistol 166. She builds a Castle 352 Elliott -- -- -- a Benefactor to St.
Germans 340 Eltham, 125, 128 Ely 77 Epping Forest 21, 113, 114, 116 Epsom 225,
226 Erasmus, his Description of Thomas a Becket 's Shrine 156 Erpingham, Lord
167 Esher 227 Essex described p. 2, 4, 11, 111 Ethelbert King, his Palace 157.
Pagan Chapel 158. His Queen ibid. Etheldred, King, his Monument 291. Founds Two
Convents 312 Exe, River 311, 317, 318, 322, 224 Exeter, Marchioness of, her
Monument 291 Exeter City 311 to 322 Eye 38 Eyles, Sir John, his House 19 Air,
Sir Simon 76
F
Fagg, Sir Robert, Bart. his Seat 189 St. Faith 's 56, 66 Fakenham 66 Falmouth
Haven and Town 346 to 348 Farnham 196 Farlo 286 Farnham 207, 208 Farnham Market
194, 195 Feast of Reconciliation at Lynn 72 Felixstow 40 Felsted 111 Fens 75,
76, 81, 82, 83 Fetcham 215 Feversham 148 to 151 Fishes, Seventeen monstrous
ones taken 75. Great Number caught at once 218, 219 Fishwick 's Hostel p 99
Fitzwalter, Earl of, his Seat p 20 Flamstead-house p 118 Flats p 116
Fleet-ditch, a Person of Quality, and the Reverend Mr. Betham, drowned there p
244 Folkstone p 168 Fonnereau, Claude, Esquire his Seat p 27 Ford-abbey p 308
Fordington p 294, 295 Fornham p 31 Fowey, River p 343 Fox, Bishop, his Monument
p 247 Fox, George, his Stone Building p 145 Fox, James, his Seat p 215 Fox, Sir
Stephen, his Beneficence p 286 Foy p 342, 343 Framlingham p 44 Frampton, Mr. p
81 Fulmerston, Sir Richard, his Will p 76 Frog-pool p 128 Froom, River p 292,
293
G
Gad's-hill p 135 Gale, Dr. digs Bones out of several Tumuli p 123 Gates, Sir
Thomas, shipwrecked p 309 Gatton p 222 George I. his Benefactions to the
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford p. 101, 102, 103. His dangerous Voyage
175, 176. Brings Hampton Court into Request 242 George II. his Statue at
Greenwich 120 St. Germans 340 Giffard's-hall 36 St. Giles's-hill 252
Gillingham-castle 141 Glanvill, Sir John, and Sergeant 326 Godalmin 214
Godolchan 351 Godolphin, Earl, his Seat 81 Godstone 222 Godwood 191, 194, 195
Gogmagog-hills 81 Gonevil, Edmund 95 Goodwin Sands 171 Gosport 199 Goudhurst
153 Grampound 345 Grant, River 82 Gravel-pits 2 Gravesend 130 to 135 Green-Man
3 Greenwich 118 to 121 Gregory, Sir William 38 Gresham, the Town 66 Greshams,
Brothers, Lord-Mayors of London ibid. Grey-coats of Kent 153 G^^le-bridge 329,
330 G^^^ford 212, 213, 214 Guldy hall 19 Gundulph, Bishop, his Effigies 137
Gunning, Bishop of Ely 98 Gunpowder Treason, where contrived 4
D
Hackney Marsh, Stone Causeway there 2 Haddenham Level 83 Hadley 28 Hales, Sir
John 159 Halesworth 45 Halldown 322 Ham 229 Ham-Ouze 335, 336 Hampton Court 236
to 242 Hankey, Sir Joseph, his Seat 36 Hanmer, Sir Thomas, his Seat ibid.
Harold, King, builds a Monastery 113. His Gravestone 114 Harrington, Lord, his
Seat 230, 231 Hartsmere Hundred 43 Harwich 15 to 17 Hastings 177
Hatfield-Peverel 21, 22 Haverhill 36 St. Helens 206 Helford 349, 350 Helston
346 Hemingston, its merry Tenure 36 Henault Forest 3, 21 Hengist, his Treachery
255 Henry II. 46. Connives at the Murder of Thomas a Becket p. 155 Henry III.
his Battle with the Barons 187 Henry V. some of his Broadpieces found 96 Henry
VI. the Founder of King's College 95. Makes the Isle of Wight a Kingdom 206
Henry VII. abolishes a Nunnery 97. Inlarges Greenwich Palace, etc. 119.
Augments Portsmouth Fortifications 197. Removes the Bones of Henry VI. 211.
Gives the Sword to the City of Exeter 317 Henry VIII. his Seat 10. Demolishes
the Abbey at Bary 32. Digs in vain for Gold 37. Changes the Name of Lynn
Episcopi to Regis 69. Founder of Trinity College Cambridge 99. Builds a
Storehouse, and establishes the Corporation of Trinity-house at Deptford 117.
Holds his Feasts at Greenwich 118. Completes Greenwich Palace 119. Repairs
Queenborough Castle, and builds others 146. Seizes on the Monastery at
Canterbury 156. Builds Dover-pier 167. Builds Sandgate-castle 169. Builds
Southampton Fort 203. His Armor 283 Herbert, William, Bishop of Norwich 60
Hereford, Lord Viscount, his Seat 27 Hertford-castle 10 Hervey of Stanton 99
Hickling 66 Hide-house 251, 252 Hitcham, Sir Robert 38 Hithe, at Colchester 12
Hoare, Mr. his Seat 20 Hogmagog-hills 81 Hollingbourn-hill 152 Holm 104
Holmward 220, 221 Holt, Lord Chief Justice, his Monument 51 Holt, the Town 66
Holy-cross Hospital 252 Honedon 36 Honiton 309, 310 Hooker, Mr. Richard 325
Hop-grounds 158 Hops, great Plantations of them 151 Hopton, Sir Ralph, defeats
the Parliament Army 339 Horndon 6 Horn-fair 125 Horse-races 78 Houghton 67
Hoxne 32, 45 Humphrey, Duke of Gloncester 35, 119 Hunter, Governor, his Seat
124 Hurseley 200 Hythe 169
I.
James I. incorporates St. Mary Magdalen 's Hospital p. 72 James II. deprives
Hadley of its Charter 28. His Statue, and its servile Inscription 72, 73.
Builds a Stable on Hogmagog-hills 81. Ill treated 149, 150. Adds to Portsmouth
Fortifications 197 Jane, Lady, proclaimed Queen 45 Iciani 11 Ickworth 38
Icleton 108 Jewel, Bishop 277 Ilford 4 Indio 322 Infirmary at Winchester 253
Ingatestone 19 Ingatestone Hall and Town 111 Inigo Jones 283 John, King, his
Gifts to the Corporation of Lynn 73. His amorous Adventure at Charlton 125.
Builds a Palace 279. Changes the Day of Honiton Market 310 Jones -- -- - Esquire
his Seat 114 Jouring, what 303 Ipswich 23 to 27 Isening-street 294 Islip,
Simon, Archbishop of Canterbury 154 Itching, River 203, 204 St. Ives 82 Ivil,
River 303 Julia Domna, her Head 312, 313 Julius Caesar, where supposed to land
161, 163, 165 Julius II. Pope, abolishes a Nunnery 97 Ixworth 37
K.
Kellington 338 Kelvedon 11 Kennington 232 Kent described 117, 127, 128, 129,
152 Kentigern and Horbus, their Tomb 154 Kett, his Rebellion 53, 72
Kett's-cotty-house 154 Kew-green 231 Kilmington 308 King, Bishop, his Monument
193 King, Lord Chancellor 326 King-barrow 267, 284 Kingsclere 243 King's-ferry
145 Kingston 226 Knowles, Sir Robert 136 Knowl-house 184
L.
Lack, River 31 Landguard Fort 15, 16, 18 Land's-end 354, 356 Langbro' p. 286
Langton, Bishop, his Monument 156 Lark, River 38 A Last, what 58 Lavant, River
192 Lavenham 30 Lavington-creek 22 Launceston 338 Layton, or Leighton-stone 3,
115 Leaden Hall 76 Leatherhead 216 Lech 171 Ledgate 36 Lee, River 113 Lee 's
Priory 20, 111 Leigh 6 Lemanis 169 Len, River 154 Lenham ibid. Leostoff 50
Leskard 339 Lestwithiel 343, 344 Letheringham 43 Jews 186, 187 Limne 169, 170,
171 Linton 105 Lisle, Sir George 11 Lith-hill 221, 222 Littlebury 107 Lizard
Point 354, 355 Lo, River 344 London, the Ship, burnt 143 Loughborough-house
232 Low-Layton 115 Lucas, Sir Charles 11 Lucius, King, 166, 247 Lufkin, Richard
43 Luggershall 255 Lyme-Regis 299, 300 Lymington 289 Lynn 68 to 75
M.
Madviacis 153 Maen-amber 351 Magmenots, a Norman Family 118 Maiden-bower 70
Maidstone 151, 153 Malden 9 Malden-water 7 Manchester, Earl of 72 Maningtree 22
Mareworth-castle 154 Margaret, Queen 96 Margaret, Countess of Richmond 97, 98
Margate 159 Marham 66 Market-Jew 349 Marlborough, Duke of 326 Martin, Sir Roger
30 Martin's-hall-hill 285, 286 Mary, Queen of France 33 Mary I. retires to
Framlingham-castle 45. Orders the Lord Stourton to be hanged 277 Mary II.
founds the Hospital at Greenwich 119. Her Apartments at Hampton Court 237. Fond
of Gardening 238 Mary, Princess, becomes a Nun 255 St. Mary 's Hamlet 203 St.
Mary Isle 352 St. Mary Ottery p. 310 Maryland Point 2 Maud, Empress 46.
Assisted Exeter 321 Maumbury, what 295 St. Mawes 346 Maynard, Sir John 326
Medway, River 136, 141, 142, 143, 146, 151, 152, 154, 181, 185, 186 Melcomb 296
Melford 30 Membury 309 Mendlesham 38 Merlin 's Cave 231 Mersey Island 8 Mersh
77 Mew, Bishop 247 St. Michael 's College 99 St. Michael 's Mount 351 Mickleham
216 Midae 191 Midhurst ibid. Milburn, Sir John 30 Milden-hall 38 Mildmay, Sir
Walter 99 Milton 148 Mineral Waters, their Virtues 181 to 184 Mines, Tin,
Copper, and Lead 227 Mole, River 216 to 219 Molesey 216 Monk, General, his
Picture 313. Where born 326 Monmouth, Duke of 299 Montacute, Lord Viscount 178.
His Seat 191, 192 Moor, Bishop of Ely 101 Moor-stone 337 Morden, Sir John, his
Hospital at Black Heath 121 to 123 More-park 208, 209 Morley, Bishop of
Winchester 246 Mount-Edgcumbe 336 Mount's-bay 351 Mullets, where the best
caught 190
N.
Nadder, River 274, 280, 284 Nase, the Promontory 14 Needham 37 Needles, the
Straight so called 289 Nene, River 82 Nero, his Gold Coin 311 Nevil, Dean of
Canterbury 99 New-chapel, (a Chapel of Ease) 4 Newenden 172 New Forest 200.
Proposal for settling the Palatines there 287 to 289 Newhaven 187 Newmarket 78,
80 Newmarket Heath 80 New Park 229 Newport 206 Newton, Sir Henry, his Seat 124
Newton-bushel 326 Neyland 29 Nicks, the Highwayman, his prodigious Expedition
p. 135, 136 St. Nicolas 335 Nigel, second Bishop of Ely 98 Nonsuch 226 Norfolk
described 52, 53, 56, 65. Duke of, his extraordinary Privilege 190 Northampton,
Henry Howard Earl of, founds a College at Greenwich 120, 121 North-Foreland 14.
Brick Tower there 15. Its Situation 161 Northleigh 309 North Waltham 66 Norton
37 Norton, Colonel 200 to 202 Norwich 53, 54 Norwood 223
O.
Ockingham 242 Old Basing-house 242 Old Sarum 273, 274 Onflow, Lord, his Seat
215 Orchestra 280 Ore, River 40, 44 Orford 40 Orford, Earl of 78 Orfordness 40
Orwel, River 16, 22, 23 Osey Island 7 Ouse, River 68, 77 Ouse, Great and Little
82 Oyster-fishery at Rochester 141. The best where 151
P.
Palmerston, Lord Viscount, his Seat 231, 232 Paper-mill, the first in England
129 Papworth 104 Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury 94 Park-hill 302 Peckham 232
Peckham, Bishop, his Monument 156 Pelham, Henry, Esquire his Seat 227 Pembroke,
Earl of, his Improvements at Wilton-house 281 Pendennis 346 Pendering-hall 36
Penryn 349 Pensance 350 Pepys -- -- Esquire 98 Perry, Captain, stops Dagenham
Breach 5 Peterborough 82 Peterborough, Earl of, his Maze 204 Petersfield 207
Petersham 229 Petre, Lord 111 Petre, Sir William 325 Petworth 190 Pevensey
Harbor 177, 178 Peverell, Randolph, his Story 22 Pheasants, where in great
Plenty 65 Philippa, Queen 146 Piddle, River p. 289 Piercies, Earls of
Northumberland, their Seat 190 Pilchards, a great Shoal of them 331. Fishing
for them 348, 349, 350 Pinnock, Mr. Henry 131 Placentia 119 Plymouth 334 to 336
Plympton 328, 329, 333 Pole, Cardinal, his Monument 156 Polesloe Priory 322
Pool 289, 292 Poor, Bishop 276 Port of London, its Extent 14 Portchester 196
Portland and Castle 296 to 298 Portsdown-hills 198 Portsmouth 196 to 198
Powderham-castle 322 Powder-mill blown up 150 Prom-hill overflowed 171 Purbeck
293 Purford 216 Pyrrhocorax 356
Q
Quarley-hills 255 Queenborough 146 to 149
R.
Raleigh, Sir Walter 325 Ramsgate 161 Ray, the learned Mr. his Monument 109,
110 Rayley 6 Raynham 67, 144 Rech 80 Rech-dyke ibid. Redbridge 199 Redgrave 51
Redhouse at Deptford burnt 118 Redwald, King of the East Angles 44 Reepham 66
Rendleham 44 Richborough-castle 161 Richmond 231 Richmond, Duke of, his Forest
196 Richmond, Countess of, her Retirement 212 Ringwood 292 Riverhead 223 Roan,
Mr. John 120 Rochester 136, 137, 141, 142 Rochester Bridge 136 Rochester, Earl
of, his House burnt 229, 230 Rochester Hundred 8 Rochford 6 Rocks, the natural
Fortification of Britain 354 to 376 Roding 113 Roll, Henry, Esquire his Tenure 311
Roman Camp, and Military Way 234, 235, 273 Roman Inscription 194 Roman, John,
his Strength 338 Romney, Ld. his Seat p. 124 Romney, the Village 171 Romney
Marsh ibid. Old Romney ibid. Romsey 253 Roodings 113 Rooke, Sir George 167
Rother, River 171, 172 Rotherham, Archbishop of York 100 Roxborough, Duke of,
his Seat 210 Royal Catharine sunk 142 Royal Charles carried off 143 Royal
Sovereign, how soon fitted out 140 Rufus, William, his Fate 286, 287
Rugemont-castle 313 Rumford 19 Russel, Lord, relieves Exeter 321 Rushbrook 80
Rutupiae 160 Ryalton 351 Rye 173 Rygate 222
S
Saffron-Walden 105 Salinae 303 Salisbury 272 to 278 Salisbury Plains 272, 273
Saltash 337 Saltwood-castle 170 Sancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury 99
Sandfort-castle 296 Sandgate-castle 169 Sandown-castle 165 Sandwich 162 Sandy
303 Sandys, Samuel, Esquire 78 Sanham 206 Saxminden 41 Say's-court, the Seat of Sir
John Evelyn 118 Scarborough, Earl of, his Seat 191 Scilly Rocks 352 Scots
Runts, where and how fatten'd 56 Seacoast of Yarmouth very dangerous 62 to 64.
dreadful Instances of it 64, 65 Seckford, Thomas 39 Seven Burnhams 67 Sevenoak
186 Sevenoak, Sir William ibid. Severus, his Silver Coins 311 Shaftesbury 302
Sheen 231 Sheep, great Numbers of them 295 Sheerness 142, 143, 144 Shelly, Sir
John, his Seat 189 Shelness 149 Shepey Isle, 143 to 146 Sherlock, Bishop 276
Ships, how caused to stop at Gravesend 132, 133 Shipway 171 Shirebourn 301, 302
Shoe-beacon 7 Shoeberry ibid. Shoeberryness p. 7 Shooters-hill 121, 129
Shoreham 188 Shovell, Sir Cloudesly 140 His Fate 352, 353 Sigebert, King 32
Silchester 243, 244 Silurum Insulae 352 Sitomagus 75 Sittingbury 148 Slate, the
best 337 Smithies, Mr. Ferdinando 97 Snape Monastery 41, 43 Snare-gate 166
Snaybell 77 Snetham 67 Sogenhoc Chapel 43 Sohan 77 Summers, Sir George,
ship-wreck'd 309 Somerset, Duke of, his noble Seat 190, 191 Sorbiodunum 273
South-Foreland 163 Southampton, 199, 202 to 204 Southwark 233 to 235 Southwick
200 Southwould 42. Sea Fight in its Bay 46, 47 Sowl bay 42 Spillman, Sir John
129 Spithead 206 Spits, Sands so called 8 Spring-garden 234 Squirries 222
Stanar 160 Standard-hill 178 Stanes-bridge 210, 211 Stane-street 170 Stannary
Towns 328, 329 Stansted-house 196 Stanton-drew 359 Steel, Sir Richard, his
Stratagem 250 Stephen, King 46. Founds a Monastery at Feversham 149. His and
his Queen's Tombs 150 Steyning 188 Stoke juxta Neyland 36 Stokebridge 254
Stomacher 217 Stone-henge 256 to 266 Stoney-street 219 Storm, the great 164
Stour, River 16, 22, 35, 36, 108, 172, 289, 300 Stourbridge 301 Stourton, Lord,
his Crime, Execution, and Monument 277 Stow-market 37 Stratford, in Essex 2
Stratford, in Suffolk 36 Strethal 108 Stretham 224, 232 Stroud 137 Sturbridge
Fair 83 to 90 Sudbourne 43 Sudbury 29 Sudbury, Simon Theobald, Archbishop of
Canterbury ibid. Suffolk, Subscription for the Widows and Orphans of Clergymen
there 27, 28 Suffolk, High, described 40, 49, 50. For what particularly famous
p. 48 Suffolk, West, how supported 50. Part of it described 79 Sussex described
185 Swain, King, takes Exeter 320 Swale, River 146 Swallows, Account of their
Departure 47 Swallows in the River Mole 217, 219 Swamp 142
T.
Tamar, River 335, 336, 337, 338 Tankerville, Earl of, his Seat 191 Tavistock
328, 329 Tavy, River 329 Tailor, Dr. Rowland, martyred 28 Temple, Sir William,
his Will 208 Tench, Sir Fisher, his Seat 115 Ten-mile-course 284 Tenterden 153,
171 Test, River 199 Thames, River 121, 124, 127, 229, 232 Thanet, Earls of,
several of their Monuments 144 Thanet Isle 159 Theodosius, his Coin 311
Thetford 54, 75 Thompson, Robert, Esquire his Tomb 154 Thorndon 111 to 113 Thorney
Isle 77 Thornhill, Sir James, his fine Paintings at Greenwich 120 Three
Hundreds, Marshes in Essex so called 6. Their Names 8. Fatal to the Fair Sex,
and why ibid. Thrembethe-bridge 145 Tichfield 199 Tidwell 309 Tilbury Fort 5, 6
Tilney, Earl, his Seat 114, 115 Timber, prodigious Quantities still remaining
in England 185, 190 Tin Mines 355, 356 Tofts, Mary, the Rabbet-woman 214
Tonstal, Bishop of Durham 100 Tooting 233 Torbay 332 Torr-abbey ibid. Totness
326 to 328 Town-Malling 223 Townshend, late Lord Viscount, his Benefactions 74,
101 Traveling Norfolk Fellowship 98 Trausantum 203 Tregony 345, 348
Tremod-ferry 145 Trewardreth Bay and Town 345 Truro 345, 346, 347, 348
Tulip-tree, a fine one 114 Tunbridge p. 179 to 184 Tunn, River 180 Tunstall,
Broad-pieces found there 159 Turkeys, prodigious Droves of them 48, 49 Turnips,
where first used for feeding Cattle 48
V.
Vaga 153 Vagniacis ibid. Venta Icenorum 53 Venus, her Marble Statue, 281
Vespasian, where he landed 332 Ufford 43 Ufford, John, Archbishop of Canterbury
154 Villa Faustini 10 Vindomia 243 Vortimer, King, his Sepulcher 160 Uplime 309
Upnor 142 Uvall, Bishop 277 Uvius, Prior of Hulm 32
W
Wainfleet, Bishop, his Monument 247, 248 Waller, Sir William, ruins the
Bishop's Palace at Winchester, etc. 246 The Walls 285, 294 Walmar-castle 165
Walpole, Sir Robert, his Seat 67. His singular Felicity 68. Inscription on the
Foundation stone of his House ibid.
Walsingham 67 Waltham-abbey 113 Waltheof, Earl, beheaded by William I. 252
Walton, in Essex, Copperas found there 15 Walton in Suffolk 39 Walton in Surry
228 Wansdike 280 Wansled-house 3, 116 Ward, Bishop, his Benefaction, and
Monument 277 Wareham 293 Warham, Archbishop, rails Rochester Bridge with Iron
136 Warminster 280 Warner, Bishop of Rochester 223 Warwick, Earl of, and King
of Wight, his Palace 206, 233 Watermen, Act for regulating them 134
Watling-street 123, 137, 165 Waveney, River 45, 46, 50, 55 Weald 190 The
Weddings 350 Welland, River 82 Wells 66 Westerham 222 West-Hythe 169 West-Loe
344, 345 Wey, River p. 212, 216, 296 Weybridge 228 Weyburn-Hope 66 Weyhill 254,
255 Weymouth 294, 296 Whalebone 3 Wheatear, the Bird 180 Whitchurch 243
Whitgift, Archbishop, his Charities 224 Wickham Market 43 Wight, Isle 205 to
207 Wightred, King of Kent 165 William the Conqueror translates the Sea of
Dunwich to Thetford 42. Takes Norwich 53. Builds a Castle at Cambridge 104.
Obliges Harold to take an Oath 166. Where he landed 177. His decisive Battle,
ibid. Institutes an Abbey ibid. His Tyranny 286 William of Wickham, Assistant
to Edward III. in building Windsor-castle 146. His Monument 248. His History
248, 249 William III. restores Audley-end to the Earl of Suffolk 106. Founds
Greenwich Hospital 119. Improves Hampton Court 237. His Taste for Painting 240,
241 Where he landed 332. Causes a wet Dock to be built at Plymouth 336 Willy,
River 274, 280, 281, 284 Wilton-house, and Town 280, 285 Wilts described 279
Wimbleton 233 Wimbourn, St. Gyles 's 292 Wimburn-minster 253, 290, 291, 292
Wimple-hall 104 Winchelsea, Old and New 176, 189 Winchelsea, the Ship, lost
334, 335 Winchester, Bishop of, his Palace 208 Winchester 246 to 253 Windsor
Forest 209 Wingham 163 Winstanley, Mr. his ingenious Contrivances 107, 108. His
unhappy Fate 334 Wintertonness 62 Wisbich 76 Witham Town and Castle 10
Wobourn-farm 228, 229 Woelfleet Bank and Oysters 7 Woking 211 212 Wolsey,
Cardinal, his Birth, and various Fortunes 26. His Seat 227 Women, their Bravery
and Success at Dartmouth 332 Woodbridge 39 Woodlark, Robert 97 Woodward, Dr.
his Benefactions to the University of Cambridge p. 103 Woolwich 126, 127
Worsted 66 Wotton 220, 221 Wren, Sir Christopher, strengthens Salisbury Spire
275 Wrey, Lord Chief Justice 98 Wring-cheese, what 342 Wrotham 223 Wulpit 37
Wyvenhoe 8
Y
Yare, River 54, 55, 57, 58 Yarmouth 57 to 62 Yarmouth, South 206 Yarnbury 280
Yeomen of Kent 153 Yeovil 330

