

THE VOYAGES, Travels and Adventures, OF WILLIAM OWEN GWIN VAUGHAN, Esquire WITH
THE HISTORY of his Brother JONATHAN VAUGHAN, Six Years a Slave in Tunis.
Intermixed with the HISTORIES of Clerimont, Maria, Eleanora, and Others. Full
of Various TURNS of FORTUNE.

VOLUME the FIRST.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS: And Sold by J. OSBORN, at the Golden-Ball in
Paternoster Row. MDCCXXXVI.

To His ROYAL HIGHNESS the PRINCE of WALES.
SIR,
THOUGH Respect due to Princes is a Bar, to prevent the Subjects rude pressing
to their Royal Persons; yet it can lay no Restraint on their Affections: Where
we see the Graces and Virtues, in their most amiable Union, we are forced,
irrisistibly, into secret Attachment, and open Admiration.

It Is with this ungovernable Impulse, I approach Your ROYAL HIGHNESS,
(conscious that my Zeal is irregular, but satisfied that it is honest) to give
vent to the Overflowings of my Heart: Neither am I at all singular in this
Presumption, though by the Faculty of an Author, I make it more manifest. The
whole Nation has the same Sentiments, and what I write is but their just
Acknowledgments. I act but as a Herald to the Public, and only proclaim the
Style and Titles they have universally voted due to your known Deserts.

What is spoke with Truth of Your ROYAL HIGHNESS, would be Flattery to any
other: But, without offending Your Modesty, there is no doing Justice to Your
other Virtues; and while I am condemned by the World for saying so little, I
may incur Your Resentment for having said so much.

If none but an Apelles, or a Praxiteles, were properly authorized to image an
Alexander, yet Numbers had the Ambition to attempt it; and, though the Effect
shamed the Artist, there was, at least, some Judgment in the Choice; it argued
that they understood what was a fit Subject for Genius, though they were not
equal to the Task themselves. Which is all the Merit and Excuse of,

May it please Your ROYAL HIGHNESS, Your ROYAL HIGHNESS's most obedient, most
devoted, and most humble Servant,

THE VOYAGES, TRAVELS, AND MEMOIRS OF WILLIAM OWEN GWIN VAUGHAN, Esquire
THE Day I was born, was the first of my Misfortunes; for the Moment that gave
me Birth, robbed my dear Mother of Life, and I came into the World an innocent
Murderer, the last of five Sons.

Though my Father had a considerable Estate, yet, as I was the youngest of all,
there was but little to expect for me; and ere I arrived to my fourth Year, a
Mother-in-law was brought into the Family, that had one Son, and two Daughters;
but she secured to my Father a considerable Estate while she lived, though after
her Death it was to devolve on her own Children; and I am pretty well informed,
that was the chief Motive of my Father's wishing her a long Life.

Sure Marriage must be an unfortunate State on such Conditions, especially on
one Side; for every body agreed my Mother-in-law (from her outward Behavior)
was very fond of my Father; but she laid out her whole Portion of Goodnature
upon him, she having not one Grain left for any of his Children, and, between
'em both, good Housekeeping was banished, that lived with us in my Mother's
Days.

My Father, give him his Due, was raking enough to provide for his Children;
and his Wife was not an Ace behind him in taking Care for hers.

My Mother-in-law's Son was much of my own Age, so to School we were sent
together, which was the happiest Time of my Life; for my good Mother-in-law
being over-fond of her only Son, allowed him handsomely of every thing; and my
Father, that there should be no Difference between us, did the like by me; so
we both fared the better by their Emulation, and whatever Brother Jack had one
Day, to be sure Billy (meaning myself) had the next: But, though it favors of
Vanity to praise myself, yet I will declare, I was a better Proficient in
Learning than my School-fellow, for I took a great Pleasure in my Studying;
but, on the contrary, my Brother was very idle, and I often received good part
of his Money for the Week, to make his Exercise for him; so by this Method, our
Parents imagined him a better Scholar than he was.

Our Master, though a rigid one, was something deceived in him; for I was very
cautious of letting any one understand the Helps I gave him, well knowing, if
it was once discovered, I should lose my Perquisites, as I called 'em. But one
Christmas it all came out.

The Parson of the Parish being at Dinner, and, as it proved, which does not
always happen, a good Scholar, was desired to examine the Yonkers, as they
called us, my Mother being gone out of the Room just before; Domine set upon me
first, paying, as he thought, a Compliment to my Father, and I went through my
Examination so readily, that my Father gave me a Crown-piece to encourage me;
but, at the same time, whispered me to put it up before the good Woman, my
Mother-in-law, came back again.

When the Parson had finished several elaborate Speeches on the Ripeness of my
Genius, and what not, adding among the rest, He did not fear in time but he
should see me a great Statesman; he took my Schoolfellow John to Task, who came
to Examination like a Thief to his Trial: I stood just behind him, and prompted
him unheard by the rest of the Company; yet he made so many Blunders, that,
like Sir Martin and his Man Warner, we were both discovered; at which I was
very much grieved, for I soon apprehended such Care would be taken of Mr.
Dunce, that I should finger no more of his Money, and all the Praises I
received from the Company for the Aptness of my Parts, etc. could not
extinguish the Thoughts on it. But, to mend the matter, my Mother-in-law, who
happened to come in just as he was beginning his Fiery Trial, big with
Expectation of her Son Johnny proving a Prodigy of Learning, and finding
herself so much disappointed, could not contain her Temper, but flew out in a
manner little pleasing to the Company. She did not doubt, she said, but there
had been much Pains taken with that Jackanapes (meaning my Worship) but she
would take care for the future to choose a Master that was in her Interest, to
instruct her Child; that it was much against her Inclination at first to let
him go where all my Brothers had gone before, being the Teacher was in my
Father's Interest, and a thousand such Speeches, which struck my Father into
Amazement; and though the Parson with a great deal of Reason (that perhaps you will
say is a Wonder) used many fine Speeches to qualify this Matter, yet they all
proved like Words uttered in a Desert; but when Brother Jack, in Tears, told
her my Father had given me a Crown, she grew outrageous, and with a great deal
of Dexterity gave me a handsome Box on the Ear, less gentle, I believe, than
the Boor gives the Duke of Carinthia is a Province of Germany, upon the Borders
of Italy: Whenever the Ducal Coronet is vacant, the Person who is to be
installed, is seated in a Chair of great Antiquity, made like two great Chairs
put Back to Back, with two Seats; in one the intended Duke sits, in the other a
Boor of the Country, who is to offer two Oxen to the Duke, one the leanest, the
other the fattest that can be got; but the Duke is to return the fat one to the
Boor, which is to intimate he is to improve his Country or Dukedom (for
sometimes it is the Emperor of Germany who is chose Duke of Carinthia) from the
Poverty of the lean Ox, to that of the fat One. When that Part of the Ceremony
is over, the Boor, or Countryman, rises up, comes to the Duke, who is fitting
with his Face to the East, and gives him a gentle Box on the Ear; after that,
he puts on his Feet a Pair of Shoes filled with the Earth of the Country, and
that concludes the Installment; though the last Part of the Ceremony they omit
when a Proxy is installed, which often happens when the Title is conferred on
the Emperor, or some other Potentate.
Carinthia at his Installation. My Father, to be even with her, returned my
Brother John one as like it as a couple of Billiard-Balls. My good
Mother-in-law perceiving it, was resolved to be even with him, and gave it me
handsomely on both sides my Ears, which was returned smartly back upon the Chops
of my Schoolfellow by my Father, till we got handsomely cuff'd between 'em.

My Father seeing his Wife's Rage rather increased, than diminished, laid hold
of both her Hands; she struggling to get loose, and finding it impossible, spit
in my Father's Face, who was so much confounded, that he let her go, and she
waddled out of the Room like a Goose upon a Common.

When she was gone, my Father sat him down in his Chair without speaking for
some time; but at last broke out with an exalted Voice, This is the first time
I ever wished myself unmarry'd, and I am very much in fear it will not be the
last; for when once Man and Wife have broke through the Respect they owe each
other, continual Jarrs will succeed, and the first Quarrel will soon be
followed by many others. I have no Notion (continued he) after this Breach, we
can ever be properly reconciled.

The good Parson said many things in order to excuse both Parties, but my
Father gave him no manner of Answer. He seeing things in so much Confusion,
took his Leave.

When he was gone, my Father began to examine me about my Brother Jack, and the
Reason why my Master did not acquaint him with his Indocibility; I well knowing
he abhorred a Lie, declared to him the whole Truth; but begged his Pardon,
telling him, my young Apprehension could not conceive such Confusion would
follow.

Well, returned my Father, I have Reason to believe you will never be guilty of
such Inadvertencies again, therefore I freely pardon you; but for the future
you must go to School by yourself, at least, 'till this Matter is blown over,
and my Wife and I are thoroughly reconciled, if there is a Possibility of it.
Upon saying this, he waved his Hand, that I might leave him to himself.

As soon as I got into the Courtyard before the House, my Brother Jack met me.
Ah! said he, my Mother has given me a Crown, as well as my Father did you. I am
glad on it, returned I. I believe that is a Lie, said my Mother, who was coming
out of the Garden, and had staid to listen, as I suppose. Madam, I have learnt,
said I, to speak Truth, whatever may be the Consequence, and in most of the
Books we are to learn, we are informed our Tongue and Heart should always go
together. Ha! said she, What, I suppose you are setting up for a young
Philosopher! But I believe you have got a few Sentences by rote, as Parrots
have, that you sputter out unseasonably. I told her, whatever I had learnt, I
would take care never to say any thing to offend her. No, said she, you will
always be an Offense to me, silent, or speaking. I told her I was very sorry
for it, and went back again, with the Tears running down my Cheeks, intending to
go up into the Room where I lay, but was met by my Father, who seeing the Tears
trickling down my Face, asked me hastily the Reason of my Grief? I told him,
Nothing.

Come, said he, you know I will have the Truth, therefore tell me without
Delay. I then, finding he would be satisfied, told all that had passed between
my Mother and me, though in as tender Terms as I could. When my Father had heard
me out, he seemed very much concerned, and making a long Pause, at last cried,
Well, I will have a Remedy! And tomorrow, continued he, you shall go to your
Uncle's, who desires to see you, where you shall remain till the Time of your
Breaking-up is over.

The next Morning I had Orders to prepare for my Journey. When I was ready to
get on Horseback, I waited on my Father, who bid me go to my Mother and take my
Leave of her. I went, but I must confess very unwillingly. When I came to her
Dressing Room, I kneeled down as usual, upon which she said hastily, Bless you!
Bless you! which I understood, by her Manner of speaking, was Dammee! Dammee!

I am come, Madam, said I, to take my Leave of you, by my Father's Command.
Why, pray Sir, returned my Mother, very scornfully, Where are you going? To my
Uncle's, Madam, said I. Go then, said she, and a good Riddance. I made my
Honors, and down Stairs I went again to my Father.

Well, Will, said he, what said your Mother to you? Did she give you any thing?
No Sir, said I, she only gave me Leave to go about my Business. Well, said my
Father, you shall never trouble her again, in the Mind I am in. Go, said he,
get on Horseback, I Will ride before, and conduct you some part of the Way.

When I went into the Stable, I heard my Brother Jack tell the Groom I must not
have the Little Horse, for it was his, and he was to go abroad with his Mother:
Brother, said I, I must have him, for my Father's gone before, and will wait
for me. No matter for that, said he, you shall not have him. Many Words passed
between us, and all the while he was endeavoring to get the Bridle out of my
Hand, but finding he was not strong enough, he let go. Just as I had got one
Foot in the Stirrup, with a Prong that he had got out of the Stable, he ran me
into the Thigh with one of the Points, the other piercing the Horse in the
Flank, who, feeling himself hurt, gave a Spring, and before I could get upon
his Back, he dragged me with one Foot in the Stirrup out into the Road, and
would have certainly beat me to pieces, if my Father coming back, wondering at
my Delay, had not stopped him. The Servant told him I was certainly wounded, for
there were Streams of Blood upon the Ground: Examining my Hurt, they found my
Boot was full of Blood. I was carried in again; though with Loss of Blood, the
Violence of the Fall, together with the Dragging of the Horse, I was deprived
of my Senses for some time.

A Surgeon was immediately sent for; yet my Father was not presently informed
how I came by the Hurt: But when he knew the Truth of it, he was so very much
provoked, that just that Instant meeting with my Brother Jack coming up Stairs,
he kicked him down again, and in the Fall he broke his Arm. I mention these
little Circumstances, only as they were the Occasion of (...)-right Breach in
the Family.

When the Surgeon came, he informed us there was no Danger but Loss of Blood;
and, with a great many hard Words, told 'em what a narrow Escape I had, for if
it had been an Inch higher, and touched such and such a Thing, all the World
could not have saved my Life to be sure.

When he had made an end of dressing my Wound, he went to the Assistance of my
Brother. The Servants had taken him up, and brought him into the same Room
where I was, for our Beds were together. I must own the Sight of him, instead
of moving my Pity, stirred my Indignation, and I was inwardly satisfied with my
Father's just Revenge. But while they were setting his Arm, my Mother came
among us (alarmed it seems with his Cries) like one of the Furies, with her
Hair about her Ears, out of her Dressing Room, not having been acquainted with
the Matter through the Confusion of the Family. She cast many furious Eyes
toward me, and I believe, if she had not been prevented by my Father, had made
me feel the Effects of her Indignation. Madam, said he, I am sorry for the
Accident that has happened to your Son, not but he deserves it for his young
wicked Intention, though I don't doubt but he was instigated by his Mother: By
me, thou barbarous Wretch! said she. -- You are sorry for the Accident! What
Accident? Did not you do it for the Purpose? with an Intention to break his
Neck I suppose: But I Will be revenged on your young Darling, with all his
Learning! Upon saying that she rushed upon me in spite of 'em, and seized
violently upon me, endeavoring to tear me out of the Bed, notwithstanding my
weak Condition. But my Father laid hold of her, and with a Pull, swung her to
the farther end of the Room. Now, Madam, said he, since I see the Inveteracy of
your Malice, and having broke the Bonds of Duty, Love, and Tenderness, I Will
make you feel the Power of a Husband; you shall be close confined to your
Apartment, never once to converse with Me, or Mine. You shall want nothing, but
your Liberty, where you will have Time enough to reflect upon your Conduct, and
what it is to injure a Husband by your violent Proceedings. So saying, he
seized upon her, maugre her Strugglings, carried her to the Nursery, and locked
her in: The Reason of his putting her there, was, as he said afterward, to
prevent her making any Attempts to get out of the Windows, being there were
Bars fixed for fear of any Accident among us, when we were under the Nurse's
Care.

Notwithstanding her Violence of Temper, she had certainly (at least in every
Body's Opinion) a tender Regard for my Father; and if he did not return it, he
gave her no Cause to complain. He had too much Humanity to use any one ill,
much less a Wife. I have often heard him say, While my Wife continues her
Good Humor to me, she shall never find me in the least to blame in my Conduct
to her; but whenever that alters, I shall have so much Regard to myself, to be
easy.

During my Illness, my Father was hardly ever from me. I did not think it was
proper for one of my Years to ask him any Questions concerning his Matrimonial
Warfare; but as he was sitting upon my Bed, about the fifth Day of my Illness,
my Mother's Maid brought him a Letter, which my Father perused, then read it to
me, as follows: SIR,
I AM sensible the Serenity of Temper you. have often promised to yourself, if
any Breach should happen between us, gives you very great Satisfaction,
whatever Uneasiness I feel: But, as I have Cause to believe the Burden will be
weightier, if you will not allow me one Favor, which I am almost assured you
will comply with, that is, to have the Company of my hurt Son in my
Confinement, besides Maternal Affections, I believe there is another Motive
which convinces me I shall not be denied, you will get rid of an Object which
cannot but be ungrateful to you, because it belongs to One who formerly thought
it her chiefest Happiness to be called

Yours.




Confinement, I find, said my Father, is a good Mortifier; but I shall very
willingly comply with her Request, upon your Account, for I cannot suppose it is
very pleasing to you, to have always before your Eyes the Cause of your Pain
and Illness. Sir, said I, there is no Motive more prevalent with me, than the
Satisfaction of my Mother; besides, I hope I have it not in my Nature to bear
Malice, therefore I have long since forgiven my Brother, imagining it to be
only the Heat of Passion, and Want of Years. My Child, said my Father, your
Years are the same, both in your Thirteenth; and yet I am convinced he has not
the Consideration that thou have, which I am pleased with, not for his Want of
Understanding, but that thine seems to exceed thy Years: Pray Heaven continue
it! Sir, said I, it is all I ask, the Blessing of Heaven and You; in having
them, I shall want nothing; but, possessed with all the Gifts of Fortune,
wanting them, I shall be poor indeed! My Boy (said my Father, and kissed me)
once more Heaven bless thee! Grant that I may be able to provide for thee
according to my Inclination!

By this time the Maid, who had retired while my Father was perusing the
Letter, came in to expect an Answer. Tell your Mistress, said my Father, I
shall comply with her Request, as I shall to all others that are reasonable.
Upon this Answer, the Maid went out, and my Father gave immediate Orders to
remove the Boy: Then, with a gentle Press by the Hand, took his Leave of me. I
must own I was very much delighted at his Expressions of Kindness to me, being
it was what I never received from him before: It Is true, he never used me
harshly, but he did not seem to me to have the least Regard, or playing and
toying with Children, as I have known Parents do; his Manner of Behavior to me
before, begot Respect in me; it was enough if he did but look at me, to make me
observe him; though I cannot fansy it is a proper Carriage from a Parent to a
Child, neither the way to beget Obedience; there is a kind of Indulgence to the
harmless Follies of Children, that insensibly wins the Affections of the Child.
I remember my own Brother, that was one Year elder than me, never cared to come
in my Father's Sight, which proceeded from his stiff Behavior to us. But I am
not laying down Rules or Examples between Parents and Children, though really I
think some Parents want as much Instruction that way as their Children. Though I
am well-assur'd my Father had a tender Regard for his, notwithstanding his
rigid Behavior, for he punished severely for Faults openly, and, as I found
afterward, rewarded 'em secretly when they did well: But my Readers may with
Reason say, this is but little to the Purpose.

In the next Visit my Father made me, he told me he fansy'd my Mother had a
great mind to be making her Peace; but, added he, Will, I Will take care, if it
comes to that, you shall be included in the Treaty. I told him I should be
pleased, let it go which way it would, if he would be so. I have received
another Letter since Morning, said he, with her Desire to speak with me; in the
Evening I shall comply with her Request; and the Result of our Conference thou
shall know tomorrow Morning; for, added he, it will be late before I can go to
her, for I expect your Schoolmaster this Evening, who is to stay all Night on
purpose to see you, as he sends me Word. And, accordingly, before Night, the
good old Man came to condole with me, and in some sort to chide me, in
neglecting to tell him of my Brother's Want of Learning: However, said he, I
forgive you, and have prevailed on your Father that I may have you again; for I
should be much concerned to lose the Flower of my Flock; as he was pleased to
call me: As for your Brother Jack, added he, I have advised with your Father,
to prevail on your Mother to put him out to some creditable Trade, and not
longer to lose his Time in fruitless Endeavors to learn what he can never
attain to; for, continued he, I have just now been examining him in the Garden
(for as he had the Use of his Legs, he could go any where) but I am in the
utmost Confusion to find him such a Dunce, and that I could be so long imposed
on between you.

I begged my Master to mention my Folly no more, for I assured him it was Want
of Thought, and Tenderness to him, that occasioned the Deceit; I had
sufficiently repented of it, and if it was to come over again, would sooner die
than be guilty of any such Proceedings. I added, It was the greatest Grief I
ever did, or ever should feel, that from so trivial a thing, as I thought, such
Difference should be created between my Father and Mother. Rest contented,
replied my Master: Thy Mother-in-law has proved what I always thought her, a
turbulent-spirited Woman, only she had Art enough to hide it so long from your
Father. Indeed her first Husband, Sir Charles, many Years ago hinted some such
thing to me. I am pleased she has declared herself upon so slight an Occasion,
that your good Father may be armed in time against her Contrivances; for I am
apt to believe, even her Affection to him is only counterfeited, and once Women
can counterfeit Love, I give 'em lost to all virtuous Principles; their
Endearments are the worst of Crimes, and the greatest Affront they can put upon
a Man. I have known some Women who have proved false to their Husband's Bed,
yet have carried it with such a Tenderness and Regard to them, that if the
World had not been convinced of their Baseness, 'twere enough to call Truth a
Liar.

I interrupted my Master, by telling him I thought there was no Grounds even
for Suspicion of any such thing concerning my Mother. I hope so too, replied my
Schoolmaster.

After some other Discourse of the Weaknesses of Women, he left me to my own
Thoughts, but I must own they were not very pleasing ones. I began to consider
my Condition. If my Mother proved an ill Woman, as I had some reason to suspect
from the Hints and Discourses of my Master, I should certainly suffer in the
end; for if my Father was reconciled to her, through her Cunning, I did not
doubt but she would improve it, and make me the Butt of her Resentment; and,
notwithstanding my Father's good Sense, and Knowledge of the World, there was
not an Impossibility but he might fall into the Snares of a subtle designing
Woman: The Thought of this spread a melancholy Cloud over my Face, which was
perceived by my Father, who entered in the midst of my Cogitations.

How now, Will, said he, does thy Wound pain thee, that thou look with such
a sorrowful Countenance? No, Sir, said I, I was only entered into thinking of
what may happen for the future, and the Fear of losing your Kindness, made me
sad. Well, said he, as I am assured from your Behavior, that will never
happen, I hope your Concern will cease. I told you (continued my Father) when I
parted with you last, that I would not let thee know the Result of the
Interview till the Morning; but as we are reconciled, I could not so long delay
thee thy Part of the Satisfaction. Tomorrow in the Morning thy Mother, thy
Master, and all of us, are to come into thy Room to Breakfast, where I hope all
Animosities will cease. On my Side, Sir, said I, they were never begun, nor
ever shall, without my Temper and Inclination should be inverted. I believe
there is no Danger of that, replied my Father; and so, my good Boy, Goodnight.

As soon as my Father was gone, my Master came in again: Billy, said he, I
could not go to Bed without seeing you, to desire, since your Father and Mother
are reconciled, to take no manner of Notice of the Discourse you and I had
together concerning her. If told him, without any Caution, it should have been
as secret as if no one had known it but himself; I believe it, said he, yet I
thought Caution might have been necessary; and so bid me Goodnight.

When I was once more left alone, Reflection began to be stronger than before,
and weighing, according to my young Judgment, the Affairs and Condition of the
Family, thought verily my Circumstances would suffer by it. I was in the midst
of a thousand confused ungrateful Thoughts, when the Surgeon came in to dress
me, and viewing my Wound, was very much surpised to see it look so angry: I am
afraid, young Gentleman, said he, you have met with something today that makes
you uneasy, or have tasted something that you should not have done, which
occasions this Alteration in your Hurt. Pray, said he, what have you had to eat
today? When I informed him, That, said he, could never hurt you; the Alteration
I perceive must proceed from some Disturbance of Mind, and I value my Patient
so much, that I must know the Cause, that I may speak to your Father to have it
remedied. I found him so pressing, that I was obliged to tell him Some little
Accidents in the Family had given me some Uneasiness, which were now
reconciled, and would soon be forgot. Yes, said he, I hear your Father and
Mother are come to an Agreement, and I cannot say I am over well pleased at it,
for if she does not play him, and all of you, some Trick, I Will be hanged; I
have Reasons best known to myself for what I say.

I am sorry, said I, you have any secret Reason to suspect my Mother's future
Conduct; and without you disclose 'em to me, I shall imagine they are Chimaeras
of your own Brain, that flow from your too much Drinking (for he was famed for
a great To^er) or otherwise from her refusing you the Cure of my Brother Jack;
for when my Mother-in-law heard he was my Surgeon, her Resentment run so high,
that she would not employ him.

Nothing of all this, I can assure you, returned the Surgeon; but I shall say
no more at present, 'till I have observed her future Behavior, and if she
deserves it, I shall disclose some things that will be very surprising ^o all
of you. I wish, said I, you would either have mentioned nothing of it now, or
would resolve to tell me what it is you know, or I fear, if you leave me in
doubt, it will not at all help me in the Cure.

I am sorry, returned the Surgeon, I have inadvertently said any thing to make
you uneasy; but, to reconcile you to your Rest tonight, be assured, whenever I
disclose it, 'twill help you rather than injure you; and though I have many
Follies, I have Discretion enough to keep this a Secret, till it shall prove
advantageous to your Father and you.

I used many Arguments to persuade him to let me know this great Secret, but
all to no purpose; so after he had dressed me, he left me with more Cause of
Uneasiness than I had before, which I too plainly showed by my Countenance. The
Maid who attended me in my Illness, who was one that lived with my Mother in
her Lifetime, and had the bringing of me up, told me I should not be uneasy at
what the Surgeon said, he was nothing but a mere Rattle, for it was his usual
way to make People imagine he knew something concerning their Affairs, and when
he came to be strictly examined, denied it all, or made an Excuse that he
supposed he was drunk when he said so.

What the Maid said seemed probable enough; yet I could not put it out of my
Head, that notwithstanding his Character, there was something in his Knowledge
concerning our Family.

The Thought of this, with other Affairs, kept me from sleeping many Hours, and
when I did, it was broken, and interrupted with frightful Dreams. In one, I
thought my Mother invited my Father and me to walk with her in a Garden, at the
End there was a prodigious high Mountain, which we ascended with much
Difficulty, and when we had gained the Summit, my Mother gave my Father a Push
down the Brow of the Mountain, on the other Side, where my troubled Fancy gave
him for lost. She then flew toward me, and violently thrust me down the same
way we came up; I thought I fell to the Bottom much bruised, as also scratched
by Brambles and Stones that lay in my way, that the Pain I felt awaked me. I
told my Dream to the Maid that sat up with me; she replied, it was nothing but
a disturbed Fancy with the Pain of my Hurt, and begged I would compose myself
to Sleep, which after some time I did.

I reassumed my Dream where I left off. My sleeping Imagination represented my
Mother on the Brow of the Hill, hurling Stones and Clods of Earth at me, yet I
thought none of 'em came near me to do me any Damage; and as she was
endeavoring to come down the Hill, in order, as I thought, to hurt me, she
vanished away, but I could not perceive which way she went. Upon the Instant I
awoke, in a very great Agony, when I told the Maid the Cause of my Uneasiness;
she laughed at me, and said 'twas only formed from my uneasy Thoughts. Whatever
she could say to me upon the Invalidity of Dreams, I could not put this out of
my Head, nor go to sleep again; and the rest of our Discourse till Morning was
Stories of Dreams proving true, which I had often heard repeated, but she called
those things Visions; I would have persuaded her mine was such, but she laughed
me out of it, or at least I had Discretion enough to say no more to her
concerning it, whatever were my Thoughts about it.

When the Time of Breakfast came, my Father entered the Room, and asked me how
I had rested last Night; the Maid answered for me, that I had been disturbed by
frightful Dreams; my Father returned, he had none of the best; but, continued
he, Dreams were the only Work of a disturbed Fancy, and were as far from Truth,
as the Glow-Worm's dim Shine from Light and Heat; the Creatures of the drowsy
Brain.

But, Sir, said I, many have been forewarned by Dreams of Accidents that have
happened to 'em; witness Calphurnia's Dream of the Butchery of Caesar, and
Ceasar's Dream before he overcame Pompey, or that mentioned by Valerius Maximus
of the two Arcadians Valerius Maximus, in his Account of Dreams, gives this
particular one. Two Arcadians, Friends to each other, traveling together, came
to the City of Megara in the Province of Achaia, formerly a Dependant on the
Athenians. One of 'em went to lodge at a Friend's House, the other at a Public
Inn. The Person that lay at his Friend's, in his Sleep, fansy'd he heard his
Companion call out for Help from the Violence of his Landlord; which awaked
him, and stamped such an Impression on his Mind, that he rose and endeavored
to find out the Inn. But Fortune not allowing him that Happiness, he went to
his Lodging, and addressed himself to Sleep again, laughing to himself, that a
Dream should so much disturb him. When Sleep had once more taken Possession of
his Faculties, he dreamt that his Friend came to his Bedside covered with
Wounds, who told him, That since Fate had not permitted him to prevent his End,
he hoped he would see his Death revenged. My Body, said the Apparition, is now
carrying in a Cart, covered with Rubbish, out of the Gate of the City, by the
Innkeeper, who murdered me for my Money. Arise! and bring him to the
Punishment he deserves. The friendly Arcadian, at this Second Warning, arose,
and taking Assistance with him, stopped the Innkeeper with the Cart, where he
found the bleeding Body of his Friend. The Man confessed his Guilt, and was
executed accordingly.
. Nothing, Child, replied my Father, but the Fancy of Poets and Historians, and
I hope you have Understanding enough to slight 'em; it is nothing but
superstitious Opinion that gives any Credit to Dreams and Omens; but, continued
he, I would have thee put on a more pleasing Countenance, for thy Mother,
Brother, and I, are coming presently to Breakfast with thee, in order for a
Reconciliation on all Hands, and if she perceives that Cloud upon thy Face, she
will be apt to conjecture her Presence is irksome to thee. I replied, I would
do my Endeavor to be composed, as indeed I had Reason; but I told him, I would
ever have my Face the Index of my Heart, for I should find it a very hard Task
to counterfeit any Passion. Well, said my Father, smiling, we shall be with you
presently, and went out.

When he was gone, I resolved to rise, and put on my Gown, in order to receive
such a Visit decently, though the Maid would have dissuaded me. I was but just
dressed, and set down in mv Chair (for I was not able to stand) when my Father,
Mother, and her Son, entered the Chamber. As soon as my Mother came in, she
said to my Father, he had informed her I had kept my Bed: Indeed, my Dear,
returned my Father, I am something surpised, for I left him in Bed not a
Quarter of an Hour ago. I answered, that I thought it my Duty to come as near
my Knees as I could, and I hoped my Mother would pardon the Posture I was in;
but I threw an humble Heart at her Feet, and hoped she would give me her
Blessing with her Pardon. Heaven bless thee (said she) my Dear; and for Pardon,
it is I ought to ask that of thee, who have really offended; but acknowledging a
Fault is the Way to Repentance, and all my Hope is we shall bury in Oblivion
past Transactions. She then brought my Brother forward, who told me with a
cloudy Countenance, He begged my Pardon, and would do so no more. I told him I
had long since learnt to forget every thing, for Forgiveness was not a Word
became a Child's Mouth. We all kissed round.

When our mutual Caresses were over, I could perceive Tears of Joy stand in my
Father's Eyes for this our Reconciliation, and I imagined my Mother's
Countenance looked with a pleasing Contentment in it. But alas! it is hard to
know the Heart of Woman! A fair Face, with a smiling Countenance, often harbor
Rancour in the Soul; and as they study to set off their Features, they also
study to make their Face a Mask to their Mind.

They staid with me some time, nor perhaps had gone so soon, if Word had not
been brought in, that the Surgeon was come to dress me. My Mother begged Leave
to retire, telling me she had not Courage enough to support the Sight of my
Hurt; so my Father led her out, and my Brother followed 'em.

Immediately after the Surgeon came in, Well, said he, I find all is right
again; I met your Father leading your Mother through the Hall, as if he had
just begun to court her. I wish it may hold on her Side. I hope there is no
Fear of it, said I, but I can assure you, what you hinted to me Yesterday, has
given me a great deal of Uneasiness.

Think on it no more, returned the Surgeon, think on it no more, Master; I am
very sorry I mentioned any thing to you, and beg you would speak of it no more.
How, said I! do you endeavor to calumniate Persons out of a Whim of your
Brain, and not expect to be called to an Account for it? I have been informed
of your Temper, or rather the Villainy of your opprobrious Tongue, and can
farther assure you, that the chimerical Aspersions you would endeavor to fix
upon my Mother-in-law, shall not go unpunished, if my Father retains his usual
Spirit, unless you this Moment tell the Truth, and either make out what you
would insinuate, or clear her by asking Pardon for the Injury you would have
done her.

The Surgeon seemed very much in Confusion during my Speech to him, which I
observing, did not doubt but it was, as the Maid said, his constant Custom to
calumniate every Body.

I see, said I, by the Confusion in your Countenance, you seemed to confess
your Error; I Will give you my Word to mention what has past between you and I to
no one, on condition, for the future, you will leave off that vile Custom of
aspersing the Characters of every Body you know; for it may prove of dangerous
Consequence to other People, as well as yourself, and it is a Crime neither
becoming a Christian, or a Man.

Sir, returned the Surgeon, I must own to you, you have opened my Eyes more by
your Discourse, than all that I have ever had said to me upon the like
Occasion, and the vile Trick has crept upon me through Custom, for come where
you will, even all Sexes, Ages, and Degrees, are fond of hearing a little
Scandal, and willing to know the Frailties of their Neighbors, not
considering, the Parasite, to the next Company, makes as free with the last he
came from; and I must own the Success I have met with, or indeed the
Willingness of my Hearers, have often put me upon inventing Stories to please
my Patients and their Families. But I now repent, and am resolved never to be
guilty of the like again, and my Repentance is owing to your Advice. After this
he ran on with many Encomiums of the Ripeness of my Understanding, and a long
Rigmerole of nothing to the Purpose: But, said he, concerning your Mother, I
know something that I am sure would cause great Uneasiness in the Family; yet I
beg you would not insist upon knowing any thing farther, for the Character I
perceive I have got in the World, would fly in my Face, and spoil my Evidence,
till I can plainly prove what I say, which if I ever see there is a Necessity
for it, I can in a few Days bring to pass. I strove many ways to get something
out of him, but it proved to no purpose, yet I verily believed he knew somewhat
against the Reputation of my Mother-in-law.

When he was gone, I began to lose myself in confused Thoughts and Notions, as
I had formerly done, which gave me vail Uneasiness, that led me to imagine my
Mother's Conduct to my Father and me all an Artifice; this put me upon a
Resolution of observing nicely her Carriage, that I might be able to form my
Behavior afterward.

We lived very lovingly together a whole Year, and I began to bury all my
Fears, imagining still the Surgeon had wrongfully aspersed my Mother: Therefore
I applied myself hard to my Studies with my Tutor, for since the first Falling
out, my Father would not let us go to School any more, but provided a Tutor for
us in the House; though he could make nothing of my Brother John, for he was
resolved to remain a Dunce, which did not a little grieve both my Father and
Mother, but there was no Remedy. Therefore John was resolved for behind the
Counter. The Time was fixed to put him Apprentice to a Mercer, and me to the
University. I could easily perceive this Resolution, though both Father and
Mother-in-law seemed to consent to it, was a great Grief to my Mother, and in a
few Days I was confirmed in it.

At the End of our Garden was a large Summer House, which I frequently made my
Place of Study; having just made an end of Claudian, I was going into the House
to fetch another Book, but perceiving my Mother at the End of one of the Walks,
in order, as I supposed, to come into the Summer House, I stepped behind it,
that I might not meet her. When she came near me, I could perceive by her
Countenance she was mightily disturbed: She staid in the Walk for her Maid, a
few Minutes; when she came to her, they both went up into the Summer House; I
found they were deep in Discourse, therefore must own I had Curiosity enough to
listen awhile; but they spoke so low, that I could only hear now and then a
Word, but yet enough to pick out it concerned my Brother John and my Self.

I had left my Claudian above in the Window of the Summer House, which my
Mother perceiving, took it up. Ha! said she, this, I suppose, is some of the
Jackanapes's Books! Ay, it is Latin, I believe, it is his. Well, I Will take care
he shall have Reading enough, I Will warrant him. And then spoke so low, that I
could not hear the rest. I listened farther, but whether they mistrusted
somebody was near 'em, or they were consulting something that was wicked, I
cannot tell, but they spoke so low, that I could not hear any thing but a
continual Humming between 'em.

I went to my Study, but had no Inclination to read; my Head run too much upon
what I had heard, and what I suggested; the more I thought, the more Reason I
had to be uneasy. I sent a Servant to the Summer House for the Book I had
forgot; when he returned, I asked him if there was any body in the
Summer House; he answered, There was my Lady, and Mrs. Betty in close
Conference; and farther added, they looked upon him with damned four
Countenances for disturbing 'em, as he supposed.

I found every thing concurred with my Thoughts, which added very much to my
discontented Mind. When my Tutor came in, he perceived by my Looks my Spirits
were discomposed, and pressing me to know the Reason, I told him I was not very
well. At Supper (for my Tutor being a Gentleman of a good Family, that had
suffered many Misfortunes in the World, my Father allowed him the Privilege of
eating with us) he desired my Father to order me a little Physic, for I had
complained I was indisposed. My Father pressed me to take it on the next
Morning, but I told him it was nothing but too much Reading, and I should be
well presently; but if I found myself worse, I would take Physic in a Day or
two. Ay, says my Mother, whether you are better or no, you ought to take Physic
this Springtime, and Johnny shall take some along with you. So it was agreed
in two Days to take it, and Word was sent to the Apothecary's accordingly; though
I resolved with myself not to take any, as believing I wanted none, mine being
an Illness of the Mind. When the Time came, the Doses were sent us, but I
conveyed mine away without taking it.

At Dinner, my Mother seemed, as I thought, to look through me, and asked me many
Questions concerning the Operation. I answered her as I thought proper. As she
asked her Maid (who always waited on her alone) for a Glass of Wine, I observed
she looked upon her with an odd sort of a Countenance; the Maid seemed to
return her another Look, which plainly told me there was a Meaning between 'em.
But the Discourse was turned on another Subject, as being not altogether so
proper at Dinner; yet every now and then my Mother would come out with -- Sure,
Billy, you did not take your Physic! I confidently told her I did, though I abhor
a Lie. Many odd Looks passed every Moment between the Mistress and the Maid
during Dinner. When it was ended, they both went up into her Dressing Room; I
could not help following 'em with my Eyes, and secretly wished I could have
been near enough to hear their Conversation; but as that could not be, I was
obliged to be contented without it.

In a little time my Mother came down again; after some short Stay in the
Dining Room, my Father, Mother, Brother John, and I, as usual, went to walk in
the Garden: John, as was his Custom, ran scampering before, and played many of
his childish Tricks. Why, Billy, said my Father, why don't you do as your
Brother Jacky does, 'twill make you strong and lusty; all Study will spoil you,
weaken your Constitution, ay, and impair your Health. So it will replied my
good Mother, I don't think he has a good State of Health, for he seems to me as
if he were in a Consumption; observe how pale he looks: Ay, but returned my
Father, that may be his Physic. I don't know but it may, says she; but, if I
might advise, he should take more in a few Days, as well as Jacky, for I am
assured 'twill do 'em good: Nay, further, my Dear (said she to my Father) I
intend to see Billy take his, for it runs in my Head he made away that he was
to take in the Morning, for I know he hates Physic. I endeavored to convince
her of the contrary, which she seemed to believe.

The Time drew near that we were to take Physic again, and I was putting my
Invention on the Stretch how to avoid it, for I found she had resolved to be by
when we were to take it, which accordingly happened. When she gave me mine, I
let it slip out of my Hand upon the Ground; this put her into such a Passion,
that she gave me a Box on the Ear; but in a little time after she begged my
Pardon, kissed me, put her Hand to her Purse, and gave me half a Guinea,
desiring I would forget it; I promised her I would, though I really could not.

When my Father came in, she told him in a merry Manner, I was resolved not to
take any Physic, for the young Rogue, said she, let it slip through his
Fingers, which convinces me he played the same Trick with that the other
Morning. I told my Father it was purely Accident. Well, well, Billy, said my
Mother-in-law, let it be what it will, we shall take care of the next, I
warrant you. I don't know when that can be, my Dear, said my Father, for he
must go to his Uncle's this Afternoon, who begs to see him, and I cannot tell
when he will return. My Mother made no Answer to it, but seemed to be in much
Confusion.

I was very well pleased to go to my Uncle's, not only to get rid of my
Mother's Physic, but to see him, who was more indulgent to me than my own
Father, and it was thought by every one that I should be his Heir, for he was
an old Bachelor, and never intended to marry.

While I was in my Study, pleasing myself with the Thoughts of going to my
Uncle's, my Father came in to me. Billy, said he, thy Mother has convinced me
it is necessary you should take Physic before you go, so that I have sent an
Excuse to your Uncle, and let him know you will wait on him in two or three
Days at farthest. I was confounded at what he said, yet I answered him, What he
pleased. I could not tell him what I thought of my Mother, and that I believed
she intended to give me something to injure me, for as it could not be proved,
it would look only like Fear, or Malice; so I even set myself to think how to
avoid it.

At last I thought to get a Phial, the same Size of that she brought me in the
Morning, and fill it with something near the Color, which seemed to me to be a
dark Brown. But then the Difficulty would be, how to put the Change upon her.
In the Morning I had prepared my Phial, and when my Mother was going to pour it
into a Glass for me to drink, I begged she would be pleased to let me drink it
out of the Phial, for the Sight of it in a Glass turned my Stomach against it.
Ay, my Dear, with all my Heart; any how, so thou do but take it, replied my
good Mother. When I had got it, I put the Change upon her, and drank what I had
prepared. My Mother seemed mightily pleased, taking her Leave of me with a It Is
a good Child; keep thyself warm, my Dear. When she was gone, I went into my
Study, and began to examine the Bottle my Mother would have had me taken. I
found it had no ill Smell; but as I had not any Inclination to taste it, I had
Thoughts of trying the Experiment upon some dumb Creature, but could not find
in my Heart to be so cruel, yet had a vast Inclination to know its Effects. At
last I resolved to give it to a Greyhound Bitch, whose Surliness had given me
Occasion enough not to have any great Compassion for her. I did not think it
proper to do it in the House, so took my Opportunity to wheedle her into the
Stable, when no one was there, but going to open her Jaws to pour it into her
Mouth, she flew at me, and ran away. In the Surprise, I let the Phial fall out
of my Hand, which broke with the Fall. I was very uneasy I could not make Proof
of what I designed, for I knew it would be to no purpose to discover my
Suspicions only.

When Dinnertime came I was called down, and observed the Confusion of Faces
were increased between the Mistress and the Maid, insomuch that my Father could
not help taking Notice of it. Pray, my Dear, what has Betty (said my Father)
done, for you look at her as if she had committed some great Crime? What, I
warrant, she has not washed your Headcloaths to please you, or some such
Trifle. She knows what she has done, said my Mother-in-law, well enough; but I
don't think it worth my While to be angry about it. Well, but don't give her
such sour Look then (returned my Father) but pardon her, you will spoil her
Stomach to her Dinner, Child. My Father went on in a jocose manner all
Dinnertime, yet notwithstanding now and then Looks past between 'em, that no
body could interpret but myself, or at least I thought I could. I see, my Dear,
cried my Father, the Peace is not made up between you; give me Leave to be the
Judge in this Matter; but first let me know the Case: Come, Betty, continued my
Father, you seem to be the Offender, confess your Crime, and that is the Way to
find Pardon the sooner. Why, Sir, returned the Maid, I have forgot to wash my
Mistress's Laced Pinners, for which she has been angry with me all this
Morning. And is this the full and whole History of her Crime, my Dear, said my
Father to my Mother-in-law? Yes, returned the good Woman. Why then I proceed to
Judgment, said my Father.

You, Mrs. Betty, not having the Fear of God before your Eyes, etc. (here my
Father ran on with the whole Sentence that a Judge repeats to one arraigned for
Murder, and during the time of Speaking, I observed Betty to be very much
startled) shall for your Punishment, before you sleep, wash and starch these
same Headcloaths, and in so doing, it shall remain as a sufficient Punishment
for your heinous Crime, though you know you deserve much worse; and be sure for
the future, you are never guilty of the like. Betty promised, in a great deal
of Confusion, to mend for the future.

The next Day was designed for me to wait on my Uncle, and though I had a great
Desire to go, yet I was not satisfied; I was in various Minds; sometimes I
fully intended to inform my Father with my Suspicions, with all the
Circumstances and Grounds for it. But then again, I considered my Suspicions
might strengthen my Opinion, and they might be really innocent. While I was
wrapped in my Cogitations, I observed my Mother and her Maid were going into the
Garden, and I did not doubt but they would get into the Summer House, in order
to another Conference. I slipped into the Garden, and got to my Hiding Place
behind the Jessamine-Hedge, before they came. As soon as they were up the
Stairs of the Summer House, my Mother asked her Maid if she were assured there
was no one in the Garden; she told her, No, nor none could come in but she
could perceive 'em from the Window where she sat.

What can be the Meaning, said my Mother, that this devilish Brat does not feel
the Effects of what he has taken? I am afraid either the Apothecary, or you,
have betrayed me. Madam, returned the Maid, I can assure you we are both
innocent of your Suspicion: As for his Part, he does not know who, or what it is
for: Yet, Madam, I don't doubt but you will be surprised at what I am going to
say to you.

I would not, continued Betty, be guilty of what before Dinner I made no
Scruple of, for the whole World. If you had observed my Countenance, while my
Master was judging my fictitious Crime, with the formal Introductions in Cases
of Murder, you might have read my Guilt in my Face. I am assured Master Billy
observed me most heedfully, and, to my thinking, his Eyes told me he knew my
real Crime in the Intention. I was some time before I could recover my
Confusion, and I then weighed in the Scales of Justice, the Reason of your
Resentment ^o him, and found the Intention to be the utmost Wickedness, and I
thanked my God our ^nhuman Designs had not taken effect. You see Heaven is
displeased, and shows the Abhorrence of the Fact, by hindering the Effect. I
looked in his Face during the latter Part of Dinner, and wondered how we could
plot to take away the Life of so mucn Innocence, that never injured us. I thank
Heaven, my Eyes are opened, nor even the worst of Torments should make me once
think of such a Crime. Therefore let me beg of you, my dear Mistress, to forget
it, bury even the Thought of it: Consider the Crime; Murder is the greatest Sin
against God; it is even striking at him, by murdering his Image. Let my
Repentance be as the Alarm to yours. I am sure, if you will give yourself time
to think, your Conscience must awake, and teach you to abhor the Crime. No one
knows our wicked Intention, but all-seeing Heaven, which will pardon us on a
sincere Repentance. We are obliged to keep each other's Counsel; therefore let
me conjure you, by the Love you ought to owe your Husband! by your Duty to
Heaven! which I should have mentioned first; by the Worth of your eternal Soul!
by the Affection you ought to owe your Children! for those of your Husbands
must be yours, since you are but One: Consider what it is to have a clear and a
quiet Conscience, it is the only Happiness on this side the Grave, it is that
which sweetens all the Ills of Life; the Innocent will be happy, let Fortune
empty her Quiver of Malice on 'em. If the Weight of this will have no
Consideration with you, think on the Welfare of this World, if you can lull to
sleep your Conscience. Murder has many Tongues to speak, even things inanimate
have divulged the Guilty; and when once revealed, think on the Punishment that
must follow. I beg, Madam, take some little time to ruminate on what I have
said, before you answer me; weigh it well, for it is of the last Importance;
for though a poor, ignorant, weak Woman, you will find what I utter to be the
Oracle of Heaven.

Here Betty paused, as expecting an Answer; and during the Interval of Speech,
the Agonies I felt at the intended Wickedness, were next to Death itself. After
about a Minute's Silence, my Mother spoke as follows.

Betty, Words can hardly speak the Torments of my Mind; yet I have this to
comfort me, it is in Repentance to set my Soul at rest, and I do repent from the
Bottom of my Heart. What a Fiend had I entertained in my Breast! How very near
the Brink of Hell, his proper Habitation, had he brought me! Thou were my
Guardian-Angel, that saved me from Destruction! To Heaven and Thee I owe my
Thanks. Now this Fury is gone forth my Bosom, I think, with thee, how it could
be possible to harbor such a Hellish Thought against the poor Child; but, now
I feel reviving Love, even equal to that of my own Son, I long to embrace and
kiss him with a real Mother's Fondness.

The Joy I felt at this Declaration, had almost made me discover myself, and it
was hard to keep my Legs from running to my Mother to accept the longed-for
Blessing; but Reason got the better of my Transport; That told me, I ought to
conceal from all the World my Knowledge of the whole Affair. While I was in my
Musing, I could hear Betty say, Madam, my Master's coming up the Walk, I beg
you will compose yourself. I Will do what I can, replied my Mother-in-law, but no
one can imagine what Torments I feel. Then sit here, Madam, said Betty, for
here it is dark, and my Master cannot perceive your Disorder. My Mother, as I
supposed, removed to the Place she desired her. Immediately after my Father
came in, and asked 'em if they had seen me, for they had been searching me all
over the House, but could not find me. My Brother's Man, said my Father, is
waiting for him. My Mother replied I had not been there, but must certainly be
in the Study. No, said my Father, he is not there, neither can I imagine where
he can be, and the not finding him makes me very uneasy.

Upon saying this, my Father went up and down the Walks calling me. When he had
left the two Women, Betty cried out, I hope in Heaven my Repentance is
accepted, and he has not now felt the Effect of the Poison. You fright me out
of my Senses, returned my Mother; let us run to seek him. Away they went. When I
was certain they were out of Sight, I clamber'd over the Wall, and came in the
Street way, just as my Mother with her Maid came out of the Garden. As soon as
my Mother met me, she clasped me about the Neck, and kissed me with as much
Transport as if I had been her own Son; which affected me in such a manner, I
could not help weeping with Excess of Satisfaction. What means these Tears, my
Child, said my Mother? Madam, said I, be not offended, they are Tears of Joy,
to see you so kind. Bless thee! my dear Boy, returned my Mother, I hope always
to prove so.

When my Father came in, he asked me where I had been; I told him, only to take
a Walk in the Fields after my Physic. We thought we had lost you, said my
Father, and were sending for the Crier to cry a great Boy of Fifteen Years of
Age? But come, continued he, mount! your Uncle's Man waits for you, and has
done this Hour. Your Things shall be there tomorrow Morning. I begged Leave
only to pack up a few Books, and I would wait on him instantly.

As I was in my Study, putting together what I intended to take with me, Betty
came up to me. Well, Sir, said me, how do you find yourself after your Physic?
Better than was expected this Morning, Betty, said I. I am very glad on it,
replied Betty, I now believe you are, said I; but there is a great Alteration
since Morning, and I hope it will continue. While I said this, I looked
steadfastly in her Face; she observing me, blushed very much. Come, Betty, said
I, it is never too late to repent, Repent, Sir! replied Betty, of what? Of doing
Ill, I returned, or even thinking Ill. I had but an ill Opinion of you this
Morning; but I have Reason to think I have done you Wrong, and I ask you
Pardon; be satisfied, I can sometimes read Peoples Thoughts. Why then, said
Betty, if it be so, you know you have no Reason to ask my Pardon, for I am sure
you never offended me. But if I have ever offended you, I ask you, and Heaven,
Pardon, and I hope I shall obtain both. Be assured you will, I replied. She
seeing me ready to go down, took her Leave of me, modestly begging leave to
kiss me. As I was going away; Sir, said she, if we both are alive ten Year
hence, and I have the Honor to see you, I may make you acquainted with
something very extraordinary. Nothing but what I partly understand already, I
returned; keep in the honest Path you are in, then Heaven will bless you.

I got on Horseback, after taking Leave of the Family, and observed Betty in
much Confusion; I shook my Head at her, with a Smile, and rid away.

When I arrived at my Uncle's, which was about fourteen Miles from my Father's,
I was told by the Servants he was gone out a little way, not expecting me so
soon; but he would return in a Quarter of an Hour. During his Stay, a Coach
came to the Door with a couple of old Ladies, and a young one about thirteen
Years of Age, the beautifullest Creature my Eyes ever beheld: I could not help
gazing upon her, with a great deal of Delight. They came to visit my Uncle, but
finding he was gone out, would not stay. I looked after the Coach which carried
this young Angel away, as far as ever I could see, and began to feel a certain
Tenderness, which People, I thought, of my Years, had but little Knowledge of.

I was pleasing myself with the charming Idea, when my Uncle came in, who
expressed a great deal of Satisfaction to see me. After the first Civilities were
over, I told him there was a Coach with some Ladies to wait upon him, but not
meeting with him at home, would not come in. My Uncle being a merry jocose Man,
said to me, Sirrah, you should have done the Duties of my House, and made 'em
come in. But who were they? I told him I could not tell. But the Servant
replied, They were my Lady -- her Sister and Daughter. Odso! you young Dog,
returned my Uncle, there would be a fine Wife, if you had but Money enough;
she is an Heiress, and will be worth Fifty Thousand Pounds. Well Sir, said I,
when I think on Marriage, I must not turn my Thoughts that way. No! why so?
replied my Uncle; a Woman with a Fortune is as soon got as one without; and
when I die, you don't know what may happen.

Sir, said I, if I never marry till I wish your Death, I hope to live single a
great while. I believe thee, Will, said my Uncle: But it is time enough to talk
of these things ten Year hence; I would have no Man marry till they are past
Twenty, nor Women till past Sixteen. I wonder, Sir, said I, you never thought
of that State! Why, you young Rogue, so I have, replied my Uncle, so much on it,
that I resolve to live single all my Life; and I am of the Opinion, few People
marry only to better their Condition. That Is a little too hard, Sir, said I: Do
you imagine no one marries for Love? O yes, a great many, replied my Uncle; but
it does not last long: Lovers have large Stomachs, but are soon cloyed, they
very often surfeit the first Meal I told him, My Mother, his Sister, I thought,
loved my Father till the Day of her Death. She was contented, I believe,
replied my Uncle. But come, young Man, this Discourse is a little too wise for
one of your Years. Not at all, said I, Uncle; I hope you will not take it ill,
if I declare your Notions of Matrimony will not hinder me to try my Fortune, when
my Inclination serves, and a good Match should offer. No, said my Uncle, I hope
to see thee wedded to a good Fortune before I die; therefore I intend to carry
thee to my Lady S -- and there you may grow acquainted with the young Lady;
your Age is much the same, and your Correspondence may be continued as your
Years increase; beside, I would have you have some Place to go to, for it would
be hard to have nothing but an old musty Uncle to converse with. Age does not
very well agree with Youth.

Our Conversation lasted much longer upon this Topic; and it might have lasted
longer than it did, if Supper had not come in to stop my Uncle's Mouth. His
Housekeeper sat down at Supper with us, which I thought a little odd; but I
soon found how Matters went, and, young as I was, I could perceive Madam was
Mistress of the Family. She appeared extremely civil to me, even, as I thought,
too civil; for her Behavior seemed to say, Observe! I am Mistress of the
House, and it is to me you are beholden for your Entertainment.

The next Day I could not help hinting to my Uncle, something of his
Housekeeper's Behavior. Why, Billy, said my Uncle, this Woman is a good Woman,
in her Way, and I should be at a great Loss without her; for, as I have many
Servants, and being a single Man, I should be but a scurvy Manager of 'em: Now
this Woman, being prudent and discreet, knows how to manage such a Kennel of
wild Hounds as I am forced to keep, out of State indeed, for I have not Service
for 'em half: But a Man of Fortune must live something answerable to it, or he
will be despised by his Neighbors. Once a Man has got in that Road, he must
not get out of it again.

Sir, said I, I beg your Pardon for being so inquisitive, and, may be,
impertinent. Billy, replied my Uncle, you may say and do just what you will
here, for I would have you to understand, this House, and all that is in it, is
not only yours when I die, but the Estate that belongs to it, which is upward
of Two Thousand Pounds a Year; and to convince you of it, I design to make my
Will forthwith. I have so much Confidence in you, to believe I shall never have
Occasion to alter it. I beg you, Sir, said I, don't talk of making of Wills,
and Death, it is a melancholy Subject, and whatever you will be pleased to leave
me, will not compensate the Grief I should feel for the Loss of so good an
Uncle. Why, you Fool, replied my Uncle, I believe you; but I hope a Man is
never the nearer Death for talking on it, or making his Will!

We were interrupted in our Discourse, by a Servant's giving my Uncle a Letter,
which he read to himself, and smiled. Here, said my Uncle, read that, there is a
Billet, whose Style may be altogether new to you; it is wrote by a young Lady,
and a fine Lady, though dictated by an old one. I took it, and read as follows:
Mr. IRONFACE,
WE all think you a good-for-nothing, fusty old Fellow, as indeed all old
Batchelors are, which is the only Motive prevails upon us to forgive your being
abroad Yesterday, when we came to wait upon your Worship. However, you must not
expect Absolution, before you have done Penance, which is, to come and Dine
with us to Day, and stay as long as we shall think fit. Your Compliance shall
bespeak some Favor from

Your enraged Judges, MINOS, RHADAMANTHUS, and AEACUS.




A very merry, free Epistle, indeed, Sir, said I. It Is the Style, said my
Uncle, we use in Writing to one another; and if any other Form should pass
between us, we should fansy each other offended at something. But come, Youth,
continued my Uncle, you must smug up yourself, and go along with me, for this
is the Place I intend to bring you acquainted in; for now they have honored me
with the Title of Knight of the Shire, I am now and then obliged to be with
some Bottle-Companions, which will not altogether agree with your Age, or
Constitution; so that I hope you will like the Company I shall provide for you;
and though the One is the Mother, and the Other Aunt to the young Creature I was
speaking of, yet they are neither of 'em Forty; the one is a Widow, and the
other an old Maid, if we may call her one at Eight and Thirty; but she has
nothing of the Stiffness or Formality of that State, but is as easy and
good-humored, as if she had lost that weighty Burden, a Maidenhead, twenty
Year ago; and, what is more surprising, resolves to die a Maid, except some
brawny Rascal does her the Favor to ravish her. The Widow, and Mother to the
young Lady, has been in the State of Widowhood near Fourteen Year, for her
Daughter was Posthumous-born; yet, though she is Mistress of a vast Fortune, and
consequently been sought by many in Marriage, (for Money is the Loadstone that
draws all the World) yet she resolves never to change her State. These Three,
with their Family, live as contentedly as any Three in the Universe. It Is here
I go, when I have a mind to be innocently merry, without bringing any Scandal
to the Family, because I am an old Fellow. They have fitted up an Apartment for
me in particular, and I very often stay all Night. Sir, said I, I suppose the
Reason why the Widow does not marry again, is the Love she bears to the Memory
of her former Husband. Rather, I believe, the Vexation she received from him,
replied my Uncle, hinders her; for I have heard her often say, he used to lead
her a damned sort of Life; and his Behavior to her has confirmed the Sister in
the same Mind. She often declares to me, in her Thoughts, the best of Husbands
are but Plagues, which I return by imagining the same thing by the Wives; so we
strengthen each other's Opinion by our Conversation; which is something odd,
you will say.

But I forget, continued my Uncle, that I am talking to a Schoolboy all this
time. Sir, I returned, whatever you say to me, shall do me no Injury, but
rather improve my Understanding; Things of Moment, I shall justly weigh; and
what is not necessary to be remembered, shall be forgot. My Uncle made me many
Compliments of my forward Sense; but at the Tag of all, to qualify 'em, told
me, Ripe Fruit was soon rotten; and so we both went to equip ourselves for our
short Journey.

In the Coach, my Uncle told me, I should do well to ingratiate myself with the
Family; for if I was ever to enter into the Matrimonial State, I could not do
better for myself; for, added he, though Marriage is a very bitter Pill, yet
there is Gold enough to gild it over, and a handsome young Lady to-boot. I told
him, whenever that Time came, I should value his Advice at the highest Rate.
Come, come, replied the old Gentleman, I don't love Compliments, they savor of
Insincerity. I returned, my Tongue and Heart ever did, and I hoped ever would,
go together; and whatever I said, it should be Truth. Ay, but Boy, answered the
old Gentleman, you know the old Saying, Truth is not to be spoke at all Times;
many a poor Man has suffered for speaking Truth.

When we came to the End of our short Journey, the two Sisters (who were both
comely Women) came to the Gate to bid us welcome; the young Lady, they gave us
to understand, was walking in the Garden. When we were brought into the
Parlour, after the usual Civilities, my Uncle told 'em, he had brought along
with him a Person that he designed one of their Acquaintance, and if they
balk'd his Intention, he threatened 'em severely with his Indignation. The
Ladies replied, I should be welcome upon my own Account, without his
Recommendation. Well, well, replied my Uncle, I don't care how it is done, so it
is done. But hold, cried the Aunt, will not it be something dangerous to allow him
the Conversation and Acquaintance of Isabella? (meaning the young Lady) he will
perhaps, in time, wipe away from her Memory the good Advice against Matrimony,
we have taken much Time and Labor to inculcate.

Fear not that, replied my Uncle, for I have, and shall take as much Pains with
the Youth, that they may be on a Footing. Upon this, the young Lady came in, to
whose Acquaintance I was introduced. Though she was the handsomest Creature my
Eyes ever beheld, the Charms of her Person were equaled by those of her
Understanding; and I soon found, young as I was, Love had taken full Possession
of my Heart.

The Conversation of the Day was chiefly composed of Mirth, and laughing at
former Transactions, which were larded, every now and then, with Contempt upon
the connubial State; and I was almost ready to die with Despair, to hear the
fair Isabella join with 'em, with more than ordinary Malice and Satyr.

My Uncle desired she would not be so inveterate, for she was taking the only
Method for him to fall directly in Love with her. And that is the only way,
replied the Sister, to get rid of your troublesome Company. I told the Lady, I
hoped my Uncle would not prove troublesome, 'till such a Declaration. I believe
not, young Gentleman, replied the Lady; but I fear there is much more Danger
from your Worship, than your Uncle; your Years will bring you forward, but his
will make him lag behind. I told her, I should always endeavor to keep myself
in the good Graces of that Family; and that nothing but Destiny should make me
forfeit it.

Oh then, returned the Lady, if it ever comes to that, the Fault must be laid
on Destiny, Fate, Ill Stars, and I know not what! I tell you, continued the
Sister, smiling, if your Years did not plead for you, I should begin to think
you guilty. I must own, though this was but Rallying, I could not help blushing
at what she said, as knowing myself a Criminal already.

Bedtime broke up our Company, and every one retired to their several
Apartments. When I was alone, Reflection began to make me very uneasy. The blind
God had wounded me, though not so deep as if I had more Years over my Head, yet
enough to break my Rest, and trouble and confuse my young Imagination. I got up
at the Dawn of Day, as uneasy as I went to Bed, and walked in the Garden alone,
for none of the Family were stirring. All my Thoughts were busied on the fair
Object of my Wishes. I continued, in my uneasy Contemplation, several Hours.

The first that interrupted my Meditations, was the Charmer of my Heart, who
came to me, with a smiling Countenance. I am informed, Sir, said she, you were
early up this Morning, I fear you did not like your Lodging! There Is nothing in
this House, I replied, but what I have the utmost Regard for; but (I continued)
it was my usual Custom of rising early to my Studies. We fell insensibly into
the Affairs of the Family, for I had not Courage once to mention what I felt
within my Breast; neither did I imagine she could have a right Conception of
what my Inclination would have declared to her. Among other things, I told her,
we should have the World unpeopled, if every body was of her Mother, Aunt, and
my Uncle's Mind. She replied, there was no Danger of that, for the Men would
find Means to have Heirs to their Estates, without troubling the Parson

I was a little confused at her Answer, for I imagined she insinuated I was
designed my Uncle's Heir, and therefore could hardly make her an Answer; for my
Uncle told me, when he mentioned making his Will, that I was the first that
knew his Inclination, and gave me a particular Charge to keep it a Secret from
every one, till he himself divulged it. It was some time before I could recover
my Confusion; for I was not assured they might not hint something of it to my
Uncle, and do me a Prejudice with him; not as to the Estate, for I little
regarded my Interest, but fearing I was not capable of keeping a Secret, even
of the utmost Consequence.

The young Lady, finding she had created some Confusion in my Thoughts, began
to comfort me, with telling me, my Uncle's Mind might alter; and tho, he was
stiff in his Opinion concerning Matrimony, did not doubt but his Eyes would be
open enough to see Merit, where it was so conspicuous. Her endeavoring to
bring me out of Confusion, plunged me farther into it, and sometimes I was
thinking she was uttering Riddles, and I knew not how to answer upon the Topic:
But at last I told her, Whatever my Uncle should think fit to do concerning his
worldly Affairs, should never trouble me, while he continued to do things
correspondent with Honor and Honesty. I am very glad to hear it, replied the
young Lady; and I fansy young Gentlemen, like you, who study much, acquire
Understanding, Fortitude, and Resolution, and all other Manly Virtues, before
their Years write 'em Men. Madam, I replied, in some it might be so; but I had
made no Progress in any of 'em, but one, and that I feared will be rather
counted a Weakness.

I fansy then, returned the Lady, since you own it a Frailty, you will make me
your Confessor; and if I judge it to be, as you call it, a Weakness, I Will tell
you what Penance you shall undergo for Pardon. Madam, I replied, you are the
only Person in the World that I will confess to; but then, you must promise me,
like a true Confessor, to keep it for ever a Secret from all the World, whether
it displeases you, or not; though I am under dismal Apprehensions of losing your
Favor, more dear to me than all the World.

Heyday! replied Isabella, if we were not both too young, I should imagine you
were going to make Love to me. Madam, I answered, you have guessed the very
Secret of my Heart. The tender Thoughts my Breast contains, are all for you.
Don't think it a Boyish Passion, apt to change; for whatever Usage I meet with
from you, I must continue to adore you. I have weighed our Years; yours and
your Family's Aversion to Matrimony, by your Yesterday's Discourse; and no
Consideration can put a Stop to my Passion: All the Favor I ask, or desire, is
only Leave silently to adore you; and if you find your Heart averse to my
constant Wishes, let me beg you to grant me Pity for all that I shall suffer,
and I shall rejoice at every Pang I feel, because they are for you. I am
convinced your Understanding far exceeds your Years, therefore I entreat you to
think beyou speak; and consider this, it is in your Power alone, to make me
live, or die. I own our Fortunes are at present unequal, but Time may produce
many things; inspired by you, I would aim at every thing that is honorable to
deserve you that Way, nor should I doubt succeeding. I said every thing my
Tongue could utter, prompted by Love, and had this Satisfaction, to observe her
Face was not dressed in Frowns. After many rallying Speeches, finding me
continue in my Distress:

Well, said she, as I promised to be your Confessor, I Will keep it a Secret, as
we agreed on; and perhaps, if I thought you in earnest, I should think of some
Punishment equal to what your Crime deserves: But you have been reading Ovid
lately, I suppose, and you would be endeavoring to put some of his Rules in
practice upon me. It is a pleasing Satisfaction to me, I replied, to hear you
understand Ovid so well; and, by your Choice, I hope you will remember all his
Rules. What! returned the young Lady, because I have read that Author, as our
English Translators have given him to us (for I own I am not so happy to
understand the Original) would you interpret for me, that I like the Subject?
No, continued Isabella, I have read Reynolds on Murder, and yet I hope you will
believe I abhor the Facts related there. I hope fo too, Madam, I replied;
therefore you will consider, that what my Tongue uttered, was from the very
Bottom of my Soul; and if you will not receive my Declaration favorably, you
will be the Death of me, which will make you a passive Murderer.

Few People, I believe, die for Love, in this Age, replied Isabella; however,
our Years will protect both of us. I told her, the Tree that took deepest Root,
stood the longest. Yes, returned Isabella, and the Impressions cut in young
Barks, soonest wear out; and often kill the Tree, Madam, said I. Well, well,
cried Isabella, we have had enough on this Subject for once. Madam, said I,
does the Word Once imply you would pardon me whenever Fortune will give me
another Opportunity of declaring my Passion? I have not Time now to answer you
(said Isabella) for I perceive your Uncle, my Mother, and Aunt, are coming
toward us. But I thought her Words were accompanied with so sweet a Look, that
bid me hope; and Hope is all the Pleasure of our Lives.

When we had joined Company, we were the Theme of the old Folks Raillery for
some time. Hark you, young Man, said my Uncle, how came you to rise so early
this Morning? Only because I do it every Morning, Sir, said I, to read. Why,
Sirrah, said my Uncle, if I had thought you had brought a Book along with you
here, I would have taken it from you, and burnt it. Is not here Contemplation
enough for you? pointing to the Ladies. Yes, Sir, replied the Mother, I think
he does well to have something to entertain his Thoughts, alone, for I don't
much relish the young Ones getting together so early; I don't well know how
they could entertain themselves, without talking of Love. Why, if we should,
replied Isabella, 'twou'd be only to fortify each other against that Passion.
Well, well, said the Aunt, your Ages secure you at present; but I should be
loath to trust you five or six Years hence. Ay but, said my Uncle, Will studies
the Mathematics, and he knows every thing of Geography and Navigation already,
but just going to Sea; and can tell you in what Latitude the Cape of Good Hope
lies under, though he was never there; he has all the Theory, and only wants the
Practice.

None of your Allegories, replied the Mother; I have a very good Opinion of the
young Gentleman, therefore hold your Tongue, for what you can say for him, will
only lessen it. Come, come, the Tea stays for us, said the Aunt. I Am glad on it,
cried my Uncle, for now we shall have a little Scandal, Tea has no Relish
without it.

My Uncle having no Business at home, we continued in this agreeable Company
three whole Days; and though we were to receive a Visit from them in two more,
yet the Separation from that I held most dear on Earth, was very irksome to me;
but the Hope of seeing her so soon, mitigated my Grief.

When we came home to my Uncle's, I observed a Youth walking in the Garden,
very near my own Age, as I could guess at the Distance I saw him; for as soon
as he perceived me, he walked another way, as not being willing I should see
him. I asked one of the Servants that happened to be in the Garden, who that
Youth was I just before saw at the Fountain. He replied, it was the
Housekeeper's Son. What, is the Housekeeper married then, said I? Not now,
replied the Servant, and smiled. Observing the Humor of the Man, by his
Countenance, I asked him many Questions concerning the Housekeeper and her
Child, but could not learn who was the Father positively; yet he gave me Hints
enough to imagine my Uncle had some Interest in the Affair, which created in me
a great deal of Uneasiness; for it soon occurred to my Memory what the divine
Isabella told me in her Mother's Garden, that Heirs to Estates might be
procured without the Help of the Parson. My Uneasiness did not proceed from any
Disappointment relating to the Estate, any farther than I thought it might have
reconciled me to Isabella's Family; for I imagined if ever I could move her
Heart to love me, she would as much despise Riches as myself; for even, young
as I was, I could have been contented to have got my Subsistence from my daily
Labor, if Isabella would have submitted to have shared my Fortune; for I never
once thought of hers, but I wished it much less, or rather none at all, that I
might have been more on the Equality.

While I was musing on the State of my Love, I was interrupted by my Uncle's
Housekeeper, who, with a familiar Air, inquired concerning our Entertainment at
the Widow's: I found, by her Discourse, the poor Creature was jealous of my
Uncle, and to increase her Opinion, I told her, I fansy'd we should shortly
have a Wedding, for it looked very like it. Between whom? asked the
Housekeeper, hastily; why, between my Uncle and the Widow, I answered. I
observed her Countenance change at what I said, and a very great Disorder
appeared about her. But I did not think fit to have any further Conversation
with her, so left her to her own disordered Thoughts.

When my Uncle and I were together, he asked me how I liked the young Lady (for
he had not an Opportunity to ask me in the Coach as we came home, because we
brought a neighboring Gentleman home with us, that came to make a Visit at the
Widow's) I told him, I had a very great Regard for her, and I did not doubt but
my Years would increase it. I would advise you, said my Uncle, to make your
Addresses there, but secretly, for I am convinced you will not meet with a more
beneficial Match. I answered my Uncle, I was of his Opinion; though not from the
Greatness of her Fortune, but from the Charms of her Person and Understanding.
Why, I would have you affect what you marry; but, I hope you don't imagine,
young Man, said my Uncle, a good Fortune will be any Hindrance. Not in the
least, Sir, said I; but I would have no Two join in that holy Ceremony, if they
could not despise Fortune. Well, well, replied my Uncle, Experience will tell
you another Tale, when you have a few Years more over your Head, which is now
filled with Notions of Honor, and I know not how many chimerical Ideas, that
have their Being in thy Brain; You read too much.

I hope, Sir, said I, Reading is designed to cultivate the Understanding, and
raise our Imaginations above the Vulgar. I am of the Opinion, a Man of Quality
with a Plebeian Soul, is a Plebeian; and on the contrary, a Plebeian with
exalted Merit, ought to change Fortunes with him. But you forget, with all your
Learning and Philosophy, that Fortune's blind, young Man, replied my Uncle, and
distributes her Favors as blindly. I have seen Dullness and Stupidity in a
Coach and Six, while Virtue, Merit, and a whole Library of Learning walk on
Foot. The more Shame to the degenerate Age, you will say, young Man. True, Sir,
said I; and if I had a Fortune answerable to my Inclination, I would never see
one of those you mentioned last, twice in the same Condition.

Don't think, replied my Uncle, that I am endeavoring to blot out those
Notions of Virtue that I see wrote in thy Soul; for it is on the Consideration
of thy noble Inclinations, that I have lately resolved in my Will, to leave
thee a considerable Fortune, being assured thou will make the right Use of it.
The Bulk of my Estate was left me by an Uncle, an old Bachelor as I am, which
I intend to leave to thee in the same manner. Neither can I think thy good
Understanding, Boy, continued my Uncle, will receive any Prejudice from our
Contempt of the Marriage State; though the Reason why I have not changed my
Condition, is, that the first Object of my Wishes was, by Fate, denied me. But
I suppose you have heard your Father often repeat the Story. Never in my Life,
I replied; for I have been at School ever since Five Years old, and very seldom
conversed with any of the Family; and I may justly say, Sir, that I am almost
as great a Stranger in the Knowledge of my Ancestors, as one that never heard
of us: Well then, said my Uncle, I Will let you into as much as I know of 'em.

We are originally Welsh: Many of our Ancestors have flourished in the Church,
as well as State, and left a sweet Scent of Virtue in their Ashes. I was the
youngest of three; the eldest dying in the Wars, when he had gained many
ever-living Laurels. Your Father proved Heir to the Estate, who is one Year
elder than myself. My Father's Brother having acquired a great Estate by
Merchandise, in the Indies, and having an Inclination for me, always declared
me his Heir, and I lived with him as such; therefore I think it almost your Due
to be Heir to mine. About the Age of Seventeen, I fell in Love with a young
Lady of a very small Fortune, but that was supplied by the Charms of her Mind
and Person. Her Mother (for her Father had been dead many Years) was averse to
my Passion. She would often tell her Daughter, I was but a younger Brother; and
though every Body imagined I was to be Heir to my Uncle, yet no body was assured
of it. Old Men were as subject to change their Minds, as young ones; therefore
she would by no means consent to my Courtship; but when she found I continued
my Addresses, she secretly informed my Uncle, who took me to task on the other
side; with many Arguments, proved I should be much to blame to think of a Woman
of such a narrow Fortune, when, in Prospect, I was Master of such a large one;
and hinted to me, if I continued in my Folly, as he called it, I might be
balk'd of my Expectation.

Though my Love was as great as could be, yet I thought it was but common
Prudence to dissemble; and I told my Uncle, I hoped I should never give him any
Occasion to forfeit the good Opinion he had already conceived of me. He gave me
very good Advice, which I promised to follow. But every thing must submit to
Love; Fortune, Interest, Relations, and Friendship, must give way to that soft
Passion. And I doubt not, young Man, notwithstanding your Learning and
pretended Fortitude, but Time will convince you of what I say. I sighed, and
was in some Confusion at my Uncle's Discourse, but made him no Answer, because
I would not interrupt him.

By secret Interviews, continued my Uncle, I gained the Heart of the young
Lady, unbiased by her Interest; for in the mean time she was courted by a
Gentleman, possessed of a Fortune much beyond the Hopes of her Family, who soon
gained the Mother's Consent, and, being an obstinate Woman, she promised him
her Daughter's. In the mean time we met almost every Night, by the Help of the
Maid, who by Bribes and Promises was in my Interest; and one Evening among the
rest, I took Possession of the willing Fair One.

Our Amors were not so secret as we imagined; for my Rival being informed of
our Correspondence, though he had no Notion how far our Intimacy was carried,
sent me a Challenge, which I accepted of, though unwillingly; for I am of that
Opinion, Men's Honor often prompts 'em on to those Acts their Consciences and
Wills would leave undone. We met, and Fortune declared in my Favor, by
dangerously wounding my Adversary, without my receiving the least Hurt. The
Mother to the Fair One was exasperated to the last Degree, and, in the Heat of
her blind Rage, took her Daughter along with her to visit her intended
Son-in-law, where she agreed, notwithstanding his Wounds, and her Daughter's
Cries and Lamentations, to marry 'em immediately, which was performed.

You may guess what we both felt at this Shock of Fate, for Possession had
heightened my Passion. I tore and raved like a Madman, and was almost
inconsolable; and nothing but the Regard I owed my Uncle, kept me from doing
some rash Act. But Time, that cures most Sorrows, gave me some Consolation, as
imagining I should have still a Correspondence with the disconsolate Fair One,
for her continued Sorrow convinced me she mourned for the same Cause.

I took an Opportunity, and got a Letter conveyed to her; but what was my
Surprise and Sorrow at her Answer! I have read it so often, and it is so well
imprinted in my Memory, that I can repeat it verbatim.

SIR,
THOUGH I love you more than Life, which I am convinced I shall not long keep,
yet the Duty I owe my Husband shall prevent any future Interviews. Strive to
forget me, as I willingly would you, though impossible, and never more think
there ever was such a Wretch as the unfortunate

MARIA.


I strove many ways to come to a better Understanding; but she as carefully
avoided it. I lingered out many Days in this Interval of Life, if I may call it
so; for I could not say I was alive. One Morning her Maid brought me a Letter;
and though I offered her Gold to stay the Reading of it, yet she would not. The
Contents of this last were as surprising as the first.

MY DEAR,
I AM now going, I firmly believe, into another World, to answer for my
Miscarriages in this, for I find the Pangs of Childbirth upon me, which I
hope, and am almost assured, I shall not outlive. It is the Fruit of our
guilty Joys. Let me conjure you, if the Infant should survive, find some means
to prove a Father, for it can not expect any other in this World; and cherish
the Memory of your unfortunate

MARIA.


I was so far plunged in Grief at the Knowledge of her State, that I went into
the Fields to have more Freedom for Contemplation; and though it was Morning when
I received the Letter, I had not thought of returning, if the Curtain of the
Night had not began to spread the Hemisphere; but ere I could get out of the
Fields, I heard somebody walk very fast behind me, and turning about, I was
somewhat surpised to see the Husband of Maria, with his Sword drawn in his
Hand, as ready to attack me. Though I was weary of Life, I had no Thought of
rendering it to one I had no very kind Thoughts for: Yet I was resolved to
parley with him, and do my Endeavor to bring him to Temper; for I considered,
he had Matter enough to gall him. But Words signified nothing; and he pressed
so violently upon me, that I was obliged to oppose him, and in a little time
left him dead upon the Ground.

I immediately got home to my Uncle's, who waited for me, and was going to
chide me; but seeing me look so pale and confused, and without my Sword (for in
the last Thrust, that gave him his Death, he fell down toward me, and I let it
fall out of my Hand, and his Body fell upon it) he very tenderly asked me the
Cause of my Concern. When I had informed him: Well, said my Uncle, be not so
troubled; since you have killed him fairly, I Will warrant thy Pardon. But were
there any Witnesses of the Action? Several, said I, on the other side of the
River, though I know not who they were, I was in so much Confusion. However, he
deserved Death, said my Uncle, for killing the unfortunate Maria, and her
innocent Infant. I did not hear what more my Uncle said, for the Use of my
Senses was taken from me, and I fell into a Swoon; yet, when I recovered, I
found myself in Bed; for my Uncle, imagining I had received some Wound in the
Encounter, ordered a Surgeon to be brought; but when he was informed of the
Truth, he was convinced that 'twas pure Grief that had overcome me, and almost
compelled me to be let Blood. I was in such a Condition, that Despair had got
the Ascendant over me, and had resolved with myself not to live: And in order
to put my Design in Execution (being informed my Uncle was gone out upon some
urgent Affairs) I ordered my Man to go to another Surgeon of my Acquaintance,
and bring him along with him; which was quickly done. I then took an Occasion
to send my Servant out of the way, and desired the Surgeon to let me Blood in
the other Arm, which he complied with, not knowing I had been let Blood before.

As soon as he was gone, I undid both the Bandages; the Blood poured out of my
Veins, and I soon became insensible. Heaven forgive me! for I now declare I had
no other Thought, but following my dear Mistress, whom it was plain, I loved
more than Life; which that Day would have put an End to, if it had not been
purely for an Accident; for the last Surgeon meeting with him that first bled
me, among other Discourse, told him he was going to see how I did after my
Bleeding by the Order of my Uncle, who was obliged to go out, and that he was
to stay with me till his Return.

The last Surgeon, in a sort of Surprise, told him, he had not been long come
from me, and had let me Blood; and soon finding there must be some
extraordinary Meaning in my Proceeding, came both together, and broke open the
Door, that I had locked before I let loose my Arms. I was so far gone, that
they gave my Uncle no Hopes of Life, which, I was informed, almost put him into
my Condition. 'Twas two whole Days ere I opened my Eyes; and three more before
I recovered my Understanding; and the Thoughts of the Catastrophe of my dear
Maria, had made me resolve to take nothing to support Life, if I had not been
prevailed upon by my Uncle, whose Sorrow quite confounded me, and a religious
Man, who set before me the heinous Sin of Self-Murder, a Sin he told me could
never be pardoned, for it was directly flying in the Face of Heaven, without a
Possibility of repenting the Action.

The Thoughts of Eternity made me repent of the Act, and resolve to live. By
degrees, I recovered my former Strength; and meeting one Day with Maria's Maid,
by Accident, I desired she would give me some Account of the melancholy Action.

Sir, said she, when my poor Mistress felt the Pangs and Throes of Labor upon
her, she wrote that Letter, and ordered me to return upon the Instant I had
delivered it, for she should want me in her unhappy Condition. When I came
back, I found her Pains grew worse. When I found how it was, I told her I would
go and send for the Midwife. Do then, said she; for though I wish for Death, the
poor Innocent has done nothing to deserve it; That may live to meet with a
better Fate than its unhappy Mother; and in her utmost Pangs, she softly
uttered your Name. The Midwife came, and she was delivered (after great
Agonies) of a fine Girl, whose early Features promised to exceed her Mother's
Beauty.

Maria's Mother, and the rest of her Relations, were in the utmost Confusion at
what they saw; for seeing it a beautiful full-grown Child, they were well
convinced the Husband was not the Father of it. The Mother came up to her, and,
notwithstanding her weak Condition, gave her all the ill Language she could
think of. The poor Lady, at last faintly told her, it was her own Fault, to
force her to that Marriage: That she was joined to you by Heaven: And she
believed she had no Guilt to answer for what she had done; for she had ever
lived with her Husband virtuously, and ceased all Correspondence with you,
since the Day of her unfortunate Marriage, which I witnessed for her in the
Letter she had wrote to you. She was brought to Bed pretty early in the
Morning. Her Husband was gone to Hunt with some Gentlemen of the Country. But
when he returned, he soon came to the Truth of every thing, for there was no
concealing how Matters went. Is is so? cried he, all enraged; And am I an
antedated Cuckold? I Will have no Man say I keep a Whore, or Bastard of his.
Therefore, upon the Instant, he flew to the Bed, first ran his Sword into the
unfortunate Maria's Breast; and, snatching the lovely Infant from the Nurse's
Arms, threw it against the Ground, and dashed out its innocent Brains.

It was some time before either of us could proceed in the sad Narration, for
Tears, at the unhappy Act. When the Maid had a little recovered herself, she
proceeded.

The Wound the barbarous Wretch gave the unfortunate Maria, did not immediately
rob her of Life; but she lived to make all the Hearers weep at what she
related; even her unkind Mother could not refrain Tears; wishing a thousand
times, she had died, before she had forced her to that unlucky Match. Dear
Mother, replied the fainting Fair One, do not repine, but learn to forget Me,
and this unhappy Day. Consider, Fate is in every thing. I beg yours and
Heaven's Forgiveness: And then began to faint. She would see the Infant, though
in that piteous Condition: After looking upon it for some time, Poor Babe! said
she, thou have severely paid, though Innocent, for the Crime of thy Father and
Mother, which I hope is forgiven by Heaven. Here she began to faint again, and
only said, Heaven forgive me; preserve, and support my Dear -- Here her Tongue
failed; she only gave a Groan, and expired. We all supposed it was your Name
she would have uttered, but Death stepped between.

This Relation had almost brought me to my former Despair; and I often wished
the Wretch alive once more, that had been the Cause of poor Maria's Death, that
I might have killed him again.

'Twas several Years before I could wipe away the Thoughts of my dear Maria:
Nay, I can never forget her, nor seldom remember her without bringing Tears
into my Eyes, as I have at this Repetition of my former Sorrow (for, indeed, we
both could not refrain from weeping) but for her sake only, I am resolved to
live and die a Bachelor, which, said he, (reassuming some of his former
Gaiety) is the better for you. Though my Uncle often told me, added the old
Gentleman, if he had known my Passion had been so strong and sincere, he would
not have been against our Marriage. Since, I have assumed a freer Air, and
having got acquainted in this Family, rail along with 'em, they having known
nothing of my Story; for it did not make any great Noise, because my Uncle
procured Witnesses enough that heard our Discourse; and the barbarous Act spoke
so much, that I was never tried for it; which was, in some sort too, prevented
by my Illness, and weak Condition.

This Story of my Uncle's, seemed to me an Introductory History to my
Misfortunes, which caused me much sorrowful Thinking; yet I had ever some
secret Hoping, that kept up my sinking Spirits. When we went to Dinner, Madam,
the Housekeeper, looked very glum upon my Uncle, though she continued her
Civility to me, yet I took but little Notice of it. After Dinner, I went to
Fish in a River at the bottom of the Garden, and in an Hour's time my Uncle
came to me.

Hark you, young Man, said he, I have a Crow to pluck with you: What is the
Reason, good young Spark, that you have disturbed my Housekeeper with a Story
of a Cock and a Bull, about Marriage, and I know not what, with I know not who?
Why really, Sir, said I, she examined me so strictly this Morning, that I hope
you will pardon me if I tell you, I thought her impertinent; neither did I
imagine she had any Right to be angry, or pleased, at what I said; though, I must
own, I saw it disordered her; but I suppose that only proceeded from her
Interest; for if she imagined you married, you would have no Occasion for a
Housekeeper; for, added I, smiling, my Lady would take that Work off her Hands.
Well, young Spark, said my Uncle, I find you are a prying young Gentleman; and
since you resolve to know all my Secrets, I Will declare another to you: This
Woman is now and then pleased to Tuck me up; and, moreover, has laid a Child to
me, but the Boy is so unlike the reputed Father, I have no Notion I had any
Hand in the forming him. Now this makes her assume an Authority. And, to let
you know further, it is the very Maid that lived with the unfortunate Maria. I
thought it was my Duty to do something for her, and, at my Uncle's Death, I
took her into the House. The Freedom I gave her in talking now and then, of
that melancholy Adventure, grew at last into an Intimacy; Flesh and Blood being
frail, and different Sexes at all Hours of opportunity together, will show
themselves.

Sir, said I, what you have entrusted me with, shall only teach me to pay her
more Respect than I have done, without letting her know I am let into the
Secret. And, for the future, I shall not tell her any thing that will perplex
her, upon your Account. Nay, said my Uncle, smiling, I shall ever make her know
the Difference between the Handmaid and the Master: And whether her Child be
mine, or not, whenever I die, I shall provide handsome enough for 'em both;
though, perhaps, not according to her Expectation. The Boy is ignorant who his
Father is, pursuant to my Instruction to the Mother; and I am apt to believe
she has kept it a Secret, for he is not yet of Age to be trusted with it; though
the Lad is forward enough in every thing, but just Learning, which makes me the
more suspect, I am none of his Father.

Our Conversation has lasted for Six and Twenty Years; and in Fifteen of my
juvenile Years, she never pretended to make me a Father. I know she has fed
herself with vain Hopes, I would make a Will, and put him down for Heir: But, I
can assure you, it never was my Intention, nor ever will be; and I shall leave
'em the less for Impertinence. Whatever you please, Sir, said I; but don't
leave 'em the less upon my Account. Well, a few Days, answered my Uncle, will
put an End to their Hopes, or Fears; and though when an Heir is settled to an
Estate, he looks like a Coffin to some People, yet, Youth, I don't know how to
part with you to the University; I am convinced you will have little to learn,
but ill Customs, which many Scholars imbibe, where they should avoid 'em: But I
am not at all in pain for you; I believe the Tenets of Virtue sufficiently
stamped in your Mind: Therefore I have some Thoughts of riding over to your
Father, to prevail upon him to let you and your Tutor live with me. I Will take
care you shall not want Books; I have a good Library of my own, and if that will not
do, let me but know your Wants, and they shall be supplied. I gave him Thanks
suitable to so agreeable an Offer; but hinted to him, a Person is not so well
esteemed in the World without a University-Education. That Is but a small
Consideration, replied my Uncle, and if we meet with no other Difficulties, I
hope we shall get over that.

From this Subject, we proceeded to that of the Widow's Family. I believe, Sir,
said I, Isabella is, and will be, as averse to Marriage (at least by her
Discourse) as her Mother, or Aunt. I fansy, young Man, replied my Uncle, you
begin to fear it. Come, come, continue your Correspondence; there is a great
deal in the first Impression, and Nature will prevail. But enough of this; I Will
now show you my Library, which you have not yet seen; and give you the Key,
that you may make use of it when you please; but, added he, if you use it too
much, I Will take it from you again.

When we came into the Library, which was a spacious Room built on purpose, I
was surpised to find it so well stored with such Variety, and valuable Books,
especially all the Classics of the best Editions. I told my Uncle, I liked my
Situation so well, that if he would give me Leave, I would employ myself a few
Hours to look 'em over. That was one Reason why I brought you here now, replied
my Uncle, for I am obliged to go for some Hours upon some urgent Affairs; and
imagining I should bring you into Company you would like, made me the more
willing to introduce you to 'em, and if you find yourself tired, and their
Conversation should not please you, they will not be disobliged at your leaving
'em. So saying, he gave me the Key, and shut me in. While I was in high
Delight, for I had even forgot the fair Isabella, I heard Whispering in the
next Closet, which made me awake from my pleasing Amusement; and in a little
time I could hear the good Housekeeper say, You may speak louder, for I am
assured there is no one within hearing, for the old Gentleman's gone out. Ay,
but, replied the Man's Voice, What Is become of the young One? Gone with him to
be sure, returned the Housekeeper, for he does not stir a Foot without him, and
therefore let us make good Use of our Time, for I fear our Meetings will be
less frequent. I am convinced this young Gentleman will be a Thorn in our Side,
for when he and his Uncle were together the Day that he came, I heard him
inform him, that he would make his Will shortly, and put him down his Heir.
Now, as you, no doubt, are to draw the Writings, I would have you find some
Means to provide for our Child, which he imagines to be his. That, I think,
will be impossible, answered the Man; for, be assured he will read it over
before he Signs it; or if he does not do it then, he may at some other Time.
No, no, that will never do. We must even wait with Patience till his Death, and
I Will find it easy enough to make a Will for our Advantage, of a later Date than
what he intends to make. I own, said the Housekeeper, it goes against me to
think of defrauding the young Gentleman. But when you consider, replied the
Man, you do it for your own Flesh and Blood, you ought to have no Scruple.
Well, returned the Housekeeper, I must leave the whole Affair to you. I should
be contented to share the Estate between the two Boys; and I think, if he does
otherwise, as he imagines our Child his, he will not do Justice. We shall see
what he intends to do, when he makes his Will, replied the Man, and, in short,
till then, we cannot make a Judgment on any one thing.

I found, afterward, they had left speaking aloud, and were making themselves
as merry as they could. They were so boisterous, that several Folios I had
leaned against the Wainscot, tumbled down, which alarmed 'em very much. Bless
me! cried Forsooth, What Is that? I cannot tell, returned the Man; I hope the
Squire is not in his Study. No, that I am sure of, said the Housekeeper. Now I
recollect myself, continued she, it is some of the Books tumbled off the
Shelves. They made themselves easy with that Supposition, and continued their
Game. After some time, I could hear 'em go softly down Stairs. I waited at the
Window some time, and at last saw him go through the Courtyard. He was a tall
thin Man, had a Cast of an Eye, and seemed about Forty.

As soon as I found all was still, I went softly out of the Library, and went
into my own Room, a pair of Stairs higher, to avoid all Suspicion. When I was
there, I resolved to acquaint my Uncle with the whole Truth; for I thought it
would be Injustice to conceal it, if it had not concerned myself. When my Uncle
came in, he was in a very good Humor, and would often smile at his own
Imagination. I told him, it was a great Pity he should stay at home as he
usually did, if going abroad made him so merry. Billy, replied my Uncle, I have
so much Reason to be merry, at least in my own Opinion, that I Will tell you the
Cause of my Mirth; and I have so good a Regard for your Understanding, that
I Will rule my Risibility, for this once, by it; and if you declare I am in the
wrong to be merry, I Will do my Endeavor to be otherwise.

Sir, said I, if that is the only Reason in letting me into the Secret of your
Mirth, you need not give yourself that Trouble, for I am apt to believe, you
will be right in every thing you do. No Compliments, Boy, replied my Uncle; I
have told you before, I don't like 'em. But to proceed.

You remember that Gentleman we brought in the Coach from the Widow's,
yesterday. That Gentleman is about Five and Thirty: Three Years ago, he was one
of the most eminent Merchants upon the Exchange, and his Credit would have
stretched as far as the best of 'em.

In the Time, of his Prosperity, he fell in Love with a Widow-Lady of a vast
Fortune, without the Encumbrances of Children upon it. The Lady gave him all the
Encouragement he could expect. The Day of their Espousals was fixed, and near
approaching, when the uncomfortable News was brought him, of the Loss of almost
all his Fortune; for three of his richest Vessels were taken by Pirates. This,
as you may suppose, was a very great Shock to him; but being a Person of the
utmost Philosophy, he calmly resigned himself to the Will of Heaven. He
immediately left off Trade; and when his Debts were paid, he that was but ten
Days before, in every Body's Opinion, worth a Hundred Thousand Pounds, found
himself Master of Seventy Pounds a Year, and his Country House, which he
instantly sold, and, as I thought it a good Bargain, I became the Purchaser.
His greatest Satisfaction in his Misfortunes, was the Thoughts of the Widow's
proving constant to him; and he did not doubt, but with her Assistance, to
recover his Losses. But few Women, my Boy, are sincere in their Protestations.
It Is true, sometimes the blind Spark stings 'em in the Tail, that they become
as blind as Fortune; or otherwise they are as hard to deal with, as a Parson
for his Tithes.

The Gentleman, after his Misfortunes, I can with Justice declare, was more
welcome to me than before; for it would be a Hardship indeed to have the
Unfortunate slighted; and I am assured that generous Minds resent things that
are offered 'em in their Adversity, that they would not have regarded in their
Prosperity. One Morning, at Breakfast, I observed him very melancholy, insomuch
that he refused his Chocolate; I encouraged him as much as I could, as
imagining the Thoughts of his Losses had attacked him. But I was very much
surpised to hear him say, his former Losses were nothing to what then
oppressed him. I must own, said he, I had some Omens of it Yesterday; for when
I went to visit the Widow, as usual, I was told, she was not at home; but
returning by the Garden-Wall, I heard her talking to her Maid; and when I
called to her, could get no Answer. This Morning my Suspicions are confirmed,
for she has just now sent me a Letter, where she tells me, She is very much
grieved at my Losses; and as Merchandising is so very precarious, she hopes I
will pardon her if she intends to keep her Fortune to herself; and endeavor to
mend my Credit with somebody else. The Loss of her Money does not vex me half
so much, as her insulting me; and though, I must own, I have a very great Regard
for her Person, yet I would not wed her now, if she should repent of her Usage.

I believe there is little Danger of that, said I. Women have Obstinacy enough
to keep bad Resolutions. All I could say to him, gave him but little Comfort;
and, I must confess, his Uneasiness infected me. But, as I have told you, Time
is an excellent Doctor, for the almost bald Gentleman wrought a Cure, so that
he often wished it in his Power to be revenged on the Widow.

Many Weeks passed on, and his Inclination strengthened, though no Accident could
assist him, till about two Months ago, an old Barn that belonged to the House,
I ordered to be pulled down, with an Intention to make an Addition to my
Garden; for I had some Overtures made me by a Nobleman, concerning a Purchase,
in which I should make a considerable Profit, though with a secret Intention to
give it to the Gentleman I had bought it of. The Barn, in reality, did still
belong to him, for it served a Farm near the House I had bought, which was the
Remainder of the Gentleman's Estate, and the same he lived in.

In digging the Earth of the Foundation, there was found a Pot of Money that
contained upwards of a Hundred Pound, which was given the Gentleman. As we were
at Supper, and pretty merry at the Accident, an odd Thought came into my Head.
Why may we not, said I, to the Gentleman, report, we have found a larger Sum?
No one knows what we have found, but the Man that dug it up, and we can
instruct him to favor the Deceit. But to what End, returned the Gentleman?
Why, to be revenged on the Widow, said I. I am assured 'twas covetous Interest
at first made her comply with your Addresses; and when once she finds it her
Interest, she will receive 'em willingly again; and if we can bring Matters
about, to complete your Revenge, you must even marry her. The Gentleman smiled
at my Project, but thought it would be impossible to bring it to any thing.
Well, said I, you shall have little to do; I warrant, I Will make your Part easy
enough. Accordingly, I went to work. We reported about the Country, that such a
Gentleman had found a vast Treasure in his Barn, supposed to be hid there in
the Civil Wars, even enough to recompense all his Losses. The Fellow that dug
up the Money, was an arch Rogue, one fit for our Design; I took care to
instruct him; and, to carry every thing on with a good Face, as I wanted a
Coach, I bought a new one, sent the Gentleman to his House again, as if he had
made a new Purchase of it, in the new Coach, and Attendance suitable. I also
let the Sister to Isabella's Mother into the Secret, who, by her Contrivance,
received the Addresses of the Gentleman. You must imagine, this surpised every
Body, and soon came to the fickle Widow's Ear: She, it seems, began to be very
inquisitive, had sent for the Fellow that dug the Money up, and examined him.
He afterward came and informed us what passed between 'em. I was very much
pleased to hear it; and we instructed him how he should behave to her. We
ordered him to let her know, that we were to meet to settle our Matters at a
neighboring Tavern in the Town, and several People, along with the fortunate
Squire.

When the Fellow came back from her, we took him into Examination again. As
soon as I came before her (said the Fellow) she asked me, if I was the Man that
had found the Money. Yes, Madam, said I. Well, and is it as much as the World
reports? Really, I cannot tell, forsooth, said I. There was sixteen great Pots,
that would hold about a Gallon a-piece; and in one of 'em there was abundance
of such Stuff as your Ladyship has about your Neck, forsooth, and in your Ears;
I cannot tell what they are good for, not I; but they say they are worth Twenty
Thousand Pounds. Well but, said the Lady to him, do you know what was in the
Pots? Why, in nine Pots, forsooth, said I, there was nothing but Pieces of old
Gold; and the rest had all Silver in 'em. But I did say, Sir, I thought it was
too good for you, for you gave me but Ten Pounds in old Jacobus's for my
Honesty; for you know, Madam, said I, I could have secured a Pot or two for
myself. But when I told her you were to meet at the Tavern, she gave me a
Crown, and said she would give me another, if I could find means to bring her
into the next Room to where you were. I am to bring her Word tomorrow, when
you are all met, and she will be ready to come with me.

Well, what say you now? said I, to the Gentleman; our Plot begins to thicken.
Why indeed, he replied, I begin to conceive some Hopes of it. We gave the
Fellow his Instructions; and I told him, I would make one of his Lies a Truth,
if we succeeded, and that should be the Ten Pounds. He gave us good Assurance,
that he would not fail in his Part.

The next Day we met at the Place appointed, with Gentlemen that we had let
into the Secret; and, among the rest, one to represent a Lawyer; for we did not
much care to trust a real One, there is so little Honesty among 'em. The Fellow
was to give Notice when the Widow was come, by shutting a Casement in the Room
where she was to be; for it was an old-fashioned Window, and made Noise enough
in the Shutting to be heard all over the House. We at last heard the Signal to
begin our Farce. I had provided a great Number of old Writings and Papers, that
if she should have the Curiosity to peep, she might perceive we had all our
Implements. One of our Company told our Gentleman, the most that could be made
of his Jewels, was Eighteen Thousand Five Hundred Pounds. Another cried,
There Is your Bills for the Forty Thousand Pounds from the Goldsmiths. And
there is the Five Thousand Bank Notes; but, added he, the Tellers were
surpised! they had not seen so many Pieces of old Gold in their Lives, neither
would they accept 'em, but by Weight. It cannot be helped, cried our Gentleman,
they will have a good Profit by it, for I suppose it will all be paid out to
the full Currency.

Every body played their Parts to Admiration. And when our Business was over,
we sat in to Drinking, with many Healths to the Gentleman, as Top of our
Company. We had not been at it long, ere our Emissary came in, who told us,
Madam had got Intelligence enough, he believed; for after we were set in to
Drinking, she presently retired, first giving me a Guinea, as a golden Key to
lock up my Tongue; which I promised her faithfully to perform; and, Masters,
you may perceive, I intend to keep my Word. We spent the rest of the Evening
with good Wine (though at a Tavern) and the Hopes of succeeding in our Design.

The next Morning we found it began to work; for this Letter (pulling one out
of his Pocket) came from the Widow to the Gentleman.

SIR,
I AM surpised I have neither seen or heard from you these three Months. I
expected an Answer from a Letter I sent you out of a Joke, to see how you would
resent a Refusal. But that Passion is not very strong, to be thrown down at a
seeming Denial. I have something to say to you, which is not altogether so
proper to commit to Writing; but if you will take the Trouble to come our Way, I
can inform you of a Person that would be glad to see you.

Yours to command, etc.


Why now, Friend, said I, she begins to nibble, and it is your own Fault if you
don't catch her; I Will engage she takes the Bait, if you will be but careful in
playing her. Why, what would you have me to do, said the Gentleman? Do! said I;
do as you should do; marry her, for you cannot be sufficiently revenged without
it. I cannot do that, he replied, that will be too full-grown a Cheat; you must
consider, that Station lasts for Life, and to have all my Hours embittered with
Upbraidings, would prove a Hell upon Earth. Why, said I, the World will but
laugh at the Trick; I mean, those that know it; and for those that don't know
the Artifice we have used, they will have the better Regard for your Wife.
Besides, when she finds the Imposition, her Understanding will make her quiet;
for my Part, I think it will be a fitting Punishment: Besides, I am assured she
must have some Inclination for you, or she would not have accepted your first
Addresses; but that her Avarice proved too weighty for her Love. This ought to
reconcile you to the Design. If you have any Regard for her, you will soon find
means to make all even; and if you have none, your Conscience will not long
trouble you. I Will assure you, if I thought there was the least Guilt in it, I
would not have any Hand in it: Besides, in the long Run, she may not prove a
Loser; Fortune has fair Looks, as well as Frowns, and her Ill Humor may be
worn out. The Consideration of that, said he, has wiped away all Scruples, and
I Will venture through all Dangers. In short, he made his Visit, and in all his
Discourse hinted, that the Report of finding so much Wealth was false; and told
her the Truth, in hopes not to be believed. To cut my Story short, he once more
gained her Consent; and this Evening they were married. Now this is the great
Business I have been about. What makes me smile, is, the Lady's mighty
Inclination to live in the House where the Money was found, imagining there
were more Mines of Wealth to be worked out yet. Tomorrow I intend to visit
'em, and let her know the whole Truth of the Matter, which I did not care to do
till after Consummation. And now, continued my Uncle, I have let you into the
Secret of my Mirth, though it is impossible to inform you of all the merry
Circumstances. I wish, said I, Sir, your Punishment is not too severe for the
poor Woman. I warrant you, said my Uncle, she will soon forget her Resentment. A
Blessing, you know, Billy, must always follow Wedlock. I wish it may, Sir, said
I.

Our Discourse was interrupted by a loud Ringing at the Door. We all ran to the
Window to see who it was in such Haste; and saw a Person at the Door, with his
Horse all in a Foam, enquiring for Squire Bridgford, which was the Name of the
Gentleman who was married that Evening. The Wedding being a Secret, my Uncle
told him he would not be in Town till the Morning. He seemed very uneasy; which
my Uncle perceiving, began to enquire into his Concern. Sir, said the Man, I
bring him welcome News, and the sooner he knows it, the sooner I shall be easy.
He was invited in, and his Horse taken care of. The Person told my Uncle, he
had brought the Squire News of above Forty Thousand Pounds. That Is News indeed!
replied my Uncle, and welcome, if it be true. It Is true, by G -- d! said the
Person, being a blunt Sailor; for I am an Eyewitness of it. After the Man was
refreshed, he told my Uncle, that one of his Ships had made her Escape from the
Pirates. We were all taken, said the Tar, near the Coast of Malabar, by French
Pirates, who used those Men that refused to make Part of their Crew, vilely;
some they cut their Noses off, some their Ears, etc. which the major Part
considering, resolved to seem to comply, 'till a fitter Opportunity should
offer, to get out of their Clutches. I understanding a little French, was their
Spokesman; I told 'em, we did not comply out of the Fear of Punishment, but
that it was what we all chose. Many of us had, a long time before, Thoughts of
running away with the Ship. They received us very kindly, gave us good Usage,
and those that did not come into their Measures, were not only tortured, as I
said before, but put under Confinement in Fetters. We took an Opportunity to
inform the poor Wretches of our Intention, which made 'em repent they had not
thought of the same Method: Most of 'em, hoping for better Usage, begged to be
admitted; but the wily Frenchman utterly denied 'em, well knowing they would
not be true Pirates.

They carried all their Prizes to their Rendezvous, into a Bay upon the Island
of Madagascar, where we had the Liberty to go on Shore, and consort among their
Hellish Crew. We fitted out again, and took several Chinese Joncks, richly
laden, and in every Engagement behaved so well, that the Captain of the Pirates
set very much by us. When we came back to our Rendezvous, there was some
Disturbance among 'em, concerning some former Shares; but we thought it was all
hushed. They had loaded one of the largest Ships that was taken from us, with
Goods out of the other Two, in order to go and trade with the Dutch at Batavia;
and one Night, Seventy of the discontented Party got in her, cut some that were
on Board in Pieces, slipped their Anchors, and stole away in the Night. The next
Morning, the Captain was out of his Wits, and the rest of the Men were as mad
as himself. But, in short, the whole Fleet, which consisted of four stout
Ships, were sent after 'em different Ways.

We steered N. N. W. three Days, and on the fourth discovered a Sail; we
crowded all we could to come up with her, and soon perceived 'twas She we
wanted. While they were busied in getting ready to engage, I stole down into
the Powder-Room, which I had the Care of, opened all the Barrels, and poured
Water into most of 'em, and with the rest I mixed some of the Ballast of the
Ship.

When we came up with 'em, a desperate Fight ensued, as long as the good Powder
lasted; then I ran up to the Captain, called him into the Cabin, where I told
him, in a seeming Confusion, I was certain some of the Men were in the Interest
of the other Ship. I then informed him what was done to the Powder. The Captain
asked me, What was to be done? Board 'em, Sir, said I, and fight 'em Sword in
Hand. What shall I do? said he. There Is no trusting our own Men. Why, said I,
there is sixty English of us, I Will engage we shall soon overcome 'em. I would
have you, replied the Captain, inform 'em of it, and tell them they shall be
well rewarded.

We bore off a little, while we were consulting, for we could overtake the
other Ship when we would, because she was heavy-laden. I acquainted all my
Ship-Mates with the Resolution I had taken, and they, one and all came into it.
When we had consulted proper Measures, we bore after 'em again. I informed the
Captain, when we had overcome the other Ship, I would put him in a Way to find
out the Knaves that had played him that Trick. He thanked me, and away we went
to work. We boarded her upon the Starboard-Quarter, entered her Pellmell, and
soon cut to Pieces those that made Resistance, with the Loss of Seven Frenchmen
and One Englishman; for we had Fifteen French to assist us. Six and Twenty of
our Opposers called for Quarter, but it was not granted, before the inveterate
Frenchmen had knocked in the Head Nine of 'em. Five more were so wounded, it
was thought they could not live, which still answered my Purpose. The others
were clapped under Hatches, and a Guard put over them.

The next Day, the Captain put me in mind of my Promise, to find out the
Guilty. Sir, said I, call all the Men upon the Quarter Deck; all I put on the
Larboard-Side, Order to be seized, and clapped under Hatches; you may tax 'em
with their Crime when they are secured; though they deny it, I Will prove what I
say upon every one of 'em before Night. My Advice was followed; the Men were
called up, to the Number of Sixty Eight, Forty One I placed on the
Larboard-Side, of those Men that were out of the Captain's Sight during the
Engagement, though doing their Duty. The other Twenty Seven were on the
Starboard. The Men on both Sides, could not imagine the Meaning of this
Division. All the Englishmen were upon the main Deck; and, by some Means or
other, according to my Directions, had their Arms about 'em; those that could
not conceal 'em, made as if they were cleaning 'em. The Captain told those on
the Larboard-Side, they were suspected to be in the Confederacy with the
Runaways, therefore, he would not have 'em take it ill, if they were confined
till their Guilt, or Innocence, were made to appear.

They were all amazed at the Captain's Speech, which he took for the Signs of
Guilt. Some were refractory; but at last, they consented to be confined, well
knowing their Innocence. They were put under Hatches accordingly. As they were
going down, the Captain said, the Innocent shall be rewarded. When they were
below, a Guard was set upon 'em, and I had taken care to have all their Arms
secured.

The Captain then told the Starboard-Side Men the whole Story, and that it was
by my Advice and Conduct the Ship was taken, etc. The Men were surpised, to be
sure. It was pleasant to hear their Discourse; they found 'em Guilty: I always
thought there was something in the Wind, in such a Mess, says one; says
another, I even heard something of their Design last Night, but as I was not
sure, I did not care to speak on it; nay, says another, I believe Jaques
such-a-one had a great mind to corrupt me, for he followed me every where
Yesterday, and only wanted an Opportunity of breaking his Mind to me. In short,
most of 'em had something to say, and all to prove 'em guilty. It was Matter
sufficient for our Mirth afterward, but I was a little too much concerned to
laugh then.

The remaining Frenchmen were got into Cabals by Fives and Sixes all over the
Deck; and our Englishmen were impatiently expecting the Word of Command to
seize 'em.

When we had proceeded thus far, I told the Captain, if he would please to go
into the great Cabin, I would convince him how he should prove 'em. When we
two were there by ourselves, I took a Pistol out of my Pocket, and told him, I
was the Man that had damaged his Powder, in order to bring that to pass, which
was happily effected. I let him know, I had gone too far not to take his Life,
if he resisted, or called out; and informed him, it would signify nothing if he
did, for I had two Signals to my Countrymen, one to seize his Men, and do 'em
no further Hurt, and the other to kill 'em all immediately. And I farther
added, Not one of 'em should suffer, if they would be quiet; and that we only
contrived this Stratagem to gain our Liberty.

The Captain thanked me, and told me he could not blame me for what I had done;
but wondered at himself that he should be imposed upon in such a manner. He
submitted himself to be tied very patiently.

When I had done, I went upon the Deck, and gave the Word, Now, which was to
seize 'em only; the other was, Now do your Work; though I did not intend to use
those Words, except I had found Resistance. Upon the Word, the Frenchmen were
all seized. It Is impossible to tell their Astonishment; but their Surprise was
heightened, when I brought out their Captain, bound, who soon let 'em into the
whole Matter. They were all struck dumb for some time, and then fell a gabbling
out their Mort de ma vie, like so many disturbed Geese. But though their Tongues
were at Liberty, we did 'em the Favor to bind 'em all by the Hands. Some of
our Men whom the others had released (those, I mean, that were ill used for not
consenting to turn Pirates, who, by good Fortune, were all in our Ship, though in
the Frenchmen's Reign, did all the servile Offices of the Vessel) were for
cutting to Pieces those that were instrumental in their ill Usage; but as they
gave me the Command, I ordered, not one should be touched, which the Frenchmen
thanked me for.

The One and Forty below soon found what we were at, and we as soon prevailed
upon 'em to be tied to their good Behavior. When we had secured 'em all in the
Steerage and Great Cabin, and ordered Centries, with a great Gun charged with
Musquet-Ball to fire in upon 'em, if they seemed to make any Resistance, we
went on Board our Prize, and took care of the other ten Frenchmen that were set
on as a Guard to the Thieves, as the rest called 'em, as if they were none. We
carried 'em all on Board. When every thing was quiet, we directed our Course
for England; and in two Days more, we took every thing out of the Pirate that
would be useful to us in our Voyage, leaving 'em a Month's Provision. We
secured all their Arms and Ammunition, and cut some of their Rigging, leaving
'em only a Foresail, with a Main Topsail, to prevent their getting into Harbor
too soon for us, and cause us to be pursued.

Thus every thing being ordered, as we hoped, for the best, we Englishmen went
on Board our own Ship, and left them to steer their Course back to Pirates
Harbor, as we called it. We continued our Voyage to England, where we happily
arrived, meeting nothing to molest us all the way.

We were mightily pleased with his Narrative, and highly commended his
Undertaking and Resolution. Said my Uncle, Mr. Bridgford is obliged to you for
his good Fortune; and I doubt not but he will reward you accordingly. He told
us, he was a Relation of Mr. Bridgford's, and Mate of the Ship, the Captain
dying when he was in the Pirates Hands; and all he desired was, only to make
his Promise good to the Sailors, which was, to allow 'em double Wages for the
whole Voyage. My Uncle told him, he would assure him of that. After a little
Conversation and Repast, the Messenger was sent to Rest, for he had come sixty
Miles that Day, upon one Horse.

When he was gone, we could not but admire at his Conduct in the Affair, and
the Providence of God to Mr. Bridgford. This good Fortune, said my Uncle, will
be a great Means of bringing on a Reconcilement. Now you see, Sir, said I,
there is a Blessing attends the Marriage-State. Yes, said my Uncle, but nothing
to provoke me to enter into the Noose. It must bring some Cares along with it,
be the Comforts ever so many. I fansy, Sir, said I, there is Cares attend your
present Way of Living. It may be so, said my Uncle, but none that I am tied to
bear.

I finding a fit Opportunity, thought it a proper Time to inform him of what I
had heard in the Library; but conjured him not to take any Notice of it, 'till
we could find an Occasion of his being an Ear-Witness. Well then, said my
Uncle, I Will take your Advice, and let it rest 'till after my Friend Bridgford's
Affair is over, and then we'll contrive some Way or other to catch 'em in their
own Snares.

The next Morning, my Uncle took me along with him, to wait upon the
new-marry'd Couple, and the Sailor with us. We gave him Instructions to wait
till we called for him. When we came to the Lady's House, we were ushered up
into the Bedchamber, where we found the Bride in Tears; for though it was agreed
not to open the Affair till my Uncle came, yet the Husband could not be easy
till he had told her all. She took it very heinously at first; but, weighing
every thing well, she had only Recourse to her Tears, which she wiped away as
soon as she perceived us.

Come, Sir, said she to my Uncle, I can now forgive your Plot upon me; though I
must own, the Disappointment caused me much Uneasiness; yet I find what is
appointed by Heaven, must be; I am satisfied we have enough, and I begin
already to loath my former Temper. Why now, Madam, said my Uncle, you strike a
true Harmony, and, to indulge it, I have brought you a Present; one must never
come empty-handed to a new-marry'd Pair, Billy, continued my Uncle, call in the
Man. When he came in, Mr. Bridgford was surpised: Cousin Brooks! said he, I am
very much pleased to see you; and this is a very acceptable Present, for I
thought you in the Hands of Pirates. Pray how got you from them? Why, to bring
home to you the good Ship Elizabeth, replied Mr. Brooks. We then let him into
the whole Story, and he bore his Joy, as he did his Grief, with a Serenity of
Temper he was (as my Uncle said) always Master of. I am pleased with this
Present from a Fortune, Madam, said he, only that it may be a Means to make you
forget some Part of your Loss in your Chimerical One. She made him a suitable
Reply, and all past Actions were soon forgot.

Mr. Bridgford gave his Cousin Brooks a Ring off his Finger, with a Promise of
a Thousand Pounds, and to make him Captain of the Ship he had so worthily
saved. But, my Dear, said the Lady, you give the Gentleman a Present, which I
suppose he is not to dispose of, but never consider he has been in the Hands of
Pirates, and perhaps all his Ready-Money's gone; and, added she, smiling, you
have not received the Money for your Jewels yet, therefore I must do something
for you; with that she went out, and immediately returned with a hundred
Guineas, which she gave to Mr. Brooks; there, Sir, said she, that is something
better than Promises; however, it is only as Earnest, my Husband shall keep his
Word.

We finding her in so good a Humor, took our Leaves: She much entreated us to
stay Dinner, but my Uncle told her, her Husband's old Sweetheart was to dine
with him, who longed to hear how Matters went. What, more Confederates?
returned the Lady; but I forgive all, and thank you for tricking me into my
Happiness.

As we were going home, my Uncle told me he was very well pleased he had been
instrumental in converting one Woman; but I had almost forgot, that I have one
at home out of the Pale of Salvation: Yet I shall not take any Pains in her
Conversion, if it is as you say) which I believe) continued my Uncle; I shall
turn her, and her Cub, to Grass, though with a moderate Maintenance, yet much
more than they deserve. But we'll let all Thoughts of that Affair sleep awhile,
for the Ladies will be here by and by, and I have never any thing that looks
like Discontent when we are together.

I found a secret Pleasure in the Hopes I had of seeing the amiable Isabella;
but then, intruding Fears would creep in to disturb my Thoughts. I imagined I
should be slighted, or perhaps she might disclose my Passion to her Mother, or
Aunt, and then all my Hopes would be entirely lost; for I had not any Notion
they would, either of 'em, consent to my Desires. The Time was spent between
Hopes and Fears, 'till the Arrival of the Ladies. When they came in, any one
might have perceived my Passion by my Countenance; but they were so much taken
up with their Discourse about Mr. Bridgford's Affairs, they had not the Leisure
to mind any thing else. My Concern was redoubled at the little Notice Isabella
took of me, and her entering so readily into the Conversation, without so much
as vouchsafing me a single Look, almost distracted me; so that I took a proper
Opportunity to retire, to conceal my Confusion. I went into the Garden to
indulge my Melancholy: Finding so many Reasons to increase it, that had almost
distracted me, I was so lost in Thought, that I did not consider how the Time
went away; and it is possible I might have remained in my Musing till Night, if
a Servant had not told me Dinner was served.

I was in some Confusion, to think what Excuse I should make for my long
Absence. When I came into the Dining Room, my Uncle asked me where I had been
so long. I told him, I found them so very deeply engaged in their Story, that,
as I knew my Company would not contribute any thing to the Conversation, I
chose to take a Walk in the Garden, and my Imagination wandering, I had lost
myself for some time. I was very much rallied for my Speech, by every body. I
thought, said the Aunt, the Company of Isabella would have had sufficient
Strength to have held you here. I suppose, returned Isabella, the young
Gentleman has been so well tutored by his Uncle, that he is beginning to put
his Advice in Practice, by shunning the Women. I told her, whatever Advice I
followed of my Uncle's, I was assured neither his Inclination, or mine, would
debar me of the Satisfaction of their Conversation, whatever I suffered in
Person, or Censure. I continued my Excuse, by telling 'em, the Story was not
new to me, and I thought it would be some time before they would have Leisure
to enter upon any other Subject. Whatever I had to say in my Justification, had
not stopped their Mouths, if Dinner had not. While it lasted, I narrowly observed
Isabella, but could not get one Look from her. I had but little Stomach, as
those in my Circumstances may easily imagine, though none made any Observation
upon it. When Dinner was over, we all walked in the Garden, and my Endeavors
to single out Isabella proved fruitless, which much increased my Agony of Mind.

In the Afternoon, Mr. Bridgford, his new Wife, and Mr. Brooks the Sailor, came
to visit my Uncle. Though, said Mr. Bridgford, it is not usual for new-marry'd
People, the Day after their Wedding, to make Visits, yet my Wife and I thought
it partly our Duty to wait upon this good Company, to take our Leaves of 'em;
for, continued he, though a Week past I was no Man of Business, yet now I find I
have Work enough on my Hands, not to mention my Matrimonial Affair. I am
obliged to leave you for Twenty Days. The Smiles of Fortune must be regarded,
or she may change her Countenance. I have experienced it, therefore am resolved
to keep up her Good Humor, if it lies in my Power. I must own, the Sorrows
that touch me at present, are raised from what I feel in parting (though but for
a short Time) with such Company as will always be very dear to me. Many
Compliments passed between the Parties, but they were ended by taking Leave,
for Mr. Bridgford set out for London from my Uncle's, with his Spouse, and his
Kinsman the Sailor, who found it necessary for his immediate Presence. After
the usual Compliment of Tea, the Ladies were resolved to go Fish; it seems it
was their common Recreation; and accordingly, their Implements were carried to
the River, no farther than the Bottom of my Uncle's Garden. I was resolved to
be only a Looker-on, as not being composed enough to follow the Pastime; and
perhaps I might have run the Hooks into my Fingers, instead of the Baits. Every
one had tolerable good Sport, but Isabella, and her ill Luck made her fret
much. Billy, said my Uncle, this is a Diversion you delight in. You know the
Fishes retiring Holes; pray see if you can help the young Lady to a little
better Fortune. I told my Uncle, I would contribute all I could to Isabella's
Entertainment, with a very good Inclination. Come, Madam, said I, if you will
be pleased to walk a little farther, we'll see if Change of Place may not
change your Luck. She made me no Answer, but with a condescending Nod, followed
me. I took care to take her out of the Sight and Hearing of the rest of the
Company. I then looked a little carefully after her Bait and Tackle, and she
caught a Fish presently.

Well, said she, I find my Luck is changed; but yet I am but half reconciled to
the barbarous Diversion; it does not suit with the tender Sentiments of our
Sex, to rob any thing of Life; neither can I see the Death of a poor Partridge,
or the most diminutive Bird, widiout a secret Tenderness and Sorrow for its
being robbed of Life, which it is not in our Power to restore again. But yet,
Madam, said I, with all this Tenderness of Soul, you can see a poor suffering
Wretch in all the Agonies of Despair, without thinking once of Pity. I am
sorry, replied Isabella, you should tax me with a Crime I most abhor; but, as I
am innocent, it does not give me much Uneasiness. Madam, I replied, I speak of
Proof; I am the poor suffering Wretch, wounded by your resistless Charms, which
you know very well, and you will neither give me Death, nor Ease. Why indeed,
young Gentleman, returned Isabella, this Playing at Lovers is what we now
should leave off. We are too young to act in Reality, and too old to act in
Jest. I Will allow, your Understanding runs something before your Years; but, to
tell you ingenuously, if it were otherwise, I don't think for myself, I have a
Mother and Aunt, who have the Privilege to think for me, and they so worthily
deserve those Characters, I hope I shall never have a Thought against their
Inclination. I replied, it was my Desire she never should, I only wished she
would have a favorable Regard for me, and give me the smallest Grounds to hope
I was not hateful to her. She replied, Hate was not in her Nature; and that she
could say no more, than that she esteemed me equally with all Mankind, and
enough to be concerned at any ill Accident that should happen to me.

I was so transported at this faint Glimpse of Hope she gave me, that my Tongue
broke out in extravagant Expressions of Thanks. Hold, Sir, said she, you will
disturb the Fish, and spoil the Diversion I expect; beside, my Mother and Aunt
will hear ypu, and I have kept your former Confession from them, according to
your Desire; but will not promise Secrecy for the Future, it is a great Task
for one of my Years. I had not time to make her a Reply, for the rest of the
Company had near joined us, to know whether Isabella's Luck was changed or no.
Truly, said she, I have no Reason to complain, I have caught two, with the
Assistance of this young Gentleman; and had like to have caught another, but,
for want of Experience, had let him go again. Ay, but Billy, said my Uncle, can
teach you how to play a Fish up and down the Stream, when once you have it
fast, and be in no Danger of losing it. You must manage a Fish, as you will
hereafter do Hearts; though, I must own, if handsome Women are mere Fools (which
is not Isabella's Case) they soon learn that. We don't allow you to be a Judge,
replied Isabella, your Heart has been Eye-proof all your Life; or else you have
concealed that Part of it from us. Why, replied my Uncle, if I have never
loved, I might have had Attempts made upon me, enough to find out the Cunning
of the Sex; as your Aunt, I suppose, may answer for ours. I don't desire to
have the Question begged, replied the Aunt; but this I am sure of, there is no
knowing whether a Man courts the Purse, or the Person. For my Part, returned my
Uncle, I think a Woman, without a Purse, is but a despicable Creature. I wish
we could find out some other Discourse, returned the Widow; I think, when we
meet, we can never talk upon any other Subject, and, because we despise it, I
think it the best way quite to forget it.

While this Discourse lasted, I observed Isabella more thoughtful than usual,
and I could not help secretly hoping, I might have some Concern in her Musing.
Yet I was very uneasy I could not get an Opportunity to speak to her the whole
Evening. As we were taking Leave, my Uncle promised to Dine with 'em the third
Day following, and the Thought gave me some Consolation.

When the Company was gone, my Uncle and I walked in the Garden again. Well,
said he, I must own the Thoughts of the Persidy of this ungrateful Woman do not
sit so easy upon me, as I could have wished; in spite of all my Fortitude, it
stole in upon the Pleasure of the Day, and sour'd my Satisfaction. But,
continued he, I am resolved to have an End put to every thing on that Account,
tomorrow, if it is possible; but I am a little at a Nonplus about it; it would
vex me, if we could not bring it about, for Doubt is a very uneasy Companion.
Sir, said I, you have a back Way up to your Study, and I believe it will be no
great Difficulty to steal in unobserved of any body. You must give it out
tonight, that you will be abroad tomorrow, all the Morning, and I must wait
on you. That shall be done at Supper, said my Uncle. 'Till that Time came, my
distracted Thoughts were roving on the dear Isabella, and Hope and Fear, by
turns, possessed my Soul. Young as I was, I perceived Death would be more
welcome to me, than her Disdain. At Supper, my Uncle told me we should rise
betimes to go a Hunting, with some Gentlemen that he named; and, added he, I
design to take my Leave of that Diversion, for some time, having some Business
will keep me at home for a few Days. I obsev'd the Countenance of the
Housekeeper, and thought I saw her shut up in her Brain some secret Intention.
When she was gone from Table, my Uncle said, he did not know how to order it,
for it is possible she may go to this Rogue of a Lawyer, and consult there; and
then our Project will come to nothing. We must trust to that, Sir, said I; we
shall soon find it out, and if it proves so, we must wait till some fitter
Opportunity. Well, said my Uncle, we shall see how it proves tomorrow. But,
Billy, I Would have you go up into the Study, unbolt the Door that leads to the
Back-Stairs, lock it only, then bring me the Key.

As I was coming from doing what he ordered me, I took Notice the Housekeeper
was busy in Talk with her Son. Immediately after, the Boy took his Hat, and
went out. I told my Uncle what I had seen. We both imagined the Boy was gone to
give Notice of our going abroad the next Day, for Mr. -- the Lawyer, lived but
a little way from my Uncle's. Why, said my Uncle, after all, Suspicion
strengthens our Imagination, and every Action of a suspected Person alarms us;
I wish I could be sure he is gone there. That you shall presently, Sir, said I.
Upon saying that, I immediately followed him, and walking a good round Pace,
got Sight of him just as he rung at the Door. I got time enough at the
backside of the Porch, unobserved, just as the Door was opened. The Boy asked
for Mr. -- who came out to him presently. As soon as he saw him, I understood
he was very fond of him, and called him his Dear Boy. Sir, said the Boy, my
Mother gives her Service to you, and sent me to tell you, that the Squire goes
out tomorrow to Hunt, 'till Dinnertime, and will expect you by Ten in the
Morning. My Love, said he, I Will be sure to come; I will not ask you to stay now,
because I have some Company with me. So away went the Boy, whistling home; and
I followed, a more slow Pace than I went out.

When I came to my Uncle, I informed him all I had heard. Well, said he, I find
it will come to the Catastrophe tomorrow. I Will go to Bed, and think over my
Part. So we parted. And I am apt to believe, both our Pillows were uneasy
enough. Though my Passion kept me long awake, yet I could not choose having some
Concern at what would happen on the Morrow. When we rose in the Morning, we
both mounted, with a Servant; and after riding about a Quarter of a Mile, my
Uncle (as we had concerted) told me, he had no very great Gout to the Sport,
therefore would even go back again. But you, said he to me, and Tom (meaning
the Man) may go, if you please. No, Sir, said I, I don't care for going without
you. So we turned our Horses Heads homewards; and as we were going slowly
along, my Uncle ordered the Man to take all the three Horses to Town (about two
Mile from my Uncle's) and bespeak new Saddles. So we alighted, walked over the
Park, and got into the Library, unperceived of any. When we were in, we bolted
the Door on the Inside, and each of us took a Book in our Hands, to pass away
the Time till the Play was to begin, for it was not proper to talk to each
other; but yet, I believe, we neither of us well knew what we were reading.

The private Door we came in at, was contrived by my Uncle, that he might more
conveniently make Madam a Visit, unobserved by the Family, when his Concerns
called him, and the Door of her Apartment joined to it, upon the Head of the
Stairs, which we soon heard open; the Lawyer entered alone, where he staid some
time, and diverted himself with humming a Song. At last, the Lady came to him,
who informed him, she could not come sooner, being she was obliged to see the
Coast a little clear.

We soon found, by the Lawyer's Discourse, he had some Inclination to be merry,
before they talked of their Affairs. Come, come, said Madam, let us mind
Business first; we shall have time enough to divert ourselves, I Will warrant
you. Ay, but replied the Lawyer, it is better to be caught in Conversation, than
the other Affair; therefore let us make an End of that first. And we soon found,
he was resolved not to be denied.

During this Business, 'twas pleasant to see my Uncle's Countenance, which was
composed of half a Smile, about one fourth Part Shame (as I suppose, to have me
a sort of an Auditor in this unlook'd-for dumb Work,) and the other Fourth,
Anger. I believe such a Face could not be compounded out of Le Brun's Passions.
When their loving Affair was over, Consultation came on.

Well, said the Lady, what is to be done? I have Reason to fear every thing; for
I find this Boy grows upon him every Day. To tell you the Truth, replied the
Lawyer, I Am at a Fault, and have lost the Scent, and know not how to proceed. I
know you Women are more fruitful in Inventions of this kind. Indeed, if the
Squire's Head were once laid, I could find an Expedient to secure the best Part
of the Estate, without Danger, or finding out. It Is not the first time I have
disinherited the True Heir, without the Consent of the Predecessor, even for a
small Sum; and you may be sure I should use my utmost Skill for Thomas, who is
our own Child; though the Squire, I believe, imagines himself sole Proprietor in
You and Him. It Is a very perplexing thing, I vow! replied the Housekeeper; I
wish both their Necks broke today in Hunting, with all my Heart! Ay, that
would do, replied the Lawyer. I Would find a Will by tomorrow Night (like Moscas
in the Fox) should disappoint every boby else, without coming near his
Punishment. Well, I hope it is no Crime, returned the Housekeeper to wish 'em
both in Heaven; nay, if I lent a helping Hand to fit 'em for their Journey, I
believe my Conscience would be as drowsy, as if it had sip'd off a Dose of
Laudanum. Oh fie! returned the Lawyer; let us not think of Murder, however;
though, if we were in Italy, I could soon procure a Tradesman or two that deal
that way, would do the Work neatly, and very cheap too. But let us not think of
that any farther, than in our good Wishes. And now let me hear what you can
propose. What Ready-money does he generally keep at home? (Not that I purpose
to rob him, I have a better Principle.) Or what Bank or Goldsmiths Notes has he
at a time. I don't know, replied the Housekeeper, he keeps himself very close
as to those Matters, and I seldom see any of his Money, but his paltry Hundred
a Year that he allows me, and what I can ship out of Housekeeping, cutting off
Tradesmen's Bills, and so sorth, which does not amount to above Fifty more.

Come, come, returned the Lawyer, that is good Pay only for rubbing a Man's Head
that is turned of Fifty; he does not give you much Trouble, I believe. I wonder
how you would conceal your Joy, to see that Head we speak of dangling over the
Horse's Tail, brought home as Crook-back'd Richard's was, with his Neck, broke.
That would be a joyful Sight indeed, returned the virtuous Housekeeper. My
Uncle could bear no more, but rushed in upon them, just as she had ended. But
since I have saved my Neck hitherto, returned my Uncle, I am resolved to hunt
less, that I may not cause such an Alteration in your Minds, for those violent
Emotions of the Soul often endanger the Body.

Perseus's Shield could not have a greater Effect on those that saw it, than
the Presence of my Uncle had upon those two Wretches, for they both stood like
Statues; but my Uncle put a little Life into the Lawyer with his Cane; yet not
being fully revived, he ran round the Room several times, before he could find
the Door. At every Stroke of Acknowledgment my Uncle gave him for the Favors
designed him, he expostulated with him; and, to end his Favors, kicked him
down Stairs, telling him, he would not take any other Revenge, because, indeed,
he did not think it worth while; but bid him go like a Villain as he was, and
let his Crime be his Punishment. But if he offered to make any Words in the
Affair, he would find some other Method, besides exposing him, to have him
punished.

The Lawyer made no Reply, and, I believe, thought himself very well off.
Neither was there much Fear of his Tattling, because it would only expose
himself. Now came the Lady's Share of the Matter, who stood quaking and
trembling in a Corner of the Room. Will your Ladyship be pleased, said my
Uncle, with your utmost Expedition, to pack up your Trumpery, and walk off? All
the ill Usage you may expect from me, is to forget you; though I think no
Punishment bad enough for you. Neither shall I leave you, or your Brat, to
starve (who in deed is innocent) but allow him the Hundred Pounds a Year for
his Life, that he may not suffer for the Faults of his Parents. Go, continued
my Uncle; let me have no Reply; take what, you can with you, and send for the
rest when you think fit. She went down Stairs, followed by my Uncle; and when
she had taken a few Things, went out, without opening her Mouth; but whether
Grief, or Anger, tied her Tongue, I cannot tell. When she was gone, my Uncle
ordered all her Things to be put together, ready against they were sent for, to
the great Surprise of the rest of the Servants.

After Dinner, my Uncle took me with him to Town, to a Lawyer of his
Acquaintance, and ordered him to fill up a Deed, that made his Estate liable to
a Hundred Pounds per Annum, to be paid during the Life of the Housekeeper's
Son, though not quite Fourteen. I was made one of the Witnesses. The next
Morning, my Uncle ordered it to be sent to his Mother, for her to be satisfied;
but the Lawyer that made it, was to be the Trustee, whose Honesty and Probity
were as great as the other's Villainy. We then set out for the Widow's House;
and my Uncle told me in the Coach, he was resolved to be merry, notwithstanding
this Bustle that happened: And, young Man, said he, You have sufficient Cause
for Mirth at what has fallen out, for your Estate will be increased; for if I
had made my Will before, or not have found 'em out, I should have left 'em more
considerably.

When we came to the Widow's, my Uncle told 'em the whole Story, and they all
seemed mightily pleased upon my Account; for they imagined the Son of the
Housekeeper was to have been Heir. Yet I fansy'd Isabella's Countenance seemed
the least concerned, which struck me to the Soul. After Dinner, I got the happy
Opportunity of being alone with her, though I imagined it was with much Regret on
her Side. Madam, said I, my Uncle's expected Fortune does not give me half that
Satisfaction, as this Opportunity, if you would be pleased to consider my
Passion. I have considered it so far, Sir, returned Isabella, that I desire we
may think of it no more. The Answer she gave, struck me dumb with Grief; and it
was some time before my troubled Heart permitted my Tongue to speak. Well,
Madam, then, said I, you have resolved my Death. I own, even the Hopes of
Fortune do not give me Merit enough to raise my Eyes to such a Pitch of
Happiness. But Time, that produces very strange things, may befriend me in
That. I have told you, Sir, returned the young Lady, our Years are too few to
admit of Love; but whenever I shall feel the gentle Flame, I have very good
Reasons to believe, I shall not much consult Fortune; I am convinced that
Money-Matches are not always the happiest; yet the first thing asked in this
Age is, What Fortune has she? If that answers their Expectations, then they
proceed; if not, they look out farther, and barter for a Wife, as they would
for a Set of Coach-Horses.

In all our Discourse, I had some Hope, because I could not find any Grounds
for hating me; neither could I prevail upon her to declare any thing in favor
of me. Her general Answer was her Want of Years; yet she told me, she had
Discretion enough to conceal my Passion for her; and she would often say her
Reason was, that if a Person could not have an Inclination for a Lover, yet
they ought to have some Regard for 'em. I was pressing her to give me some
Token that I was not indifferent to her, when my Uncle came in, and interrupted
us. It was, I own, the first time I ever thought his Company a Trouble. Come,
young Man, said he, you will be suspected, you have been together a long time.
The Mother and Aunt sent me to part you. Besides, yonder is Matter for the young
Lady's Tears, the Burial of two Lovers. We all went into the Garden, and saw
two Coffins bearing to the Church. We were told, the young Man had lived in the
Neighborhood, and courting a young Woman of the next Parish, her Father had
prevailed upon her to marry another of a better Estate, which occasioned the
young Man's Death, for the Morning of the Marriage was the last of his Life,
making the River his Winding Sheet. The Bride and Bridegroom coming from
Church, were stopped by his Corpse lying in their Way; the melancholy Object had
such an Effect upon the Bride, that she fell down speechless on the Body, and
in a few Days expir^d with Grief. And her last Request was, to be buried
together.

The Story made us all very melancholy, and Isabella could not forbear shedding
Tears at the Relation; but we rallied one another out of our Sorrow. Methinks,
said the Mother, this Story would make a very good tender Ballad. You need not
fear the Ballad, replied the Aunt, by some Grub-street Bard or other. Why, said
my Uncle, cannot you make a Ballad, Billy? I have seen some of your Translations
from Ovid's Elegies, and such a dismal Subject, in my Imagination, will fit
your Muse to a Hair. Isabella seemed mighty fond of such a Thing; though I
declined it, as having never drank of the Streams of Helicon. But when we came
home, I sat down, and lanch'd out, though I did not understand how to steer my
Muse. But the Hopes of pleasing Isabella, made me embark; and the next Day, I
sent her the following Letter, by a Servant of my Uncle's, with a Charge to
deliver it into her own Hands.

MADAM,
IN the pleasing Hope of giving you some small Satisfaction, I have ventured to
walk out into the Field of Poetry: And though perhaps, I have gathered Weeds, yet
you must consider, it is for want of Knowledge in the amiable Flowers. But I
had rather err in endeavoring to please you, than not to obey your Commands. I
beg you will not expose 'em. I know you have Goodnature enough not to let any
one else laugh at my Want of Numbers. Consider, all the Faculties of my Soul
are yours; and I fear poor Damon's Fate will be mine; for I am assured I
neither could, or would, survive his Fortune. But I too much doubt, if it comes
to that, I shall never, after Death, meet with the same Pity as the unfortunate
Damon. I fear what I have already writ has disgusted you; but, consider it
comes from one, that shall ever esteem it his only Happiness to subscribe
himself

Your eternal Admirer, etc.

THE BALLAD.
I.
DAMON, whose tuneful Pipe had Charms,
To wound and heal the wondering Throng,
Long courted CAELIA to his Arms,
'Twas CAELIA that inspired his Song.
II.
The lovely Virgin joys to hear
His thrilling Pipe, and humble Verse;
Yet frowns, when Sighs his Pains declare,
Regardless of his Happiness.
III.
A sullen Swain, whose Wealth was great,
By Force of Gold, her Parent gains:
Poor DAMON, he bewails his Fate,
In sighing melancholy Strains.
IV.
And thus complains -- Accursed Gold!
Thou base Betrayer of my Love!
Mean are the Hearts are bought, or sold;
It Is Interest does the Fair One move.
V.
The Nuptial Day was fixed, and near,
Which added to poor DAMON's Smart,
Who every Moment dropped a Tear,
The Prelude to a broken Heart.
VI.
The dusky Morn came lowering on,
When all for Church prepare to go;
The sable Clouds obscured the Sun,
As loath to see the Lover's Woe.
VII.
The jocund Bridegroom, swelled with Joy,
Eyed CAELIA, as he passed along.
Exulting over the lovesick Boy,
Who faintly pressed among the Throng.
VIII.
With watery Eyes he viewed the Bride,
Who, seeing DAMON, sighed aloud!
And trembling by the Bridegroom's Side,
The Wonder of the gazing Crowd.
IX.
Some pitied DAMON; others rail:
Such Wretches are no Friends to Love;
On such the God will never prevail,
To sigh within the Paphian Grove.
X.
Poor Slaves to low and base Desires,
It Is Love that new-creates the Mind!
Without his pleasing, gentle Fires,
We Are sordid Metal, unrefin'd.
XI.
DAMON, depressed with mortal Grief,
Walks slowly by the River's Side;
By Hope forsaken! No Relief!
And all his Thoughts were on the Bride.
XII.
Ye murmuring Streams! the Shepherd cried,
Who often have heard my plaintive Voice,
Convey my Body to the Bride,
And show that Death is now my Choice.
XIII.
Fond Love, farewell! Adieu, vain Dream!
Farewell to every Grief and Pain;
Thus said, he plunged amid the Stream,
And never rose up to Life again.
XIV.
The rapid Torrent rolls him down,
Deprived, alas! of breathing Life,
Regardless now of CAELIA's Frown,
Who now returns, a Virgin Wife.
XV.
The Stream, repenting of the Deed,
Threw DAMON's Corpse upon the Grass,
Scarce cold (from Worldly Troubles freed)
Where CAELIA, and her Train, must pass.
XVI.
But when she viewed the well-known Face,
And knew each pale, dead Feature there,
She cried, poor DAMON! hapless Case!
My stubborn Heart was too severe.
XVII.
But why do I accuse my Heart?
'Twas always thine, poor lifeless Boy!
In all thy Pains it bore a Part,
A Part in every Grief, or Joy.
XVIII.
My rigid Parent caused this Woe,
Whose flinty Heart no Love can prove;
It Is he has wrought thy Overthrow,
And robbed me of my only Love.
XIX.
But, since on Earth we could not wed,
This only Comfort still I have,
My Heart shall join our Hands; though dead,
We'll keep our Nuptials in the Grave.
XX.
Then kneeling down, his Lips she pressed,
And, eager, clasped his pale cold Hand;
The other beat her troubled Breast,
While all the Hearers wondering stand.
XXI.
Come, gentle Death, the Virgin cried,
Give DAMON to my longing Breast!
She sighing wept, and sighing died,
Replete with Woe, and sunk to Rest.

When the Servant returned, he informed me, he had given it into her own Hands,
unperceived of any one. I showed my Uncle the Song, who told me, he believed it
as good as any of the Grub-street Quill-drivers could write; but he would not
allow it to be a Degree better; however, said he, it may please the Women well
enough, who seldom consider Sense, but Sound. I replied, I was to be excused,
it being my first Essay, and very probably might be my last.

While we were at Dinner, a Messenger came with a Letter from my Father,
desiring my Uncle to let me come home for a few Days, in order to get every
thing ready for the University; when that was done, I should return, and stay
with him till I was to go there. My Uncle agreed to it, and would accompany me
himself. Sir, said I, would it not be proper to wait upon the Ladies, to take
Leave? Ho! returned my Uncle, are you so loath to part with 'em for so short a
Time? What will you do, when you are at the University, where you must not
return for the first Year? For a whole Year, Sir? said I: Is there a Necessity
for staying so long, before I wait on you, or any of my Relations? Yes, replied
my Uncle, if you would be thought to mind your Studies; but I cannot perceive,
continued he, there is a Necessity for going there at all; and that is the
Reason why I shall wait on your Worship to your Father, to endeavor to
persuade him to let you and your Tutor be with me; I dare answer for you, it
will not hinder the Progress of your Learning; you shall want neither Masters,
Books, nor Money; and I am convinced the Universities often spoil more Youth,
than they cultivate with good Education. Youth is like Wax, fit for any
Impression; they as soon take an ill, as a good one. Though, I must own, I have
nothing to fear from you; and I freely confess, it is the Regret I have to part
with you, makes me desire your not going to the University; though if it does not
agree with your Sentiments, I shall say no more about it. I told him, I was
very well inclined to it, and could not but agree with his Thoughts. Well then,
said my Uncle, we'll away immediately, and, if it is possible, return tomorrow.
I hope that short Absence from the Ladies will not break your Heart.

I made him no Reply, but went to prepare for my Journey with a good
Inclination, for, I must own, I longed to see my Father, and observe how
Matters were carried on at home, not doubting but my Mother-in-law was still in
the Way of Goodness; though I had received no Recommendation from her, either in
my Father's Letter, or by the Messenger, but I knew my Father seldom regarded
those formal Matters.

As we came within three Mile of my Father's, my Uncle's Servant stopped a Horse
that was running away without his Rider, and a little farther, we could
perceive a Man lying weltring in Blood; when we approached him, we found him
senseless; and I was something surpised to find it the Surgeon that had the
Care of me, when I was wounded by my Brother. My Uncle was as much concerned as
I was, when he knew who it was. We took him up, and found his Scull was
fractur'd; but we did not doubt, if we could get timely Aid, but he might be
recovered. We put him into my Uncle's Coach, and drove to the next Town, with
all the Expedition was consistent with the Surgeon's Condition; by good
Fortune, we met with one of his own Acquaintance and Profession, who took him
in Hand, dressed him, and brought him to his Senses, though with much Fear of his
Life; he being a gross Man, a Fever had seized the Blood; and all agreed, his
Life was in Danger. However, he seemed very much pleased to find me so near
him; and I had some Thoughts it might prove a convenient Opportunity to work
out that Secret he informed me he knew of my Mother-in-law; but finding it not
proper to talk much, I resolved with myself to come to him again: So we took
our Leaves, and arrived safe at my Father's, who, not expecting us the same Day
he sent to us, was gone to visit a neighboring Gentleman.

My Mother seemed very much rejoiced at our Arrival, and welcoming me with
Tears, her Tenderness gave me no small Satisfaction. My Brother John, indeed,
looked as glum upon me, as if I had been come to rob him of his Birthright. My
Uncle perceiving his Behavior, rattled him, in his merry way; but it had no
other Effect, than bringing Tears into his Eyes, and running to tell Mama.
Zounds! says my Uncle (when he was gone) what a Country Cub it is! Why don't
they put him Prentice to a Farmer, for he will never be fit for any thing, but to
follow the Plough.

When my Father came home, he told my Uncle, he did not think he should have
complied with his Desires so soon, as not expecting me in two or three Days.
Why, said my Uncle, we made the more Expedition here, that we may return the
sooner; and, because you should not keep him too long, I came with him, to
carry him back. In short, the Matter was made up that Night. It was agreed my
Tutor and I should go back with my Uncle. I must own, I was not a little
pleased, for I feared the good Woman, my Mother-in-law, might oppose it; but
she readily consented, to save Charges, I suppose.

While I was walking in the Garden alone, Betty came up to me, and wept for Joy
to see me. Well, said I, Betty, how go Matters between you and my Mother? Is
the Affair made up? I hope I am to take no more Physic! The poor Girl was ready
to sink at the Word Physic. Indeed, Sir, said she (after a long Pause) I
believe you know every thing of former Affairs; but if you do, you also know I
have sufficiently repented of my Part, and I hope my Mistress has of hers. I
gave her so many Hints, that she confessed every thing. I was struck with
Horror at her Relation, for she discovered such Traps they had designed to get
rid of me, that I thought it almost impossible they should enter into the Minds
of Women. Sir, said Betty, you may find, by my Story, I am at a true
Confession; nay, I would kneel down at your Feet for Pardon, if it might not be
observed by any body. I told her, I had pardoned her long ago, as well as my
Mother, who might have had something of a stronger Tie to use me well, than
she. I hope, said Betty, she has forgot what is past, or if she remembers it,
it is only as I do, to think with Horror on what was designed, and a high
Satisfaction in knowing we are innocent of the Fact; though, pursued she, there
does not seem to be that Candor and Freedom between us, as there was when we
were wickedly caballing against your innocent Life; therefore I have some
Intention of leaving her Service, and going to my Relations in Wales, where, I
hope, I have enough to last me moderately all my Life. I told her, I was
assured my Uncle would accept of her for his Housekeeper, upon my
Recommendation, if she thought fit, for at present he had never a one. She
seemed mightily rejoiced at the Proposal, telling me, it was the only Thing she
should desire. I bid her not take any Notice of it to any body, till she heard
from me again; which she promised, and we parted.

The next Day, I took an Opportunity, early in the Morning, to visit the
Surgeon, and found him much better than any one expected, though he himself had
no Thoughts of Recovery. He told me, he was very much obliged to me, for the
Care I had taken of him; and, notwithstanding he was convinced his End was
near, yet he thought Providence had a Hand in sending me to his Assistance;
therefore, as I would not willingly go out of the World (said he) without
acquainting you with what I had formerly hinted to you, for fear you should
nourish the Opinion, that I wanted only to create Uneasiness, without any
Grounds; therefore, if you please, now I find I have Strength enough, I Will
acquaint you with all I know, if you will order the Room to be cleared for a
little while; which was soon done. I sat down by his Bedside, when he began as
follows.

You know, we Country-Surgeons are generally bred Apothecaries. I served my
Time with one, eminent in both Faculties, and it was allowed by every body, I
was not behindhand in my Master's Experience. He used to trust his Patients, in
general, to me, after my Capacity had been thought equal to such a Charge.

Sir Charles, your Mother-in-law's former Husband, lived near die Town, and my
Master was very great there; insomuch, that it was thought the Knight was in a
fair Road to Heaven, with my Master's Assistance; but it is often the Fate of
Cuckolds, to be one of the last in discovering his own Horns. For several
Years, the Knight and my Master were very gracious: They often rid a Hunting
together. But one Day, when it was supposed my Master wanted an Opportunity of
conversing with the Knight's Wife, took an Occasion of leaving him, making all
the Haste he could to visit the Lady. The Knight missing my Master, though not
mistrusting any thing of the Matter, went home likewise, and going up to his
Lady's Chamber, found the Door shut; but peeping through the Keyhole, perceived
she had got his Companion with her, and both in a Posture not very decent. The
Knight, being neither a Hercules nor an Ajax, stood some time to consider what
he should do (as he told me afterward) but at last, summoning all his Courage,
he burst the Door open, and surpised 'em very disadvantageously, giving my
Master several Strokes upon the naked Buttocks, ere he could put up the proper
Covering; but, being a good-humored easy Man, and a Wittol to boot, at their
Tears and Entreaties, forgave 'em both; but would not allow of my Master's
Correspondence any more. When any thing was wanted from the Shop, I always
carried it; till, by degrees, I got into the good Graces of the Knight, and rid
out a Hunting with him; though not so often as my Master used to do; but I
believe he gave me Leave more readily, that he might have a better Opportunity
of visiting the Lady,

In one of the Knight's drunken Moods, he discovered what I have told you,
between his Wife and my Master, which I was ignorant of before; but, said he,
they have promised me never to do the like again. I only smiled at his
Simplicity, and confirmed him in his Belief; though I was pretty well convinced,
when I looked a little backwards, they only met as often as they had an
Opportunity. In a few Days after this Confession, when I was a Hunting with
him, he seemed to be less merry than usual: I asked him the Reason: He told me,
he believed his Wife continued to see my Master in a criminal manner; though he
was not convinced by Proof. I asked him the Reason of his Belief. Said he,
going into my Wife's Chamber this Morning, as she was dressing herself, a
Letter dropped from her Bosom, which I took up, and was well assured 'twas your
Master's Hand; I opened it, and had but just time to read, My Dear, when my
Wife, in some Confusion, snatched it out of my Hand, and told me it was a
Letter from a Relation of hers. I told her, I was assured it was the Doctor's
Hand. Well, said she, if you are jealous, you shall not see it now; but I Will give
you Leave to read it when you come back from Hunting. I was forced to be
satisfied, continued the Knight; but I shall be convinced it is so, if she
pretends to have lost the Letter. The Knight took an Opportunity of seeing me
the same Evening. He told me, with a great deal of Joy in his Countenance, that
he was deceived. See here the Letter that gave me so much Uneasiness. I took it
from him, and soon knew my Master's Hand, though he had endeavored to write not
like himself.

I could not choose but smile at the Cheat that was put upon him; it was plain
enough that she had acquainted my Master with the Matter, and while the Knight
was gone a Hunting, he wrote her another in a Woman's Name, beginning as the
other did, about nothing at all to any Purpose. I was convinced in my
Supposition when I came home, for my Master pulling out a Parcel of Papers,
gave me one to take Directions for compounding some Medicines; I soon found it
was the Father to the Letter the Knight showed some time before, for it began
as the other did, and Sir Charles's Name was mentioned in it. I told my Master,
smiling, I could find no Directions there for me. Odso! said he, I have given
you the wrong Letter; that neither concerns you nor me. He immediately fumbled
out the right one, and went away in some Confusion of Countenance. I was very
uneasy myself, that he knew I had discovered the Secret of his Intrigue, though
it could not properly be called a Secret, that was whispered every where.

Some time after, my Master was caught again, making the Beast with two Backs
with the Knight's Wife; which so enraged the Cuckold, that he resolved to have
Recourse to Law for Redress; but, as I was now his Oracle, I persuaded him from
it, though with some Difficulty, and in a little time his Resentment began to
sleep again; though he watched his Wife so narrowly, there could be no Time to
graft another Antler; for I must own to you, I did all I could to prevent it,
giving him Notice, when I suspected any Movement that way. Yet, I must confess,
had it been my own Case, I should sooner have thought of revenging myself on
the Cuckold-maker, than bore it so patiently; but there is nothing to be said
for the Tempers of Men.

This Strictness continued for near half a Year, and, I verily believe, much to
the Discontent of the Lady. At last the Knight fell sick, perhaps through his
Perturbation of Spirit, or for want of his usual Exercise; for he had
undertaken a voluntary Confinement, in order to inspect the Actions of his
Wife. During his Illness, she seemed very tender of him, hardly ever being from
his Bedside; which the good-natured Knight took so kindly, that I even fansy'd
he was resolved, when he was recovered, to leave her to her own Conduct; for
she expressed so much Sorrow for her past Actions, that I was myself deceived.
The Disposition to Goodness of the Wife, had an extraordinary Effect on the
Husband, and he began to mend apace: He left his Bed, where, through Weakness, he
had remained for ten Days, and walked about his Chamber, gathering Strength
hourly, in less Time than his Illness had kept him in Bed. He had recovered his
former Strength, and had fixed a Day with me to ride out; but, in the mean time
he was to take some Physic which I sent him; but, to my great Surprise and
Confusion, the Day he had taken it, I found him expiring in the utmost Agonies.
He was speechless when I came to him, and in less than five Minutes breathed
his last.

The Lady was all in Tears, raved at me, telling me I had certainly given him
something by Mistake. I assured her to the contrary, and informed her it was
composed by my Master, before my Face, and what he had taken could not hurt an
Infant. She held her Tongue, when she understood who it was that had made up
what he took, which immediately struck my Fancy there was some Villainy in the
Case.

My Master hearing of the Knight's Death, came while I was there, and examining
the Body, seemed in very great Confusion. We both went home together, without
one Word passing between us. When we had been there some time, my Master told
me he had something to disclose, if I would swear solemnly to keep it a Secret.
I answered him, if he was in any doubt of my Fidelity, to keep the Secret to
himself. Well then, said he, give me your Word not to discover it, and I will
tell you; which I did.

I am afraid, said he, the Knight has not had fair Play for his Life; for,
viewing his Body, I could easily perceive strong Symptoms of Poison; and what
strengthens my Opinion is, that some time ago she prevailed upon me to let her
have some Ratsbane, in order, as she said, to clear the Granary of Vermin. I
easily came into my Master's Opinion; and, by his declaring it to me, was well
assured he was innocent. I am so shocked, said my Master, at the Barbarity of
the Woman, that I am resolved never to go near her more; neither will I make
any further Enquiry into the Business, but leave her to her own wicked
Thoughts. Though perhaps I have not, in my past Days, had any great Regard for
Religion, and might leave it to be decided by Chance, as the King of Macasar
did Macasar is a large Kingdom on the South Part of the Celebes, an Island in
the Indian Sea. Near three Centuries ago, they worshipped the Sun and Moon, as
the most worthy Objects of their Adoration. Two Macasarian Merchants, trading
to Ternate, the chief of the Molucca Islands settled by the Portuguese, were so
well pleased with the Integrity of the Priests, and the Tenets of the Christian
Religion, that their chief Business was to make themselves perfect in it, which
liked 'em so well, that they were soon Baptized; and returning into their, own
Country, prevailed upon the King of Macasar to follow their Steps, which was
soon done, with a great Number of the Inhabitants, that were Christened. But
the Priests that were sent by the Portuguese, to instruct 'em in the Christian
Religion, miscarrying in their Voyage, the King began to have Doubts which none
of the new Christians could answer. Some Mahometans being at the Court when
these Doubts arose, recommended the Alcoran to him, and by their Reasons, began
to stagger his new Faith: Yet still continuing a Friend to the Christian.
Religion, he resolved to put his Choice on this Hazard: He gave Commission to
the Christians and Mahometans, to send for Teachers of both Religions, and the
first that arrived, whether Christian or Mohammedan, should be allowed the
Established Religion. The Followers of Mahomet sent, without losing Time, to
the Queen of Acihn, a Kingdom on the Island of Sumatra, one that followed the
Laws of Mahomet; the Queen immediately dispatched several learned Bonzi's, or
Priests, who arrived before the Christians: And ever since, the People of
Macasar have been zealous Mahometans.
: Yet she has so alarmed my drowsy Conscience, that I shall, for the future,
endeavor to lead a Life consonant to one that thinks of Futurity. We both
agreed, it was the best way to be silent in the unhappy Affair.

In a few Days the Knight was buried, without the least Suspicion of any thing
but a Natural Death. My Master and I were invited to the Funeral, but neither
of us went. And, for my own Part, I never cared to go near the House; for the
Thought of its harboring so cruel a Woman, made me abhor it. My Master, I
believe, imagined the same, for he never made the Widow a Visit. In a Fortnight
after the Funeral, she sent a Letter to my Master, which was to this Effect;
(for he gave it to me to read, having before that, freely declared to me the
Correspondence that had past between 'em.) She wondered mightily at his long
Absence; and that she would have come to him long before, if Decency would have
permitted her; but she hoped to see him that Evening, having disposed every
thing to favor their Meeting.

My Master returned her an Answer, I believe, little to her Expectation;
telling her plainly, he resolved never to see her more; also hinting her
unnatural Barbarity to her Husband. I cannot tell you what Effect it had upon
her, but she sent no more Letters or Messages. I often told my Master, I was
afraid she would resent his slighting of her, to his Prejudice: He laughed at
that, as imagining himself out of her Power. But, in less than a Month's time,
my unfortunate Master going to visit a Relation, about ten Miles from the Place
where we lived, was found murdered and thrown into a Copse near the Road. He
lay several Days before he was found; and might have laid longer, if a
Gentleman had not gone through that Way a Hunting. I must confess, my Heart
forboded some such Mischance, when sending to seek him at his Relation's, was
informed he went from thence the same Evening he came there.

Great Inquisition was made after the Murderer, but was never found to this
Day; yet, whoever did it, I was well assured within my self, the Widow had put
'em on; but as I could not bring any Proof, I kept my Opinion to myself, well
knowing, if I should endeavor to prosecute her, it would be a certain Charge
to me, and perhaps discover nothing. Yet, I must own, I could never give her a
good Word; and though I had always a Watch upon my Tongue, yet I could not avoid
raving against her in all Companies.

Some time after the Death of my Master, I imagined I had found out the
Murderer. A Trooper that was quartered in the Town, of a sudden had got into
the Equipage of a Gentleman, and it was shrewdly suspected he occupy'd the
Widow. I was convinced in my Suspicion. One Morning early being called to one
that was taken suddenly ill, and being obliged to pass by the Widow's Door, I
could perceive, though dark, her Door open, and this Trooper, mentioned before,
let in by the Widow herself. This Fellow, whenever he passed by our Shop, I
could perceive always a sudden Turn of Countenance from what he had on before.
One Day, as he was passing by, some of my Neighbors were talking with me
concerning the Murder of my late Master; and I could not help saying, loud
enough to be heard by the Trooper, that I suspected a Person that often passed
by our Door, had been his Murderer, and looked full in the Fellow's Face. He
changed as pale as Ashes. But all the while I staid in that Town, which was
upward of two Years afterward, I never set Eyes on him; and the next time I
saw him, I found him lurking about your Father's House, which convinces me not
only that he was the Murderer of my Master, but that he corresponds with your
Mother-in-law at this Time.

Now, Sir, added the Doctor, I have told you this Secret, which I have kept
near Seventeen Years; neither should I have discovered it now, if I did not
firmly believe I am going into another World; for, notwithstanding every one
tells me I am much better, I am convinced I have not ten Days to live. I
endeavored to put him out of that idle Conceit, but all to no purpose. So I
took my Leave, after promising him to keep his Secret; and within the Time he
mentioned, I was informed he died, after telling the very Hour of his Death. I
returned home, full of many disjointed Thoughts, wondering how Providence had
ordered my Father to marry such a wicked Woman. But then again, I did not doubt
but she had repented of her former Wickedness, and walked in the Paths toward
Grace, which gave me some Comfort, but not enough to hinder my wishing she
never had been one of our Family.

Betty had told me nothing of this Affair, neither was I assured she lived with
her at that time; but I was resolved to be informed the first Opportunity. In
the Afternoon, I took an Occasion to get my Tutor out of the way, and being
alone, beckoned Betty to come to me. Pray, said I, Betty, do you know any thing
of my Mother's former Husband, Sir Charles? No, Sir, said she, I came to live
with my Lady not long before her Marriage to your Father. But, said I, know you
nothing of a Galant of my good Mother-in-law's? for I have some Reason to
suspect her of being guilty that way. Indeed, said she, blushing, that is the
only Thing I have kept a Secret from you, and, I believe, the very Reason of my
Lady's Coldness to me; for the Person she corresponds with, or rather, the
Person she has corresponded with, for I have great Hopes she has left it off,
coming to me as usual, I flatly denied him Entrance, and farther told him, I
was assured my Lady would break off with him, being ashamed of the Injury she
had done so good a Husband. I never acquainted my Lady with what I said to him;
but I observed her Coldness took beginning some time after this. I asked her
what sort of Person he was? She told me, a young Gentleman of a very good
Family, fallen to Decay, who she believed was forced, through Necessity, to what
he did. That cannot be the Person, said I, that I suspect; for he I mean, must
be above Forty. There is, said Betty, sometimes, a Man of that Age with my
Lady; but she ever took care to keep their Affair private, even from me; but
however, I am assured there is no criminal Conversation between 'em.

I did not tell Betty any thing that I knew of what the Doctor informed me; but
we parted with an Assurance of my succeeding with my Uncle in what I promised
her. In the Afternoon my Uncle rid out with me, when I broke the Matter about
Betty. I thought, said my Uncle, you had enough of Housekeepers already. Sir,
said I, I have enough of such a one as your last; neither am I afraid of any
great Familiarity between you, for Betty is neither young, nor handsome. Nay,
said my Uncle, I can give you a better Reason than all that, which I am assured
you will soon come into, and that is, I am not so young, by Twenty Years, as I
was Twenty Years ago. That Is true, Sir, said I; but I am flattered I can give
you a better Reason that you should accept of Betty, that is, it is the only
Thing I can desire of you. Well, said my Uncle, your Desires shall be granted.
But we must limit Betty's Power; for you know the former had all in her own
Hands. I told him, I wanted nothing else, but that she might be accepted; we
would both leave the Terms to him. But hold, said my Uncle, I have one Scruple
just now arose, concerning this Affair, which must be got over, and that is,
whether my Sister will be willing to part with her. Sir, said I, if you will
hear me a little while with Patience, and give me your Word never to disclose
what I shall tell you, I will inform you of something will very much surprise
you. Well, said my Uncle, I shall come to your Terms, be they what they will.

I then related to him all that had happened while I was at home, in every
Circumstance. When I had finished, my Uncle was quite confounded! Is it
possible, said he, there can be such a Woman breathing? If I did not give
Credit to you, continued he, I should have imagined I had heard a Romance. But,
however, I am convinced, and think my Service for Betty but poor Recompense for
her Return to Virtue. But I know not how to look on that injurious Woman, who
may, under the Cover of Affection, still retain her Barbarity. I think it would
be but just and reasonable to give my Brother some Hint of her former
Inhumanity. A Woman of her Cunning may counterfeit Virtue, when she is replete
with Vice. I begged my Uncle not to take any farther Notice of it, 'till we had
some Grounds of her returning to Wickedness; and if we should find the least
swerving from Virtue, to bring Betty for Proof of what was past, and put my
Father out of all manner of Danger from her Wiles, or Resentment.

I know not, said my Uncle; I like it not, and shall hardly be persuaded to
conceal the Knowledge of her Perfidy. You know the old Saying, Boy, What Is bred
in the Bone, is never out of the Flesh. Dear Uncle, said I, let me entreat you
to conceal what I have told you, till we perceive something in her Conduct to
give us Cause to suspect her again, and then you may do just as you please, He
promised to comply with my Request, which gave me no small Satisfaction.

When we came home, we found my Father, and Mother-in-law, very merry in the
Garden; but finding myself little inclined to Mirth, I left my Uncle to make
one of the Company. Beside, I wanted to confer with Betty, but could not find
her all over the House. I imagined she might be walking under the Trees before
the House, so, upon that Supposition, went to seek her; when I had got through
the Courtyard, I perceived Betty was not there; but I could not help observing
an old Woman prying about the House, with a Basket upon her Arm: I went to her,
and demanding of her, whether she had any Business there, she answered she had
some fine Oranges for my Lady. My Lady is at present busy, said I; but pray let
me see your Oranges; which she did, after some awkward Difficulty. Her
Reluctance in showing me her Fruit, raised a Suspicion in my Mind, which made
me resolve to be satisfied, if possible. They are fine Oranges, good Woman,
said I; and I believe my Lady will buy 'em all: But I wish you had some
Peaches, for I have a great Mind to some, and would give a good Price for 'em.
I wish I had known that, said the old Woman, I could have brought you some of
the finest in England. I told her, if she would go back and fetch 'em, I should
be very much obliged to her. You may leave your Basket in that Green-House, to
secure 'em; I Will lock the Door, and give you the Key. She seemed willing to
consent to that; so I did as I said, gave her the Key, and away she went. As
soon as she was out of Sight, I went the Back-way, and got into the Green-House
through the Window. I began to examine her Basket very narrowly, yet found
nothing that I expected to find; but handling the Oranges, I perceived one of
'em to be very light, and at last found it was hollow. I undid it, with much
Difficulty, for it was put together with Pins without Heads. In it I found a
Slip of Paper rolled up, whose Contents I transcribed with a Pencil: MY DEAR,
I AM out of my Senses. Burleigh has been with me, and threatens to discover
both you and me to your Husband; and farther adds, if you miss sending him
Fifty Pounds in three Days, he will declare a Secret that will endanger your
Life, and yet escape himself. I know not what he means; but if he has any such
Secret, the best way will be to stop his Mouth, by sending him the Money. Shall
we never meet again? Consider how long it is since you blessed me last. I am
amazed at the Treatment I received from Betty. And notwithstanding in your
last, you gave me Hopes of a sudden Meeting, yet I am apt to believe she spoke
Truth, when she declared you would shake of all Commerce with me. Therefore (if
you would not have me believe her) let me see you tomorrow at the Bearer's
House, where I shall wait the whole Day with impatient Expectation. If you will
comply, and have not an Opportunity of Writing, tell her, All Is well; and by
those Words, I shall be satisfied till tomorrow. For ever Yours,

S. W.




When I had done, I put it up again, and, with much Difficulty, left it in the
same Order as I found it. I then returned to expect the Woman. I really
imagined by this Letter, that my Mother-in-law designed to be honest, and what
she had wrote to her Galant, was only a Pretext to keep him quiet. However I
did design to suspend my Judgment till the next Day; and if I perceived my
Mother went to the Place appointed, it would not be unnatural to believe her
still guilty.

When the Woman brought me the Peaches, I asked her, if I should acquaint my
Mother that she was there. Yes, Sir, said she, if you please, and thank you
too. I immediately went, and met her coming out of the Garden. When I told her
who wanted her, I could perceive her Countenance change; but she hid her
Confusion, by wiping her Face with her Handkerchief. I would fain have followed
her, to have observed (though at a Distance) her Behavior to the Woman; but she
took her into a back Parlour, shutting the Door after her. They were a pretty
while together, and, when they parted, I could perceive a great deal of
Discontent in the Countenance of my Mother-in-law. When the Woman was gone, I
resolved to follow her, and try, if by any Stratagem I could find my Mother's
Resolutions. I soon overtook her, at which she seemed something surpised. Good
Woman, said I, I came after you to know whereabouts you dwell, for your Fruit
was so good, as I ride out now and then, I design to call upon you, to buy some
more; for though, added I, we have Fruit enough in our own Garden, it is so
narrowly watched by the Gardener, according to my Mother's Directions, that I
can never get any. That is (replied the old Go-between) for fear you should eat
too much. However, if you have a mind to traffic that way with me, I live in
such a Place, I am easy enough to be found, every Child knows Goody -- Well
then, said I, I Will come to see you tomorrow in the Afternoon. Odso! returned
the old Woman, now I think on it, I shall not be at home tomorrow; but any other
time you will be sure to find me. Why, if you are not, said I, I suppose you have
somebody at your House that can serve me. No, indeed have NOT I, returned the
Woman. I asked her so many Questions, that, though a Woman ignorant enough, she
began to smell a Rat, and seemed so very shy in her Answers afterward, that
plainly informed me she was tired of my Company. She at last told me, she would
not sell me any Fruit if I came for it, for fear it should do me an Injury. I
tried many Ways to bring her into Humor again, but to no Purpose, and I did
not care to say any more, for fear she should be confirmed in her Suspicions.
However, I kept her so long in Talk, that a Man met us, who I observed wanted
to discourse the old Woman. When he came up with us, I could perceive the old
Woman wink at him, and seemed to exact from him a cautious Behavior. The
Person seemed to be in some Confusion; however, he called her by her Name, and
asked whose Child I was; with a great many common Words of Pretty Youth, and so
forth; but when she told him who I was, his Countenance expressed the utmost
Confusion. He asked her, in a hasty manner, What Business I had with her? I
don't know (said the old Woman) Master wants to buy some Fruit of me, and would
fain come tomorrow, and I have told him, I shall not be in the Way. If that be
all, answered the Gentleman, looking wistfully on the old Woman, you may comply
with the young Man, for I suppose you will not be abroad all Day. No, said the
old Woman, only in the Afternoon. Why, said I, it is only in the Morning that I
can come out; but you seem, said I to the old Woman, not very willing to part
with what you deal in, to me, as perhaps doubting my Pay. But to convince you I
am sincere in what I say, there is Money beforehand, and I desire you will save
me two Dozen of the same I had of you today, and I Will be with you by Seven a
Clock in the Morning.

She made several awkward Speeches in receiving my Money; but I found the Sight
of it pleased her very well; and so we parted. I had a strong Desire to know
their Conference, but I was obliged to be contented till the next Day. I did
not doubt of my Mother-in-law's going to the Place of Rendezvous; but then I
imagined she might go to pacify that Burleigh mentioned in the Note. However, I
resolved with myself to keep it a Secret from my Uncle, and use my utmost
Endeavor to know something of their Conference the next Day.

I arose next Morning, without sleeping a Wink all Night, my Thoughts were so
confused and troublesome to me. I got out before my Uncle, or any of the Family
were stirring, except some of the Servants. I directed my Steps toward the
Town, and met the old Woman before I had got half way. I was somewhat
surpised, because it was not much past Six, which was an Hour before I
promised to come. So, said I, good Woman, you are resolved to save me a Walk, I
see. No, Sir, said she, not for that; but I have a fresh Parcel of Oranges come
in last Night, and my Lady ordered me to bring some of the first I had. Why,
good Woman, said I, she cannot want any yet, sure; you brought her a sufficient
Quantity Yesterday, to serve her a great while, even as long as they will last
good. I cannot tell for that, said she, but as long as she ordered me to bring
her some, I Will even carry 'em. But, said I, why did not you bring my Fruit at
the same time. Laud! said the old Woman, I protest I forgot it. But I shall be
back presently, and then I Will gather 'em fresh for you; for as yet, I Will assure
you, they are growing. I soon found, by all this Hurry, there was another
Letter to be delivered, and I was resolved to read it by fair means, or
otherwise. Pray, said I, good Woman, how do you sell your Ware a Dozen? Why
truly, Sir, said she, Half a Crown. Why then, said I, I Will give you the Money,
and make my Mother a Present of 'em.

The Woman was struck dumb at what I said. But at last she recovered her
Confusion, and, with a stammering Tongue, told me she would not do such a Thing
for all the World. Pray, good Woman, said I, can you, out of your Wisdom, tell
me what Reason you have for refusing me your Oranges, when I offer to pay you
for 'em, and carry 'em home myself, without giving you any farther Trouble? She
could not give me any reasonable Answer to my Question; so I even resolved to
declare to her my Knowledge of her Affair, which, when I had done, she fell
down upon her Knees, and begged I would forgive her; telling me, she would
never be guilty of the like again. Good Woman, said I, the Way to make me
excuse you, and keep this a Secret, (though such a guilty Commerce is the
greatest Crime) is to deliver me your whole Affair, and deal ingenuously with
me. I have given you convincing Proofs that I know your Proceedings hitherto,
and shall be able to judge whether you are sincere or no. Why then, truly, Sir,
said she, all I have done was merely out of Necessity. Mr. Wigmore, you know,
has a very persuasive Tongue, especially backed with his Money. Well, good
Woman, said I, go on, for at present, I have no Acquaintance with the Person
you mention. Really, nor I neither, but that he has come often to our House to
meet my Lady; and it was the same Person you saw with me Yesterday.

I was too eager to ask many Questions, therefore, I bid her tell me what was
her present Errant. Nothing, Sir, but to carry a Letter in an Orange, as I did
Yesterday in the Afternoon. Upon that, I took out the Orange she told me it was
in, and read as follows: DEAR MADAM,
THOUGH I was infinitely rejoiced at your kind Letter Yesterday, and the pleasing
Hope of seeing you today; yet I must beg of you, for both our Safeties, to
defer my longing Expectations, till we can find some more convenient Place of
meeting. That Villain, Burleigh, has been with me again, and has, by some means
unknown to me, discovered our Meeting; therefore, let me once more entreat you
to think of some other Place, where we may feed our famished Joys. The time
will not permit you to send me any Answer by our Emissary, who, I believe, is
very faithful; therefore I will wait in my usual Disguise, at the usual Place;
but let me beg you, by our past Enjoyments, to fix by this Afternoon, a secure
Place, where I may take to my Arms all that is valuable in this World, to the
expecting

WIGMORE.
P. S. I beg you, for both our Quiets, to stop the Mouth of the implacable
Burleigh.






When I had read the Note, I was well convinced my Mother was returned to her
former Vice; but could not determine which was the best Way, either to send the
Letter, or keep it to show my Father and Uncle, to convince 'em of her Perfidy.
While I was reading the Epistle, the Woman had time to come to herself; and
asked me how she should behave in the Affair. For, said she, if I go back, Mr.
Wigmore will certainly discover me; therefore, if you will please to instruct
me in what I shall say to him, I will be sure to follow your Directions. Well,
good Woman, said I, since you are so condescending, I Will ask your Advice, for I
don't doubt, however you express yourself in Words, you have Cunning enough in
your Business to advise me. If you think so, Sir, said she, you shall have my
Counsel, such as it is. Hold then, said I, since it is so, let me do as a
Client should do, pay my Fee beforehand. Upon saying this, I gave her a Crown.
She was very much surpised at it, and viewed me from Head to Foot, as if she
had said, she could not imagine I was Master of such a Sum. When she had
recovered her Speech (for old Women don't want Tongue long) I find, said she,
by your Fee, you expect good Counsel; therefore I would advise you, if you can
counterfeit a Hand any thing like your Mother's, to send him an Answer, that
shall forewarn him to come to her any more. I fear, said I, good Woman, we
shall be found out, for such an Answer will be too sudden for the kind Return
she sent him Yesterday. Why, I think you are in the right there, replied the
old Woman; and I believe it was kind enough, for he kissed it several times
when he first had it, seeming greatly pleased; and since you don't approve of
my Advice, I dare swear you can tell what to do without me. Pr'y-thee, said I,
good Woman, know you any thing of the Affair between my Mother-in-law and this
Wigmore? Your Sincerity in your Confession shall oblige me to find a
Recompense. Really, replied the Woman, I know nothing more, than that they have
met at my House about some Dozen times; and I was so well paid, that I must
freely own, I wish it had been oftener; for indeed, young Sir, I am a very poor
Woman, and Money, as I told you before, carries a great deal of Persuasion with
it; though I must needs own, I would much rather have gotten Money honestly: But
then again, if I had not undertaken the Affair, somebody else would; so I
thought it was as much my Business as -- Well, well, Mistress, I am not asking
what was the Motive that induced you to it; I am pretty well acquainted with it
already: But I would know what Correspondence has been carried on between the
Parties. Indeed, Sir, I know no more than I have told you before, that they
meet at my House, and have a private Room to themselves. Mr. Wigmore and your
Mother, both were Strangers to me a Twelvemonth ago; and I know no more of Mr.
Wigmore now, but that he comes to our Town almost every Day, and they say he
lives at a Lord's about ten Mile off, but I have forgot his Name. But, Sir, I
would not have you defer what you intend to do, any longer, for Mr. Wigmore
will think me long a coming, and perhaps come to meet me, as he has often done.
You advise well, I returned; one Word more, and I have done. Have you no
Knowledge of one Burleigh that is mentioned in this Note? No really, Sir, said
she; but I know there has been a Man with Mr. Wigmore, and his Visits have
given him much Uneasiness; but I don't know the Reason of it.

I was convinced by the Woman's manner of speaking, that she was sincere in
what she said; and as she knew nothing more, I was resolved to ask her no more
Questions; but being fortunately provided with a Pencil and some Paper, I wrote
the following Words: Mr. WIGMORE,
I HAVE at last repented of my Behavior to a Husband that deserves the best of
Wives; therefore I beg you will do your endeavor to forget me, it being the
safety Conduct for us both. I fear I am suspected already, and the way to wipe
off all manner of Suspicion, is no more to be guilty. Farewell, and be happy.




I read the Note to the old Woman, who approved of it. I had counterfeited my
Mother's Hand so well, that it could hardly be distinguished, especially being
wrote with a Pencil And I ordered the Woman to tell Mr. Wigmore, that my Mother
was in a Chamber where she had not the Convenience of Pen and Ink. The old
Woman put it up in the room of the other, giving me her Promise to be very
faithful in her new Commission. I gave her Assurance of being well rewarded for
her Pains, and so we parted.

As I was going home, I began to consider what I had done, and soon imagined
this Affair of my Mother's could not be long a Secret; therefore I resolved
within myself to take an Opportunity of disclosing it to her, with a faithful
Account of all the Proceedings, as well as the Knowledge I had of her intended
barbarous Design against me. I did not know, but this might deter her from her
cruel Intentions. But then I began to consider, that in all my Readings I had
learnt, the Cruelty of a Woman was hard to be removed. Therefore I determined
to declare all to my Uncle, and take his Advice upon it.

When I came home, the Family were at Breakfast, which was something earlier
than usual; but I was soon acquainted with the Reason, for my good
Mother-in-law, it seems, did design to set out immediately to see a Friend that
was dangerously Ill. As this was no new thing, so it alarmed no one but me; for
the good Woman pretended to understand abundance of things, and was a second
Lady Bountiful. This Practice, I suppose, she took up to blind the Eyes of my
Father and Family, that they might not look too narrowly into her Actions. When
I was sat among 'em, I was asked to drink Tea, but I excused myself, by telling
'em I had my Breakfast already, and looked my Mother full in the Face; but she
regarded me not, having, I suppose, her Thoughts taken up concerning that Day's
Business. Pray, said my Uncle, have you broke your Fast with Homer, or Virgil,
this Morning? Neither, Sir, said I; I have kept no other Company but Juvenal
today. And why so fond of Satyr, Sir? said my Uncle; that favors of
Ill Nature. True, Sir, I returned; for I cannot think the Writings of either
Juvenal or Petronius, true Copies of those Times: I cannot imagine either the
Men, or the Women, such Monsters of Iniquity, as those Authors represent 'em.
That, replied my Uncle, proceeds from the simple Innocence of thy own Thoughts:
But we have Instances every Day of the Inhumanity, and all other vicious
Principles, of either Sex. Are not the Sessions-Papers frequently filled with
barbarous and inhuman Murders, Men of their Wives, and Wives of their Husbands
and Children? But the crying Sin of Murder is oftener perpetrated by the Women
than the Men, being their Passions are more violent and vindictive, and once
entered in the Road of Wickedness, they generally travel to the End on it.

I observed, my Mother-in-law did not very well relish the Discourse, therefore
ordered her Pad to be ready. What, said my Uncle, does my Sister go alone?
Sure, it will not be improper for a Servant to wait on her, No Sir, replied my
Mother, I always visit my Patients alone, for this Reason; if I should take a
Servant with me, they would presume on the Benefit the Patient might hope to
receive, expecting some Reward; which to avoid, I never take one with me.
Beside, I am so well known round me Country, that I never met with any Insults
from any one. Nay, said my Uncle, smiling, Innocence and Virtue are sufficient
Guards; and those, I don't doubt, but my Sister takes along with her. She made
him no Answer, but immediately mounted, and rode away. As soon as she was gone,
I ran up to the Top of the House, where was a Cupola that commanded a large
Prospect. I perceived, ere she had got a Quarter of a Mile from our House, she
met a Countryman, who stopped, and discoursed together. I had a Perspective in
my Study, which I had brought up with me, and I could plainly perceive they
were very earnest in Discourse; for I could distinguish their Countenances as
plain as if they had not been forty Yards from me. After talking some time, I
observed my Mother stoop down to kiss him (first looking about if the Coast was
clear) then turned her Horse's Head, in order to come home again, as I thought.
Upon this I immediately went down to acquaint my Uncle with my Morning's
Adventure, but was informed that my Father and He were shut up together in his
Closet. As they had locked the Door, I supposed they had no mind to be
disturbed, therefore retired, with a Mind in the utmost Confusion of Thought;
for I imagined, with Probability enough, that my Uncle was acquainting my
Father with what I had informed him of my Mother-in-law.

The Anxiety I felt for what I supposed would follow, when all was discovered,
almost robbed me of my Understanding. I took several hasty Turns in the
Courtyard, without knowing where I was. At last it occurred to my Memory, that
I had seen my Mother-in-law turn her Horse's Head, in order, as I imagined, to
come Home, but wondered at her Delay, for more time was past than was necessary
for her Return, at a moderate Pace. After waiting, and not seeing her, I began
to think she had altered her Resolution, and proceeded on her intended wicked
Journey. While I was ruminating on this wretched Affair, my Father and Uncle
came to me. My Uncle told me, he had been depositing a Copy of his Will into my
Father's Hands, that if Death should pay him a Visit unexpectedly, and the
Lawyer out of the way, we might, by having Recourse to that Copy, know how far
I was beholden to him.

After some Talk, I took an Opportunity to let my Uncle know I had something to
communicate to him, who was as forward to give me an Occasion of talking with
him. When we were disengaged from my Father, I acquainted my Uncle with what I
had done Yesterday, and this Morning, and what Observations I had made on my
Mother-in-law. Certainly, said my Uncle, this Woman as far exceeds the
lascivious Queen of Naples in Wickedness, as she did the rest of her Sex. What
think you, Sir, said I, if we take Horse, and follow her? It may be we may have
the Fortune of finding the Bottom of this Intrigue; or at least, from thence,
know how to form your Behavior to her and my Father. My Uncle liked my Advice
so well, that we immediately mounted our Horses, without letting my Father know
of our going. Ere we had gone half a Mile, the Horse my Uncle rode on, which
was one of my Father's, fell a neighing, and was answered by another in a
neighboring Thicket. As we went forward, the Horse seemed willing to go that
way. Nay, said my Uncle, if you have such a Mind to go out of the Road, I Will
humor you for once; it may be, as we are Knights-Errant, we may meet with some
extraordinary Adventure. Accordingly, he gave the Horse the Reins, and he
readily entered the Copse. The first thing our Eyes encountered, was my
Mother's Pad tied to a Tree; and a little farther, behind some Shrubs, we
discovered my good Mother-in-law, and a likely Country-Fellow, very familiar
together. You may guess their Surprise at the Sight of us; and ours was almost
as great. But my Mother-in-law recovered herself the soonest, ran to Horse,
mounted without any Help, and rode off. On my Conscience, said my Uncle, the
honest Countryman has put Vigor into her Ladyship; but I think it a Pity he
should go unrewarded, and that he may be the fitter for running, we'll make him
something lighter.

The Man found it was to no Purpose to attempt running away, as he was on Foot,
therefore he approached us with a submissive Behavior, and begged our Pardon,
imagining we were Strangers to my Father and his Wife; telling us, he hoped we
would not expose a Lady to an injured Husband's Resentment. Sir, said I, I
remember you now, notwithstanding your Disguise, and this is not the first time
you have seen me: Call to mind Yesterday; look in my Face, and then consider
the Injury you have done my worthy Father and his Family. I then informed my
Uncle, this was the Person that met me Yesterday conversing with the old Woman
who was the Letter-Carrier. Then, said the disguised Countryman, I find all is
discovered! But, if you are Persons of Honor, you will not oppress a naked
Man. I own my Guilt, nay, will confess the whole Progress of it, if you will
forgive me: Do but keep it a Secret from the Husband, and I farther vow, never
to be guilty that way again.

I am a Gentleman of a good Family, but fallen to Decay. Necessity first drew
me into this criminal Conversation with the Lady; though I must own,
notwithstanding our Disparity of Years, I have a tender Regard for her. Youth
do not always weigh their Actions, and, for want of Thought, plunge into
Crimes, we are afterward ashamed of. Well, young Man, said my Uncle, though you
have injured a noble Family, yet, as you seem to repent of your past Folly, and
if you fulfill your Promise of revealing this black Correspondence, I shall
freely pardon you, and desire never to see you more. I thank you, replied the
Offender; but I must farther beg you to mend your Promise, by concealing this
Affair from all the World. Well, said my Uncle, notwithstanding this Woman's
Wickedness, which you are a Stranger to, at least, the worst Part of her vile
Intentions, I will, with this young Gentleman's Consent (pointing at me) keep
this a Secret, till we have Reason to suspect she continues in her wicked
Courses. That Is all I ask, or can well desire, said the Gentleman in Disguise,
and began as follows.

I was born younger Brother to a numerous Issue, and therefore designed for a
Tradesman. I was put Prentice to a Mercer in the City, where I learnt little
else but Idleness and Intriguing; and wronging my Master, by mispending his
Time and Money. You may perceive, Gentlemen, said he, I intend to be sincere,
by revealing the Crimes of my first setting out in the World. My
Fellow-Prentices, I believe, had no more Honesty than myself, though we were
never privy to each others Secrets. Before I had served three Years of my Time,
my Master found his Business in a very declining Condition; as indeed how could
it be otherwise, when he had so many Harpies about him. His Friends, to do him
Service, had a Statute of Bankrupcy taken out against him, which, in a Year or
two turned much to his Advantage; for by that means he got rid of his
Creditors, and his Servants.

He has since married a good Fortune, and drives a flourishing Trade. My
Relations pressed him to accept of me for the Remainder of my Time, but he had
too just an Opinion of me, to comply with their Requests. The Character I bore,
was the Obstacle that no one of the Trade would entertain me; and my Relations
perceiving how Matters went, thought it was to no Purpose to think of the
Counter for me, therefore prevailed upon a noble Lord to accept me for his
Gentleman, who, out of Regard to my Family, used me like one. It Is needless to
inform you of the many Intrigues I went through while I was a Retainer with this
noble Peer; but I shall proceed to the Affair with this Lady.

The first time I saw her, was at a neighboring Gentlewoman's, a Relation to
our Family, and a Lover of Intrigues. Once every Week she had an Assembly,
where all the idle People of Fashion resorted to Game, and make merry. I
observed, she often cast a favorable Eye upon me, though it was some time before
I took any Notice of it. But one Day losing a considerable Sum at Quadrille, I
was walking very melancholy alone in the Garden, with troubled Thoughts how to
get more; I was interrupted in my Meditations by this Lady, who, after much
Talk of indifferent Matters, told me, a young Gentleman without Money, made but
a dismal Figure. Come, come, said she, don't let us lose your Company for want
of a little Trash. Gamesters have various Fortune; she may cast a more
favorable Eye upon you, at your next Trial; therefore there is a Hundred Pieces
to tempt her; I don't doubt but you will soon be in a Capacity to pay me.

I was so overjoyed at the Sight of the Money, that I was too eager for Play,
to return her then the suitable Thanks for so great a Favor; but immediately
hurried among the Gamesters, and in less than an Hour, recovered my own Money,
and a handsome Sum beside, at Basset. Immediately after, the Company broke up
Play, and went to Supper. My good Fortune had so much elevated me, that I had
no Stomach to eat (for I believe Extremes either way, for some time, spoil the
Appetite) therefore I took a Walk in the Garden again, in a far better Temper
than when I was there before. I had not walked long, ere I perceived the Lady
in the same Walk; but whether she had continued there, or had come after me, I
could not tell, for my good Fortune had quite blinded me. However, I went up to
her, and thanked her for the great Favor I had received; and was fumbling for
the Money to repay her. Come, said she, I am not in such Haste, we'll find a
Time to be paid; after Supper, no doubt, you will try the fickle Dame again,
therefore keep it, till I demand it of you; it is very possible I may soon stand
in as much need of it, as you did some time ago; till then, you shall be my
Banker.

I don't know how much farther we should have proceeded, if we had not been
interrupted by some of the Company; which she perceiving coming toward us,
gave me a gentle Press by the Fingers, and left me. It was not very difficult
to guess, she had a farther Meaning in leaving her Money in my Hands, and I
must own I was not displeased with the Thoughts of it, for even her Person did
not seem despicable to me; so, on that Score, I should not need much Constraint
in my Compliance; but the Pleasure of being paid for whatever Trouble I should
be at, was the most prevailing Argument. The next Assembly I was prevented in
making one of the Company, because my Lord took me out a Hunting. The Morning
following, an old Woman brought me this Letter (pulling one out of his Bosom)
which I took from him, by my Uncle's Order. See, Billy, said he, if it be that
ill Woman's Hand; when I assured him it was, I read the Contents as follows;
SIR,
I SHOULD have been very well pleased if you could have made one of the Company
Yesterday, for Fortune was so favorable to me to keep me in Countenance during
the whole Evening. I have another Sum to put into my Banker's Hands; and if he
will follow the Directions of the Bearer, he may have full Possession of it
this Evening.

Yours, etc.




I was very well pleased with this Billet, and took Instructions where to wait
on the Lady. When Evening came, I went to the Place appointed, where I found
her waiting with some Impatience, as she told me. The old Woman left us alone;
and it was not long ere we came to a right Understanding, which Acquaintance
has continued upwards of four Years; yet I must own to you, her Conversation
was always agreeable to me, setting aside my Interest. But, Sir, said I, in one
of your Letters you sent a Day or two ago, you mention one Burleigh, and that
you feared some rash Proceedings from him. Pray what do you know of him?
Really, very little, replied Wigmore: But I am very much surpised that you
know any thing of that Letter; I never thought the old Woman would have
betrayed me. No, said I, she has not betrayed you, she was only over-reached;
though now, I believe, she repents of her past Actions. Why then, said Wigmore,
the Hand of Heaven has pointed her out as a Mark for my Repentance, which I
will sincerely, for all my past Follies. Well, Sir, said my Uncle, I am
inclined to believe you. But pray, to make me stronger in that Faith, deliver
us what Letters you have of hers. Upon my Honor, I Will never put 'em to a wrong
Use. I shall confide in you, replied Mr. Wigmore, and therefore put 'em into
your Hands. I carry 'em always about me, that no Accident should discover our
Affair: But I am convinced Heaven will not let such Actions be ever a Secret.
You may see, added he, how they followed one another, because I have numbered
'em as I received 'em. After my Uncle had given him some wholesome Advice
relating to Conduct in Life, we left him.

Well, said my Uncle, now let us examine the Contents of these fine Epistles.
Come, Billy, your Eyes are younger than mine, read 'em. I then opened Numb. 2.
(having read Numb. 1. before) which was as follows: WHAT Words can express the
Satisfaction I received at our last Conversation! I am impatient till I see the
Light of my Life again; and, if you would not leave me for ever in Darkness,
come this Evening to the same Place, to receive with the utmost Transports from
One, all that is in her Power to give, who thinks it her only Happiness to call
herself

Yours, etc.




Well said! cried my Uncle; the Woman was well pleased, I find. She writes
pretty plain. But what will not Women do, when they abandon Modesty! But come,
to the next. Let Us have some more of her Wit and Parts.

NUMB. III.
MY dear Boy, some hated Family-Business will prevent my seeing the Darling of
my Soul tomorrow; but be assured the usual Time of the Day following, shall
bring me to your Arms, where we will revel in Delight, and laugh at my foolish
credulous Husband, who imagines, when I come to see you, I am visiting the
Sick; But the poor Man is very wicked, and I can think of no other way of
sending him to Heaven, but with the Assistance of my dear Wigmore. I would have
you make our Go-between, Goody -- a Present of a Pair of Sheets, for she
complained to me heavily of the Want of 'em; and though I believe she is very
faithful to us, yet now and then a small Trifle that way, will not only keep
her in Humor, but make it her Interest to observe us. Farewell, and be happy,
though I shall not taste of it, till I see those Eyes.

Yours, etc.


O Woman, Woman! said my Uncle, how ripe in Wickedness! The most profligate of
Man would not have been open-hearted so soon. But come, let us make an End with
her as fast as we can, for I have almost enough of her.

NUMB. IV.
WHAT a despicable Creature is a Husband, after the ardent Embraces of a Lover!
I thought nothing could have added to the Aversion I had already conceived for
him; but since I have known thee, thou Charmer of my Soul, I find that Aversion
daily increase. I yield to his fulsome Caresses, as the Criminal receives the
parting Kiss of the Executioner; and what is the greatest Torment, I am obliged
to fain a wanton Joy, which you know is real. But I must dissemble to all the
World, but my dear Wigmore; and whatever I say or do to him, comes from the
warm Blood of my Heart. I am sick of this Evil of a Husband; but one Touch from
you will Heal my Disease. I only wish, as we have shown him the ready Road to
Heaven, he would set out toward his Journey; nay, to make the more Haste, I
would lend him a Hand to pull on his Boots. But let us have a little Patience.
Time kills as well as cures. Tomorrow I shall open my Heart to him that has the
Soul of

J. V.


Sure, said my Uncle, this is the Quintessence of all ill Women put together!
But on.

NUMB. V.
PITY, my dear Wigmore, the Grief of Mind I lie under. But you may guess the
Cause, when I declare it is not in my Power to see you these ten Days, except
you can think of some Disguise; for my Son Johnny is taken ill of the
Smallpox. I am obliged to attend him myself, for he will not let any of the
Family give him the least Nourishment. But if you can think of any Disguise,
and venture at the Back of our Garden, near the Tree where I hide my Letters,
in the Dusk of the Evening, (though no Disguise can hide the dear Wigmore from
me, who will ever carry his Image in my Heart) I Will find an Opportunity of
seeing him in Reality, who is always present to the Imagination of One who
shall be ever

Yours, etc.


Pray, said my Uncle, is there no Date to these loving Epistles? No Sir, said
I; but we may guess pretty near the Time by my Brother's having the Smallpox,
which is near three Years ago. Well, on to the next, said my Uncle.

NUMB. VI.
I THANK my Stars! my Boy is past all Danger. That, and the Hopes of seeing my
dear Wigmore again, at a more convenient Place than our last, made me comply
with my Husband's Request of making one Bed serve us both. But as I thought of
you all Day, I dreamt of you all Night. When wished Morning came, my Husband
went out a Hunting, and having an Opportunity, with a Poetical Fancy in my
Head, I have put my Dream into as good Verse as ever I could; but you must
forgive bad Numbers, since Love of you has made me a Poet.

When balmy Sleep my Eyelids closed,
And half the World their Cares reposed,
Your Image filled my fancied Breast;
My eager Arms the Phantome pressed.
Waked with th'imaginary Bliss,
I strove to give my Love a Kiss:
But, Death to Love, and all Love's Charms,
I found my Husband in my Arms!
The nauseous Joy his Tongue expressed,
Quite robbed my gentle Heart of Rest.
But yet, to cover the Deceit,
I was compelled to aid the Cheat,
And Kiss for Kiss return again,
When nothing could be greater Pain:
For Bankrupts too to make Demands!
Curse on the Priest that joined our Hands!
But all my Grief, and all Annoy,
At Sight of thee will turn to Joy;
When you my dazzled Eyes shall bless,
All Sorrow turns to Happiness.

Oh the Devil! said my Uncle; shall such a wicked Wretch as this Woman, pretend
to taste of the heavenly Drops of Poetry, when all Hell is in her Soul! It is
the greatest Profanation to the Muses. Yet though Clio cannot tune her Lyre,
Melpomene presides over her black Soul, together with Alecto, and the rest of
the Furies. This Woman would have been well pleased to have been a Samorin Wife
The Country of the Samorins reaches along the Seacoast of the East Indies,
from Ticori to Chitwa. It is the Custom of that Country, for the Women to have
twelve Husbands, if they think fit; yet they all agree very well, taking their
Turns to cohabit with the Wife. The Husband whose Turn it is, leaves his Arms
at the Door of the Wife's Chamber, which must not be removed on Pain of Death.
When the Wife is with Child, she names the Husband who is to father it, and he
is to take care of its Education; but those Children do never inherit their
Father's Estate; that descends to the Male Issue of the Father's Sister; but if
she have no Issue, the Estate comes to the nearest Relation of the Father's
Grandmother.
. But I hope, continued my Uncle, there is not many more. Yes, Sir, said I,
there is Five more; and I find by the Numbers, there is some wanting, for the
next is Numb. 9. Those, replied my Uncle, no doubt, contained something too
dangerous to be kept. As we were preparing to read the next Letter, we could
perceive running toward us, the Person they were sent to. We were something
surpised at his Return; but when he came up to us (for we stood still to read
the Letters,) he told us (almost out of Breath with running) that Burleigh was
coming the same way, and no doubt, for no good, for I know he has been
disappointed by my Lady, concerning the receiving of Money, which
Disappointment has so much exasperated him, that he resolves to ruin my Lady,
though I know not by what Means. We perceived a Man about a Quarter of a Mile
behind us, bending his Course toward our House, the Foot-Way. My Uncle asked
what was best to be done? Why Sir, said Mr. Wigmore, if you will give me Leave
to advise you, I would have you prevent his getting to my Lady's, if possible,
for this Time; who knows what may follow? I intend, if you approve of it, to
write to my Lady, which Letter, if you please, you shall see first; wherein I
will declare all Correspondence, for the future, shall be entirely broke off
between us; and, to convince her I am sincere in what I write, to crush all her
Hopes at once, in a few Days I intend to embark for Virginia, where I have some
Relations in Power, that I am assured will provide for me. Do so, said my
Uncle. But how shall we see this Letter? Why, returned Mr. Wigmore, I Will be
walking before the Court-Gate, under the great Trees, three Hours hence. My
Disguise will prevent my being known by any one, but you two Gentlemen, or my
Lady; and if I can meet with my Lady, I should be pleased to deliver the Letter
to her myself. Well, said my Uncle, let it be so. But Will tells me, there is
some Letters missing, as you have numbered 'em. Pray what might they contain,
if it is not improper to know? Really, replied Mr. Wigmore, I cannot very well
remember the Contents, but, in gross, they were something too free for a
Woman's Pen. I believe, said my Uncle, if the Story of the Norman Monk was true
Richard, sirnam'd the Religious, Grandson to Rollo Duke of Normandy, was
esteemed a Prince of singular Piety. Among many Monkish Stories of him, the
following one seems to be calculated for those of large Faith.

A Monk of Normandy, given more to the Flesh than the Spirit, used to visit his
Mistress by Night, for more Secrecy. One very dark Evening, going to the
Rendezvous, his Way lying over a Bridge, he fell in, and was drowned. When his
Soul was descended into the Regions of the Dead, an Angel of Light, and another
of Darkness, had many Strugglings about it; but not agreeing, they resolved to
put it to the Decision of the pious Duke Richard. The Angels pleaded like
themselves before their Judge; who, wisely weighing the Matter, gave Sentence
the Body should have its Soul again, and placed near the Bridge where he fell
from; if he fell in, the black Gentleman should take him for his Perquisite.
The Sentence being put in Execution, the Priest had learnt more Wit, returned
to his Convent, and there defied the Devil, and all his Works. This Affair was
so quick in the Dispatch, that Duke Richard going to the Convent to see what
was become of the Monk, found his Habit all wet with his Fall into the River.


, and this Woman was in his Condition, it would not be hard to guess which
Angel would have the Guardianship of her Ladyship. Come, Sir, said Mr. Wigmore,
may be Heaven intends all for the best. I hope so too, replied my Uncle; but I
fear, without a Miracle, she will go the other Way, for all that. However, I Will
wait patiently, though with little Hope; more for the Peace and Quiet of my
Brother and his Family, than any good Will to such a wicked Woman.

I fear, Sir, said I, you will not have Time enough for Reflection now, for
Burleigh walks at a very great Rate; therefore, the sooner we think how to
prevent his getting to the House, the better. Od so! said my Uncle, that is
true; then let us be gone, and leave Mr. Wigmore to think of his Epistle.

The Horse-Road to our House was even with the Foot-Road, 'till within a
Furlong of the Gate, and then there was no other Way but the common Road. We
kept just before Burleigh all the way, and as he came over the last Style, he
stumbled, and fell on his Face. Why, how now! honest Friend, said my Uncle, you
seem so much in haste, that you don't regard your Way. Take care. Remember the
old Saying, The more Haste, the worse Speed; which has indeed no other Meaning,
than when People go about things unlawful, they should not succeed. If you were
a Roman now, you should take that for an ill Omen. Why, (replied Burleigh,
something surlily) what Matter is it to you, or any body else, whether I am a
Roman, or a Protestant, a Dissenter, or a Muggletonian, an Anabaptist, or a
Quaker, or -- Hold, hold! cried my Uncle (smiling at his Absurdity) you seem to
be pretty perfect in the Names of many Opinions; and yet I fancy you are a mere
Stranger to the Tenets of any of 'em. I am well skilled in Physiognomy, and to
assure you that I am, you are now going about a black Work, that, let it go
which way it will, must, of mere Necessity, bring you into extreme Danger and
Trouble.

Why, the Devil's in the Gentleman, (replied Burleigh, with a less-assur'd Tone
than at first) or if the Devil is not in you, you must be the Devil himself, or
at least a Conjuror. Good Friend, returned my Uncle, I am neither the Devil,
nor a Conjuror; and yet I can tell, and foretell; and farther, I assure you
(looking him full in the Face, which put the other out of Countenance) if you
proceed in this Business, you will be in some Danger of a Halter. Examine your
Conscience. You know if what I say be true, or no. Return from whence you came:
And, for the future, amend your Life, and know me for your Friend. Amend your
Life, and know me for your Friend! cried Burleigh, muttering; sure I am asleep,
and all this is a Dream. He stood some time gazing at my Uncle, and then at me.
Pray Sir, said he, after a Pause, who the Devil are you, and what Business have
you with me? I am going about my Affairs, and shall not stay any longer losing my
Time. Upon saying this, he was pressing on. But my Uncle crossed him with his
Horse, and calling him by his Name, with a menacing Tone, told him, he should
severely repent it, if he moved a Step farther toward that House, pointing at
my Father's; neither is the Lady whom you go to seek, at home, she is gone to
visit a sick Person. Return three Days hence, and it may be you will meet with
better Success than you expect. Whether my Uncle's stern Looks frighted him, or
that he really thought him the Devil, I cannot tell; but at those last Words, he
went back again over the Style, turned to give us another Look, and ran back
the Way he came, as fast as his Legs could carry him.

There is more, said my Uncle, in a guilty Conscience, than a Brace of
Evidences. It Is not impossible but this is the sure Means of your Mother's
getting rid of this troublesome Retainer; so I suppose there will be an annual
Pension saved. But what shall we do with this Woman? If she has any Grace left,
the best way of showing it will be, to hang herself out of the way; for, I must
own, I cannot find any other Method to give Peace to the Family. If we should
conceal these horrible Crimes in Hopes of her Amendment, and she should commit
more, we are in some sort accessory. But Heaven guide us for the best! We must
proceed as Things occurr. When the Groom had taken our Horses, my Uncle asked
him, if he knew where his Master was. He answered, that he rid out presently
after us, being informed we were taking the Air, and that he took the same Road
as we had done. Sure, said my Uncle, softly to me, Providence, by its secret
Workings, intends to reclaim this Woman; or, by its mysterious Darkness, will
have her stumble into more Wickedness; for my Brother's missing us must be
almost a Miracle. Pr'ythee let us go into the Summer House, and think on these
wretched Accidents over again.

As we went through the Hall, I saw Betty at work, and letting my Uncle go
before, I informed her, in brief, of the Day's Affair. She seemed quite dead
with my Relation. For God's sake! said she, if you have any Value for your own
Life, get out of her Power; for if she can be so wicked to do as you say, I
fear she will arrive at the same Pitch she was at before. I must own, continued
she, my own Life is but of small Value, and I would freely part with it to
atone for my past Crimes, if it could save my dear Master's; but, methinks, I
would not have it made a Sacrifice to a revengeful Woman, who will be sure to
rid her Hands of me, because she remembers I know her former wicked Intention.

Well, Betty, said I, rest contented, you are provided for, if you can like my
Uncle's Service; for I have prevailed upon him to accept you for his
Housekeeper; therefore, whenever you think fit, you may leave my Lady, and be
received there, without any other Recommendation. She was very much rejoiced at
the agreeable News, telling me, such good Fortune was far beyond her Hopes; yet
nothing, she told me, could make her easy, till I was entirely out of my
Mother-in-law's Reach. Well, Betty, I returned, I hope every thing will be
determined in a few Days, and so followed my Uncle.

When I came into the Summer House to him, he asked me why I staid? When I
informed him, he did not seem pleased. It had not been much matter (said he)
Billy, whether Betty had been let into the Secret so soon; but however, it
cannot be helped; I must own she knows enough already to be trusted with every
thing. We canvass'd the Matter over several times, but could make very little
of it; and before we could come to any Resolution, Betty interrupted us, by
bringing a Letter directed to my Uncle, which she said, the Messenger that
brought it told her, it required no Answer. Pr'ythee, Billy, said my Uncle,
read it, for I have no Secrets shall be hid from you. As soon as I had cast my
Eyes on the Directions, I told him it was my Mother-in-law's Hand. Odso! said
he, this is an Honor indeed! for I never was favored so far before. But let
us hear what her Ladyship can say for herself. May be it is a Letter of leave to
dispose of her sweet Person; or rather, now I think on it, to be careful of her
dear Wigmore. But read it, that we may be acquainted with her Commands.

SIR,
WHAT shall I say, to gain Credit that what I write to you is sincere? If the
ripping out my false Heart would do it, it should be done this Moment. What you
have (guided by Fate) seen today, I must confess is not my only Crime. But
whatever I have been guilty of, shall be remembered only with a sincere
Repentance. Do not imbitter our Lives, by discovering to my too indulgent
Husband, the Faults of his wicked Wife. If you knew with what Horror my Soul is
filled (not for the Fear of Punishment, but for what my unthinking Heart has
dene) even you would pity me. Consider the rarer Virtue is in Forgiveness, it is
that which distinguishes us from Brutes. Do you stand in the Place of my
Husband; think no more of what is past; and upon the Assurance of a hearty
Repentance, I will never have a Thought of my former Guilt, but to bewail my
Fall from Virtue. Though you are no great Admirer of the Female Sex, I am assured
you have Humanity. I shall expect no Answer, but come home in the Evening, as
usual, where, if I find all discovered, I shall not in my Heart blame you; but I
will, to get rid of my Shame, put an End to the Life of

Your affectionate Sister, J. V.


That Word, Affectionate, at last, said my Uncle, puts me out of Conceit with
all the rest. However, we'll comply, and beg the Hand of Heaven to guide us.
While we were debating, my Father came in. I thought, said he, you were both
run away, you disappeared so suddenly. Pray, which way went you? And how was it
possible for me to miss you? We only rid into the Copse after a Hare, replied
my Uncle, that a Countryman informed us he saw there, but the Greyhound lost
her.

We took several Turns in the Garden, and I could not look upon my Father
without the Tears coming into my Eyes. How different, thought I, is this Woman
from my dear Mother! And how unhappy has a second Marriage made the Family! My
Father took Notice of my Melancholy, asking if I was out of Order? But my Uncle
made him an Answer; for the Question came so much unlooked for, that I could
not tell what to say. Billy, said he, I believe is out of Humor, because I
hindered his going to pore over his Books, for he thinks every Hour lost out of
such Company. I made him no Answer, which confirmed what my Uncle said. I hope,
Billy, returned my Father, has read enough not to take any thing Ill his Uncle
says. My Uncle finding he could not make me dissipate that Discontent that sat
on my Countenance, turned the Discourse, and by that brought me out of my
Confusion. Our uneasy Conversation was broke by the Ringing of the Bell for
Dinner, where I was forced to eat against my Stomach, for fear my Father should
take more Notice of me.

When we had dined, my Father went to take a Nap, as usual, which gave my Uncle
and me an Opportunity of waiting, without Observation, for Mr. Wigmore, with
his Letter. About Three in the Afternoon, we saw him approach us, in the same
Disguise, he had on in the Morning. We went out to meet him, that we might not
be observed by the Servants of the House. When he was within hearing, my Uncle
bid him turn back, and we would follow to the Copse.

When we came there, said Mr. Wigmore, This Place strengthens the Memory of my
Crimes I have already repented of, and shall to my dying Breath. Here, Sir, is
the Letter I promised in the Morning, and whatever Fault you find with it, I Will
do my Endeavor to mend it. My Uncle took the Letter, and gave it me to read,
which was as follows: MADAM,
IF my Life would call back past Years, I would freely render it for that
Satisfaction, to die an Innocent. Heaven sees our Guilt, and if we do not
repent, I fear will severely punish us. All the Hours I have to come, I shall
remember our past Crimes with Horror; and I do not in the least doubt, but you
will do so too, when you reflect what it is to defile the Marriage Bed, even
with a Thought. Do not imagine Fear obliges me to write to you in this manner.
No, it is the Result of my Thoughts, from an unquiet Conscience. I do not say
it is easy for me to part with you for ever; therefore, as I am assured our
guilty Commerce ought to have an End, I intend tomorrow to imbark for another
Climate, where I shall have Leisure to reflect on my past Follies, those, I
confess, are very numerous: But my Capital Sin was, my Tenderness for you, and
that I fear, will press in sometimes, in a manner not pleasing to virtuous Men;
which Character, for the future, Heaven assist me to maintain! So, wishing you
an eternal Farewell, I beg you to think on the Advice of your sincere Friend in
Virtue,

T. WIGMORE.




Well, said my Uncle, as there is, I hope, Truth in it, there is no Want of
Rhetoric. But how must this be delivered to the good Gentlewoman now? It will
not be at all proper for either my Nephew, or me, to have a Hand in it, for that
may raise Suspicions. Suppose, replied Mr. Wigmore, we should give it Mrs.
Betty: With all my Heart, said my Uncle, if Billy approves on it. I must own (I
replied) that is the safest Method we can take; but, as the Case stands, Betty
must know the Contents, or she will not deliver it. We agreed it should be so,
and took our Leaves of Mr. Wigmore, with Thoughts of never seeing him more. I
must confess, I could not look upon him without the utmost Horror, though his
Guilt was not near of so black a Dye as my Mother-in-law's. And I had such a
Conflict between Reason and Rage, that I had often Thoughts, young as I was, to
call him to a more strict Account; but the Hopes of his going abroad, laid
asleep my Resentment. I thought I made but an odd Figure in tamely listening to
these Interviews; and told my Uncle afterward what I had suffered. It Is well,
Boy, said he, smiling, he that conquers his Passions, overcomes his greatest
Enemy. Even Scipio could do no more.

When we came home, we were told my Father was still asleep. I therefore went
to find out Betty, to give her the Letter, and proper Instructions; first
acquainting her with the Contents. This, Betty, may work upon her. I pray
Heaven it may (says Betty) for if she still continues her ill Life, there is no
farther Hopes, we must discover all to your Father, to prevent her Ill Designs
for the future. While I was talking with Betty, my Uncle came to us, and, in a
merry manner, told her, he should soon have Occasion for her; nay, he would be
sure to manage it, that her Mistress should give her Consent. But, said my
Uncle, I think I ought to limit your Power, for my last Lady had something too
much. However, I Will take your Word, and William's Bond, for the Performance of
Articles. But, to think of more serious Matters, continued my Uncle, I wish my
Brother could be got out of the way, when his good Lady arrives, that we may
have a little more Freedom of Conversation; for I am not yet fully determined
what to do with her. Sir, said I, I know the ready way to send him abroad; only
tell him, in such a Place is a Covy of Partridges, and he and his Man will soon
leave us; neither is it a Falsehood, for the other Morning, as I was going to
meet the old Woman, a Covy sprung up almost under my Feet. Be it so then, said
my Uncle; and here he comes, get him out of the way as fast as you can. I then
went to my Father, and informed him of what I knew; who immediately called for
his Man, his Dog, and his Gun, and out he went, first asking us if we would
accompany him, but my Uncle excused himself, and me too.

He had not been gone above half a Hour, but my Mother-in-law came in, with a
Countenance full of penitential Sorrow. As soon as ever she had an Opportunity,
she fell at my Uncle's Feet, and with her Face sprinkled with Tears, and a
broken Voice, interrupted with Sighs, spoke to my Uncle after this manner.

How shall I look up? or what shall I do to gain Credit for what I am going to
say? It is but justice to suspect the Sincerity of my Words, after what your
Eyes have seen. But be assured, from this Day, I will take my Date of Virtue.
While I have Life, never will I wrong my worthy Husband, even with a Thought.
What a gaping Ruin have I avoided, if you will be prevailed upon by Repentance,
to believe me! And to gain more Credit from you, I am obliged to let you know,
that even Adultery is not my greatest Sin. I have, since you saw me last,
weighed well my past Crimes, and think there is not such another wicked Woman
breathing. But Heaven, I hope, has in its infinite Stock of Mercy, Forgiveness
in store for a sincere Repentance. If my Words cannot gain Credit, let your
Sword blot out with my Blood, my former Wickedness! I know I have deserved
Death, and shall with Satisfaction resign my self to your Punishment; if you
can conceal my Crimes, you may term it Accident, or whatever you think fit, for
I am even weary of this World, made burdensome to me by the Weight of Sin I
have laid upon myself, and would freely make an End of this wretched Being with
my own Hands, but that I consider, I should commit a Crime never to be repented
of; and take away all Hopes of Salvation, even in the very Act. Though I doubt
not but Sorrow, in a few Days, will end my Crimes with my Life, and the sooner
that Day comes, the sooner I shall be rid of a terrible Load of Reflection, even
worse than Death itself. Here Tears choked her Words, and she sunk to the
Ground, quite overwhelmed with Sorrow.

Well, Madam, said my Uncle, raising her, if all this Grief is not real, you
are an excellent Counterfeit: But I am willing to believe you sincere in your
Confession. And, for my own Part, I Will strive to forget all that is past, or
think of it as a Dream. But you must pardon me, if I am more careful for the
future, in observing your Actions; for if you should make an ill Use of my
Credulity, I should, in some sort, be guilty. Sir, said my Mother-in-law, Words
are too poor to speak my Thanks, but you shall find my Sincerity by my Actions.
If in the least of all my future ones, you find me erring, I shall expect no
Admonition from you, but to be delivered up to the Hands of Justice. And that
you may have it in your Power to call me to an Account when you please, I shall
succinctly tell you which way I deserve the worst of Deaths. She then related
what you have read already, concerning her first Husband's Death, but solemnly
protested, the Poison was given him by Mistake; for though she procured it for
that Intent, yet she had repented of her wicked Design; and it being put into
the Closet by Mistake, among some Cordials, the Nurse gave it her Husband as
such; for she was so far from believing that he came by his Death through her
Means, that she accused the Apothecary's Man, and had followed the Accusation,
if she had not found out the Mistake. I must own, I had a guilty Commerce with
the Apothecary, who left off making his Visits after my Husband's unfortunate
End. This Proceeding exasperated me so far, that I often wished his Death; and
the Devil, to back my Wishes, brought me acquainted with one Burleigh, who used
to work in the Gardens, as Helper to the Gardener, though otherwise a Trooper. He
undertook the black Deed; and the Day he first knew my Mind, he put me past the
Power to recall it, by making an End of the unfortunate Man; for even as soon
as I parted with him, I repented of the Crime; and though I sought him all the
Day after, to prevent the Deed, I never set Eyes on him, till he came to tell
me my Commands were obeyed. The Concern I felt at the wicked News, could hardly
be expressed by Words; but the Wretch, taking hold of my Weakness, made me
comply with every thing he desired, and even to this Day compels me to maintain
him.

All the while she was relating her horrid Deeds, my Uncle seemed perfectly
Thunderstruck. Who would think, said he, one Woman could be so wicked! Sir,
said she, that is not all. Then she proceeded to tell us of her Designs against
me; but that, said she, I have long since repented of, as my worst of Crimes.

Well, said my Uncle, I hope by this Confession, we shall find your future
Sincerity. But what do you propose to do with this Burleigh? It was with some
Difficulty I prevented his coming here today. Though I am amazed to find you
know any thing of him, said my Mother-in-law, yet I should be much obliged to
you for your Advice in this Affair. Well, said my Uncle, in Hopes of future
Amendment, I have it in my Head to get rid of him, which shall be done
tomorrow, if you will let me know where to find him. This, Sir, said she, will
double all my Obligations to you. I Will give you a Direction in Writing. While
she was writing the Direction, Betty brought her Mr. Wigmore's Letter, which
she took and read. Well, said she, I take Heaven to have a Hand in my
Conversion, for here is another Convert, which very much pleases me, because I
was troubled before how to make an End with him. She then related what had past
between 'em. And all her Relations agreed so well with what we knew before,
that we thought it a Crime in us, not to believe her Promises for her future
Behavior.

A little while after, Word was brought us my Father was come home. How, said
my Mother-in-law, shall I look upon that dear injured Face, without betraying
my Guilt? When I was envelop'd in Sin, without Thought of Repentance, I could
form my Behavior as I thought fit, without any Difficulty; but now, I cannot
tell how to appear before him, without the utmost Confusion. Pray, said my
Uncle, let this be the last Act of Dissembling, and hide from him the Combat in
your Mind. Time will bring you to the Tranquillity of Virtue again.

When my Father came to us, he seemed very much pleased with his Diversion.
What, said he, you must be idling at home, while I am obliged to go abroad to
procure you a Supper. Well, I have got every Man his Bird. It Is your Duty,
replied my Uncle, to provide for your Family; though Billy and I are, at present,
Interlopers. Heyday! cried my Father, What Is the matter with Jane! (meaning his
Wife) are your Patients got well upon your Hands, my Dear, that you have not an
Opportunity of showing your Art, you look so melancholy? I am not very well, my
Dear, replied my Mother, in some Confusion. I am sorry for that, returned my
Father. But as you can cure other People, I hope you know what is good for
yourself. Yes, Sir, said she, I have been troubled with it a great while; it is
a Heaviness of Heart, but I have taken that I hope will cure it. A Heaviness of
Heart, replied my Father! there is nothing cures that Distemper like a Glass or
two of good Wine; nay, I think it a general Cure for all Diseases, and the
sooner you take the Remedy, the sooner you will get rid of your Malady. I think,
said my Uncle, that Physic is good for us all, therefore let us have it. While
the Wine was gone for, my Father seemed to caress his Wife, which occasioned
her bursting into Tears. Pray, said he, my Dear, tell me what is it disturbs
you. In Truth, Sir, said she, I am not very well, and beg leave I may go to
Bed; perhaps Rest may help me. So saying, she took leave of the Company, and
retired. When my Father had drank a Glass of Wine, he followed her to know how
she did, and left my Uncle and me together.

Well, Billy, said he, what think you of Affairs? Do you believe she is sincere
in her Protestations? Yes, really Sir, said I, if she does continue it. I am
confounded, returned my Uncle, at what I have heard. If she should be as good
as her Word, and let murdering Sorrow make an End of her, I must confess I
should be very easy, notwithstanding her Penitence. However, we must find out
Burleigh tomorrow, and get rid of him: And though I am assured he deserves an
Halter, yet I Will give him a few Pieces to send him into another Part of the
World, with all my Heart, and then, sure, she will be easy. I am of your
Opinion, Sir, said I; I fansy her Decline of Years will prevent her seeking
another Lover. I do not know that, replied my Uncle, that itching Folly never
considers Years; however, I believe we have nothing to fear from her; but if we
should be deceived, I should never forgive myself. I must own, it is but seldom
Virtue succeeds Vice, yet such things have been, and therefore may happen
again. We have all the Prospect we can desire, in the Confession of her Guilt;
for as she was ignorant of our Knowledge of it, she might have spared the
Relation, if she had not intended for the future to amend her Life. We had much
Discourse concerning her, till interrupted by my Father, who told us, his Wife
seemed very much indisposed, but he hoped Rest would restore her. For my own
Part, I freely declare, her Death would certainly have grieved me; but the
Content I should have found from the Family's being entirely out of her Power,
would have soon wiped away my Tears.

After Supper, I informed Betty of all Passages, whose Hopes and Fears agreed
with mine, though our Hopes, by far, over-balanc'd our Fears.

In the Morning, my Uncle told my Father, that he and I had a Visit to make,
and very possibly might be obliged to stay Dinner. Accordingly, we took Horse,
but in order to find out Burleigh, who lived in an obscure Village three Miles
from my Father's. When we arrived, we could perceive him running out of the
Backdoor, at the first Sight of us; and I believe would have got away from us,
if his Over-haste had not often made him fall in the Stubble. When we overtook
him, my Uncle asked him, why he made such Haste from his best Friends? Why, to
tell you the Truth, Sir, said he, I don't care for conversing with the Devil,
for I can hardly take you for any thing else. Why, said my Uncle, were you not
afraid of conversing with him, when you made away with Mr. -- the Apothecary?
for Murder is always instigated by the Devil. At these Words, the Fellow fell a
trembling, and cried out, I am a dead Man! No, said my Uncle, though Murder
should never be forgiven, and though I am no Devil, yet I have sufficient Reasons
to assist you in making your Escape; for if you stay Four and Twenty Hours,
Justice will lay hold on you, and there will be no other Road to get away, but
that of the Gallows. In short, such a Person, naming my Mother-in-law, has
discovered it. Now I would save both your Lives, which cannot be done without
you fly immediately. Alas! Sir, said Burleigh, whither should I fly? I have no
Money, or Friends, or I would be gone with all my Heart. For that, said my
Uncle, I Will take care. Go and provide yourself with what Necessaries you have,
and then follow me. We were not long before we mounted, and pursued our Journey
toward Bristol.

As we rid along, my Uncle asked him how he could be so inhuman to murder a Man
in cold Blood, and one, very probable, almost a Stranger to him? Why indeed,
replied Burleigh, I had but little Knowledge of him; but, as to murdering him,
I cannot give it that Name, for I fairly fought with him; though indeed that cannot
be proved, because I am only my own Witness. What do you mean by fighting fairly,
cried my Uncle; is taking a Man's Life, without any Provocation, to be called
fair? I cannot directly argue the Point with you, Sir, returned Burleigh; but
when a Person has equal Arms to his Opposer, and the other fairly runs the risk
of Death, I say it cannot be called Murder, for he always rode with a Pair of
Pistols, as I did the same; and I gave him fair Warning; told him, either he or
I had breathed our last Hour. It Is true, he was not very willing to fight, but
he found it was to no purpose; and I must own, if he had not, I must of
Necessity have killed him; but he fired both his Pistols, and missed me; and I,
with one of mine, shot him through the Throat. After he fell from his Horse, I
dragged him into the neighboring unfrequented Wood, tied his Horse to a Tree in
the same Wood, and rid home with my own. The same Day I got leave to be absent
a few Days, returned to the Wood, took the Horse I had left there, and sold him
at Chester, with a Pretense I was bound for Ireland; so returned home on Foot.
I must own, I was too hasty in executing my Lady's Desire, for she never
peremptorily bid me; but I was willing to get him out of the way, that I might
have her all to my self. I continued my Correspondence for three or four Years,
and constantly received an annual Pension. But when she was about marrying, she
gave me three Years Allowance together, telling me at the same time, that what
I then received was the utmost she could do for me. And, indeed, gave me good
Advice. But my Money was soon gone; therefore I applied myself to her again,
and almost forced a Subsistence from her, by threatening to declare what she has
now done herself, like a silly Woman as she is. I must own, I often threatened
a young Gentleman, who I am assured keeps Company with her, of declaring
something might endanger her Life; but I can assure you it was only to fright
some Money out of her.

This Talk had brought us to the Town's End. We went directly to my Uncle's
Friend, and, by good Fortune, found him at home. My Uncle, in private, declared
to him the Cause of this unexpected Visit; and the Bargain was soon struck for
the Disposal of my Friend Burleigh. My Uncle at parting, gave him Twenty
Guineas, for his own Use; but with a strict Charge to his Friend not to trust
him out of his Sight. And in three Days after we were informed, by Letter, that
the Ship set sail on her Voyage to New York.

Now, said my Uncle, I hope we have laid an excellent Plan for raising your
Mother's Virtue; and I hope the Superstructure will answer the Basis. I am in
Heart convinced of it, I replied. And indeed my Thoughts were now entirely bent
on my lovely Isabella, and the Contemplation of her Perfections produced a
careful Musing, which my Uncle took notice of. Why how now, William? said my
Uncle, What are those wise Thoughts that have tied your Tongue up? I hope all
Affairs at home are accommodated. Come, let me know the Reason of your
Rumination. Sir, said I, my Mind was fixed upon the Company we left behind us in
your Neighborhood. I hope, replied my Uncle, the fair Isabella is not stealing
into your Heart? No, Sir, I returned, I have kept her Image there from the
first Moment I saw her Face, never to be defaced by Years, or Misfortune. Why
how now! Youth, cried my Uncle; is your Heart susceptible of Love so soon? But
I thought as much by your Uneasiness to leave 'em at our last Visit: But come,
we'll make 'em another tomorrow; for I must own, I long to be at home too.
Indeed, Sir, said I, I freely confess, there lies my Loadstone, and turn which
way I will, my Inclinations look that way.

Well, said my Uncle, I must own, I am not against your embarking on the Sea of
Love, if I was sure you could arrive at your desired Port, without meeting with
Storms in your Voyage. Have you had any Talk with your fair Mistress? Sir (said
I) I will never conceal any thing from you, and therefore I shall declare all
my Proceedings. I then told him the whole Progress of my amorous Affairs. Well,
returned my Uncle, I don't find you have any great Reason to despair. Neither,
Sir, said I, can I find any thing to beget a Hope, especially when I think of
the implacable Aversion rooted in the Minds of the Mother and the Aunt, against
Men and Matrimony. Indeed, said my Uncle, they have both sufficient Reasons for
that Aversion; the one, from the complicated Humors of an ill-natured Husband;
and the other, from the Ill-usage of a Man unworthy the Name; which, to beguile
the Time, I will relate; I mean, the Story of the Aunt, which I learnt from her
own Mouth but the last time we were there.

When she had scarce seen Seventeen, she was courted by a Person remarkable for
his good Make, and Address, with the Addition of a large Fortune, which in many
People, serve only as instrumental to evil Actions. This Man of the World, by
the common Wiles, gained the Heart of the young Lady, and by his subtle
Insinuations, prevailed upon her to steal from her Relations. His Pretense for
it was, his Friends Aversion to the Match; for indeed his Estate might have
commanded, as the World goes, a more ample Dowry with a Wife. Blinded by Love,
and his Hypocrisy, she complied with his Desire, and stole away from her
Father. When he had got her Person in his Custody, he endeavored to gain his
Ends without giving the Priest any Trouble; but the Lady, though much in Love,
abhorred his base Intentions, and, by her Resentment, showed the Spark had
nothing to hope for from that ungenerous Way. He then got into her good Graces
again, by declaring, his Attempt was only to try her; letting her know at the
same time, how happy he should be with a Woman of such an impregnable Virtue.
In a few Days after this Trial, he married her, and in a Month after the
Wedding, told her he would have her go home to her Friends, for he expected his
Wife out of the Country, who was of such a violent Temper, every thing was to
be feared from her Rage.

The poor Lady was dumb through Astonishment, and many times fancied he had a
mind to try her Temper, and gave him to understand as much. Well Madam (said
the base Wretch) I am resolved to make the Matter as plain as I can to you.
Here, John! (calling to one of his Servants) this, Madam, said he, is the good
Man that gave us a Commission to go to Bed together, and he is come to take his
Leave of you, being to attend a Gentleman of my Acquaintance in his Travels, in
the Quality of his Footman; and I believe he is so far from being a Churchman,
that he never was in a Church in his Life. I hope, said the Fellow, your Honor
will pardon my contradicting you in that, for I have been many a Day in Twenty,
one after another. The poor Lady too soon found the Truth of her Misfortune;
and her Rage and Despair, vented in the bitterest Reproaches, had no Effeft on
the inhumane Brute. But, instead of giving her any Comfort (finding she made no
Haste in leaving him) left her in sole Possession of the Lodging he had taken
for that Purpose, where she was forced to part with every thing she had of
Value, to support her in common Necessaries of Life; and, if her careful Father
had not found her out, was resolved to part with Life, to put an End to her
Shame and Misfortunes. The old Gentleman took her home; and, to comfort her,
gave her his Word he would forget her Unhappiness, being well assured of her
honest Intentions. And this is the Cause of the Aunt's Aversion to Men and
Matrimony.

I shall own, Sir, said I, I cannot well blame the Resolution she has taken. I
must declare, I wonder how such barbarous Notions can enter the Minds of Men!
and if there were not Instances of it every Day, I should think such Relations
Fables. How is it possible that the Nature of Men should be so very different!
Every kind of the Brute Creation are much the same; but Man sympathizes with
every Degree of 'em; and are full as various. A Man had better not be, than to
be born with such Appetites; and the Dignity of his Figure only makes him the
greater Monster. I own (replied my Uncle) your good Sense, at so early an Age,
gives me the utmost Contentment; and though Philosophy may be learnt without
practicing, yet I believe I have nothing to fear from your Conduct.

It was late in the Evening before we came home; and we were informed by my
Father, that his Wife's Indisposition increaand'd. My Father seemed so very
much concerned, that he was not very inquisitive about the Journey we had made
that Day. We sympathiz'd with him. However, my Uncle informed him, that we
intended to be gone in the Morning early; and all his Entreaties could not
prevail upon him to stay longer. Well then, said my Father, since you will go,
I would have you take Leave of my Wife tonight; which was agreed to. A Message
was sent to her, to know if it was proper to see us; and she sent Word she
should take it kindly. When we came into the Room, my Uncle and I sat on each
side her Bed, and neither of us spoke for some Moments. At last, my
Mother-in-law broke Silence. Well, Sir, said she to my Uncle, has your Journey
succeeded, and am I to number this Day's Work among the many other Obligations
I have to your Virtue? Madam, replied my Uncle, every thing has fell out, I
hope, according to your Desire; for, I am fully persuaded, Burleigh will never
come more to interrupt your growing Quiet. He then related the Transactions of
the Day to her. Well then, said my Mother, my Mind's at rest, and I hope Heaven
will pardon me, as you have done; it is all I have now to do, to gain it, for I
find I am not long to continue in this World, for the Wounds my Virtue, though a
Conqueror, has received, in the sharp Combat with overgrown Vice, I find will
not be healed but by the Hand of Death; therefore, when you hear I am no more,
bury my Failings with my Body, in my Grave, nor never think of me, but as a
sincere and humble Penitent.

The Behavior of my Mother-in-law, brought Tears into my Eyes, which she
observed with a Tenderness I had never perceived in her before. Dry thy Tears,
my Child, said she; thy soft Disposition overwhelms me with Confusion. If I
survive, I beg you will look upon me as thy own Mother, for my Actions shall
ever declare me so. And if Death releases me from this troublesome World,
remember me as such in every thing, but thy Grief. I could not return any
Answer, my Heart was so overburden'd with Sorrow; which she perceiving, flung
her Arms about my Neck, pressed me to her Cheeks, and we mingled our Tears
together. We continued in this sorrowful Employment till my Father came in and
interrupted us. Come, said he, no more Grieving; by the Grace of God, a few
Days will chase away this Indisposition; and then we'll come and make my
Brother a Visit. I must own, I parted with her in the utmost Sorrow, for I
found my Tenderness increase every Moment; and if the Thoughts of seeing my
dear Isabella had not stole into my Memory, I should have been inconsolable in
this Parting: But every thing must give way to Love. We also took Leave of my
Father overnight, that Ceremony might give us no Hindrance in the Morning.
When the Veil of Obscurity was drawn, to let in the cheerful Beams of the Sun,
my Uncle and I mounted, and pursued our Journey. My Uncle, to make the Way less
tedious, told me many pleasant Stories; which gave me so much Satisfaction,
that we got home before I thought we were half way.

After Dinner, my Uncle asked me if I had Stomach enough to pay a Visit to the
Ladies? I told him, nothing could be more agreeable to me. We were soon ready,
and soon on Horseback. When we arrived, we found a great many Female Visitors,
and Isabella presiding over the Tea-Table, as usual: I observed a Blush in her
Cheeks, when she first saw me; which I interpreted in my Favor at first, as
Love's a Flatterer. Yet she took so little Notice of me, during the rest of the
Day, that my Uneasiness was very great. The Company staid Supper; and Isabella,
to complete my Discontent, took all Occasions to avoid me. One Lady I took
particular Notice of, a Woman about Thirty. She seemed to have a languishing
Sweetness in her Countenance, that discovered a Temper without any Gall. She
often took notice of my Sadness, without the Heed of Isabella, or the rest of
the Company. I have heard, said she, many Commendations of this young
Gentleman's Understanding, which makes me imagine something extraordinary has
put him out of Humor. This Speech, I must own, put me into some Confusion; and
I thought myself under the Necessity of making a Reply; but my Uncle gave me
time to recover, by answering for me. A Man, said he, must have a fine Time
on it, to give Proofs of his Understanding among so many Female Tatlers (begging
this Lady's Pardon, bowing to the Stranger) but yet I think Billy has made his
plain, by holding his Tongue. Women have not Souls capable of edifying by his
Discourse. And I am sure there is nothing learnt by their eternal Clacks,
except it gives us an Idea of a Perpetual Motion. We are sure of your good
Word, replied the Aunt. Yet I am as much concerned as you are, if the young
Gentleman has met with any thing to put him out of Humor. Perhaps, replied the
Stranger Lady, he had rather be in Company more suitable to his Years. I think
Isabella should entertain him. Really Madam, returned Isabella, I am not of
your Opinion; I have left off Play-things for some time, therefore I imagine I
shall be as dull Company for him, as he will be for me. You are a little too
free with the young Gentleman, returned the Mother; and, in general, you are
all too hard upon him. I have done, Madam, replied Isabella, I shall say no
more, and ask Pardon, if I have offended him. Their Discourse was interrupted,
by the strange Lady's Husband's Entrance, who came to fetch her home. When she
was gone, my Uncle asked who she was, for, to the best of his Remembrance, he
had never seen her before. There is something very extraordinary in that Lady's
Fortune, said the Aunt; and if it were not so late, Isabella should read her
Story, wrote by her Husband, which she has procured a Copy of from the Lady's
Original. Why then replied my Uncle, with Isabella's Leave, we'll trespass upon
the Time, it is Moonlight, and we shall find our way home without a Candle. I am
ready to satisfy you, returned Isabella, if I once receive my Mother's
Commands. My Commands are at your Service, replied the Mother. Upon that
Isabella went out, and returned immediately, with a Paper in her Hand. This
true Story, said she, is called, by the Person that wrote it,

ELEANORA OR, THE WILLING CUCKOLD.
ELEANORA, was Daughter to a wealthy Citizen of London; but, having many
Children, he could not give her a Fortune equal to her Merit. She had all the
Advantage of Education, even for one of a higher Station; and there was nothing
wanting, but Grandeur, to make her the finest Woman in the World. A Physician,
of good Practice, fell in Love with her, and declaring his Passion to her
Father, gained his Consent to address his Daughter. But, like an indulgent
Parent, considering the Bargain he was driving was to last for Life, frankly
told him, if he could not gain his Daughter's Heart, there was no Advantage to
be expected from his Consent; for he valued the Repose of his Children beyond
every thing else in this World. The Doctor approved of his Sentiments,
therefore endeavored to gain the Affection of the young Lady. As he was a Man
of a tolerable Person and handsome Address, he gained upon her to receive the
Proposals of Marriage without any Reluctance.

The Nuptials were solemnized, and, in all Appearance, they bid fair for a very
happy Couple. Some Years passed with an uninterrupted Series of Contentment. In
the Summer-Season, when Business would permit, he with his Family, would retire
into the Country. In their rural Neighborhood lived a Gentleman of a great
Estate, who seeing Eleanora by Accident in her Garden, fell desperately in Love
with her. When the Gifts of Fortune are thrown upon an Undeserver, they only
serve to encourage Baseness.

This Gentleman was resolved to enjoy the virtuous Lady on any Hazard; and his
first Step was to get acquainted with the Husband, which was no very difficult
Point to gain; it was easy to feign an Indisposition, and the Physician gains
as much by the Sound, as the Diseased; imaginary Distempers out-number the real
ones. The Gentleman was liberal in his Fees to the Doctor; and the Doctor had
Understanding enough in his Profession to know, that he received his Money for
nothing; but that was his Curse, the Curse of Avarice.

The lovesick Gentleman took all Occasions to visit the Doctor at his own
House, where he had many Opportunities of conversing with the Lady, and the
Charms of her Understanding were as strong as those of her Person: But then, to
freeze his Hopes, he found her one of an impregnable Virtue. He had often
declared his Passion to her, and she as often threatened to acquaint her Husband;
but her Threats were of no Use, for he was too powerful, and too much in Love,
to fear any thing but her Scorn. When the Lady found no Usage would make him
forbear his Visits or Addresses, resolved never to appear when ever he came;
but this only added Fuel to the amorous Fire, and rendered him the more
impatient.

Burning in this unlawful Flame, he was resolved by Force to possess her, since
every other way failed. He found means to corrupt her Maid, for few Servants
are Proof against Gold; and being informed by her, that the Doctor was obliged
to attend a Nobleman, his Patient, to the Bath, he determined that very Night,
with the Assistance of the treacherous Maid, to execute his villainous Design.
In Eleanora's Bedchamber was a Closet, that opened on the Inside with a
Spring-Lock, into which the Gentleman was conveyed, disguised, by the Servant,
who took the Key in her Pocket. When the innocent Lady came to go to Bed, which
she did early, in the Absence of the Husband, she inquired for the Key of her
Closet, to go to her Devotion, as usual; but the Maid, after hunting a great
while, told her she could not find it; therefore must send for the Smith in the
Morning. The Gentleman has ofttimes declared since, that the Fervency of her
Devotion had almost made him forgo his rash Attempt. But Love proved too
powerful for those pious Thoughts. As she was undressing herself to go to Rest,
her Husband returned. She expressed a great deal of Satisfaction for his sudden
and unlook'd-for coming back; but it is easy to guess what the Gentleman in the
Closet felt at so cruel a Disappointment; and he sometimes thought that Heaven
had heard her Prayers, and prevented his wicked Intention. The Doctor told his
Wife, that he had met his Patient upon the Road, who came to Town on Purpose to
be near him and his own Apothecary, for his Advice. After some trivial Talk, he
called for Supper; but the Maid, who stood upon Thorns, desired that he might
go and sup in the Parlour, that she might have an Opportunity of conveying the
baffled Lover out of the House: But the Doctor proved obstinate, and swore he
would sup there, and no Persuasions could alter his Resolution. Therefore
Supper was brought up, and the Lover and the Maid wished him heartily choked.
Among other Discourse, the Doctor asked his Wife, Why she appeared so strange
to the Squire? meaning our closeted Lover. You should consider, my Dear, added
he, he is one of my best Patients, and in all Probability will continue so; for
he, like my Lord, has no other Disease than what is formed by Fancy, which is a
Companion certain for Life. The Doctor said so much upon the Subject, that
Eleanora at last confessed his unlawful Solicitations. And she further added,
the Way to be freed from his wicked Addresses, was never to come into his
Sight. Ay, but my Dear, replied the Husband, if that be his Motive of visiting
us, I shall lose my Patient, when he perceives the Deprivation of your Company.

Eleanora was something surpised at his manner of Reasoning, imagining he
would resent it, as a Man of Honor ought. The Husband perceiving her Confusion
at his unexpected Answer, cried, No, no, my Dear, I am very well satisfied in
your Virtue, and that no Temptation will be strong enough to overcome it.
Therefore I desire, whenever the Squire comes, you would appear as you were
wont, and only make a Jest of his Passion; I Will warrant you, nothing that he
can say will hurt your Features, or deaden your Complexion: Therefore,
pr'ythee, let him say what he will; as long as I am satisfied, you need not
have any further Regard. Eleanora was confounded with the Sentiments of her
Husband, plainly telling him, that Avarice had blinded him, and the prattling
World would soon declare her guilty, if the Squire continued his Visits; and if
your own Honor will not prompt you to put a Period to this dangerous
Correspondence, I hope, said she, my Quiet will be of sufficient Force with
you. The Doctor still proved obstinate, and insisted upon her receiving the
Squire with favorable Looks. He being of an obstinate passionate Temper, she
seemed, at last, consenting to his Will, hoping Time would, some way or other,
put an End to such an Affair.

The Gentleman in the Closet, though uneasy at his Confinement, yet received some
Consolation in the Sentiments of the Husband, and conceived Hope even of
succeeding in his Wishes, through the Doctor's Avarice, and bad Principles. All
his Uneasiness was, now, how to get away undiscovered; his being near the
Object of his Wishes, gave him no Contentment, when his Ideas gave her to the
Arms of a dull insipid Husband. The Closet where he was, looked into the
Garden, and being a Ground-Floor, he got out with little Difficulty; but,
getting over the Garden-Wall, a Mastiff-Dog belonging to the House, seized him
by the Leg, and pulled him down again; and having no Arms about him, but what
were prepared for Love, it was with much Difficulty and Danger he escaped the
Mastiff's Fury.

When he came home, he was obliged to send for a Surgeon, for the Dog had bit
him in several Places, and a reasonable Person would imagine the Smart of his
Wounds might have cured the Pain in his Heart; but he was more in Love than
ever. The Cure of his Hurts kept him at home much longer than his impatient
Soul would permit, which retarded his Cure. The Doctor visited him every Day,
and never without a Fee; and no doubt, in his Heart, he wished when he was
cured of this Hurt, to meet with another such, the first time he went abroad.
Though the Gentleman had formed a Story, far from the Road of Truth, yet the
Doctor told him, he did not doubt, but he met with the Accident in pursuing
some Love Intrigue.

One Day, when they were together in the Squire's Garden, pretty well warmed
with the Juice of the Grape, he spoke to him after this manner: Sir, I stand in
very great need of your Advice, without prescribing to the Apothecary. I am
sick, I own, but my Disease lies in the Mind. I have long languish'd for a
beautiful Lady, that if I do not enjoy, I must seek for my Contentment in the
Grave, for there is nothing else in this World, can give me Ease. This Charmer
is married, and I believe strictly virtuous. I shall conceal the Name, till I
hear your Advice and Sentiments on this Occasion; but, by the way, before you
speak, I am willing to give 500 l. to complete the Business, and 20 l. every
time I have the Enjoyment of the Lady. The Doctor did not take a long time to
consider the Proposal, but made him this Answer: Sir, were it my own Case, I
should not long demur upon it, for, I can assure you, I should take the Money;
and though it might seem strange in the Eyes of the World, yet, in my own private
Opinion, there is no Crime in it. What the worse is a Woman for being enjoyed by
more than her Husband, especially with his Consent; for I believe there are but
few guiltless without it, and commit the Sin, if it be one, without any Profit.

The Gentleman finding the Doctor pretty willing in such an Affair, told him
the whole Truth, and that it was his Wife whose Eyes had wounded him. To deal
as freely with you, replied the Doctor, I imagined as much; for my Wife has
been complaining to me of your criminal Addresses, as she calls 'em; and I find
(not as I have put it directly to her) that there is no Hope in gaining her,
knowingly, to consent; or perhaps if she were willing, I should not be easily
brought to treat about the Matter: But I suppose if it were so, I should never
have heard of the Affair. Well then, said the Squire, since you are willing to
assist me, I Will give you my Word and Honor, every Article I have mentioned to
you, shall be made good; and let us begin as soon as you please. Hold, Sir,
replied the Doctor, we are now driving a Bargain, I am well assured you would
not apply to me, if you could get your Business done without me; therefore I am
resolved you shall come to my Terms, or you shall never see my Wife more. --
First, you shall enter into Bonds, never to disclose the Secret to any Person:
Next, you must make the 500 l. a 1000 l. for the first time; for how do I know
but you may repent your Bargain, after Enjoyment? for I am convinced,
Expectation exceeds Possession of our Wishes: And for the second time, 100 l.
the third 50 l. and the fourth 20 l. and so to continue.

The Gentleman, eager as he was to possess the Lady, was surprised at his
Proposal; but, as his Passion exceeded his Reason, soon agreed to the mentioned
Articles. But the Difficulty was, how to have 'em drawn with Secrecy; but the
Doctor soon solved that, by telling him, he would draw up the Bond himself, and
the Squire's Servants might sign it, without knowing the Contents. The first
1000 l. should be brought in Specie; and so the rest, as they should become
due. The Gentleman was too much blinded with Love, to stop at any thing. The
next Day the Bond of Secrecy was signed, with the Penalty of 3000 l. and the
Night after that, was agreed on for the first Time, when he should take
Possession of all he desired. In the Interim, the Doctor had many Discourses
with his Wife, upon the Levity of Women, and that the Crime of Adultery was
only as People were pleased to form it to themselves. The poor innocent Lady
little imagined the base Design that was hatched against her, and only begged
her Husband would cease such Discourses, that but ill agreed with her
Sentiments.

The better to carry on the Contrivance, the Squire had not made one Visit at
the Doctor's, since the Night he was confined in the Closet; and the poor Lady,
far from Ill Nature, was not displeased that he had any thing to hinder his
troublesome Visits. When the fatal Evening came, the Doctor took care in
conveying the Gentleman with his 1000 l. into the Closet, unperceived by any;
and that his Wife should not have an Occasion for any thing that was there, had
ordered all her Female Geers out two Days before, with this Reason, That he
should want that Place entirely to himself, for some time.

Bedtime came, and the poor Victim was laid in Sheets, the Emblem of her
Innocence, ready for the Sacrifice of unlawful Love. The base-spirited Husband
took an Occasion of putting out the Candle, and dismissed the Maid. Upon the
Instant, the expecting Lover took his Place, and the Doctor prudently and
decently retired to his Closet. I cannot give the Reader his Thoughts of what
was doing; but it is reasonable to suppose, even the Possession of his Mammon,
could not quite banish some scurvy Ideas. The Gentleman, after revelling
several Hours in guilty Joys, retired into the Closet, as was agreed on,
dressed himself, and went home, with the Help of his Cuckold; who, to favor
his Retreat, pretended he heard some Noise in the House. Every thing thus
succeeded as the Wretch desired; who, notwithstanding his Guilt, went to Bed,
and slept as found as unpolluted Innocence.

The next Day he made a Visit to the Squire, where he applauded his own Wit,
for his nice Conduct in the Affair: But his chief Reason of visiting the Lover,
was to know if he designed another Visit that Night; and was much rejoiced to
find the Gentleman as eager, as he was willing. In short, the Gentleman went
much oftener than his Fortune would permit; and the Cuckold wore his Antlers all
over Gold. But though the Gentleman's Love was not dead, yet the Edge was so far
taken off, that he began to reason with himself, and therefore went not so
often as the Doctor desired; he reproached him with his Decay of Passion for
his Wife; and the Gentleman wanted to be upon better Terms. In short, there had
like to have been a Breach between 'em: For the Doctor would not bate an Ace of
his first Price, imagining it would be undervaluing the Goods in Trade. The
Gentleman told him, though he loved his Wife as much as ever, yet he should be
obliged to make less frequent Visits, or his Fortune would be much impaired.
The Husband was much chagrin'd at it, but made himself easy with this
Reflection, that if his Love continued, as he had no Reason to think the
contrary, his Prudence would give way to it. The Lover imagined, if he could
disclose the Intrigue to the Lady, she would, out of a just Resentment,
continue the Correspondence more to his Advantage. He therefore laid a Plot to
get the Husband out, when he was expecting the happy Moment in the Closet.
Accordingly, at the Time, a Servant came with a Coach and Six, to bring the
Doctor to my Lord -- his Patient formerly, who was taken dangerously and
suddenly ill. He had just time to step into the Closet, and to inform the Lover
he should be back in two Hours; therefore desired him to have Patience till
that Time. As he went out, he desired his Wife not to go to Bed, till he came
back.

The Gentleman had taken care he should not return so soon as he imagined, for
he had given Directions to his Servants to turn him out upon a Common, Fifteen
Miles from his own House, in the middle of a dark Night. So there we shall
leave him, to his Disappointment and inward Vexation; and go home to the
Doctor's House again. His Wife sat up beyond the expected Time, and would have
sat up much longer, if the Maid, to go to Bed herself, had not persuaded her,
that my Lord might be in very great Danger, and consequently her Master obliged
to attend him. The Wife, upon these Persuasions, went into her Bedchamber, and
dismissed her Female Attendant; but not being quite easy in her Mind,
concerning her Brute of a Husband, sat down to read; which the Gentleman
perceiving, imagined she would be less surprised while there was Light, than if
he should make his Discovery in the Dark, therefore opened the Door softly, and
came out of the Closet. His first Appearance had so much affrighted her, that
she had not Power to speak, or cry out. Madam, said the Gentleman, don't be
surpised at this unexpected and unseasonable Visitation; for, on my Honor, I
mean you no Injury; and, to open your Eyes, and prepare you for what I shall
say, I was conducted hither by your Husband. He then proceeded, and acquainted
her with every Circumstance of their Agreement. The grieved Lady had not
Strength enough to hear it out, but fell in a Swoon upon the Bed where she sat.
The Gentleman was truly concerned for this Accident, and used all the Means in
his Power, to bring back her Senses again: But when her Understanding was
restored, her Lamentations, Sighs, and Tears, were beyond Expression moving.
She seemed resolved to receive no Consolation, but looked upon him as the
hateful Executioner of her Honor. Madam, said the Gentleman, if I could have
imagined you would have felt this Injury so sharply, I never would have
committed it; and I shall ever repent, to the last of my Life, the Sorrow I
have given to a Woman of such impregnable Virtue. But it is all owing to the
Baseness of that Wretch, who is no longer worthy to be called your Husband. If
you can bury the Remembrance of what is past, be assured, for the future, I
shall be a Friend to your Virtue, and never once attempt any thing injurious to
your Honor. After Death (replied the Lady, in Tears) it is too late for Physic,
I am for ever miserable; and, to aggravate my Sorrows, I am even tied up from
resenting, as I ought, this irreparable Injury; for though the Baseness of my
Husband might cancel every Matrimonial Tie, yet I have a Soul that tells me,
all my Resentments will be to grieve in Silence, till Death releases me from
all my Pain.

All the Gentleman's Endeavors to sooth her Sorrows, proved vain; and he took
his Leave of her, with a solemn Resolution never to have any Correspondence
with the hateful Husband more; sincerely repenting for his Follies past, and in
the utmost Grief it was no farther in his Power to redress her Injuries.

The next Day, about Noon, the Willing Cuckold returned, laden with Curses for
the Trick put upon him; and though his Wife endeavored to conceal her Sorrows,
yet it was impossible; for her Tears stole from her Eyes, pursuing one another,
and Sighs heaved in her Breast, as if every one intended to be her last Breath.
The Husband soon found the Meaning of 'em, and set himself, aukwardly, to
comfort her; and, by degrees, came to understand the best part of their last
Night's melancholy Conversation. But when he learnt the Gentleman had resolved
to make no more Visits in that criminal manner, he was almost distracted at the
Loss of so good a Customer, as he termed him; fell out with the poor innocent
Eleanora, and was outrageous out of all Bounds. Sdeath! said he, this is your
Doings! Pray, what the worse are you, for what is past? Have not I gained more
by the Squire in one Month, than I have got in three Years by my Practice? But
however, I have one Card more to play yet; and since he has resolved to make no
more of his Visits, I Will make him pay well for the last. He then declared he
would have the Penalty of the Bond, which he had broke, by disclosing to her
their Terms of Agreement, and if he would not pay him willingly, the Law should
force him.

The poor Wife was quite overwhelmed with this avaricious Declaration, and
entreated her base Husband, as well as her Sorrows would permit, that he would
desist in such a mean Proceeding; but to no Purpose. Nay, he farther told her,
she must be his chief Evidence in the Cause. And though she declared she would
put an End to her Shame by Death, yet he still persisted, and went to the
Gentleman the next Day, who, at his unreasonable Demand, gave him no other
Answer, but a sound Bastinado; and the Cuckold was obliged to go home with more
Pains in his Body, than ever he felt in his Conscience. His Head being broke,
and his Face bruised, he was obliged to stay at home some few Days, till his
Hurts were healed. But the poor Eleanora felt the Effects of his Ill-humour;
yet, notwithstanding this hard Treatment, she could never once think of hating
him, but bore all with the utmost Patience. She knew, by his Expressions, that
he had resolved to go to Law upon a double Score, as well for the Assault, as
Breach of Articles, whenever he was able to go abroad; therefore she prevailed
upon herself to send him the following Letter.

SIR,
YOU know, I am already injured past Redress; and it is my greatest Unhappiness,
that I must sue in one who has been the chiefest Instrument in my Undoing.
Nothing in this World can make me forget my Misfortunes; yet they will, in some
part, sit lighter on my Mind, if you will make up the Quarrel between Mr. T --
and yourself; otherwise, you will have a Life to answer for, having resolved on
Death, if there is any farther Proceeding. Whatever Charge you are at, you
shall be repaid out of my yearly Allowance. Your Compliance with this, will be
the only way to gain Forgiveness from Heaven, and the wretched

ELEANORA.


The Gentleman, who had now conceived a disinterested Friendship for her, was
resolved to comply with her just Request, without expecting any Return,
according to her Letter. Thereupon he sent a Message to the sordid Wretch, that
he was willing to come to an Accommodation, and in the End, got clear of him
for 500 l. But the Matter could not be finished without Witnesses to general
Releases; these having no other Concern than to make an End for their Friend
the Squire, were not so choice of keeping the Secret, and as most Secrets are
whispered about to the Enlargement of every thing, this Story lost nothing by
the Carriage.

At last Lady Fame trumpeted it about the whole Kingdom; 'till the cornuted
Doctor could not peep abroad for the Scoffs of the Neighbors; and his
Patients, in general, abhorring the Fact, sell from him; which struck so to his
Heart, being wounded in the tenderest Part, Interest, that in less than a Year,
his wretched Soul took its last Farewell of his vile Body.

The poor Eleanora (who resided with her Father when the Story began to be
public) could not avoid grieving, out of her Sweetness of Temper, for a Wretch
that did not deserve her least Regard; and begged her Father to seek out some
Retirement for her in the Country, where she might end the rest of her Days in
peaceful Contemplation, free from the Censure of the World. Her Father had just
procured her such a Place as she desired, when the Gentleman that had been the
Cause of her Sorrows, put an End to 'em. For, being, as much in Love with her
Virtue, as her Beauty, made his Addresses to her; and, as that was the only Way
to save her Credit, she consented to the Match, after her Year of Mourning was
over, and they have lived ever since, a Pattern of conjugal Affection.

When Isabella had finished this short true Story, her Manner of Reading was
approved by every one of the Company, but myself; for I must own, I had not
recovered Spirit enough even to open my Mouth; for I observed she cast her
Eyes, by turns, on all the Company, but still avoided me.

They were sometimes descanting upon the Story, and every Person gave their
Sentiments; but I was in no Humor to give mine. Immediately after we parted,
and as we rode home, Billy, said my Uncle, you seemed very melancholy all the
while you were at my Lady's; you hardly took any Notice of those about you, and
your dumb Civility when we parted, spoke your Mind full of some melancholy
Thoughts, which I judge were concerning the young Isabella. To deal
ingenuously, Uncle (I replied) the Carriage of that amiable Creature almost
distracts me, and I find Love strengthens with every Morning's Sun; and though I
would give all the World for her Esteem, yet her Behavior to me today, raises
in me a decent Pride, which Pride will make me show my Resentments in
refraining my Visits.

Pr'ythee, Will, returned my Uncle, don't appear more a Man in this Boyish
Passion, than thou do in the rest of thy Actions. I intend to part you and
your Mistress, next Spring; therefore prepare your Mind accordingly, for you
and your Tutor shall make the Tour of Europe, for three Years; and by that time
you may even forget the Name of Isabella. Nothing, Sir, said I, can make me
forget her, or her Usage; though her Scorn will touch me nearer than any thing
can fall upon me in this World, after losing your Affection. Pr'ythee, have
done with this Topic then, said my Uncle. The remaining Part of this Summer, I
intend you and I shall make a Journey over most of the celebrated Places in our
own Country, that you may not be, as most of our young Travelers are,
inquisitive after the Knowledge of foreign Climates, when you are a Stranger to
your own. Sir, the sooner you make this Journey (I replied) the better; and you
could not propose any thing I like so well. Why then, said my Uncle, tomorrow
we'll be going, after Dinner; I suppose you have nothing material to hinder
you. Should we not acquaint my Father and Mother with your Intention? said I.
No, no matter, replied my Uncle, we'll take no Leave of any one, but the
Company we have just now left; neither would I do that, but as their House will
stand in the way of our first Day's Journey. The Thoughts of seeing Isabella so
soon, gave me some Satisfaction, though mixed with a great deal of Anxiety.

The next Morning we set out; my Uncle altering his Resolution of dining at
home, intending to dine at my Lady's. When we came there, we were informed the
whole Family were gone to dine with the Husband of Eleanora. This News, and
Disappointment of not seeing Isabella, according to my Expectation, almost
overcame my Spirits; but I bore it outwardly well enough; and my Uncle seemed
very well pleased with my Calmness of Temper; though, alas! he little guessed the
Perturbation of my Thoughts. My Uncle intended the first Tour as far as
Edinburgh, and accordingly pursued our Journey, with one Servant only. My Uncle
was such pleasant Company, that I had not Leisure to think of Isabella, till I
went to Rest; and even the Fatigues of the Day would hardly prevent my waking
all Night. Sometimes I imagined Isabella might have some tender Thoughts of me;
especially when I called to mind her former Conversation with me, and that my
sudden Absence might possibly create her some Uneasiness. But then, her late
Behavior to me, cancelled those pleasing Hopes. It is needless to describe the
Towns we passed; but we arrived safe at Edinburgh, without any Accident, the
once Regal Town of Scotland.

Edinburgh, Ag neda, or Edenburgum, was called, in the earlier Ages, Castrum
Alatum. It stands on a high Eminence; and the Plan of the City, as it lies,
resembles the Skeleton of a Human Figure. The Castle was reckoned, before the
Use of Cannon, impregnable; and is now of sufficient Strength to withstand a
powerful Siege. The Buildings are very strong, and large, composed of
Freestone, and Mortar of a hard Cement, most of the Houses eight Stories high.
But as we have many Descriptions of Scotland, I shall take no farther Notice of
this City; only it is not very convenient to walk the Streets by Night, without
a Person before you, who cries as he passes along, Hand your Haund! Haud your
Haund! otherwise you may chance to have upon your Heads something offensive to
the Nose, as well as your Clothes. The Streets, in the Morning, are covered
over with somewhat, that every one who walks till Ten of the Clock, may very
well expect good Luck, according to our old English Saying. Before Noon, so
many People walk the Streets, there is not the least remaining of that
ill-custom'd Filth.

In many Parts of the Streets stands a Person, with a great Cloak to cover his
Customers, with another Convenience, crying, Wha wants me?

After visiting several Places in Scotland, we returned, viewing the noted
Places in England, in our Way home. Though, I must own, Curiosity very often took
up all my Thoughts, yet my Love was not in the least lessened; and the nearer I
came to the Place of the Divine Isabella's Abode, the more was the Increase of
my Anxiety. My Uncle had not once mentioned that Passion, through our whole
Journey, till the Morning of the Day that put an End to our first Tour. Now,
said my Uncle, I imagine you have some Thoughts of your young Mistress. I
intend to dine there today, but shall leave the Conduct of that Part of your
Life to yourself, and say no more upon that Head. But when you stand in need of
my Advice, or Assistance, ask it, and you shall have it, because I am assured
you will not ask any thing contrary to the Honor of a Gentleman. I returned
suitable thanks for so kind a Condescension, and changed the Subject, because I
thought my Uncle seemed pleased to have it so.

We came to my Lady's about Twelve of Clock, and were told they were Dressing.
My Uncle, notwithstanding his Freedom, would not interrupt 'em, but went to
rest upon a Couch in the Parlour. I not being so much fatigued, went into the
Garden to indulge my Thoughts. But what was my Surprise, when I found the
lovely Isabella sitting by the Fountain, with a Book in her Hand, on which she
seemed very intent; her Back was toward me, so that I came within six Paces of
her, before she saw me. At the Noise I made in approaching her, she turned
about, and upon seeing me, gave a Shriek, and put the Book hastily in her
Pocket. Madam, said I, if I had thought that my Presence could have created in
your Mind any Disturbance, I would have sooner cut off these Limbs that brought
me hither, than have occasioned it. Last time I saw you, has made me think my
Sight distasteful to you; but if you will inform me, that I deserve to be thus
punished, I have Courage enough to put an End to my Life, if it will be any
Satisfaction to you.

No, Sir, replied Isabella, I should grieve to be the Death of any thing of the
Brute Creation, much more any thing that bears a Human Form. And I am so far
from thinking there is any Bravery in putting an End to Life, that, beside the
unrepented Crime, I think it a Poverty of Spirit, and want of Fortitude to bear
the Ills of Life. Both Brutus, and Cato, were, in my Opinion, proud and
pusillanimous, and parted with Life, to rid 'em of their Fears. I could, Madam,
I returned, bear all the Ills of Life, but slighted Love. Young Gentlemen, like
you, replied Isabella, talking of Love, is like Fools talking Divinity; it will
leave but little Impression on the Judicious; and I have formerly told you,
this Topic is not proper for you to talk of, or me to hear. Well, Madam, said
I, if by covering the Flame of Love, I had any Hope Time would kindle that
innocent Fire in you, that Thought would give me Ease; and whatever Climate
this Body should be in, my Soul would be with you. I doubt not, replied
Isabella, but your Body and Soul were together in your short Travels, and this
new Passion, Love, was laid by for Curiosity. I will not deny, I returned, but
Knowledge is what my Mind is bent upon; but even the acquiring that, does but
the more indear the Thoughts of you; and all of your Sex that I see, does but
oblige me to make Comparisons, though there is none when I think of you.

Well, Sir, replied the Fair One, we'll leave this Discourse, that I may not
provoke any more Compliments, and desire to know the Progress of your sudden
Journey. Sudden indeed, I replied, for my Uncle did not take a Night to
consider on it; but if you had felt one Particle of the Sorrow, if we may so
divide it, that I felt, when we were disappointed of seeing you, in our first
setting out, you would have some Motion of Pity. Must every thing, cried
Isabella, smiling, administer to this youthful Folly? In me, I replied, it is a
Whirlpool, that swallows every thing that comes near it. Well, no more
Similies, nor no more Love, returned Isabella, but the Account of your Journey.
Well, Madam, said I, you must be obeyed. I then gave her a Description of every
thing curious we had observed in our short Travels, with which she seemed very
much pleased. I am convinced, said Isabella, that all young Gentlemen that
travel, do not make the same Improvement; or rather, many do not improve at
all, but bring home greater Fools than they carried with 'em; I mean, those
that go into foreign Countries, for I take yours to be no more than a Journey,
as we call it. But I believe, by this time, my Mother and Aunt are dressed,
therefore it will be very proper for me to wait on 'em. Dear, Madam, said I,
relieve my Torments, and say you do not despise me. I shall say no more at this
time, replied Isabella, than that I must wait on my Mother; therefore come
along, and hold your Tongue. Upon this I led her by the Hand, and had not an
Opportunity of speaking to her in Return, because there were several Workmen in
the Garden would have heard our Discourse. As we were hurrying along, the Wind
blew her Petticoat upon my Spur, which, stooping to untangle hastily, I pricked
my Fingers with the Rowel, and they bled very much; searching my Pocket for a
Handkerchief to wrap my Hand in, I remembered that I had left it in my Hat in
the Parlour, when we first came in. Isabella, upon that, took hers out, and
gave it me, and at the same time let fall a folded Paper, she drew out with the
Handkerchief, unseen by her. I took it up without Observation, by letting the
Handkerchief fall upon it, and secretly conveyed it into my Pocket. When I came
in to my Uncle, he was fast asleep; upon which, I stole out again, not seeing
the Ladies in the Parlour. As, soon as I came to a convenient Place in the
Garden, I took out the Paper I had found, and when I had opened it, perceived
it was the Letter, and Song I had formerly sent her; and by being much worn in
the Folds, I imagined with a pleasing Satisfaction she had often perused it for
my Sake. At the Bottom of the Letter, I found these Lines of the Poet: In vain,
all Arts the Lovesick Virgin tries,
Affects to frown, and seems severely wise,
In hopes to cheat the wary Lover's Eyes.
If the dear Youth her Pity seems to move,
And pleads with Tenderness the Cause of Love,
Nature asserts her Empire in her Heart,
And kindly takes the faithful Lover's Part:
By Love, her Self, and Nature, thus betrayed,
No more she trusts in Pride's Fantastic Aid,
But bids her Eyes confess the yielding Maid.


Those Lines I remembered very well in the celebrated Play of Tamerlane: But
the following Verses, as I could not charge my Memory with, I fancied were of
her own Composition, and seemed as an Answer to the others: Too soon, alas!
I Have felt the tingling Dart,
And Love-triumphant rides within my Heart:
But, spite of pleading Love, and Nature's Cause,
That through the World dispenses rigid Laws:
The Flame shall be concealed within my Breast,
Though the sharp Pangs disturb my balmy Rest.
I Will learn my Eyes (those Tell-Tales of the Mind)
To look severe, though my poor Heart is kind:
My Tongue no Whisper of my Griefs shall tell,
Even Love shall teach me to dissemble well.


I had the Vanity to imagine, the last Lines very much concerned me; which
certainly would have made me lose my Senses with Joy, if a Doubt had not arose,
that some other might be meant. The Thought of that kept the Balance even with
Hope, and sometimes seemed to weigh heavier.

I was upon the Rack of Thought, when a Servant came to acquaint me the Ladies
were dressed, and in the Parlour. After the ordinary Salutations, the Mother
and Aunt began to rally my Uncle, for going his Journey without taking Leave of
'em. Why really, replied my Uncle, I think it the best way to avoid
Impertinence, for I hate your formal Parting. However, you are such eternal
Gadders, there is no finding you at home; for we did you the Honor to call upon
you as we set out; and, that we may spare ourselves some Trouble, we shall now
take our Leaves for one Month more; for we shall set out upon another Tour to
morrow. Why this is doing Business indeed, replied the Aunt! You Will fatigue the
young Gentleman too much. Fatigue! returned my Uncle; sure if I am able to bear
it, he very well may. But my chief Reason of this sudden Journeying is, to show
my Nephew some of his own Country, before he begins his Foreign Travels, that
he may satisfy the Curiosity of any Person that wants to be informed, when he is
abroad. Pray, when do you intend he should begin his Foreign Travels, as you
call 'em, said the Mother. Even as soon as he has finished his Home ones,
returned my Uncle. At this, I observed Isabella's Color to change, and rising
hastily, to hide her Concern, threw up the Sash, and looked out of the Window,
unobserved by any one but myself. The Joy I felt was almost without Bounds, and
I stood in need of the utmost Art to conceal it. There were several Discourses,
pro and con, upon young Gentlemen's Traveling; but my Mind was so full of the
happy Ecstasy I had conceived, that I took but little Notice of either. Well,
said my Uncle, what you Women say upon these Subjects, is but whipped Cream, all
Froth, and nothing substantial. But how must we employ ourselves till Dinner,
for I cannot walk? What think you of Ombre, or Quadrille, said the Aunt? With
all my Heart, a Game at Ombre, replied my Uncle. But that will not employ us all,
said the Mother. Isabella complained of a Pain in her Head, and therefore was
unfit to make one; and for my Part, I declared I did not understand the Game.
So the Mother, the Aunt, and my Uncle, sat to it. Isabella went up into her
Chamber, and carried with her the Object of my Adoration. When she was gone, I
went into the Garden to feed upon Contemplation; and, in my own Imagination,
thought myself the happiest Creature in the Universe. But my Satisfaction did
not last long, for, walking upon a Terras that overlooked the Country, I saw a
Coach and Six stop at the Gate. There came out of it an elderly Gentleman,
followed by a young one about Twenty, as I guessed; and before I could make any
Judgment of 'em, two Fellows that were at work under the Terras-Wall, who did
not see me. were observing the Coach. Adso! said one to the other, There Is
young Lady's Suitor, Sir Eustace, and his Father, com'd again. I had not Power
to stir, at this unexpected Knowledge, and remained a considerable time like
one thunderstruck. A thousand Resolutions crowded into my Mind, and all to the
destroying of my Peace. My Rival was hated with an immortal Hatred, before I
knew him, and his or my Death was fixed as irrevocable as Fate. The
Perturbation of my Fancy worked so violently, that my Strength failed me, and I
fell, almost Senseless, upon a Grass-Plat, where my feeble Limbs had
unknowingly carried me. When the Hurry of my confused Thoughts was over, they
gave me absolute Despair. I was assured an Hour before, she loved, and Hope had
flattered me, that I was the happy He; but now I as surely thought, my Rival
was the Object of her Wishes. Why then, thought I, why should I endeavor to
destroy one, whom she would wish should live? that will not be the way to gain
her, but rather make her loath me. Death seemed to me the only Friend; yet,
through a Principle of my Faith, I could not put an End to Life. I only wished
for Death, without the Thought of separating Soul and Body.

Long I lay in my Confusion of Thought; till at last I beheld the divine
Isabella in the Garden, looking about, as for something she had lost, which I
imagined to be the Paper I took up. She was within two Paces of me before she
saw me, she was so intent on what she was about; and when her Eyes encountered
mine, she started back, as though she had beheld something baneful to her. Well,
Madam, said I, must I ever be the Object of Horror to your Eyes? and must you
always start at the Sight of me, as if you saw the Form of one rise from the
Grave? A little Time will take this Bugbear from your Sight, I hope, for ever.
I know, I can never deserve your Love; and yet I cannot bear to see you make
another happy. For Heaven's sake! cried Isabella, surprised, what is it moves
you so? Why do you lie stretched on the Ground, and look as if some Distraction
had seized you? Come, give me your Hand, and let us walk; have a Question to
ask you, which I expect to be truly resolved in. Have you found any Paper of
Writing, since you came into the Garden? There, Madam, said I; and would to
Heaven I had never seen it! (giving her the Paper) there, take it. I must own,
I cannot blame you. Love is not to be forced; it is a freeborn Child of the
Mind. I only think the young Gentleman is completely blessed. I am sure, I
should be distracted with the mighty Joy, in such Return of Love.

Well, Sir, said Isabella, this Freedom I can forgive, because I see something
extraordinary has ruffled your Temper. I doubt not but you have read these
Lines (pointing to the Letter) that were writ on the Blank Leaf; it is the
Thought of a young Gentlewoman, a Neighbor of mine; I liking the Lines,
transcrib d 'em. I was under some Concern, I own, for the Loss of the Paper,
because the Ballad that you sent me was along with it, and I promised her to
copy it, and send it back this Evening.

I soon perceived, by some Confusion in the Utterance of these Words, that what
she said was to disguise the Truth, and that Thought stabbed me to the Heart;
though her Civility to me, seemed tender enough, yet I imagined that was only to
blind me, and prevent any farther Enquiry. While we both were in great
Confusion of Thought, we perceived Sir Eustace coming down out of the Hall,
into the Garden. To let you see, your Suspicions are unjust, said Isabella,
(for I had informed her what I heard one of the Workmen say) I Will instantly
avoid the Person we see coming. With that she went into a private Walk, and
opening a Door that led into another Garden, took me by the Hand, and pulled me
in after her, then shut to the Door again. I must confess, this Proceeding
began to revive Hope, that, 'till then, seemed quite expired. This
Condescension, said I, does, indeed, something ease my Heart, but yet will not
cure my Pain. That young Gentleman, no doubt, comes here to make his Addresses
to you, and coming thus publicly attended by that elderly Gentleman, which I
suppose to be his Father, tells me he has the Approbation of your Mother and
Aunt.

I will not deny, replied Isabella, but that Sir Eustace pretends to be my
Lover, and my Mother and Aunt do not discountenance him. But they have more
Tenderness for me, than to force my Inclination. And you more Duty, I replied,
than to contradict 'em. No Sir, returned Isabella, I am satisfied they never
will impose any one upon me for a Husband; or should they endeavor it, though
Duty is very prevalent with me, yet in that one only Thing, I would dare to
disobey.

Well, Madam, my Destiny, I find, has marked me for unhappy, for Title and
Riches must prevail. I have told you before, replied Isabella, that Fortune I
despise, and Title can no more make a Man Good and Virtuous, in my Opinion,
than a good and virtuous Man can make a Title. A King can give Honor, but not
Honesty; yet, like the Sun, it shines upon Weeds that are often admired for
their eminent Worthlesness. Your Sentiments of Honor, divine Isabella, I
replied, are so just, that inspires me to ask you one Question, and hope an
Answer. What is it, returned Isabella, in some Confusion? Am I to hope, said I,
or despair? I would not have made the important Question so abruptly; but the
Time of my Departure is so short, and my Unhappiness of not seeing you so often
as my impatient Heart desires, will, I am assured from your Goodness, stand
excused, whatever your Heart can say, for, or against me. Why will you Press
me, replied Isabella, now? I have (I returned) told you my Reasons already.
Think, ere you answer me, for my whole Peace of Mind depends upon it; and if I
am banished from your Presence now, with cold Despair, I am assured I cannot
survive it. No Love was ever more pure than mine, or stronger. A distant Hope
of once possessing you, would arm me for all Dangers; and I could wait
patiently an Age of Torments, if in the End I should be blessed with your
consenting Love. Do not surmise my Passion, youthful Folly; it is rooted in my
Soul so deep, that no Storm of Fortune can ever shake its Foundation. If you
cannot love, freely declare it, as you would your Vows to Heaven; I shall only
blame my Stars, not you; and take for ever from your Sight, an Object hateful
to himself as well as you.

Hate, replied Isabella, is not in my Nature; and since you press me to declare
myself, the Person you saw me fly from, never shall have my Heart; and be
assured, if you remain ever constant, I shall, no doubt, in time, be willing to
reward that Constancy. This Declaration, continued Isabella, blushing, is much
more than I so soon intended to let you know; and what Constructions you put
upon it, keep it a Secret from the whole World: Let not your Uncle, whom I know
you can hide nothing from, be acquainted with the least Syllable. This, from a
Person of Isabella's Character, was enough to raise me from the Dead. I said
all an impatient loving Heart could suggest; and was so extravagant in my
transporting Joy, that Isabella checked me, telling me, I should certainly
discover something extraordinary had happened to me, if I had not a Heed to my
Eyes and Tongue. Before we parted, she opened all her Soul to me, telling me,
her Passion did not seem so violent as mine, but more lasting.

In short, never was a Man more happy than I thought myself. However, Prudence
obliged us to part, though I could have lived for ever in her Company. She gave
me the Key, to let me through the same Way we came in, while she went another
Way; first commanding me not to show the least Resentment to the young
Nobleman, if we should meet. I replied, I knew so well the Nature of his
Disease, that, if he truly loved her, he had now a Title to my Pity. We left
each other, with a Promise to meet in the Afternoon again, in the same Place,
if an Opportunity offered.

When I had parted with the divine Isabella, I went up the Walk with the utmost
Contentment in my Heart; though I endeavored to conceal it in my Countenance as
much as possible. Upon the Terras I met Sir Eustace, whom I saluted, and passed
him; he returned it indeed, but with too much Pride, as I thought. However, I
passed on, and took no farther Notice of him. When I came into the Parlour, I
found the old Gentleman, with the two Ladies and my Uncle, playing at
Quadrille, and Isabella reading in the Window. Immediately after, Sir Eustace
came in, and finding Isabella, expressed abundance of of fulsome Joy at the Sight
of her. I must own, I was obliged to make use of all my Philosophy, to keep my
Temper, and should very hardly have done it, if Isabella had not rallied him
with so much Wit, as in the end, gave me a malicious Satisfaction. I observed,
all the Company seemed as well pleased, only the Gentleman that came with him;
but he being something deaf, could not understand every thing that was said.

When Dinner was served in, Sir Eustace placed himself next Isabella, and was
continually helping her to such Quantities, that would have served her a Week.
I observe, Sir, said Isabella, you would have me eat for the whole Family; or,
if you imagined every body in Company had as good a Stomach as you suppose me
to have, by your loading my Plate, they might rise ready for another Dinner.
However, I am obliged to you. You mistake the Gentleman, replied my Uncle, he is
a young Cannibal, he only fats you as we do Chickens, in hope of feeding upon
you. Sir Eustace took what my Uncle said, as a very good Jest, and laughed
heartily; saying, if he should feed upon her, she would go very much against
his Stomach. At the End of his ridiculous Jest, he laughed so immoderately,
with his Mouth full, that he sputter'd it in my Face. I would the Gentleman,
said I, had taken an Opportunity of laughing when his Mouth was empty, I should
have been the more obliged to him. Harkye, young Gentleman, replied Sir
Eustace, you were told before I was a Cannibal, and I can assure you, I often
eat Youngsters that are too forward. Really, Sir, said I, very calmly, I cannot
see that prodigious Stomach in your Countenance, or any thing there, would make
me afraid to meet you any where fasting.

The Company laughed to see his Uneasiness at my Reply, but he gave me no
Answer. Isabella, I observed, seemed much concerned at what I said, and, with a
Look with her Eyes, told me, I should carry the Jest no farther. Well, Sir,
said I, without jesting, I mean no Harm; if you make any farther Constructions
on my Words, but as a Jest, you go beyond my Meaning. This mollifying Speech
seemed to raise his Anger more. A Jest has often cost the Maker his Life,
replied Sir Eustace, and such young Gentlemen as you, should remember the Smart
of the Rod, and curb their Tongues for fear of a Whipping. Sir, said I, I
presume your voracious Cannibal's Stomach is not quite appeased, therefore I Will
take a Walk in the Garden, for fear you should fall foul on me in an improper
Place; saying this, I arose, and taking my Hat and Sword out of the Window,
went into the Garden.

The whole Company arose to stop the Baron, who offered to follow me. My Uncle
began to be very much disturbed, upon my Account; and, as he told me
afterward, did intend to follow me. But, thinking to oblige me, he desired the
Mother to send Isabella after me. When she came up to me, she began to reproach
me with my Conduct, telling me, if I had any Hope or Desire to gain her Heart,
I must conceal my Passion from all the World, and this Proceeding will betray
the Secret; if not on your Side, said she, tenderly, I fear my Concern will.
Those Words have Force enough to restore me to my Senses, were I in the Grave,
said I; and after this Confession, that makes me the happiest of Mortals, even
Blows shall not make me draw my Sword, if you desire it. No, said Isabella, I
know what Men of Honor should bear; and I should despise the Wretch for being
a Coward. Yet, Madam, I replied, Cowardice can no more be helped, than the
Tincture of a Skin; it is rooted in the Nature, and known Cowards, like Fools,
should be pitied. Certainly, no Man would be a Coward if he could help it,
replied Isabella; but when I say I should despise a Coward, I imagine to
myself, the Man that has true Courage, has every other noble Qualification,
that will make him deserving; as on the contrary, a Coward Soul inherits every
weak Failing, and is as incapable of doing a worthy Action, as the Man of
Spirit is of doing a mean one. I shall ever submit my Actions, to you, Madam,
said I. Then, said Isabella, immediately return, and be reconciled to the hot
Spark within, whom the more I know, the more I despise; and I fansy that
Declaration will not displease you; but I Will have no Reply now. Nothing more but
this, said I, you promised me a Meeting in the Afternoon, which I fear will be
a difficult thing to bring to pass. Do you start Difficulties, replied
Isabella? Never fear, I warrant we'll bring it about. The same River that runs
through your Garden, runs through the Bottom of ours, therefore I Will propose
Fishing. We'll go first, and the Man shall take us two over to an Island in the
River, and return. My Mother does not care to go into a Boat, and the rest of
the Company, I suppose, out of Complainsance, will stay with her. But I fear,
Madam, the young Spark will come to interrupt us, said I. Why that is all we
have to fear, replied Isabella; but as soon as he comes, we'll return; and
that, I hope, will give you some Satisfaction. Do but consider my Temper, and
you will find this is enough to make you easy. This I can do, without Suspicion
from any one; for none of my Family suspects either you or me to be in Love.
There have so many Accidents odly concurred today, that I will no longer
conceal it from you. First, your sudden Departure, then this Rival, and the
disagreeable Quarrel. Though your Rival is the main Motive, joined with your
Foreign Tour, which I understand by your Uncle, is for three Years. But I Will
say no more now, in the Afternoon we shall have a better Opportunity. As soon
as I came into the Dining Room, Sir Eustace met me, with a constrained Smile,
and told me, he was sorry any Uneasiness had been created by Words uttered
without Thought, and should, for the future, be willing to have more
Acquaintance with me. I should have considered indeed, there is some Difference
in our Years, said he; therefore I own myself the Criminal, and ask Pardon for
what is past. Years, said my Uncle, do not always imply Age or Understanding;
for some at Fifteen have the Discretion of Thirty; and Fifty-Five, in a good
Constitution, is an abler Man than Five and Thirty; I mean, continued my Uncle,
smiling, some Men are younger at Sixty, than others at Thirty. That is a
Compliment, replied the Aunt, we may very reasonably suppose, designed for
yourself. However, let us have no more of 'em; we'll make an End of our Dinner,
and drink a Cup of Oblivion, and then all will be well again. Meaning Tea, I
suppose, replied my Uncle, where every Cup is broaching new Scandal, and we
shall have so much Noise, and so little understood, that it will put me in mind
of the Confusion of Babel.

I found the Company were not rightly in Humor, yet I perceived, with some
Satisfaction, that I was not the Occasion; even the old Gentleman that came
with Sir Eustace, appeared concerned for his Behavior. After we were risen
from Table, the Company divided into Parties, all but my Uncle, who went to
take his usual Afternoon's Nap. The deaf old Gentleman singled me out, and led
me into the Garden. Said he, I have the Misfortune of having but an ill
Hearing, yet I heard enough to know my Son was much in Fault. Youth, Fortune,
and Title, make him too presuming. I have, with the best Advice I am capable of
giving him, endeavored to soften his too turbulent Temper; but, I fear, it is
rooted too deeply in his Nature, ever to be eras'd. Honor should be tacked to
Nobility; yet, I find Mankind so depraved in their Nature, that the more Power
they have, the greater Propensity they have to do Evil, which shows, to the
Judicious, Riches and Titles ill placed. But as Nobility can be no more
inherited than Virtue, so, in my Opinion, he is noble that has noble
Inclinations. I should not talk to one so little advanced in Years, in this
manner, as I do to you, if I had not been informed by my Lady, of a ripe
Understanding in so early an Age. I expect no Reply in the Complimental Way; I
only beg you would forgive my Son, and, for the future, know me for your
Friend. I should desire your Conversation, but my Infirmity will not admit of
it, therefore I shall take my Leave of you. Upon this he went from me, and left
me full of Regard for his right Way of Thinking.

While I was musing upon what he said to me, Isabella came down the Walks,
followed by a Servant with Fishing-Tackle. Come, Sir, said she, as she past me,
you are to teach me how to catch Fish, for as yet, I am but a mere Bungler.
With all my Heart, Madam, I replied. When the Servant had put us over to the
Island, Isabella said to him, John, I desire you would bring over no Strangers.
No, no, Madam, John replied; if you will be pleased to tell me when I shall wait
on you, to bring you back, I Will lock the Boat on the other side, and be out of
the way till then. Do, said Isabella, and fetch us about an Hour hence. When
John was gone, I fell at the Fair One's Feet, and gave her Thanks for this
surprising Condescension. What Words, divine Isabella, said I, shall I use to
express my Gratitude! but there are none that will speak the least Part of what
my Mind feels; you have raised me from the Bottom of Despair, to the Summit of
Joy; and when my Heart forgets this Goodness, may I be for ever miserable! Your
Protestations I believe, returned the divine Isabella, raising me from the
Earth, and I will freely declare, if you ever should prove false, the Knowledge
will break my Heart. I was going once more to fall at her Feet, but was
interrupted in my exalted Bliss, by a Noise we heard at the Boat.

Sir Eustace missing us in the Garden, and being informed by the Aunt where we
were gone, followed us. But John had made the Boat too fast for him to undo,
without his Assistance. But in the Bustle he made to unloose it, he tumbled
into the Water, and by that time I came to the Waterside, he was sunk to the
Bottom. All other Passions flew immediately from my Breast, but Pity, and when
I saw the Danger he was in, I threw myself into the Water, and, by good
Fortune, caught hold of a Shoulder-Knot he wore, and brought him to the Island,
without any Appearance of Life. When I had dragged him on Shore, with the
Assistance of Isabella, I held him up by the Heels against a Tree, where he
disgorg'd the Water he had swallowed, and fetching two or three Groans, he came
to himself; though so faint, he could not stand; and for want of proper Remedies,
we were in Fear he might not survive the Accident, for we were too far from the
House to make 'em hear us. I therefore pulled off my Coat and Waistcoat, and
swam across the River to the Garden, and informed the Family of the Accident;
but John was no where to be found. The Difficulty we had to get the Boat loose,
took up so much time, that Sir Eustace was almost perished with Cold, ere we
could bring him Assistance; and Isabella's Fear had almost put her in the same
Condition. It was with much Difficulty, by pouring Cordials into his Mouth,
that we brought him once more to his Senses. He was put to bed; but the Fright,
and the Water he drank, threw him into a high Fever. The Hurry of my Spirits,
and being so long in my wet Clothes, gave me a great deal of Disorder; and,
having no other Clothes to shift me (for my Uncle's Servants were gone home
with our Equipage) I was obliged to go to Bed too, but had the Satisfaction of
being laid in Isabella's Bed; and, what heightened that Satisfaction, I was
stripped of my wet Shirt, and, by the Mother's Order, had one of Isabella's
Shifts put on me. The Joy took away all Thoughts of my Disorder; but it could
not hinder a strong Fever seizing me, to the utmost Concern of all the Family.
The Father of the Nobleman expressed more Concern for me, than his Son, giving
me all the Encomiums due to the most consummate Virtue; that maugre the
Distaste I might have justly conceived against his Son, I had hazarded my own
Life to preserve his. I must own, the Action gave me a great deal of
Satisfaction, and the Praises, though no Addition to Pride (for that is a Failing
I hope I shall ever be a Stranger to) yet pleased me, because I had done what
many of my Age would have neglected, or refused.

The following Day, my Fever abated, but Sir Eustace seemed worse and worse. I
was grieved I could not have an Opportunity of seeing the Divine Isabella
alone, during my short Illness. But I had the Happiness of receiving a Letter
from her, which she put into my Hand unobserved by any one. But the Joy I felt
in reading the following Lines, had more Force than any of the Doctor's
Prescriptions toward my Cure.

WHAT shall I say, to describe the Anxiety of my Mind for your Illness? My
Heart, unguarded now from all the Niceties of my Sex, freely declares itself
yours. But yet, let us both be careful. I would not have our Passions whispered
in a Desert; though perhaps, through the Knowledge of your Virtues, it might not
meet with many Obstacles. My Mother and Aunt, I am assured, contemn the
Addresses of your Rival, even as much as I do. However, once more, I beg you to
be cautious; conceal our Loves even from your good Uncle; and be assured, the
two Persons under our Roof, are the entire Joy and Contempt of ever yours,

ISABELLA.
P. S. At our next Meeting, I shall declare more.




I wished my Indisposition had continued longer, that I might have had the
Satisfaction of being under the same Roof with my dear Isabella. But my Health
returned, and I was obliged to go home to my Uncle's, without conversing in
private with her. However the Contentment of my Mind appeared in my Face, and
my Uncle several times took Notice of it, yet I concealed, according to her
Desire, even from him, the Reason of it.

When we had been at home a Week, my Uncle told me we should make another Tour
the next Day; and I gathered by his Discourse, that we should not make any more
Visits to Isabella's Mother, till we came back, which would not be in six
Weeks. The Heartbreaking I felt, almost killed me. I did not doubt, but I
could have gained Leave to make a Visit alone; but I knew I must then have
discovered more than Isabella would like. I cast about, several Hours, how to
send her a Letter without Suspicion; but, to my Mortification, could not pitch
upon an Expedient. But while I was perplexing my Brain to no Purpose, I had the
unexpected Joy of seeing her Coach stop at the Door; and before I could recover
myself from the pleasing Confusion, she entered, with her Mother and Aunt. But
understanding my Uncle was in the Garden, the Mother and Aunt went to him, and
left the divine Isabella alone with me in the Parlour. The sudden Surprise had
tied my Tongue fast, and it was some time ere I could speak a Word. All I could
do, was to fall at her Feet with the utmost Transport of Joy, which was
increased by her raising me, and putting her Lily Hand round my Neck, pressing
my Head close to her Bosom. I spoke at last, but such wild incoherent Speeches,
that gave her more Satisfaction, she told me, than if I had uttered Volumes of
regular Nonsense, vulgarly called, Love. But when I told her of our intended
Journey the next Day, her amiable Countenance was overclouded with Sorrow, and
ere we could recover ourselves, my Uncle, her Mother and Aunt came out of the
Garden; but before they entered the Room where we were, Isabella told me she
had provided a Place where we might send Letters to each other, without any
Suspicion; she would seek for an Opportunity after Dinner to inform me, and if
that should not happen, she would contrive to let me know by a Line before
tomorrow Morning.

After Dinner, Isabella and I were engaged, much against our Inclination, to
make up a Set at Quadrille; and, to add to our Mortification, we were obliged
to part without any further Opportunity of Converse. However, I was forced to
keep up a cheerful Countenance, that my Uncle might not suspect the Chagrin I
felt. The Night proved as disagreeable a one to me, as the Evening; and I could
not get any Rest, till it was almost time to rise. As I was dressing myself, my
Servant told me there was a Boy at the Door, had brought me a Present of a
Brace of Partridges; I ordered him to come in; when I asked him from whence
they came, he told me he had a Note in his Pocket would inform me. As soon as I
received it, I soon knew the dear Character to be Isabella's. When I had
dismissed the Boy, I opened the Note, and found the Contents as follows: SIR,
WHEN I left you Yesterday, I carried Discontent home with me, which never left
me till Sleep (which was slow in coming to my Aid) drove it away. Whenever you
have any Time hangs heavy on your Hands, you may write an Account of your
Home-Travels, and direct 'em to Mrs. Jane Stubbs, at -- The poor Woman has the
Misfortune of wanting the Use of Letters, and always brings 'em to me to read;
therefore whatever comes to her Hands, will be sure to come to mine. I shall
say no more (my Time being short) but this, I care not how much Trouble the
good Woman gives me; so that you may write to her as soon as you please, who
will bring it to one who is entirely

Yours, etc.




The Pleasure this little Note gave me, was partly taken from me, in that I did
not detain the Boy to send an Answer. Yet, upon second Thoughts, I imagined it
would be safer to carry one myself. I was soon determined, wrote one, and went
to the House, and was there before the Boy, who, I suppose, might loiter by the
way. This Woman was a Tenant of the divine Isabella's, and had formerly been
her Nurse; she could not be said to love her Mistress, but rather doated on
her. This Creature was the Picture of Honesty; and she was so well assured of
her young Lady's Conduct, she made no Scruple to tell me, the Letters I would
honor her with, should faithfully be conveyed to the proper Hands. Why then to
begin, said I, there is one, I don't care how soon it was where it should be. I
don't think it proper till after Dinner, replied the good Woman; for though I am
ever welcome at my young Landlady's Mother's, yet, as I have not been come long
from thence, I think it will not be quite so well to go so soon. I agreed with
her in that Particular, and took my Leave: first making her a handsome Present;
for though those sort of People may continue uncorruptively honest, yet it is as
well, when it is made their Interest to be so.

The next Day my Uncle resolved we should make a Visit to my Father and Mother,
and I was of the Opinion it would be highly proper, as well as a Desire I had
to see how the Family went on. When we arrived there, we found every thing
according to our Wishes. There was such a Harmony between my Father and my
Mother, that my Father told my Uncle, smiling, his Wife's late Illness had
mended her Temper prodigiously, and he would not have her be indisposed in the
same manner again, for ever so much; for if, said he, she should, and be better
in proportion, she would be too good for him, and only fit for Heaven. We found
every thing so much to our Liking, that we took our Leave of 'em with a great
deal of Satisfaction; and my Uncle told me, as we were going home, that
Miracles were not ceased, for there was an ill Woman mended.

The next Day we set out on our intended Progress, and met with nothing
extraordinary in our Course; only one Thing I thought was odd enough. In a
small Village, near the Seacoast in Sussex, as we were at Church on a Sunday,
with a full Congregation, a Man came to the Church-Door, and cried out, A
Wreck! A Wreck! The Congregation immediately unbuckled their Devotions, and
were crouding out as fast as they could, though the Parson had not gone through
half his Sermon. When the good Man found they were going to leave him to finish
his Sermon by himself, he called to 'em with an audible Voice, desiring his
Audience to hear one Word before they went: Upon his earnest Entreaty, most of
'em turned about to hear the one Word. When the Parson found they seemed
willing to hear him, he cried out, Pray, good Folks, let us start fair! and
upon that, pressed to the Door with all the Expedition he could, and, in a few
Minutes, my Uncle and I might have robbed the Church, for there was not a Soul
to hinder us. The Oddity of the Thing very much surpised us, though it often
made us merry afterward. Well, Will, said my Uncle (when the Church was empty)
we may as well say our Prayers at home, as stay here by ourselves. What, Sir,
said I, have you no Curiosity to see the Proceeding of this wild Congregation?
Why, I cannot say but I have, replied my Uncle; let us get our Horses and
follow 'em. When we came to the Gentleman's where we lay, a Friend of my
Uncle's, we found the House as empty as the Church; for they were all gone upon
the same Design, and my Tutor, with our Servants along with 'em, as we
supposed. So we were forced to be our own Grooms, and followed 'em. We could
not well miss our Way, for we saw People from all Quarters running before us.
When we came within Sight of the Sea, we could perceive several Vessels
laboring to keep from the Shore, with all their Art and Industry; for the Wind
was very high, and blew right ashore, as the Sailors term it. But what Horror
had I in my Mind, to see in what Anxiety the Wretches on Shore were, for fear
they should escape, and save themselves. At last, one of 'em bulg'd upon the
Rocks, and split in Pieces, at which Sight the Barbarians (for I can term 'em
no less) gave a Shout, and threw one another down for Eagerness, who should be
foremost, not the least regarding the poor unfortunate Wretches plunged in the
Waves. But my Uncle and I, with my Tutor, and our Servants (that were there
before us) gave 'em all the Assistance we could, and with much Trouble, and
some Hazard, saved Five out of Eight that were in the Vessel; though with many a
hearty Curse for our Pains; for it seems they could not make the Vessel a
Wreck, if there were any of the Crew alive. However, the inhuman Brutes fell to
securing every thing as fast as ever they could, while we carried the poor
Shipwrecked Wretches to the next Village, to give 'em some Refreshment. The
Vessel was a Frenchman, laden with Wine, which they brought to exchange for
Corn, the common Custom of all the Seacoast contiguous to France; which may
prove a pernicious Custom, if the Produce of Grain should ever fail us in
England.

We took our Leaves that Evening of my Uncle's Friend, who, in my Opinion,
seemed very glad to be rid of us, for he was as busy about the Wreck, as any of
the rest. A few Miles farther, a Dutch Vessel was cast away, and all the
unhappy Sailors drowned. Our Road lying through the same Place three Days
afterward, several People had sold Part of a new Fount of Letter, of the Greek
Alphabet, at a Penny per Pound, as waste Metal, when perhaps the Purchaser had
paid fifty times more for it. What Brutes are these Wretches! Had they been
their own Countrymen, it had been the same. What Horror must it be to the poor
Sailors, when having weathered many a Storm, and perhaps escaped from their
Enemies, to come in Sight of their native Country, and perish for want of
timely Assistance from their Countrymen, who wish for nothing more than their
Deaths. What can the worst of the Savage Kind do more? Nay, I have been
informed, that to make a Vessel a Wreck, they have often murdered the poor
Sailors that have been struggling for Life, lifting their Hands in vain for
Succor, to those that have proved their Murderers. We ought not to condemn the
Heathenish Indians, that serve the Europeans in the same manner, who do it from
the Love of Liberty, who imagine (and not unjustly) that the Europeans come to
enslave 'em. These Reflections cast a Melancholy upon our whole Company for some
time after, and the Diversity of new Objects could hardly wipe away the
Thoughts of the other. When my Uncle asked a Farmer in that Neighborhood, how
he could be so inhuman to feed on the Loss of his Fellow Creatures? he
answered, if it were not now and then for such a lucky Hit, he should never be
able to pay his Landlord his Rent; besides, Custom had made it natural to him,
and he could not call that a Crime, so generally followed by all his
Neighbors. All we could say, could not make him think of leaving off so
profitable a Perquisite, as he was pleased to term it. Which put me in mind of
those excellent Verses of Waller's.

Bold were the Men who on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails, when Shipwreck was the worst;
More Dangers now from Man alone we find,
Than from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind.
Some few Days after, my good Tutor was attacked with a violent Fever, which we
imagined he had got by endeavoring to save the poor shipwrecked People, though
we were all as much wet with the Billows of the Sea, as he was. This Accident
stopped us at St. Edmund's-Bury in Suffolk, several Days, and though my Uncle
spared no Cost for his Recovery, yet the good Man expired, to the great Grief
of us all. We buried him decently, though privately, not without wetting his
Grave with my Tears, for he was a Person that deserved, and had a great Share
in my Friendship.

After his Funeral, we set ourselves forward for Home; and for my own Part,
with a heavy Heart; and my Uncle seemed very much grieved, because he ever
expressed a great deal of Satisfaction in trusting to him the Conduct of my
Youth in my Tour of Europe. Yet the Imagination of my Travels being retarded
for some time, gave me some Pleasure, because I should have the Happiness of
seeing my dear Isabella longer. When we came home, Betty informed me my
Mother-in-law had made her a Visit, and expressed such a Horror at my former
Treatment, that they did nothing but weep all Day. She made her several
Presents, and seemed very much pleased at her Settlement in my Uncle's Family.
But the Idea of my charming Isabella took up all my Thoughts, and fatigued as I
was, I sent her the following Letter, as soon as I dismounted.

MY FAIREST,
THE Thoughts of You, took from me all the Satisfaction I should have received
from the Variety of Objects that opposed my View. Every thing I saw, put me in
mind of you. The Roses and Lilies, were Remembrancers of your amiable Face; the
Down of Swans, of the Whiteness and Softness of your Skin; when I heard the
Warbling of the Nightingale, it put me in mind of your Voice; the Dove, of your
soft Disposition; and the soaring Lark, of that complete Beauty that surmounts
all other Women's, as that surmounts the Soaring of all other Birds. When I
think of your Perfections, my Mind is filled with a thousand Inquietudes, for
such wondrous Charms are far above the Possession of any Mortal. What would I
give to read the Book of Fate, to see if my happy Stars had allotted me the
Possession of so much Beauty! But if the eternal Volume were disclosed to me,
and I had the Liberty of reading my Destiny, and should find we were not paired
above, my Woes would be of short Duration, for Death would soon put an End to
my hated Life. What shall I say to express my Passion? The Sun, the Moon, the
Day, and Night, all put me in mind of you; and the Griefs I feel at our near
Separation, almost rend my Heart asunder. The three Years I am to be absent
from my Love, to me, will far exceed the Age of Nestor. The very Imagination
disturbs me Day and Night, for every Hour is spent in thinking of the divine
Isabella.

When gloomy Night o'erspreads the Earth,
And all retire to downy Rest,
My Sorrows feel a second Birth,
And dismal Thoughts disturb my Breast.
Yet every Thought is still on thee,
Thou Image of the Queen of Love!
Even halting Age would fly to see
Those Charms that would a Hermit move.
When I behold the Silver Light,
With dusky Spots upon her Face,
I know my Fair One shines more bright,
And think the Moon usurps thy Place.
What Dangers would I face for thee!
(Whose pointed Eyes have pierced my Heart)
Thy Captive never would be free,
But hug with Joy the pleasing Dart.
Forgive me, dear Isabella, in pretending to Poetry; but be assured, the
Inspiration comes from you; and though the Numbers fall short of your
all-conquering Charms, receive 'em as a Tribute from my Love. How many Ages
more will it be ere I behold thy Face? I am but a worthless Flower, that must
perish, if deprived of thy all-chearing Beams. I hope my hated Rival has not
renewed his Addresses. It is the Fears of Love that make me dread even my
Isabella should be looked upon by other Eyes than mine, who wishes the End of
Life, if I should view that Day, when I shall cease to subscribe myself
eternally

Yours, etc.


The next Morning I received an Answer to mine; which gave me more Joy, than a
Mariner receives after escaping a dangerous Tempest, and no Hope left for
Safety.

IT is in vain to hide my Heart from one that has it in his Possession. Use it
with the Tenderness it deserves, for taking Shelter in your Breast. Be assured
of my Constancy, for nothing shall ever make me change my Love. I am almost
ashamed to commit my Weakness to Writing, but almighty Love will have it so. I
thank you for your Poetry; and, be it good, or bad, I have sent you some Trash
of my own; but find no Fault with it, for you are the Apollo that has inspired
me. However, destroy it, when you have read 'it, as I would have you destroy
all Thoughts of Jealousy of him you call your Rival.

If I within the Heavens should be,
Instead of Cynthia's lucid Rays,
I Would borrow all my Light from thee,
And rule the Nights, as thou the Days.
Should there a Flower be placed for me,
To nourish, as it blooming grew,
Sweet William should that Flower be,
For I would shine on none but you.
I almost repent of being so open, as Murderers do when the Deed is done, and
Punishment appears in view. But it is done, and past Recall, as is the Heart of
your ever constant

ISABELLA.
P. S. I had closed this Letter, but unsealed it again, to let you know that
your Uncle has just sent a Footman to my Mother, to tell her he intends to dine
with us tomorrow; but if he comes alone, I cannot, for my Soul, say, he will be
heartily welcome.




As we were going the next Day to dine at Isabella's Mother's, my Uncle
received a Letter from a distant Relation, which he gave me to read: SIR,
UNderstanding Mr. Meredith, my young Cousin's Tutor, is dead, I take the
Liberty to recommend a young Gentleman to you, who, I dare prowise, will answer
every thing you desire from such a Person. He shall wait on you tomorrow. I
choose to give you this early Notice; for fear you should provide yourself. He
understands the dead Languages, as well as the modish Living. Mistake me not, I
mean all the European Tongues, but Low Dutch, and Muscovite, which, I presume,
you will have but little Occasion for.

Your affectionate Kinsman, N. L.




After I had read the Letter, my Uncle told me, it was from a Person he could
very well confide in, and his Recommendation was sufficient to him; however,
Billy, said my Uncle, you shall see the Gentleman, for this is your Affair: If
you cannot like him, I will not force him upon you, no more than I would do a Wife.
Well, Sir, said I, tomorrow will decide that; though I am apt to believe I shall
like him as well as you do. I am glad to find he is not a Man in Years; for
they are generally so ill-natured, the Precepts they teach us favor too much
of Severity. And very often, replied my Uncle, Youth borders too much upon
Levity. However, I have told you, more than once, that I shall leave you to
your own Discretion.

When we came to the House, we found the Company together in the Parlour, and
the Cloth laid ready for Dinner. I am glad you're come, said Isabella's Mother,
for we are obliged to dine very early, because, after Dinner, we are to make a
formal Visit to a Neighbor Lady, but we shall leave Isabella to entertain you.
You may imagine, I felt no little Joy, when I understood Isabella was to be
left behind; and the Freedom of my Humor had almost betrayed my Contentment,
for I was rallied both by the Mother and Aunt. Nay, my Uncle could not help
having a Fling at me. Why, good Ladies, said my Uncle, don't be too hard upon
my Nephew; do you imagine a young Lad past Fifteen, cares a Fig for Women's
Company looking hard toward Forty. No, no, it is very seldom Youth and Age can
agree, except Youth is very sober indeed; or Age is not tinctured with its old
Distemper, Peevishness, with a Hatred of all Mirth. Ay, but (I replied) we find
nothing of that in this good Company; there is none here forgets they were once
young. Very true, returned the Mother, your Uncle, I believe, imagines he is as
young now, as he was thirty Years ago. Pray speak for yourself, Madam, returned
my Uncle, you are as unwilling as I am, to be reckoned in the Catalogue of Old.
Why sure, replied the Aunt, my Sister has not quite so many Years over her
Head, as your Worship! No, nor so much Experience neither, returned my Uncle.
Dinner coming in, ended this Dispute. And after it was over, the Mother and
Aunt went to their several Chambers to dress; and my Uncle went to sleep in the
Summer House; so I was left alone with the divine Isabella. We said all our
young Hearts conceived, and I thought myself the happiest of Mortals. But when
I touched upon my Absence for so long a time, she begged we might do something
to divert that terrible Thought; for if she gave herself leave to look into her
Breast, she was assured, such a Torrent of Tears would follow, that her Sorrow
would be taken Notice of by the Company, and perhaps the Cause of Grief
surmis'd, if not in reality found out. Therefore, said she, to divert the
Thought, let us play a Party at Picquet. My Uncle, Madam, I replied, will not
forgo his Afternoon's Nap, for any thing, therefore we must play by ourselves.
Before we had played out one Game, the Ladies came down, and the Coach being
ready, drove away to their Visit.

When they were gone, I could not refrain opening my whole Soul to Isabella,
who felt the Pangs of Parting as sharp as myself, and her lovely Face was all
bedewed with Tears. We were so long in this tender Scene of Parting, that my
Uncle had finished his Sleep, and was coming toward us. Isabella at the Sight
of him, was obliged to retire to hide her Tears; and I was forced to have
Recourse to Otway's Orphan, to have a Pretense for the Gloom that was settled
upon my Countenance. Why how now, young Man, said my Uncle, when he entered,
what all alone, and melancholy? Yes, Sir, said I, I never can read the last Act
of this Play, without being sensibly touched with the Catastrophe. Pr'ythee
read Comedies then, said my Uncle, for I will not have you sad. Sir, said I, I
cannot find many Comedies fit to read; for those that are good, I have read so
often, I Am as well acquainted with them as the Authors, or Actors in them.
What Is become of the young Lady, said my Uncle, have you not Rhetoric enough
to keep her here? So it seems, Sir, said I, for she is retired. Well then, said
my Uncle, since we are alone, and the Time short we shall be together, let me
give you a little Advice before we part; for it is not an Improbability, when
we part, we may part for ever. I find, Sir, said I, you intend to increase my
Melancholy, for if I thought that, by my Consent, we would never part. Never
the nearer Death for talking of it, neither, returned my Uncle. But what I am
going to say to you, I would have you often think on, to strengthen your Mind
in Virtue.

When you have changed your Climate, don't change your Nature, but always think
England your native Country; and not like some young Gentlemen that I know, who
return with a Contempt for their own Country, with their Understandings like a
Fool's Coat, patched all over, and nothing of the Ground seen. Never stay long
at a Place; for even Rome, with the Help of Books which describe their
Antiquities, may be seen in three Months, as well as so many Years. Converse
with elder People than your self, for their Knowledge will increase yours; and
do not, as I know some of our Countrymen do, because they are brought up in the
Protestant Religion, avoid all Conversation with the Clergy abroad; for when I
traveled, I found among all their Holy Bodies, Men of the profoundest Learning
and Judgment, who never attempted to make me a Proselyte, or gave me any
Uneasiness about my Religion. I would have you go into all Companies, but take
care of being too particular. Make no Intimates, but as many Friends as you
can. The French have too much Levity, the Spaniards too much Moroseness, the
Italians too much Jealousy, and addicted to overmuch Pleasure without Mirth;
the Germans, though learned, love the Juice of the Grape too well; and the Dutch
are all Men of Business; though there is no general Rule without an Exception.
Always live soberly; for as you will be frequently changing Place, a spare Diet
will best agree with your Constitution, and will learn you never to be
disappointed, If Heaven should afflict you with Sickness, take my Method. Send
for the most eminent of the Profession, tell him your Stay in that Place is but
short, and agree with him for such a Sum when you are thoroughly cured. This
Management, will make it his Interest to set you upon your Legs as fast as he
can. You must hire a Native Servant at every Place you intend to make any Stay
at. Give him good Wages, but trust him not; let him know as little of your
Affairs as possible; and keep him ignorant of your next Station, and the Time
you intend to set forth; for some of 'em, I have proved, are Confederates with
Robbers, and are as inquisitive after Foreigners, as some Foreigners are after
new Fashions. The Variety of Dress (I mean Fashions) is what I abhor; yet you
must put yourself in the Garb of every Place you make any Stay at. It will not
only prevent your being gazed at, but will ingratiate you with the Natives,
when you take their Habit upon you. Hear much, and speak little. Be not too
intimate with the Feminine Gender; for an Intimacy there, too often creates
Discontent and Trouble. Be very cautious in making Acquaintance with your own
Countrymen, for most of 'em Nowadays enter into Society, to enter into all
the fashionable Vices of the Places they go through. Be like the industrious Be,
suck Honey from every Flower, and contemn the gaudy Weeds that bloom and
flourish to no Use. Avoid all Quarrels; but if you should unhappily fall into
one, behave your self with Courage and Resolution; and if you should succeed,
don't let your Sword hang the looser in its Scabbard. A Man of true Spirit will
be as cautious how he draws his Sword, as he would be of treading in the Dark
over Heaps of Ruins. Be cau^ious of every one you deal with, for in many Places
they make it a common Practice to overreach Foreigners; and the fairer their
Looks, often the fouler their Hearts. Whenever you come to have your Equipage
examined by Officers of the Customs, make a handsome Present beforehand, which
will either prevent their giving you any Trouble, or at least will prevent
their tumbling your Things, which often proves of more Damage, than the Present
you make 'em comes to. When you go by Sea, as you must, to arrive at several
Places of Italy, bargain with the Master of the Vessel before you imbark; but
pay him not before you arrive at the End of your Voyage; nor then, till all
your Things are brought to your Lodgings, to answer your Bill of Parcels; and
be sure you have two drawn at the same time, one for the Master, and the other
for yourself. When you are to imbark, if you can, get a Recommendation from the
last Place you leave; or, if you cannot, enquire out some Englishman (for there
is no fear of finding 'em at all the noted Places) and beg he would recommend
you to some Native of the Place, where you may reside; for I have often made it
my Observation, to have more Respect shown me, when I took up my Quarters at
one of the Natives, than when I did at one of my own Countrymen's. Though it is
possible I may get you several recommendatory Letters. One I am sure of, from
the worthy Person that we received a Letter from this Morning concerning your
new Tutor; he was Envoy at Florence two Years, and has a good Acquaintance in
several Courts of Europe. Now, said my Uncle, giving me a Paper, here is
written the Heads of what I have been speaking, which I would have you read
over once a Week. And I desire I may hear from you all Opportunities, with a
succinct Account of every thing worth Notice you see abroad. It will serve to
kill some Part of your Time that may hang heavy on your Hands. Besides, it will
be acceptable to me.

We had several other Discourses on the same Subject; but we were interrupted
by the Arrival of the Mother and Aunt. They got into a Chat, no way agreeable
to me, of their Visit, which gave me an Opportunity of looking after my dear
Isabella, who I had observed some time before, to go into the Garden. I found
her in a by Summer House, bathing her lovely Cheeks in Tears. When she saw me,
she strove to dry her Eyes, but freely confessed, the Thoughts of Parting had
raised that Sorrow in her. She told me, various Objects and Climates might
alter my young Heart, and wipe her out from thence. It was with much Persuasion
I could settle her Mind to talk of any thing else; and though it gave me
unconceivable Transports to see the Strength of her Love, yet it was necessary
we should have some time to settle our future Correspondence by Letter. When
that was finished, I took my solemn leave of her, not without shedding Tears at
our tender Separation. But poor Isabella's Grief quite overcame her, she
fainted in my Arms. The tender Proof of her Heart, however, gave me some
Uneasiness, left we should be discovered, for it was some time before she came
to herself. When we had composed ourselves as well as we could, we were
troubled to find a Means or Pretense for Isabella's Tears, for there was no
concealing her Grief from the Company within. At last she told me, she would
make 'em believe a Be had stung her Hand.

We went, with some Confusion, into the Parlour where they were sitting.
Isabella was soon discovered to have been weeping. When she was asked the
Cause, she told 'em, as she went to pluck a Rose, a Be, concealed, had stung
her. I thought you had more Philosophy, replied my Uncle, young Lady, than to
shed Tears for Pain. Truly, Sir, said she, I shall never be so much a Stoic,
to think Pain is all Fancy, for I am sure I feel it still. Well, replied my
Uncle, you find, young Lady, the sweetest thing sometimes conceals a Sting.
However, your Pain will not hold, you long, there is a Balm to cure it; Honey,
and a little Time, will soon ease you, I warrant you. A while after, my Uncle
ordered me to take my last Leave of the good Company, which I did, with ten
thousand Pangs. But as I pressed my Lips to those of my dear Isabella's, I found
'em tremble so much, that I feared a Discovery; yet she bore it outwardly very
well; but did not come out to see us to the Coach, though no one took Notice of
it but myself. 'Twas well the Dusk of Evening was approaching, for the Concern
in my Countenance was not to be concealed; however, I composed myself as well
as I could before we came home.

The next Morning, the Gentleman that was to be my Tutor, arrived; and I must
confess, I took an Affection to him at first Sight. His Countenance pleased me,
as well as his Behavior; and my Uncle seemed as well pleased as myself. He was
not above Five and Twenty, and though young enough for a Tutor, yet we found him
old in Experience and Understanding, and answered fully the Character the
Letter gave my Uncle of him. My Uncle was so well assured of his Abilities,
that he resolved we should begin our Journey in two Days. In the mean time I
wrote several Letters to my dear Isabella, and received Answers so tender and
passionate, that my Heart felt all the Joy it could desire; but that Joy was
lost in the dismal Thoughts of being separated from all my Soul held dear, so
long.

At length the Day came we were to set out. My dear Uncle would accompany me to
Dover, where we arrived. But the Weather proving a little boisterous, he would
not let me imbark before it was settled, though the Vessels set Sail, as not
regarding it; however, as it was his Tenderness and Goodnature, I complied
with his Desire, though there was no apparent Danger.

The Sight of the Cliffs of Dover, put me in mind of those Lines in King Lear,
of our inimitable Shakespeare: -- How fearful
And dizzy it is, to cast one's Eyes below!
The Crows, and Choughs, that wing the midway Air,
Show scarce so big as Beetles. Half way down
Hangs one that gathers Samphire, dreadful Trade!
The Fishermen that walk upon the Beech,
Appear like Mice. And you tall anchoring Bark
Seems lessened to her Boat; her Boat, a Buoy
Almost too small for Sight. The murmuring Surge,
That on the unnumber'd idle Pebbles b^ats,
Cannot be heard so high. I Will look no more,
Lest my Brain turn, and the Disorder makes me
Fall headlong down.


The next Day, the Weather proved so calm, that the Sea looked like polished
Glass; or, as the Sailors say, so smooth, you might throw Dice upon it;
therefore my Uncle, after mingling our Tears, gave me leave to embark, with my
Tutor and one Servant; and we left the British Shore behind.

End of the First Volume.

