A True Relation OF THE APPARITION OF ONE Mrs. VEAL, The next Day after Her
DEATH: TO ONE Mrs. BARGRAVE At Canterbury. The 8th of September, 1705.

LONDON: Printed for B. Bragg, at the Black Raven in Paternoster Row, 1706.

THE PREFACE.
THIS relation is Matter of Fact, and attended with such Circumstances as may
induce any Reasonable Man to believe it. It was sent by a Gentleman, a Justice
of Peace at Maidstone in Kent, and a very Intelligent Person, to his Friend in
London, as it is here Worded; which Discourse is attested by a very sober and
understanding Gentlewoman, a Kinswoman of the said Gentleman's, who lives in
Canterbury, within a few Doors of the House in whi^^ the within named Mrs.
Bargrave lives; who believes his Kinswoman to be of so discerning a Spirit, as
not to be put upon by any Fallacy, and who possitively assured him, that the
whole Matter, as it is here Related and laid down, is what is really True; and
what She her self had in the same Words (as near as may be) from Mrs. Bargraves
own Mouth, who she knows had no Reason to Invent and publish such a Story, nor
any design to forge and tell a Lie, being a Woman of much Honesty and Virtue,
and her whole Life a Course as it were of Piety. The use which we ought to make
of it is, to consider, That there is a Life to come after this, and a Just God,
who will retribute to every one according to the Deeds done in the Body; and
therefore, to reflect upon our Past course of Life we have led in the World;
That our Time is Short and Uncertain, and that if we would escape the
Punishment of the Ungodly, and receive the Reward of the Righteous, which is
the laying hold of Eternal Life, we ought for the time to come, to turn to God
by a speedy Repentance, ceasing to do Evil and Learning to do Well: To seek
after God Early, if happily he may be found of us, and lead such Lives for the
future, as may be well pleasing in his sight.

A RELATION OF THE APPARITION Of Mrs. VEAL.
THIS thing is so rare in all its Circumstances, and on so good Authority, that
my Reading and Conversation has not given me any thing like it; it is fit to
gratify the most Ingenious and Serious Enquirer. Mrs. Bargrave is the Person
to whom Mrs. Veal Appeared after her Death; she is my Intimate Friend, and I
can avouch for her Reputation, for these last fifteen or sixteen Years, on my
own Knowledge; and I can confirm the Good Character she had from her Youth, to
the time of my Acquaintance. Though since this Relation, she is Calumniated by
some People, that are Friends to the Brother of Mrs. Veal who Appeared; who
think the Relation of this Appearance to be a Reflection, and endeavor what
they can to Blast Mrs. Bargrave's Reputation; and to Laugh the Story out of
Countenance* But the Circumstances thereof, and the Cheerful Disposition of
Mrs. Bargrave, notwithstanding the unheard of ill Usage of a very Wicked
Husband, there is not the least sign of Dejection in her Face; nor did I ever
hear her let fall a Desponding or Murmuring Expression; nay, not when actually
under her Husbands Barbarity; which I have been Witness to, and several other
Persons of undoubted Reputation.

Now you must know, that Mrs. Veal was a Maiden Gentlewoman of about 30 Years
of Age, and for some Years last past, had been troubled with Fits; which were
perceived coming on her, by her going off from her Discourse very abruptly, to
some impertinence: She was maintained by an only Brother, and kept his House in
Dover. She was a very Pious Woman, and her Brother a very Sober Man to all
appearance: But now he does all he can to Null or Quash the Story. Mrs. Veal
was intimately acquainted with Mrs. Bargrave from her Childhood. Mrs Veals
Circumstances were then Mean; her Father did not take care of his Children as
he ought, so that they were exposed to Hardships: And Mrs. Bargrave in those
days, had as Unkind a Father, though She wanted for neither Food nor Clothing,
whilst Mrs. Veal wanted for both: So that it was in the Power of Mrs. Bargrave
to be very much her Friend in several Instances, which mightily endeared Mrs
Veal; insomuch that she would often say, Mrs. Bargrave you are not only the
Best, but the only Friend I have in the World; and no Circumstances of Life,
shall ever dissolve my Friendship. They would often Condole each others adverse
Fortune, and read together, Drelincourt upon Death, and other good Books: And
so like two Christian Friends, they comforted each other under their Sorrow.

Sometime after, Mr. Veals Friends got him a Place in the Custom-House at
Dover, which occasioned Mrs Veal by little and little, to fall off from her
Intimacy with Mrs. Bargrave, though there was never any such thing as a Quarrel;
but an Indifferency came on by degrees, till at last Mrs. Bargrave had not seen
her in two Years and a half; though above a Twelve Month of the time, Mrs.
Bargrave had been absent from Dover, and this last half Year, has been in
Canterbury about two Months of the time, dwelling in a House of her own.

In this House, on the Eighth of September last, viz 1705. She was sitting
alone in the Forenoon, thinking over her Unfortunate Life, and arguing her self
into a due Resignation to Providence, though her condition seemed hard. And said
she, I have been provided for hitherto, and doubt not but I shall be still, and
am well satisfied, that my Afflictions shall end, when it is most fit for me:
And then took up her Sewing-Work, which she had no sooner done, but she hears a
Knocking at the Door; she went to see who it was there, and this proved to be
Mrs. Veal, her Old Friend, who was in a Riding Habit: At that Moment of Time,
the Clock struck Twelve at Noon.

Madam says Mrs. Bargrave, I am surprised to see you, you have been so long a
stranger, but told her, she was glad to see her and offered to Salute her,
which Mrs. Veal complied with, till their Lips almost touched, and then Mrs
Veal drew her hand cross her own Eyes, and said, I am not very well, and so
waved it. She told Mrs. Bargrave, she was going a Journey, and had a great mind
to see her first: But says Mrs. Bargrave, how came you to take a Journey alone?
I am amazed at it, because I know you have so fond a Brother. O! says Mrs.
Veal, I gave my Brother the Slip, and came away, because I had so great a Mind
to see you before I took my Journey. So Mrs. Bargrave went in with her, into
another Room within the first, and Mrs. Veal sat her self down in an
Elbow-chair, in which Mrs. Bargrave was sitting when she heard Mrs. Veal Knock.
Then says Mrs. Veal, My Dear Friend, I am come to renew our Old Friendship
again, and to beg your Pardon for my breach of it, and if you can forgive me
you are one of the best of Women. O! says Mrs. Bargrave, don't mention such a
thing, I have not had an uneasy thought about it, I can easily forgive it.
What did you think of me says Mrs. Veal? Says Mrs. Bargrave, I thought you were
like the rest of the World, and that Prosperity had made you forget your self
and me. Then Mrs. Veal reminded Mrs. Bargrave of the many Friendly Offices she
did her in former Days, and much of the Conversation they had with each other
in the time of their Adversity; what Books they Read, and what Comfort in
particular they received from Drelincourt's, Book of Death, which was the best
she said on that Subject, was ever Wrote. She also mentioned Dr. Sherlock, and
two Dutch Books which were Translated, Wrote upon Death, and several others:
But Drelincourt she said, had the clearest Notions of Death, and of the Future
State, of any who have handled that Subject. Then she asked Mrs. Bargrave,
whether she had Drelincourt; she said yes. Says Mrs. Veal fetch it, and so Mrs.
Bargrave goes up Stairs, and brings it down. Says Mrs. Veal, Dear Mrs.
Bargrave, If the Eyes of our Faith were as open as the Eyes of our Body, we
should see numbers of Angels about us for our Guard: The Notions we have of
Heaven now, are nothing like what it is, as Drelincourt says. Therefore be
comforted under your Afflictions, and believe that the Almighty has a
particular regard to you; and that your Afflictions are Marks of Gods Favor:
And when they have done the business they were sent for, they shall be removed
from you. And believe me my Dear Friend, believe what I say to you, One Minute
of future Happiness will infinitely reward you for all your Sufferings. For I
can never believe, (and claps her Hand upon her Knee, with a great deal of
Earnestness, which indeed ran through all her Discourse) that ever God will
suffer you to spend all your Days in this Afflicted State: But be assured, that
your Afflictions shall leave you, or you them in a short time. She spoke in
that Pathetical and Heavenly manner, that Mrs. Bargrave wept several times; she
was so deeply affected with it. Then Mrs. Veal mentioned Dr. Hornecks Ascetick,
at the end of which, he gives an account of the Lives of the Primitive
Christians. Their Pattern she recommended to our Imitation; and said, their
Conversation was not like this of our Age. For now (says she) there is nothing
but frothy vain Discourse, which is far different from theirs. Theirs was to
Edification, and to Build one another up in the Faith: So that they were not as
we are, nor are we as they are; but said she, We might do as they did. There
was a Hearty Friendship among them, but where is it now to be found? Says Mrs.
Bargrave, it is hard indeed to find a true Friend in these days. Says Mrs. Veal,
Mr. Norris has a Fine Copy of Verses, called Friendship in Perfection, which I
wonderfully admire, have you seen the Book says Mrs. Veal? No, says Mrs.
Bargrave, but I have the Verses of my own writing out. Have you, says Mrs.
Veal, then fetch them; which she did from above Stairs, and offered them to
Mrs. Veal to read, who refused, and waved the thing, saying, holding down her
Head would make it ache, and then desired Mrs. Bargrave to read them to her,
which she did. As they were admiring Friendship, Mrs. Veal said, Dear Mrs.
Bargrave, I shall love you for ever: In the Verses, there is twice used the
Word Elysium. Ah! says Mrs. Veal, These Poets have such Names for Heaven. She
would often draw her Hand cross her own Eyes; and say, Mrs. Bargrave Don't you
think I am mightily impaired by my Fits? No, says Mrs. Bargrave, I think you
look as well as ever I knew you.

After all this discourse, which the Apparition put in Words much finer than
Mrs. Bargrave said she could pretend to, and was much more than she can
remember (for it cannot be thought, that an hour and three quarters
Conversation could all be retained, though the main of it, she thinks she does.)
She said to Mrs. Bargrave, she would have her write a Letter to her Brother,
and tell him, she would have him give Rings to such and such; and that there
was a Purse of Gold in her Cabinet, and that she would have Two Broad Pieces
given to her Cousin Watson. Talking at this Rate, Mrs. Bargrave thought that a
Fit was coming upon her, and so placed her self in a Chair, just before her
Knees, to keep her from falling to the Ground, if her Fits should occasion it;
for the Elbow Chair she thought would keep her from falling on either side. And
to divert Mrs. Veal as she thought, she took hold of her Gown Sleeve several
times, and commended it. Mrs. Veal told her, it was a Scower'd Silk, and newly
made up. But for all this Mrs. Veal persisted in her Request, and told Mrs.
Bargrave she must not deny her: and she would have her tell her Brother all
their Conversation, when she had an opportunity. Dear Mrs. Veal, says Mrs.
Bargrave, this seems so impertinent, that I cannot tell how to comply with it;
and what a mortifying Story will our Conversation be to a Young Gentleman?
Well, says Mrs. Veal, I must not be denied. Why, says Mrs. Bargrave, it is much
better methinks to do it your self, No, says Mrs. Veal; though it seems
impertinent to you now, you will see more reason for it hereafter. Mrs.
Bargrave then to satisfy her importunity, was going to fetch a Pen and Ink;
but Mrs. Veal said, let it alone now, and do it when I am gone; but you must be
sure to do it: which was one of the last things she enjoined her at parting;
and so she promised her.

Then Mrs. Veal asked for Mrs. Bargraves Daughter; she said she was not at
home; but if you have a mind to see her says Mrs. Bargrave, I Will send for her.
Do, says Mrs. Veal. On which she left her, and went to a Neighbors, to send
for her; and by the Time Mrs. Bargrave was returning, Mrs. Veal was got without
the Door in the Street, in the face of the Beast-Market on a Saturday (which is
Market day) and stood ready to part, as soon as Mrs. Bargrave came to her. She
asked her, why she was in such have? she said, she must be going; though perhaps
she might not go her journey till Monday. And told Mrs. Bargrave she hoped she
should see her again, at her Cousin Watsons before she went whether she was a
going. Then she said, she would not take her Leave of her, and walked from Mrs.
Bargrave in her view, till a turning interrupted the sight of her, which was
three quarters after One in the Afternoon.

Mrs. Veal Dyed the 7th of September at 12 a Clock at Noon, of her Fits, and
had not above four hours Senses before her Death, in which time she received
the Sacrament. The next day after Mrs. Veals appearing being Sunday, Mrs.
Bargrave was mightily indisposed with a Cold, and a Sore Throat, that she could
not go out that day: but on Monday morning she sends a person to Captain
Watsons to know if Mrs. Veal were there. They wondered at Mrs. Bargraves
enquiry, and sent her Word, that she was not there, nor was expected. At this
Answer Mrs. Bargrave told the Maid she had certainly mistook the Name, or made
some blunder. And though she was ill, she put on her Hood, and went her self to
Captain Watsons, though she knew none of the Family, to see if Mrs. Veal was
there or not. They said, they wondered at her asking, for that she had not been
in Town; they were sure, if she had, she would have been there. Says Mrs.
Bargrave, I am sure she was with me on Saturday almost two hours. They said it
was impossible, for they must have seen her if she had. In comes Captain
Watson, while they were in Dispute, and said that Mrs. Veal was certainly Dead,
and her Escocheons were making. This strangely surprised Mrs. Bargrave, who
went to the Person immediately who had the care of them, and found it true.
Then she related the whole Story to Captain Watsons Family, and what Gown she
had on, and how striped. And that Mrs. Veal told her it was Scowred. Then Mrs.
Watson cried out, you have seen her indeed, for none knew but Mrs. Veal and my
self, that the Gown was Scowr'd; and Mrs Watson owned that she described the
Gown exactly; for, said she, I helped her to make it up. This, Mrs. Watson
blazed all about the Town, and avouch'd the Demonstration of the Truth of Mrs.
Bargraves seeing Mrs. Veal's Apparition. And Captain Watson carried two
Gentlemen immediately to Mrs. Bargraves House, to hear the Relation from her
own Mouth. And then it spread so fast, that Gentlemen and Persons of Quality,
the Judicious and Skeptical part of the World, flock't in upon her, which at
last became such a Task, that she was forced to go out of the way. For they
were in general, extremely satisfied of the truth of the thing; and plainly
saw, that Mrs. Bargrave was no Hypochondriack, for she always appears with such
a cheerful Air, and pleasing Mien, that she has gained the favor and esteem of
all the Gentry. And its thought a great favor if they can but get the Relation
from her own Mouth. I should have told you before, that Mrs. Veal told Mrs.
Bargrave, that her Sister and Brother in Law, were just come down from London
to see her. Says Mrs. Bargrave, how came you to order matters so strangely? it
could not be helped said Mrs. Veal; and her Sister and Brother did come to see
her, and entered the Town of Dover, just as Mrs. Veal was expiring. Mrs.
Bargrave asked her, whether she would not drink some Tea. Says Mrs. Veal, I do
not care if I do: But I Will Warrant this Mad Fellow (meaning Mrs. Bargraves
Husband,) has broke all your Trinckets. But, says Mrs. Bargrave, I Will get
something to Drink in for all that; but Mrs. Veal waved it, and said, it is no
matter, let it alone, and so it passed.

All the time I sat with Mrs. Bargrave, which was some Hours, she recollected
fresh sayings of Mrs. Veal. And one material thing more she told Mrs. Bargrave,
that Old Mr. Breton allowed Mrs. Veal Ten pounds a Year, which was a secret,
and unknown to Mrs. Bargrave, till Mrs. Veal told it her. Mrs. Bargrave never
varies in her Story, which puzzles those who doubt of the Truth, or are
unwilling to believe it. A Servant in a Neighbors Yard adjoining to Mrs.
Bargraves House, heard her talking to some body, an hour of the Time Mrs. Veal
was with her. Mrs. Bargrave went out to her next Neighbors the very Moment she
parted with Mrs. Veal, and told what Ravishing Conversation she had with an Old
Friend, and told the whole of it. Drelincourt's Book of Death is, since this
happened, Bought up strangely. And it is to be observed, that notwithstanding
all this Trouble and Fatigue Mrs. Bargrave has undergone upon this Account, she
never took the value of a Farthing, nor suffered her Daughter to take any thing
of any Body, and therefore can have no Interest in telling the Story.

But Mr. Veal does what he can to stifle the matter, and said he would see Mrs.
Bargrave; but yet it is certain matter fact, that he has been at Captain
Watsons since the Death of his Sister, and yet never went near Mrs. Bargrave;
and some of his Friends report her to be a great Liar, and that she knew of Mr.
Breton's Ten Pounds a Year. But the Person who pretends to say so, has the
Reputation of a Notorious Liar, among persons which I know to be of undoubted
Repute. Now Mr. Veal is more a Gentleman, than to say she Lies; but says, a bad
Husband has Crazed her. But she needs only to present her self, and it will
effectually confute that Pretense. Mr. Veal says he asked his Sister on her
Death Bed, whether she had a mind to dispose of any thing, and she said, No.
Now what the things which Mrs. Veals Apparition would have disposed of, were so
Trifling, and nothing of Justice aimed at in their disposal, that the design of
it appears to me to be only in order to make Mrs. Bargrave, so to demonstrate
the Truth of her Appearance, as to satisfy the World of the Reality thereof,
as to what she had seen and heard: and to secure her Reputation among the
Reasonable and understanding part of Mankind. And then again, Mr. Veal owns
that there was a Purse of Gold; but it was not found in her Cabinet, but in a
Comb-Box This looks improbable, for that Mrs. Watson owned that Mrs. Veal was
so very careful of the Key of her Cabinet, that she would trust no Body, with
it. And if so, no doubt she would not trust her Gold out of it. And Mrs. Veals
often drawing her hand over her Eyes, and asking Mrs. Bargrave, whether her
Fits had not impaired her; looks to me, as if she did it on purpose to remind
Mrs. Bargrave of her Fits, to prepare her not to think it strange that she
should put her upon Writing to her Brother to dispose of Rings and Gold, which
looked so much like a dying Persons Bequest; and it took accordingly with Mrs.
Bargrave, as the effect of her Fits coming upon her; and was one of the many
Instances of her Wonderful Love to her, and Care of her, that she should nor be
affrighted: which indeed appears in her whole management; particularly in her
coming to her in the day time, waving the Salutation, and when she was alone;
and then the manner of her parting, to prevent a second attempt to Salute her.

Now, why Mr. Veal should think this Relation a Reflection, (as it is plain he
does by his endeavoring to stifle it) I cannot imagine, because the Generality
believe her to be a good Spirit, her Discourse was so Heavenly. Her two great
Errands were to comfort Mrs. Bargrave in her Affliction, and to ask her
Forgiveness for her Breach of Friendship, and with a Pious Discourse to
encourage her. So that after all, to suppose that Mrs. Bargrave could Hatch
such an Invention as this from Friday-Noon, till Saturday-Noon, (supposing that
she knew of Mrs. Veals Death the very first Moment) without jumbling
Circumstances, and without any Interest too; she must be more Witty, Fortunate,
and Wicked too, than any indifferent Person I dare say, will allow. I asked
Mrs. Bargrave several times, If she was sure she felt the Gown. She answered
Modestly, if my Senses be to be relied on, I am sure of it. I asked her, If she
heard a Sound, when she clapped her Hand upon her Knee: She said, she did not
remember she did: And she said, she Appeared to be as much a Substance as I
did, who talked with her. And I may said she, be as soon persuaded that your
Apparition is talking to me now, as that I did not really see her; for I was
under no manner of Fear, I received her as a Friend, and parted with her as
such. I would not, says she, give one Farthing to make any one believe it, I
have no Interest in it; nothing but trouble is entailed upon me for a long time
for ought that I know; and had it not come to Light by Accident, it would never
have been made Public But now she says, she will make her own Private Use of
it, and keep her self out of the way as much as she can. And so she has done
since. She says, she had a Gentleman who came thirty Miles to her to hear the
Relation; and that she had told it to a Room full of People at a time. Several
particular Gentlemen have had the Story from Mrs Bargraves own Mouth.

This thing has very much affected me, and I am as well satisfied, as I am of
the best grounded Matter of Fact. And why should we dispute Matter of Fact,
because we cannot solve things, of which we can have no certain or
demonstrative Notions, seems strange to me: Mrs. Bargraves's Authority and
Sincerity alone, would have been undoubted in any other Case.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
DRelincourts's Book of the Consolations against the Fears of Death, has been
four times Printed already in English, of which many Thousands have been Sold,
and not without great Applause: And its bearing so great a Character in this
Relation, the Impression is near Sold off.


