A TOUR Through the Whole ISLAND of GREAT BRITAIN. Divided into CIRCUITS or
JOURNEYS. GIVING A Particular and Entertaining ACCOUNT of whatever is Curious,
and worth Observation; VIZ. I. A DESCRIPTION of the Principal Cities and Towns,
their Situation, Government, and Commerce. II. The Customs, Manners, Exercises,
Diversions, and Employment of the People. III. The Produce and Improvement of
the Lands, the Trade, and Manufactures. IV. The Sea Ports and Fortifications,
the Course of Rivers, and the Inland Navigation. V. The Public Edifices,
Seats, and Palaces of the NOBILITY and GENTRY. VI. The Isles of Wight,
Portland, Jersey, Guernsey, and the other English and Scottish Isles of most
Note.
Interspersed with Useful OBSERVATIONS. Particularly fitted for the Perusal of
such as desire to Travel over the ISLAND.

By a GENTLEMAN.

The THIRD EDITION. With very great Additions, Improvements, and Corrections;
which bring it down to the Year 1742. And a Copious INDEX to each Volume.

VOL. IV.

LONDON: Printed for J. OSBORN, S. BIRT, D. BROWN, J. HODGES, A. MILLAR, J.
WHISTON, and J. ROBINSON. M.DCC..XLII.

A TOUR Through that PART of GREAT BRITAIN CALLED SCOTLAND.
LETTER I. Containing a General DESCRIPTION of NORTH BRITAIN, its Soil,
Produce, Manufactures, Ecclesiastical Government, etc.
SIR,
THAT I may avoid Repetitions in my TOUR through the Northern Part of this famous
Island, I shall begin with the following Particulars. I. I shall give a brief
Geographical Account of Scotland. II. Of its Lakes and Rivers. III. Of its
Fisheries, including that for Pearls. IV. Of the Cattle, Fowls, etc. V. Of its
Manufactures of Linen and Woollen. VI. Of the Grain and Pulse it produces. VII.
Of its Mountains, Woods, etc. VIII. Of its Fountains, Springs, Medicinal
Waters, etc. IX. Of precious Stones, etc. found there. X. Of the Customs,
Language, Manners, etc, of the People. XI. Of the Religion and Ecclesiastical
Government of Scotland. XII. Of the Civil Government of Scotland. XIII. A short
View of the Acts of Parliament since the Union, that have made any Alteration
in the Laws of Scotland. XIV. Of the Order of the Thistle. XV. Some brief
Observations on the Whole; and the Division of Scotland into Shires, etc.
Of all which, as succinctly as possible. And,

I. A brief Geographical Account of Scotland.
SCOTLAND is bounded on the North by the Irish Sea and England, from which it
is divided by Solway Firth, and the Rivers Esk and Kexsop; on the West Border,
by the Cheviot Hills in the Middle Marches; and by the lower Parts of the
Tweed, on the East Border. On the East it is bounded by the German Sea; on the
North by the Deucaledonian Sea; and on the West, by the great Western Ocean.

Its greatest Length from Dungsby-head or John of Grot's- house in Caithness,
to the Mull of Galloway toward Ireland, is no more than about 215 Scots Miles;
but if we reckon directly North from Dumfries, or the said Mull of Galloway, to
the utmost Parts of Caithness, or Strathnavern, the Length will not be so much;
and less still, if we reckon from Berwick to either of these Places.

Its Breadth, from the Point of Ard-na-murchan near the Isle of Mull, about the
middle Part of Scotland in the West, to Buchan-ness in the East Parts, toward
the North, is about 140 Scots Miles; but the Sea running up into the Land, or
the Land thrusting out into the Sea in many Places, makes the Breadth of it
everywhere else very various and disproportionable; for in the South Parts it
is seldom 100 Miles over, and in the North Parts, beyond Inverness, not so
many; so that there is no House above 40 or 45 Miles from salt Water.

Besides the main Land, there are about 300 Islands, some of them very
considerable, which may be distinguished into several Classes: The Western
Islands called Hebrides, or Aebudae, by Latin Authors; the Orcades, or Orkney
Islands: the Islands of Shetland, or Zetland, and some few in the Firth of
Forth.

The whole Country abounds in Lakes and Rivers, many whereof running into
Creeks and Arms of the Sea, (which in several Places are very wide and deep)
afford great and commodious Opportunities for Fishing and Shipping: But it is
much to be regretted, that the Land is neither cultivated, nor the Fishing and
Shipping carried on and improved, to so much Advantage as might be expected.

Though the Soil is not generally so level and fruitful as that of England, yet
the South Parts of Scotland are far more pleasant than, and preferable to, the
North Parts of England; and there are everywhere all Things necessary for human
Life: And not only sufficient for the Inhabitants, but also to export and
exchange for such foreign Commodities as the People want, and to return
considerable Sums.

II. Of the most remarkable Lakes and Rivers in Scotland.
THE most remarkable Lakes in Scotland are Loch-tay, and Loch-ness, and
Loch-levin: Which all send forth Rivers of the same Name with themselves:
Loch-lomond, which sends forth the River of Lomond; and Loch-iern, which sends
the River Iern. It Is observed, that Loch-ness, Loch-tay, and Loch-iern, seldom
freeze.

Loch-myrton in Galloway is another, and remarkable for this, That one Part of
it generally freezes in the Winter-season, and the other Part seldom does.

There is a Loch in Straith-errach, in the Lord Lovat's Lands, which never
freezes, however severe the Frost be, till February; and then, in one Night's
time, it freezes all over; and if the Frost continue two Nights, the Ice grows
very thick. There is a Lake of the same Nature called Lochmonar, in the Earl of
Cromarty's Lands in the North; and there is another Lake in Straglash, at a
Place called Glencanich, in a high Ground betwixt the Tops of two Mountains,
the middle of which Lake is always frozen throughout the Summer,
notwithstanding the strong Reflections of the Sunbeams from the Mountains,
which melt the Ice at the Sides of the Lake. The Ground round the Lake has a
constant Verdure, as if there were a perpetual Spring; and Cattle grow sooner
fat by that Grass than any-where else: And this is so much the more remarkable,
that there are several other Lakes in the Neighborhood, of as high a
Situation, wherein no such thing is seen.

In Linlithgowshire is a Lake called Loch-coat Lough, from whence a Stream runs
under a neighboring Mountain, the Murmur of which is heard among the Stones;
and after it has run thus under Ground for about two hundred Paces, it issues
with great Force from a Fountain about three Feet broad, and forms a Stream
which turns a Water-mill.

For the Convenience of Trade and Fishing, there are so many Inlets of the Sea,
that there is scarce any Part of it, as I have said, above 40 Miles distant
from some Bay, Creek, or Arm of the Ocean; and these afford many Harbors,
several of them very good, and capable of receiving Men of War, and Ships of
the greatest Burden.

The principal Rivers in Scotland are TAY, which divides it in the Middle, and
running by Scone, Perth, and Dundee, empties itself into the German Ocean. In
the Southern Parts, the FORTH and TWEED run into the same; CLYDE runs into the
Western Sea; as ESK, ANNAND, NITH, KEN, DEE, and CREE, do into the Irish. In
the North, DEE and DON run into the German Ocean, as SPEY and NESS do into
Murray Firth.

The most convenient for Trade are TAY, which is navigable to Perth; FORTH and
CLYDE, which, if joined by a Canal, near the Place where the Romans formerly
built their Wall of about 30 Miles long, to defend their Province from the
Scots and Picts, would open a Communication betwixt the East and West Seas, to
the great Advancement of the Commerce of the whole Island. There was much Talk
of it about the Time of the Union; but as it would undoubtedly be attended with
very great Charges, and other Difficulties, the Project seems to be laid quite
aside.

I am the briefer in my Account of the Lakes and Rivers in Scotland, because I
shall be obliged to be more particular upon them in their respective Places.

III. Of the Fisheries in Scotland, includeing that of Pearls.
THE Salmon-fishery is particularly the Boast and Delight of the Scots;
insomuch that for it they too much neglect all the rest.

Their SALMON are accounted the best in Europe, and though their Barrels be a
Third less than that of Berwick, yet they have yielded 10 Livres more per
Barrel, in France; partly because of their Goodness, and partly because better
cured, wherein the Magistrates and Town-council of Aberdeen take a very
particular Care. Salmon abound not only in the navigable Rivers of Scotland,
but in those which are less, in most Parts of the Kingdom; and they valued them
so much formerly, that in several of their old Acts of Parliament they forbad
selling them to England, except for Gold. Clyde abounds with Salmon, for which
the Town of Renfrew has been famous; and Bishop Lesley, in his Description of
Scotland, says, They used, in his Time, to employ sixty Vessels in Fishing most
of Spring and Summer; but it is much short of Aberdeen, where the same Author
says, the Rivers Dee and Don exceed all those of the Kingdom for Number and
Goodness of Salmon: For which he assigns this Reason, That they delight in
clear Streams, which occasions our Rivers in Scotland to abound more with
Salmon than those of other Countries where the Rivers are more muddy. The other
Places, most remarkable for Salmon-fishing in Scotland, are in the Dovern at
Bamf, the Rivers Nesse, Nairn, Findorn, Lossey and Spey in Murray; the latter
abounds with Salmon for 60 Miles together. Lochlomond in Lenox is remarkable
for Salmon of an excellent Taste, Loch-ou in Argyll, the like: And there is
good Salmon-fishing in the Rivers Lough and Speynie in Lochaber, in the Bay of
Cromarty, near Dingwal Castle, and in the Rivers Tay and Tweed, and other
smaller Rivers in the bordering Counties. They have marl'd or speckled Salmon
in Harries, North-vist and Benbecula. And in the Isle of Sky, there are no less
than 30 Rivers all abounding with Salmon.

As to their COD-fishing, Mr. Spruel (an eminent Scots Merchant, who laid an
Account of the Product of the Kingdom for Trade before their Parliament, some
Years ago) says, he was informed by a Yarmouth Man, who use to buy those Fish
and Salt on the Scots Coast, that he has sometimes got four thousand cured Fish
in a Voyage, at 1 d. or 2 d. apiece, and retail'd them again from 18 d. to 2 s.
6 d. apiece; which shows what vast Advantage might be made of this Trade, since
the Scots Cod are reckoned as good or better than those of Newfoundland. And
what contibutes much to the Cheapness of this and the Herring-fishery in
Scotland, is, that they are caught with fewer Hands, and Vessels of far less
Expense, than Doggers, which must be well manned and strong, because obliged to
lie at Sea; whereas the Scots catch those Fish in their own Creeks, Bays and
Harbors, where few Hands and open Vessels are for the most part sufficient,
because they are seldom exposed to any Danger by Storms, being always near the
Shore, and laid up at Night.

HERRINGS abound on all the Coasts of the Kingdom, but especially on the
Western Isles, which are reckoned the best and fattest, though not so large as
those taken on the Eastern and Northern Coasts. The Scots Herring-fishing is
accounted the best in the World, and the Dutch have got a great Part of their
Wealth by it.

A Fishery was attempted in the Isles by King Charles I. in Conjunction with
some Merchants; and a Magazine was erected for that Use in Hermetra, one of the
Harries Islands, and another in the Isle of Vacksay; but the unhappy Civil War
coming on, it was not prosecuted. It was renewed by King Charles II. and
succeeded well for a Time: The Fish they caught were accounted the best in
Europe, and yielded a Price accordingly; but the King withdrawing his Money
afterward, to supply his pressing Occasions, the Merchants were displeased at
it, and differing among themselves, did also withdraw theirs; which ruined the
Design.

Some Dutch Families settled in the Village of Stornway, in the Isle of Jews,
soon after that Prince's Restoration; and so much improved the Inhabitants in
the Fishing Trade, during the small Time of their Abode there, that they still
exceed all those of the neighboring Isles and Continent; they brought the
Natives a great deal of Money likewise, for their Sea and Land-Fowl: But King
Charles II. being prevailed on to send away the Dutch, it was a great Loss to
the Country.

Herrings are sometimes bought in the Isles for 6 d. per Barrel, and when cured
and sent abroad, yield from 25 to 40 s. per Barrel; and sometimes 36000 Barrels
of white Herrings have been exported to France from Clyde in a Season, besides
what were exported from Dunbar, and other Parts of the Kingdom, to France, and
other Nations; which may serve as a Specimen to show how capable that Trade is
of Improvement, especially considering the Situation of the West of Scotland
and the Isles, from whence they may be a Month sooner at Market with them, than
from any Part of England and Holland; which, with the Advantage of taking and
curing them cheaper and sooner than the Dutch can possibly do, considering how
far they have to sail backward and forward, what Risques they run at Sea, and
what Numbers of Tenders they are obliged to send to and again betwixt their own
Country, and their Doggers with Provisions, Salt, etc. they might soon be
outdone in that profitable Trade by the Inhabitants of Great Britain, who may
lie ashore at Night, and land their Fish as soon as caught, without any Danger
from Tempests or Enemies; many of those Bays where the Herring abound, being
very safe for Ships to ride in.

Whales in abundance frequent the Islands of Fladden, Orkney and Jews: One
hundred and fourteen run ashore on the Island of Orkney at one time, in the
Year 1691.

Cod, Tusk, and Ling, are caught in vast Plenty upon all their Coasts.

Haddocks, Sturgeon, Turbut, Trouts, Perch, Pike, Scate, Greyberd, Maycril,
Keeling, Whiting, Sea-urchin, Cat-fish, Cockpadle, Lyths, Spirlings, Soles,
Flukes, Garvie, Eels, are also caught on the Scottish Coasts in great Plenty,
for Home-consumption.

Otters, whose Skins are useful for Muffs, etc. are very numerous in the Isles.

Shellfish of all sorts, as Lobsters, Crabs, Oysters, are also found in vast
Quantities in the Western Islands; the latter so large, that they must be cut
in three or four Pieces, to be eaten.

Cockles, Muscles, Limpets, Wilks, Scollops, and Spouts, are cast up by the
Tide in such Numbers on the Isles, that the People cannot consume them.

PEARL being the Product of Fish, it is proper to discourse of the Scots Pearl
here. Mr. Spruel, the Merchant abovementioned, who understood the Pearl-trade
best of any Man in that Kingdom, having dealt in it above forty Years, says, He
has sometimes given a hundred Rixdollars, which is near 25 l. for one Scots
Pearl; and that he had Scots Pearl as fine, clear, and more transparent, than
any Oriental Pearl. Though the latter be more easily matched, because they are
all of a yellow Water, yet Foreigners covet Scots Pearl. The more Wrinkles
there are in a Pearl-shell, the more Sign it is of the Age and Goodness of a
Pearl; for the smooth Shells are young and barren: Therefore he proposed, that
a Law should be made to forbid the Fishing of young Pearl; for the longer they
stay in the Water, the more valuable they are: So that he would have no Shells
taken up less than four Inches in Length, or two or three in Breadth; and that
none should be allowed to offer any Pearl to be sold, that weighs less than
five Grains; which is as reasonable as Laws to prevent the taking of the young
Fry of Salmon, since Pearl are of much more Value. And that they might have
Time to grow and increase, he proposes, That Pearl-fishing should be forbid,
except once in ten Years at least; because he has been sorry to see some
Thousands of young Pearls offered to Sale, that were of no manner of Value;
whereas, had they lain in the Waters their due Time, they might have been worth
from four to fifty Crowns apiece.

Pearl is found in most Places of the Nation where Salmon are taken; and once
in twenty Years, he says, there is a great Pearl-fishing in Scotland. This does
not hinder, but that Pearl-shells of the Size he proposes, or larger, may be
taken up at any time when found; and these are probably to be had among the
unfrequented Isles.

Particular Places where Pearl abound, are the Rivers in the Isle of Sky,
where they are frequently found in black Muscles, especially in the Rivers
Kilmartin and Ord, where Pearls have lately been found of 20 l. per Piece; and
in a fresh water Lake near the South Side of Loch-einardstad. In that same
Island there are also Muscles that breed Pearl.

Though the small Pearl be not so useful for Ornament, yet they may be of very
good Use in Physic, and make a fine Article in the Apothecary's Bills, being
reputed the chief of all Cordials, and very good against the Plague, violent
and pestilential Fevers, Fluxes, Heart-burning, Giddiness of the Head,
Trembling of the Heart, etc. which is sufficient to show, that the
Pearl-fishery well deserves Encouragement, since we may be supplied with it
much cheaper at Home, than from the Indies.

IV. Of the Cattle, Horses, Fowls, etc. of Scotland.
THE Country in general abounds in Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle; which
are generally black, except in Corn-soils, where they seldom breed or keep any
more than are necessary for the Plough or the Pail. But it is observable, that
such as are bred in the Corn-countries, are much larger than those bred in
other Parts, and equal in Size to those bred in some Parts of England, even
where the Land seems to be better.

In general, their Sheep and Cattle are much smaller than those of England,
especially in Pasture-lands; yet are they of a far sweeter and more delicious
Taste. The Highlanders bring great Numbers of them yearly into the Lowlands,
where some are fatted; but the Bulk of them, and also many of those bred in the
Lowlands, are sent into diverse Parts of England, especially to St. Faith's near
Norwich, where they turn out to good Account; as I have observed in its Place.

They have also very many Hogs, and an incredible Number of Goats, particularly
in the North and Highlands; the latter they eat themselves, but the former they
pickle and export, as they likewise do vast Quantities of salt Beef.

In the Southern Counties there are no Deer, except in Gentlemen's Parks; but
everywhere else, they are in great Plenty.

They breed great Numbers of Horses, especially in Galloway and the Highlands;
small indeed, but capable of great Fatigue, especially if we consider, that
they are not only more proper for the Saddle, and other Uses in that Country,
which, being hilly, will not admit, in many Places, of Teams and Carriages; but
are more hardy than Horses of a larger Size, and will thrive upon what would
starve great Horses. Nevertheless, in many Places of the Lowlands they can
breed Horses fit for War, Coach, or Carriage.

Scotland has not only Plenty of domestic Fowl, such as are common to other
Countries; but many that are peculiar to themselves, especially in the Islands,
where they are in such Multitudes as the Inhabitants can neither consume nor
vend half of them; but their Trade for them will still increase, as it has done
since the Union.

Their Fowl and Eggs afford a large Fund of Trade for Food, and their Feathers
for Bedding and other Uses: Their Fat is made use of by the Inhabitants not
only in many Cases where Oil is necessary, but likewise for Physic.

V. Of the Linen and Woollen Manufactures of Scotland.
FLAX abounds in Scotland, so that besides what they consume themselves, they
export great Quantities of Linen, brown and whitened; which is one of the
greatest Manufactures of the Kingdom, and, if duly regulated and encouraged, as
it is more and more since the Union, might save a great deal of Money in the
Island, besides what it may bring in to it; for the Scots have improved their
Linen Manufacture much of late; and besides fine Linen, make very good Holland,
Cambrick, Muslins plain and striped, Calicoes, Damask, Ticken for Beds, etc.
white and dyed Threads, Laces, Tape, etc.

Mr. Spruel (in his Account current betwixt Scotland and England) says, He has
known, out of a Pound of Flax of Scots Growth, which cost but 12 d. six
Spangles of fine Yarn spun, which was sold at Glasgow at about 4 s. 8 d. per
Spangle; which made the Product of that 12 d. to the Spinners 28 s. and, made
into fine Muslin, that same Pound of Flax amounted to 10 or 12 Dollars, which
is 2 l. 16 s. 8 d. or 2 l. 16 s. the Charges of Weaving and Whitening deducted.
He adds, That from one Pound of Scots Flax, Lace-makers have made Lace to the
Value of 8 l. Sterling; which is sufficient to show how much the Linen
Manufacture may be improved there, and how many poor Women, who are not capable
of employing themselves otherwise, may get a Livelihood by it, and what Money
it may bring into the Nation.

Their HEMP is also capable of being improved, not only to save Money in the
Island, which is exported for Canvas, Sailcloth, etc. but also to export, and
to make Nets for their Fishery, and other Uses.

The numerous and large Flocks of Sheep they have in Scotland produce abundance
of WOOL, from whence come Manufactures of several Sorts; as Broad-cloth, Coarse
or Housewife's-cloth, Fingrims, Serges, Bays, Crapes, Temmin, Glasgow Plaids,
Worsted Camblets, and other Stuffs and Stockens for Home-consumption and
Export; besides their Tallow and Skins. Their Wool in general is not so good as
that of England; yet they have brought their Broad-cloth lately to a great
Perfection, but can never equal England in that Part of Woollen Manufacture:
Nevertheless it is very proper for Serges, Bays, Camblets, Shaloons, and other
Stuffs; and by due Regulation is capable of great Improvement for a foreign
Trade. They are come to a great Perfection in making Stuffs; and for Plaids, I
shall observe by-and-by, they exceed all the World.

An Instance of what great Improvement may be made of their Wool, we have from
Mr. Spruel (in his Account current); viz. That they make such fine Worsted
Stockens at Aberdeen, that they yield 10, 15, 20, and 30 s. a Pair for Women's
Stockens; which is sufficient to show, that they are capable of making Stockens
at lower Rates, especially considering that they have store of very good Wool
brought thither from the Highlands and Isles; which because sold at the Cross
of Aberdeen, is commonly called Cross-Wool. The most remarkable Places besides
in Scotland, for good Wool, are Galloway and Tweedale; from which great
Improvement might be made in Bays, Serges and Shaloons.

The Scots Plaids are a Manufacture in which they exceed all Nations, as I have
said, both as to Color and Fineness. They have of late been pretty much
fansied in England, for Beds, Hangings, Window-curtains, and Night-gowns, for
both Sexes; so that Attempts have been made at Norwich to imitate them; but
they fall much short of the Scots in Color, Fineness, and Workmanship, as is
evident at first Sight. Their greatest Trade for their Woollen Manufactures,
and other Commodities, has for many Years been with the United Netherlands,
where they have a Conservator, who serves both for a Consul and Envoy, to take
care of the Affairs of their Trade, being part of the ancient Privileges they
enjoyed by Treaties with the Dukes of Burgundy and others, when Sovereigns of
the Netherlands. From this Trade the Towns of Rotterdam and Ter-veer have
acquired considerable Wealth; in Return for which, the Scots have been always
well esteemed in those Provinces; and the States allow them Churches, and
Maintenance for their Ministers.

VI. Of the Grain and Pulse of Scotland.
THE WHEAT of Scotland is so excellent, that Joseph Scaliger, who had been in
the Country, says, No Bread in Europe is comparable to what is made of it, for
Whiteness, Lightness, and easy Digestion. It abounds in the Mers, Lothian,
Gavrie, etc. so that they have not only enough for their own Consumption, but
for Exportation.

OATS are the most universal Grain of the Kingdom, and exceed those in England,
for all Uses. They grow very well everywhere, and in such Quantities as afford
a considerable Fund for Export, both in Grain and Meal, and make very good
Bread and Drink.

PEASE they have in great Plenty, both for their own Consumption, and for
Exportation; and they are so good of the Kind, that in some Parts of the
Country the laboring Husbandmen make good nourishing Bread of them.

BEANS they have also in great plenty for their own Use, and for Export.

BARLEY grows likewise very well in Scotland; but they sow more of that Sort
they call Beer, which has four Rows of Grain upon an Ear; whereas Barley has
but two: Of this they make good Bread, Broth, Ale, and Beer, and export great
Quantities.

RYE grows also very well in Scotland, and makes good Bread; but this they
don't cultivate so much as they do the Grains abovementioned.

VII. Of the Mountains, Wood, Timber, etc. of Scotland.
THE most remarkable Mountains of Scotland are the Grampian Mountains, which
run from East to West, from near Aberdeen to Cowal in Argyllshire, almost the
whole Breadth of the Kingdom, famous for the Battle fought on them betwixt the
Romans and the ancient Scots and Caledonians, under the Conduct of Galgacus, as
we find in Tacitus. The next most remarkable Chain of Mountains are those of
Lammermoor, which run from the Eastern Coast in the Mers a great way West. Next
to these are Pentland Hills, which run through Lothian, and join the Mountains of
Tweedale; and these again are joined by others, which run through the whole
Breadth of the Island. Other remarkable Mountains are those called Cheviot
Hills, in the Border betwixt the two Kingdoms: Drumbenderlaw and
North-Berwicklaw, both in East-Lothian; Arthur's- seat in Mid-Lothian;
Cairn-apple in West-Lothian; Tentock in Clydsdale; Brinmore in Argyll; the
Ochel Mountains in Perthshire; the Lowmonds and Largolaw in Fife; in Angus,
Dundeelaw, and Part of the Grampians; in Caithness, Ord; and, in the Orkney
Islands, the Mountains of Hoy.

There are many large Woods of OAK in Scotland, which afford Materials for
Building and Shipping, and for the Husbandman's Use; and the Country is very
improveable this way, if Planting were more encouraged; however, they have at
present not only such as are fit for the Uses abovementioned, but also for
Pipe-staves and Barrels; and their Bark is of Use to the Tanners, great
Quantities of which are annually exported to Ireland, and elsewhere. They have
likewise ASH Trees, ELMS, and others, fit for Building, and other domestic
Uses; and great Forests of FIR, which afford Materials for Building and
Shipping; and might, with due Care, afford Pitch and Tar, without being obliged
to bring such large Quantities from the Northern Countries, as is usually done
by the Inhabitants of Great Britain.

There were formerly many great Woods in Scotland, among which the Forest of
Caledonia was famous; but there are now scarce any Remains of it.

The Woods are more rare than formerly in the Southern Parts of the Kingdom; of
which the most remarkable now left are those of Hamilton, Calendar, and
Torwood: But in the North, especially in Perthshire, Lochaber, Badenoch, and
Mar, there are many Forests, some of them 20, and some 30 Miles in Length.

They have abundance of Fruit Trees of all Sorts, in their Gardens and
Orchards, and might, by Improvement, not only have sufficient to afford them
Fruit for Home-consumption, but also Cider for their own Drinking and Export.

VIII. Of the Medicinal Waters, Fountains, Springs, etc.
THE more remarkable Medicinal Fountains in Scotland are Moffat Wells, which
spring from the Top of a Rock near the Town of that Name in Annandale. The
Wells are two in Number, near one another; the higher Well runs through whitish
and crystalline Stones, and the lower through black ones, resembling Marcasites
of Antimony: The Smell of the Water is like that of Gunpowder, and it dies
Silver of a black Color. To the Stones of the upper Well grows a Matter
resembling stinking Sulphur of Antimony, of a yellowish red Color; the Stones
of the lower Well are of the Color of Antimony, and some of them contain a
metallic Matter, that sparkles like Antimony. Where the Stream of the lower
Well runs down into a neighboring Brook, there sticks to the Rock a whitish
Salt, and perhaps a nitrous Matter, which has the diuretic Virtue of the
Water. Those Waters also purge by Stool and Vomit, and are very good against
Colic and Nephritick Pains, because they powerfully remove the Obstructions of
the Bowels. They are outwardly applied to Ulcers, and against Pains in the
Joints; they are strongest in their Operation in the driest Season of the
Summer and Autumn, but are not so good in a rainy, or in the Winter-season.

Mahon's Well, near St. Mahon's Church, has the same Virtue, but does not
operate so strongly; and there is a Well of the same Nature discovered not many
Years ago at Hallyards, within six Miles of Edinburgh.

At Kinghorne a very clear and cold Water flows from the Clefts of a Rock,
which quickly passes through the Body; is of excellent Use for recovering a
lost Appetite, and against the Gravel and Stone; it is outwardly applied to
watery and itching Eyes, and against Redness and Pimples in the Face: The famous
Dr. P. Anderson wrote upon its Usefulness. There flows also from the same Rock
a whitish viscid Liquor, which is an excellent Cosmetick.

Arthrey Well, two Miles North of Stirling, flows from a Mountain; where is a
Copper Mine, with some Mixture of Gold and Silver: The Water is very cold, and
being tinctured with the Minerals it flows through, is of Use against outward
Distempers.

In Glenelg, at a Place called Achignigle, is a Stream which turns Holly into a
greenish Stone of which they make Moulds for casting Musket-bullets, and
Melting-pots for melting Brass, and other Metals, and Whirls for Women's
Spindles.

There is a petrifying Fountain near the Castle of Slain, the Water of which,
dropping from a natural Cave, presently turns into Pyramids of Stones, which
are brittle, and make good Lime; there is another in Hamilton Wood, the Stones
made by which resemble putrid Moss.

At Monkton, near Edinburgh, is a Well, called The routing Well; because of the
Noise it makes before Tempests, from the Part of the Well which looks to that
Quarter of the Sky, from whence the Tempest is to blow.

There is another on the West Side of Campsey Hills, which divides
Stirlingshire from Lenox; whose Water makes People drunk.

IX. Of Precious Stones, and other valuable Commodities.
THE following valuable Commodities, and Precious Stones, are found in
different Parts of Scotland.

Coral and Coraline, in the Isles of Jews, Sky, and Jura. Ambergris, on the
Coasts of the Islands Bernera, South-vist, Bintire, and Orkney. Marcasites,
Lapis Ceranius, Lapis Hecticus, Agat of different Sizes and Colors; all in the
Isle of Sky. Crystal, in the Isles of Sky, Arran, and St. Kilda. Fullers Earth,
in the Isle of Sky. Fine Shells, which pass in Africa for Money, in the Isles.
Loadstone, in the Isle of Cannay. Sperma Ceti, on the Coasts of Orkney, and
other Isles. Mines of Gold, in Crawford Moor. Also Azure, in the Reign of James
IV. Silver Mines, three Miles South of Linlithgow, in the Reign of James VI.
Copper, in Airthrey, near Stirling. Lead, in Clydsdale, of which the Earl of
Hopton makes good Account. Lead and Tin in Orkney. Iron, at Dumfernling in
Fife. Coal, in Lothian, Fife, etc. Freestone, Slate, Limestone, Marble, in
great Plenty all over the Country.
And Sir Robert Sibbalds asserts, that they have also Diamonds, Rubies,
Carbuncles, Hyacinths, Jaspers, Cornelians, Amethysts, etc. to whom I refer you
for farther Satisfaction on this Head.

X. Of the Customs, Manners, Language, etc. of the Scots.
THE Scots are divided into HIGHLANDERS, who call themselves the ancient Scots;
and into LOWLANDERS, who are a Mixture of ancient Scots, Picts, Britons,
French, English, Danes, Germans, Hungarians, and others.

Buchanan describes the Customs of the Highlanders graphically thus: In their
Diet, Apparel, and Houshold-furniture they follow the Parsimony of the
Ancients; they provide their Diet by Fishing and Hunting, and boil their Flesh
in the Paunch or Skin of a Beast: While they hunt, they eat it raw, after
having squeezed out the Blood. Their Drink is the Broth of boiled Meat, or Whey
they keep some Years, and drink it plentifully in their Entertainments; but
most of them drink Water. Their Bread is of Oats and Barley, the only Grain
produced in their Country, which they prepare very artfully: They eat a little
of it in the Morning, and contenting themselves with that, hunt, or go about
their Business without eating any more till Night. They delight most in Clothes
of several Colors, especially stripped; the Colors they affect most, are
Purple and Blue. Their Ancestors, as do most of them still, made use of Plaids
very much variegated; but now they make them rather of dark Colors, resembling
that of the Crops of Heath, that they may not be discovered while they lie in
the Heaths waiting for their Game. Being rather wrapped up than covered with
those Plaids, they endure all the Rigours of the Seasons, and sometimes sleep
covered all over with Snow. At Home they lie upon the Ground, having under them
Fern or Heath (covered with a Sheet or Blanket); the latter laid with the Roots
undermost, so as it is almost equal to Feathers for Softness, but much more
healthful; for the Quality of Heath being to draw out superfluous Humors, when
they lie down weary and faint upon it at Night, they rise fresh and vigorous in
the Morning. They affect this hard way of sleeping; and if at any time they
come into other Places of the Country, where there is better Accommodation,
they pull the Coverings off the Bed, and lie down upon them wrapped in their
Plaids, lest they should be spoiled by this barbarous Effeminacy, as they call
it.

The LOWLANDERS partake much of the Temper of the People, of whom we have
mentioned them to be composed, but most resemble the French, occasioned by the
long League betwixt the two Nations, their mutual Commerce, frequent
Intermarriages, and Custom of traveling into France to study the Law, and
other Sciences, and by their affecting to serve in the French Armies. But since
the Union of the Crowns, the English Customs, and Way of Living, have obtained
much in the Lowlands, where the English Tongue has been their natural Language
for above 600 Years; but still retains more ancient Saxon and French. This
being extraordinary, and perhaps singular, that a foreign Language should
prevail in a Country altogether independent of England, and where the
Inhabitants are of another Lineage, and maintained such fierce and long Wars to
preserve their distinct Sovereignty; the Scottish Antiquaries and Historians
give the following Reasons of it: 1. The frequent Saxon Auxiliaries sent to
assist the Picts against the Scots, which occasioned many of those Saxons to
settle in the Lowlands of Scotland, then possessed by the Picts. 2. The last
considerable Effort made by the Picts, in Conjunction with the English, to
recover their Country against Donald V. of Scotland; who, after he had defeated
the English and Picts upon the River Jedd in Tiviotdale, neglecting to improve
his Victory, was afterward surprised by them near Berwick, and taken Prisoner
after a great Slaughter of his Men. Upon this Success, the English, under the
Conduct of Osbreth and Ella, possessed themselves of the Country as far as
Dumbarton, without restoring the Picts; the major Part of which retired to
Denmark and Norway, and the Remainder were cut off by the English, to prevent
their calling in Foreigners. Thus the English continued in Possession of that
Part of the Country, from the Year 858, till about the Year 875; when King
Gregory the Great of Scotland recovered the Country; and the Scottish
Proprietors, the Possession of their Estates: But willingly entertained the
English Commonalty and Husbandmen, who were as desirous to stay, their own
Country being, at that time, infested by the Danes; and they rather chose to be
under the Dominion of the Scots, who were Christians, than under that of the
Danes, who were Pagans. 3. Great Numbers of the English came into Scotland to
assist King Malcolm III. against the Usurper Macbeth, whom he rewarded after
his Victory with Possessions in Scotland. 4. A great many English came to
Scotland after the Norman Conquest, with Edgar Atheling, and his Sister
Margaret, who was afterward married to King Malcolm abovementioned; which
makes the Reasons of the Scots Historians for the prevailing of the English
Language in the Lowlands of Scotland, very probable.


It has been gaining Ground upon the old Scots Language ever since, which is
now confined to the Highlands and the Isles, where most of those of Note do
also understand English: Though about 100 Years ago, the old People in Galloway
generally understood the Erse or ancient Scots Language, which is now worn
quite out.

XI. Of the Religion and Ecclesiastical Government of Scotland.
THE Estabished Religion of Scotland, since the Revolution, and confirmed by
the Act of Union, is what is called The Presbyterian; being a Church Government
by Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons. Before the Revolution, the Church
was governed by Bishops; but they not coming so readily into the new
Settlement, as the Presbyterians did, were abolished.

The Ecclesiastical Courts, as they now stand, are Four; viz. 1. The Kirk
Session, consisting of the Minister, Elders, and Deacons in each Parish, who
consider the Affairs of the Parish as a Religious Society. They judge in all
Matters of lesser Scandals, can suspend from the Communion, and regulate all
Particulars relating to public Worship and the Poor. 2. The Presbytery, which
consists of the Minister, and one Elder, from five to ten, twelve or more
neighboring Parishes, who choose one of these Ministers to be Praeses or
Moderator. Here are tried Appeals from the Kirk Sessions; and here they inspect
into the Behavior of the Ministers and Elders within their respective Bounds.
They supply vacant Parishes, ordain Pastors, examine and license
Schoolmasters, and young Students, for probationary Preachers; and judge when,
or on whom, to inflict the greater Excommunication. 3. The Provincial Synod.
This is composed of all the Members of several adjacent Presbyteries. It meets
twice a Year at some principal Place within its Bounds: Is opened by a Sermon.
Their Business is to receive Correspondents from the neighboring Synods, who
are a Check upon one another; to determine Appeals from the Presbyteries in
their District; to inquire into, and censure the Behavior of the Presbyteries
themselves. They likewise have Power to transport or remove a Minister from one
Place to another; which often occasions great Disturbance. Hence lie Appeals,
however, to 4. The General Assembly, the highest Ecclesiastical Power in the
Kingdom, in which presides a Lord-Commissioner, a Man of the first Quality, as
a Representative of the King's Person. All the Members of this are annually
elected: and the last Moderator opens the new Sessions with a Sermon.


The same Discipline, as to the main of the several Forms and Proceedings, was
observed in the Episcopal Times, only they had no Lay Elders; the Bishop, or
his Deputy, being a Minister, or Ministers, within the Bounds, presided in all
Presbyteries and Diocesan Synods, as the Archbishop of St. Andrews did in the
National or General Assemblies. For it must be observed, that Episcopacy in
Scotland differed from the same Thing in England; for here it was as low as the
Nature of an Episcopal Church could admit. The Bishops were sine quibus non;
they had no Lay-chancellors, but did all Things Presbyterorum Consilio.

The Number of Churches in Scotland since the Reformation, is much less than it
was before. However, there are none now of peculiar or exempt Jurisdiction.
They are about 950, beside some few Chapels, which make up 68 Presbyteries,
included in 13 Provincial Synods, which formerly were divided into two
Provinces, under two Archbishops, and twelve Bishops, as follow: 1. The
Archbishopric of ST. ANDREW'S contained all Fife, Part of Perthshire, Angus,
and Mernis. 2. The Bishopric of EDINBURGH contained the Three Lothians, (some
few Parishes excepted) Sterlingshire, and the Merse. 3. DUNKELD contained the
North Parts of Perthshire, and some Part of Angus and Lothian. 4. DUMBLANE,
contained the West and South Parts of Perthshire. 5. BREECHIN contained Part of
Angus and Mernis. 6. ABERDEEN contained all Aberdeenshire, and Part of Bamff.
7. MURRAY contained Murray, Nairn, Part of Bamff, and Inverness. 8. ROSS
contained the Shires of Ross, Cromarty, and Part of Inverness. 9. CAITHNESS
contained Caithness, Sutherland, and Strathnaver. 10. ORKNEY contained all
Orkney and Zetland. 11. The Archbishopric of GLASGOW, which was very
extensive, contained the Shires of Clyddesdale, Dunbarton, Renfrew, Air,
Dumfries, Peeblis, Selkirk, and Roxburgh. 12. The Bishopric of GALLOWAY
contained the Shire of Wigton, and Stewartry of Kirkudbright. 13. The ISLES
contained Arran, Bute, Cumbra, and almost all the Hebrides, or Western Isles.
14. ARGYLL contained all the Shire of Argyll, Lochaber, and some few of the
Isles.


The Thirteen PROVINCIAL SYNODS, into which Scotland is at present divided,
are, 1. LOTHIAN and TWEEDALE, consisting of Seven Presbyteries; viz. Edinburgh,
Linlithgow, Biggar, Peeblis, Dalkeith, Haddington, and Dumbar. 2. MERSE and
TIVIOTDALE, consisting of Six Presbyteries; viz. Dunse, Chirnside, Kelso,
Jedburgh, Selkirk, Ersilton. 3. DUMFRIES consists of Four Presbyteries; viz.
Middlebee, Lochmaban, Pentpont, and Dumfries. 4. GALLOWAY consists of Three
Presbyteries; Wigton, Stranrawer, and Kirkudbright. 5. GLASGOW and AIR consist
of Seven Presbyteries; viz. Air, Irvin, Paisley, Hamilton, Lanerk, Glasgow,
Dumbarton. 6. ARGYLL and AIR consist of Seven Presbyteries; viz. Denoon,
Campleton, Inverary, Kilmoir, Sky. 7. PERTH and STIRLING contain Five
Presbyteries; viz. Dunkeld, Perth, Dumblane, Stirling, Auchterarder. 8. FIFE
contains Four Presbyteries; viz. Dunfermling, Kirkalder, St. Andrews, Cowpar.
9. ANGUS and MEARNIS contain Six Presbyteries; viz. Meigle, Dundee, Forfar,
Breechin, Aberbrothock, Fordun. 10. ABERDEEN consists of Eight Presbyteries;
viz. Kincardin, Aberdeen, Alford, Garioch, Deer, Turreff, Fordice, Ellon. 11.
MURRAY consists of Six Presbyteries; viz. Strathbogie, Elgin, Forres,
Inverness, Abernethy, Aberlower. 12. ROSS consists of Four Presbyteries; viz.
Chanonry, Tain, Dingwal, Dornoch. 13. ORKNEY consists of Three Presbyteries;
viz. Caithness, Orkney, Zetland.


The Law of Scotland has provided against Pluralities; and throughout the whole
Country there are scarce any Benefices worth less than 50 l. per Annum,
Sterling; which in that Country is a good Maintenance.

XII. Of the Order of the Thistle, or St. Andrew, in Scotland.
THE Order of St. Andrew, or the Thistle, by reason of its great Antiquity, and
memorable Institution, is, upon all Occasions, called, The most Ancient and
most Noble Order of the Thistle, being founded, as all the Scots Historians
assert, by Achaius the 65th King of Scotland, after a signal Victory obtained
over the Saxons, Anno 819. and dedicated to St. Andrew, the Patron or tutelar
Saint of Scotland.

This Order came at length to shine forth in fuller Splendour in the Reign of
King James V. who was himself a most splendid and magnificent Prince. He caused
the Collar of the Order to be composed of two ancient Badges or Symbols of the
Scots and Picts; viz. The Thistle, and Sprigs of Rue; but about the Time of the
Reformation it fell into Desuetude, and was scarcely used by the Knights then;
being so very zealous for the Reformed Religion, that they left their Order
where they laid down their Popery, and it was never after reassumed till the
Reign of King James VII. who, for the better regulating of the Order in all its
Proceedings, signed a Body of Statutes, and appointed the Knights Brethren to
wear the Image of St. Andrew upon a blue watered tabby Ribband; and likewise
named the Royal Chapel, or Abbey Church of Holy-rood-house, to be the Chapel of
the Order (the old Church of St. Andrews being ruined at the Reformation); for
which End it was put in excellent Repair, but was divested of all its beautiful
Ornaments by a furious Rabble at the late Revolution.

Her late Majesty Queen Anne was pleased to revive the said Order upon the 31st
of December 1703. and signed a Body of Statutes, wherein the Color of the
Ribband was charged from Blue to Green, to make a Distinction between this
Order, and that of the Garter: all which Statut^s the late King George I. was
pleased to confirm, with some additional ones, among which, was that of adding
Rays of Glory to surround the whole Figure of St. Andrew, which hangs at the
Collar. And though from the Time of the Reformation, both Elections and
Installments had been dispensed with, his Majesty was pleased to order, that
for the future Chapters for Election shall be held in the Royal Presence; to
which End he commanded the great Wardrobe to provide the Knights Brethren, and
Officers of the Order, with such Mantles, as are appointed by the Statutes of
the Order.

XIII. Of the Civil Government of Scotland.
THE College of Justice, commonly called, The Sessions, consists of a
President, and Fourteen fixed Senators or Judges, called Ordinary Lords of
Session, and Two Extraordinary Lords; and they have Seven Clerks of Session,
and Six other inferior Officers. Before this Court all civil Causes are tried
at stated Times. And they determine Causes by Acts of Parliament, and the
Custom of the Nation; and where these are defective, they determine according
to the Imperial and Civil Law, not according to the Rigor of the Letter, but
according to Equity and Justice. There lies no Appeal from this Court, but to
the Parliament; and the Presence of Nine Judges is required to make their
Decree valid. The Parliament has full Power to affirm or reverse, with Costs
not exceeding 200 l. Sterling.

This Court has distributive Justice only, both in Law and Equity; but no
Authority as to Life or Limb, unless for some Faults competent to themselves.
Since the Union, Lords of Session are appointed a Committee for planting of
Churches, and Valuation of Tithes.

2. The Justiciary, commonly called, The Justice or Criminal Court, consists of
Five Lords of the Session, and the Justice-General and Justice-Clerk. They try
all Crimes. All Prosecutions in this Court are raised by the King's Advocate;
and the greatest Traitor is, here, allowed Advocates to plead for him.

3. The Court of Exchequer was established in pursuance of the Act of Union, in
the 6th Year of Queen Anne; and has the same Power, Authority, Privilege, and
Jurisdiction of the Revenue of Scotland, as the Court of Exchequer in England
has over the Revenues there. The Judges have also the Power of passing
Signatures, Gifts, and Tutories, etc. The Court consists of a Chief, and Four
other Barons; and it has Two Remembrancers, a Clerk of the Pipe, Attorneys,
Auditors, and other Officers.

The Officers of State are: 1. The Keeper of the Seal, and his Officers. 2. The
Lord Privy Seal, and his Officers. 3. Lord Clerk-Register, and his Officers. 4.
Lord Advocate.


The Faculty of Advocates enjoy many and great Privileges with the rest of the
College of Justice; and have a Dean, a Treasurer, Clerk, Curator, and other
Officers.

Writers of the Signet are those who subscribe all Writs and Summons's that
pass the Signet; and they, as well as the Advocates, are capable of being made
ordinary Lords.

Besides the above National Judges, every particular County or Shire has a
chief Magistrate, or his Depute, ordinary Judge in all Cases Civil and
Criminal; but there lies an Appeal from this Magistrate, in most Cases, to the
Session and Court of Justiciary.

The Sheriff is, in effect, the supreme Justice of Peace, to whom the Law
principally intrusts the securing the Quiet and Tranquillity of the Part of the
Kingdom of which he is Sheriff. King James VI. and King Charles I. bought in
some, and designed to buy in all the rest, of these heretable Sheriffalties;
but most of them yet remain in the great Families of the Kingdom.

Bailiffs, Stewards, and Constables, in their respective Districts, have the
same Liberty as Sheriffs in their Shires.

There are Three Sorts of Burghs; viz. Burghs Royal, Burghs of Regality, and
Burghs of Barony; every one whereof is a Corporation, and holds Courts, though
only the Royal Burghs send Members to Parliament.

The Royal Burghs are one entire Body, governed by, and accountable to, one
general Court, called, The Convention of Burrows, which is annually held
generally at Edinburgh, and have Cognizance of all Matters relating to the
Trade and Interest of all the Burghs in general.

Regalities are Fews granted by the King to some particular Subjects, whose
Authority and Jurisdiction are very large and extensive, both in Civil and
Criminal Cases; and the Lord, or his Baillie, has not only the Power of Furca
and Fossa, Pit and Gallows, but a Jurisdiction with the Magistrate in Civilibus.

As to Burghs of Barony, every one that holds a Barony of the Crown, has a
Court wherein lesser Causes, both Civil and Criminal, are tried, etc.

The Commissariot Courts are a kind of Ecclesiastical Courts. The Commissaries
of Edinburgh, who are Four, particularly try Causes of Matrimony and Adultery,
in order to a plenary Divorce, not only a thoro and mensa, but even a vinculo
matrimonii; so that the innocent Party may marry, as if the offending Party
were naturally dead.

The Court of Admiralty is a supreme Court, in all the Causes competent to its
own Jurisdiction; and the Lord High-Admiral is the King's Lieutenant and
Justice-General upon the Seas, and in all Ports, Harbors and Creeks of the
same, and upon fresh Water and navigable Rivers below the first Bridge, or
within Flood-mark. And no Appeal lies to the Court of Session for Maritime
Matters. All Maritime Causes, Crimes, Faults, Trespasses, Quarrels, etc. are
triable before the Lord-Admiral's Judge, (for he himself never judges in
Person) by the Civil Law and Customs of Scotland. Nevertheless, there are some
particular Jurisdictions of Admiralty hereditary in some great Families; as the
Duke of Argyll, who is Admiral of the Western Isles; the Earl of Sutherland, of
the Shire of that Name; the Earl of Morton, of Orkney and Zetland, etc. And
such Men of War as come up the Firth of Forth, for guarding and securing the
Coasts, receive Orders from the Lord-Provost of Edinburgh.

By the 6th of Queen Anne, Justices of Peace are established in Scotland, with
the same Authority as those in England.

XIV. A short View of the Acts of Parliament of Great Britain, that have made
any Alteration in the Laws of Scotland, from the Union of the two Kingdoms,
Anno 1707.
UNION of the two Kingdoms] By 5 A. R. cap. 8. it was Enacted, That the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland should be united into one Kingdom, by the Name
of Great Britain; to commence on the 1st of May 1707.

Parliament] That the said united Kingdom should be represented by one
Parliament.

Succession of the Crown] That the Succession of the Crown be settled in the
Protestant Branches of the House of Hanover, as it stands limited in England.

Land-Tax] That when 1, 997, 763 l. 8 s. 6 d.. shall be raised in England by a
Land Tax, the Quota for Scotland should be 48,000 l. as the Quota of that
Kingdom, Scotland, not to be charged with any Duties laid on by the Parliament
of England before the Union.

Coin, Weights and Measure] To be the same as in England.

Trade, Customs, and Excise] The Subjects of the united Kingdom shall have free
Trade to all Places belonging to either. To be regulated, as in England,
throughout the united Kingdom.

Civil Government] The Courts of Session or College of Justice, the Courts of
Justiciary, and the Inferior Courts of Scotland, to remain as they are, and no
Cause in Scotland to be cognizable in the Courts of Westminster.

Offenders by Dittay] 8 A. cap. 15. The Method of taking up Offenders by
Dittay, and Exhibiting Informations by the Stress of the Portous Roll,
abolished.

8 A. cap. 15. Informations in order to make up Dittays concerning Crimes to be
tried in the Circuits in Scotland, to be by Presentiments made by the Justices
at their Quarter Sessions, or upon Information taken by them for Stewards,
Bailiffs of Regalities, etc.

Superiors, Vassals, disarming Highlanders.
1 Geo. cap. 20. An Act for encouraging all Superiors, Vassals, Landlords, and
Tenants, who continue loyal to King George.

Vassals Attendance] 1 George I. cap. 54. injoins, That the personal Service
and Attendance which was wont to be paid to the Heads of Clans, and Owners of
Estates, at the Pleasure of such Chiefs, under the Names of personal
Attendance, Hosting, Hunting, Watching, and Warding, shall be for the future
paid in Money, annually; and the said personal Service, etc. shall be utterly
annulled.

This Act was further enforced in the same Reign, 11 Geo. cap. 26. on the
Non-observance of the former, by many of the contemptuous Highlanders.

Highlanders disarmed] 1 Geo. I. cap. 54. An Act for more effectual securing
the Peace of the Highlands in Scotland: which enacts, That no Person within the
said Highlands shall use or bear Broadswords or Target, Poynard, Wingar or
Durk, Side-pistol or Gun, or any warlike Weapons, in the Fields, or in the Way
to or from any Church, Market, Fair, Burial, Huntings, Meetings, etc. However,
not to extend to Noblemen, Officers of Justice, or Commoners, having yearly 400
l. Scots, or who are otherwise qualified to vote at Elections for
Parliament Men; allowing to every such Commoner Two Firelocks, Two Pair of
Pistols, and Two Swords; and that the Magistrates of the Royal Burghs may keep
Arms in Magazines.

Equivalent.
1 Geo. cap. 27. Commissioners appointed to state the Debts due to Scotland, by
way of Equivalent. Also,

5 Geo. I. cap. 20. An Act for settling certain yearly Funds, payable out of
the Revenues of Scotland; to satisfy public Debts in Scotland, and other Uses
mentioned in the Treaty of Union, and to discharge the Equivalents claimed on
behalf of Scotland, and for obviating future Disputes concerning it. N.B. This
Equivalent was stated by the Union Act, at 398,085 l. 10 s.

The said Fund to be payable out of the Excise and Customs of Scotland; the
Charges of the Civil List there being first paid.

If the Produce of the Excise, etc. shall be deficient, to be made good out of
the Revenues of Scotland.

Proprietors of Debts incorporated] The King empowered to incorporate the
Proprietors of 248,550 l. 9 s. 0 d.. on whom the abovesaid Annuities are
settled, when of it: The said Sum to be the Joint Stock of the Company, and
every one to have a Share in the Annuity in proportion to his Debt.

Elections of Peers and Commoners.
Sixteen Peers of Scotland to be chosen out of the Scots Peerage, to sit and
vote in the House of Lords; and Forty-five Representatives of Scotland, in the
House of Commons of the Parliament of Great Britain; Thirty for the Shires,
etc. and Fifteen by the Royal Burghs.

12 A. cap. 6. No Person who has purchased an Estate, entitled to elect, or be
elected, a Member of Parliament, till after a Year's Possession.

Anno 1734. An Act for better regulating the Election of Members to serve in
the House of Commons for Scotland, and for incapacitating the Judges of the
Court of Justiciary, and Barons of the Exchequer there, to be elected, or to
sit and vote as Members of the House of Commons.

6 A. cap. 23. An Act requiring the Election of Sixteen Peers. By the same Act,
Peers of Scotland are to be tried as English Peers are, for Treason or Felony.

Scots Customs and Privileges in Statu quo.
Royal Burghs.] Their Rights and Privileges to remain entire.

Regalia and Records] Of Scotland to remain there.

Alterations in Scots Customs, etc.
Great Seal] Only one to be made for the united Kingdom, different from the
Great-Seal used in either. Another Seal for Scotland to be used in Matters of
private Right.

Privy-Council] By 6 A. cap. 6. After the 1st of May 1708. there shall be but
one Privy Council for the united Kingdom.

Exchequer] 6 A. cap. 26. An Act for erecting a Court of Exchequer in Scotland,
after the Model of that in England. Jurors to have 5 l. per Annum. Four Terms
annually for the Court of Exchequer. Writs of Error there to be returnable in
the Parliament of Great Britain.

Malt Act] 11 Geo. cap. 8. The Duties on Malt in Scotland, settled at 3 d. the
Bushel; being half the Duty paid in England.

Church Government, Toleration, etc.
The Presbyterian Church Government to remain established in Scotland. The
Church of England to remain established in England.

10 A. cap. 7. It shall be lawful for those of the Episcopal Communion in
Scotland, to assemble for divine Worship to be performed by Pastors ordained by
Protestant Bishops without Disturbance, except in Parish-Churches.

Such Pastors to exhibit their Orders at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and
the same to be registered, paying one Shilling.

Such Pastors may baptize and marry, provided the Christnings be registered, and
Banns three times published in the Episcopal Congregations.

One hundred Pounds Penalty for disturbing such Congregations.

Excommunication] No Pain or Forfeiture to be incurred by any Person on any
Excommunication by the Church-Judicatories in Scotland. Ministers to pray for
the Royal Family.

Patrons] 10 A. cap. 12. Patrons of Churches, etc. restored to their Right of
Presentation.

Papists and Nonjurors, to register] 9 Geo. cap. 24. An Act to oblige Papists
and Nonjurors to register their Estates in Scotland.

10 Geo. cap. 10. An Act to explain the said Act, to oblige Papists to register
their Estates.

Civil Government.
Justices of Peace] A sufficient Number to be in Scotland, who besides the
Powers such Justices now have there, shall have the same Authority as Justices
of Peace in England.

Circuit Courts] In Scotland to be held but twice a Year.

Another 8 A. cap. 15. None obliged to attend Lords of Justiciary in their
Circuits, but the Sheriff and his Officers.

And 10 A. cap. 23. Another for appointing Circuit Courts to be held only in
April and May.

Christmas Vacation] 10 A. cap. 13. The Yule Vacance restored.

1 Geo. cap. 28. An Act to take away the Yule Vacance, or Christmas Vacation.

3 Geo. II. cap. 32. The Judges of the Court of Session are empowered to
adjourn their Sessions, so that they may still have a Yule Vacance, or
Christmas Vacation, if they see fit.

Lords of Session] 10 Geo. cap. 19. An Act to explain the Law concerning the
Trial and Admission of Lords of Session in Scotland.

Oaths] 6 A. cap. 14. An Act requiring the Abjuration Oath to be taken by all
Officers in Scotland.

Another 8 A. cap. 14. requiring the Oaths to be taken by all Officers in
Scotland.

Another 5 G. I. cap. 29. To make the former more effectual, and to cause the
Oaths to be taken by Ministers and Preachers in Scotland.

Treason and other Crimes.
7 A. cap. 21. High Treason, and Misprision of Treason, to be deemed the same
in Scotland as in England; and the Crown empowered to grant Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer to try the same in Scotland.

Jurors] Jurors at such Trials to have Estates of Forty Shillings per Annum
each.

Treason, Indictments and Presentments] After the Decease of the Pretender, and
Three Years after the Hanover Succession shall take place, no Attainder for
Treason shall disinherit the Heir -- And then a Copy of the Indictment for
Treason, and a List of the Witnesses to prove it, and the Names of the Jury
with these Additions, shall be delivered to the Party indicted, Ten Days before
the Trial.

Capital Crimes] Theft of landed Men, Murder under Trust, wilful Fire-raising,
firing Colehughs, and Assassination, to be no longer Treason in Scotland, but
capital Offenses, and punished as such.

Bail] Enacted, That double Bail be taken in criminal Cases.

Capital and Corporal Punishments,
Not to be executed to the South of the Firth, within Thirty Days after
Sentence; nor any North of the Firth, within less than Forty Days after
Sentence.

Lord Lieutenant, etc. empowered by this Act to summon the Clans to deliver in
their Arms.

3 Geo. II. cap. 32. An Act for enabling the Judges of the Court of Session in
Scotland to adjourn the said Court, and to limit the Time for the Execution of
Sentences importing Corporal Punishments in that Kingdom.

Further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the Magistrates, and Courts of
Judicature, to put in Execution any Sentence importing Corporal Punishment,
less than Death or Dismembring, in any Part of Scotland, South of the Firth,
within Eight Days after it is pronounced; and to the Northward of the Firth,
within Ten Days after it is pronounced.

And the Judges of the Court of Justiciary, or any of them, are authorized,
upon Application to them, to delay Execution, if they think proper, for Thirty
Days: to the end Application may be made for Relief against any hard or unjust
Sentence.

Trade and Manufactures.
Linen Manufacture] 10 A. cap. 21. An Act for regulating the making of
Linen-cloth.

Another 12 A. cap. 20. for regulating the Linen Manufactures.

And 13 G. I. An Act for regulating the Linen and Hempen Manufactures of
Scotland, which gives great Encouragement to that improving Branch.

Woollen Manufacturies] 6 Geo. cap. 13. An Act for regulating the Woollen
Manufacturies in Scotland.

10 Geo. cap. 13. An Act to explain and amend the Act for regulating Woollen
Manufacturies in Scotland.

Fisheries and Manufacturies] The annual Sum of 2000 l. to be applied to the
Encouragement of the Fishery, and other Manufacturies in Scotland, the said
Annuities to be in lieu of all Equivalents claimed by Scotland.

13 G. I. cap. 26. An Act for encouraging the Fisheries, and other
Manufacturies and Improvements in Scotland; impowering his Majesty to settle a
Plan for improving the same.

Naval Stores] 2 Geo. II. cap. 32. An Act to encourage the Importation of
Masts, Yards, and Bowsprits from Scotland.

Highways] 5 Geo. cap. 30. An Act for making the Laws more effectual for
repairing Highways, Bridges and Ferries in Scotland, in the same manner as in
England.

The Act relating to the Forfeited Estates, appropriates 20,000 l. out of the
said Estates for making a capital Stock for erecting Schools in the Highlands,
after other Uses and Designations appointed by the Act, are complied with.

XV. Brief Observations on the preceding XIV Articles; with the Division of
Scotland into Shires, etc.
FROM the foregoing Particulars you will perceive, Sir, that this Part of the
united Kingdom is far from being so inconsiderable a Country as some would have
it thought, who know nothing of the Matter, and give themselves the License of
making National Reflections; an ungenerous Vice, to which the English are but
two much addicted, as well with regard to this as a neighboring Kingdom, and a
still nearer Principality. You will observe, that there are but few Things
wanting to make Scotland as populous, and as full of Trade, Shipping, and
Wealth, in proportion, as most, if not the best, Counties in England. Those few
Things, indeed, are very difficult, if not impossible, to be obtained, as
Things stand; particularly, 1. A Change in the Disposition of the common
People, from a Desire of Traveling Abroad, to an industrious and diligent
Application to Labor at Home. 2. Stock and Substance to encourage that
Application. Sloth is not a Disease of the Nation. The Scots are as diligent,
as industrious, as apt for Labor and Business, and as capable of it, when they
are Abroad, as any People in the World; and why should they not be so at Home?
No doubt they would, if they had suitable Encouragement. 3. Some little
Alterations in their Method of Husbandry, by which their Lands would be
improved, and the Produce thereof turn to better Account; of all which
something shall be said in my Progress through the Country, as Occasion offers.
4. If Vassalage, Servi^ and other Bas-Tenures, or Holdings of L^ l^gally
altered, and the Superiors obliged by Law to sell, or accept of a valuable
Consideration, for their Feuds and Superiorities This has been in a great
measure effected by virtue of the Acts for Disarming the Highlanders, etc. See
p. 32, 33.
. 5. If they were more accustomed to Leases for Years or Lives, such Tenants
and Lease-holders would be better enabled and encouraged to improve the Ground,
than otherwise they are or can be. 6. If the Court resided and Parliaments were
held sometimes in Scotland, or near it; which would save a great deal of Money,
now spent in Journeys to London, and attending a long time there, which if
Individuals find their Account in, is nevertheless a Loss to the Whole.


In the mean time, I shall endeavor to show what Scotland really is, and what
it might be, if those Engagements were fulfilled which were promised to them
before the Union; such as erecting Manufactures under English Direction,
embarking Stocks from England to carry on Trade, employing Hands to cut down
their Northern Woods, and to bring the Fir Timber and Deals to England, of
which Scotland is able to furnish a very great Quantity; and lastly,
encouraging their Fishery, etc.

But leaving its Manufacturies and Wants to the Consideration of those in whose
Power it is to promote and supply them, I shall hasten to conclude this Letter;
but first shall give you an Account of the present Division of this Part of the
united Kingdom into Counties, etc.

Scotland then is divided into 31 Shires or Counties, and two Stewarties; which
I shall give, as follows, in Alphabetical Order, though, from the Nature of my
Work, I cannot observe that Method in my future Letters. Shires of 1. Aberdeen
2. Air 3. Argyll 4. Bamf 5. Berwick 6. Bute 7. Caithness 8. Clakmannan 9.
Cromarty 10. Dumbar 11. Dumfries, with the Stewarty of Annandale 12. Edinburgh,
or Mid-Lothian 13. Elgin 14. Fife 15. Forfar, or Angus 16. Hadington 17.
Inverness 18. Kincardin 19. Kinross 20. Lanerk 21. Linlithgow, or West Lothian
22. Nairn 23. Peebles, or Twedale 24. Perth 25. Renfrew 26. Ross 27. Roxburgh
28. Selkirk 29. Sterling 30. Sutherland 31. Wigtown.
The Stewarties of Kirkubright and Orkney.


And now, Sir, having premised these general Things, which will save me much
Repetition in my following Letters, I will conclude this with assuring you,
that I am

Your humble Servant.

LETTER II. CONTAINING A Description of the Merse, the Two Lothians, of
Edinburgh, Leith, etc.
SIR,
I AM just now entered Scotland by the ordinary Way of Berwick, which stands on
the North Side of the River Tweed, and has a Bridge by which it is joined to
Northumberland. It was originally a Scots Town, and is to this Day no Part of
England; but has diverse distinct Customs and Privileges, and is mentioned in
all Statutes and Proclamations as a Place or Liberty of itself, distinct from
England and Wales. It was formerly the chief Town of the Merse, which to this
Day is called the Shire of Berwick. It was often taken from, and retaken by the
Scots; but the last time it fell into the English Hands, which was long before
the Union of the Two Crowns in the Person of King James VI. they fortified it
more strongly than it had been formerly, and manned it with a sufficient
Garrison, so that all the Attempts of the Scots to regain it afterward, proved
ineffectual. It is a Place of no extraordinary Trade, though a great
Thorough-fare. It has but one Church, which is under the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop, and in the Gift of the Dean and Chapter of Durham.

As soon as we get out of the Town, we enter on Scots Ground, though, in Times of
War, it used to be part of what was called Debateable Land, and on that Account
but thinly inhabited; for the Borderers of each Kingdom often made Inroads on
one another, notwithstanding that a great Number of Men, at an incredible
Trouble and Expense, kept Watch every Night; besides which, there were
Watch-towers all along the Borders at proper Distances, and several Laws
relating to the Borders made by Commissioners from both Kingdoms.

The first Thing we observed was the Sea on the Right Hand, and the River
Tweed, which fetches a Reach Northward, on the Left. The Land between lies so
high, that in stormy Weather it is very bleak and unpleasant, having little or
no Shelter: However, the Land, compared to what we left in Northumberland, or
what we soon found farther in Scotland, is good.

The first Town in Scotland is Mordington, a poor sorry Village; yet gives the
Title of Lord to a Branch of the noble Family of Douglas. The present Lord
lives in England, and is so well known, that I need say no more of him.

From the Brow of a very high and steep Hill, we had a large View into
Scotland; but we were welcomed to it by such a Gust of Wind, that it obliged us
to quit our Horses in real Apprehension of being blown off; besides, the Wind
blowing full North, and the Road turning toward the same Quarter, it blew
directly in our Faces. I can truly say, I never was sensible of so exceeding
keen and sharp a Cold; for it pierced our very Eyes, so that we could scarcely
keep them open.

When we went down the Hill, the first Town we came to is almost as perfectly
Scots, as if you were an hundred Miles North of Edinburgh; and there is very
little Appearance of any thing English there, either in Customs, Habits, Usages
of the People, or in their way of Living, Eating, or Behavior. And there are
very few English Familes to be found among them.

On the contrary, you have in England abundance of Scots Men, Scots Customs,
Words, Habits, and Usages; nay, even the Buildings in the Towns and Villages
all over Northumberland imitate the Scots; witness their building their Houses
with the Stairs going up to the second Story on the Outside of the House, that
one Family may live below, and another above, without going in at the same Door
(which is the Scots way of Living); as you may see in Alnwick, Wirkworth, and
several other Towns; witness also their setting their Corn in great Numbers of
small Stacks without Doors, not making use of Barns, but only a particular
Building, which they call a Barn, though no more than a Threshing-floor, into
which they rake one of these small Stacks at a time, and thresh it out.

The first Town is called Ayton, from the small River Ay, on whose Bank it
stands. The Church was ruinous, and quite destitute of a Roof. The Heritors
being of different Opinions, contributed not a little to the Dilapidation. Such
as were episcopally inclined were very backward in contributing their Share,
and the Presbyterians thought it hard the Whole should lie upon them; so that,
between the two, the Roof fell to the Ground. However, the Minister preached in
a Barn to the Generality of the Parishioners, and such as were otherwise
inclined, heard Episcopal Ministers in the Houses of some of the neighboring
Gentry.

About Three Miles farther East is a small Harbor, with a Town called Eymouth,
Aymouth, or Haymouth, where a Fort was formerly raised to curb the Garrison of
Berwick. This Town gave Title of Baron to the late Duke of Marlborough; but the
Patent being granted only to him, and the Heirs-male of his own Body, the
Honor extinguished with him. It is a good Fishing-town, and affords a good
Harbor for Fishing-vessels. In Queen Elizabeth's Time, the French held it, and
fortified it, as it was the first Port in Scotland they could safely land their
Supplies at, for the Queen Mother; but they were obliged to quit that, and the
Kingdom, some time after, by a Treaty, Queen Elizabeth supporting the Reformers
against her.

From this Bridge we enter upon a most desolate, and, in Winter, frightful Moor
for Travelers, especially Strangers, called Coldingham Moor, upon which, for
about Eight Miles, you hardly see a Hedge or a Tree, and you meet with but one
House all the Way, and that not a House of Entertainment.

Coldingham, whence this Moor derives its Name, was an old Monastery, built by
Edgar, King of Scotland, about the Year 1100, and famous for its Lady Abbess
Ebba, of whom they tell us the following Story.

This Lady was the Daughter of Edelfred, King of Northumberland; and, when her
Father was taken Prisoner by the Pagan Mercians, she got into a Boat in the
Humber, with three other Women, and, by their own Prayers only, were
miraculously preserved, and carried as far as Scotland, where, under a
Promontory, they were driven on Shore by a Storm, and their Boat dashed in
Pieces.

When they got ashore, they labored with their Hands, and made themselves a
little Hut to lodge in; they continued their religious way of Living, and the
Country People sustained them with Food; till at length, acquiring a great
Character by their Sanctity and Austerity, they were addressed to far and near
for their Prayers; and, by the Charity of the People, got enough to build a
religious House at Coldingham.

Here, as Fame says, when the cruel Danes came on Shore, the religious Lady
(who, it seems, was very beautiful too!) cut off her Nose and upper Lip, and
made all her Nuns do the same, in order to preserve their Chastity. Whereupon
the barbarous Danes, enraged at their Zeal, fired their Nunnery, and burnt them
all alive. From this Lady, who, it is said, was sainted for these Sufferings,
the Promontory where she landed is to this Day called St. Ebbe's Head, and
vulgarly, by our Sailors, St. Tabbe's. There was once, upon the Point of this
Promontory, a strong Fort called Fast-castle, belonging to the Earl of Hume;
but it has been some time demolished.

A little to the North-west is the Town and Castle of Duns, remarkable for the
Birth of John Duns Scotus, Anno 1274. some of whose Family are still in Being
there. He was a Friar Minor, and the greatest Scholar of his Age. Scaliger
says, there was nothing his Genius was not capable of. But his chief Study was
in Points more nice than necessary, whereupon he was called Doctor Subtilis.
His Followers, called Scotists, were great Opposers of the Thomists, another
Set of Scholasticks, so named from Thomas Aquinas. He studied at Oxford and
Paris, and died of an Apoplexy at Cologn. After Berwick was taken by the
English, the Sheriff-Court was kept here, which was but lately removed to a
Market Town, called Greenlow; which is also a Royal Burgh, and the principal in
the Shire, belonging to the Earl of Marchmont.

Duns was also remarkable for the Encampment of the Scottish Army, under General
Lesley, assembled to oppose King Charles I. when he came to the English Borders
with an Army, to persuade that Kingdom to Obedience. It has the best weekly
Market for Cattle in Scotland, and is a Place of the best Trade in this County.

Coldstream is also a Market Town, in this County of Merse, where was anciently
an Abbey. Eccles likewise had another: and Ersilton is noted for the
Birthplace of the Rhyming Poet Lermouth, so much admired by the Vulgar Scots.
Hume was formerly the Residence of the Earls of that Name, which they derived
from the Town, and they had a strong Castle there, now demolished.

The inconsiderate Vanity of the ancient Scottish Gentry and Nobility, of
deriving their Names from the Places of their Residence, had this Inconvenience
attending it, that in a few Generations, it lost the old Name of the Family
from which these Changelings (may I, without Affront, call them?) descended.
Thus the Dunbars and Humes, originally the same, came to be thought two
distinct ones. In like manner, the Gordons, Swintons, Ridpaths, Nisbets, and
the Spotswoods, as some say, though all of the same Original, must have lost the
Knowledge of it, had it not been for Tradition, or the Armorial Bearings of the
several Families, which bespeak them to be of the same Lineage. This Hint may
serve once for all, as to those Families called of that Ilk; i. e. whose
Surname and paternal Estate, are the same, and are generally esteemed ancient
and honorable.

The County of Merse, or March, formerly gave Title of Earls of March, to the
Family of Dunbar, who, according to Camden, derived their Origin from the
famous Gospatrick, Earl of Northumberland, who retired into Scotland on the
Norman Conquest, and was honored with the Earldom of March, and Castle of
Dunbar, by the then King Malcolm Canmore, whence his Posterity took the Name;
while another Branch, being possessed of the Barony of Hume, assumed that for
their Surname, which they still retain. George de Dunbar being proscribed in
the Reign of James I. of Scotland, the Title of Earl of March was conferred on
the Duke of Albany, then on the Family of Stewart and Lenox; which being
extinct, King William III. conferred it on William Douglas, Brother of the Duke
of Queensbury, whose Son now enjoys it.

Having passed over Coldingham Moor, called also Lambermoor, the Lowlands of
East-Lothian show themselves from the Top of a steep Hill, and give a Prospect
of a fruitful and pleasant Country. As soon as we come down the Hill, there is
a Village, called Cockburnspath, or Cobberspath, where Nature forms a very
steep and difficult Pass, and where a thousand Men well armed, and boldly doing
their Duty, could keep out a very great Army, if there was occasion for it.

The next Shire is that of East-Lothian; and the first House of any Note we met
with in it, was that of Dunglass, the Seat of Sir James Hall. We began here to
see, that Scotland was not naturally so barren, as some People represent it;
but might be made equal even to the richest, most fruitful, most pleasant, and
best improved Part of England, if the Scots had the same Methods of doing it,
and were as good Husbandmen, as the English; and this might easily be brought
to pass, would the Gentry set about it, as this Gentleman has, in part, already
done.

The Truth is, the Soil hereabout is very good, and the Sea-ware, as they call
the Weeds which the Sea casts up, abundantly supplies the Defect of Marl,
Chalk, or Limestone; for by laying this continually on the Land, they plough
every Year, without letting it lie fallow, as we do; and I found they had as
much Corn, as our Ploughmen express it, as could stand upon the Ground.

The next Town of Note is Dunbar, a Royal Burgh, which, in Scotland, is much
the same with what we call a Corporation in England, and sends Members to
Parliament in like manner; only, in Scotland, these Burghs have some particular
Privileges separate to themselves; as that, for Example, of holding a Sort of
Parliament, called a Convention of Burghs, a Method taken from the Union of the
Hans Towns in the North, in which they meet and concert Measures for the
public Good of the Towns, and of their Trade, and make Bylaws, or Acts and
Declarations, which bind the whole Body. Not have they lost this Privilege by
the Union with England, but it is preserved entire, and is now many ways more
advantageous to them than it was before, as their Trade is like to be, in time,
more considerable. But this I have taken notice of in another Place.

This Town of Dunbar is a handsome well built Town, situated in the Mouth of
the River Forth, on the South Side toward the German Ocean. It is a very
considerable Port, and of great Advantage to all Ships in the River, in case of
Stress of Weather; but yet its Entrance was so difficult by steep Rocks, in the
Mouth of the Harbor, that the Corporation had exhausted itself by endeavoring
to cut through them; and being unable to proceed further in it; and at the same
time, the Townhouse and School of the Town being run to Decay, and the Town
itself destitute of fresh Water: To answer all these good Purposes, they
procured an Act to pass, in the Year 1718. entitled, An Act for laying a Duty
of (...) Pennies Scots, or one 6 th Part of a Penny, upon every Pint of Ale or
Beer that shall be sold within the Town of Dunbar; for improving and preserving
the Harbor, and repairing the Townhouse, and building a School, and other
public Buildings there; and for supplying the said Town with fresh Water.

This Duty has been of very great Service to the Town, and has enabled them to
make a great Progress in the intended Improvements; but the principal Works,
which were to dig up Part of a Rock at the Bottom of the Harbor, to carry out
the great Pier to the Rock called The Beacon Rock, to cut the Slope of the
Island down to a Perpendicular, and to supply the Town with fresh Water,
remaining undone; and the Act expiring in the Year 1738. the same was continued
for 25 Years longer, by an Act passed 10 Geo. II. which will, it is hoped,
perfect all that remains undone.

They had here a great Herring-fishery, which has decayed very much of late
Years; and they cure Herrings here, as they do at Yarmouth in Norfolk, though I
cannot say they cure them so well, nor are they so fit for keeping and sending
on long Voyages. The Herrings themselves may indeed make a little Difference,
being generally larger and fatter than those of Yarmouth; which makes it more
difficult to cure them, so as to keep in a hot Climate, and on a long Voyage.
Here was formerly a strong Castle, which was demolished by Act of Parliament
during the Minority of King James VI.

Between the Town and the great Road stands a little, but pleasant and
agreeable Seat of the Duke of Roxburgh, called Broxmouth, with a Park well
planted in Vista's and Walks; for the Gentlemen of Scotland are now set upon
planting Forest-trees, as well for Ornament as Profit. And here I would give an
useful Hint to the Gentlemen who plant Trees in Scotland, the Want of which, as
I have observed at several great Houses and Parks in that Country, is the
Reason they do not thrive, as they might otherwise do: And this is, by securing
the young Trees by a triangular Frame seven or eight Feet high, which is made
by setting three large Stakes about them in an equilateral Triangle, and Tree
and all, with Haybands, to defend the Bark, fastened together at the Top. Then,
as the Tree stands in the Center of the Triangle, which way soever the Wind
blows, the Root is not shaken, or the Earth moved and loosened about it.

For want of this, the Tree being left without Support before it has taken
Root, the Winds shake it every way, and loosen the Earth about it, so that it
gets no Time to strike. This is the Reason why, in many of the Gentlemen's
Parks, I saw the Trees stunted and balked, though they had been planted many
Years.

On the South-west Side of this Town, under the Mountains, near a Place called
Dun-hill, is the Field where the Battle of Dunbar was fought between Oliver
Cromwell and General Lesly, Commander of the Scots Army, where the desperate
Few (for Cromwell's Army was not above 8000 Men) defeated and totally overthrew
the great Army of the other Side, killed 6000 of them, and took 10000
Prisoners, to the Surprise of the World.

Here we turned out of the Way, to see the Marquis of Tweedale's fine Park at
Yester, or Zester; in the Center of which stands a very noble House, but in a
too low Situation.

The old Earl of Tweedale, in the Reign of King Charles II. having seen the
Plans of Greenwich and St. James's Parks, was so pleased with them, that, as
soon as he went down into Scotland, he laid out the Plan and Design of all
those noble Walks and Forests of Trees, which he planted here. A Gentleman
whose Judgment I can depend upon, told me, that if ever those Trees came to be
worth but Sixpence apiece, they would be of more Value than the Fee Simple of
the whole paternal Estate of the Family. Nor is this unlikely, if it be true,
that his Lordship, and his immediate Successor, planted above 6000 Acres of
Land with Fir-trees; and wherever any of them failed, they were constantly
renewed the next Year.

The Park itself is said to be eight Miles round, and exceeds, in many
respects, the new Park at Richmond in Surrey: But the Plantation of Fir is not
confined to this Estate; for the Family has another Seat at Pinkey near
Musselburgh, where the same Lord planted also a great Number of Trees, as his
Successors have likewise done at another Seat, which they have in Fife, near
Aberdour.

As this Planting is a great Encouragement to the Nobility of Scotland to
improve their Estates by the same Method, so we find abundance of Gentlemen
follow the Example; insomuch that you hardly see a House of Note, especially in
the South Parts of this Country, but is adorned with Groves and Walks of
Fir-trees about it; by which we may reasonably expect, that in a little time
Scotland will have no need to send to Norway for Timber and Deal, but will have
sufficient of her own, and, perhaps, be able to furnish England too with
considerable Quantities.

From this Town of Dunbar to Edinburgh, the Country may be reckoned as
fruitful, pleasant, and rich, as any in Scotland, or, indeed, as most in
England. The Sea is on the Right Hand at a moderate Distance, and the Hills on
the Left, farther off, which are habitable, and feed large Flocks of Sheep, and
have many open Roads leading over them from Edinburgh, and other Parts, toward
England.

The most material Thing this Country wants, is more enclosed Pastures, by
which the Farmers would be enabled to keep a sufficient Stock of Cattle well
foddered in the Winter, and thereby not only be furnished with Store of Butter,
Cheese, and Beef for the Market, but likewise by the Dung of the Beasts ^nrich
their Soil, according to the unanswerable Maxim in grasing, That Stock upon
Land improves Land.

Two other Articles would increase and enrich them, which they seldom or never
practice: 1. Folding their Sheep within moveable Hurdles. 2. Fallowing their
ploughed Land.


The first would fatten the Ground, and the latter destroy the Weeds; which
would be of great Service to the Land at a Distance from the Sea, where they
have not the Benefit of Sea-weed, which I have just now mentioned.

But at present, for want of Enclosures, they have no Winter Provision for
black Cattle, and therefore the Farmers have no Dairies, no Butter or Cheese,
in any Quantity, and no Heaps of Dung in their Yards to return upon the Land
for its Improvement. Thus a good Soil is impoverished for want of Husbandry.

From Dunbar we pass another River Tyne, which, to distinguish it from the two
Tynes in Northumberland, I shall call Scots Tyne, though not so distinguished
here. It rises in the Hills near Yester, and watering part of the fine and
pleasant Vale I mentioned before, runs by Haddingtoun, a Royal Burgh, and an
old, half-ruined Town, with the Remains of an old Nunnery. It was formerly
large, handsome, and well built, and reckoned very strong; for besides the
Walls of Stone, which were in those Times esteemed very good, the English
fortified it with Lines and Bastions, four of which latter were very large, as
may be seen by what remains of them to this Day. It had also a large Ditch, and
was so strong, that the English, commanded by Sir George Wilford, defended it
against a great Army of French and Scots, though his Garrison were almost all
swept away by the Plague, till he was relieved from England, when he quitted
it, after demolishing the Fortifications.

They have a good Stone Bridge here over the Tyne, though the River is but small.
The Church was large, but has suffered in the Ruin of the rest, and but part of
it is repaired, though big enough for the Number of Inhabitants. There are in it
some Monuments remaining of the Duke of Lauderdale, and other Maitlands,
ancient Lords of this Part of the Country; but as the Choir of the Church is
open and defaced, they have suffered with the rest.

In and about this Place I saw something of a Manufacture, and a Face of
Industry, which was the first I had hitherto seen the least Appearance of in
Scotland; particularly, here was a Woollen Manufacture, erected by a Company or
Corporation for making Broad-cloth, which they call English Cloth: And as they
had English Workmen, and English Wool, they really made it very good; but I
cannot say they could bring it so cheap to the Market as they do in England.
This was the Reason, that though before the late Union, the English Cloth being
prohibited upon severe Penalties, their own Cloth supplied them very well; yet,
as soon as the Union was made, by which the English Trade was opened, the
Clothiers from Worcester, Gloucester, Wilts, Somerset, and Devonshire, brought
in their Goods, and underselling the Scots, those Manufacturies were not able
to stand it. However, the People turn their Hands to other Things, are still
employed in Spinning, Dying, Weaving, etc. and carry on a good deal of that
Sort of Business.

On the North-side of the Mouth of the Forth, stand the Remains of Tantallon
Castle, infamous in the Scots History for being the Seat of Rebellion in the
Reign of King James V. Hence came the odd Fancy among the Soldiers, That the
Drums beating the Scots March, which was invented by the King's Soldiers, when
they marched against the Earl of Angus, who held out this Castle against him,
say, Ding down Tantallon. But it is now no more a Fortress, being entirely
demolished.

Over Against this, in the Mouth of the same River, stands a steep Rock, called
the Bass, inaccessible on all Sides, except by one narrow Passage. It was
formerly slightly fortified, rather to prevent its being made a Retreat for
Pirates and Thieves, than for any Use it could be of to command the Sea; for
the Entrance of the Forth is so wide, that Ships can go in and out, without the
least Danger of being hurt by any thing that could be offered from the Bass.

In the Times of the late King Charles II. and his Brother King James VII. it
was made a State-Prison, where the Western People, called in those Days
Cameronians, were confined, for being in Arms against the King. And after the
Revolution a desperate Crew of People got Possession of it; and having a large
Boat, which they hoisted up upon the Rock, or let down at Pleasure, committed
several Piracies, took a great many Vessels, and held out the last of any Place
in Great Britain for King James: But their Boat being at last either seized or
lost, and not being seasonably supplied with Provisions from France, as they
used to be, they were obliged to surrender.

The Solan Geese are the principal Inhabitants of this Island, a Fowl rare as
to its Kind; for they are not found any-where in Britain that I can learn,
except here, in some of the lesser Islands in the Orcades, and in the Island of
Ailzye, in the Mouth of the Clyde. They come as certainly at their Season, as
the Swallows or Wood-cocks, with this Difference, (if what the People there
tell us may be depended on) that they generally come exactly to the very same
Day of the Month.

They feed mostly on Herrings, and therefore it is observed, they come just
before or with them, and go away with them likewise, though, it is evident, they
do not follow them; for they go all away to the North, but whither, is not
known. As they live on Fish, so they eat like Fish, which, together with their
being so exceeding fat, makes them, in my Opinion, a very coarse Dish, rank,
ill-relished, and soon gorges the Stomach. But here they are looked upon as a
Dainty.

It is a large Fowl, rather bigger than an ordinary Goose. It Is web-footed, but
its Bill is pointed like a Crane or Heron, only much thicker, and not above
five Inches long. When they are coming, they send some before to fix their
Mansion, which, for that Reason, are called Scouts. The Inhabitants are careful
not to disturb them till they have built their Nests, and then they are not to
be frightened by any Noise whatsoever. They lay but one Egg at a time, which
they so dexterously fix by one End to a Point of the Rock in the middle of the
Nest, that if it be pulled off, it is difficult to fix it so any more. They
hatch it, by holding it fast under one Foot, and seldom leave it till it be
hatched. The Fish caught by the old ones often serve the Inhabitants for Food,
and the Sticks they bring to make their Nests supply them with Fuel. They make
great Profit both of the Flesh and Feathers of their young ones, which are
taken from their Nests by one let down the Rock with a Rope. When young, they
are of an ash Color; but when old, white.

At the Top of the Rock is a fresh water Spring, with a small Warren for
Rabbets; but the Bottom of it is almost worn through by the Tide. It was
formerly the Possession, and sometimes the Seat, of the ancient Family of
Lawder, who a long time refused to sell it, though often solicited to it by
several Kings. King James VI. told the then Lord, He would give him whatever
he pleased to ask for it; whereby that Gentleman had a fine Opportunity of
making a good Bargain: But after he had told his Majesty, That he would sell it
upon these Terms, and the King desiring to know what he would ask, he answered,
Your Majesty must even resign it to me; for I Will have the ald Craig ( i. e.
Rock) back again. However, the Family, at last, coming to Decay, it was
purchased by King Charles II.

From hence, keeping the Shore of the Forth, due West, we find a Range of large
and populous Villages all along the Coast, almost as far as Leith.

All this Part of the Country is delightfully spread with the Seats of Noblemen
and Gentlemen; as the Duke of Roxburgh's near Dunbar, the Earl of Haddington's
at Tinningham, the Lord Beilhaven's at Beilhaven, and that of the Family of
Dalrymple, Earl of Stair, who have fine Seats at the Burgh of North Berwick,
(where there is a small, but pretty good Market) Hales, and in the
Neighborhood of this Place.

The House and Estate of Dirleton, now in the Family of Nisbet, is pleasantly
seated in this Part of the Country; as is Ormistoun, a thriving little Town,
belonging to the Family of Cockburn; round which they have a handsome Estate,
so well planted and improved, that I don't remember to have ever seen a more
beautiful Spot of Ground. They have also a pretty good Seat here; but when I
saw it, it was very much out of Repair.

I must here add, the ancient and noble Houses of Seton and Winton, both
Palaces (for so they deserve to be called) of the late Earl of Winton, who did
so many weak and rash Things in the Affair of the late Rebellion. They are now
in a State of Ruin, as is the Estate on which they stand, which, for its Value,
is as fine as any in Scotland, lying all contiguous with itself, and valued at
almost 5000 l. Sterling per Annum; but all being under Forfeiture, it was sold
to the York-Buildings Company. The fine Gates, and Stone Wall, were demolished
by the Government, after it had been made a Garrison by the Highlanders, who
from hence began their harebrain'd March to England, which Expedition ended at
Preston. The Name Seton was given the Family from the Term Set-on, which one of
the Ancestors of it used to the Soldiers he commanded, when entering upon an
Engagement. They were reckoned a very gallant, as well as loyal Family; and no
true Scotsman can well omit telling the memorable Story, That in the Year 1332.
when Edward II. came before Berwick, where Sir Alexander Seton was then
Governor, he summoned him to surrender, and threatened to hang his two Sons,
whom he had among his Hostages, if he delayed. Accordingly a Gallows was
erected near the Town Wall, and the young Men led forth. Tenderness for his
Children began to move the Governor, when his Lady (of the Name of Cheyne) came
and told him, He and she were both young enough to have more Children; but if
he surrendered, he could never recover his Honor. Upon this, he refused, and
the Tyrant cruelly murdered the young Gentlemen; but the Lady was rewarded with
Two Sons afterward.

The Towns upon this Coast, as I said, stand very thick; and there are two or
three Articles of Trade which render them more populous, and more considerable,
than they would otherwise be. 1. There are great Quantities of white Fish taken
and cured all along this Coast; and I observed, that they were very well cured,
merchantable, and fit for Exportation. 2. There is great Plenty of Coal in the
Hills, so near the Sea, that the Carriage is easy, a great deal of which is
carried to Edinburgh, and other Towns thereabouts. 3. They make very good Salt
at almost all the Towns upon the Shore; as at Seton, Cockenny, Prestonpans, and
several other Places. They have a very great Trade for this Salt to Norway,
Hamburgh, Bremen, the Baltic, and even Holland; and the Number of Ships loaded
with it here yearly is very considerable. 4. They take great Quantities of
Oysters here also, with which they not only supply the City of Edinburgh, but
carry abundance of them in large open Boats, called Cobles, as far as Newcastle
upon Tyne; from whence they generally bring back Glass Bottles.


At several of these Villages are little Moles and Harbors, or Peers, built up
at a considerable Expense, for securing the Ships that come to load Salt, and
other Goods; as at North Berwick, Aberlady, Preston, Prestonpans, which is also
noted for good Malt Liquor, Cockenny, Port-seton, etc.

The Country hereabouts is both pleasant and populous, and full of Gentlemen's
Houses; among which is Salton, belonging to Mr. Fletcher.

We came next to Musselburgh, an ancient Burgh of Regality. In this Town are
many Hands employed in the Woollen Manufacture, especially in coarse Stuffs for
the Use of the Poor; and they have continued many Years successfully this
Branch of Trade without any Rival.

A little West from this lies Fisher-raw, so called from a very large Row of
Houses mostly inhabited by Fishermen, who were formerly more numerous here than
at present; for the Muscle Trade, which was of old reckoned very valuable, is
now given over; and their chief Business, at present, consists in catching
Cods, Haddocks, Whitings, and some few Shellfish.

More to the South are two small Villages, called New-bigging and
Good-speed-all; but they are so nearly joined to Musselburgh and Fisher-raw,
that a Stranger would take them to be all one continued Town. Nevertheless,
they have not had a Church since the Reformation, but are only a Part of the
Parish of Inveresk, an adjoining Village, so called, because it stands on the
River Esk, which, though it be sometimes so full of Water as to overflow its
Banks, yet, being rapid, it is not made navigable.

This Village enjoys so good an Air, that the eminent Dr. Pitcairn called it
the Montpelier of Scotland. It is very full of People, and there are several
very handsome Houses and Gardens in it, which invite the Citizens of Edinburgh
to take Lodgings here in the Summer, as the Londoners do at
Kensington-gravel-pits, Hampstead, Hackney, and High-gate.

But the Glory and Beauty of this Parish is Pinkey, which formerly belonged to
Seton, Earl of Dumfermline, but now to the Marquis of Tweedale, who usually
resided here before his House at Yester was finished; which, though it be the
most magnificent Building, yet is not so agreeably situated as Pinkey, which
stands near the Sea, just as we enter into Musselburgh.

In the Court before the House is a large Stone Well, covered with an Imperial
Crown of Stone, supported by Pillars of the Ionick Order. The great Hall on the
Right, as you enter, is adorned with Views of the great Cities of Italy; and in
a Drawing Room adjoining to it, is a Billiard-table. The great Staircase on
the Left is balustraded with Iron, and crowded with Pictures.

The first Apartment consists of a Dining Room, Drawing Room, and Bedchamber,
all very spacious, curiously wainscotted with Oak, and hung with the Seasons in
Tapestry, of the small Figures, and best Sort. The Bed is of crimson Velvet in
an Alcove, neatly supported with Pillars. The Chimneys are of Marble, and above
that of the Dining Room is painted the finest Inside of a Church that is
any-where to be seen.

The great Gallery is very long and spacious, the Ceiling whereof is full of
Latin Inscriptions suitable to the several Paintings. Here is a Family Picture
of the Lord Seton, with his Four Sons and Daughters, by Hans Holbein; Mr.
Henderson, the Covenanter, by Vandyke; the whole Length of King Charles I. and
his Chancellor, the Earl of Dumfermline, in his Robes, by the same Hand. The
first Earl of Tweedale, with his Eight Sons and Seven Daughters, all in one
Picture, as big as the Life, takes up almost one End of the Room. There are
fine Altar-pieces, Passion-pieces, and others of that Kind, that were saved
from Plunder out of Monasteries at the Reformation. Here is likewise a good
Picture of the Earl of Strafford, and another of the Duke of Lauderdale, (who
married his only Child to the Heir of this Family) with great Numbers of Family
Pictures of the Hays and Setons. There is also well preserved the genealogical
Tree of the Family, from the Year 970. to this Time; viz. the Hays, Giffards,
and Frazers. But many of the Pictures have been of late carried to Yester.

The Parterre behind the House is very large, and nobly adorned with
Ever-greens, and on each Side of it spacious Gardens. The Whole stands in a
Park above three Miles in Circumference, well planted with an incredible Number
of Fir-trees, and walled round with Stone. I confess, if I had been Owner of
Pinkey, I should hardly have built Yester; for Pinkey stands nobly, and has a
commanding Prospect, not only over the adjacent Country, but also of the Coast
of Fife, over the Sea, at nine Miles Distance: Whereas Yester, as I have said,
lies in a Bottom, and all its Views bounded within itself. Yester, it is true,
is the ancient Seat of the Family, whose Title to Pinkey is but late, and (some
say) was precarious.

Near this Place was fought a Battle by Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, when
he came to force the Scots into the Marriage of their young Queen Mary with his
Nephew King Edward VI. which was, by-the-by, a very coarse way of Wooing. Here
was a great Slaughter of the Scots: But though the English won the Battle, yet
they lost their Prize; for the young Queen was privately embarked, carried to
France, and afterward married to the Dauphin, who became King Francis II.

The English call this the Battle of Musselburgh; but some Scots Gentlemen,
riding out with us, to show us the Place where the Action was begun and ended,
we all agreed, that the Scots are in the right, who call it the Battle of
Pinkey.

I now approached the capital City of Edinburgh; but must say a Word or two of
its Situation, before I enter it. Standing then at a small Distance, and taking
a View of it from the East, you have really but a very confused Idea of the
City, because the Situation being in Length from East to West, and the Breadth
ill-proportioned to it, you view it under the greatest Disadvantage possible;
whereas, if you turn a little to the Right Hand toward Leith, you have a very
handsome Prospect of it; and from the South you see it to yet more Advantage,
because it is increased on that Side with new Streets.

At the Extremity of the East End of the City stands the Palace of
Holy-rood-house; leaving which, a little to the Left, you come through a populous
Suburb to the Entrance, called the Water-port. From hence, turning West, the
Street goes on in a strait Line, through the whole City to the Castle. It is
above a Mile in Length, and is, perhaps, the largest, longest, and finest
Street, for Buildings, and Number of Inhabitants, in the World.

From the Palace Door, which stands on a Level with the lowest of the plain
Country, the Street begins to ascend very gradually, being nowhere steep; but
this Ascent being continued for so long a Way, it is easy to understand, that
the further Part must necessarily be very high; for the Castle, which stands,
as it were, at the Extremity West, as the Palace does East, makes, on all the
three Sides, (that only excepted, which joins it to the City) a frightful and
impassable Precipice.

Together with this continued Ascent, you are to suppose the Edge or Top of the
Ascent so narrow, that the Street, and the Row of Houses on each Side, take up
the whole Breadth; so that which way soever you turn, you go down Hill
immediately; which is so steep, that it is very troublesome to those who have
not very good Lungs, to walk in those Side-lanes, which they call Wynds. By
this Description you will perceive, that the City stands upon the narrow Ridge
of a long ascending Mountain.

On the North-side of the City, toward the West End of it, where the Castle
stands, is a Lough, or Lake of Water; which has a small Brook that runs through
it, so that it cannot be said to be quite standing. There was formerly another
Lake on the South Side of it, which, being now filled up, is built into a
Street, though so much lower than the high Street, that, as I said before, the
Lanes between them are very steep.

The Town is so ancient, that no History has recorded when, by whom, or on what
Occasion, it was built; yet, it seems most natural to conclude, that such a
Situation could not be chosen, but for a Retreat from the Outrages and Attempts
of the Britons, Saxons, Danes, or other Enemies; for having an impregnable
Castle at the West End, and a Lake on either Side, the Inhabitants had nothing
to defend but the Entrance at the East End, which it was easy to fortify.

If this was not the Reason for choosing the Situation, what should have
hindered them from building the City in a pleasant, delightful Valley, with the
Sea flowing up to one Side, and a River running through the Middle of it? such as
that Space of Ground between it and the Sea, where the Town of Leith stands.
There they would have had a noble, pleasant, and most useful Situation, a very
fine Harbor for their Trade, a good Road in the Firth for their Ships of
Burden; a pleasant River, which, with small Art and Charge, might have been so
drawn round the City as to have filled its Ditches, and made its Fortifications
almost impregnable, as the French did, when they fortified Leith. Or had they
gone to the South Side of the City, and extended it toward Libertoun and
Goodtrees, they had found a Plain large enough to have contained another
London, watered on the South-part with a pleasant Brook, capable, by the Help
of Pipes, to have conveyed Water into every Street and House.

These Things they did not foresee, or not understand in those Days; but,
regarding immediate Safety, fixed on the Hill, as a sure Strength, formed by
Nature, ready at their Hand. By this means, the City lies under such
Inconveniences as are made a Subject of Scorn and Reproach by some, as if the
People delighted in Stench and Nastiness; whereas, were any other People to
live under the same Unhappiness of a rocky and mountainous Situation, a Throng
of Buildings from six to ten Stories high, a Difficulty of obtaining Water,
(that little they have being to be carried up to the uppermost Apartments) we
should find a London or a Bristol as dirty as Edinburgh, and, perhaps, less
able to make their Dwelling tolerable, at least in so narrow a Compass; for
though many Cities have more People in them, yet, I believe, there is none in the
World, where so many People live in so little Room.

On the North-side of the City, as I have said, is a spacious, rich, and
pleasant Plain, extending from the Lake, which joins it, to the River of Leith,
at the Mouth of which is the Town of Leith, at the Distance of a long Scots
Mile. Here, were not the North-side of the Hill which the City stands on, so
exceeding steep, that it is not only impassable for Carriages, but can hardly
be clambered up on Foot, and were the Lake filled up, as that on the other Side
is, the City might have been extended upon the Plain below, and fine Streets
would, no doubt, have been built: Nay, I question much, whether, in time, the
high Streets would not have been forsaken, and the City, as I may say, run all
out of its Gates to the North.

This might have been the Consequence, if the City had been in a State of
Increase; for had their Trade flourished, as was reasonably expected, if the
Business of Darien had succeeded, or upon the Union, the Inhabitants would have
likewise increased.

Having thus considered the City in its outward Appearance, and in its
Situation, I must look next into its Inside, where we shall find it
(notwithstanding all its Discouragements and Disadvantages) a large, populous,
noble, rich, and even Royal City. The main Street, as above, is the most
spacious and best inhabited in Europe. The Buildings are surprising for their
Strength, their Beauty, and their Height, and are mostly of Freestone; yet so
firm, that though they stand so high, and in a Country where Storms and violent
Winds are so frequent, it is very rare, and only on such Occasions as I shall
mention by-and-by, that any Damage is done here.

From the Palace-gate Westward, this Street is called the Canongate, as
belonging to the Canons of the Abbey, which is a kind of Suburb by itself, as
Southwark is to London. In this Part of the Street, though otherwise not so well
inhabited as the City itself, are several very magnificent Houses of the
Nobility, built for their Residence when the Court was here. Of these the Duke
of Queensbury's, the Earl of Winton's, the Duke of Roxburgh's, the Earl of
Panmure's, and the Earl of Murray's, are the chief: The first and last are very
large and princely Buildings, all of Freestone, large in Front, and have good
Gardens behind them.

At the Upper or West End of this Street, where it joins to the City, is a
Gate, which, like Ludgate, parts the City from the Suburb, but does not
discontinue the Street, which rather widens, and is more spacious, when you are
through the Gate, than before. This is the famous Nether-bow Port, whose Doors
were like to have been taken away by the Parliament, when the Affair of Captain
Porteous was under their Consideration, as I shall mention more particularly
by-and-by.

Just at this Gate, on the Outside, are two Streets, one of which is called St.
Mary Wynd, and the other Leith Wynd; the first leads out of the City, South,
into the great Road for England, by the Way of Kelso; and at the Foot of it is
a Gate turning Westward into the low Street, called the Cowgate, because the
Cattle are driven through it to and from the great Marketplace: The other leads
North into a Suburb, called the Calton, from whence there is a very handsome
Gravel-walk, 20 Feet broad, continued to the Town of Leith, which is kept in
Repair at the public Charge, and no Horses suffered to come upon it.

We now enter the City at the Nether-bow Port, and have an open View up the
high Street. It must not be expected I should describe all the Buildings of the
City; I shall therefore touch upon some few, and go on. The first of any Note
is a fine House on the South Side of the Street, a little within the Gate,
belonging to the Marquis of Tweedale, with a Plantation of Lime-trees behind
it, the Place not allowing Room for a large Garden: Adjoining to this are very
good Buildings, which, if set out in handsome Streets, would adorn a very noble
City; but being crowded together in narrow Wynds and Alleys, deserve no Notice.

A little further, on the same Side, is the Trone Kirk; and near it, in the
Middle of the Street, stands the Guard-house, where two Companies of
disciplined Men, clothed and armed like Grenadiers at the Charge of the Town,
do Duty every Night, and keep the public Peace of the City.

About Midway between the Nether-bow and the Castle, is the great Church,
which, before the Reformation, was Collegiate, and dedicated to St. Gyles; but
it was afterward divided into several Preaching-places, and Districts of the
City were allotted to them, so as to be parochial. When King Charles I. erected
a new Bishopric at Edinburgh, which before that time was in the Diocese of St.
Andrews, it was made a Cathedral, and the Dean was Forenoon Minister of that
Part of it, called the New Kirk, which is the Choir, Chancel, or Eastern Part.
In it is a noble Gallery for the King, or his Commissioner. Here also the
Magistrates assemble, and the Judges in their Habits, in time of Session. In a
large Chapel, on the South-west Part of this Church, the General Assembly hold
their Sessions, as does also the Commission of the Assembly, in the Interval
between the General Meetings.

The great Cross under the Tower is called the Old Kirk; and the Front or
West-part of the great Church is divided into two Parts: That on the South is
called the Tolbooth Kirk, and that on the North Haddo's Hole, from the Lord of
Haddo, (Grandfather to the present Earl of Aberdeen) who being a great Royalist
and Anti-covenanter, was kept Prisoner in a Vault there, till he was beheaded.

The Steeple in the Middle is very high, and of good Architecture; the Summit
of it resembles an Imperial Crown. Here they have a Set of Bells, which are not
rung out as in England, (for that way of Ringing is not known in this Country)
but are played upon by the Hand with Keys, like a Harpsichord, the Person
playing having great Leather Covers to his Fists, by which he is able to strike
with the more Force. They play all manner of Tunes very musically, and the Town
gives a Man a yearly Salary for playing upon them from half an Hour after
Eleven, till half an Hour after Twelve, every Day, Sundays and Holidays
excepted.

On the South Side of this Church (formerly the Churchyard) is a Square of
very fine Buildings, called the Parliament Close, the West and South-sides of
which are mostly taken up with the Parliament House, the several Courts of
Justice, the Council Chamger, the Exchequer, the public Registers, the Court
for the Royal Boroughs to assemble in, the Lawyers Library, the Post Office,
etc. The great Church makes up the North-side of the Square, and the East and
Part of the South Side is built into private Dwellings very stately, lofty, and
strong, being seven Stories high to the Front of the Square, and the Hill they
stand on having a very steep Descent, some of them are no less than fourteen
Stories high backwards. In the middle of this Square is an Equestrian Statue of
King Charles II. which is reckoned the finest of its kind in Europe.

The Parliament House is a stately, convenient, and large Structure. Over its
Entrance are the Arms of Scotland well cut, with Mercy and Truth on each Side,
for Supporters; and this Inscription, Stant his felicia regna; importing, that
these Virtues make Kingdoms happy. And under the Arms was this Motto, Unio
Unionum; relating not only to the Union of the two Crowns, but signifying, that
their Advice was necessary for the Maintenance of it. The Room for meeting of
the Parliament had, on that Occasion, a high Throne for the Sovereign, or the
Commissioner, with Benches on each Side for the Nobility and Bishops, and Forms
conveniently placed in the Middle, for the Commoners. Without the Area was a
Pulpit for Sermons to the Parliament, on particular Occasions; and behind the
Pulpit a large Partition for others, besides Members, to hear the Sermons, and
Debates of the House, when they thought fit to allow it. This Building, in some
measure, resembles Westminster Hall, and though not quite so large, has a much
more curious Roof. In the South or Upper-end, one of the ordinary Judges sits
every Week in Session-time, to hear Causes in the first Instance: But when the
Parliament sat, that Court was removed to another Part of the Hall. At the
West End of it are kept the Sheriff and Commissary Courts. Near the North-end
is the Town Council-house or Guild Hall, and over it is the Justciary or
Criminal Court. At the South-east Part of the Parliament House, is a Door from
what they call the Outer-house (where the Lord Ordinary sits) into the Inner,
where sit the other Fourteen Judges, or Lords of Session; which is the supreme
Civil Judicature of Scotland. Over which are Apartments for the Lords of
Exchequer, and for the Privy Council when in Being.

In the Lower-part under the Parliament House, is a noble Library of Books and
MSS. belonging to the College of Justice, or Gentlemen of the Law.

Near the Council Chamger stands the Royal Exchange, made up of a double Row of
Shops, and another Exchange inferior to this.

The great Opening into the high Street, being the only Passage into it for
Coaches, is at the North-east Corner, a little from which is the Market-cross,
where all their Proclamations and public Acts are read and published by
Heralds and Sound of Trumpet. Here is the great Parade, where Gentlemen meet
for Business or News, as at the Exchange, every Day from Eleven to One.

Near the West End of the great Church stands the Tolbooth, or common Prison,
as well for Criminals as for Debtors. It was formerly the Place of Residence
for the Provost of St. Gyles's, as most of the adjacent Houses were for the
Canons and Choiristers of that Church.

The great Church and this Prison both standing in the middle of the Street,
the Breadth and Beauty of it is for some Space interrupted; but those Buildings
past, the Street opens again to its former Breadth, and is now called the
Lawn-market, from the Linen-market being kept here. This Part of the Street
extends West to a narrower one, which leads to the Castle-hill. At the
Upper-end of it is a Stone Building appropriated to several public Offices of
lesser Value, called the Weigh-house; for below Stairs are Warehouses, with
public Weights and Scales for weighing heavy Goods.

Here the high Street parts into two, one of which leads to the Castle Hill, as
already noticed, and the other turns South-west, and descending gradually,
leads to the Grass-market, a Place very like Smithfield in every respect, where
is kept a weekly Market for Black Cattle, Sheep, Horses, etc. This Street,
which is called the West-bow, is inhabited mostly by wholesale Dealers in Iron,
Pitch, Tar, Oil, Hemp, Flax, Linseed, Drugs, Woads, and suchlike heavy Goods.

This City has seven Gates, or Ports, as they are here called, viz. 1. The
Nether-bow Port: This is the chief Gate; it was magnificently built in 1606.
and adorned with Towers on both Sides. This is the Entrance from the Palace,
and the principal Suburb called the Canon-gate. 2. The Cow-gate Port, at the
East End, likewise gives Entrance to the Street of that Name, leading to the
Abbey by a Backway. 3. The Potter-row Port, gives Entrance to the Suburb so
called, and leads to Dalkeith, Kelso, etc. Southward. 4. The Society Port,
called so from the Society of Brewers, who have a great square Court near it,
with stately Houses and Buildings round it. 5. The West Port, the only Gate at
the West End of the City, which leads through a large Suburb to Glasgow,
Sterling, Queens-ferry, and from thence to the West and North Highlands. 6. The
New Port, at the East End of the Lake, leading Northward toward a Village
called Mouter's Hill and Leith. 7. The College-Kirk Port, leading also to Leith.


The Markets here are very well supplied with all the Necessaries of Life, and
are mostly kept in distinct Marketplaces walled in, and reserved for the
particular Things they are appointed for; such as 1. The Meal Market. 2. The
Flesh Market. 3. The Poultry Market. 4. The Fish Market. 5. The Corn Market. 6.
The Leather Market.


Besides these, there is a Weekly Market for all Sorts of Woollen Manufactures,
and Linen Cloth, kept in that Part of the high Street called the Lawn Market,
just now mentioned. There is also in the same Street, below the Cross, an Herb
and Fruit Market kept every Morning, but abates before Noon, so that it is no
Encumbrance. The Market for Black Cattle, Sheep, Horses, and Grass, is kept in
that large Space of Ground within the West Port, called the Grass Market, as I
have already mentioned.

On the South Side of the City, toward the East End, stands a large Building,
erected at the Charge of the Surgeons and Apothecaries of this City, in which
is their great Hall, hung round with the Pictures of all the Surgeons of this
Place that have been since this Building was founded. Here they have also a
Theater for Dissections, and a Chamber of Rarities, in which there are several
Skeletons of uncommon Creatures, a Mummy, and other Curiosities.

Near the Potter-row Port stands the College, or University. It consists of
three Courts, two lower, and one higher, equal to the other two. These Courts
are encompassed with neat Buildings for the Use of such Students as please to
lodge in them; for they don't live in common, nor are they obliged to reside,
but only to attend their Classes at certain Hours. There is a high Tower over
the great Gate, looking to the City.

The Public Schools are large and commodious; there are Accommodations for
Students, handsome Dwellings for the Professors, and fine Gardens for their
Recreation. It was founded in 1580. by King James VI. upon a Petition from the
City, to grant them a Charter with the Privilege of an University; but the
Foundation was not perfected till 1582. The Persons established by the
Foundation were, a Principal or Primate, a Professor of Divinity, four Regents
or Masters of Philosophy, and a Professor of Philology called Prof. Humaniorum
Literarum, or Regent of Humanity. In 1640. the Town added a Professor of
Mathematics. To which have been lately added Professors of Ecclesiastical
History, Civil Law, Theoretical and Practical Medicine, Chemistry, etc. The
Dignity of Chancellor and Vice Chancellor of the University is in the
Lord-Provost and Town Council.

They have a very good Library, which was founded by Clement Little, one of the
Commissaries of Edinburgh; since which it is much increased by Donations from
the Citizens, Persons of Quality, and others, who had their Education there.
The Library is neatly kept, well furnished with Books, put in very good Order,
cloistered with Wire Doors, which none but the Keeper can open, which is more
commodious, and less encumbering, than Multitudes of Chains, commonly used in
other Libraries. The Books given by the grand Benefactors, are kept in distinct
Apartments, and the Donor's Name over them in Letters of Gold.

Over the Books hang the Pictures of several Princes, and of the most eminent
Reformers at Home and Abroad; and near them is kept the Skull of the famous
Buchanan, very entire, and so thin, that the Light may be seen through it. It was
deposited there by Mr. Adamson, formerly Principal of the University, who
procured it to be taken out of his Grave, and fastened some Latin Verses to it
in Commendation of that celebrated Historian. There is also the Original of the
Bohemian Protest against the Council of Constance, for burning John Hus and
Jerome of Prague, Anno 1417. with 105 Seals of Bohemian and Moravian Grandees
annexed to it. It was procured by a Scots Gentleman in his Travels, and given
to the University.

Under the Library was the King's Printing House, for Bibles, etc. At the
farther End of the Library is a Staircase, which leads to the higher and lower
Common Halls, where they hold their Commencements and College Entertainmenrs.
In this Place are several Maps, Globes, Books, and Rarities; and among others a
crooked Horn, cut out of a Woman's Head when fifty Years old, and who lived
twelve Years after it. It is several Inches long, and was taken out of her Head
by a Surgeon, Anno 1671. Here also are Lectures read, Exercises performed, and
Apartments for the Professor of Divinity to teach his Pupils in, and for a
select Library proper for Divines.

In this higher Common Hall, which is a very spacious Room, are placed such
Books as have been bought by, or given to the College, since the Library below
was full; and in the South-end of it is a curious and noble Museum, collected
by the very eminent Sir Andrew Balfour, who was once Tutor to the famous Earl
of Rochester. It contains a vast Treasure of Curiosities of Art and Nature,
domestic and foreign, from almost all Parts of the World, and is greatly
valued by the Virtuoso's, containing some Rarities that are not to be found,
either in those of the Royal Society at London, or the Ashmolean at Oxford. Sir
Robert Sibbald, having a mind to engraft his Name and Merit, on that of the
celebrated Balfour, made a Present of a great Number of Shells, and other
Curiosities, to the College, on Condition the Magistrates would print the
Account of it, called, Auctarium Musei Balfouriani e Museo Sibbaldiano; to
which I refer the Reader.

Eastward from the College is the High-School, well endowed, and with proper
Apartments for one Master and four Ushers, who teach Youth Grammar and
Rhetoric.

In Gray's-close, near the Cowgate Port, is the Mint-house, in a large Court,
with neat and convenient Buildings, and other Accommodations for the Master,
Officers, and Workmen. It is now disused for that Purpose; and is a Sanctuary,
or Place of Privilege.

At a small Distance from the College are two neat Hospitals, with pretty
Gardens to each of them; and a little further is the Churchyard of the
Franciscans, or Gr^y-friars, the common Burial-place for the whole City within
the Walls, where are a great many fine and curious Monuments. It contains about
two Acres of Ground.

Adjoining to it is Heriot's Hospital, a large and stately Building, the most
magnificent of its Kind in the World, adorned with a consecrated Chapel, large
Walks, delightful Greens, and pleasant Gardens. It was built by the Rev. Dr.
Balcanqual, to whom George Heriot, Jeweller to King James VI. left near 17000
Pounds, to be disposed of in pious Uses, which that worthy Dean did by building
and endowing this House, and giving Statutes to it, which he ordered should be
unalterable. It Is a Nursery for an indefinite Number of the Sons of Freemen,
who are maintained, clothed, and educated in useful Learning, till they are
fit for Apprenticeships, or to go to the University, where they are allowed
handsome Salaries and Exhibitions.

On the South Side of the City, in the way to Leith, is a beautiful Collegiate
Church, built by Queen Mary of Guelders, Queen to King James II. and dedicated
to the Holy Trinity, but now Parochial, though nothing but the Church Part was
ever finished.

Near it is St. Thomas's Hospital; wherein old decayed Citizens, and their
Widows, are very decently provided for, and allowed a Chaplain.

Over Against it is Bridewell, or the House of Correction, in which dissolute
People undergo Discipline, and are kept to hard Labor. There is an Apartment
in it for lunatic and distracted Persons.

Of late Years, Mrs. Hare left a noble Benefaction for a new Hospital for
Female Orphans of decayed Freemen; which created a laudable Emulation in many
others, whose united Contributions have raised another, for the same good
Purpose.

An Infirmary, called the Royal Infirmary, after the Example of those at
London, Winchester, etc. has been lately erected at Edinburgh, by the liberal
Contribution of many well-disposed Persons; and there was so general a
Good Will to the Work, that the like Spirit has hardly ever been known
any-where. The Proprietors of several Stone-Quarries made Presents of Stone to
it, others of Lime. Merchants contributed Timber. The Wrights and Masons were
not wanting in their Contributions: The neighboring Farmers agreed to carry
Materials gratis: The Journeymen Masons contributed their Labor for a certain
Quantity of hewn Stones; and as this Undertaking is for the Relief of the
diseased, lame, and maimed Poor, even the Day-labourers would not be exempted,
but conditioned to work a Day in a Month gratis to the Erection. The Ladies too
contributed in their own way to it; for they appointed an Assembly for the
Benefit of the Work; and it being well-attended, every one contributed
bountifully to it. It has met with no small Encouragement from the Nobility and
Gentry; and his Majesty was pleased to give 100 l. toward it: So that it is
really a noble Work, and is now in a flourishing Condition. The following is
the Inscription on the first Stone: The Royal Infirmary at Edinburgh, Founded
Aug. 2. 1738. Earl Cromarty, G. M.

Another necessary Charity was setting on foot, as a Correspondent writes me
word, in a Letter dated Edinburgh, July 24. 1740. and it is to be hoped will be
attended with the desired Success. The following is an Abstract of the Letter:
"Amongst the several pious and commendable Designs which have of late Years
been formed for the Relief of the Helpless and Forlorn, Pity it (...), that one
Case, as claimant as any, viz. the INCURABLES, has hitherto escaped public
No^^: Th^se poor Creatures have, in common with the others abovementioned,
every thing that can move Sympathy, being equally destitute of Health,
Subsistence, and Care, but with this one distinguishing Aggravation of their
Calamity, that they are without Hope, which is the finishing Stroke of
Distress, and changes Misfortune into Misery. When the Learned in Physic and
Surgery have pronounced their Diseases desperate and irremediable, and when
upon that Account they have been set out of the Infirmary, or refused
Admittance into it, as being without Compass of the Power of Medicine, or Skill
of the Physician to recover them, many of them have no Houses of their own,
where they may languish out the tedious Remains of a comfortless Life; so that
if they do not soon die in the Streets or Fields, they must wander to Places
where they can have neither Ministers nor Physicians to bring them that
Assistance, and those Softenings, which may make unavoidable Death more easy
and happy to them.

"The Consideration of this moving Case being suggested at a late Meeting of
some Persons in Edinburgh, they (touched with Compassion of their
Fellow Creatures in such dismal Circumstances, and thankful for the Goodness of
God to themselves, in preserving them from such Distress) judged it worthy of
Attention, and proposed to raise by Subscription a Fund for this charitable
Use, to be under the Guardianship and Administration of the Governors of the
Orphan-Hospital at Edinburgh."



What will be done in this Case, I cannot judge; but my Friend has set it forth
with so much honest Warmth, and good Sense, that nothing need be added to it,
to show the Necessity of so excellent a Design.

The Physicians were incorporated in 1682. by King Charles II. and have their
College near the Nether-bow in the Fountain-close. They are deservedly esteemed
learned and able, and give not place to the Physicians of any Country. The late
Dr. Pitcairn has left behind him ample Testimonies of his Skill in Nature and
Medicine, and bore a Character that no Man of his Time, abroad or at home,
eclipsed.

On the North-side of the City is an excellent Physick-garden, containing some
thousands of Exotic Plants and Simples. The late learned and industrious Mr.
James Sutherland, its then Intendant, published an Account of it in 1684. under
the Title of Hortus Medicus Edinburgensis. They are all disposed into the most
rational Method, according to that of the learned Dr. Morison, the late Oxford
Botanist, a Native of Scotland.

The City is governed by a Lord-Provost, whose Office is much the same as that
of the Lord Mayor of London; four Bailiffs, who, besides the Power of Aldermen
in the Government of this City, have that of Sheriffs, and a common Council,
ordinarily consisting of twenty-five Persons, but extraordinarily of
thirty-eight. All these are chosen annually; and the Provost, Dean of Guild,
and Treasurer, are to be Merchants; or if any Tradesman be chosen, he must quit
his Trade, and not return to it without Leave of the Magistrates and
Town-Council; and he must also be a Year or two a Member of the common Council.
No one is to continue in the Council above two Years at a time, except he be a
Member of it by virtue of a superior Office. The Bailiffs are to be chosen
indifferently out of twelve Candidates proposed, and none is to be elected
Deacon of any of the fourteen incorporated Trades, except he has been Master of
his Trade two Years at least; and must not continue Deacon above two Years at a
time. The fourteen incorporated Trades are; Surgeons. Goldsmiths. Skinners.
Farriers. Hammermen. Wrights. Masons. Tailors. Bakers. Butchers. Cordwainers.
Weavers. Wakers, i. e. Fullers. Bonnet-makers.
The Magistrates are chosen annually upon the Tuesday next after
Michaelmas-day, by thirty-eight Electors, whereof twenty are to be Merchants
and Tradesmen, who are to choose such as in their Conscience they think best
qualified; and these Magistrates, and the Town-Council, have the Administration
of the Government, except in some reserved Cases; as the Election of
Magistrates, Dean of Guild and Treasurer, and setting of Fews or Leases, giving
Boundaries and Places, and other public Matters; in which Cases they are to
consult the fourteen Deacons of Trades.

None of the Merchants or Traders are to have any particular Conventions, or
make any Bylaws among themselves without Consent of the Magistrates and
Town-Council, except to choose their own Deacons at the appointed Time, to make
Persons free of their Trade, or to try their Work; and one of the Commissioners
for Parliament was always to be chosen out of the Tradesmen, and another out of
the Merchants. The Auditors of Accounts are to be chosen out of an equal Number
of both. The Lord-Provost, Dean of Guild, and Treasurer, are not to continue
longer than two Years at a time; and the Bailiff must be one Year a Bailiff,
one Year old Bailiff, and one Year free of Office. Before the Union, the
Lord-Provost for the Time being was always one of the Privy Council.

The Trained Bands of the City consist of sixteen Companies; besides which they
have a standing Company of Town Guards.

And here it will be proper to take notice of the notorious Riot committed in
this City on the 7th of Sept. 1736. in relation to Capt. Porteous, which made
so much Noise, and brought down upon this famous City the Resentment of the
Legislature of Great Britain.

The Case was this: One Andrew Wilson was condemned for a Robbery of the
public Money, committed on the Highway; and on Wednesday, the 14th of April
1736. the Day appointed for his Execution, the Magistrates, being apprehensive
that a Rescue would be attempted, ordered Capt. John Porteous, at the Head of a
Detachment of the City Guard, to attend the Execution; and Powder and Ball were
delivered to them for that Purpose. That while Wilson was hanging, the
Populace, insisting he should be cut down before the usual Time, and being
refused, attempted to do it by Force, and meeting Opposition from the Captain
and his Guard, they outrageously pelted them with Stones, and hurt several of
the Detachment. That hereupon the Captain ordered them, as he was accused, but
which he denied, to fire; and upon the Mob continuing their Insults, and the
Captain's Men firing over their Heads to intimidate them, the Captain ordered
them to level their Pieces, and fired himself, both which however he denied;
and by that means six Persons were mortally wounded, and fourteen others very
desperately maimed and hurt. That hereupon the Captain was brought to his
Trial, and on a very solemn Hearing, was found guilty of firing a Gun himself,
and ordering his Men to fire; and so was condemned to be hanged upon a Gibbet,
on the 8th of Sept. 1736. The Captain drew up a Petition to her late Majesty,
then Regent of the Kingdom, in the Absence of the King; and insisted on his
Innocence, praying for Mercy; and great Application having been made to her
Majesty for changing the Sentence to Transportation, a Reprieve for six Weeks,
was granted. Which arriving, on the 2d of September, at Edinburgh, occasioned
the most extraordinary Riot that ever was known or heard of, all Circumstances
considered, except that at York against the Jews, mentioned in its Place.

For, on the 7th of September, the Night before the Captain was to be executed,
had he not been reprieved, about ten at Night, some Men by Surprise entered the
City, seized all the Firearms, Battle-axes, and Drums belonging to the City
Guard.

The Mob hereupon, in a few Minutes, locked and secured all the City Gates, and
with Drums beating an Alarm, attempted with Hammers, and other Instruments, to
force open the [ Tolbooth] Prison-door: But failing, they desperately set Fire
to it, and burnt it. When they entered the Prison, they made the Under-keeper
open the double Locks of the Apartment where the Captain was. He begged in vain
to be spared till the Afternoon; and making some Resistance, they dragged him
down Stairs by his Legs, and hurried him away. This was about eleven at Night,
and they marched out with Lights before them. In their Way to the Grass-market,
passing by a Barber's Sign-post, some called out to hang him up there; but it
was resolved to hang him where the Murders, for which he was condemned, were
committed. So they proceeded to the Place where, on Executions, the Gallows
used to be fixed; where they kept him above a Quarter of an Hour, till they
opened a Shop, and brought out a Rope, one End of which they threw over a
Signpost about 20 Feet high. He desired some Time to prepare for Death; but was
answered, They would allow him no more than those had who were shot. They then
pulled him up in the Dress in which they found him; viz. a Nightgown and Cap:
His Hands not being tied, he fixed them betwixt his Neck and the Rope,
whereupon one with a Battle-ax struck at his Hands. They then let him down, and
he having on two Shirts, they wrapped one of them about his Face, and tied his
Arms with his Nightgown, and then pulled him up again, where he hung next
Morning till Daylight; when he was cut down, and carried to the Grey-fryars
Church. Upon inspecting his Body, it appeared his Left-shoulder was wounded,
his Back discolored, and his Neck broke. He denied his giving Orders to fire,
with his last Breath.

It was observed, that this Mob was under a stricter Concert, and better
Conduct, than usual; for, marching along to the Execution, the unhappy Man
observing a Gentleman of his Acquaintance, he gave him a Purse of twenty-three
Guineas, which he desired might be delivered to his Brother; which they offered
not to obstruct. They left indeed the Prisondoors open, whereby several
Prisoners escaped; but after they had perpetrated the unprecedented Fact, they
left the Arms and Drums at the Place of Execution, where they were found next
Morning. Moreover, during the Tumult, Parties of armed Men, with Drums,
patrolled in the different Streets, to prevent any Surprise from the King's
Forces quartered in the Suburbs. The Magistrates, attended with several of the
Burgesses, attempted, as was said, to disperse the Mob; but were pelted with
Stones, and threatened with Firearms, if they did not retire. After the
Execution was over, they went to the Lord-Provost's House, and telling him they
were satisfied, departed, without offering any other Violence. Nay, it was
said, that to do the Act with more Decency, having no Clergyman, they ordered
two of the gravest among them to exhort the unhappy Man, as they carried him to
Execution.

The Boldness, Secrecy, and Conduct of this Enterprise, was the most
extraordinary Instance of its kind that ever was known; and the Keeper
declaring, that though the Persons who first entered, and demanded the Keys, wore
Leather Aprons, but were otherwise well dressed, it made some imagine, that
Persons above the vulgar Rank had a hand in it.

Be this as it would, the Insult on the Sovereign Authority was too flagrant to
be overlooked. Proclamations, with Rewards of 200 l. Sterling, were issued for
apprehending the Rioters; and when the Parliament met, vigorous Measures were
taken in the Affair. The Lord-Provost was ordered up to London in Custody, the
Magistrates were ordered up also, to attend the House of Lords at London; and
finally, an Act of Parliament was passed, to disable Alexander Wilson, Esquire from
holding or enjoying any Office of Magistracy in Edinburgh, or Great Britain; a
new Provost was enjoined to be chosen, and a Fine of Two thousand Pounds levied
upon the City of Edinburgh for the Use of the Widow of Captain Porteous, as
Punishments for their respective Remissnesses in not endeavoring to prevent
this Insult on Sovereignty, and all lawful Authority.

This Act, however, passed not without great Debates; and as some thought it
impossible to prevent a Design so well concerted, and so suddenly and boldly
executed, they were of Opinion, that the City of Edinburgh was treated with too
much Severity. But, after all, it could not be expected, but that the
Legislature should show the highest Indignation against so insolent a Riot.

This Act was passed in the 10th Year of his Majesty, and in the same Session
was also passed another, for the more effectual bringing to Justice any Persons
concerned in this strange Attempt; in which Fugitives not surrendering were
made liable to Death: The concealing of those who should be declared Fugitives,
was also made Death: This Act was to be read before Morning Sermon in every
Church of Scotland, every Sunday for a Year: Impeachers were to be encouraged,
and discharged; Informers rewarded with 200 l. Sterling for every Person they
should convict, and be admitted Witnesses.

But so secretly was this dark Affair managed, that I don't remember any body
has suffered on the Account; and the reading of the Act was but indifferently
digested by many in that Kingdom.

Greater Severity was intended; such as the imprisoning, as well as
disqualifying the Lord-Provost for a Year; for abolishing the Town-Guard of the
City of Edinburgh, and for taking away the Gates of the Nether-bow Port, and
keeping open the same. But the City of Edinburgh was happily saved from this
Disgrace.

It is now Time to return to our Subject.

The Churches in this populous City and Suburbs are Twelve, including the
Chapel of the Castle: The Ministers about Twenty; besides Three Chapels.

The Twelve Churches are: 1. The Canon-gate Kirk. 2. The Collegiate, or College
Kirk. 3. The Trone Kirk, or Christ's Kirk. All these are Parts of the Cathedral
of St. Gyles's. 4. The New Kirk. 5. The Old Kirk. 6. The Tolbooth Kirk. 7.
Haddo's Hole Kirk.
8. The Lady Yester's Kirk. 9.10. The Grey-friers Kirk, now divided into two.
11. The West Kirk, or St. Cuthbert's. 12. The Chapel of the Castle.


There are also about twenty Meeting Houses of the Episcopal Party; for though
Presbytery be the established Religion of Scotland since the Revolution, yet a
great Number of the People of all Ranks are not of that Opinion, especially in
the Nothern Parts.

The Churches are always very full; for the People in this Country do not
wander about on the Sabbath Days, as in England. They have also one very good
Custom as to their Behavior in Church, which I wish was practiced in England:
If any Person comes in after Divine Service is begun, he takes no Notice of any
body, nor any body of him; whereas we make our Bows and Cringes, even in the
Middle of our Prayers. Not that the Scots want Manners; for they show them more
properly after the Sermon is done, and the Blessing given, when they all look
round upon their Friends, especially to Persons of Distinction, and make their
Civilities as courteously as we do.

The City is encompassed with a kind of Roman Wall on every Side, except the
North, where it is secured by a Lake.

The Castle only, and the Palace, remain to be mentioned. The first is strong
both by Situation and Art, but far from being impregnable, as has been
experienced more than once. It was formerly called the Maiden Castle, because
the Pictish Kings kept their Daughters in it. Still more anciently, it was
called Alatum Castrum, or the Winged Castle, perhaps from its Form, and
standing on so high a Hill, as it were in the Air: It is situated at the
West End of the City, as we have said, where the Rock rises to a high and large
Summit. It Is inaccessible on the South, West, and North. The Entrance is from
the Town, where the Rock is also very high, and is defended by a round Battery,
and an Outwork at the Foot of it. In the Castle is a Royal Palace of hewn
Stone, where are kept the Regalia, and chief Records of State, as also the
Magazine for the Arms and Ammunition of the Nation.

A Chapel is also in it for the Use of the Garrison; and it is furnished with
Water by two Wells in the Rock. From the Castle is a delightful Prospect over
the City and neighboring Country, and to the River of Forth, from whence it is
saluted by such Men of War as come to anchor in Leith Road. The Governor is
always a Person of prime Quality, and General of the Forces.

The Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Fort-Major, and some other Officers, have
very good Apartments; and there are deep Vaults in the Rock, which, they say,
are Bomb-proof.

The Palace, called Holy-rood-house, is a very handsome Building, rather
convenient than large. The Entrance is majestic, and over the Gate is a large
Apartment, which the Duke of Hamilton claims as Hereditary Keeper of the
Palace. Within this is a large, irregular Court, where are Coach-houses and
Stables, which, I think, are very improperly placed here; for if they had stood
farther off, either in the Park, or without the Out-gate, and a Barrack, or
Guard-house, like the Horse-Guards at White Hall, built in their Stead, it
would have been much more becoming a Royal Palace.

This may be called the Escurial of Scotland, being both a Royal Palace, and an
Abbey, founded by King David I. for Canons Regular of St. Austin, who named it
Holy-rood-house. The Entrance from the great outer Court, already described, is
adorned with Pillars of hewn Stone, under a Cupola in the Form of an Imperial
Crown, balustraded on each Side a-top. The Forepart has two Wings, on each of
which are two Turrets; that toward the North was built by King James V. whose
Name it bears in Letters of Gold, and that toward the South (as well as all
the rest) by King Charles II. whereof Sir William Bruce was Architect. The
inner Court is very stately, all of Freestone well hewed, with Piazzas round
it, from which there are Entries into the several Apartments, truly royal and
magnificent; but above all, the Long Gallery is very remarkable, being adorned
with the Pictures of all the Scots Kings from Fergus I. to James VII.
inclusive, by masterly Hands. Those Kings that were eminent, and all the Race
of Stuarts, are in full Length; the others are but Busto's.

You turn to the Right to the Royal Apartments, as at St. James's; and the
Staircase and Guard-room run exactly as there, but far more lofty and
magnificent. Duke Hamilton's Apartment (as Hereditary Keeper) is in the double
Tower to the North, and the great Council Chamber in the Tower to the South.
The Earl of Perth, when Chancellor, in the late King James's Reign, converted
this noble Room into a Popish Chapel, and his Apartment behind it was the
Jesuits School, which being demolished by the Mob at the Revolution, has been
neglected ever since. The Chimney-pieces are all of Marble, and the Apartments
two Pair of Stairs for the Officers of State are very well kept, being lent to
many of the Nobility, who now live in them.

Behind this Palace, the Conventual Church makes a Wing to the North, and
Eastward from it is St. Anne's-yard, which was designed to be branched out into
Gravel-walks, adorned with Statues; but the Revolution coming on, attended with
a long and expensive War, and afterward the Union with England, prevented its
being put in Execution.

The Church is very high to the Roof, and the Pillars are as exquisite as those
of St. George's Chapel at Windsor. It is an ancient, very reverend, but
declining Fabric, and used only as a Burial-place for Persons of Quality. In
it King James VI. was crowned by Bishop Hepburn, assisted by John Knox, as was
King Charles I. by Archbishop Spotswood.

King James VII. began to erect a magnificent Throne here for the Sovereign,
and twelve Stalls for the twelve Knights Companions of the most noble and
ancient Order of St. Andrew, or the Thistle, which he had revived after a long
Disuse: The finest Carvers and other Masters in Europe were employed in it. But
at the Revolution the Rabble demolished all, and ransacking every Corner, fell
upon a Vault quite built up, so as not to be known what it certainly was, in
which were found the Bodies of King James V. and Magdalene of Valois, his first
Queen, together with Lord Darnley's, all embalmed and preserved in Pickle;
whereby the Malice of Buchanan, and others, to blacken Queen Mary's Memory, was
discovered; for she gave him a Royal Funeral suitable to his high Dignity, and
did not carry him by Porters privately to a common Burial-place, as that Author
had asserted.

The adjoining Park is about four Miles in Circumference; but, which is very
odd, there is neither Deer nor Tree in it, and, though it be very mountainous,
affords good Pasture for Cattle. There is a very high and craggy Rock in it,
near half a Mile to the Top, called Arthur's Seat, from Arthur, the British
King, who, they say, used to view the adjacent Country from thence.

This Palace, or Abbey, and Park, is Sanctuary for Debtors; and no one, but by
the King's Order only, can arrest any Man, who has entered his Name in an
Office kept there for that Purpose.

It may not be amiss to observe, that according to several Acts of Parliament,
diverse great public Works have been undertaken, and mostly brought to
Perfection, for the Benefit of the City of Edinburgh, and Town of Leith, and
their Vicinities, within these few Years past, by Benefit partly of the easy
Scottish Tax of Twopence Scots on every Scots Pint of Ale and Beer sold in the
said City: And partly of the Discontinuance of what they called the
Petty-port-Customs there; some of which Works are as follow:

The Magistrates have, at a great Expense, collected the Springs, and renewed
the Pipes which convey Water to the Town; rebuilt the Fountains in the
High Street; enlarged the Harbor of Leith, and deepened its Chanel; have built
several hundred Feet of Key there in a very sufficient manner; have built two
new Churches; have paved, at a great Expense, with Causey-stone, the whole
High-streets and Ways leading to their City; have made a good Highway from
Edinburgh to Leith; have built a large Workhouse for the Poor, to be employed
in Manufacture, and endowed the same with 300 l. per Annum. Also have settled
Salaries on the Law Professor at Edinburgh, and Stipends on the Ministers of
the two new Churches; have rebuilt the City Walls; and taken Measures for
paying their old Debts, as well as those incurred on account of the Rebellion
in 1715.

They further proposed also, by means of this Fund, to narrow the noxious Lake
on the North-side of the City, commonly called the North Loch, into a Canal of
running Water; to erect a Street of Communication to the Fields, on the
North-side of the City; to build a proper Hall for the Court of Justiciary, and
an Edifice for the public Records; to establish a Salary to a Professor of
Civil History, and Greek and Roman Antiquities; another to a Professor of Scots
Law, and other publick-spirited Purposes. And all this is provided for and
established by an Act, which passed 9 George I. Anno 1722. confirming and
continuing a Scottish Act of Parliament 1693. and an Act of 3 George I. to which
Act of 9 George I. we refer the Reader.

I shall just stop to mention an odd Circumstance that was of fatal Consequence
to the poor Dogs about Edinburgh and Leith, in the Month of April 1738. A mad
Bull-bitch having bitten many Dogs in the Flesh-market, to prevent the bad
Consequences that might follow, the Magistrates of Edinburgh issued a
Proclamation, ordering all the Dogs in that Incorporation to be forthwith put
to Death, under Penalty of 5 l. Sterling, and Imprisonment to the Owners, for
twelve Calendar Months; and to prohibit all Persons from keeping Dogs for
thirty Days from that Time: And the Magistrates of Leith joining in the Order,
nothing was to be seen for several Days, but chasing, hacking, slashing,
hanging, and drowning of Dogs; and great Lamentations were heard from diverse,
for the Loss of their favorite Puppies; for with such Zeal was this Order
executed, that the Ladies had enough to do to preserve any of their Lap-dogs;
and, as it was, many Gentlemen got rid by it of formidable Rivals.

I shall also take notice here of the Mischiefs done by a terrible Storm, which
happened Jan. 14. 1739. in this City, and the adjacent Parts, of the like of
which we have hardly any Example. The Wind began to blow pretty hard between
Eleven and Twelve the preceding Night, and before One it rose to a complete
Hurricane, and continued with surprising Fury till Four in the Morning.

As the Houses in Edinburgh are built high, they suffered considerable Damage.
The Leads which covered the stately Building in the Parliament-Close, were
carried off the Roofs, some of them more than forty Feet in Dimensions. The
Canon-gate Church suffered exceedingly, and the fine Portico there was almost
demolished. The Consternation was heightened by the Alarm of the Fire-Drum; for
the Brewery at the East End of the Meadow, belonging to one Mr. Bryson, taking
Fire, the Wind increased the Flame, insomuch that the Waterworks proved so
many useless Machines; so that the Brewery and House were consumed, and some
low Houses at a considerable Distance catching the Flame, were likewise reduced
to Ashes. Nor was the Fire confined to that Quarter; for, near the Canon-mills,
on the opposite Part of the Town, a Farm-house, belonging to one Mrs. Angus,
likewise took Fire, which consumed it together with the Corn-stacks and
Outhouses. These Fires happened not through any Negligence, but were entirely
occasioned by the Impetuosity of the Wind, which having got Entrance to the
Houses, scattered the Fire, and set it in a Glow. A large new House at the Back
of the Canon-gate, consisting of five Stories, was entirely beaten down. This
was the more remarkable, as it had been twice destroyed before; and the Owner
had built it so strongly, that she promised herself Security against any
Accidents of that kind. The Buildings in the Castle were prodigiously damaged;
their fine Lead Coverings were carried off, and thrown upon the Rocks; the
Magazine was almost demolished, and other considerable Damages done. The Houses
at the Multries-hill, which lay much exposed, were almost all unroofed, and the
new Playhouse was quite uncovered.

This violent Tempest confined not itself to this City: At Leith it produced
likewise very dismal Effects; several Houses were damaged, and the End of one
struck down; the Lead-mill was uncovered; several of the Ships in the Harbor
broke loose, and with such Violence, that they carried along with them the
great Iron Rings to which they were fastened.

The Shire of Air produced no less dismal Accounts; at Irvine it blew so hard,
that many of the Ships suffered much, and many of the Buildings in the Town
were thrown down. At Air the Loss was much greater; a general Havoc was made
among the Houses and Shipping, most of which suffered; and the Anne Galley,
bound for Jamaica, drove on Shore, and was dashed to Pieces; but the Crew were
happily saved.

The like dismal Account they gave from the Merse, where the Storm occasioned a
terrible Destruction, few Houses being left undestroy'd, and several Churches
blown down, and Numbers smothered in the Ruins, and a general Havoc made among
the Sheep and Cattle.

This Storm did very great Damage in other Parts of the Island, in South as
well as North Britain; but the Effects of it at Edinburgh were so terribly
remarkable, that we thought the above Particulars would not be amiss to insert
here.

Now we are on the Subject of melancholy Accidents, the Reader will excuse me
for the following Account of a very deplorable one, which happened at Kirkaldy,
Jan. 7. 1739-40.

It is a well-known Custom, that in these Parts, the first Monday of the Year
is always observed with uncommon Gaiety and Mirth, and in Consequence becomes a
Holy Day to Apprentices and Servants, fourteen of which, belonging to
Path-head, a little Village adjacent to Kirkaldy, having got a little Money,
went to divert themselves with a common Amusement among Boys, by throwing up
Thistles or Crowns: The Place they chose was a Cave, or a large Hollow below a
rocky Eminence. As they were thus innocently amusing themselves, the Rock
tumbled down, and crushed them to-pieces. It Is scarce possible to form an Idea
of the ghastly Sight which their mangled Bodies exhibited. Parents could not
distinguish the Corpses of their own Children. The Parts of some who were close
together when the Rock fell, were so mingled, that there was no Distinction;
and the Carnage was the most dismal that could be imagined. One escaped by his
being at a greater Distance from the Rock; but his Leg was broke in a vast
Number of Places. This fatal Catastrophe caused an extraordinary Grief,
especially as some Parents lost two, others all their Children.

The following odd Accident happened at Edinburgh, in September 1740. A Soldier
belonging to the Regiment in the Canon-gate, went to the King's Park on a
Sheep-stealing Expedition, where he unluckily happened to engage with a large
headstrong Ram, near one of the Precipices at Arthur's Seat, mentioned above,
which pushed him headlong from the Top of the Rock, so that they both fell down
together, and had their Necks broken. The unhappy Fellow was found next Morning
with a Handful of the Ram's Wool clench'd in his Fist.

We next visited Leith, the Seaport of Edinburgh, which is a large and
populous Town, or rather two Towns; for the River or Harbor parts them: but
they are joined by a stately Stone Bridge, to which Ships of Burden may come,
and, at High Water, lay their Sides close to the Shore.

Here is a very fine Quay, well wharfed up with Stone, and fenced with Piles,
able to discharge much more Business than the Place can supply, though the Trade
is far from being inconsiderable. At the Mouth of the Harbor is a very long
and well built Pier, or Head, which runs out beyond the Land a great way, and
defends the Entrance into the Harbor from being filled up with Sand, as it
would otherwise be, when the Wind blows hard at North-east. There are also
Ranges of Piles, or Break-waters, as the Seamen call them, on the other Side of
the Harbor, all which are kept in good Repair; and by this means the Harbor
is preserved, and kept open, in spite of a flat Shore, and a large Swell of the
Sea.

On the other Side of the Bridge are the Remains of a strong Castle, built by
Oliver Cromwell to command the Port, which is not yet so far demolished, but
that a little Expense would soon restore it. Here the late Rebel Highlanders
made a bold Stop, and took Possession of it for one Night; but not finding
their Friends in the City in any Condition to join them, and the Troops
preparing to attack them, they quitted it in the Night, and marched off to the
Earl of Winton's House, as I have already related.

This Town was once very strong; for the French held it for some Years against
the Reformers, but were at last driven out by an Army which Queen Elizabeth
sent from England to assist the Protestants. It is under the Jurisdiction of
the Magistrates of Edinburgh, and is governed by a Bailiff under them.

At Leith the Firth is seven Miles over, and holds that Breadth for five or six
Miles; but is narrower a little beyond Cramond, and at Queen's-ferry is reduced
to two Miles in Breadth. This Place is a very good Town as well as Ferry, and a
Corporation, or Royal Burgh. Near the Water of Leith is a good Copper Mine.

At Cramond, just mentioned, and in the Lands of Inglestown, as well as at
other Places in this County, Roman Antiquities have been found; particularly,
near the former Place were dug up two Stones, late in Sir Robert Sibbald's Yard
at Edinburgh, upon one of which is a Laurel Crown, and on the other a Roman
Securis: they are supposed to have been Part of a Pillar erected in Domitian's
Time, when Agricola was in these Parts. Near this Place, in the Beginning of
December 1740. a Whale between 50 and 60 Feet in Length, and 16 in Depth, was
cast on Shore; whose Mate afterward, tumbling about above the Ferry, was heard
to make a hideous Moan, as is supposed, for its Loss.

Between Edinburgh and this Town the Country is thronged with the Seats of
Noblemen and Gentlemen; among which the Marquis of Annandale has a very pretty
one, with a fine Garden enclosed with a Brick Wall, a thing hardly to be seen
any-where else in Scotland, the want of which is the Reason why the Wall-fruit
does not thrive so well as it would otherwise do; for the Stone does not hold
the Warmth of the Sun, after it is gone, as the Bricks do.

But the Beauty of this Part of the Country is Hopton House, built upon a
delightful Plain, on the Bank of the River. It was originally a Square, but
there are two Wings lately joined to it, which add greatly to the Beauty of the
Building. The Situation is so extremely good, and gives so elegant a Prospect
as well to the Sea as to the Land, that nothing can be finer. It is exquisitely
finished both within and without; and there are some Pieces of curious Painting
in it, besides a great Number of Family Pictures. The Stables and Riding-place
are by far the finest and most magnificent in Scotland; and his Lordship, who
delights in good Horses, has the best, without Comparison, in all the Country.
Hawthornden also is celebrated for its Caves hewn out of the Rock, and Roslin
for a great stately Chapel.

From hence the Firth widens again, and soon after is three or four Miles wide,
and makes a safe and deep Road, with good Anchor-ground, where, if there was a
Trade to answer it, a thousand Sail of Ships of any Burden might safely ride.

On the South-shore, upon a narrow Point of Land running into the Water, stands
Blackness Castle, wherein State-prisoners were confined in former Times,
especially such as were taken up for religious Differences, many of whom
miserably perished here, either by the Unhealthiness of the Place, Want of
Conveniences, or something worse. This Castle might be of Use, if the Harbor
was frequented; but as it is not, there seems to be no Occasion for it at
present.

Farther West is Borrows-toun-ness, a long Town, consisting only of one Street,
which is extended along the Shore, close to the Water. It has been, and still
is, a Town of the greatest Trade to Holland and France of any in Scotland,
except Leith; but it suffers very much of late by the Dutch Trade being carried
on so much by way of England. However, if the Glasgow Merchants would settle a
Trade to Holland and Hamburgh in the Firth, by bringing their foreign Goods by
Land to Alloway, and exporting them from thence, as they proposed some Time
ago, it is very likely the Borrows-toun-ness Men would come into Business again;
for as they have the most Shipping, so they are the best Seamen in the Firth,
and are very good Pilots for the Coast of Holland, the Baltic, and the Coast
of Norway.

But it is time to put an End to this Letter, which I do, by assuring you, that
I am, Sir,

Your most humble Servant.

LETTER III. CONTAINING A Description of the following Shires and Towns; viz.
Annan, Dumfries, Galloway, Air, Renfrew, Glasgow, Stirling, Linlithgow,
Clidsdale, Tweedale, Roxborough, etc.
SIR,
AS I entered the East Side of Scotland at Berwick upon Tweed, and have carried
on my Account through the Lothians, so, having traveled over the West Part at
another Journey, when I went from England by a different Road, I shall here
give you the Particulars of that also.

Passing the River Esk, or (as it is commonly called) the Solway Firth, beyond
Carlisle, we entered Scotland on the Side of Dumfriesshire. The Division of
this County into Eskdale, Nithsdale, and Annandale, is but the ordinary marking
out the Rivers Esk, Annan, and Nith, as I observed of the Rivers Teesdale,
Tyndale, Swaledale, and others, in the North of England; for the whole Province
makes but one Shire; viz. that of Dumfries.

The Esk is a pretty large River, and gives Name to the South-east Part of this
County; but we saw very little near it, worth our Notice, except Kirsop, a very
small Town on a River of the same Name, which afterward falls into the Esk,
and is famous for being the Place where, by a Treaty, after the Battle of
Pinkey, the Limits or Borders of the two Kingdoms were settled; though the
Borderers did not long observe it, but robbed and plundered one another upon
all Occasions, as Opportunity offered.

This River soon leaves Scotland, and running into the English Border, empties
itself into the Solway Firth, which receives all the Rivers on this Part of the
Island, as well from England as from Scotland.

The first Place of Note we came to in Scotland was Annand, the chief Town of
Annandale, which, being a Seaport, and having a good Harbor, was once a Town
of pretty good Trade; but it was often taken by the English, who, at last,
burnt it to the Ground in the Reign of King Edward VI. from which it never
recovered. Here was a good Salmon Fishery, and a Trade to Ireland by the Isle
of Man; but most of the Merchants, and Men of Substance, being removed to
Dumfries the Town continues, to all Appearance, in a State of irrevocable Decay.

The Town and Castle of Lockmaben is a Royal Burgh as well as Annand. Three
Parts of it are surrounded by Lakes, which afford excellent Fish, and one
particularly which is found nowhere else. The Castle, as well as that of
Annand, is now demolished.

M^ffet is remarkable for its medicinal Springs. They rise from the Top of a
Rock near the Town: There are two Wells near one another. The Waters purge and
vomit, and are very good against Colicky and Nephritical Pains, powerfully
removing Obstructions in the Bowels. They are applied outwardly to Ulcers, and
for Pains in the Joints. They have more Virtue in dry Seasons, and in Summer
and Autumn, than in Winter and rainy Weather.

The Town of Rivel also deserves to be mentioned, on account of a very good
Salt made out of a particular Sand there, which they gather up and boil.

From Annand, keeping the Sea as close as we could to the Left, we went on due
West to Dumfries, a Seaport Town at the Mouth of the River Nid, or Nith, which
gives Name to the third Division of the County, called Nithsdale; but this Town
is the Capital of the whole Shire, and indeed of all the South-west Part of
Scotland. Here, as in some few other Ports on this Side of the Island, the
Benefits of Commerce, obtained to this Country by the Union, appear much more
visible than on the East Side.

Dumfries was always a good Town, with large Streets, and full of reputable and
wealthy Merchants, who trade into foreign Parts, and employ a considerable
Number of Ships, especially since they have embarked in Trade to England, and
the English Plantations. This Town is also advantageously situated for an
Increase of Commerce on the River Nid, or Nith; for though it stands near two
Leagues from the Sea, yet the Tide flows up to the Town, and Ships of Burden
come close up to the Key, and about four Miles below it the largest
Merchant-ships in Britain may ride in Safety.

Over the River Nith, is a very fine Stone Bridge, at this Place, with nine
Arches, and so broad, that two Coaches may go abreast on it. Here they have
also an Exchange for the Merchants, a handsome Church, a Tolbooth or Prison,
and a Town Hall for the Use of the Magistrates. They had formerly a Woolen
Manufacture here; but the Union has, in great measure, suppressed these Things
in Scotland, the English supplying them much better and cheaper: yet, at the
same time, it must be observed, that the Scots have more than an Equivalent by
an open Trade to England, and all the English Plantations.

The Castle in this Town is very old, yet is still pretty good and strong. This
Castle, as well as that at Carlavrok, near the Mouth of the River, which has
been a very magnificent Structure, belonged formerly to the ancient Family of
the Maxwells, Earls of Nithsdale, the only remaining Branch of which, being
unhappily embarked in the late Rebellion, and taken in Arms at Preston, made
his Escape out of the Tower, and is now abroad, under Forfeiture.

The Inhabitants of the Town of Dumfries exerted themselves in a distinguishing
manner for the present Establishment, in the Year 1715. fortified the Town at a
great Expense, and provided themselves with Arms and Ammunition: This involving
them in a larger Debt, an Act passed, Anno 1716. for laying a Duty of Two
Pennies Scots upon every Scots Pint of Ale or Beer sold within the Town and its
Privileges, for paying the said Debts, and for building a new Church, the other
being not capacious enough to hold the Inhabitants; and also to make a
convenient Harbor there, for the Preservation of Ships, and Improvement of
Trade.

This Act enabled them to make some Progress in the designed Projections; but
the Town having been forced to rebuild Part of their old Church, the
Council-house and Prison, which were become ruinous, they were rendered unable
to proceed in the most useful Parts of their Undertaking; and as the Act
expired in the 10th of King George II. they procured the same to be continued
in that Session for 25 Years longer; and also an additional Duty on the Tonnage
of Shipping, and on Goods imported and exported into and out of the Port of
Dumfries: Which they hope will enable them completely to finish all they
intended.

There are many considerable Woods in this County, the chief of which is Holy
Wood, where was an Abbey, which gave Surname to the famous Astrologer Johannes
de Sacro Bosco, or Holy Wood. Drumlanrick also, the noble Palace of the Duke of
Queensberry, is remarkable for its Wood of Oak six Miles long.

At this Town the River Nith parts the Stewarty of Galloway, and the Shire of
Dumfries; and in the middle of the Bridge over it, is a Gate, which is the
Limit between them. This Neighborhood of Galloway, which is a great and rich
Province, promotes the Trade of this Place very much.

In November 1740. here was a great Struggle, in View to the Elections of
Members for the succeeding Parliament, and the Town of Dumfries signalized
themselves by the following extraordinary Act; which we shall give, without
making any Remarks upon it, or the Occasion of it: "At Dumfries, August 23.
1740. The said Day, the Deacon Convener, and Deacons of the several
Corporations, having the Advice and Consent of the Grand Committee, and of the
Community and whole Members of the Corporations, taking to their Consideration
the Reports and Suspicions now going current upon Persons setting up for
Deacons, and the offering, and giving or promising Compliments, Rewards, Gifts,
Remunerations, and good Deeds by themselves, or Trustees interposed, or Persons
for their Behoof, either at this present, or at a greater Distance, with
Prospect and View of the Election for the five Burghs, for the Parliament of
Great Britain, when the ensuing Session is determined; and being desirous to
suppress such Methods, and any Report thereof; do, according to all Laws,
Divine and Human, Equity and Reason, enact and declare, and be it enacted and
declared by these Presents, That after the Date hereof, no Person or Persons,
Members of the several Corporations, whether Deacon, late Deacon, Box-master,
late Box-master, Masters, late Masters, or other Members who are qualified to
elect, or be elected, in any Station of the Corporation, shall give, promise,
offer, or accept, by himself, or any interposed Persons, Relations, or others
for their Behoof, or being meaned for the Behoof of the Person, who may be
thought capable to receive or give a Vote, either to put himself into any
Station of his Corporation, or capaciate him to vote therein, or in Council of
the Burgh, for any Person in, of the Council, or out of the Council, any Money,
valuable Subject, as Remunerations, Reward and Compliment, for any good Deed or
Promotion to any Station or Office whatsoever, under the Pain of such Persons,
who shall be found giving or receiving, promising or accepting, as above, their
being dismissed and removed from their Stations, and losing their Votes in the
Corporations: Besides, if Deacon, or in order to promote themselves in that
Station, to pay to the General Box-master the Sum of Thirty Pounds Sterling
Money; and this to be prosecuted before the Convener and Deacons, or Civil
Judge, at their Option, by the General Box-master, and the Probation be by
Oath, Writ, or Witnesses, if the same can be found: And these Presents are
signed by the Deacons, as instructed by their Corporations, and in their Name,
Place and Day aforesaid."



We could not pass Dumfries, without going out of our Way to see the Castle of
Drumlanrig, the fine Palace of the Duke of Queensberry, just mentioned, which
stands at 12 Miles Distance, upon the same River. The Vale on either Side is
pleasant, and tolerably good: But when these rapid Rivers overflow their Banks,
they do not, like Nile, or even like the Thames, and other Southern Streams,
fatten and enrich the Soil; but, on the contrary, they lodge so much Sand and
Splinters of Stone upon the Surface of the Earth, and among the Roots of the
Grass, that it spoils and beggars it; nay, the Water is sometimes hurried on
with such Force, that it washes the best Part of the Earth away, where the Soil
is light.

Drumlanrig is like a fine Picture in a dirty Grotto, or an Equestrian Statue
set up in a Barn. It is environed with Mountains, which have the wildest and
most hideous Aspect of any in all the South Part of Scotland.

We were not so surprised with the Height of the Mountains, and the Barrenness
of the Country beyond them, as we were with the Manners of the People, who are
not so polished here, as in the other Parts of Scotland. But what was most
wonderful, was to see so glorious a Palace, with such fine Gardens, and every
thing about it so truly magnificent, standing in a wild and mountainous
Country, where nothing but what was desolate and dismal could be expected.
However, the Situation, like that of Chatsworth in Derbyshire, is certainly a
Foil to the Buildings, and sets them off with greater Advantage.

If you come to the Palace by the Road, which leads to it from Edinburgh, you
pass the River Nith, which is there both broad and deep, over a stately
Stone Bridge, erected by the noble Founder of the Castle, and Builder of the
House, the first Duke of Queensberry.

The Building is Apiece, with Roundels in the inner Angles of the Court,
in every one of which is a Staircase, and a kind of Tower on the Top. It
stands on the Summit of a rising Ground, which is beautifully laid out in
Slopes and Terraces. At the Extent of the Gardens are Pavilions and
Banqueting-houses exactly answering to one another; and the Greens, Espaliers,
and Hedges, are in great Perfection.

The Apartments are fine and richly furnished. The Gallery is filled from one
End to the other with Family Pictures of the Duke's Ancestors, most of them at
full Length, and in their Robes of State, or of Office. William, the first of
the Family, was a younger Son of James Earl of Douglas, who got the Barony of
Drumlanrig by a Deed from his Father, as his Portion, in the Time of King
Robert III. He was afterward sent Ambassador to England to ransom King James
I. who was detained there. In the Year 1708. the late Duke of Queensberry was
created Duke of Dover, as also Marquis of Beverly, and Baron of Rippon, in
England.

The next Trip we made was to Galloway, so called from the Gauls, from whom the
ancient Inhabitants descended. It is divided into two different Districts; that
toward the West is called the Shire of Wigton, and the other toward the East,
which, as I said before, begins at the middle of the Bridge of Dumfries, is
called the Stewarty of Kirkcudbright, of which the Maxwells, Earls of
Nithsdale, were Heretable Stewards. The Country hereabouts seems one continued
Heath, proper for Grazing small Cattle, which are generally sold in England;
and wherever you perceive a Grove of Trees, you may depend upon it there is a
Laird's House near it, which are mostly old Towers of Stone, strongly built, to
prevent a Surprise from Inroads, which were frequent between the two Nations,
before the Death of Queen Elizabeth.

The first Town of Note on the Coast is Kirkcudbright: Though its Situation is
extremely convenient for carrying on a very advantageous Commerce, we saw
nothing but a Harbor without Ships, a Port without Trade, and a Fishery
without Nets. This is owing partly to the Poverty, and partly to the
Disposition of the Inhabitants, who are indeed a sober, grave, religious Sort
of People, but have no Notion of acquiring Wealth by Trade; for they strictly
obey the Scriptures in the very Letter of the Text, by being content with such
Things as they have. The River Dee, which enters the Sea here, and forms the
Harbor, comes out of the Mountains near Carrick, and is so full of Turnings
and Meanders, that, though it is not above 70 Miles in a Line, it runs near 200
Miles in its Course.

The Country of Galloway lies due West from Dumfries; and as that Part of it
they call the Upper Galloway runs out farther into the Irish Seas than the
rest, all that Bay on the South Side may be reckoned Part of Solway Firth, as
all on the North-side is called the Firth of Clyde, though near 50 Miles from the
River itself.

The Western Galloway, or the Shire of Wigton, runs out with a Peninsula so far
into the Sea, that from the utmost Shores you see the Coast of Ireland as plain
as you see Calais from Dover. Port Patrick, which is the ordinary Place for the
Ferry or Passage to Belfast and other Ports in Ireland, has a tolerable good
Harbor, and a safe Road; but there is very little Use for it; the Packet-boat,
and a few fishing Vessels, are the Sum of its Navigation. There was nothing
here to invite our Stay; for it is a mean dirty homely Place: and as we had no
Business but to see the Coast, we came away very ill satisfied with our
Accommodation. Upon a Hill near the Town, we could plainly see Ireland to the
South-west, the Coast of Cumberland, and the Isle of Man to the South-east, and
the Isle of Ila, and the Mull of Kintyre, to the North-west.

As we passed into the Peninsula, we stopped at Stranrawer, situate on the
North-side of the Isthmus, which is formed by two Arms of the Sea; one on the
North-side, called Lochrain; and the other on the South, called the Bay of
Glenluce. On each Side of this Isthmus is an excellent Road for Ships: But we
could discover no Genius in the People for Trade, or for Sea Affairs of any
Kind.

Six Miles South of Wigton lies Whithern, the ancient Candida Casa, a Royal
Burgh, but very poor, especially since the Dissolution of the Priory. In this
Town was the Seat of the Bishop of Galloway, which was founded by St. Ninian
about 1200 Years ago.

But though the People of Galloway, especially on the Sea Coast, are much to
blame for not falling in to Commerce, Navigation, etc. yet they are not quite
idle; for they are great Cultivators of the Earth, and Breeders of Cattle, of
which they send above 50000 Head every Year to England. Besides, they have the
best Breed of strong, low, punch Horses in Britain, if not in Europe, which are
from thence called Galloways. These Horses, which are very much bought up in
England, are remarkable for being good natural Pacers, strong, easy Goers,
hardy, gentle, well-broken, and, above all, not apt to tire.

Proceeding from Lower Galloway hither, we had like to have been driven down
the Stream of a River, though a Countryman went before for our Guide; for the
Water swelled upon us as we passed, and the Stream was very strong, so that we
were obliged to turn our Horses Heads to the Current, and sloping over, edged
near the Shore by Degrees; whereas, if our Horses had stood directly cross the
Stream, they could not have kept their Feet. The Inhabitants follow Fishing, as
well in the Sea, as in the Rivers and Loughs, which lie everywhere under the
Hills; it which, about September, they catch an incredible Number of excellent
Eels; by which they are no less Gainers, than by their little Horses.

This Part of the Country is very mountainous, and some of the Hills
prodigiously high; but they were all covered with Sheep, and other Cattle, the
Gentlemen hereabouts being the greatest Sheep-masters, (for so they call
themselves) and the greatest Breeders of Black Cattle and Horses, in the whole
Kingdom.

We now entered the Shire of Air, full North from the Mull, or North-point of
Galloway: And as we, before, coasted the South Bay, or Firth of Solway, which
parts England from Scotland, so now we coasted the Firth of Clyde, which, for
near 60 Miles, lies on the West Side of the Shore, standing away North-east
from the Point of the Mull. This Shire is divided into three great Bailleries;
viz. Carrick, Kyle, and Cunningham.

Carrick is a more fruitful and better cultivated Country than Galloway, and
not so mountainous; but it does not so much abound in Cattle, especially Sheep
and Horses. Though there is no considerable Port in this Part of the Country, yet
the People begin to trade here, and those who live toward the Coast are great
Fishermen, and are employed by the Merchants of Glasgow, and other Places, to
catch Herrings for them. May-bole is the chief Town; but though it stands on the
Coast, it has no Harbor, and is poor and decayed. The Market is pretty good,
because there are many Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, and the Coast near it
full of People; but the Houses are mean, low, and very coarse. The Family of
Kennedy, Earls of Cassils, are or were Lords of great Part of the Country, and
have a good ancient Seat; but we did not go to see it.

Coming to the North Bounds of Carrick, we passed the River Dun over a Bridge
of one Arch, consisting of 90 Feet; which is much larger than the Rialto at
Venice, or the middle Arch of the great Bridge at York. We found many large
ones in this Country, though I think, none so large as this, except at Glasgow
and Stirling. This Bridge led us into the County of Kyle, the second Division
of the Shire of Air. Here I observed, that, contrary to our Expectation, we
found, the farther North we traveled, the Country was the finer, better, and
richer.

Kyle is more populous than Carrick; and the Soil being better here, and the
Country more plain and level, so on the Banks of the River there are abundance
of Gentlemen's Seats, though most of them are built Castle-wise, because of
Enemies. But that Fear being now over, they begin to plant and enclose after
the Manner of England.

The Scots Writers tell us a long Story of a great Battle in this Country
between Coilus, or Kylus, a British King, and their Fergus I. where the former
was killed, and from thence the Country took his Name. Many Monuments of this
Battle are still to be seen here. The Place where were it was fought is called
Coil-field; a Church near it, is called Coil-town Kirk. The River near which it
was won, and which falls into the River Air, four Miles above the Town of
Air, is called Coil; a Lake not far from it, near which the Scots encamped, is
called Lake Fergus. A Trumpet resembling a crooked Horn, which has a very
shrill Sound, was dug up in the Field of Battle, and is still kept in the
Lord of Caprington's House, called Coil-field, and made use of to call his
Servants and Workmen together. Here, or, as some say, at Largis in the Bay of
Clyde, was another bloody Battle in the Year 1263. between King Alexander III.
of Scotland, and Acho, King of Norway, who came to the Port of Air with a
great Fleet of Ships, and 20,000 Men, who, after ravaging the Country, was
routed, and lost both his Army, and 140 Ships. At this last Battle, an Irish
Gentleman, of the Name of Mackenzie, behaved so well, that King Alexander gave
him the Lands of Kintail, which continued in the Possession of the Earl of
Seaforth, his Successor, till the late Earl taking Part with the Pretender, his
Estate became forfeited. From this brave Irishman, are descended the numerous
Name of Mackenzie.

Over the River Air is a Bridge of Four Arches, near the new Town; and South
of the Bridge stands the old Town of Air or Erigena, famous for its Antiquity
and Privileges. It has a very large Jurisdiction of near 64 Miles, reaching
from the Mouth of Clyde to the Borders of Galloway. It stands on a sandy Plain,
but has pleasant green Fields two Miles South and North of it. In the Fields
betwixt the Mouth of the River Dun and Air, stands a very beautiful Church.
The Town has a very good Harbor in the River, and lies conveniently for Trade:
And it is easy to see, that it has been much larger, than it is at present. It
is now like an old Beauty, and shows the Ruins of a good Face, but is still
decaying every Day; and from having been the fifth best Town in Scotland, as
the Townsmen say, it is now the fifth worst; which is owing to the Decay of its
Trade: So true it is, that Commerce is the Life of Cities, of Nations, and even
of Kingdoms. What was the Reason of the Decay of Trade in this Place, is not
easy to determine, the People themselves being either unwilling or unable to
tell. Here, over the River Irvin, which divides Air from Cunningham, is a good
Bridge of four Arches. Air is noted for the treacherous Murder of many
Noblemen and Gentlemen by the English in Wallace's Time; when they were called
together during a Truce (after Edward I. had overrun the Country) on Pretense
of holding a Court of Justice, and were treacherously hanged one after another,
as they entered the King's large Barns, where the Court was held.

This was as severely, as justly, revenged by Wallace, with whom, as Warden of
Scotland, they had made the Truce, and whom they endeavored to entice thither
by their Charter of Peace, as they had done a great many others of Quality. But
he, having Notice of what had passed, surprised them that very Night in their
Jollity, rejoicing that they had, as they thought, by these treacherous
Murders, secured Scotland for ever; and having set Guards round the Barn, that
none should escape, he burnt all the English in them. The Ruins of those Barns
are still shown here.

Oliver Cromwell built a Citadel at Air, well fortified with a Fosse, and a
Stone Wall. At the Restoration it was demolished; and at present only some
Houses, and Angles of the Ramparts, are standing.

Two Miles North of Air Town stands Kincase, which has been, from Time
immemorial, a Place of Retirement for Leprous Persons.

From Air, keeping still North, we came to Irwin, upon a River of the same
Name. Here they have a Port, which formerly was in much better Condition than
it had been for some Years past, the Harbor being so much decayed by Length of
Time, and other Accidents, that the Trade of the Town began to decay; for the
Water not being confined to its proper Chanel, the Harbor became so choked up
with Sand-Banks, that it was of little Use to what it had been; so that Ships
of very small Burden were freqently shut up for several Months in the River,
before they could sail out to Sea. At the same time the Townhouse, Church,
Streets, and other public Works, as the common Gaol, and one of the Arches of
the Bridge, were all in a ruinous Condition: All which occasioned an Act of
Parliament to pass in the Ninth of King George II. for laying a Duty of
Two-pennies Scots upon every Scots Pint of Ale or Beer sold in the Town of
Irvin, and its Liberties; and a Duty of a Penny Sterling upon every Ton of
Coals shipped off for Transportation. By which means the Harbor will soon be
restored to its pristine Goodness, and the Town to its former flourishing
Condition. But thus much must be said, that notwithstanding the declining
Condition of its Harbor, before this Act passed, it carried on a greater
Trade, than most of the Ports between Air and Dumfries. Their chief Trade is
in Scots Coal, which they export in great Quantities to Ireland; for the
neighboring Hills abound with this Commodity. Irvin is the Capital of that
Division of the Shire of Air, which they call Cunningham, and is really within
the Firth of Clyde, though not actually within the River itself. The Name of
Cunningham signifies, the King's Habitation, from the Beauty of its Situation.

As it has more Trade than the other Parts I have been speaking of, so it is
better built. Here are two handsome Streets, a good Quay, and a capacious
Harbor. The Country is rich and fruitful, filled with Gentlemen's Seats and
well built Houses; and wherever you turn your Eye, you see nothing but
beautiful Enclosures, pleasant Pastures, and Grass Grounds, so that we thought
ourselves in England again. It is said, this enclosing the Ground was owing to
the English Soldiers, who were placed here and in Kyle by Oliver Cromwell (for
at Air he built a Citadel, as I have said); these prompted and encouraged the
People to enclose and improve their Lands, and instructed them in the Manner of
Husbandry practiced in England, which they have not forgot to this Day.

A very extraordinary Storm of Thunder and Lightning happened here, on the 26th
of November 1740. which deserves to be taken notice of, for the Terror it
occasioned, it being equally uncommon for the Season of the Year, and the
Climate.

At Noon began to fall a very heavy Rain, which ended in such a Shower of large
Hail, that every body betook themselves to Shelter from its Violence. This was
followed with a sudden and most dreadful Flash of Fire, and Crack of Thunder.
The Lightning accompanied the Thunder, which did not continue rolling, as
usually, short and quick; but the Noise seemed greater and more frightful, than
as if all the Ordnance on Earth had been at one Instant discharged. The Whole
seemed to break upon the Tolbooth and Steeple; drove in much of the Roof on two
Sides, so as Wagons might pass through; the Steeple was much shattered, and the
Crevices large. The Town-clock was broke to Pieces, the Work either calcined or
melted. The strong Door of the Prison was burst up (notwithstanding its large
iron Bars). A Lad of Fourteen was killed as he stood at a Window, and his
Clothes entirely consumed; his Brother, aged Twelve, was thrown down near by
him; another Brother was struck blind; their Aunt had all her Clothes burnt to
Ashes on one Side, and even her Skin flayed off, worse than could have been
done by any Blistering-plaister; her other Side seemed untouched. It Is
observable, that not one Bone of any of them was broken, though every Hair was
singed, and that the sulphurous Stench about them was intolerable. Many other
Persons were also grievously hurt. Two Sailors coming from the Quay, said, that
a large Pillar of Fire struck them in the Face, which brought them to their
Knees. One Mr. Cunningham said, it appeared to him as a most voluminous Pillar
of Fire, proceeding quick as from the Mouth of Cannon; and, that he thought,
from the uncommon Smoke over the Tolbooth, that it had been all on Fire; he was
thrown down, and his Foot much hurt. The People had scarce recovered their
Senses, when two other Cracks of Thunder gave fresh Grounds of Terror; so that
it was apprehended the General Judgment approached, and every one prostrated
themselves in Humility, imploring Mercy from on high; but these last, though
terrible and uncommon, were nothing to the first. Great hewn Stones were
carried violently out of the Steeple to Baillie Nesbitt's House, where they
left Impressions.

A little from Irvin stood Kilmarnock Castle, the Seat of the Family of the
Boyds, Earls of Kilmarnock, which on the 15th of March 1738-9. was entirely
consumed, with the Furniture, and a curious Collection of Books in MSS. nothing
being saved but the Charter-chest. On the other Side is the Castle of
Eglington, the Seat of the ancient Family of the Montgomeries, Earls of
Eglington. On the North-east Borders of this County, where it joins to
Clydsdale, is the Castle of London, the noble and beautiful Seat of the Earl of
London.

Upon the Bay of Clyde stands the Town of Largis, famous for the Defeat of the
Norwegians by King Alexander III. of Scotland, which some give to Kyle, as we
have said above.

Kilmaers, in the same County, is the Seat of the noble and ancient Family of
Cunningham, Earls of Glencairn. Camden says, that the Family derives its
Original from one of that Name concerned in the Murder of Thomas a Becket, who
fled into Scotland on that Account, and therefore bear an Episcopal Pall in
their Arms; but it is plain from their Motto, Over, Fork, over, that it is a
Fork, and not an Episcopal Pall: and the Family, no doubt, is of a much higher
and nobler Original.

In the Sea lies Lady Isle, where is great Plenty of Rabbets and Fowl, but no
Inhabitants.

With the Division of Cunningham I quitted the Shire of Air, which is, without
Exception, one of the pleasantest Counties in Scotland.

Joining to it North, and bordering on the Clyde itself, lies the Shire, or
rather Barony of Renfrew, which was the ancient Estate of the Stuarts before
they succeeded to the Crown of Scotland; and his Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales, among other Titles, is now styled Baron of Renfrew. It is a pleasant,
rich, and populous Country; and though the Soil is not thought to be so good as
in Cunningham, yet that is abundantly recompensed by the Neighborhood of
Glasgow and the Clyde, and the great Commerce of both.

We kept our Rout from Irvin along the Coast, as near as we could; so that we
saw all the Firth of the Clyde, and the very Opening itself, which is just at
the West-corner of this County. There are some Villages and Fishing Towns
within the Mouth of this River which have good Business.

The first Town of Note is called Greenock, which seems not to be an ancient
Place, but to be grown up in later Years by being a good Road for Ships to ride
in that come into, and go out from Glasgow, as Ships for London do in the
Downs. The Town is well built, has many rich trading Families in it, and a
Castle to command the Road. It is the chief Place in the West of Scotland for
the Herring Fishing; and the Merchants of Glasgow, who are concerned in it,
employ their Vessels for catching and curing the Fish, and for carrying them
Abroad to Market afterward; and their being ready on all Hands to go to Sea,
makes them often leave the Care of their own Ships to the Greenock Men, who are
good Seamen, and excellent Pilots for those difficult Seas.

At the West End of a Bay on the Firth is a small Town, called Gowrock, where
is a noted Road and Harbor lately fitted up.

Paisley also stands in this County on the River Cart; and, though no Borough, is
larger than Renfrew; and was formerly noted for its noble Abbey of the Order of
Cluny; the Monks of which wrote a Chronicle called, The black Book of Paisley.
The Abbey and Church, with fair Gardens and Orchards, and a little Park for
fallow Deer, are all enclosed with a Stone Wall about a Mile in Circuit: The
Water of the River Whitecart, upon which Paisley stands, is commended for its
Largeness, and the Pearls frequently found thereabouts, and three Miles above.
They commonly fish for them in Summertime, and meet with them in a Shellfish
larger than an ordinary Muscle, at the Bottom of the Water. It lies on the
West Side of Clyde over against Glasgow. The Remains of the Abbey are still to
be seen, and the Town bears the Marks of having been fortified. At the West End
of the Town are the Remains of a large Roman Camp and Praetorium, supposed to
be vaulted underneath, because the Ground, when trod upon, sounds hollow. Here
it was Mary Queen of Scots was defeated by her rebellious Subjects under the
Bastard Earl of Murray, from whence she took Refuge in England, and was there
most inhospitably imprisoned for several Years, and at last beheaded. In the
Lands of Newyards, near Paisley, on a high Ground, is a Fountain noted for
ebbing and flowing with the Tide.

The Country between Paisley and Glasgow, on the Bank of Clyde, I take to be
one of the most agreeable Places in Scotland for its Situation, Fertility,
Healthiness, and for the Benefits it receives from the Neighborhood of
Glasgow, and the Sea.

I am now come to the Bank of Clyde; but my Method here, as in England, forbids
my wandering North, till I have given you a full View of the South. The Clyde
and the Forth may be said to cross Scotland here, their two Firths not being
above 20 Miles distant from one another, which, if joined, would divide it very
near in the Center.

Nor can I refrain mentioning how easy a Work it would be to make a Navigation
from the Forth to the Clyde, joining the two Seas, as the King of France has
done in a Place five hundred times more difficult, namely, from Toulouse to
Narbonne; and as the late Czar of Muscovy, Peter, justly surnamed The Great,
did in several Places of infinitely greater Difficulty and Expense. What an
Advantage in Commerce would this be? It would establish a Trade between Ireland
and the Merchants in Glasgow, and open a Communication between the West-coast
of Scotland, and the East of England, even to London; nay, several Ports of
England on the Irish Sea, from Liverpool Northward, would all trade with London
by such a Canal. It would take up a Volume to lay down the several Advantages
that would immediately accrue from such a Navigation, and in particular in
Times of War; but it must lie till Posterity, by the rising Greatness of their
Commerce, shall not only feel the Want of it, but find themselves inclinable,
as well as able, to effect it.

Glasgow is the Emporium of the West of Scotland, being, for its Commerce and
Riches, the second in this Northern Part of Great Britain. It is a large,
stately, and well built City, standing on a Plain, in a manner apiece; and
the four principal Streets are the fairest for Breadth, and the finest built,
that I have ever seen in one City together. The Houses are all of Stone, and
generally uniform in Height, as well as in Front. The lower Stories for the
most part stand on vast square Dorick Columns, with Arches which open into the
Shops, adding to the Strength, as well as Beauty, of the Building. In a Word,
it is one of the cleanliest, most beautiful, and best-built Cities in Great
Britain.

It stands on the Side of a Hill, sloping to the River; only that Part next the
River, for near one-third of the City, is flat, and by this means, exposed to
the Water upon any extraordinay Flood: It is situated upon the East Bank of the
Clyde, which is not navigable to the Town but by small Vessels. Its Port
therefore is Newport-Glasgow, which stands near the Clyde's Mouth, and is an
Harbor for Ships of the greatest Burden. Here it is on a good Wharf or Quay
the Merchants load and unload. Their Custom-house is also here, and their Ships
are here repaired, laid up, and fitted out either here or at Greenock, where
Work is well done, and Labor cheap.

The City is joined to the Suburbs on the West Bank of the Clyde by the noble
Bridge I have mentioned.

Where the four principal Streets meet, the Crossing makes a very spacious
Marketplace, as may be easily imagined, since the Streets are so large. As we
come down the Hill from the North-gate to this Place, the Tolbooth and
Guild Hall make the North-west Angle, or Right Hand Corner of the Street, which
is now rebuilt in a very magnificent Manner. Here the Town-council sit, and the
Magistrates try such Causes as come within their Cognizance, and do all their
other public Business. So that, as will be easily conceived, the Tolbooth
stands in the very Center of the City. It is a noble Structure of hewn Stone,
with a very lofty Tower, and melodious hourly Chimes. All these four principal
Streets are adorned with several public Buildings.

But the chief Ornament of this City is the College or University, a most
magnificent and stately Fabric, consisting of several Courts. The Front to the
City is of hewn Stone, and excellent Architecture. Its Precincts were lately
enlarged by some Acres of Ground purchased for it by public Money; and it is
separated from the rest of the City by a very high Wall.

It owes its Erection to Archbishop Turnbull, and was legally founded by King
James II. in 1453. by virtue of a Bull from Pope Nicolas V. granting it all the
Privileges, Liberties, Honors, Immunities, and Exemptions, given by the
Apostolical See to the College of Bononia, in Italy, for teaching Universal
Learning. A Rector, a Dean of the Faculty, a Principal or Warden, who was to
teach Theology, three Philosophy-Professors, were established by the first
Foundation; and afterward some Clergymen taught the Civil and Canon Law there.

In 1577. King James VI. established a Principal, three Professors of
Philosophy, four Bursars, a Steward to furnish their Table, a Servant for the
Principal, a Janitor to look after the Gate, and a Cook.

The Family of Hamilton gave some of the Ground on which the College stands,
with an adjacent Field.

Kings, Parliaments, the City of Glasgow, several of the Archbishops, and many
particular Persons, have been Benefactors to it.

In 1662. the Earl of Dundonald gave 1000 l. Sterling to it, for the
Maintenance of poor Scholars. The great Buchanan, and the famous Cameron had,
among other eminent Men, their Education here.

Several fine Roman Stones, dug up in the Latter-end of 1740. near
Kirkentilloch, with very curious Inscriptions, have been removed to this
University, where before was a good Collection of Pieces of Antiquity, chiefly
found near the same Place.

In the higher Part of the City stands the great Church, formerly Cathedral and
Metropolitan, dedicated to St. Mungo, who was Bishop here about the Year 560.
It is a magnificent and stately Edifice, and surprises the Beholders with its
stupendous Bigness, and the Workmanship of the Artizan. The several Rows of
Pillars, and the exceeding high Spire which rises from a square Tower in the
middle of the Cross, show a wonderful Piece of Architecture. It is now divided
into several Preaching-places, one above the other.

Near the Church stands a ruinous Castle, formerly the Residence of the
Archbishop, who was legal Lord or Superior of the City, which stands on his
Ground, and from whom it received its first Charter, and many Privileges. It is
encompassed with an exceeding high Wall of hewn Stone, and has a fine Prospect
into the City.

The Duke of Montrose has so great an Interest here, and in the Country round,
that he is, in a Civil Sense, Governor of this City, as he is legally of their
University, and much beloved in these Parts.

Glasgow is a City of Business, and has the Face of Foreign as well as
Domestic Trade; nay, I may say, it is the only City in Scotland, at this Time,
that apparently increases in both. The Union has, indeed, answered its End to
them, more than to any other Part of the Kingdom, their Trade being new formed
by it; for as the Union opened the Door to the Scots into our American
Colonies, the Glasgow Merchants presently embraced the Opportunity; and though,
at its first concerting, the Rabble of this City made a formidable Attempt to
prevent it, yet afterward they knew better, when they found the great Increase
of their Trade by it; for they now send near 50 Sail of Ships every Year to
Virginia, New England, and other English Colonies in America.

But if this City could have a Communication with the Firth of Forth, so as to
send their Tobacco and Sugar by Water to Alloway below Stirling, as they might
from thence again to London, Holland, Hamburgh, and the Baltic, they would
very probably in a few Years double their Trade.

The Share they have in the Herring Fishery is very considerable; and they cure
their Herrings so well, and so much better than they are done in any other Part
of Great Britain, that a Glasgow Herring is esteemed as good as a Dutch one.

I have no room to enlarge upon the Home Trade of this City, which is very
considerable in many Things. I shall therefore touch at some few Particulars.

1. Here are two very handsome Sugar-baking Houses, carried on by skilful
Persons, with large Stocks, and to a very great Perfection. Here is likewise a
large Distillery for distilling Spirits from the Melasses drawn from Sugars, by
which they enjoyed a vast Advantage for a Time, by a reserved Article in the
Union, freeing them from English Duties.

2. Here is a Manufacture of Plaiding, a Stuff crossstriped with yellow, red,
and other Mixtures, for the Plaids or Veils worn by the Women in Scotland.

3. Here is a Manufacture of Muslins, which they make so good and fine, that
great Quantities of them are sent into England, and to the British Plantations,
where they sell at a good Price. They are generally striped, and are very much
used for Aprons by the Ladies, and sometimes in Head-cloaths by the meaner Sort
of Englishwomen.

4. Here is also a Linen Manufacture; but as that is in common with all Parts
of Scotland, which improve in it daily, I will not insist upon it as a Peculiar
here, though they make a very great Quantity of it, and send it to the
Plantations as their principal Merchandise: Nor are the Scots without a Supply
of Goods for sorting their Cargoes to the English Colonies, without sending to
England for them; and it is necessary to mention it here, because it has been
objected by some, that the Scots could not send a sortable Cargo to America,
without buying from England; which, coming through many Hands, and by a long
Carriage, must consequently be so dear, that the English Merchants can
undersell them.

It is very probable indeed, that some Things cannot be had here so well as
from England, so as to make out such a sortable Cargo as the Virginia Merchants
in London ship off, whose Entries at the Custom-house consist sometimes of two
hundred Particulars, as Tin, Turnery, Milanery, Upholstery, Cutlery, and other
Crooked-lane Wares; in short, somewhat of every Thing, either for Wearing or
House-furniture, building Houses or Ships.

But though the Scots cannot do all this, we may reckon up what they can furnish,
which they have not only in sufficient Quantities, but some in greater
Perfection than England itself.

1. They have Woollen Manufactures of their own, such as Stirling Serges,
Musselburgh Stuffs, Aberdeen Stockens, Edinburgh Shalloons, Blankets, etc. 2.
The Trade with England being open, they have now all the Manchester, Sheffield,
and Birmingham Wares, and likewise the Cloths, Kerseys, Half-thicks, Duffels,
Stockens, and coarse Manufactures of the North of England, brought as cheap or
cheaper to them by Horse-packs, as they are carried to London, it being at a
less Distance. 3. They have Linens of most Kinds, especially Diapers and
Table-linen, Damasks, and many other Sorts not known in England, and cheaper
than there, because made at their own Doors. 4. What Linens they want from
Holland or Hamburgh, they import from thence as cheap as the English can do,
and for Muslins, their own are very acceptable, and cheaper than in England. 5.
Gloves they make better and cheaper than in England; for they send great
Quantities thither. 6. Another Article, which is very considerable here, is
Servants, which they can transport in greater Plenty, and upon better Terms,
than the English, without the scandalous Art of Kidnapping, Wheedling,
Betraying, and the like; for the poor People offer themselves fast enough, and
think it their Advantage, as it certainly is, to serve out their Times soberly
in the foreign Plantations, and then become diligent Planters for themselves;
which is a much wiser Course than to turn Thieves, and then be transported to
save them from the Gallows. This may be given as a Reason, and, I believe, it
is the only one, why so many more of the Scots Servants, who go over to
Virginia, settle and thrive there, than of the English; which is so certainly
true, that if it holds on for many Years more, Virginia may be rather called a
Scots than an English Plantation.
I might mention many other Particulars; but this is sufficient to show, that
the Scots Merchants are not at a Loss how to make up sortable Cargoes to send
to the Plantations; and that if we can outdo them in some things, they are able
to outdo us in others. If they are under any Disadvantages in the Trade I am
speaking of, it is that they may not, perhaps, have so easy a Vend and
Consumption for the Goods they bring back, as the English have at London,
Bristol, or Liverpool; for which Reason they have lately set up a Wharf at
Alloway in the Forth, whence they send their Tobacco and Sugars thither by
Land-carriage, and ship them off from thence for Holland, Hamburgh, or London,
as the Market offers; and indeed they carry on a profitable Trade with England
in Tobacco, which from the Difference of Duty, etc. they do with no small
Advantage.

Now, though the carrying their Tobacco and Sugars several Miles over Land may be
some Disadvantage, yet, if, on the other hand, it be calculated how much sooner
the Voyage is made from Glasgow to the Capes of Virginia, than from London, the
Difference will be made up in the Frieght, and in the Expense of the Ships,
especially in time of War, when the Chanel is thronged with Privateers, and the
Ships wait to go in Fleets for fear of Enemies; for the Glasgow Vessels are no
sooner out of the Firth of Clyde, but they stretch away to the North-west, are
out of the Road of the Privateers immediately, and are often at the Capes of
Virginia before the London Ships get clear of the Chanel. Nay, even in times of
Peace, there must always be allowed, one time with another, at least fourteen
or twenty Days Difference in the Voyage, both going out and coming in, which,
taken together, is a Month or six Weeks in the whole Voyage; and considering
Wear and Tear, Victuals and Wages, this makes a considerable Difference in the
Trade.

One thing still I must take notice of, before I quit Glasgow. I have
mentioned, more than once, the Duties laid on Ale and Beer sold in diverse Towns
in Scotland, for the Benefit and public Emolument of the said Towns; but have
here to take Notice of the like Duty laid for a different Purpose, that is to
say, for a Punishment: The Case was this:

When the Malt-Duty was extended for the first time to Scotland, it occasioned
much murmuring; and particularly Daniel Campbell, Esquire who lived at Glasgow, and
was Member for that Town, having given his Vote for it in Parliament, the
Populace rose, entered his House, destroyed all his Goods and Furniture, and
committed other Acts of Violence and Outrage.

This the Legislature resenting as a Defiance of lawful Authority, an Act
passed in the 12th of King George I. 1725. to take from the Town of Glasgow the
Benefits of an Act before passed, for laying a Duty of two Penies Scots on
every Pint of Ale or Beer brewed for Sale in the said City and its Privileges;
and vesting it for the Remainder of the Term, which was for thirteen Years to
come, ( viz. from 1725. to 1738.) in his Majesty, to be put under the
Commissioners of Excise, in order to raise the Sum of 6080 l. for satisfying
the Damages and Losses sustained by Mr. Campbell in the said Riot; but it was
provided, that when the said Sum was paid, the Duty of Two Penies Scots was to
return, for the Remainder of the Term, to the Magistrates, for the Purposes for
which they were originally granted. This occasioned no good Blood, it may be
believed, between the City and Mr. Campbell; but yet, this was not the last
time this City had the Honor to be represented in Parliament by the same
Gentleman, as it is joined with the Burghs of Renfrew, Ruglen, and Dunbarton!
-- So placable, and so forgiving, are the generous Scottish Nation! or, at
least, so little Title has the City of Glasgow in particular to the National
Motto of Scotland! -- Nor did this good Behavior of theirs turn out to its
Disadvantage; for in the 9th of George II. a new Act passed, continuing the
former Act for Twenty-five Years longer, and extending it to the Villages of
Gorbells, and Port Glasgow, both which Places were in the Jurisdiction of the
City, and reaped all their Advantages from its Neighborhood; the latter
especially, at which the People of Glasgow had built, and constantly
maintained, a very commodious Harbor, and yet were neither of them in the
former Act.

From Glasgow I went eight Miles Southward to Hamilton, a Town pleasant and
well built, the Church of which is the Burying-place of the Noble Family of
Hamilton. But it is chiefly noted for its fine Palace, the Seat of the Duke of
Hamilton, premier Peer in Scotland, and nearly related to the Royal Family of
the Stuarts. The House at present is large, though Part of the Design is yet
unfinished. It has a fair Front, with two Wings, and two more are laid out in
the Ichnography of the Building, which are not yet begun.

The Front is very magnificent, all of white Freestone, with regular Ornaments
according to the Rules of Art. The Wings are very deep, and when the other two
are added, the Sides of the House will be like two large Fronts rather than
Wings. The Apartments are very noble, and more fit for the Court of a Prince,
than the House of a Subject. The Pictures, the Furniture, and other Decorations
are exquisitely fine, and suitable to the Dignity of the great Possessors. The
late Duchess, marrying a Branch of the Family of Douglas, obliged him to take
the Name of Hamilton, and so continue the Estate in her Name. Her Grace had six
Sons, four of whom were Peers either by Birth or Creation; viz. The late Duke,
who was killed in a Duel with Lord Mohun, Anno 1712. Charles, late Earl of
Selkirk, so created by King James VII. John, Earl of Ruglen; and George, late
Earl of Orkney. The other two were Lord Basil, and Lord Archibald, late one of
the Lords of the Admiralty.

The Situation of the House has all the Advantage imaginable; for it stands in
a plain Country, near enough to the Banks of Clyde to enjoy the Prospect of its
Stream, and yet far enough from it to be out of the Reach of its Torrents and
Floods.

The great Park is about seven Miles in Circumference, and noted for its fine
Oaks and Firs, and the small River Aven runs through it. It is walled round with
Stone, and well stocked with Deer. The lesser Park is rather a great Enclosure,
than a Park; though this, as well as the other, is extremely well planted with
Trees. The Gardens are finely designed, but I cannot say they are so well
finished and kept, as those at Drumlanrig.

Ruglen is another Town in this County, which gives Title of Earl to a Branch
of the Family of Hamilton, as has been said.

Here is also the Town and Castle of Douglas, which gives Title and Surname to
the Dukes of Douglas: Of which Family more anon.

Crawford Lindsey, in this County, gives Title also to the Earl of Crawford,
who claims Precedence as first Earl.

In Crawford-Moor, Gold has been found in the Sand of the Brooks after Rain,
and that in pretty large Pieces, and they dug up Lapis Lazuli there. The
Remains of a Roman Causeway are to be seen in this County from one End to the
other.

We then turned to the Left for Stirlingshire, and, after passing the Clyde,
came to Kilsyth, a good plain Country Burgh, tolerably well built, but not
large, near which the Marquis of Montross gave a great Overthrow to the
Covenanters in the Civil Wars. Here, upon a particular Occasion, we went to see
the ancient Seat of Calendar, which seems now in its Decline. The Town of
Falkirk is near Calendar House, but has nothing remarkable in it, except the
other old decayed House of the Earl of Calendar.

Here we plainly saw the Remains of the ancient Work, which they call Severus's
Wall, Adrian's Wall, or Graham's Dyke, for it is known by all these; built by
the Romans cross this narrow Part of the Country, and fortified with Redoubts
and Stations to defend the South Country from the Incursions of the Picts,
Irish, and other wild Nations, in the Highlands. This Wall reached from
Dunbriton Firth (so they called the Firth of Clyde) to the Forth, and was
several times repaired, till the Destruction of the Roman Empire in Britain,
with which it perished. Yet neither this, while it stood, nor the stronger one
at Newcastle, called Severus's Wall, could so well preserve the Country from
the Invasion of Picts and Scots, but the Romans were often obliged to send
powerful Succors to the Relief of the distressed Britons. Camden thinks, that
this Wall was built by Antoninus Pius, who being adopted by Adrian, assumed his
Name. Be this as it will, it is certain, that in all the Scottish Histories, it
is called Graham's Dyke.

The Manner of the Wall is best understood by Mr. Pont's Description in Dr.
Gibson's (now Lord Bishop of London) Translation of Camden's Britannia, p. 959.
First, there appears a Ditch of 12 Feet wide before the Wall, toward the
Enemies Country; the Wall is 10 Feet thick, but it is not known how high it was
at first: There is a paved Way at the Foot of the Wall, five Feet broad,
Watch-towers within Call of one another, where Sentinels kept Watch Day and
Night; a Court of Guard to lodge a sufficient Number of Soldiers against all
sudden Alarms, and a Void within, for the Soldiers Lodgings. Besides these,
there are along the Wall great and noble Forts, strongly entrenched, and though
within the Wall, able to receive a whole Army together. The Forts which
remained in Mr. Pont's Time, who traced them all, were these; one at Langtoun,
a Mile East of Falkirk; one just at Rouintree Burnhead; one at Wester-Gowden,
about St. Helen's Chapel; one at the Croykill; a very great one at the Top of
the Banhill; one at Atchindevy; one at Kirkintilloch, or Kaerpencolloch; one at
East-Calder; one at Hilltoun-Calder; one at Balmudy; one at Simerstone, and
over Kilvin River, and Carestoun; one at Atermynie; one at Balcastle,
over against Banhil; one at Kaellybe, over against Croy-hill; one at the
Roch-hill, over against the West-wood; a large one at Bankyir, over against
Castle-Cairy; one at Dumbase: In the Ruins of that at Bankyir was found a large
Iron Shovel, or some Instrument resembling it, so weighty that it could hardly
be lifted by one Man. At the same Fort also were discovered several Sepulchers
covered with large rough Stones; and at Dun-Chroe Chyr, by Mony-Abroch, were
formerly large Buildings. The Length of the Wall was 36 Scots Miles, beginning
between Queen's Ferry and Abercorn; it ranged along West by the Grange and
Kineil, to Innereving, so on to Falkirk; from whence it proceeded directly to
the Forest of Cumernald; next, it ran to the great Fort at the Banhill, where
have been found several Stones, some with Pictures engraven upon them, and with
Inscriptions. From whence it went to the Peel of Kirkintilloch, the greatest
Fort of all, and so Westward to Dumbarton, with a great Ditch upon the
North-side of the Wall all along. It had also many square Fortifications in
form of Roman Camps.

From Kilsyth we mounted the Hills, black and frightful as they were, to find
the Road over the Moors and Mountains to Sterling; and being directed by
Guides, we came to the River Carron. The Chanel of a River appeared, indeed,
and looked as if it had been cut out by Art through horrid Precipices, to mark
out a Course for the Water; but yet not a Drop was at that time to be seen.
Great Stones, square, and formed as if cut out by Hand, of a prodigious Size,
lay scattered in a confused manner in the very Course of the River, which, as
we were told, the Fury of the Water, at other times, had hurried down from the
Mountains. If so, they must have been some Ages upon their Jouney down the
Stream; for it is not probable, that a Flood often comes with a Force sufficient
to move such Stones as these, unless a great Quantity of Ice, as well as Water,
comes down upon them together. But in all Probability, they are not not driven
down by the Force of the Water at all; but are Roman Monuments; of which more
by-and-by.

Here we passed another Bridge of one Arch, not quite so large as that we saw
in Galloway, but very like it. It Is finely built of Freestone, but the Shores
being flat, it rises so high, that it is not every Head can bear to ride over
it. But there was a Necessity of building it with one Arch only; for no Piers
in the middle of the Chanel could have borne the Shock of the great Stones,
which sometimes come down this Stream.

From hence, descending on the North-side, we had a View of the Firth of Forth
on our Right, and of the Castle of Stirling on our Left. In going to the
latter, we passed the Water of Bannockburn, famous in the Scots History for the
great Battle fought here between King Robert de Bruce, and the English Army
commanded by King Edward II. in Person, in which the English were utterly
overthrown, and that with so terrible a Slaughter, that though it was the
greatest Army that ever marched from England into Scotland, very few escaped,
and the King with much ado saved himself by Flight. How he could save himself
by a little Boat, (as Mr. Camden says) I cannot understand, there being no
River near, that had any Boats in it, but the Forth; and then the King must
have fled North, whereas, to be sure, he fled to England with all the Speed he
could. He might, indeed, have made use of a Boat to pass the Tweed, but that
was at least 50 Miles from the Field of Battle.

Whether the Scots magnify this Victory or not, is not my Business to inquire.
It Is certain that the English Army was totally overthrown here; for they lost
50000 Men, among whom were abundance of their Nobility and Gentry.

This Place is also remarkable for the execrable Murder of King James III.
whose young Son was by some discontented Nobles worked up to this impious Deed.
But when his Understanding ripened, he saw the Action in its proper Light, and
was so greatly affected by it, that he did Penance for ever after by constantly
wearing an Iron Chain near his Flesh.

Sterling was our next Stage, an ancient Town, and an important Pass, which,
together with Dumbarton, is the Defense of the Lowlands against the Highlands;
for, as one very knowingly said, Dumbarton is the Lock of the Highlands, and
Stirling Castle keeps the Key. The Town is situated, exactly as Edinburgh, on
the Ridge of a Hill, sloping down on both Sides, and the Street gradually
ascending from the East to the Castle, which is at the West End. It is large
and well built, and though it is ancient, yet the Buildings are not unlike those
of Edinburgh.

The Church is also a very spacious Building, but not Collegiate. It stands in
the upper Part of the Town, toward the End, is of good Architecture, and
adorned with a lofty Tower. There was formerly a Church, or rather a Collegiate
Chapel, in the Castle, and likewise a private Chapel, or Oratory, in the
Palace, for the Royal Family; but they have been long disused.

The Castle is not so very difficult of Access as that at Edinburgh, but is
esteemed equally strong; for the Works are capable to mount more Cannon, and
there is a Battery that commands the Bridge, which is of the utmost Importance,
and seems to have been the main End and Purpose for which it was built. The
Walls, and all the Outworks, are so firm, that they seem in as good Condition,
as if they had been lately built.

The Palace and Royal Apartments are very magnificent, but are all in Decay,
and likely to continue so. This is at present also the Fate of the Palaces of
Linlithgow, Falkland, Dumfermling, and all the other Royal Houses in Scotland,
Holy-rood-house at Edinburgh excepted.

In the Park adjoining to the Castle were formerly large Gardens. The Figure of
the Walks and Grass-plots is still plainly to be seen.

The Park here is large, and walled about, as most of the Parks in Scotland
are; but there is little or no Wood in it. The Earls of Mar, of the Name of
Ereskin, who claims to be Hereditary Keeper of the King's Children, and of this
Castle, had a House at the upper End of the Town, very finely situated for
Prospect, but not for Security, being too near the Castle; for were the Castle
ever to suffer a close Siege, and be vigorously defended, it would run a great
Risque of being demolished on one Side or other; besides, this Nearness to the
Castle makes the Site more confused to the Eye.

From a pretty little Flower-garden upon one of the Bastions on the North-side
of the Castle, we had a most agreeable Prospect over the Valley, and of the
Meanders, Turnings, or Reaches of the River Forth, which are extremely
beautiful. They are so spacious, and return so near themselves with so regular
and exact a Sweep, that, I believe, the like of it is not to be seen in
Britain, and perhaps, not in Europe, especially in so large a River. The Seine,
indeed, between Paris and Roan, fetches a Sweep something like these, and some
Miles longer, but then it is but one; whereas here are three double Reaches,
which makes six Returns together, and each of them above three Scots Miles in
Length: And as the Bows are almost equal for Breadth, as the Reaches are for
Length, it makes the Figure complete. It is an admirable Sight indeed, and
continues from a little below the great Bridge at Stirling to Alloway, the Seat
of the Earls of Mar. The Form of this Winding may be conceived by the Length of
the Way; for it is twenty-four Miles from Stirling to Alloway by Water, and
hardly four Miles by Land.

One would think these large Windings of the Stream would check the Tide very
much; but, on the contrary, we found the Tide of Flood make up very strong
under Stirling-bridge, though it does not flow above seven or eight Miles
farther; for the Stream grows narrow apace, and the rapid Current of all Rivers
in this Country checks the Tide, when it comes into narrow Limits: The same is
the Case in the Tyne at Newcastle, and the Tweed at Berwick, in both which,
though the Tide flows as strong in at the Mouth of these Rivers as in this, yet
the Navigation goes not near so far up.

The Bridge of Stirling has only four Arches; but they are very large, and the
Chanel widens considerably below it. At Alloway it is above a Mile broad, and
deep enough for Ships of any Burden; so that the Glasgow Merchants are
certainly in the right to settle Warehouses there, and ship off their Goods for
the Eastern Countries.

I was very curious to inquire into the Course of this River, as I had been
before into that of the Clyde, to see if there was a Possibility of uniting
their Waters for an Inland Navigation; because I had observed that the Charts
and Plans of the Country brought them almost to meet. But when I came to survey
the Ground exactly, I found the Map-makers greatly mistaken, and that they had
not only given the Situation and Courses of the Rivers wrong, but the Distances
also. However, upon the whole, I saw plainly, that notwithstanding several
Circumstances which might obstruct it, and cause the Workmen to fetch some
winding Turns out of the Way, yet a Canal of about 18 Miles would fairly join
the Rivers, and make a clear Navigation from the Irish to the German Sea; and
that this could be done without any considerable Obstruction; for they would
not have Occasion for above four Sluices in the whole Way, and those only to
head a Basin, or Receptacle, to contain a Flush of Water, to push on the
Vessels either way, as Occasion required.

How easy such a Work would be, and how advantageous, not to Scotland only, but
even to England and Ireland, the Thing itself will explain at first Sight. I
could enter upon particular Descriptions of the Work, and answer all the
Objections raised from the great Quantity of Waters in the Winter, and the
Force and Fury of their Streams; but I have no room for it here.

There is a very considerable Manufacture at Stirling for Serges or Shalloons,
which they make and dye very well; nor has the English Manufacture for
Shalloons broke in so much upon them as it was apprehended it would. This
Manufacture is a great Support to the poor People that are employed in it, who
are thereby enabled to live very comfortably.

The Family of Ereskine is very considerable here; for besides the Earls of Mar
and Buchan, there are several Gentlemen of Quality of that Name.

We had here a very fine Prospect both East and West: Eastward we could plainly
see the Castle of Edinburgh, and the Hill, called Arthur's Seat, in the Royal
Park at Holy-rood-house; and Westward we could see Dumbarton Castle. To the
Northward we saw Dumblane, and the Field of Battle, called Sheriffmuir, between
it and Sterling.

But our Business was not to the North yet; for having a Part of the Border to
view, we went from Stirling to the South-east, over some of the same Hills we
passed at our coming hither, that we might leave nothing behind to oblige us to
come this Way again. The Duke of Argyll has a small House here, which the
Family call the Lowland House, to distinguish it from the many Seats they are
possessed of in the Highlands. This Seat belonged formerly to the Earls of
Stirling. The County round it, South of the Forth, is called Stirlingshire, or
Strivelingshire.

Stirling was one of the Boundaries of the Roman Empire in Britain, as appears
by the Inscription on a Stone below the Castle, toward the Bridge, importing,
That one of the Wings of their Army kept Guard there. On the Right of the Town
stood the noble Abbey of Cambuskenneth. The River Carron, which I mentioned
before, is famous for some Roman Monuments, particularly two little Hills,
called by the Vulgar Dunipace, i. e. Hills of Peace, and two Miles lower is a
round Edifice of Stone, which, by the Description, resembles what the Romans
called the Temple of Terminus. But Buchanan thinks, they were rather Monuments
of some great Actions performed here.

From Stirling we went directly to Linlithgow, a large Town, well built, with a
stately Townhouse, but most famous for the noble Palace of the Kings of
Scotland, which is the least decayed of all the rest; for King James VI.
repaired, or rather rebuilt it; and his two Sons Prince Henry, and Prince
Charles, afterward King of England, had Apartments here, which a Traveller may
easily distinguish by the different Coats of Arms, especially over those called
the Prince's Lodgings.

This Palace stands on a rising Ground, which runs into the Lake, in form of an
Amphitheatre, and has a Descent resembling Terrace-walks. There are two Towers
at each Corner of the Court, with Apartments, and a curious Fountain in the
Middle, adorned with several fine Statues, from whence the Water rises to a
good Height. A noble Park also belongs to it.

The Church of St. Michael makes a Part of this Building, and is a Wing on the
Right Hand of the first Court, as the proper Offices make the Left. The
Inner-court is very large and elegant for the Taste of the Times. In the Middle
of this is the large Fountain I have mentioned, which still shows the Remains
of some good Carving, and other Ornaments.

Here King James V. restored the Order of the Knights of St. Andrew, as the
Order of Knights of the Bath lately was in England, and erected a Throne and
Stalls for them in St. Michael's Church, making it the Chapel of the Order. He
was likewise the first who ordered the Thistle to be added to the Badge of the
Order, and the Motto, viz. Nemo me impune lacesset, which is worn about it in
the Royal Arms, was of his Invention. This Prince seems to have been very much
honored in the World; for he wore the Badges of three Orders besides his own;
viz. That of the Garter, conferred upon him by his Uncle, the King of England;
that of the Golden Fleece, by the Emperor, then King of Spain; that of St.
Michael, by the King of France.

In his Time the Green Ribband was worn by the Knights Companions of this
Order; but King James VII. changed it to the Blue, like that of the Knights of
the Garter in England. After the Union, Queen Anne, the Sovereign of both, to
distinguish them, restored the Green Ribband, and intended to have called a
Chapter of the Order, to bring it once more to its full Luster, but was
prevented by Death.

In this Town the Earl of Murray, Lord Regent, was murdered with a
Musket-bullet shot by one Hamilton. This Earl was a natural Son of King James
V. and aspiring to the Crown, joined with the Reformers, having first got the
Revenues of the Convents of St. Andrews and Pittenweem, whereof he was Abbot,
or Prior, secured to him and his Heirs. His Ambition and Intrigues were the
chief Cause of almost all the Troubles of Queen Mary's Reign. But I shall have
Occasion to mention him in another Place.

At Linlithgow is a great Linen Manufacture, as there is at Glasgow; and the
Water of the Lake here is esteemed so extraordinary for Bleaching or Whitening
of Linen Cloth, that a vast deal of it is brought hither from other Parts of
the Country for that Purpose. This Lake is situate on the North-side of the
Town, and between it and the Palace are Terrace-walks, which are so beautiful,
that a more delightful Place can scarce be seen.

In the Year 1722. An Act passed for laying Two-penies Scots on every Scots
Pint of Ale or Beer sold in Linlithgow, and its Liberties, in order to repair
the public Buildings, which were run to Decay, such as the Church and
Townhouse, etc. to supply such Parts of the Town with fresh Water, as want it;
to pave and amend the Streets, and also the Avenues within a Mile round the
Town; for discharging the Town-Debts, and other necessary Purposes. Great
Progress was made in these laudable Undertakings by virtue of this Act; but the
End being not sufficiently attained, nor likely to be, at the Expiration of the
Act, these Duties were farther continued for 21 Years more, by an Act which
passed in the Year 1733. which, it is not doubted, will completely answer all
the proposed Ends, to the great Advantage of the Town and Country.

Forfichen, formerly the Residence of the Knights of Malta, is two Miles
South-west from Linlithgow.

Near a Place called Kips, South from this Town, is an ancient Chapel or Altar
of great unpolished Stones, leaning so as to support one another. The Vulgar
call them Arthur's Oven; but the Learned think them to be a Temple of Terminus,
built by the Romans; and others still there are, who conjecture them to be a
Temple of the Celts or Druids. Near this Chapel or Altar is a Circle of great
Stones, and on two adjacent Hills are the Remains of old Camps, with great
Heaps of Stones, and ancient Graves, which some think Roman Works.

About four Miles North from Linlithgow lies the Castle of Abercorn, supposed
to be the Kebercurnig of Bid, where began the Roman Wall, thought to be begun
by Severus.

From Linlithgow we turned to the Right, and following the Clyde upwards, from
a little above Hamilton, where we were before, we came into the Shire of
Clydsale. This Tract has some Remains of Roman Antiquity; for from Errick-stone
to Mauls Mitre, which borders upon the Shire of Renfrew, are evident Footsteps
of a Roman Causeway for several Miles together; and there is a Tradition, that
another Roman Street went from Lanark to the Roman Camp near Falkirk.

Lanark is the Capital of this County, but is no extraordinary Town; its
Bridge, however, is very remarkable. It was built at a vast Expense by the
Inhabitants: But the violent Current of the Water rendering the keeping it in
Repair too chargeable for the Town to support, and making it require frequent
Reparations, an Act of the Scottish Parliament passed, Anno 1703. impowering
them to collect Tolls for Pontage, in order to keep up the same. This Act was
in Force for 19 Years, and there was so much Reason for it, and the Bridge was
of so great Use to the County, that though the Duties expired in the Year 1722.
yet the Rates were voluntarily paid for many Years; till some Disputes arising
with some selfish Persons, who wanted to reap the Fruits of other Peoples
Labor for nothing, an Act was passed, in the 10th of King George II. for
enabling the Magistrates to repair and maintain so useful a Work. This Act is
to continue in Force for 31 Years, and is so reasonable, that it ought, and
perhaps will be, perpetuated: For the Rates are only 6 d. Sterling for every
Coach or Chariot drawn by four or more Horses; 2 d. for every Cart or
Wheel-carriage; 1 d. for every Sledge or Horse loaded or unloaded; Two-thirds
of a Penny for every Ox, Cow, or Bull; One-sixth of a Penny for every Calf, Hog,
Sheep or Lamb; and the same for every Foot Passenger; who must be a worse Beast
than any I have named, to grudge it for so great a Convenience.

A little below this Town the River Douglas falls into the Clyde, and gives the
Name of Dowglasdale to the Lands near it. In a dull Vale near this River stands
a very old Castle, which has been the paternal Seat of the great Family of
Douglas for above a thousand Years, for which Reason it is still kept in
Repair: But by the frequent Additions to the Building, it is become such a wild
irregular Mass, that, at a Distance, it seems rather like a Town than a single
Fabric; though the Apartments are very noble.

The complete History of this Family would take up a Volume by itself, as it
actually has in a late Work, where the Heroes of the Name are fully set forth,
and all the illustrious Actions they have been concerned in. I shall only
observe, that there are no less than Seven Branches of this Family in the
Peerage of Great Britain, namely, the Duke of Douglas, who is Chief of the
Name, the Duke of Queensberry and Dover, the Earls of Morton, Dumbarton, and
March, and the Lords Mordington and Forfar, the latter of whom was unhappily
killed at the Fight near Dumblaine, against the Pretender.

The Country abounds with Coals, Peat and Limestone; but what turns to the
greatest Profit, are the Lead-mines belonging to the Earl of Hopton; not far
from which (after Rains) the Country People find Pieces of Gold, some of which
are of a considerable Bigness. This is thought to be what Camden calls
Crawford-Moor, where Lapis Lazuli is daily dug up with little Trouble, as I
have said.

Here we left the last-mentioned wild Place on the Right, and went Westward
into the Shire of Peebles. The first Town we came to of any Note was Peebles,
which stands on the Bank of the Tweed, and is Capital of the County. The Town
is small, and but very indifferently built or inhabited, yet there are some
good Houses in it. It was formerly remarkable for three Churches, three Gates,
three Streets, and three Bridges, of which that over Tweed has five Arches.

The Country hereabouts is very hilly; but those Hills are covered with Sheep,
which are a principal Part of the Estates of the Gentry. A great Quantity of
them are sent into England, to the great Damage of the Poor, who are thereby
deprived of the Advantage of manufacturing their Wool. They used formerly to
export it to France; but by the Act of Union, the Exportation of it was
prohibited upon the severest Penalties; and to make the Gentlemen of the
Southern Counties amends for this Loss, a great Sum of Money was at that time
granted them as an Equivalent, as I have mentioned before, to encourage them to
set the Poor to work.

This County of Tweedale has two remarkable Lakes in it; the one called
West-water Lake, abounds so with Eels and other Fish, about August, that,
during a West Wind, they come out in such Shoals into a small River which runs
from the Lake, that, we were told, they are ready to overthrow the People who
go in to catch them. The other is Lochgenen Lake, upon Genen-hill, which falls
into Annandale from a Precipice of 250 Feet high, that many times Fishes are
killed by the Fall of the Water.

The Frazers were Ancestors by Marriage to the Family of Tweedale; and of this
Name was that great Captain, who contributed so much to the Victory which the
Scots obtained in one Day over three English Armies at Rosbin 1301. during
Wallace's Administration.

Merlin is said to be buried in the Churchyard of Drumelzier, in this County;
and according to an old Prophecy, That the Kingdoms should be united, when
Tweed and Pausel met at his Grave, they say that it happened so by an
Inundation, when King James VI. came to the Crown of England, Anno 1603. the
only time, before or since, it ever did so.

Some Remains of Antiquity are visible in this County. The Place called
Randal's Trench seems to have been a Roman Camp, and a Causeway leads from it
half a Mile together to the Town of Line.

In this County are two very lively Monuments of the Vanity of human Glory. The
first is the Foundation of a prodigious Building (more like a Royal Palace,
than the Seat of a private Nobleman) begun by the Earl of Morton, whose Head
was no sooner cut off, than his Design perished; for it has never since been
carried on.

The other is the Palace of Traquair, built and finished by the late Earl of
Traquair, for some Years Lord High Treasurer of Scotland, and a Person in the
highest Posts both of Honor and Profit in the Kingdom, who yet lost all by the
Fatality of the Times; for growing into universal Dislike by his Conduct under
King Charles I. he sunk into the most abject Condition of human Life, even to
want Bread, and to take Alms, and died in those miserable Circumstances about a
Year before the Restoration. The House is noble, the Design great, and well
finished; but the Owner was soon turned out of it by his Enemies, who thought
the sparing his Life an Act of great Mercy.

Bishop Burnet represents this Earl as a very mean-spirited Man, and one that
suffered himself to be made so vile a Tool in other Peoples Mischiefs, that he
fell unpitied. It Is very remarkable, that he was despised even by the Party
which he had served, and but too faithfully adhered to.

Here we saw the Ruins of the once famous Abbey of Melross, the Greatness of
which may be a little guessed at by the vast Extent of its Remains. One may
still distinguish many noble Parts of the Monastery, particularly the great
Church or Chapel, as large as some Cathedrals, the Choir of which is visible,
and 140 Feet in Length, besides what may have been pulled down at the East End;
and by the Thickness of the Foundations there must have been a large and strong
Tower, or Steeple, in the Center of the Church. There are likewise several
Fragments of the House itself; and the Court, and other Buildings are so
visible, that it is easy to know it was a most magnificent Place in its Day.

Following the Course of the Tweed, we passed by abundance of ancient Seats of
Gentlemen, whose Possessions are large in this Country; such as that of the
Family of Douglas, of whom one is called Douglas of Cavers, who is Hereditary
Sheriff of the County; and who shows the Standard of the brave Lord Douglas,
who was killed at the Battle of Otterburn, falsely, as the Scots say, called
Cheviot Chase (which I have mentioned in Vol. III.) just as he had gained the
Victory; as also the Mace of Iron he fought with.

The Country, South-east from Tweedale, is called Tiviotdale, or the Shire of
Roxburgh. In which are some Footsteps of Roman Encampments, and a Military Way
runs from Hounam to Tweed, called the Roman Causeway, and vulgarly, the rugged
Causeway.

The Town and Castle of Roxburgh are both now demolished. They were famous in
the History of both Nations, during their mutual Wars, when the Town was
frequently taken and retaken, and in the Siege of which King James II. of
Scotland was killed by the bursting of a Gun.

Jedburgh is a Royal Burgh, on the River Jed. It was one of those Towns that
suffered in the Rebellion in 1715. and being beside in Debt, and its Revenue
small to answer its Outgoings; and it being well situated for manufacturing
coarse Wool; but greatly suffering for want of fresh Water; and its public
Buildings, Bridges, Streets, and Works, greatly out of Repair; for these
Reasons, and also to enable the Inhabitants to erect Workhouses, etc. for the
Manufacture aforesaid, an Act passed 1720. imposing a Duty of Two-penies Scots
upon every Pint of Scots Ale, etc. to be vended within the said Town and its
Liberties; and it now reaps the good Effects of it.

The Duke of Roxburgh has a very great Estate. His Grace's House, called
Fleurs, has been finely embellished of late Years, and is a noble Seat; and the
Country about it, which was formerly wild and rugged, is now greatly impaired
and cultivated, and fine Plantations of Trees and Vista's surround the House,

From hence we came to Kelso, a handsome Market Town upon the Bank of Tweed,
which, being so near the English Border, and having one of the great Roads from
Edinburgh to Newcastle lying through it, which is a nearer Way by far than by
that through Berwick, is a considerable Thorough-fare to England. They only want
a good Bridge over the Tweed; for at present they have only a Ferry just at the
Town, and a good Ford through the River a little below it.

The Country about Kelso is very pleasant and fruitful on both Sides the Tweed.
The River here does not part England from Scotland; but you are upon Scots
Ground for four Miles, or thereabouts, on the South Side of the Tweed; and the
farther West, the more the Tweed lies within the Limits of the Country.

From Kelso we went North, where we passed through Lauderdale, a long Valley on
both Sides of the little River Lauder, from whence the Family of Maitland,
first Earls, then Dukes, and now Earls again, took their Title.

The Country is good here, and fenced with Hills on both Sides. The River
Lauder runs through it, keeping its Course due North.

The Town of Lauder is a Royal Burgh, the Seat of the Commissariot; and very
pleasantly situated. It Is remarkable for the Execution done upon the Minions of
King James III. who, headed by the Earls of Angus, took them out of the Court,
and hanged them over Lauder-bridge. The Seat of the noble Family of Maitland,
Earls of Lauderdale, is called Lauderfort: It is a stately House, about the
Middle of the Valley, on the River, but not large.

We kept the great Road over a high Ridge of Mountains, from whence we had a
plain View of Mid-Lothian. One of these Mountains is called Soutra-hill, and
belongs to a Branch of the Family of Maitland, the elder Brother of which House
was a Gentleman of great Merit, and raised himself by his personal
Accomplishments to the highest Posts in the Army. At the Battle of Treves in
Germany, where the French Army, under the Marshall de Crequi, was defeated by
the Germans, commanded by the old Duke of Zell, he had the Misfortune to lose
one of his Hands, which he supplied with another of Steel, from whence he was
called Handy Maitland. About the Time of the Union he was Lieutenant General of
the Queen's Armies, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, and Governor of Fort-William
and Inverlochy.

I could not pass this Way to Edinburgh without going off a little to the
Right, to see two very fine Seats. One of them is an old Abbey belonging to the
Marquis of Lothian, of the ancient Name of Ker, a younger Branch of the House
of Roxburgh, at Newbottle; whose Predecessor, Mark Ker, being Abbot of it,
turned Protestant, and got it settled on him and his Heirs. It Is an old
Building, but finely situated among the most agreeable Walks and Rows of Trees,
all full grown, and contains one of the best chosen Collections of Pictures,
Statues, and Busts, in Scotland.

About a Mile from hence is the Duke of Buccleugh's House at Dalkeith, without
Exception the finest and largest new-built House in Scotland. It was built by
the late Duchess, Relict of the Duke of Monmouth, on the Ground where the old
Castle of Dalkeith stood, which was the Estate of the Great Earl of Morton,
Regent of Scotland, who was beheaded under King James VI. by an Engine he
himself had introduced into this Country, as I have mentioned, at Halifax, in
Vol. III. He suffered for being accessory to, and acquainted with the barbarous
Design of the Lord Darnley's Murder.

This Palace stands on a rising Ground on the Edge of the River North-Esk, from
whence it overlooks the Plain, with a Majesty like that of Windsor on the Bank
of the Thames, making some Allowance for the Difference of the two Rivers. The
Park is very large, and beautified with Waterworks, Jets d' Eau, and a Canal,
the expensive Work of the late Duchess, and the present Duke.

The Inside of this magnificent Palace is answerable to the Grandeur of the
Family, being very richly furnished, and adorned with many fine Paintings,
especially of the Ladies of the English Court, and some Royal Originals.

Just beyond the Park is Dalkeith, a pretty large Market Town, and the more
considerable for being so near Edinburgh; for great Quantities of Provisions
are brought hither from the Southern Countries, which are sold here, and
afterward sent to that City.

I will conclude this Letter with the following Inscription on the Tombstone of
one Margaret Scott, who died in the Town of Dalkeith February 9. 1738. Stop,
Passenger, until my Life you have read:
The Living may get Knowledge by the Dead.
Five times five Years I lived a Virgin Life:
Ten times five Years I was a virtuous Wife:
Ten times five Years I lived a Widow chaste;
Now, tired of this Mortal Life, I rest.
I, from my Cradle to my Grave, have seen,
Eight mighty Kings of Scotland, and a Queen.
Four times five Years the Commonwealth I saw;
Ten times the Subjects rose against the Law.
Twice did I see old Prelacy pulled down;
And twice the Cloak was humbled by the Gown.
An End of Stuart 's Race I saw: No more!
I saw my Country sold for English Ore.
Such Desolations in my Time have been,
I have an End of all Perfection seen.


I am, Sir, Yours, etc.

LETTER IV. CONTAINING A Description of the ancient Caledonia, or Northern Part
of Scotland; and particularly of the Shires and Towns of Fife, St. Andrews,
Perth, Dumblain, Alloway, Culross, Scone, Angus, Dundee, Montrose, Aberdeen,
Buchan, Murray, Elgin, Inverness, and the Highlands, etc.
SIR,
I AM now to enter the true and real Caledonia; for that Part of the Country on
the North of the Firth of Forth is alone called by that Name, and was anciently
known by no other.

I crossed the River at Queensferry, seven Miles West of Edinburgh, into the
Shire of Fife; and as the most considerable Places in this County are on the
Seaside, or near it, I directed my Journey East along the Coast. The first
Place we came to was the Burgh of Innerkeithin, an ancient walled Town, with a
spacious Harbor opening from the East into the River, which has been lately
much neglected for want of Trade. The Town however is large, and still populous.

I cannot pass over a tragical Story, which happened in this Town in the Reign
of the late Queen Anne. The Master of Burleigh (so the eldest Son of a Lord or
Viscount is called, while the Father is living) fell in Love with a young Woman
in his Father's Family, but could not prevail with her either to marry him, or
to sacrifice her Virtue to him; which being known, she was sent away, and he
persuaded to travel. However, before his Departure, he declared she should be
his Wife at his Return; and if any one else should marry her in his Absence, he
would murder him. This passed without much Notice, and the young Woman was soon
after married to a Schoolmaster in this Town.

The Gentleman returned, and understanding who was her Husband, went to his
House at Noonday, pulled out a Pistol, and shot him dead on the Spot, making
his Escape unmolested.

But a Proclamation being afterward issued, with a Reward of 200 l. for
apprehending him, he was at last taken, and tried at Edinburgh by the Lords of
the Justiciary, and condemned to have his Head cut off. Great Intercession was
made to the Queen for his Pardon, which proving ineffectual, he found means to
make his Escape out of the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, disguised in his Sister's
Clothes, the Night before he was to have been executed.

After that, he appeared in the late Rebellion, and was in the Battle of
Dumblane, or Sheriffmuir, but escaped again with his Life, though his Estate,
which was but small, was forfeited among the rest.

Near Innerkeithin, a little within the Land, stands the ancient Town of
Dumfermling, which is now in a very ruinous State. For, 1. Here is a decayed
Monastery, which before the Reformation was very large, but then demolished,
saving a Part, which was turned into a Parochial Church; and even that is now
decayed, and with it the Monuments of several Kings and Queens of Scotland;
particularly, that of Malcolm III. who founded the Monastery.

2. Here is a decayed Court, or Royal Palace, of the Kings of Scotland; but by
whom built, is uncertain. Almost all King James the Sixth's Children were born
in it, particularly King Charles I. and the Princess Elizabeth, afterward
Queen of Bohemia; and his Queen made this Place her particular Residence, and
had it settled upon her as her Jointure: Here she built herself an Apartment
over the Arch of the great Gate for her particular Retirement, having a Gallery
reaching from it to the Royal Lodgings. All is now ruinous.

3. Here is a decayed Town, the natural Consequence of the Decay of the Palace.
The Treatment King Charles II. met with here, from the Covenanters, was
sufficient to make him take a Disgust to the Place.

The Church has still a venerable Face, and at a Distance seems a mighty Pile,
the Building being once vastly large. What is left appears too heavy for the
present Dimensions. The Church itself is said to be as long as the Cathedral of
Carlisle, designed by the Model of that at Glasgow; but I rather think, that at
Glasgow was designed by the Model of this at Dumfermling; for it seems the most
ancient.

The People are poor, but would be poorer, if they had not the Manufacture of
Linen for their Support, the Diaper and better Sort of Linen-trade being
carried on here, and in the neighboring Towns, with more Hands than ordinary.
The Marquis of Tweedale has a great Estate in these Parts, and is hereditary
Chamberlain or Keeper of the Royal House.

The Rocking Stone, near Balvaird in Fife, was a remarkable Curiosity. It was
broken by Oliver Cromwell's Soldiers, and then it was discovered, that its
Motion was performed by an egg-shaped Extuberance in the Middle of the under
Surface of the upper Stone, which was inserted in a Cavity in the Surface of
the lower Stone. As the lower Stone was flat, the upper was globular; and not
only a just Proportion in the Motion was calculated from the Weight of the
Stone, and the Wideness of the Cavity, as well as the oval Figure of the
inserted Prominence; but the vast Bulk of the upper Stone absolutely concealed
the Mechanism of the Motion; and, the better still to impose on the Vulgar,
there were two or three surrounding flat Stones, though that only in the Middle
was concerned in the Feat. By this pretended Miracle they condemned of Perjury,
or acquitted, as their Interest or Affection led them; and often brought
Criminals to confess what could be no other way extorted from them.

From turning East, we saw many Seats of private Gentlemen, and some of
Noblemen, particularly one belonging to the Earl of Morton, at Aberdour; which
fronts the Firth to the South, and the Grounds belonging to it reach down to
the Shore.

From this Part of the Firth, to the Mouth of Innerkeithin Harbor, is a very
good Road for Ships, the Water being deep, and the Ground good; but the Western
Part, which they call St. Margaret's Bay, is a steep Shore and rocky, there
being 20 Fathom Water within a Ship's Length of the Rocks. So that if a
South-east Wind blows hard, it may be dangerous riding in it: But this Wind
blows so seldom, that the Ships often venture it.

He that will view the County of Fife, which is wedged in by the Forth and the
Tay, and shoots out far into the East, must, as I said before, go round the
Coast; and yet there are four or five Places of Note in the Middle of the
County, which are superior to all the rest, and must not be omitted: Kinross,
Lessly, Falkland, Melvil, Balgony, and Cowpar; the last a Town, the others
great Houses, and one, viz. Falkland, a Royal Palace, and once the most in
Request of all the Royal Houses in Scotland.

An English Reader will be surprised to hear of such Numbers of Palaces; but
however mean our Thoughts may be of the Scots Court in ancient Times, their
Kings had more fine Palaces than most Princes in Europe; for in the Time of
King James IV. they had all in good Repair and in Use, the several Royal
Palaces of Holy-rood-house, and the Castle at Edinburgh, the Royal Palace in
the Castle at Sterling, Linlithgow, Dumfermling, Falkland, Scone, the Castles
of Dumbarton, Blackness, and Inverness.

Besides lesser Seats and Hunting-houses, of which King James V. had several;
and the several Palaces of Earl Morton and others, which were forfeited into
the King's Hands.

The South Coast of the County of Fife abounds with Towns; and the following
Thirteen are Royal Burghs, viz. Innerkeithin, Bruntisland, Kingborn, Kirkaldy,
Dysart, Pittenweem, Anstruther Wester, Anstruther Easter, Kilrinny, Crail, St.
Andrews, all on the Coast, Dumfermling and Cowpar in the midst of the County.
And it contains also these other Towns of Note; viz. Toryburn, Aberdour, the
two Weemys's, Levinsmouth, Ely, St. Monan's, and Newburg on the Tay: And it has
in it four Presbyteries; viz. at Cowpar, St. Andrews, Kirkaldy and Dumfermling.

The Shire itself takes its Name from Fyfus, surnamed Duffus, to whom it was
granted by King Kenneth II. for his Valor against the Picts, about the Year
840. His Posterity were first called Thanes of Fife, and afterward Earls by
Malcolm II. about the Year 1057. and endowed with greater Privileges than any
other Earls of the Kingdom, because of their extraordinary Services: A famous
Monument of which, was that called Clan Macduff's Cross, on the public Road
near Abernethy, to which if any within the 9th Degree to the great Macduff, who
was the chief Instrument of subduing the Tyrant Macbeth, should have recourse
in case of Manslaughter, he was to be pardoned on paying a small Number of
Cattle. This Monument had an Inscription importing those Privileges, now worn
out, and was in such antiquated Terms, mixed with Macaronick, or half Latin
Words, that few Men now living would have been able to make it out.

From this Macduff the Families of Douglas, Weemys, and the Clan Chattau, are
said to be descended. The Earl of Rothes is hereditary Sheriff of Fife.

Having seen Aberdour, I took a Turn, at a Friend's Invitation, to Lessly; but
by the Way stopped at Kinross, where we had a View of two Things worth noting.
First, The famous Lake or Lough, called Lough Leven, in an Island of which
stands the Castle, where Queen Mary, commonly known in England by the Name of
Queen of Scots, was confined by the first Reformers, being first compelled to
quit her Favorite Bothwell, and afterward her Crown; but from which she found
means to make her Escape, though, as it proved, Out of the Drying Pan into the
Fire.

The Lough itself is worth seeing; it is very large, being above 10 Miles in
Circumference, in some Places deep, and famous for Fish. Formerly it had good
Salmon, but now chiefly Trouts, Perch, Pikes, and other small Fry; out of it
flows the River Leven, which runs from thence to Lessly.

At the West End of the Lake, (the Gardens reaching down to the very Water's
Edge) stands the most beautiful and regular Piece of Architecture (for a
private Gentleman's Seat) in all Scotland; I mean the House of Kinross,
belonging to Sir John Hope Bruce, Bart. The Town, which has a very good Market
and a Street tolerably well built, lies at a little Distance from the House, so
as not to obtrude upon its Privacy, and yet so as to be ready to wait upon its
Call. It Is all Beauty; the Stone is white and fine, the Order regular, the
Contrivance elegant, the Workmanship exquisite. Dryden's Lines, intended for a
Compliment on his Friend's Poetry, are here literally true. Strong Dorick
Columns form the Base,
Corinthian fills the upper Space;
So all below is Strength, and all above is Grace.


Sir William Bruce, the Surveyor-General of the Works, the Wren of North
Britain, was the Founder, as well as Architect, of this House. That Gentleman
has left many noble Monuments of his admirable Skill and Taste in those Parts;
such as the Palace of Holy-rood at Edinburgh; the House of Rothes, and this at
Kinross, besides several others.

The Situation of this House of Kinross would be disliked by some for its being
so very near the Water, insomuch that sometimes, when the Lake is swelled by
Winter Rains, and melted Snows, it reaches to the very Gardens; but as the
Country round is dry, free from stagnated Boggs, and unhealthy Marshes, this is
of very little Inconvenience, if any. Sir William planted Numbers of Fir-trees
upon the Land round his House, which the present Possessor, Sir John Hope
Bruce, is as careful to improve as his Grandfather was to plant. Posterity will
find the Advantage of this Taste, which, if it spreads as it has begun, will in
time make Scotland a second Norway for Fir; for the Lowlands, as well as the
Highlands, will be overspread with Timber.

From Kinross I came to Lessly, where I had a full View of the Palace of the
Earl of Rothes, built in the Reign of King Charles II. by the said Sir William
Bruce.

Here it was King James II. when Duke of York, lodged, most part of the Time,
when he was obliged by his Brother to retire into Scotland; and his Apartments
are still called the Duke of York's Lodgings.

The Magnificence of the Inside of this House is unusually great; but what is
very particular, is the long Gallery, which is the full Length of one Side of
the Building, and is filled with Paintings, but especially (as that is at
Drumlanrig) of the great Ancestors of the House of Rothes, or Lessly, at full
Lengths, and in their Robes of Office.

The Rooms of State at Kinross are well supplied with very fine and valuable
Pictures, many of which are of Princes, etc. but most, if not all the full
Lengths in this Gallery of Rothes, are of the Family, and the immediate
Ancestors, of the present Earl, most of them having been Peers, and possessed
of the greatest Places of Trust in Scotland, from the Year 1320. to 1725. so
that you may imagine there may well be enough to furnish a Gallery.

Though the House is magnificent, I cannot say the Situation of it is so
advantageous as that of some other Seats; for it has no excellent Prospect from
the grand Town, though it stands on the Banks of the Leven just where another
smaller River joins it.

The Park on the South Side is very beautiful, six Miles in Circumference,
walled round and diversified with little Woods of Fir-trees, which have Vistas
reaching through them up to the House. The Gardens are at the East End of the
House, well designed and planted, extending to the Angle where the two Rivers
meet; so that they are watered on the North and East Side, and on the South are
parted with a Wall from the Park, the West End of them beginning from the House.

The Town of Lessly (seated at a small Distance West from the House, or a
little North-west) has a good Market, but is, in no other respect,
considerable. The House aforesaid is the principal Glory of the Place.

From Lessly, we turned South to the Coast, and came to Bruntisland, situated
in the middle of the North-side of the River Forth, just opposite to Leith; so
that we have from hence a fair Prospect as well of the Road of Leith, as of the
City and Castle of Edinburgh. Here is a very commodious Harbor, which has no
Bar, but enters, as if it had been made by Hand, into the Center of the Town;
so that the Ships lie with their broad Sides to the very Houses; and it is the
common Port of Safety to all Ships that happen to be forced up the Firth by
Storms or contrary Winds: And Ships trading on this Coast frequently winter
here. The Water is commonly 18, and at Spring-tides, 26 Feet deep within the
Harbor; so that it is capable of receiving and careening the largest Men of
War. The Town is adorned also with a beautiful Church, and has a large
Townhouse and Gaol. But the Harbor having suffered much by Time, and by
Storms; and the Church, Townhouse and Gaol, becoming ruinous, an Act passed
Anno 1719. for laying a Duty of Two-penies Scots upon every Scots Pint of Beer,
etc. sold within the Town and Liberties, for increasing the Revenues, restoring
the Harbor, and repairing the public Structures abovementioned.

Here is a Manufacture of Linen, as there is upon all the Coast of Fife, and
especially for Green-cloth, as it is called, which has been several Years in
great Demand in England for Printing or Painting, in the room of Calicoes,
which are prohibited there.

Next to Bruntisland, upon the same Coast, is Kinghorn, noted for its Thread
Manufacture, which the Women chiefly carry on; the Men being generally Seamen
upon all this Coast, as high as the Queen's-Ferry.

Great Numbers of Porpoises are seen almost constantly in this Firth, which the
Men make a Practice of shooting, and then bring on Shore, and boil their Fat
into Train Oil, as they do Whales, and several other great Fish, which they
sometimes meet with thereabout. But the Firth affords a much more regular
Fishing-trade lower down; of which in its Place.

The Ferry from Leith to the Shore of Fife, is fixed in Kinghorn, which is of
considerable Advantage to it; though sometimes the Boats by Stress of Weather,
are driven into Bruntisland.

East of this Town is Kirkcaldy, a larger, more populous, and better-built Town
than the other, and indeed, than any on this Coast. It consists chiefly of one
Street running along the Shore, from East to West, a full Mile, very well
built. It has some considerable Merchants in it, in the most extensive Sense of
the Word, besides others that deal very largely in Corn, exporting great
Quantities of it both to England and Holland. Others again trade in Linen to
England, who in Return bring back all needful Supplies of foreign Manufactures.

Here are several Coal-pits, not only in the Neighborhood, but even close to
the very Sea, at the West End of the Town, and where, one would think, the Tide
should make it impossible to work them. At the East End of the Town is a
convenient Yard for building and repairing of Ships, and farther on, several
Salt-pans for boiling and making Salt.

Dysert boasts, as I said, of being a Royal Burgh; but notwithstanding it is a
very decaying Corporation; the only Support of it is, that the Lord Dysert, the
Landlord, has a good Salt-work here, and in the Lands adjoining an excellent
Vein of Scotch Coal; both which are easily put on Shipboard at a small Wharf
adjoining. This, I think, is the whole Trade of the Town, except what arises
from a few Nail-makers and Hard-ware Workers.

I take the Decay of most of these Seaport Towns, which it is evident have made
a much better Figure in former Times, to be owing to the removing of the Court
and Nobility of Scotland to England, which has been doing ever since the
Junction of the Kingdoms under the same Prince in James I. and VI. and more
completely by the Union. Their Seaport Towns had, before, a Trade; when their
Court was magnificent; when their Nobility built fine Houses, and lived in
them. They then exported Goods infinitely more in Value, than what they
received; and therefore the Balance was evidently on their Side; whereas, now,
the Union has opened a Door to all the English Manufactures, and suppressed
many of the Scots; has prohibited their Wool going abroad, and yet scarcely
takes it off at home. If the Cattle are sent to England, the Money is too
generally spent there likewise. The Troops raised here are in English Service,
and Scotland receives no Premium for the Levies, which she might have done, had
they been sent abroad, as the Swiss and other Nations do at this time.

But the Benefits that will attend its principal Ports on the Repairs of their
Harbor, and public Structures, by the many Acts already passed, and every
Session of Parliament passing, by the Two-penies Scots levied for those
Purposes, will in time, very probably, turn the Scale in favor of the Union,
and increase the Trade of this Part of the United Kingdom, as by virtue of that
Act it stands on the same foot of Advantage with England, and has so many good
Ports, to receive Shipping, and carry on a Commerce with foreign Parts, as well
as Coastwise to England and Ireland. Of this the Towns of Glasgow, Dundee,
Dumfries, Irvin, Dunbar, Pittenweem, Montrose, Inverness, Elgin, Aberbrothock,
Bruntisland, Lanark, Linlithgow, etc. will bear Testimony, as I have and shall
observe in their proper Places. Indeed it is pity but Scotland should find its
Account in this respect, in general; for it must be owned, as I have in part
observed before, that it has a plentiful Product for Exportation; and were the
Issue of that Product returned and consumed at home, it must necessarily grow
rich and flourish.

To take only a short View of the Commodities it exports into foreign
Countries, England included; for I am now considering Scotland as if not
united: Carried to England; Corn, Black Cattle, Sheep, Wool; Linen of several
Sorts; some Woolen Manufactures, Stockens in particular. To Holland, Bremen,
and Hamburgh; Corn, Lead, Salt, Coal, barrell'd Pork, and Salmon. Note, The
Dutch buy the barrell'd Pork from Aberdeen for Victualling their East India
Ships, it being much better cured than that from any other Country. To Norway,
Salt, Oatmeal, Salmon, Lead, Stockens, and Linen. To Sweden, Dantzick, and
Riga; Salt, Woolen Manufactures of Sterling and Aberdeen. To Spain and the
Streights; Herrings pickled; barrell'd and dried Salmon; Herrings, and
White-fish. To France; Coal, Salt, Lead, Herrings, White-fish, and Wool. For
all these Exportations the Returns are, or at least were, before the Union;
From England; Pewter, Block-tin, Wrought Iron, Glass Ware, Sugars, Tobacco,
Drugs and Dyers Stuffs. All the English Woolen and Silk Manufactures were
prohibited upon the severest Penalties; so that the Returns from England in
Goods were very small; the grand Return from thence was in Specie: And it is
known, that above an Hundred Thousand Pounds was paid into Scotland every Year
for Cattle only. From Holland; some fine Linens; but not much, because of their
own. Lace, and fine Threads, Gimp, Incle, etc. East India Goods, Linseed, and
Lint, or Flax, Linseed-oil, Train-oil, and Whalebone. From Norway, Pitch and
Tar, Deals and Firr Timber. From Sweden, Iron in Bars, and Copper, Deals and
Timber. From Dantzick, Koningsberg, Riga, Narva, and Petersburg; Plank, called
East Country Clap-board, or Wainscot, Oak Timber, and in Quarters; Hemp, Pitch,
Tar, Turpentine, Sturgeon, and Flax. From France; Wine, Brandy, Apples,
(Rennets) Resin, Cork, Paper, Wrought Silks, Raw Silks, Toys, Perfumes, etc.
From the Royal Canal through France; Oil and Italian Pickles from Leghorn. From
Hamburgh; Staves for Casks, Clap-board, Rhenish Wine, and Old Hock.


All these Sorts of Goods are returned into Scotland, but the Quantities are
very small: The chief Articles, to sum up all in a little, are,

From England, Sugar and Tobacco; from France, Wine and Brandy; from the East
Country, Naval Stores; from Sweden, Iron and Copper; from Norway, Deals and
Timber; from Holland, Lint and Linseed.

Now these put together, if I am rightly informed, do not balance the Lead,
Coal, and Salt, which they export every Year: So that the Balance of Trade must
stand greatly to the Credit of the Scots Account, which would be all returned
into Scotland in Specie every Year, if there was not a neighboring Gulf, into
which it is all sunk. And what a Figure would such an Advantage of running Cash
be able to make?

I have already touched upon the Advantages, that will probably accrue to
Scotland by the Method they have fallen upon of augmenting and repairing their
Ports and Harbors, by virtue of the Two-penies Tax; and some will further add,
to balance the Disadvantages they lie under from the Union, that it is now
established in a lasting Tranquillity; and an End put to those Wars that used
to lay waste the Borders of both Nations; that this will give Encouragement to
the Improvement of the Land, and consequently of raising the Value of Estates;
that the Taxes are easy and ascertained; that the Charges of defending the
Country both Abroad and at Home lie upon England; and the West India Trade
abundantly pours in Wealth upon her. And all this is true; but, is it not Pity,
for all that, that her own Nobility should not, like true Patriots, lend a
helping Hand to the rising Advantage of their own Country, and spend some of
the large Sums they get in England, in erecting Manufactures, employing the
Poor, and propagating the Trade at Home, which they may see plainly has made
their united Neighbors of England so much exceed them?

But to return to our Travels: We came next to a Village called the
Wester-Wemys, belonging to the Earl of Wemys, whose House stands a little
farther East, on the Top of a high Cliff, with its Front looking down upon the
Sea. At the West End of this Cliff, is a small Plain, once a Bowling-green,
where the late Earl, being Admiral, had some small Fieldpieces planted to
answer Salutes. Behind the House is a small and irregular Courtyard, with two
Wings of Building, being Offices to the House on one Side, and Stables on the
other. Gardens there are none, only a large well-planted Orchard, between which
and the House, the Road goes on to Easter-Wemys.

From thence you come to another Village, called Buckhaven, inhabited by
Fishermen, who are employed wholly in catching fresh Fish every Day in the
Firth, and carrying them to Leith and Edinburgh Markets. The Buildings are but
a miserable Row of Cottages; yet there is scarce a poor Man in it; but they are
in general so very clownish, that to be of the College of Buckhaven, is become
a Proverb.

Here we saw the Shore of the Sea covered with Shrimps, like a thin Snow; and
as you rode among them, they would rise like a kind of Dust, and hop like
Grasshoppers, being scared by the Footing of the Horse.

The Fishermen of this Town have a great many Boats of all Sizes, which lie
upon the Beach unrigged, ready to be fitted out every Year for the Herring
Season, in which they have a very great Share.

Beyond this is the Ely, a little Town, but a very safe and good Harbor,
firmly built of Stone, almost like the Cobb at Lime, though not projecting into
the Sea so much as that. It stands a little on the West Side of the Mouth of
the Leven; the Salmon of which River are esteemed the best in this Part of
Scotland.

To this Town the Earl of Wemys brings his Coal, which he digs about two Miles
off, on the Banks of the River Leven; as also what little Salt he can make. The
Coal-works are greatly prejudiced by the breaking in of the Water,
notwithstanding the immense Charges they have been at to prevent that
Inconvenience.

The People, who work in the Coal Mines in this Country, partly from their
Poverty and hard Labor, and partly from the black Hue which they get from the
Coal, make such a frightful Appearance, that their own Countryman Drumond of
Hawthornden, in his famous Macaronick Poem, called Polemo-Middinia, thus
describes them: Coale-hewers Nigri, Girnantes more Divelli.


From hence we have several small Towns on the Coast, as Criel or Crail,
Anstruther or Anster, as it is usually called, also the Port of Pittenweem;
these are all Royal Burghs.

Pittenweem is a Port and Harbor very conveniently situated near the Mouth of
the Forth, in the Shire of Fife; and great Quantities of Herring, Cod, and
other Fish, are taken here. But it has had two great Difficulties to encounter
with; that is to say, the low Situation of the Town, close on the Harbor, by
which means the Inhabitants were at a great and constant Expense beyond their
Ability, to maintain a Pier, and other Works, to defend both the Shipping and
its People: The other, that the Entrance was very narrow and strait, and
several Rocks lay in the Way of the Shipping, which was a great Hindrance to
its Trade and Commerce. But in the Year 1719. an Act passed for laying a Duty
of Two-penies Scots upon every Scots Pint of Ale, etc. sold within the Town and
its Liberties, for remedying these Inconveniences.

Over Against this Shore, and in the Mouth of the Forth, opposite to the Isle
of the Bass, lies the Isle of May, known to Mariners by a Light-house upon it.
The only constant Inhabitant is said to be the Man maintained there by the
Government to take care of the Fire in the Light-house. It was famous in former
Times for barren Women going to St. Adrian's Shrine there.

Here the French Fleet lay with some Assurance, with the Pretender on board, in
1708. when the English Squadron approaching, the Four o'clock Gun gave the
Alarm; upon which they immediately weighed, got under Sail, and made the best
of their Way, the English pursuing in vain.

The Shore of the Firth or Frith ends here, and the Aestuarium or Mouth
opening, the Land of Fife falls off to the North, making a Promontory of Land,
which the Seamen call Fifeness, looking East on the German Ocean, after which
the Coast bends away North, and the first Town you come to is St. Andrew's, an
ancient, and once flourishing City, the Metropolis of all Scotland, and the
Seat of the first University, and before the Revolution an Archbishop's See.

It is remarkable for a fine Situation, surrounded with extensive Cornfieldsd
abounding in excellent Wheat and Barley, and the pleasant Downs, called the
Links, lying on the Seaside toward the North. The famous Physician Cardan
esteemed it the healthiest Town he ever lived in, having Occasion to experience
it some Months, when he came over from Italy, at the Request of the Pope, to
prescribe to Archbishop John Hamilton, whom he recovered of a Consumption. And
twenty Years before, it had the Approbation of the most eminent Physicians of
the Country, when a House was fitted up here for the Reception of Magdalen,
Daughter of Francis King of France, who married James V. King of Scotland, in
1537. but that Lady died shortly after her Arrival at Holy-rood-house in
Edinburgh, and never reached St. Andrews.

The Town of old consisted of four large Streets lying from East to West,
almost parallel to one another. The Northermost of the four, called
Swallow-street, though formerly the principal, is now totally ruined, not so much
as one House remaining. The other three by their Regularity do not seem to have
been a fortuitous Concourse of Houses, as most of the other Towns of this
Country do; all of them terminating Eastward at the Cathedral, which look upon
each other, and seem to lament their decaying Condition. For though the Town was
heretofore about two Miles in Circumference, there remain now hardly 1000
Houses; and of those near 200 are become ruinous, and not habitable. The Number
of Inhabitants still amount to above 4000, but many of them have nothing to do;
there being neither Trade nor Manufactures in the Place, though at the same time
it has a Harbor, but capable only of small Vessels. Near the Town is plenty of
Freestone, of which all the Houses are built.

Before the Reformation, this City was crowded both on account of Trade and
Religion, Pilgrims coming hither in great Numbers to visit the Relics of St.
Andrew, said to be brought over by St. Regulus, about the End of the fourth
Century, from Patras in Greece, where that Apostle suffered Martyrdom. Here
were three religious Houses, a Franciscan, Dominican, and Augustine Priory, the
last founded by Robert, Bishop of St. Andrews, who died 1139. and was
established upon some of the Revenues formerly belonging to the ancient Culdees
of this Place. James Stewart, afterward Earl of Murray, and Regent of
Scotland, was, in his younger Days, Prior of it. This Monastery was more like
the magnificent Palace of a Prince, than a Convent of Monks professing Poverty,
as appears still by its Ruins, and particularly by the Wall that encompassed it
of fine hewn Stone, with many Battlements and Turrets.

Here is now only one Parish Church, that of the Holy Trinity, remaining; but
there are two others, which are rather Chapels, one to St. Salvator's College;
of which, however, no Use is made, it having no Endowment, and the Provost of
that College being often a Layman, even in a Presbyterian Sense. The other is
the Chapel belonging to St. Leonard's College, the Provost whereof must be a
Minister.

The Church of the Holy Trinity is an ancient and stately Edifice built with
fine Freestone in form of a Cross, and has at the West End a handsome Spire in
good Repair. In it is a fine Monument of Archbishop Sharp, who was
assassinated upon a Moor, as he was coming Home in his Coach: It was erected by
the Archbishop's Son, Sir William Sharp, Bart. who to secure it from the Fate
he feared it might be liable to, mortified 6000 Merks to the City of St.
Andrews to keep it in constant Repair; which has had its intended Effect; for
the Magistrates are very careful of it, and would be very severe upon any who
should attempt to deface it.

On the North-side of the Town was the old Castle, of which now nothing is
remaining but the Walls, built by Roger, Bishop of St. Andrews, who died 1202.
being the second Son of Robert Beaumont, Earl of Leicester, and Chancellor of
Scotland. It was repaired by Cardinal Bethune, and Archbp. Hamilton; the former
of whom procured George Wishart to be burnt here in the Parade, while from his
Window he glutted his Eyes with so horrid a Spectacle; but was himself
afterward assassinated, 1546. in the same Place; to revenge whose Death, the
Queen Regent permitted it to be attacked by the French, from whom it suffered
greatly. But at the Reformation it suffered more, and its Ruin has been
completed since the Revolution.

To the East of the Castle are the Ruins of the stately Cathedral founded by
Bishop Arnold, who died 1163. and finished by Bishop Lambertoun, who died 1328.
It was in Length from East to West 370 Feet, and the Cross from South to North
180; its Breadth 65, and its Height 100 Feet; though some draw another kind of
Ichnography, and make it seven Feet longer, and two broader, than St. Peter's
at Rome; and for the Height, as well as the Beauty of its Pillars, and the
Symmetry and Proportion of the Whole, it was one of the best Gothic Structures
in the World.

It was sometimes called Kill-ri-mont, from the Church built by Hergust King of
the Picts in the fourth Century; but the Name of St. Andrews has prevailed for
many Ages. The Cathedral was near demolished at the Reformation; but was
repaired, in some measure, by the succeeding Archbishops; but since the
Revolution it has been entirely in Ruins, as we now see it.

Near the Ruins of the Cathedral are still remaining the Walls of the most
ancient Chapel of St. Rule, with the great square Spire still very entire. It
is in Height 105 Feet, and made of such large and durable Stones, that though it
was built so many Ages ago, yet so little has it suffered by the Injuries of
the Weather, that a small Sum would save it from falling for many Ages to come:
And as this is probably one of the most ancient Monuments of Christianity in
Great Britain, it is Pity it should go to Ruin for want of a suitable
Reparation. This besides would be the most proper Chapel and Chapter House for
the noble Knights of the most ancient Order of the Thistle, since under the
Patronage of the Apostle St. Andrew (whose Relics were preserved at this
Place) that Order of Knighthood had its Rise and Foundation; and by King James
VII's Letters Patents reviving and restoring this noble Order, which were dated
at Windsor the 26th of May 1687. it appears the Knights of the Thistle, or St.
Andrew, formerly held their Chapters in the great Church of St. Andrews; which
being demolished, his said Majesty ordered them for the future, to be kept at
the Chapel Royal of Holy-rood-house.

This City is famous particularly for its University, consisting of three
Colleges, founded by Henry Wardlaw, Bishop of St. Andrews, in the Year 1412. It
obtained very ample Privileges and Immunities from Pope Benedict XIII. which
were afterward confirmed to them by King James I. of Scotland, and by several
other succeeding Kings. During Episcopacy the Archbishops were Chancellors of
it. The Rector is chosen yearly, and by the Statutes ought to be one of the
Principals of the three Colleges here, called St. Salvator's, St. Leonard's,
and the New College.

St. Salvator's College was founded by James Kennedy, Bishop of St. Andrews,
Anno 1448. who erected the Edifice, furnished it with costly Ornaments, and
endowed it with sufficient Revenues for a Doctor, a Bachelor, and Licentiate
of Divinity, four Professors of Philosophy, and eight poor Scholars. The Earl
of Cassils settled a Maintenance for a Professor of Philosophy. It has a good
Library founded by Dr. Sheen. The Edifice itself is a most stately Pile of fine
hewn Stone, has a large vaulted Chapel covered with Freestone, and over it is
a very lofty Spire. The common Hall and Schools are vastly large; and the
Cloisters and private Lodgings for Masters and Scholars have been very
magnificent and convenient; but the Fabric is of late become very much out of
Repair, nor is the College Revenue able to support it.

St. Leonard's College was founded by John Hepburne, Prior of St. Andrews, in
the Reign of King James V. with Salaries for a Principal or Warden, four
Professors of Philosophy, and eight poor Scholars. A Professor of Philology was
added by Sir John Scot of Scots-tarvet, with a liberal Salary. He also
augmented the Library very considerably; and Sir John Wedderburn, at his Death,
left a great Collection of Books to it. Fordun's MS. of the Scottish History is
in this Library.

The New College was founded by Archbishop Bethune, Uncle to the Cardinal of
that Name, with Endowments for a Principal and Professor of Divinity, and some
Students in the same Faculty; for no Philosophy is taught in this College.

These last two Colleges, having a better Revenue to support them, than that of
St. Salvator, are in much better Repair. In the latter, King Charles I. held a
Parliament, in a large spacious Room able to seat 400 Persons in regular Order,
and it still retains the Name of the Parliament Room.

A Professor of Mathematics was of late Years added to this University; as was
also, not long since, a Professor of Medicine, with a handsome Endowment by his
Grace James Duke of Chandos; whom the University, upon the Death of the Duke of
Athol, in Gratitude, chose to be their Chancellor; which Office is during Life;
and to that alone, and that of his Vice Chancellor, belongs the conferring of
all University Degrees.

Mr. James Gregory, Professor of Mathematics in this University, famous for
his Knowledge in that Science, has erected in the College Gardens, a commodious
Observatory, and furnished it with good Mathematical Instruments.

It has produced many learned Men; among others, the famous Lord Napier, who
invented the Logarithms, Sir Robert Murray, Sir Andrew Balfour, and the great
Lawyer Sir George Mackenzie.

The Harbor here has suffered so much by the Encroachments of the Sea, that I
fear it will never be sufficiently repaired. The Pier is founded upon a Rock of
Freestone, in Length about 440 Feet; but this Rock extends itself into the Sea
500 Feet further, on the Point of which stands a Beacon; and the great Rolling
of the Sea, breaking over the Rock, between the Pier-end and this Beacon, makes
the Harbor very dangerous. In the Year 1728. it was proposed to be repaired,
and the Pier carried as far as the Beacon, and a Brief was granted for that
Purpose. But the Collections were too small to make any great Advances.

By all we have said, it will appear, that this ancient City, and its
University too, are in a very declining State. The Archbishop's Seat, and
Ecclesiastical Courts kept there, beside the great Resort of Pilgrims to the
Convents, brought great Business thither, which being now disused, and one new
College erected at Edinburgh, and another at Aberdeen, contribute much to the
Decay of both. The City enjoys still some Privileges by the original Charter,
yet extant, whereby it was incorporated by King David, Anno 1153.

From St. Andrews we proceeded on to two very agreeable Seats belonging to the
present Earl of Leven; one called Melvil, and the other Balgony. Melvil is a
regular and beautiful Building, after the Model of Sir William Bruce's House at
Kinross, described before. Balgony is an ancient Seat, formerly belonging to
the Family of Lessly; and if not built, was enlarged and repaired by General
Alexander Lessly, noted for his Services in Germany, under Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden; and at last, against King Charles I.

The River Leven runs hard by the Walls of the House, and makes the Situation
very pleasant. The Park is large, but not well planted; at least, the Trees do
not thrive.

From hence we went North to Cowpar, the Shire Town, and turned to the
North-east Part of the Country, to see the Ruins of the famous Monastery of
Balmerinoch, of which Mr. Camden takes Notice; but we saw nothing worth our
Observation, the very Ruins being almost eaten up by Time. The Monastery was
founded by Queen Ermengred, Wife of King William of Scotland.

Hence we came to the Bank of another Firth, called the Firth of Tay, which
opening to a large Breadth at its Entrance, as the Firth of Edinburgh does,
draws in afterward, as that does at the Queen's-ferry, and makes a Ferry over
at the Breadth of two Miles to the Town of Dundee; and then the Firth widening
again just as that of the Forth does also, continues its Breadth from four to
six Miles, till it comes almost to Perth, as the other does to Sterling.

This River Tay is, without Exception, the largest River in Scotland, though not
of the longest Course; for it rises out of the Mountains, near the Edge of
Argyllshire; and running first North into the District of Braidalbin, there
receiving many other Rivers, spreads itself into a large Lake, called Lough
Tay, extending near 40 Miles in Length, and traversing the very Heart of
Scotland, comes into the Sea near this Place: Now, as I design to keep in this
Part of my Work to the East Coast of the Country, I must for the present quit
the Tay, keeping a little on the hither Side of it, and go back to that Part of
the Country which lies to the South, and East of Dumbarton or Lenoxshire; so
drawing an imaginary Line from Sterling-bridge, due North, through the Heart of
the Country, to Inverness, which I take to lie almost due North and South.

In this Course I moved from the Ferry mentioned above, to Perth, lying upon
the same Tay, but on the hither Bank. It was formerly called Johnston, or St.
John's Town, from an old Church, dedicated to the Evangelist St. John, which is
still remaining, and so big as to make two Parochial Churches, and can serve
the whole Town for their public Worship.

Perth is the second Town of Scotland for Dignity. Near it stood anciently the
Town of Berth, which being overflowed by an Inundation of the Tay, occasioned
the building of this, where it now stands.

The chief Business of this Town at present is the Linen Manufacture; which is
so considerable here, that all the neighboring Country is employed in it, and
it is the Wealth of the whole Place. The Tay is navigable up to the Town for
Ships of good Burden; and they ship off here vast Quantities of Linen, for
England.

The Salmon taken here, and all over the Tay, are extremely good, and the
Quantity prodigious. They carry them to Edinburgh, and to all the Towns where
they have no Salmon, and barrel up great Quantities for Exportation: The
Merchants of this Town have also a considerable Trade to the Baltic and Norway.

This Town was for some time the Seat of the late Rebellion; but by a peculiar
Felicity the Townsmen got so much Money by both Parties, that they have ever
since been enriched by it, as appears not only from particular Families, but
from the public and private Buildings which they have raised since that time;
particularly a new Tolbooth or Town Hall.

It will seem a little strange to us in the South, that any Place should be
enriched by a Rebellion; but a few Words will explain it. It must be observed,
that the Pretender and his Troops having their Quarters hereabouts a
considerable time, occasioned a great Consumption of Victuals and Drink, which
are so plentiful in these Parts, that it is frequent for Towns to petition the
Government to have Regiments of Soldiers quartered upon them; though in England
nothing gives greater Uneasiness.

Again, as the Pretender was here and at Scone, it occasioned a great
Confluence of Persons of Note, who gathered about him, waiting the Issue of his
Fortunes, till they found the Storm gathering from the South, and no probable
Means to resist it, and then they shifted off as they could.

While they resided here, Lodgings in the Town let at such a Rate, as was
never known before; Provisions were dear, Trade brisk; and had it lasted two or
three Months longer, it would have made all the Towns rich in the Neighborhood.

When this Cloud was dispersed, the Victors entered; new Officers succeeded the
routed Party. Still the Head Quarters were here; and afterward the Dutch
Troops continued here most Part of the Winter. All this while the Money flowed
in, and the Town made their Market on both Sides; they were Gainers even by War
and Foreigners!

The Linen Trade, which we have mentioned before, has mightily increased since
the Act of Parliament in England, for suppressing the Use of printed Calicoes;
in the room of which Scotch and Irish Linens have been bought and printed in
England: So that the Worsted and Silk Weavers in London seem to have had very
little Benefit by the Act.

At Ardock in Perthshire are the Remains of a Roman Camp; and near Perth is a
Roman Way, where several Medals, sepulchral Urns, and other Monuments of
Antiquity, have been found.

From Perth, I went South to that Part which they call Clackmanan, lying West
from Dumfermling, and extending itself toward Sterling and Dumblain, none of
which Part I had gone over before.

North-eastward from Perth to Brechen lies a Vale which they call Strathmore,
esteemed the most fruitful in Corn of all that Part of the Country: Here are a
great many Gentlemen's Seats, though on the North-side of the Tay, particularly
the noble Palace of Glames, the Hereditary Seat of the Family of Lion, Earls of
Strathmore. The Heir in Reversion now enjoys the Title and Estate, though it very
narrowly escaped being forfeited; for the elder Brother entertained here the
Pretender very magnificently, making up for him and his Retinue fourscore and
eight Beds, and afterward espoused his Cause so strenuously, that he lost his
Life in his Service, at the Battle of Sheriff-muir. The Estate, being entailed,
descended to the second Son, or younger Brother, who is now Earl of Strathmore.

It is one of the finest old-built Palaces in Scotland, and by far the largest.
When you see it at a Distance, it is so full of Turrets and lofty Buildings,
Spires and Towers, some plain, others shining with gilded Tops, that it looks
not like a Town, but a City; and the Appearances seen through the long Vista's of
the Park are so different, that you would not think it the same House any two
Ways together.

The great Avenue is a full half Mile, planted on either Side with several Rows
of Trees. When you come to the outer Gate, you are surprised with the Beauty
and Variety of the Statues and Busts, some of Stone, some of Brass, some
gilded, some plain. The Statues in Brass are four, one of King James VI. one of
King Charles I. booted and spurred, as if going to take Horse at the Head of
his Army; one of King Charles II. habited like that in the Royal Exchange,
London; and one of King James VII. after the Pattern of that which is at
Whitehall.

From hence I came away South-west, and crossing the Tay below Perth, but above
Dundee, came at last to Dumblain, a Town pleasantly situated, on the Banks of
the River Allan; but without any sort of Trade. It contains the Ruins of a
Church of excellent Workmanship; but within our own Memory it was made famous
by the Battle fought between the Army of King George I. under the Command of
the Duke of Argyll, and the Pretender's Forces under the Earl of Mar, on
Sheriff-muir, between this Place and Sterling. We took a full View of the Field
of Battle, and could not but reflect with Surprise, that a Rabble of
Highlanders appearing in Rebellion, armed in Haste, and headed by a Person of
no Experience in War, should come so near to the overthrowing an Army of
regular disciplined Troops, and led on by experienced Officers, and so great a
General.

From hence I proceeded on in Sight of Sterling-bridge; but leaving it on the
Right Hand, turned away East to Alloway, where the Earl of Mar had a noble
Seat, and where the Navigation of the Firth of Forth begins. This is, as I
hinted before, within four Miles of Sterling by Land, and scarcely within 24 by
Water, occasioned by those uncommon Meanders and Reaches in the River, which
gives so beautiful a Prospect from the Castle of Sterling.

This fine Seat was formerly called the Castle of Alloway, but is now so
completely modernized, that no Appearance of a Castle remains.

The Gardens of Alloway House are by much the finest in Scotland, and not
outdone by any in England, consisting of above 40 Acres of Ground; and the
adjoining Wood, which is adapted to the House in Avenues and Vistas, above
three times as much.

Here is a Harbor where Ships of Burden safely ride. The Glasgow Merchants
have erected Warehouses, to which they bring their Tobacco and Sugars by Land,
and then ship them for Holland or Hamburgh, or the Baltic, or England, as they
find the Market.

The High Street of Alloway reaches down to this Harbor, and is a very
spacious, well built Street, with Rows of Trees finely planted all the Way.
Here are several Testimonies of the Goodness of their Trade, as particularly a
large Deal-yard, or Place for laying up all Sorts of Norway Goods, which shows
that they have a Commerce thither. They have large Warehouses of naval Stores;
such as Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, two sawing Mills for cutting or slitting of
Deals; and a Rope-walk, for making all Sorts of Ropes and Cables for rigging
and fitting Ships; with several other Things, which convinces us they are no
Strangers to other Trades, as well by Sea as Land.

East from Alloway, is a small County, called Clackmannanshire, from the Head
Burgh, and is Part of Fife. The Country is plain, the Soil fertile; most of it
proper for Pasture; and what lies below the Orchil-hills, producing Corn very
well. But the Shire is chiefly known for yielding the best of Coal, and the
greatest Quantity of it, of any Country of Scotland; so that it is carried, not
only to Edinburgh, but also to England, Holland, and France. But while the
Freight from Scotland is so dear, and the Tax in England so heavy, the Price of
these Coals must always be so high at London, as will not fail to restrain the
Consumption.

On this Shore of the Firth, farther down, stands the neat and agreeable Town
of Culross, lying in Length by the Waterside, like Kirkaldy, being likewise a
Trading Town, as Trade must be understood in Scotland. Here is a pretty Market,
a plentiful Country behind it, and the navigable Firth before it. The Coal, the
Linen Manufacture, and Plenty of Corn, will always keep something of Trade
alive upon the whole Coast.

Here is a very noble Seat belonging to the Bruces, Earls of Kincairn, and is
well worth a Traveller's Notice; and indeed these Instances of Magnificence are
so frequent in Scotland, that were we to dwell upon each of them, such of our
Readers as know nothing of Scotland would be apt to think we were too partial
in its Favor. But it is certain, that no Gentry or Nobility in the World
exceeded the Scots, while an independent Kingdom, in noble Houses, and all
manner of Magnificence; as their Families for Antiquity of Descent hardly have
any Equals in any one Country on Earth.

Culross is a Royal Burgh in the Shire of Perth, but in the Confines of Fife,
famous for a Branch of the Iron Manufacture in making Girdles, i. e. broad
round Plates, on which they bake their oaten Cakes. They told me of Mines of
Copper, and of Lead, lately discovered in Fife, and of Silver also: But I could
not learn that any of them were actually wrought. It is, however, not
improbable, but that there are such Mines; and particularly the two Lomons,
which are remarkable Mountains in this Shire, seem to promise Metal in their
Bowels, if they were thoroughly searched. They rise up like two Sugar-loaves in
the Middle of a plain Country, not far from Falkland, and give a View of the
Firth of Edinburgh South, and the Firth of Tay North, and are seen from
Edinburgh very plain.

Having made this little Excursion to the South from Perth, you may suppose me
now returned Northward again; and we proceeded to Scone, that ancient Seat of
Royal Ceremony, where almost all the Kings of Scotland were crowned, since the
Conquest of the Picts.

The celebrated Wooden Chair, with the Stone in it, was brought away from
hence, as is well known, by the victorious King Edward I. and placed in
Westminster-Abbey, where it now is; but the Scottish Royal Blood succeeding to
the English Crown, in the Person of King James I. of England, and VI. of
Scotland, verified the following prophetic Distich, though at the Time, it was
accounted no small Loss and Disgrace to the Kingdom. The Lines were these: Ni
fallat Fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Thus translated by the Scots: Unless old Prophets fail, and Wizards Wit decay,
Wherever this Stone is found, the Scots shall reign for ay.


It is said to have been first dignified by K. Kenneth, who having fought a
bloody Battle here with the Picts, in which he gave them a great Overthrow, sat
down to rest him upon this Stone, after he had been tired with the Slaughter of
the Enemy; upon which his Nobles came round him to congratulate his Success;
and in Honor to his Valor, crowned him with a Garland of Victory; from whence
he dedicated the Stone to the Coronation of all the future Kings of Scotland,
hoping from this Omen, that they should, like him, be victorious over all their
Enemies.

But the better Sort of Scots Historians say, their Kings brought it from
Ireland into I-Colm-Kill in the Isles, and from thence to Scone or Scoon, when
they had subdued the Picts.

The Palace of Scoon, though ancient, is not so much decayed as those I have
already spoken of; and the Pretender found it very well in Repair for his Use.
Here he lived and kept his Court, in all the State and Appearance of a
Sovereign; but it was a short-lived Splendour; for in 20 Days he was obliged to
quit the Kingdom, by the Advance of the Royal Army. In this Palace is the
longest Gallery in Scotland, and the Ceiling painted, but the Painting very old.

The Building is large, the Front being above 200 Feet; it has two
extraordinary fine square Courts, besides others, which contain the Offices,
Outhouses, etc. The Royal Apartments are spacious and large; but the whole
Building is entirely after the ancient Manner.

From Scoon to Dunkeld is so little a Way, that we could not help visiting it,
being the Place where a Skirmish was fought between the Forces of King William,
after the Revolution, and some of the Viscount of Dundee's Men, who pursued the
King's Forces, as they were obliged to retire from Gillicranky, after Lord
Dundee himself had been killed there. The Duke of Athol has a noble old House
here, in one of the Courts of which that Part of the Action happened.

Here was formerly a beautiful and magnificent Cathedral Church, dedicated to
St. Columba, the Seat of a Bishop, whose Chapter or Prebendaries were Culdees,
or Black Monks; but they are now dissolved, and most Part of the Church in
Ruins.

Dunkeld is the chief Market Town of the Highlands, and supposed to have been
formerly the chief Town of Caledonia. It is situated on the Northside of the
Tay, at the Foot of the Grampian Hills, and is surrounded with pleasant Woods.

Upon the River Tay also lies Errol, the Seat of the Earl of that Name, chief
of the ancient Family of Hay, who derive their Origin from a famous Peasant,
who in the Reign of Kenneth III. being at Plough with his two Sons, and
perceiving the Scots fleeing before the Danes, he and his two Sons stopped their
Flight, renewed the Battle, and gained the Victory; for which they had the
Lands of Errol bestowed upon them; and the Family Arms is three bloody Shields,
supported by two naked Men with Yokes, in Remembrance of this famous Victory;
the Father and two Sons having no other Weapons when they put themselves at the
Head of the flying Scots, but the Yokes they took from their Ploughs. Of this
Family are, besides the Earls of Errol, the Marquis of Tweedale, the Earl of
Kinnoul, etc.

But our determined Rout lay up the Eastern Shore, and through the Shires
adjacent on that Side, as particularly Angus, Mearns, Mar, Aberdeen, Buchan,
and so, as I laid it out before, to Inverness.

Mr. Camden tells us, That the Firth of Tay was the utmost Boundary of the
Roman Empire in Britain: That Julius Agricola, the best of Generals, under
Domitian, the worst of Emperors, though he pierced farther, and traversed by Land
into the Heart of the Highlands, yet seeing no End of a barbarous Country, and
no Advantage by the Conquest of it, withdrew, and here fixed the Roman Eagles;
that he frequently harassed the Picts by Excursions and Inroads, but always
returned to his Post here, making the Tay his Frontier.

But our English Caesar's have outgone the Romans; for Edward I. as is said
before, passed the Tay, and rifled the Abbey at Scoon; and, if we may believe
History, penetrated into the remotest Parts, which, however, I take to be only
the remotest Parts of what was then known to the English; for as to the
Highlands, the Mountains of Loquhaber, Ross, Murray, Sutherland, and Caithness,
we read nothing of them: From these Retreats the Scots always returned, Antaeus
like, with double Strength after every Defeat; till in the next Reign they
overthrew his Successor Edward II. at Bannockbourn, and drove the English out
of the whole Country; following them over Tweed into England, and ravaging the
Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland.

Oliver Cromwell, indeed, (according to the Motto of a noble House in Scotland,
Rode Through) penetrated to the remotest Part of the Island; and that he might
even literally rule it with a Rod of Iron, built Citadels and Forts in all the
Angles and Extremes, where he found it needful to place his stationary Legions,
just as the Romans did; as at Leith, at St. Andrew's, at Inverness, Perth,
Air, and several other Places. We have since seen the Forces of King George I.
making the same Rout, nay, ferrying over into the Western, and North-western
Islands; here again imitating the Prudence of the old Romans, who employed
their Soldiery in mending Roads, and making Causeways over Mountains, that were
before thought inaccessible.

Where Armies have marched, there is Room enough, no doubt, for Travelers. With
this Assurance therefore, we cheerfully crossed the Tay.

We left Strathern, with the little Country of Menteith; for our Return, and
went down into Angus to Dundee, a pleasant, large, populous City, which as it
stands well for Trade, so it has as large a Share of it, as most Towns in
Scotland, and that as well Foreign as Domestic.

It is exceeding populous, full of stately Houses, and large handsome Streets;
particularly four very good ones, with a large Marketplace in the Middle, the
largest and fairest in Scotland, except that of Aberdeen.

The Inhabitants have a very large Correspondence with England, and ship off a
great deal of Linen thither; and a great Quantity of Corn is sent from hence to
England, as well as to Holland. They have likewise a good Share of the Norway
Trade; and as they are concerned in the Herring Fishery, they consequently have
some East Country Trade, viz. to Dantzick, Koningsberg, Riga, etc. They send
Ships also to Sweden, and import Iron, Copper, Tar, Pitch, Deals, etc. from the
several trading Ports of that Kingdom.

The Country behind them called the Carse, or the Carse of Gowry, with the Vale
mentioned above of Strathmore, abounds in Corn, which the Port of Dundee ships
off in large Quantities, when a Crop allows it, to the great Advantage of the
Gentlemen as well as Farmers; for as the Gentlemen receive all their Rents in
Kind, they would find a great Difficulty sometimes to dispose of it, if the
Merchants here did not ship it off, either for London or Amsterdam.

The Town of Dundee stands at a little Distance from the Tay; but they are
joined by a Causeway or Walk, well paved with flat Freestone, such as the
Side-ways in Cheapside and Cornhill; and Rows of Trees are planted on either
Side of the Walk, which makes it very agreeable. On one Part of this Walk are
very good Warehouses for Merchandises, especially for heavy Goods; and also
Granaries for Corn of which sometimes they have a vast Quantity laid up here;
and these, being near the Harbor, are convenient, as well for the housing of
Goods, when landed, as for the easy shipping off what lies for Exportation.

The Harbor of Dundee was formerly very good and safe; but of late Years
became so ruinous and choked up with Sand, that it would not contain, as
anciently, Ships of Burden, except at the highest Tides; and its Piers were so
out of Repair, that Ships could not lie in it with Safety. At the same time the
Tolbooth and public Gaol were so much decayed, that they were obliged to be
pulled down; and the Town, being greatly in Debt besides, could not rebuild the
same. Wherefore, to answer all these good Purposes, and to pave the Streets,
discharge their Debts, and provide Salaries for Schoolmasters to instruct
their Children, an Act passed, Anno 1731. for continuing the Duties imposed by
a former Act, then near expired, of Two-penies Scots, upon every Pint of Ale
and Beer sold within the Town and its Privileges, for 25 Years longer. And the
Inhabitants now reap the Benefit of it, and will still more, when the proposed
Works are absolutely perfected.

This Town was stormed and plundered of great Riches by Cromwell and the
English Army.

The great Church was formerly collegiate, and a very large Building; but part
of it was demolished in the Civil War; the Remainder is divided into three
Churches for the present Use of the Citizens.

They have also a Meeting House or two for the Episcopal Worship; for you are
to take it once for all, that North of Tay, there are far more of the Episcopal
Persuasion than are to be found in the South; and the farther North, the more
so.

The Tower upon the great Church here is a handsome square Building, large and
ancient, and very high, and is a good Ornament to the City: It resembles the
great Tower upon the Cathedral of Canterbury, but not quite so high. There is a
fine and well-endowed Hospital for decayed Townsmen of Dundee, where they are
well taken care of, and provided for. The Pretender was in this City soon after
his Landing, and staid here some time, before he advanced to Scoon.

It was the Birthplace of Hector Boethius, the Scots Historian; a Man famous in
his Time, and whose Work was anciently more in Esteem, than of late. It gave
the Title of Viscount to Graham of Clavers, who commanded the Forces that
appeared for the late King James at the Revolution, and was killed at the
Battle of Gillicranky, which I have mentioned.

Near to Dundee, in the Mouth of the River, lies Brochty-craig, formerly
well-fortify'd, and noted now for a noble Salmon-fishery in its Neighborhood.

It is 20 Scots Miles from Dundee to Montrose, the Way pleasant, the Country
fruitful, and filled with Gentlemen's Houses. Among these is the noble Palace of
Panmure, forfeited in the late Rebellion by the unfortunate Earl of that Name,
who was wounded in the Fight near Dumblain. The Surname of the Family is Maul;
and Maulsburgh, a small Town near Montrose, is called from it.

The Town and Port of Montrose was our next Stage, standing upon the Eastmost
Shore of Angus, open to the German, or the Caledonian Ocean, and at the Mouth
of the little River of Southesk, which makes the Harbor.

This Town is well situated for Trade, and has a good Harbor, and the
Inhabitants always carried on an advantageous Trade with Norway. But as it was
still capable of great Improvements, were a Dock to be made for the Convenience
of Shipping; and if good fresh Water could be procured for it, of which it
stood in very great Want; and the two Hills that defend the Town against
Inundations, having also suffered by Tempests; the Corporation procured an Act,
Anno 1719. for laying a Duty of Two-penies Scots upon every Pint of Ale, etc.
sold within the Town and its Privileges, for effecting these good Purposes.

The Town is adorned with fine Buildings, and has an Hospital for the poorer
Inhabitants. It gives Title of Duke, as it did formerly of Earl and Marquis, to
the Chief of the ancient and noble Family of Graham.

The French Fleet first made Land at this Port, when they had the Pretender on
board, in the Reign of Queen Anne, having over-shot the Mouth of the Firth so
far, whither they at first designed; but this Mistake, which some thought a
Misfortune, was certainly a Deliverance to them; for as on one hand it gave
time to the English Fleet to come up with them before they could enter the
Firth, so it left them time and room also to make their Escape; which, if they
had gone up the Firth, they could never have done, but must inevitably have
been burnt and destroyed, or taken by the British Fleet under Sir George Byng,
which was superior to them in Force.

The Royal Burgh of Aberbrothock on this Coast, besides being famous for the
stately Ruins of the greatest Abbey in Scotland, deserves to be mentioned for
its convenient Situation for Trade; which induced, some Years since, the
Inhabitants to lay the Foundation of a new Harbor, the old one being so
decayed, that it was hazardous even for small Vessels to sail into it. But the
Work exceeding their Abilities, they procured Contributions toward so good a
Design; but still all proving short of what was requisite to complete the Work,
and the Town having run itself into Debt by what it had done, and at the same
time the public Streets and Causeways, as well as the Townhouse and Gaol,
being in a very ruinous Condition, they procured an Act to pass in the 11th of
King George II. for laying a Duty of Two-penies Scots upon every Scots Pint of
Ale or Beer sold within the Town and Liberties, which was to commence in May
1738. and to continue for 25 Years, for bringing to Effect these good Purposes.
And we may say, that of late so many of these Acts have passed, that Scotland
will in a few Years, if harassed by no intestine Broils, and continuing in
Peace, make a better Figure than it has done for Centuries past.

The Abbey was formerly endowed with great Revenues by King William I. who was
buried here under a stately Monument.

In the inner Parts of the Shire, to the Westward, is Forfar the County Town,
and Brechin formerly a Bishop's See, made so by K. David, and where some Part
of a small Cathedral is still standing. It is seated upon the River Southesk,
over which it has a stately Bridge of two Arches, and is considerable for its
Salmon and Cattle-markets. It is also memorable for a great Victory obtained
here over the Danes, by the Chief of the Family of Keith, Earl Marshall, who
having killed their General, was advanced to great Honors by Malcolm II. There
was a high Stone erected over the Grave of the Danish General, which is still
called Camus's Cross, from his Name; and at 10 Miles Distance is another Cross,
over the Grave of another eminent Danish Warrior; and both of them have antique
Letters and Pictures upon them.

From Montrose the Shore lies due North to Aberdeen: In the Way is the Castle
of Dunnoter, once a strong Fortification upon an high Precipice of a Rock. The
Castle was surrounded with invincible Walls, (said the honest Scot, who showed
us the Road to it) having Towers at proper Distances, after the old Way of
fortifying Towns. The Earl Marshall, of the Name of Keith, was Lord of this
Castle, as also of a good House near it, and a great Estate: But what he had,
is now gone; for, being in the Rebellion, his Estate was forfeited, and his
Lordship, making his Escape, went into the Service of Spain, in which he still
continues. But we ought to observe, that his Brother, going into the Service of
Russia, made such a Figure there, that he is a Lieutenant General in that
Empire, and greatly esteemed for his personal Bravery and Conduct. This
Gentleman making, lately, a Visit to England, was received with great Marks of
Distinction and Favor, by the Court and Nobility; and may be truly said to be
one of the best Generals that the late Czarina, who yet had many excellent
Commanders, had Reason to boast of.

Dunnoter Castle is now demolished. It is situated in the Shire of Kincardin
called the Merns. The County is noted for its Timber, having in it upwards of
Five Millions of Fir-trees, besides vast Numbers of other Kinds, planted within
these 70 Years by the Gentry, at and about their Seats, and which they are
yearly adding to, and improving. Kincardin was formerly the County-town; but
that Advantage now, by Statute, belongs to Stonehyne.

Innerbervy, on the Coast, was made a Royal Burgh by King Alexander III.

Paldykirk, so called from Palladius, first Bishop of the Scots, is noted for
its annual three Days Fair: The principal Commodity brought to it is coarse
Cloth, which is commonly transported to the Netherlands.

On the Lands of Arbuthie and Redeloak, are some Trenches to be seen, cast up
by the Danes at one of their Invasions: And round the Hill of Urie is a deep
Ditch, where the Scots encamped.

Fordun lies also in this County, famous in ancient Times for the Relics of
the aforesaid St. Palladius. It is also noted for being the Surname of John
Fordun, the Scots Historian, Author of the Book called The Scots Chronicon, to
which all succeeding Historians of this Nation have been much obliged.

The Earl Marshall was hereditary Sheriff of this Country.

We proceeded then to Aberdeen, a Place so eminent, that it commands some Stay
upon it. It stands at the Mouth of two Rivers, and is divided into two Towns or
Cities, one called the New, the other the Old Aberdeen, about a Mile distant
from each other; one situate on the River Don, the other on the River Dee, from
whence they are more properly called Aberdon and Aberdeen.

Aberdon, or the Old Town, lies a Mile Northward from Aberdeen, or the New
Town, and is sometimes called Bon-accord, from its Motto. It is situated in the
Mouth of the River Don, which is remarkable for the Multitude of Salmon and
Perch taken in it.

The Old Town must, without doubt, be very ancient; for they tell us the New
Aberdeen is supposed to be upwards of 1200 Years old, though none of their
Registers mention the particular Time of its being built, or by whom. The
Cities are not equally situated for Trade, one of the Rivers being broader than
the other; and it is the common Opinion, that Part of the old City, called the
Monastery, was washed down by the Sea, so that it obliged the Citizens to build
farther off: That accordingly they built the New Aberdeen upon the Bank of the
other River, upon a Piece of hilly Ground: But this is all Conjecture, and has
Probability only for its Support.

Old Aberdeen was formerly the Bishop's Seat, and has a Cathedral, commonly
called St. Machar's, a large and stately Structure, which was anciently much
more magnificent: it suffered greatly at the Time of the Reformation, and more
since the Revolution.

The chief Ornament of this Town is the King's College on the South Side of it,
a neat and stately Structure.

The Church and Steeple are built of hewn Stone, and the Summit of the latter
resembles an Imperial Crown. The Windows of the Church were formerly esteemed
for their Paintings; and something of their Splendour still remains. In the
Steeple are two Bells of extraordinary Bigness, besides others.

Close to the Church is a Library well furnished with Books.

This College was founded by Bishop Elphinston, in the Year 1500. and the
greatest Part built by him; but King James IV. taking the Patronage upon him,
it was called The King's College. The Bull for it was procured from Pope
Alexander VI. in 1510. endowing it with as ample Privileges as those of Paris
and Bononia.

There are in this College a Principal, a Sub-principal, who is also one of the
Regents, three other Regents, or Professors of Philosophy, a Professor of
Humanity or Philology, a Professor of Divinity, a Doctor of Physic, a
Professor of the Oriental Tongues, a Professor of the Civil Law, and a
Professor of the Mathematics. Dr. Frazer has lately been a great Benefactor to
it.

New Aberdeen is about a Mile distant, as we have said, from the Old, situated
at the Mouth of the River Dee. It is the County Town, and by Consequence the
Seat of the Sheriffs Courts. It exceeds all the Cities in the North of Scotland
for Largeness, Extent and Beauty. It stands in a wholesome Air, has a great
Revenue from its Salmon-fishery, and the Inhabitants are generally very
courteous. It stands upon three Hills; the main Part upon the highest, and the
Skirts of it extend into the Plain. The Houses are neatly built, are generally
four Stories high, or more, and have for the most part Gardens and Orchards
belonging to them, which makes the City pleasant and healthful, and the
Prospect of it beautiful at a Distance.

From a round Hill, at the West End of the City, flow two Springs, one of clear
Water, and another with Water, which, in Taste and Quality, comes very near the
Spaw in Germany: Dr. William Barclay wrote a Treatise concerning it.

In the High Street is a Church built of Freestone, and good Architecture.

In this City stands the Marshal College, founded by George Earl Marshal, in
the Year 1593. to which the City has added many Buildings at their own Charge.

In this College, which is a distinct University of itself, are a Principal,
four Professors of Philosophy, a Professor of Divinity, and a Professor of
Mathematics, and there is lately added a Professor of Physic. It has a very
good Library, which was founded by the City, enlarged by the Gifts of several
learned Men, and furnished with Mathematical Instruments.

In this City is also a Grammar School, founded by Dr. Dune, having one Master
and three Ushers. There is also a Music School.

The Church called St. Nicolas's, is a handsome Edifice of Freestone, with a
lofty Steeple, resembling a Pyramid; it was formerly divided into three
Churches. The Body of this Church is adorned with a Tower, and a Steeple with
Pinacles.

Here is also a Prison and a Workhouse belonging to the Town, likewise an
Almshouse, and three Hospitals; and near the Harbor stands the Custom-house.
The Marketplace is very beautiful and spacious, and the Streets adjoining are
very handsome, and most of the Houses are built of Stone, four Stories high,
with handsome Sash-windows, and are very well furnished within; the Citizens
here being as gay, as genteel, and perhaps as rich, as in any City in Scotland.

The Bridge at Old Aberdeen, over the Don, consists of one immense Arch of
Stone, sprung from two Rocks, one on each Side, which serve as a Buttment to
the Arch, so that it may be said to have a Foundation coeval with Nature, and
which will last as long. The other Bridge is upon the River Dee, West above New
Aberdeen, and has seven very stately Arches.

The People of Aberdeen, and indeed of almost all this Country, are generally
of the Episcopal Persuasion; so that, were it not for the legal Establishment,
the Presbyterian Preachers would have but few Hearers, and slender Incomes:
Almost every Parish has a Meeting House, where the Liturgy is read: At Aberdeen
and Peterhead they have beautiful Chapels, and even Organs.

Near the City is a stately Stone Bridge of seven Arches over the Dee, built by
Bishop Gawin Dumbar.

The Air of this County, to those who were born in a hotter, seems cold, but is
in itself healthful and temperate. The Winter is milder than can be expected
from such a Climate, which seems a Wonder to Danes, Poles, and Prussians, when
they come into this Country, and consider that with them, during the Winter,
there is nothing but perpetual Frost and Snow. The Soil in general is not
unfruitful, if duly cultivated; it produces Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats in
abundance, Pease and Beans; nor do they want Roots and Herbs for Food and
Physic; and foreign Plants grow very well there, as daily Experience
testifies. The mountainous Part of the County affords very good Pasturage, and
the other as good Corn.

The adjoining Sea not only furnishes them with plenty of Fish, but reproaches
them with their Negligence, when they see the Dutch Fleets continually fishing
on the Coasts, from whence they reap great Gain; but it is the Humor of the
Inhabitants to apply themselves to the Salmon-fishing, and to neglect that of
all other Sorts.

The Quantity of Salmon and Perches, taken in both Rivers, is a kind of
Prodigy. The Proprietors are united into a Company, there being so many Shares,
of which no Person can enjoy above one at a time. The Profits are very
considerable, the Salmon being sent abroad into different Parts of the World,
particularly into England, France, the Baltic, and several other Places.

The Herring-fishing is a common Blessing to all this Shore of Scotland, and is
like the Indies at their Door, were it properly used, by the Scots in general:
But I must observe, that by this, however, the Merchants of Aberdeen are able
to carry on a Trade to Dantzick and Koningsberg, Riga and Narva, Wybourgh and
Stockholm.

They have also a very good Manufacture of Linen, and likewise of Worsted
Stockens, which they send to England in great Quantities, and of which they
make some so fine, that I have seen them sold for 14, 20, and 30 Shillings a
Pair. They also send them over to Holland, and into the North and East Seas, in
large Quantities.

They have also a particular Export here of Pork, pickled and packed up in
Barrels, which they sell chiefly to the Dutch for the victualling their
East India Ships and their Men of War, the Aberdeen Pork having the Reputation
of being the best cured, for keeping on very long Voyages, of any in Europe.

They export also Corn and Meal; but they generally bring it from the Firth of
Murray, or Cromarty, the Corn coming from about Inverness, where they have
great Quantities.

In a word, the People of Aberdeen are universal Merchants, so far as the Trade
of the Northern Part of the World will extend; and it may be esteemed the third
City in Scotland, that is, the next after Edinburgh and Glasgow.

This Shire contains in it Mar, with its Appurtenances, Birse, Glentaner,
Glenmuick, Strathdee, Strathdon, Braes of Mar and Cromar, most part of Buchan,
Formartin, Garioch, and Strathbogy.

The latter is a large and ancient Barony, watered by the Rivers Dovern and
Bogy; it was erected into an Earldom by King James VI. in favor of the Chief
of the noble and ancient Family of Gordon, whom he afterward created Marquis
of Huntley. Strathbogy is very fruitful in Corn and Pasturage, and is
remarkable for the fine Linen-yarn spun by the Women there, and sold to the
Merchant.

It is mostly inhabited by Gordons, Vassals to the Duke of Gordon, who has a
magnificent Castle here, called Strathbogy, from the Name of the County. There
are of this Name, besides the Duke, the Earls of Sutherland, Aboyn, Aberdeen,
and late Viscount of Kenmure; likewise a great many Gentlemen of Note in other
Parts of the Kingdom.

The County of Mar gave Title of Earl to the Chief of the Family of Erskine.
The Sheriffdom is the King's Gift.

In Aberdeenshire are Quarries of spotted Marble and Slate, and Pearls are
found in their Rivers of a large Size, and fine Color.

There was formerly a Mint at Aberdeen, as appears by several Pieces of Coin
with the Aberdeae upon them, kept in the Closets of the Curious.

Other Towns in this County are; 1. Kintore, a Royal Burgh on the Don, which
gives the Title of Earl to a Branch of the Family of Keith. 2. Inverary, made a
Royal Burgh by King Robert Bruce. 3. Peterhead, with a good Harbor.


We ought not to omit, that on the 30th of October 1721. an accidental Fire
broke out in Aberdeen, whereby the Commissary-Clerk's Office was suddenly
consumed, and at the same time the Registers and Records of all Testaments and
Confirmations, all Acts of Curacy, Judicial Deeds, and other Writs and
Evidences, etc. were entirely burnt and destroyed; which unhappy Accident being
likely to be attended with pernicious Effects to Persons Rights and Properties,
an Act passed 8 George I. for supplying the Records so burnt or lost; and
another in the 9th of the same Reign, for making the former more effectual.

The Town of Aberdeen had suffered much by the public Commotions in Scotland,
after the Revolution took place, so that an Act for laying the Duty of
Two-penies Scots on every Scots Pint of Ale and Beer sold within the Town, etc.
had been imposed by the Scottish Parliament in 1695. and continued by the same
in 1707. for enabling them to discharge the Debts incurred on that Occasion.
And the last Act being near expired, and Debts still remaining unpaid, an Act
passed 1731. for continuing the said Duties, for the following good Purposes;
viz. for paying off the remaining Debts of the Town; for building a new Pier on
the North-side of the Harbor, for repairing the old Pier on the South Side,
which was very much sunk and decayed; for repairing the great Church, called
the Old Church, which was in a very decayed Condition; for rebuilding the
Townhouse, which was also in a very bad State; and for maintaining and
carrying on other public Works for the Benefit of the Town. This Act is to
remain in Force for 25 Years; and it may be easily judged, that the Town of
Aberdeen will be much improved, when the proposed Works are all absolutely
completed.

From Aberdeen the Coast goes on to a Point of Land, which is the farthest
North-east Part of Britain, and is called by the Sailors Buchanness, being in
the Shire or County of Buchan, Part of which belongs to Aberdeenshire. It was
to this Point the French Squadron, with the Pretender on board, in the Reign of
Queen Anne, kept their Flight in Sight of the Shore, being thus far pursued by
Sir George Byng with the English Fleet; but from hence they steered away
North-east as if for the Norway Coast, when the English Admiral, seeing no
Probability of coming up with them, gave over the Chase; but they altered their
Course in the Night, stood away South, and came back to Dunkirk, whence they
set out.

On the South Side of the Water of Eugic stands Peterhead, with a Road which
will hold 100 Sail of Ships; and at this Place it is High Water, when the Moon
is directly South. In many Places of this Shire are great Stones placed
circularly, one of the largest in the Middle toward the South, which have the
Air of Places of Worship in the Ages of Heathenism. The dropping Cave of Slanes
is very remarkable, of the petrified Substance whereof is made excellent Lime.

This Country, however remote, is full of Nobility and Gentry, and their Seats
are seen even unto the extremest Shores: The Family of Frazer carries its Name
to Frazerburgh, in the very Northermost Point of the Country. Ereskines, Earls
of Mar, had their Family-seat at Kildrummy, in the County of Mar, a little
South of this Part of the County, where the late unhappy Earl first set up his
Standard for the Pretender. The Hayes, Earls of Errol, are in Buchan; and the
Family of Forbes Lord Forbes, and Forbes Lord Pitsligo, are still farther, and
the latter on the very Shore of the Caledonian Ocean. The Gordons and Keiths
are very numerous also in these Parts.

Mr. Camden relates, that on the Coast of this Country a great Piece of Amber
was driven on Shore by the Force of the Sea, as big (to use his own Words) As
an Horse. I shall add nothing to the Story, because it is hard to give Credit
to it: it is enough that I name my Author; for I could not learn from the
Inhabitants, that they ever saw any more of it.

I ought not to omit Innerury, belonging to Garioch in Aberdeenshire, being the
Scotsman's Boast; for here Robert Bruce, though sick, and carried in a
Horse-litter, defeated John Cummins, and those who adhered to him, in Favor of
Edward I. of England; who held Scotland in Subjection. This was the first
Victory King Robert obtained, and laid the Foundation of the Overthrow of the
English Usurpation in Scotland. Near the same Place also in 1411. Alexander
Steuart, Earl of Mar, defeated Donald of the Isles, in the bloody Battle of the
Harlow.

From hence, the East Shore of Scotland being at an End, the Land tends away
due West; and the Shire of Bamff beginning, you see the Towns of Bamff, Elgin,
Frazersburg, and the famous Monastery of Kinloss, where the murdered Body of
King Duff was after many Years dug up, and discovered to be his by various
Tokens.

The Shire of Bamff deserves some Notice for the following Particulars; for
that in it is situated Strathyla, which drives a great Trade in Lime, and fat
Cattle; and it abounds so with Limestone, that they build their Houses with
it. They carry on a Trade in fine Linen also, by means of their weekly Markets
at Keith, a neighboring Village. Upon the Banks of the Spey, which runs through
this County, lies the Bog of Gicht, now called Gordon Castle, the noblest
Palace in the North, being the Duke of Gordon's chief Seat, adorned with
pleasant Gardens, and a great Park. The Castle appears so large, that it looks
more like a Town than a Nobleman's Seat. The Duke is Proprietor of this Part of
the County. Strathave is the paternal Inheritance of his Family: And his Grace
has a fine Estate, and other Seats hereabouts. The late Duke had a little
embroiled himself with the Affairs of 1715, and his Son, then Marquis of
Huntley, still more; but got off without a Forfeiture, by his Prudence and good
Fortune.

The Town of Cullen, an ancient Royal Burgh, stands in the Shire of Bamff. It
is chiefly noted for its fruitful Soil, and Salmon-fishing; for having no Port,
it has little Trade, except for its Corn and Salmon.

The Shire itself takes Name from Bamff, a Burgh Royal, seated at the Mouth of
Doverne in the Boyne, where the Sheriff holds his Courts. In it are the Ruins
of an old Castle, near which is the Abbey of Deer, formerly belonging to the
Cistercian Monks, and founded by William Cumin, Earl of Buchan. In Belvenie is
found the Stone of which Alum is made, and in the County of Boyne great
Quarries of spotted Marble have been discovered.

Buchan is Part in Aberdeenshire, Part in the Shire of Bamff, one of its
principal Towns is Frazersburgh, and Peterhead is another. The latter is a good
Market Town, with a Port, and small Harbor with two little Piers for Fishing;
but being so near Aberdeen, has not those Helps and Advantages, that might be
otherwise probably given to it; so that at low Water it is all dry, and the
smallest Ships lie aground in it.

The Earl of Saltoun has very lately built, (1738) at Frazersburgh, a most
excellent new Pier and Bulwark, all of Freestone; which renders that Harbor
as safe and commodious as any on the East Coast; so that 30 Ships may winter
there at once, with great Safety: The Water at full Sea is 18 or 20 Feet.

From the Point of Land, called Buchanness the Ships begin their Accounts for
their several Voyages; what they call their Departure: As in England, they do
from Wintertonness, on the North-east Part of Norfolk, and from the Downs for
the Voyages to the Southward.

From Fifeness, which is the Northermost Point, on the Mouth of Edinburgh
Firth, being the Southermost Land of Fife to this Point of Buchanness, the Land
lies almost due North and South, and the Shore is the Eastermost Land of
Scotland. The Distance between them is 33 Leagues, 1 Mile, which is just 100
Miles; though the Mariners say, that measuring by the Sea, it is but 28; and from
Wintertonness, near Yarmouth, to this Point called Buchanness, is just 300
Miles.

The River or Firth of Tay opens into the Sea, about four Leagues North from
Fifeness; and as there is a Light-house on the Isle of May, as I have said
before, in the Mouth of the Firth of Forth at Edinburgh, a little South of this
Point, called Fifeness; there are likewise two Light-houses at the Entrance of
the Firth of Tay, for the Directions of the Sailors, when they are bound into
that River, and particularly for their avoiding the two Sands, which lie off
from the South Side of the Entrance.

Buchanness is generally also the first Land of Great Britain, which the Ships
make in their Voyages Home from Archangel in Russia, or from their
Whale-fishing Voyages to Greenland and Spits-bergen in the North Seas: And near
this Point, at Pitsligo, a great Ship was cast away in Queen Elizabeth's Time,
bound Home from Archangel, having on board the first Ambassador sent by the
Great Duke of Muscovy to any of the Christian Princes of Europe, he being
commissioned to treat with Queen Elizabeth for a League of Peace and Commerce.
He likewise lost a most valuable Present, designed for the Queen, of rich and
costly Furrs, in those Days, reputed inestimable. The Ambassador was happily
saved, and brought on Shore by the People of Pitsligo; but the Ship and all the
Goods were lost.

From this Point of Easterly Land all that great Bay, or Inlet of the Sea,
reaching quite to the North of Scotland, is called Murray Firth, and the
Northermost Point is Dungsby-head, which is the North-east Point of Caithness,
and opens to Pentland Firth. By Pentland Firth you are to understand the
Passage of the Sea beyond Caithness, between Scotland and the Isles of Orkney.
What is called Murray Firth, is not, like many others, the Mouth of a River, as
that of Edinburgh or Tay, but is an open Bay in the Sea, as the Bay of Biscay,
or the Gulf of Mexico are; and reaches, as I have said, from Peters-head, to
Dungsby-head, opposite to the Orkneys, the Distance of 79 Miles; but it is
almost twice as far by Land, because of the Depth of that Bay, which obliges us
to travel from Pitsligo West, near 70 Miles, till we come to Inverness.

This County of Buchan is more to be taken Notice of from what is to be seen on
the Sea Shore than in the Land; for the Country is mountainous, and in some
Places not very fertile; but as we coasted along West, we came into a much
better Country, particularly the Shires of Bamff, which I have already
mentioned, Elgin, and the County of Murray, from whence the Bay I just now
described, is called Murray Firth.

Murray is a pleasant Country, the Soil fruitful, watered with fine Rivers, and
full of good Towns, and Gentlemen's Seats more than could be expected in so
remote a Part of the Kingdom.

This Country is a Plain for between 20 and 30 Miles together, and the Soil is
by that means rendered more fruitful and rich, and the Temperature of the Air
more softened, than in other Parts of Scotland; insomuch that the Harvest here,
and in the Vale of Strathbogy, and all the Country to Inverness, is observed to
be more early than in Northumberland, nay, than in Derbyshire, and even some
Parts of the more Southerly Counties in England; as particularly in the East of
Kent and Sussex. As a Confirmation of this, I affirm that I have seen the new
Wheat of this Country and Inverness brought to Market to Edinburgh, before the
Wheat at Edinburgh has been fit to reap; and yet the Harvest about Edinburgh is
thought to be as forward as in most Parts, even of England itself. In a Word,
it is usual in Murray and the Country about it, to begin with their Harvest in
the Month of July, and it is not very unusual to have new Corn fully ripe and
thresh'd out, shipped off, and brought to Edinburgh to Sale, within the Month
of August.

The River Lossie in this County is famous for Salmon; there being annually
pickled and exported from 80 to 100 Lasts, all taken in a few Months of the
Summer, and in a Space of one Mile, at a Village called Germach. It abounds
with Fish to the very Head; but still the greatest Quantity is used for home
Consumption, and taken either with hooked Tridents by Day, or Wicker Baskets,
or little Boats covered with Hides, by Night. None but the Natives, who are
used to them, will venture into those Boats. The common Drink in these Parts is
Ale, and sometimes Beer, and they have good French Wine very cheap, as I and my
Company experienced; but the Inhabitants prefer Aqua Vitae of their own
extracting from Ale-dregs and Spices, to much richer Wines than the French; of
this they drink plentifully themselves, and are very liberal of it to their
Friends. And a Bottle of this Liquor, and some Cheese, will make a Murray Man
undertake the greatest Winter-Journeys, without wishing for any other Provision.

This County is divided into two Shires; the greater, called the Shire of
Elgin; the other, the Shire of Nairn. The Town of Nairn lies on the Mouth of
the River of that Name; along which lie the Seats of many Persons of Quality.

Near the Castle of Caddel or Calder, on that River, is a Vein of Freestone,
and many Signs of Copper.

Tarnaway Castle, on the River Findorn, in this County, is an old Castle and
Seat belonging to the Earls of Murray.

A little lower on the other Side, stands the Burgh of Forress, in an exceeding
pleasant Situation. The Kings of Scotland formerly resided here, in a Castle
that is now gone to Ruin; and lower, formerly, stood the noble Abbey of Kinloss.

On the Road to Forress is a large Pillar of one Stone, being a Monument of a
Victory obtained by King Malcolm Mac Kenneth over Sueno King of Denmark; the
Inscription is now worn out. Betwixt this Place and Elgin, are numberless Seats
of the Quality.

In this rich County, on the River Lossie, which rises a few Miles above it,
and empties itself into the Sea a few Miles below it, lies Elgin, formerly a
Bishop's See. It is situated in a very fruitful Soil, though somewhat sandy. The
Ruins of the Castle are still to be seen on the East End of the Town; though
demolished so long ago, as the Wars of the Danes. There was a noble Cathedral
here, which for Largeness, Splendour, Magnificence and Workmanship, had hardly
its Equal in the Kingdom. The usual Place of Residence of the Bishop was at the
Castle of Spynie, within a Mile of the Town, a very noble Seat, with fine
Gardens and Woods.

But though the Town of Elgin has Reason to be proud of its Situation, it was not
very rich in its Town Revenues; for it had long labored under heavy and
burdensome Debts; which being increased by the Rebellion in 1715. put a Stop to
diverse of its new public Works, and made several others run into Decay. At the
same time the River Lossie having very insufficient Banks, the Chanel of it
became choked with Sand, which made it subject to overflow; and moreover, the
Harbor of Lossie itself, which may be called the Port of Elgin, lying not far
from it, became ruinous and decayed, to the great Prejudice of Persons trading
in the Murray Firth, as well as to the Town. For all these Reasons, and in
order to enlarge and improve, as well as repair, the said Harbor of Lossie, an
Act passed in the Year 1721, laying a Duty of Two-penies Scots on every Scots
Pint of Ale or Beer, that should be vended within the said Town and its
Liberties; so that it bids fair to make as flourishing a Figure as it has done
for Centuries past.

Above Elgin, Forress and Nairn, lies that Part of the Country called, The Bra^
of Murray, no way comparable to the lower Part for Fruitfulness; and beyond
this are Mountains, Woods, and green Valleys; particularly Strathherin, well
inhabited, and abounding with little Towns and Villages, and Strathnairn, a
still better Soil, and possessed by several Gentlemen. Strathherin also abounds
with Lakes, Mountains and Streams.

In this County lies Lochmoy, with an Island, where the Lord of Mackintosh (a
Name well known in England, as well as Scotland, by means of the famous
Brigadier of that Name, who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Preston,
escaped out of Newgate, and lately died in Peace in Scotland) has his Seat.
This Tribe is called Clan Chattau; and are numerous in this County.

But to say a few Words more of Elgin, before we leave this County: Gentlemen
of all Parties and Opinions, as if this Town was the Court for this Part of the
Island, leave their Highland Habitations in the Winter, and come to live at
Elgin, with very engaging Freedom; so that it is a Place of greater Resort than
could be imagined, at the Distance of 450 measured Miles from London, and more,
if we must go by Edinburgh.

This rich Country continues with very little Intermission, till we come to
Strathnairn, or the Valley of Nairn, where it extends a little farther in
Breadth toward the Mountains, and is not inferior to the other in
Fruitfulness: From the western Part of this County you may observe that the
Land goes away again to the North; and, as if you were to enter into another
Island beyond Britain, you find a large Lake or Inlet from the Sea of Murray,
going on West, as if it were to cut through the Island; for we could see no End
of it, nor could some of the Country People tell us how far it reached, but
that it went beyond Lochaber: So that we thought, till our Maps and further
Inquisition informed us, it had joined the Western Ocean.

After we had traveled about twelve Miles, and descended from a rising Ground,
upon which we then were; we perceived the Lake contracted in one particular
Place to the ordinary Size of a River, as if designed by Nature to give Passage
to the Inhabitants to converse with the Northern Part; and then it opened again
to its former Breadth, and continued in the Form of a large Lake, as before,
for many more Miles than we could see; being in the Whole, according to Mr.
Camden, 23 Miles long; but if it be taken on both Sides the Pass, it is above 35
Miles in Length.

This Situation must necessarily make the narrow Part a most important Pass,
from the more Southerly Parts of Scotland to the Northern Countries, which are
beyond it. We have been told, the Romans never conquered thus far, and the
Conquests of Oliver Cromwell have been much magnified on this Account; but if
what Mr. Camden records, and is confirmed by other Accounts from the Men of
Learning and Observation, be true, this must be a Mistake; for we are told,
that near Bean Castle in the County of Nairn, there was found, in the Year
1406. a fine Marble Vessel curiously carved, which was full of Roman Coins of
several Sorts; also several old Forts or Mounts have been seen here, which, by
their Remains, evidently showed themselves to be Roman.

I now entered the Shire of Inverness, abounding with large Woods of Firr and
Oak, and having in it some Iron Mines. It contains Badenock, Lochaber, and the
South and West Parts of Rosse, and the Isle of Sky; of all which I shall speak,
as they offer in the Course I took.

In the narrow Pass mentioned above, over the Lake stands the Town and Fortress
of Inverness, that is, a Town on the inner Bank of the River Ness. The
Situation of it (as I have said before) intimates, that it is a Place of
Strength; and accordingly it has a Castle, founded in ancient Times to command
the Pass: And some Authors write, that it was anciently a Royal House for the
Kings of Scotland. Be that as it will, Oliver Cromwell thought it a Place of
such Importance, that he built a strong Citadel here, and kept a stated Garrison
always in it, and sometimes more than a Garrison; finding it needful to have a
large Body of his old veteran Troops posted here to preserve the Peace of the
Country, and keep the Highlanders in Awe, which they did effectually all his
Time.

It is observed, that at the End of those troublesome Days, when the Troops on
all Sides came to be disbanded, and the Men dispersed, abundance of English
Soldiers settled in this fruitful Part of the Country, from whence it received
two Advantages: 1. They learnt the Art of Husbandry in full Perfection, which
they did not understand before; which, with the Help of a rich Soil, has
rendered this Part of the Country more fruitful than the rest of Scotland to
this Day. And to this it is in some measure owing, that the Harvest is so
early, and the Corn so good, as is observed above. 2. As Cromwell's Soldiers
initiated them thus into the Arts and Industry of the Husbandman, so they left
them the English Accent upon their Tongues, which they likewise preserve to
this Day; for they speak perfect English, even much better than in the most
Southerly Provinces of Scotland; nay, some will say, as well as at London
itself.


Their Tongue is not only Anglicised, but their Palates too; their Way of
Eating and Cookery, Dress and Behavior, is according to the Southern Mode: I
wish they do not, in time, degenerate into Luxury, and forget that military
Original which first reformed them.

The Fort which was then built, and afterward demolished, has been restored
since the Revolution, and a Garrison was always kept here by King William, for
the better regulating the Highlands; which Post was of singular Importance in
the Time of the Insurrection of the Earl of Mar for the Pretender; when, though
his Party took it, they were driven out again by the Country with the
Assistance of the Earl of Sutherland, and several other of the Nobility and
Gentry, who stood fast to the King's Interest.

Inverness may be said to be a pleasant, clean, and well built Town. There are
some Merchants in it, and it has a good Share of Trade. In it the Sheriff keeps
his Court. It consists of two large handsome Streets, and has a stately Stone
Bridge of seven large Arches over the River Ness, where (as I said before) it
grows narrow between the Sea and the Lake. The Water of this River is almost
always warm, and all the Year long is never so cold as to freeze; nay, in the
sharpest Winter, if Cakes of Ice are thrown into it, they will be quickly
thawed by its Warmth. Small Vessels may come up to the Town; but larger Ships,
which often come thither for Corn, are forced to lie at some Distance East from
it.

But it has been lately improved, and is still farther improving; for in the
Year 1718 an Act passed, for laying a Duty of a Sixth of a Penny Sterling on
every Pint of Ale, etc. sold within the Town and its Privileges, for building a
Church and making a Harbor there. The Preamble to the Act, giving a
Description of the Place, and the Reasons of applying for it, I shall insert,
and is to the following Effect:

That the Town of Inverness is situate near the Sea, and very capable of
Improvements in its Trade and Commerce, and having but a very small public
Revenue, incumbered with Debts, and those increased by the Expense the
Inhabitants were at in opposing the Rebellion of 1715. And the Church of the
said Town, beside, being ruinous, was not large enough to contain the
Inhabitants; for the effecting of these good Purposes the said Act was passed.

This Act was to be in Force for 19 Years only; and the first five Years it
produced so well, that the Magistrates of Inverness entered upon a Design
greatly to enlarge and improve their Harbor; in order to which they purchased
Grounds, rented Quarries, built Boats for transporting Stone, deepened their
Harbor, erected Bulwarks and Quays; so that it was made much more commodious
than ever: But the next 13 Years the Produce of the Duties was so low,
occasioned by the excessive Use of run Tea and Brandy, which People could buy
so cheap, that the Consumption of Beer and Ale was greatly lessened, and they
having run much behind-hand, were forced to apply for a further Continuation of
the Act; and accordingly, in the 11th Year of King George II. an Act passed for
continuing the same for 21 Years more, for paying the Debts contracted, and
effecting the other good Purposes I have mentioned. Which, when done, will make
Inverness a Place of as great Account as any in the North of Scotland.

When we are over the Bridge of Inverness, you enter that which we truly call
the North of Scotland, and others the North Highlands; in which are several
distinct Shires, but cannot call for a particular Description, because they are
all one undistinguished Range of Mountains and Woods, overspread with vast and
almost uninhabited Rocks and Steeps filled with Deer innumerable of various
Kinds; among which are some of those the Ancients called Hearts and Roebucks,
with overgrown Stags and Hinds of the Red-deer Kind.

Before I describe this frightful Country, it is necessary to observe, that
Scotland may be divided into four Districts, which I have not seen any of our
Geographers do before me; yet, I believe, may not be an improper Measurement
for such as would form a due Idea of the Whole in their Minds. 1. The
South-land, or that Part of Scotland South of the River Tay, drawing a Line
from the Tay, about Perth, to Loch-lomond, and down to Dumbarton, and the Bank
of Clyde. 2. The Middle, or Mid-land, being all the Country from the Tay and
the Lough-lomond, North to the Lake of Ness and Aber, including a long Slope to
the South, taking in the Western Highlands of Argyll and Lorn, and the Isles of
Isla and Jura. 3. The North-land, being all the Country beyond Inverness, and
the Lough or River Ness, North, drawing the Line over the narrow Space of
Glengary; between the Ness and Aber, and bounded by them both from the Eastern
to the Western Sea. 4. The Islands, being all the Western and Northern Islands,
the Hebrides, Sky, Orkneys, and other Isles of Shetland.


According to this Description, having passed the Bridge over the River Ness, I
am now entered on the third Division of Scotland called the North-land. Here
are not only the best Hawks of all Kinds, but Eagles in great Numbers, which
prey upon the young Fawns when they fall first, and upon Wild Fowl, with which
this Part of the Country abounds.

The Rivers and Lakes also in this Country are so prodigiously full of Salmon,
that it is hardly credible what Quantities are taken in the Spey, the Nairn,
the Ness, and other Rivers hereabout.

The several Countries beyond the Ness are, Ross, Sutherland, Strathnavern,
Caithness, and beyond those the Islands of Orkney and Shetland.

Sutherland is called the Shire of Dornoch, from the chief Town of the Province
called Dornoch, a Royal Burgh, noted for a Castle belonging to the Earl of
Sutherland; for its Cathedral Church for the Diocese of Caithness, which once
was Part of this Shire; and for its four annual Fairs. It has three remarkable
Forests, besides abundance of other Woods, which afford pleasant Hunting and
Fowling. One sort of Bird is peculiar to this Country, called Knug, which
resembles a Parrot, and digs its Nest in the Trunks of Oak, with its Beak.
There are about 60 Lakes in this County: The greatest is Lochskin, 14 Miles in
Length; in many of them are Islands very pleasant for Summer Habitations. In
the Isle of Brora, the Earl of Sutherland has a House, which he makes use of
when he comes to hunt Deer, which abound in it; and in some of the Lakes and
Rivers of this County, as well as in the Rivers of Aberdeen, and Rosse, are
found Pearls of great Value. In short, this Shire so abounds with Lakes,
Rivers, and Bays, that there is scarce a Farm in the whole County, but is
washed either with fresh or salt Water, so that the Inhabitants have Store of
Fish and Fowl. The Beer or Big in this County is reckoned excellent. It has
also Silver Mines, and excellent Iron Mines, Coal Mines, and Quarries of
Freestone, but much neglected. It has many commodious Harbors for Ships to
export its Commodities; which are Cod, Salmon, salt Beef, Wool, Skins, Hides,
Tallow, Butter, Cheese, etc. The Bays and Coasts also abound with Seals, have
sometimes Whales, and Shell Fish of all sorts.

The Earl of Sutherland has a Castle beyond Inverness, called Dunrobin, situate
on the Eastern Shore, of which his Lordship was sent down by Sea to take an
early Possession in the late Rebellion; and which if he had not done, would
soon have fallen into the Hands of the late Earl of Marr's Party; but his
coming timely thither, prevented him and the Country on that Side, from joining
the Troops of the Pretender. In the Gardens of this Seat, though so Northerly,
Saffron grows very well, and comes to Maturity.

Strathnavern is Part of Sutherland, and derives its Name from Strath, a
Valley, situated on the River Navern, which runs through it. The Country is
mountainous, and formerly was noted for breeding greater Numbers of ravenous
Wolves than any other in Scotland. The Bays and Rivers are full of Fish; it is
very woody, and many Lakes are in the Valleys. There are several Monuments in
it, of Victories gained over the Danes, particularly one at Enbo, which is a
Stone Cross, said to be over a Danish King. The Inhabitants are great Hunters,
and despise those who are not; so that Venison with them is a common Dish. The
Situation of the Country not admitting of Towns, the Inhabitants live up and
down in small Villages. On the Northern Coast of this County are several
Islands. Of the many Lakes, Lochnavern and Lochyol are the largest, and the
latter affords an Island which is inhabited in the Summer time. Borwe and
Young, are the Places of most Note, the latter the principal Seat of the Lord
Rea, Chief of the Mackays, who is the principal Proprietor of Strathnavern; but
holds it of the Earl of Sutherland, to whose eldest Son it gives the Title of
Lord. The Earls of Sutherland were formerly of the Name of Sutherland, to the
Heiress of which a Son of the House of Gordon married, from whom the present
Earl is descended. They have a long time claimed Precedence, as the first Earls
of the Kingdom, and in order to recover it, have reassumed their former Name.
They have great Royalties, as being Admirals of that, and some of the
neighboring Counties, and all the Gentlemen of Sutherland hold of them. Lord
Duffus is descended of this Family. The Earl is Hereditary Sheriff of it. The
County has several Mountains of white Marble, as we were told.

North of the Mouth of the River Nesse, is the famous Cromarty Bay, or Cromarty
Firth, noted for being the finest Harbor, with the least Business, perhaps, of
any in Britain. It is 15 Miles long, and in many Places two Miles broad; and,
like Milford-haven in Wales, is able to receive the Royal Navy of Great Britain
both to go out and come in with Safety; but, for want of Trade, this noble
Harbor, which by Geographers and Mariners, is called Portus Salutis, or the
Harbor of Safety, is become almost useless.

The Shire of Cromarty is denominated from a Royal Burgh, standing upon the
Firth of Cromarty. The Waters of Connel are celebrated for the Pearls found in
them. Of great Part of this County the Earl of Cromarty is Sheriff and
Proprietor. The Straths or Valleys upon the Waterside abound with Woods.
Particularly, upon the Hills is great Store of all sorts of Game; also near
Alserig, upon the Waters of Braan, and on the Carron, are great Woods of Fir.

All the County beyond the River Nesse, and the Loch flowing into it, is called
Caithness, and extends to the Northermost Land in Scotland. It is divided from
Sutherland by the Mountain Ord, and a Tract of Mountains running from it as far
as Knochfin.

Some People tell us they have Lead, Copper, and Iron in this Part of Scotland;
and I am very much inclined to believe it; but it seems reserved for a future
and more industrious Age to search into it. Should a Time come, when these
hidden Treasures of the Earth shall be discovered and improved, this Part of
Scotland would be no longer esteemed poor; for such a Production would soon
change the Face of Things, bring Wealth and Commerce to it, fill the Harbors
with Ships, the Towns with People, and by consuming the Provisions, occasion
the Soil to be cultivated, the Fish cured, the Cattle consumed at Home, and
thereby diffuse Prosperity all around them.

Our Writers have represented the Inhabitants here wild and barbarous: They
were so formerly, perhaps; but we see the Mackenzies, Macleods, Sutherlands, Mc
Leans, Mc Donalds, Gordons, Mc Keys, Macfergusons, Mc Intoshes, and others
sprung from thence, equally accomplished for the Court or Camp.

It must be owned, here are but few Towns; the People live dispersed in Clans
under a kind of Vassalage, submitting to their Lords as their lawful Monarchs,
and many of them acknowledge no other; though this too, is in a manner got over,
and the Clans are less dependent on their Chiefs, than they used to be, by
virtue of an Act of Parliament made for that very Purpose.

Their Employment is chiefly Hunting for their Food, though they also breed large
Quantities of Black Cattle, with which they pay their Lairds or Leaders the
Rent of the Lands. These Cattle are driven annually to England to be sold, and
are bought up chiefly in the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex; as I have
mentioned in several Places in my Tour.

There are many little Towns and Villages, besides Gentlemen's Seats in
Caithness, as far North as it is: But the People are more addicted to good
Living within Doors, than to shewy Edifices, or fine Seats. The best House in
it, is Castle Sinclair, so called from the Name of the Earls of Sinclair, whose
Seat it is, and they have several other Castles in the County. The Lord
Sinclair of Ravensheugh in Fife is chief of the Name. His Ancestors formerly
possessed Orkney and Shetland, and were allied to the Royal Family of Denmark.
But one of the Family squandered away his Estate, and among the rest, these
Islands; and got for it the inglorious Title of, William the Waster. The chief
Town and Royal Burgh in Caithness is Wick or Weich, whence it is called the
Shire of Weich. This Town lies conveniently for Trade, and has a good Harbor
for Ships on the Eastern Coast. It is the Residence of the Sheriff, or his
Officer.

Thurso, another Town with a good Harbor, lies also on the Northern Coast, in
a little Bay. The Isles of Orkney and Shetland, I refer to the Account of the
Isles.

And I shall observe, once for all, that I am the more particular in my
Description of these Northern Parts of Scotland, because they are least known,
and less valued and esteemed than they deserve.

This County is surrounded with the Sea, and those two great Inlets of Water,
mentioned above, called the Ness and the Abre: So that it forms a Peninsula, by
means of that small Neck of Land of about eight Miles long, which Mr. Camden
calls the Garrow or Glengarrough, others Glengary. Were it not for this, the
whole Division of the Northland would be a distinct Island, separated from all
the rest of Great Britain, as effectually as the Orkneys or the Isle of Sky is
from this.

That Part which lies to the East, is open to the Sea, without Cover; the West
and the North are, in a manner, surrounded with Outworks as a Defense to break
off the raging Ocean from the North; for the Western Islands on one Side, and
the Orkneys on the other, lie as so many advanced Fortifications or Redoubts,
to combat that Enemy at a Distance.

From Dunrobin Castle you have nothing of Note offers itself, either by Sea or
Land, but an extended Shore lying North and South, without Towns, and without
Harbors; and as there are none of the former to be found, so there are none of
the last wanting.

The Land thus extended lies North and South to Dungsby-head, which is the
utmost Extent of it, on the East Side of Britain North, and is distant from
Cromarty 18 Leagues North. From this Point of Dingsby or Dungsby-head, as I
observed before of Buchan and Winterton, the Sailors take their Distances, and
keep their Accounts in their going farther North; e. g.

From this Point of Dingsby-head to the Fair-isle or Faro, which is the first
of Shetland, or the last of the Orkneys, (call it which you will; for it lies
between both) is 25 Leagues, or 75 Miles.

From the same Dungsby-head to Sumburgh-head, that is, to Shetland, is 32
Leagues, or 96 Miles, and to Lerwick Fort in Shetland 110 Miles.

Thus from Buchanness to Sumburgh-head in Shetland, is 47 Leagues.

And from Wintertonness near Yarmouth, on the Coast of Norfolk, to Buchanness,
on the Coast of Aberdeen, is just 100 Leagues. So from Winterton to Shetland is
147 Leagues, or 431 Miles.

I am now to observe, that we are here at the extremest Point of the Island of
Great Britain; and that here the Land bears away West, leaving a large Straight
or Sea, which they call Pictland, or Pentland Firth, and which divides between
the Island of Great Britain, and the Isles of the Orkneys; a Passage broad and
fair; for it is not less than five Leagues over, and has a sufficient Depth of
Water for Ships to sail in: But the Tides are so fierce, so uncertain, and the
Gusts and sudden Squalls of Wind so frequent, that very few Merchant Ships care
to venture through it, and the Dutch East India Ships, which come North about,
(as it is called) in their Return from India, keep all farther off, and choose to
come by Fair-isle, in the Passage between the Islands of Orkney and Shetland;
whither they generally send their Men of War to meet them, being sure of not
missing them in so narrow a Passage.

But the Passage here is much broader, being at least nine Leagues from North
Ranalsha, the farthest Island of the Orkneys, to Fair-isle, and five more from
Fair-isle to Shetland: So that it is 14 Leagues clear open Sea between the
Orkneys and Shetland, with only a small Island in the Way, which has nothing
dangerous about it.

In the Passage between the Land's End of Britain and the Orkneys, is a small
Island, which our Mariners call Stroma, Mr. Camden, and others, Sowna; and is
much spoken of as dangerous for Ships: But I see no room to record any thing of
that kind, any more than the Report, that it is haunted by Witches and Spirits,
which draw Ships on Shore to their Misfortune.

At Dungsby-head is the most Northerly Land of Great Britain, where, in the
Month of June, after a clear Day, we could see to read the smallest Print, and
to write distinctly, all Night long, without the Help of a Candle.

No wonder the ancient Mariners, be they Phoenician or Carthaginian, who knew
nothing of the Motion of the heavenly Bodies, when they were driven thus far,
were surprised to find they had lost the steady Rotation of Day and Night,
which they thought had spread over the whole Globe. They imagined the Elysian
Fields must lie this Way, when they found they were come already to the Realm
of everlasting Day.

From hence West we go along the Shore of the Firth, which they call Pentland,
where is the famous House called John a Grot's. We set our Horses Feet into the
Sea, on the most Northerly Land, as the People say, of Britain, though, I think,
Dungsbyhead is as far North. It Is certain, however, the Difference is but very
small, being either of them in the Latitude of 59 North, and Shetland reaching
above two Degrees farther. The Dominions of Great Britain are extended from the
Isle of Wight, in the Latitude of 50 Degrees, to the Isles of Unsta in
Shetland, in the Latitude of 61 Degrees 30 Minutes, being 10 Degrees, or full
600 Miles, in Length; which Island of Unst or Unsta, being the most remote of
the Isles of Shetland to the North-east, lies 167 Leagues from Wintertonness in
Norfolk.

Here we found, however mountainous and wild the Country appeared, the People
extremely well furnished with Provisions, especially four Sorts in great
Plenty; two of them sufficient for a common Table, the other two the Splendour
of the greatest 1. Very good Bread, as well Oat Bread as Wheat, though the last
not so cheap as the first. 2. Venison exceeding plentiful, and at all Seasons,
young or old, which they kill with their Guns wherever they find it, for there
is no Restraint; on which Account all the Highlanders have Firearms, and
become excellent Marksmen. 3. Salmon in such Plenty as is scarce credible, and
consequently so cheap, that to those who have any Substance to buy with, it is
not worth giving themselves any Trouble to catch it. This they eat fresh in the
Season, and at other times cured by being dried in the Sun, and so preserved
all the Year. 4. They have no want of Cows and Sheep, but the latter are so
wild, that sometimes, were they not, by their own Disposition, used to flock
together, they would be much harder to kill than the Deer.


From hence to the West Point of the Passage to Orkney is near 20 Miles, which
may be called the End of the Island of Britain, which faces directly to the
North Pole, so that the Tail of the Great Bear is seen just over your Head. The
Day is here, in Summer, said to be 18 Hours long, the Sun remaining so long
above the Horizon; and when he is set, he makes so small an Arch of a Circle
below the Horizon, that it is much above a Twilight all the Night; but it must
be remembered, that the dark Nights take in Winter their Turn, and are
protracted to as great a Degree.

Yet it is observable here, that they have more temperate Winters, generally
speaking, than we have in the most Southerly Part of the Island; and
particularly, the Water in some of the Rivers, as in the Ness, for Example,
never freezes (as I have observed before); which is accounted for from the
Nearness of the Sea, which filling the Air with salt Vapors, sheathes, as it
were, the acute Particles of the Cold.

For the same Reason the Snows are not so deep, nor do they lie so long upon
the Ground, as in other Places. The Summits indeed of the high Hills, whither
these Vapors cannot reach, are continually covered with Snow, and perhaps have
been so for many Ages, so that this Country, if any in the World, agrees with
the following Description: -- Vast watery Lakes, which spread below,
And Mountains covered with eternal Snow.


On the most inland Parts of this Country, especially in the Shire of Ross,
they have vast Woods of Fir-trees for 15 or 20 Miles in Length, not planted by
Men's Hands, as I have described in the Southern Part of Scotland; but as they
came out of the Hands of Nature, and nourished by her Handmaid, Time. If we
may believe the Inhabitants, they are large enough to make Masts for the
biggest Ships; and yet are of no Service, merely for want of the Convenience of
Water-carriage to bring them away. But methinks, rather than they should remain
an useless Burden to the Earth, they might be cut down and burnt, from whence
might be drawn vast Quantities of Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentine, etc. which is
of easier Carriage, and would well answer the Trouble. Indeed an Attempt has
been made of this kind for Pot-ash; but it did not succeed, rather through the
Fault of the Undertakers at London, than any thing else.

And now leaving the Northern Prospect, we pass the opposite Point West from
Dungsby-head, and which the People call Farro-head, though Mr. Camden calls these
two Points by two different Names: The East Point, or Dungsby-head, he calls
Virvedrum Promontorium. The West Point, or Farro-head, he calls Sarvedrum
Promontorium.

From hence the vast Western Atlantic Ocean appears, for which the Geographers
have not agreed upon a Name, there being no Country to derive it from.

And now we were to turn our Faces South; for as to the Islands of this Sea,
which make the fourth Division of Scotland, as I mentioned before, I shall take
notice of them under one Head, in the Conclusion of my Tour.

In our Attempt to come down to the Southward by the Coast of Tayne, and the
Shire of Ross, we should have been extremely disappointed, and perhaps have
been obliged to get a Ship or Bark, to have carried us round the Isle of Sky
into Lochaber, had it not been for the extraordinary Courtesy of some of the
Gentlemen of the Country.

On the other hand, we unexpectedly met here some English Men, who were
employed by Merchants in the South, to take and cure a large Quantity of
White-fish, and afterward of Herrings, on account of Trade. Here we had not
only the Civility of their Assistance and Accommodation in our Journey, but the
Pleasure of seeing what Progress they made in their Undertaking.

As for the Herrings, the Quantity of them was prodigious. The Shoal was
beginning to come, when we first came to the Head of Pentland Firth; and in a
Fortnight's time, the Body of their numberless Shoals began to appear; but
before we left the Coast, you would have ventured to say of the Sea, as they do
of the River Tibiscus, or Thiesse in Hungary, that it was one third Water, and
two thirds Fish. The Operation of taking them could hardly be called Fishing;
for they did little more than dip for them into the Water, and take them up. I
make no Scruple to say, that if there had been 10,000 Ships to have loaded with
them, they might all have been filled. The Fish did not seem to stay, but
passed on to the South, that they might supply other Parts, and make way also
for those innumerable Shoals which were to come after.

Had the Quantity of White-fish been any way proportioned to the Herrings,
there would, no doubt, have been such Encouragement to the Merchants, that they
would never have given it over; but they found it would not fully answer: Not
but that there were great Quantities of Cod, and the Fish were sizeable and
good; but as they are taken with Hook and Line, they could not with any
Dispatch get a sufficient Loading, or lay up enough in large Quantities in the
Season.

The Bay of Tayne is unsafe for Ships, runs a great way up into the County,
divides Rosse from Sutherland, and ends at the Promontory of Tarbat. We found
the Town of Tayne, and some other Villages, tolerably well inhabited, and some
Trade also, occasioned principally by the Communication with the Western
Islands, and also by the Herring-fishing, the Fishing-boats from other Parts
often putting into those Ports; for all their Coast is full of Loughs and
Rivers, and other Openings, which make very good Harbors for Shipping; and
what is remarkable, some of those Loughs are infinitely full of Herrings, even
where, as they tell us, they have no Communication with the Sea, so that they
must have, in all Probability, been put into them alive by some particular
Hands, and have multiplied there, as we find at this Time, if they have not
some Communications with the Sea, which are not discovered to the Inhabitants.

We could understand no more of what the People commonly said on this Side,
than if we had been in Morocco; all the Remedy we had was, that we found most
of the Gentlemen spoke French, and some few broad Scottish. It was indeed upon
other Accounts much for our Convenience to make the common People believe we
were French.

Should we go about here to give you an Account of the Religion of the People
in this Country, it would be an unpleasant Work, and perhaps scarce gain
Credit. You would hardly believe, that in a Christian Island, as this is said
to be, there should be People who know so little of the Christian Religion, as
not to distinguish Sunday from a common Day of Labor, or the Worship of God
from an ordinary Meeting for Conversation. I am unwilling to record so
ungrateful a Truth, which may in time find Redress; but I cannot but say that
his Majesty's Gift of 1000 l. paid annually to the Assembly of Scotland, for
sending Ministers or Missionaries for the propagating Christian Knowledge in
the Highlands, is certainly one of the most needful Charities that could have
been thought of, and truly worthy of a King; and, if prudently applied, as
there is Reason to believe it is, may in time dispel that Cloud of Ignorance
that has so far overspread this unhappy Part of the Country. The People have
the Bible in their own Language, the IRS; and the Missionaries are obliged to
preach to them, and examine and catechize their Children in the IRS Language,
so that we are not to despair of having this Country as well instructed in time
as other Parts of Britain.

The Shire of Tayne, with the little Shire of Cromarty, and part of the Shire
of Inverness, comprehends the whole Country called Rosse. The first Tract
toward the South-west in the County of Rosse, is Kintail, separated from the
Isle of Sky by a narrow Firth. Next is a little Track called Glenelebeg, the
paternal Estate of the Earl of Seaforth, whose chief Seat is called Castle
Ylendoven, lying in an Island of the abovementioned Firth. Farther North, on
the same Coast, lies Loch-ew, with thick Woods, where Iron was formerly made. A
little farther North, Loch-brien runs into this County, and is remarkable for
its noble annual Fishery of Herrings.

The Peninsula which lies betwixt the Bay of Cromarty and Murray is called
Ardmeanach, upon the Shore of which stands the Town called, the Chanonry of
Ross, formerly a Bishop's See. It is pleasantly situated in a Valley betwixt
fruitful Hills. It had once a stately Cathedral and Castle, where the Bishop
dwelt. Here the late Earl of Seaforth had a noble House. Beaulieu, formerly a
pleasant and rich Abbey, lies near the Mouth of the River Farrar, and is now
possessed by the Lord Lovat. The Earl of Seaforth had near it a Castle called
Kildun. There are other Seats of ancient Families in this County, which my
Compass will not let me describe, and I shall mention them at the latter End of
my Tour, in a general List, that you may be enabled to form an Idea of the
numerous Families of Gentry which Scotland produces.

On this Coast is the Isle of Sky, lying from the West-north-west, to the
East-south-east, and bearing upon the main Island, only separated by a narrow
Straight of Water; something like as the Isle of Wight is separated from the
County of Southampton. We left this on our Right, and crossing the Mountains,
came, with as little Stay as we could, to the Loughs called Lochyol, and
Lochlochy, which run through that large Country called Lochaber, that is, ^ver
the Lochs, and which some affect to call the River Aber or Abre, i. e. the
Water which, as I said above, assists, with Loughness, or Lochness, to separate
the North Land of Scotland, from the middle Part.

This is a long and narrow Inlet of the Sea, in Length above 24 Miles, the
Depth unknown, which opening from the Irish Sea South-west, meets the River
Abre, or, as the Scots much more properly express it, the Water of Abre; for it
is rather a large Lake or Loch than a River, and receives innumerable small
Rivers into it. It rises in the Mountains of Ross, or of Glengary, within five
or six Miles from the Shore of the Lochness, or the Water of Ness, which is a
long and narrow Lake like itself; and as the Ness runs away East to Innerness,
and so into the great Gulf called Murray Firth, so the Abre, becoming
presently a Loch or Lake, always goes away more to the Southward, and sloping
South-west, runs into the Irish Seas, as above.

Lochaber is 50 Miles in a strait Line from Inverlochy to Inverness, and is one
of the most barren Countries in North Britain, though the People have Wood, Goats
and Deer in Plenty. Glenco is almost the only Town in it; noted for the
barbarous and inhuman Massacre perpetrated there by K. William's Soldiers,
quartered in those Parts, and who cut off Men, Women and Children without
Mercy. A Massacre that made a great Noise, and was universally detested; and
what made it still the more odious was, that the Commander in that bloody Work
found Friends enough to screen him from the Inquiry that was attempted to be
made into the horrid Fact, in order to find out who gave him his Orders for it.

Lochaber is noted in History for Banco, its gallant Thane, about the Year
1050, who was murdered by the Tyrant Macbeth, because of a Prophecy, That his
Posterity should enjoy the Crown for a long Series of Years: Which accordingly
happened; for his Son flying into Wales, married the Prince of North Wales's
Daughter; by whom he had Walter, afterward Steward of Scotland, from whom the
Royal Family of Stuart was descended. It was on this Story that our celebrated
Shakespeare founded his Tragedy called Macbeth.

On this Water of Abre, just at the Entrance of the Loch, was anciently a Fort
built to curb the Highlanders, on either Side, called Inverlochy. It was
formerly of great Strength, and yet often destroyed by the Danes and
Norwegians. And at the Revolution, King William caused it to be rebuilt, or
rather erected a new Fort there, which is called Castle William, as the Village
is Mary-burgh; and there is always a good Garrison kept in it for curbing the
Highlanders. It is so situated, that though it may indeed be blocked up by Land,
and distressed by a Siege, yet, as it is open to the Sea, it may constantly
receive Supplies by Shipping.

From Inverlochy to Lochness has General Wade, with the most commendable
Industry and Pains, through almost inaccessible Mountains, and Mosses, and
Morasses, made a most convenient Road, which even surpasses (the County
considered) what the Romans had done with their several Military Ways; and
shows, that the Soldiery might be made useful even in Times of Peace, and
rather a Benefit than a Burden to the Country; and at the same time so inure
them to Toil, Labor, and Hardiness, as would render them fitter for their
Country's Service in Time of War. To defend this Road from the Rage of the
Highlanders, and at the same time to keep them in Awe, the General built a
regular Fortification, which is called Fort Augustus. By this means the
Highlands, which before were inaccessible but by Highlanders, who eluded always
the Resentment of their Pursuers, are easily entered, and traversed at the
Pleasure of the King's Forces; and even the noted Rob Roy himself, (so famous
for his Excursions and Plunders on the Lowlands, and the King's Friends, and
who, notwithstanding the Proclamations, and Rewards issued for apprehending
him, could never be taken) were he alive, would not be able now to find a Place
of Refuge from his Pursuers. And this must be in time a great Help to the
civilizing of the Highlanders, as the Schools established among them (of which
more by-and-by) will be another.

At this Place we take our Leave of the Third Division, which I call the North
Land of Scotland; for this Fort, being on the South Side of the Lochaber, is
therefore called Innerlochy, as the other for the like Reason was called
Innerness.

We have nothing now remaining for a full Survey of Scotland, but the Western
Part of the Middle Division of Scotland; and this, though a large Country, yet
affords not an equal Variety with the Eastern Part of the same Division.

To traverse the Remainder of this Country, I must begin upon the Upper Tay, as
we may justly call it, where I left off, when I turned away East; and here we
have in especial manner the Countries of Badenach, Athol and Braidalbin: This
is a hilly Country indeed; but as it is watered by the Tay, and many other
pleasant Rivers which fall into it, there are several fruitful Valleys
interspersed among the Hills; nor are even the Highlands themselves, or the
Highlanders the Inhabitants, any thing so wild, untaught, or untractable, as we
have been made to believe, and as are to be found in the North Land Division,
that is to say, in Strathnavern, Ross, Tain, etc.

The Duke of Athol is Lord, I had almost said King, of this Country; and has
the greatest Number of Vassals, of any Nobleman in this, or any Part of
Scotland.

The late Duke was always an Opposer of the Union in the Parliament holden at
Edinburgh, for passing it into an Act; but he did not carry his Opposition to a
Height of Tumult and Rebellion. If he had, as some were forward to have had him
done, he would possibly at that time have bid fair to have prevented the
Conclusion of it: But the Hour was come, when the Calamities of War, which for
so many hundred Years had vexed the two Nations, were to have an End; and though
the English Government had never less Power than then in Scotland, yet the
Affair was carried through with a high Hand, all the little Tumults and Disorders
of the Rabble, as well at Edinburgh as at Glasgow, and other Places, being
timely suppressed, and others by prudent Management prevented.

The Duke has several fine Seats in this Country; as first at Dunkeld, upon the
Tay, which I mentioned before, where there was a Fight between the regular
Troops and the Highlanders, in the Beginning of the Reign of King William;
another at Huntingtour, in the Strathern, or Valley of Ern, where the Duke has
a fine Park, and great Store of Deer; which may be called his Hunting-seat,
whither he sometimes retires for Sport.

He has another Seat at the Castle of Blair, farther North, and beyond the Tay,
on the Edge of Braidalbin, upon the Banks of a clear and fine River, which
falls into the Tay a few Miles lower.

The Country of Braidalbin has not so much as a single Village in it of ten
Houses; yet from its Latin Name Albania, gives oft-times the Title of Duke to
some of the Royal Family; it is seated very near the Center of Scotland, and is
alleged to be the highest Ground in it, for that the Rivers which rise here,
are said to run every Way from this Part, some into the Eastern, and some into
the Western Seas.

The Grampian Mountains here are said to cut through Scotland. As the Country is
rough and uncultivated, the Inhabitants are a hardy Race of Men, who make
excellent Soldiers, when they are listed abroad in regular and disciplined
Troops; and I must add, that they are much civilized from what they were
formerly. These Mountains abound with Flocks of Black Cattle, Sheep, Horses,
and Goats. The Beef and Mutton are of a delicious Taste, and the Wool is valued
for its Whiteness and Softness.

The Duke of Athol, though he had not (till of late) an Estate equal to some of
the Nobility, yet was Master of more of the Superiorities, as they are called
here, than many of those who have twice his Estate; and I have been told, that
he can bring a Body of above 6000 Men together in Arms at very little Warning.

The Pomp and Grandeur in which this noble Person lives, is not to be imitated
in Great Britain; for he is served like a Prince, and maintains a greater
Equipage and Retinue, than five times his Estate would support in another
Country.

The Duke has also another Seat in Strathern, which is called Tullibardin, and
which gives Title of Marquis to the eldest Son of the House of Athol, for the
Time being. At the lower Part of this Country the River Ern falls into the Tay,
and greatly increases its Waters. This River rises far West, on the Frontiers
of the Western Highlands near Glengyl, and running through that pleasant Country
called Strathern, falls into Tay, below St. Johnston.

The present Duke is the only Peer that I know of, that is so by Statute,
rather than Patent; for his eldest Brother, the Marquis of Tullibardin, being
attainted for his Adherence to the Pretender, the Title would of course have
failed; but that (together with the Estate) it was settled by Act of Parliament
on the second Brother, who is also Lord of, or King in, the Isle of Man, and
also Lord Strange of Knocking, to both which he succeeded by the Death of his
Cousin James late Earl of Derby.

Soon after the Ern shoots forth from the Mountains, it spreads itself into a
Loch, as most of those Rivers do, called Lochern; and then runs by Duplin
Castle, the Seat of the Earl of Kinnoul, whose eldest Son is thence called Lord
Duplin. The present Earl of Kinnoul, when Lord Duplin, married the Daughter of
the Earl of Oxford, when Lord High Treasurer of England; and was, on that
Occasion, made a Peer of Great Britain, by the Title of Lord Hay of Peperdon.
His Estate here is a very good one, but not attended with Vassals and
Superiorities, as, I observed, the Duke of Athol's is. The several Owners of
this Seat having been pretty much used to reside in it, have adorned it at
several times, each according to his particular Genius. It has lately received
a new Decoration, two Wings being added for Offices as well as Ornament.

The old Building is spacious, the Rooms large, and Ceilings lofty, filled with
Furniture suitable to its outward Magnificence, particularly with abundance of
fine Paintings, some of the Royal Family, among which is one of King Charles I.
with a Letter in his Hand, held out to his Son the Duke of York, afterward
King James VII. which they said he was to have carried to France. There is also
a Statue in Brass of the same King on Horseback; a Picture of Oliver Cromwell;
another of General Monk, both from the Life. There is also a whole Length of
that Earl of Kinnoul, who was Lord Chancellor of Scotland, in the Reign of King
James VI. and King Charles I. with several other Pieces of Italian Masters of
great Value.

Duplin Castle is remarkable also for the greatest Defeat the Scots ever
received from the English, in the Reign of Edward Baliol, whom the English came
to assist. In this Battle fourscore of the Family of Lindsay perished, and of
the Family of Hay so many, that the Name had been extinguished, had not the
Chief left his Lady with Child.

From this Place we went to Brechin in Angus, formerly mentioned, an ancient
Town with a Castle finely situated; but the Grandeur of it is lost; the Family
of Panmure, to whom it belonged chiefly, having forfeited it in the late
Rebellion.

Here I shall mention the Cataract near Blair Drummond on the Keith, which
empties itself into the Tay, which makes so great a Noise among the Rocks, that
it stuns those who come near it.

We were now, after a long Mountain-ramble, come down to the Lowlands, and into
a pleasant and agreeable Country; but as we had yet another Journey to take
Westward, we had a like Prospect of a rude and wild Part of Scotland to go
through.

The Highlands of Scotland may be divided into two Parts, the West Highlands
and the North Highlands; the latter I have spoken of at large, containing the
Countries of Athol, Lochaber, Badenach, Strathspey, Innerness, Ross,
Sutherland, and Strathnavern, together with the Isles of Sky, Lewis, etc.

The West Highlands contain the Shires or Counties of Dunbritton or Dunbarton,
alias Lenox, Bute, and Argyll, which last contains the Districts of Cowal,
Knapdale, Lorn and Cantyre; the Isles of Mull, Jura, Isla, etc.

Braidalbin is sometimes reckoned a Part of the North, and sometimes of the
West Highlands.

On the Banks of the River Ern lies a very pleasant Vale, which continues from
the Tay, quite up to the Highlands, called by Claudian, Glacialis Ierne; but
now, according to the Usage of Scotland, Strathern, or the Vale of Ern. It Is an
agreeable Country, has many Gentlemen's Seats on both Sides the River; but being
near the Highlands, has often suffered by Depredations in former Times.

In it are many Roman Camps; particularly one at Ardoch; besides a Roman
Highway, toward Perth. Several Roman Medals have also been found there, and of
late two Tabulae curiously enamelled with a Sepulchral Stone. The Ochil-hills,
which run along the South Parts of Perthshire, abound with Metals and Minerals;
particularly they find good Copper, and Lapis Calaminaris; and at Glen-lion
they meet with Lead. Here is great Want of Coal; but their excellent Peat, and
abundance of Wood, supply that Defect.

The Family of Montrose, whose Chief was sacrificed for the Royal Cause in the
late Civil Broils, had a strong Castle here called Kincardin, which was
demolished in those Wars, and is not rebuilt. The Castle of Drummond is almost
in the same Condition, b^^ng deserted by its Owners; the two late Earls of
^^^th, Father and Grandfather of the present Earl, were forced into Exile for
adhering to the late King James II. and the Pretender. King James had the
latter in such Esteem, that he not only made him a Duke, and Knight of the
Garter, but Governor to the Chevalier.

The Western Highlands, properly so called, are the only remaining Part of
Scotland, which as yet I have not touched upon. This is that particular
Country, which a certain Man in King James II.'s Time called the Kingdom of
Argyll, complimenting King James upon having conquered two Kings, when he
suppressed the Duke of Monmouth, whom in Derision they called the little King
of Lime, and the Earl of Argyll, whom they called, with much more Propriety,
the great King of the Highlands.

But though the greatest Part of these Western Highlands may be said to be
subject to the House of Argyll, or, to speak more properly, to the Family or
Clan of the Campbells, of whom the Duke of Argyll is the Chief, yet some of the
Western Gentlemen are not so blindly guided by their Chiefs as those in the
North; nor, when led on, are they so apt to commit Outrages and Violence.

But though the People are different in these Western and Northern Highlands, the
Countries are much alike; only in the former there are not such extensive Woods
of Fir-trees, nor such Quantities of large Eagles.

The People also dress alike in both, in the Played and the Trouse; go naked
from below the Knee to the Mid-thighs; wear a Durk and a Pistol at their
Girdle, and a Target at their Shoulder.

Some reckon the Shire of Braidalbin to belong, as I have said, to these
Western Highlands; not that it is West in its Situation, for it is rather
North; but, I suppose, because one Part of it is inhabited by the Campbells,
whose Clan, as I have observed, generally possesses most of the West Highlands.

But if they claim the Country, they will have no Reason to boast of the
People, who are, if I may give my Opinion, some of the most barbarous and
ill-governed of all the Highlands of Scotland; desperate in Fight, fierce in
Conversation, apt to quarrel, mischievous, and even Murderers in their Passion.

At the Fight which happened at Gillekranky in Athol, against the Viscount of
Dundee, they tell us a Story of a Combat between an English Soldier and a
Highlander. The Englishman understood the Back-sword very well, but the
Scotchman received all the Blows upon his Target; and yet at the same time laid
so hard at his Antagonist with his Broad-sword, that he cut him in two or three
Places; at which the Englishman enraged, rather than discouraged, cried out to
him, You Dog, come out from behind the Door, and fight like a Man; but the
Scot, though as brave as the other, knew better things; he pursued him, in short,
so closely, that he was just going to kill him, when some of the Regiment, that
saw him distressed, came up and rescued him, and took the Highlander Prisoner.

It is hard to say whether the Northern or Western Highlanders make the best
Soldiers. It Is certain they both of them are defrauded of an Honor due to
them, when we attribute several gallant Achievements to the Irish Battalions
Abroad, which were performed by the Scots. Thus in particular it is said, the
Irish Troops beat the Germans out of Cremona, after they had got Possession of
the Town, and had taken the French General, the Marshal Viller^y, Prisoner:
That the Irish Battalions in the Spanish Service behaved gallantly in Sicily,
and so on many extraordinary Occasions. Now though it is true, that the Scots
came originally from Ireland, yet it is to be observed, that these Soldiers were
most of them Scots Highlanders, who, upon all Occasions get over into France,
there list among the Irish Troops; nay, in the late Wars, it has been observed,
whole Regiments of Highlanders have been raised for the Service, who, when they
were got Abroad, would take the first Opportunity to desert, and go over to the
French, and so list in the Irish Battalions, their original Countrymen, and who
still speak the same Language.

Leaving the Country about Brechin, and the Lowlands of Strathern, we went away
West; but were presently interrupted by a vast inland Sea, rather than a Lake,
called Lochlomond. It is indeed a Sea, and looked like it from the Hills from
whence we first descried it. It contains thirty Islands, three of which have
Churches, and several of the rest are inhabited. The chief is Inchmurin, about
two Miles and a half in Length, fruitful in Corn and Grass, and abounds with
Deer, which the Scottish Kings were accustomed to hunt there. The others most
remarkable are Nachastel, so called from the old Castle in it. Inchdavanan,
noted for Broom, abundance of wild Berries, pleasant Habitations, Gardens and
Fruit Trees. Inchonnaugan, noted for Birch-trees and Cornfieldsd. Inchnolaig,
noted for Yew-trees, which grow nowhere else in these Islands. And Rouglash,
where the Lord of Macfarlan has a handsome Seat on the East Side of the Lake.
Kilmaronoch, a fine Seat once belonging to the Earls of Cassils; but now to the
Earl of Dondonald. Buchanan-castle, and several others.

This Lake or Loch is one of the largest in Scotland, being more than 20 Miles
long, and generally eight Miles in Breadth, though at the North End of it it is
not near so broad. It receives many Rivers into it, but empties itself into the
Firth of Clyde, at one Mouth.

This Lake abounds with Fish of several Sorts, particularly a Sort called
Poans, and by some Pollacks, peculiar to it; a Kind of Eel, very delicious to
eat. This gave Occasion to the Mistake of Authors, who said this Lake had Fish
without Fins. So the Beams fastened together in some Places of the Lake, by the
Inhabitants, and covered with Turf, for them to have recourse to in time of
War, and to move from Part to Part, gave Rise to the Fable of floating Islands
here.

The famous Grampian Mountains begin near this Lake, and run Northward toward
Aberdeen.

The County of Lenox, on which this Lake lies, is in Length about 24 Miles, and
in Breadth about twenty. The lower Part is very fertile in Corn; the higher is
hilly, moorish, and more fit for Pasture. It is the paternal Estate and
Property of the Stuarts, and extends itself from both Sides the Levin, which is
the River that (as I said before) empties the Lochlomond into the Clyde. On
this Side, Eastward, Lenox joins to Monteith, which is Part of Perthshire, and
runs up for some Length on the East Side of the Loch, and on the West Side it
extends to the Edge of the Lochloing, and a great way North, almost to the
Mountains of Lochaber.

All our Writers of the Description of Lenox enlarge upon its Family of
Stuarts, as proceeding from the Royal Line of Scotland; and, in some respect,
the Royal Line may be said to proceed from this House, Henry Lord Darnley,
eldest Son of Matthew Earl of Lenox, having been married to Queen Mary, by whom
he was Father of King James the Sixth and First. He was most barbarously
murdered; the Queen was unjustly blamed for it; whereas Murray projected it,
Bothwell put it in Execution, Morton and others were privy to it; as the said
Earl Morton, and others who suffered for it, declared at the last.

From this Earl Matthew descended Charles Duke of Lenox and Richmond, who dying
without Issue, in 1672. the Estate and Honor devolved to King Charles II. as
Heir at Law, which he conferred on his natural Son by the Duchess of
Portsmouth, and to whom he gave the Surname of Lenox; from whom is descended
the present Duke of Richmond and Lenox.

The Buchanans, among many illustrious Names, are originally of this County,
whence the famous George Buchanan, one of the great Ornaments of his Age for
all polite Learning, and not hitherto equalled by any Poet or Historian since
his Time, for smooth and elegant Latin. But his excessive Bias for the Earl of
Murray, and his inveterate Prejudice against the unfortunate Queen Mary, has
quite lost him the Title of Impartiality; insomuch, that his History of
Scotland was condemned by Act of Parliament, when first published, Anno 1582.
Whence Sir George Mackenzie took Occasion to say, He was both Decus and Dedecus
Patriae, the Grace and Disgrace of his Country.

Dunbarton is the County Town of Lenoxshire. It was once considerable for its
Trade, which is now much decayed; but is still remarkable for its Castle, one
of the strongest by Nature in Europe; being secured by the River on one Side,
the Firth of Clyde on the other, by an impassable Morass on the third, and the
fourth is a Precipice: Of this Castle the Earl of Hay is Governor.

Take Buchanan's Description of it, to the following Effect: Betwixt the
Conflux of Clyde and Leven is a Plain about a Mile long, at the End of which,
where the Rivers join, is a Rock with two Summits; on the Westermost is a
Watchtower, affording an extended Prospect into the neighboring Country. The
Eastern Summit is lower; and betwixt them are Steps cut out of the Rock,
passable only by one Man at a time. When any Part is cut or falls off from the
Rock, it emits a sulphurous Smell. At the upper Part of the Castle is a great
Rock of Loadstone. The Rock is very steep on all Sides but toward the Clyde,
where the Ascent is more easy; and betwixt the two Rocks is a Space of Ground
enclosed by Art and Nature, which contains many Houses, makes a safe Harbor
for Ships, under Protection of the Castle, and opens a Passage for Boats to the
very Gate. On the Ascent in the Middle are Houses which look like another
Castle, separated from the former. The same serves for a Ditch on the West, and
the Clyde on the South; and the Tide comes up to the East Side; and on the
North, where the Rock is steep, is a green Plain. Three Wells are in the Castle
always flowing with Water, besides many Springs; so that it may well be deemed
impregnable. The Town lies about half a Mile from it, on the Bank of the Levin.

The Roman Wall, which begins at Abercorn, runs through this County, and ends at
Kilpatrick on Clyde, a Regality of the Lord Blantyre's.

We now entered the large extended Country of Argyll, or the Western Islands,
commonly called, the Shire of Innerary, from the principal Town, where the Duke
of Argyll has his Residence. It comprehends, as I have said, Argyllshire,
Knapdale, Caval, Kintyre, and Lorn, with the Western Isles of Coll,
Illcollimkil, Isla, Jura, Lismore, Mull, Tereff, and Wist. It is 120 Miles
long, and 40 broad. It joins to Perthshire on the East, to Lochaber on the
North-east, to the Isles on the North-west, and to the Irish Sea on the South.

Kintyre is a Peninsula, which runs 30 Miles out into the Irish Sea, and is no
more than 13, some say 16 Miles from Ireland. Campbel-town, made a Royal Burgh
by King William, with a safe Harbor for Ships, lies in this County. Camden
says, the People of this Part, formerly made Excursions into Ireland, and
possessed themselves of the Provinces of Gline and Roll.

Knapdale joins to Kintyre on the North by a narrow Neck of Land, scarce a Mile
over, through which the People of the Country draw their small Vessels, to avoid
sailing round to Kintyre. It abounds with Lakes and Bays, several of which
contain Islands and Castles; and the Soil is generally fitter for Pasturage
than Cultivation; yet it produces Corn in great Plenty.

Lorn is the pleasantest and most fruitful Part of the Shire of Argyll. The
Castle of Dunstafage stands in this County, formerly a Royal Seat, where
several of the ancient Kings are buried. The Family of Campbell was made Earls
by King James II. of Scotland. They were a long time Lords Justices General of
the Kingdom; but surrendered that Office to King Charles I. on a valuable
Equivalent, besides having the Jurisdiction of Argyll and the Isles, and are
still Great Masters of the King's Household in Scotland. They derive their
Surname from the Castle of Campbell, and according to Camden, their Pedigree
from the ancient Kings of Argyll, by a long Series of Ancestors. The Earl of
Loudon, the Earl of Braidalbin, the Earl of Isla, and other great Men, are of
this Family.

The whole Shire of Argyll, taking in the above Parts, has seven Bays of the
Sea entering into it, called, by the Inhabitants, Lochs; the chief is Lochfyn,
famous for the Number and Goodness of its Herrings; it is said to be about 40
Miles in Length, and at the narrowest Place about four in Breadth. Lochew,
according to Bishop Lesly, is almost as large as Lochlomond, and contains
twelve Islands, in one of which is the Castle of Enconel, in another that of
Gleurquhart, and where it enters the Sea, abounds with Salmon. The Seacoast of
Argyll, or as far as Lochfyn, abounds with high Rocks, and black Mountains
covered with Heath, which afford Pasturage for Black Cattle and Deer. The Black
Cattle run for the most part wild, but are excellent Meat; and their Fat, when
boiled, does not congeal, as others, but continues for some Days like Oil. The
Inhabitants make great Profit of them by selling them to the Lowlanders.

The Duke of Argyll is hereditary Sheriff of this County. It Is an old Right of
this Family, that when they marry any Daughter, their Vassals are obliged to
pay their Portion, and are taxed in order to it, according to the Number of
their Cattle.

From the Mull of Cantyre you see Ireland very plain, it being not above 15 or
16 Miles from the Point of Land, which they call the Mull, to the Fair
Foreland, on the Coast of Colrain, on the North of Ireland. In the Mouth of
this Sea of Clyde lies a Rock, somewhat like the Bass in the Firth of Forth, or
of Edinburgh, not for Shape, but for this Particular, that at the Bass the
Solan Geese are noted to come in the Season of the Fishery, and then fly back
again. This Island is called the Ailzey.

I shall here mention the Isles of Bute and Arran. Buchanan says, that of Bute
is eight Miles long, and four broad; Bishop Lesly, that it is 10 Miles long. It
is fruitful in Corn and Pasturage. It has a Royal Burgh called Rothsay, with an
ancient Castle. From this the Royal Family of Stuart is supposed to derive
their Origin: And Duke of Rothsay is now one of the Titles of the Prince of
Wales. It has another Castle called the Castle of Kermes, and four Churches.
This Island lies in the Mouth of the Clyde, eight Miles West from Arran, and is
remarkable for its Herring-fishing. The Isle of Bute gives Title of Earl to a
Branch of the noble Family of Hamilton, who is the chief Proprietor, and
heretable Coroner of the Island, and has a Seat at Rosa; as Callartine has at
Kermes, and Stuart of Ascog another. Queen Mary, before she married Lord
Darnley, conferred upon him the Title of Duke of Rothsay. Near Bute are two
small Islands, called Great and Little Cumbrays, the Property of the Earl of
Glasgow.

The Isle of Arran, which with Bute make up one Sheriffdom, lies also in the
Mouth of the Clyde, 24 Miles in Length, and near 16 broad, fruitful in Corn and
Pasturage. It is very well inhabited on the Coast, and is a safe and good
Harbor, covered by Lamlash or the Holy Isle. It has two Churches, and several
Castles, of which that of Brodich is the strongest and most noted, and is the
Residence of the Hamilton Family when in these Parts, who also have a Forest
here containing about 400 Head of Deer; and the Island gives Title of Earl to
the Duke of that Name. The Island has several Rivers in it, which abound with
Salmon, as the Sea about it does with Herrings, Cod and Whitings.

The People are Protestants, speak the Irish Language, and are still composed
of several Tribes or Clans. The most ancient are Mac-Lewis, of French
Extraction, in English named Fullerton, and Lairds of Kirk-Michael, where they
reside.

These two Islands are surrounded with a tumultous and dangerous Sea,
especially in a hard South-west Wind, which brings the Sea rolling in upon them
in a frightful manner. But the above Harbor of Lamlash stands them in great
stead in this Case.

Now we are upon these Western Coasts, I shall mention, that in the Month of
August 1740. an Attempt was made by Diving, to come at one of the largest Ships
of the Spanish Armada, stranded in 1588. on these Coasts. Another was dived for
some Years ago; but the Sand being loose, it turned to little or no Account.
The other, which was lost near Portin-cross, was begun to be searched after by
Sir Archibald Grant, and Captain Roe, in August 1740. and the following was the
Account that was transmitted to us, which we the rather insert, as it gives
some Notion of the Operation by the Diving-engine.

The Country People had preserved by Tradition the Spot pretty near where she
sunk, and gave them all the Information they were able: Immediately the Diverse
went to Work, and swept for her, which they do thus: They have a long Line,
which they sink with Leads; one End of the Rope is fixed to one Boat, and the
other End to another; they row; and whatever interrupts them, the Diver goes
down to make a Discovery. They soon happened on the Place where the Ship lay,
which is scarce a Quarter of a Mile from the Shore, in ten Fathom and a Foot
Water. Captain Roe immediately went down, and found the Vessel to be very
entire, to have a great Number of Guns on board, but to be full of Sand. The
first Thing he fixed upon was a Cannon, which lay upon the Sand at the Head of
the Ship: To this he fixed his Tongs, which are made of strong Bars of Iron;
they are open when they are let down, and have Teeth which join into one
another. As soon as they are fixed upon any thing, he gives the Signal, when
they are made to shut, and the heavier the Subject, the closer they hold. The
Cannon was drawn up with a good deal of Difficulty; it measures full nine Feet,
is of Brass, greenish-coloured, but nothing the worse. On the Breach there is a
Rose, with an E on the one Side and an R on the other, with this Inscription,
Richard and John Philips, Brethren, made this Piece, Anno 1584. But we may be
allowed to observe, That by the E. R. on the Cannon, which denotes Eliz.
Regina, and the Rose, as also the English Inscription of the Makers, it should
seem to us, that it could not belong to the Armada; but rather to some English
Ship, that might have been cast away there. Ten of these Brass Cannon, and ten
Iron ones, have been since carried into Dublin; and they hope to recover sixty
out of this Ship. The Guns were all charged, and the Metal of some, by lying so
long under Water, moulders away like Clay.

Several People have scraped the Iron Guns, which are as moldy as Bricks; and
by keeping the Metal some time in their Hands, it grows so hot, that they are
not able to bear it; but when it is exposed two or three Hours in open Air, it
loses all its burning Quality. This is accounted for in the following Manner;
viz.

Dr. Tournefort, a French Physician, in his Voyage to the Levant, Part I. says:
It is certain, that the Filings of Iron, steeped in common Water, will grow
considerably warm, and much more so in Sea Water. And if you mingle therewith
some Sulphur powdered, you will really see this Mixture burn.

Sir Isaac Newton, in the last Edition of his Optics, Page 354. says: That
even the gross Body of Sulphur, powdered with an equal Weight of Iron Filings,
and a little Water made into a Paste, acts upon the Iron; and in five or six
Hours grows too hot to be touched, and emits a Flame.

Now it is certain, that cast Iron contains a great deal of Bitumen or Sulphur
in its Composition, and that Iron in its sensible Quality effects Heat, and
cannot be perceived without the Admission of Air; which is the Reason why the
Scrapings should grow hot, although the Guns are actually cold to the Touch.

As I have given Accounts of several public Charities, and other laudable
Institutions, in the Southern Parts of Britain, it would be inexcusable not to
mention the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge in the
Highlands, it being one of the worthiest Designs of the present Age; and as we
shall include in it also a Description of the said Highlands, and of the Scots
Islands besides; we cannot insert it in a more proper Place. It is comprehended
in a Letter written June 1739. from a Gentleman who is a great Encourager of
this noble Institution, to his Friend; and is as follows: "The Extent of the
Highlands of Scotland is much greater than has commonly been imagined: From the
Mull of Kintyre to Farohead in Strathnavern, is more than 200 Miles in a strait
Line from South to North; and from Farohead to John a Grot's House, is above 60
Miles along the North and Northern Coast of the Continent: Besides, there is a
vast Number of inhabited Islands, of which some are both large and populous:
For instance, Jura is 24 Miles long; Isla, 16; Mull, 24; Sky, 48; Long Island,
comprehending Bara, Southuist, Northuist, and Jews, 100; and many others, from
two to 12 Miles in Length. The Isles of Orkney and Zetland are to be considered
by themselves; for to Orkney alone belong thirty-three inhabited Islands, one
of which is 24 Miles, and another 12, in Length. In Zetland there are about 30
inhabited Islands, some of which are six, others seven Miles long. Many of
these Islands lie at considerable Distances from the Continent, and from one
another, and are in Extent about one half of Scotland.

"In this large Track of Country, Ignorance and Superstition greatly prevail:
In some Places, the Remains even of Paganism are still to be found; and in many
others, the Reformation from Popery has never yet obtained. The Parishes where
Ministers are settled, are commonly of very great Extent, some 30, 40, 50 Miles
long, and generally divided by impassable Mountains and Lakes; so that most of
the Inhabitants, being destitute of all Means of Knowledge, and without any
Schools to educate their Children, are entirely ignorant of the Principles of
Religion and Virtue, live in Idleness and Poverty, have no Notion of Industry,
or Sense of Liberty; are subject to the Command of their Popish disaffected
Chieftains, who have always opposed the propagating Christian Knowledge, and
the English Tongue, that they might with less Difficulty keep their miserable
Vassals in a slavish Dependence. The poorer Sort have only the Irish Tongue,
and little Correspondence with the civilized Parts of the Nation, and only come
among them to pillage the more industrious Inhabitants: They are brought up in
Principles of Tyranny and Arbitrary Government, depend upon foreign Papists as
their main Support, and the native Irish as their best Correspondents and
Allies. This has been the Source of all the Rebellions and Insurrections in
that Country since the Revolution.

"On the other hand, they are naturally of a quick Genius, of great bodily
Strength, inured to Hardship. Their Country is commodiously situated for the
noblest Fishery in the World, of which our Neighbors have made immense Profit.
They have Mines and Woods, and great Quantity of Black Cattle, and vast Tracks
of improveable Land, which lie waste for want of Industry in the People, and
not considering the Advantage of their Situation. They are a numerous and
prolifick People; and, if reformed in their Principles and Manners, and
usefully employed, might be made a considerable Accession of Power and Wealth
to Great Britain. Some Clans of Highlanders, well instructed in the Arts of
War, and well affected to the Government, would make as a^e and formidable a
Body for their Country's Defense, as Great Britain, or Switzerland, or any Part
of Europe, are able to produce.

"In the Year 1701, some Gentlemen of Edinburgh first considered of proper
Methods for civilizing and reforming them; and agreed, that the setting up of
Schools in different and convenient Places, for the instructing of their Youth
in the English Tongue, and Principles of the Christian Religion, and disposing
them to Virtue and Industry, would be the most likely and effectual Means. They
joined in a voluntary Subscription among themselves, and engaged as many others
in it as they could, which laid the first Foundation of this great and public
Design. They soon found the Work too heavy a Burden for a few private Hands,
and made Application to her late Majesty Queen Anne, who was graciously pleased
to approve and recommend the same by her Royal Proclamation, in the Year 1708:
and in 1709. granted her Letters Patent, constituting and appointing a certain
Number of the Subscribers to be a Society, or Body Politic, by the Name of,
The Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge in the Highlands,
and Islands, etc. with full Powers to receive Donations of Money, etc. and to
purchase Lands, etc. not exceeding 2000 l. a Year; and with the Profits and
yearly Interest of the same to erect and maintain Schools, with many other
Privileges and Regulations. The Lords of Session, or Judges in Scotland,
according to her Majesty's Commission, nominated 82 Subscribers to be the first
Members of the Society, all of them Persons of the best and most distinguished
Characters; who at their first General Meeting chose a President, a Treasurer,
a Secretary, and other Officers. They also chose a Committee of Fifteen, who
meet every Month, or oftener, as they have Occasion. There is a General Meeting
of the whole Society every three Months, when they assume new Members, make
general Regulations, give Orders to the Committee, and receive their Accounts.
All Proceedings, both of the Committee, and of the General Meeting, are
recorded in distinct Books, which are always open to the Examination of every
Contributor. The Names of the Contributors are kept in a distinct Register with
an Account of the several Benefactions.

"In the Year 1710. they began to settle Schools in such Places as had never
been reformed from Heathenism: And their capital Stock having yearly increased
by the liberal Contributions of many Persons of all Ranks in Great Britain, and
amounting to above 10000 l. most of which is laid out upon good Security, they
have increased their Schools in Proportion. Their Number at present is about
100, where above 4000 are taught gratis, to read, write, Arithmetic, and
Psalmody. Many of the poorer Scholars have a weekly Allowance for their
Maintenance, and Clothes and Books provided for them. Great Care is taken, that
the Schoolmasters are Men of Probity, Capacity, and well affected to the
Government; and they are obliged, besides the teaching the Children in the
Schools, to instruct those in the Principles of Religion who are too old to
come to School, and at too great a Distance from the Parish Church. Many Popish
Parents have at length permitted their Children to be instructed.

"This Society has appointed Persons of Character and Consideration to be
Visitors of their Schools, and to examine the Conduct and Diligence of the
Schoolmasters, and the Proficiency of the Scholars, and to transmit Accounts
to them at Edinburgh. All possible Care is taken to manage the Money to the
best Advantage, not a Farthing being diverted to any other Purpose; and all the
principal Officers of the Society serve gratis. The Success of the Undertaking
has answered all the Pains and Expense of the Society: There appears a great
Disposition in the rising Generation to be instructed; many have learned to
read the Scriptures, and attend Divine Service in English, where formerly the
Irish Tongue was only understood. Several of the Scholars are capable of
assisting the Masters; and some of them of being Masters of the Society's
Schools. Many of them have attained to such Degrees of Knowledge, as to be
admitted to the Celebration of the Lord's Supper. The Face of Reformation and
Virtue begins to appear everywhere; and there is Reason to apprehend, that in
a few Years, Ignorance, Popery, and the Irish Language, will be utterly
extirpated; and in their stead, Virtue, Loyalty, and Industry, will take Place.

"Nevertheless, the present Fund is far from being sufficient to the Vastness
of the Design, as appears from the Report of the Commissioners, appointed by
his late Majesty King George, Anno 1716, to inquire into the State of the
Highlands and Islands of Scotland, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament of the
preceding Session, who gave it as their Opinion, That no Method was so likely
to reduce these Countries to a State of Peace among themselves, and hearty
Subjection to the present Government, as that of establishing Schools among
them; and that over and above the present Number, one hundred and fifty more
were absolutely necessary to render the Design fully effectual.

"This Report had so good an Effect, that it was enacted, ( Anno 4 Georgii) in
the Act for vesting the forfeited Estates in Trustees, etc. 'That a Sum not
exceeding 20000 l. shall be appropriated toward making a capital Stock, for a
yearly Interest or Income, out of the Moneys which shall arise by Sale of the
said Estates which are in Scotland, toward erecting and maintaining Schools in
the Highlands, etc. And in the Act (6 Georgii) for laying a Duty on wrought
Plate, there is a Proviso, That nothing therein shall invalidate the said
Provision for Schools in the Highlands, etc. But notwithstanding this
charitable Provision of the Legislature, it is much to be lamented, that neither
that Country, nor this Society, ever reaped any Benefit by it, the Produce of
the said Estates having been applied to other Purposes; whereby the reforming
and civilizing of that Country is left to depend very much on private
Contribution.

"I must not forget to observe, That the Society's Charter extends to Popish
and Infidel Countries beyond the Seas, and that four Missionaries are
maintained for converting the native Indians in America to the Christian Faith;
three of which are stationed on the Frontiers of New England, between our
Settlements and those of French Canada, by which Means the Indians in those
Parts will more easily be kept in Subjection to our Government. The Charge of
these three is in a great measure defrayed out of an Estate left to the Society
by a late worthy Clergyman in England for that Purpose. The other Missionary is
entirely supported at the Society's Charge in the new Colony of Georgia; where
several of the poorer People are gone to reside.

"And to render this Design more fully a national Benefit, his present Majesty,
from an earnest Desire to promote the Good of his Subjects in all Parts of his
Dominions, was graciously pleased, in the Year 1738, to grant his Royal
additional Charter, to cause such Children as they should find proper, to be
instructed in Husbandry, Housewifry, and Manufactures. The Society is taking
all proper Measures for erecting Working-schools; and have good Encouragement
to hope, that the landed Gentlemen in the Highlands and Isles will not suffer
themselves to be outdone by their Protestant Neighbors in Ireland, who took
the first Hint from their Design; but will, like them, let out and make Grants
of small Parcels of Ground to build their Schools, and for Kitchen-gardens and
Agriculture; and for the raising of Hemp and Flax for the Linen Manufacture,
which is now so greatly improved in that Country. This is the distinct State of
the Case, in all the Circumstances and Steps of it.

"As this Undertaking is not the Work of a Party or Faction, but the common
Cause of Christianity, and an Attempt to civilize vast Numbers of People, near
half a Million, and make them useful to Society, who have been in a great
measure useless, and in some Circumstances very hurtful to it; it is
apprehended, That the Wealthy and Well-disposed, who have an hearty Zeal for
the Honor of God, and the Good of the Souls of Men, a true Love for their
Country, and the public Welfare, or a due Concern for the Protestant Religion,
and the present happy Establishment, cannot easily find any Instance of
Usefulness more likely to turn to Account, or capable of answering more noble
and extensive Purposes of Good."



Thus far this Gentleman: We shall add, That his Majesty gives 1000 l. per
Annum toward this noble Design.

I shall here subjoin the following List of the principal Seats of the Nobility
and Gentry in the respective Counties of North Britain, having by the Course of
my Tour, out of one County into another, as it was most convenient to me, not
been able to confine myself to a Description of any one entire County in one
Place.

Principal Seats in the County of March or Merse. Polwarth, Earl of Marchmont
's; Blackader, Sir J. Hume 's; Har^ass, Sir Roger Hay 's; Allenbank, Sir Robert
Stewart 's; Nishet, Car 's of Cavers* Langton, Cockburn 's; Mertin, Sir William
Scot 's; Heisel and Hume Castle, Earl of Hume 's; Swinton, Sir J. Swinton 's;
Coldenknows, Mr. Daes 's. Teviotdale or Roxburgh. Flems, Duke of Roxburgh 's;
Bridgout, Sir William Kerr 's; Marlefield, Sir William Bennet 's; Kingdale, Sir
William Scot 's; Ancram, Sir John Scot 's; Cavers, Archibald Douglass 's;
Riddal, Sir Walter Riddal 's; Wooley and Stobs, Sir Gilbert Elliot 's;
Bransholm, Duke of Buccleugh's, etc. Annandale. Wester-hall, Sir John Johnstoun
's; Lither-hall, Mr. To. Johnstann 's; Lockwood, Marquis Annandale 's;
Applegirth, Sir John Jarden 's; Kelhead, Sir William Douglass 's; Springkell,
Sir Patrick Maxwell 's; Hawmains, Sir John Caruther 's; Castle-milk, Sir John
Douglass 's; Dornoch, -- Douglass 's; Kelburn, Thomas Scot 's; Erkleton,
William Elliot 's; Langholm, -- Melvin 's; Ramersk^ll, T. Caruther 's; Denby,
Jo. Caruther 's; Drumlanrig, Duke of Queensberry 's; Terecles, Earl of
Nithsdale 's; Closburn, Kilpatrick 's. Annandale and Nithsdale make up only one
Shire, but are distinct Stewarties.

East Lothian. North Berwick, Sir Hugh Dalrymple 's; Divleton, Mr. Nisbet 's;
Yester, Marquis Twedale 's; Seaton and Winton, Earl of Winton 's; Leith, Mr.
Heyburn 's; Salton, Mr. Fletcher 's; Elphingston, Lord Primrose 's; Buyers, Earl
Hopton 's; Hermiston, Mr. Sinclair 's; Hales, Sir James Dalrymple 's;
Lidington, Lord Blantyre 's; Ormiston, Mr. Cockburn 's; Tynningham, Earl of
Haddington 's; Broxburn, Duke of Roxburgh 's; Newbaith, Sir William Baird 's;
Banereeth, Lord Elibank 's; Bell, Lord Beelhaven 's; Spot, Lord David Hays 's;
Gilmerton, Sir. Fr. Kinlock 's, etc. Mid Lothian. Holyrood-house, the King 's;
Dalkeith, Duke of Buccleugh 's; Newbottle, Marquis of Lothian 's; Dalhousie,
Earl of Dalhousie 's; Roseberry, Earl of Roseberry 's; Borthwick, Sir I.
Dalrymple 's; Rosline, -- Sinclair 's; Cranstoun, Sir I. Dalrymple 's;
Cranstoun Ridel, Viscount Oxenford 's; Preston-hall, Lord Justice Clerk;
Smetoun, Sir Ja. Richardson 's; Roystoun, Sir Ja. Mackenzie 's; Barntoun, Earl
of Rutherglen 's; Elphinstoun, Viscount Primrose 's; Haltoun, Earl of
Lauderdale's; Arnistoun, Mr. To. Dundass 's; Shank, late Mackenzie 's; Pinkie,
Marquis Twedele 's; Addistoun, Mr. Gibson 's; Collingtoun, Sir Ja. Fowls 's;
Bonningtoun, Sir To. Chesly 's; Melvin Castle, Lord Ross 's; Cranstoun, Mr. W.
Maitland 's; Inch, Sir Alexander Gilmore 's; Priestfield, Sir Ja. Dick 's;
Wolmet, -- Wallace 's; Dredon, G. Lockhart 's; Corstorfin, Lord Forrester 's.
West Lothian, or Linlithgowshire. Linlithgow, the King's; Cragy-hall, Marquis
of Annandale 's; Gogar, Sir Andrew Morton 's; Newliston, Earl of Stair 's;
Kenneil, Duke of Hamilton 's; Dalmeny, Earl of Roseberrie 's; Caridden, Earl of
Dalhousie 's; Bineis, Sir F. Dalzeil 's; Hoptoun, Earl of Hoptoun 's;
Blackness, a Garrison. Shire of Selkirk. Hanging-shaw, -- Murray 's; Whitford,
Robert Scot 's; Newark, Lord Elibank 's; Minto, Sir Gilbert Elliot 's. Shire of
Peebles, or Twedale. Nidpath, Earl of March's; Traquair, Earl of Traquair's;
Davick, Sir Ja. Nasemith's. Other Seats are those called; Pern, Grieston,
Cardron, Ormisten, Horseburgh-castle, Smithfield, Darlihall, Manners-castle,
Pos^^-Caverhille, Barns, Drumelzier, Stenhop, Pomud, Wilkiston, Hawkshaw,
Kinglidores, Kuttlehall, Littlehop, Hartrey, Skirlin, Fowlege, Lower Urd,
Quota, Urd Church, Halmire, Romano-Drokel. And many others.

Galloway. Clarie, Glaston and Garlies, Earl of Galloway 's; Castle-Kenmure,
Viscount of Kenmure 's; Castle-Kenedy, formerly Earl of Cassil 's, now Earl of
Stair 's; Dunskey, belonging to the Adairs; Garthland, to the Macdowals;
Lochnaw, to the Agnews; Raveston, Stewart 's of Castlemilk; Sorbie, Colonel
James Stewart 's; Mockrum, Sir James Dunbar 's; Baldon, Lady Mary Hamilton 's;
Crugulton, Clary, Cuthbert, Cardonesse, Ruscow; and many others. Cunningham.
The Cone, Kennedy 's; Craigy, Sir T. Wallace 's; Dunchanan, Sir J. Ferguson 's;
Askins, Earl of Dundonald 's; Closeburn, Sir T. Kilpatrick 's; Girvenmains, Sir
T. Kennedy 's; Stair, Earl of Stair 's; Euterkin, Cunningham 's; Garthgirth,
Chambers 's; Capington, Sir W. Cunningham 's; Adamton, Blair 's; Corsby,
Fullerton 's; Kyle, Crawford 's; Kilbirny, Lord Viscount Garnock 's. Renfrew.
Paisley, Earl of Dundonald 's; Castle-Cruikston and Inchinnen, late Duke of
Lenox 's; Cordonal, Lord Blantyre 's; Nether-Pollock, Sir John Maxwell 's;
Arskine, Lord Blantyre 's; Castle-Semple, Lord Semple 's; Greenock, Sir J. Shaw
's; Houston, Houston 's; Stainly, Johnston 's; Finlaston, Earl of Glencairn 's;
Pollock, Sir R. Pollock 's; Ardgouan, Sir. A. Stewart 's; and many others,
besides Ellersly, of which was the Family of the great Wallace. Clydsdale.
Douglas Castle, Duke of Douglas 's; Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton 's; Carmichael,
Earl of Hyndford 's Halk-head, Lord Rosse 's; Carnwarth, Mr. Lockhart 's; Lee,
Sir -- Lockhart 's; Malesley, Mr. Carmichael 's; Crawford, Earl of Selkirk 's;
Lamington, Mr. Baillie 's; Rosehall, Sir James Hamilton 's Torrence, -- Stewart
's; Dolphington, Mr. Brown 's; etc. Stirlingshire. The chief Families of this
County are the Levingstons, of whom the Earl of Callendar, a Branch of the
Family of Lithgow, had a Seat nere at Callendar-Castle, and was hereditary
Sheriff of County; and (...) ^mings, who ^ve their Seats at Cum^rr^, which they
had from King R^ Bruce, for their noble Service in Defense of their Country;
the Lord Elphinston, who has ^is Seat at Elphinston-Castle; the Murrays, S^,
Grahams, Napers, Buchanans, Bruces, Stirlings, etc. Other Seats here are,
Bannockburn, Sir H. Paterson 's; Kilsyth, Viscount Kilsyth 's; Dunipace, Sir
Archibald Primrose 's; Keir, Mr. Stirling 's; Polhouse, Mr. Rollo 's;
Herbertshire, Mr. Stirling 's; Kilearn, Mr. Graham 's; Carden, Mr. Stirling 's,
etc.

Lenox. Mugdock-Castle, Duke of Montrose 's; Roseneath, Duke of Argyll 's;
Rosedue, Colquhon 's; Ardincaple, Mackalan 's; and many others. Argyllshire.
Lochgaer, Sir J. Campbel 's; Kilchurn, Earl of Braidalbin 's; and many others
of the Campbels, Macdowgals, etc. Perthshire. Blair-Castle and Hunting-Tower,
Duke of Athol 's; Taymouth, Earl of Braidalbin 's; Methuen, Mr. Smith 's;
Kincardin, Duke of Montrose 's; Duplin, Earl of Kinnoul 's; Stobhall, Earl of
Perth 's; Machiney and Incheffrey, Viscount Strathallan's; Scone, Viscount
Stormont 's; Gask, Mr. Oliphant 's; Balgowan, Mr. Graham 's; Abercarny, Sir --
Murray 's; Duncrob, Lord Rollo 's. Many other considerable Gentlemen's Seats are
in this County; the principal Families are the Murrays, the Hays, the Stuarts,
Drummonds, Campbels, Grahams, Oliphants, Ruthvens, Ogilvies, Haldens,
Robertsons, Rollos, Kinnairds, Blairs, Toschobs, Menzies, Fullertons, Nairns,
Rosses. Clackmanan. Alloway, late the Earl of Mar 's; Kennet, Col. Bruce 's;
Menstry, late Sir James Holburn 's; Tillibody, Abercromby 's; Tillicutry,
Stewart 's; Sawchie, Sir John Shaw 's of Greenock. Fife. Castle-Lesley, Earl of
Rothes 's; Struthers, Earl of Crawford 's; Weems, Earl of Weems 's; Kelly, Earl
of Kelly; Abbots-hall, Sir Ant. Ramsey 's; Melvil, Earl of Melvil; Cambo, Sir
A. Erskin 's; Balkask, Sir J. Anstruther 's; Dury, Sir A. Gibson 's; Balgony,
Earl of Leven; Balcarras, Earl of Balcarras; Dunnibersel, Earl of Murray;
Aberdour, Earl of Morton; Ravenshugh, Lord Sinclair; Burnt-island, Mackenzie
's. Other Families of Note are: Lord Burleigh, Lord Lindaw, Lord Balmerinoch;
also the Arnots, Anstruthers, Erskins, Beatons, Kinneers, Barclays,
Balcanquals, Bruces, Browns, Boswels, Colvils, Carstairs, Creightons,
Cunninghams, Clephans, Forbes's, Gibsons, Hamiltons, Hendersons, Hackets, Hays,
Hopes, Heriots, Inglis's, Kirkaldies, Kinningmounts, Lundies, Lumsdales,
Monnypennys, Moncriefs, Mirtons, Macgils, Orocks, Pitcairns, Prestons, Scots,
Sibbalds, Wardlaws, and Woods. Angus. Dun, Erskin 's, Lord of Session;
Inglishmady, Falconer 's of Newton; Hetherwick, Mr. Scot 's; Burowfield, Mr.
Tailor 's; Fullerton, Mr. Fullerton's; Pittarow, Sir David Carnagy 's; Newmans
Walls, Mr. Scot 's of Logy; Galro, Mr. Falconer 's; Brime, Turnbull 's of
Stircathro; Edgeyill, Mr. Lindsay 's; Old Bar, Mr. Robert Young 's; Carse, Lion
's; Morphie, Mr. Graham 's; Loggy, Mr. Wishart 's; Balmiquien, Barclay 's;
Kirktownhill, Ferguson 's; Grange, Mr. James Martin 's; Achterhouse, Mr.
Patrick Lion 's; Maine, Mr. David Graham 's of Fintri; Castle Pouri, Mr. Pouri
's; Lethem, Sir James Wood 's of Bonitoun; Bonitoun, Mr. Ferguson 's; Montrose,
Earl of Middleton 's; Craig and Rossie, Scot 's of Rossie; Duinald, Mr. Robert
Scot 's; Ulysses-Haven, Mr. Patrick Renny 's; Glamis, Earl of Strathmore 's;
Panmure and Brechin, Earl of Panmure 's; Kinnard, Earl of Southesk 's; Ethie,
Earl of Northesk 's; Carriston, Stewart 's of Garntully; Fotheringham, T.
Fotheringham 's; Inverharitie, Mr. J. Ogilvie 's; Blackness, Mr. Wedderbuin 's;
Craigy, Mr. Kied 's. Merns. Halkerton, Lord Halkerton 's; Arbuthnot, Viscount
Arbuthnot 's; Fetteresso, Earl Marshal 's; Elsick, Sir Alexander Bannerman 's;
Leys, Sir Thomas Burnet 's; Balmain, Sir David Ramsey 's; Fettercairn, Earl of
Middleton 's; Glenbervy, late Sir -- Dowglass 's; Benholm, Mr. Scot 's;
Pittarrow, Sir James Carnagy 's; Fordon, Arbuthnot 's; Fasque, Sir Alexander
Ramsey 's; Phesdo, Falconer 's; Kirkside, Straton 's, etc. Aberdeenshire.
Kildrummy, late Earl of Mar 's; Inverugy, Earl Marshal 's; Keith-hall, Earl of
Kintore 's; Pitsligo, Lord Pitsligo 's; Kainburgh, Col. Buchan 's; Dalgety,
Earl of Errol 's; Aboyn, Earl of Aboyn 's; Muckwall, Lord Frazer 's; Pitmedden,
Sir Alexander Seton 's; Knockhall, Mr. Woodny 's; Drum, Mr. Irwin 's;
Cragievar, Sir Arthur Forbes 's; Tolquham, Mr. Forbes 's; Monemusk, Sir William
Forbes 's; Castle-Forbes, Lord Forbes 's; Crathes, Sir Thomas Burnet 's of
Leyth; Frendraught, late Lord Frendraught 's; Philorths, Lord Salton 's;
Fetterneer belongs to Count Lesly in Germany; Fyvi^, late Earl of Dumfermling
's; Tyri, Mr. Frazer 's; Kelly, Earl of Aberdeen 's; Udoch, Mr. Symson 's.
Shire of Bamff and Buchan. Other Seats in this County are, Cullen and Deskford,
the Earl of Finlater 's; Indruer, Lord Bamff 's; Craig of Boyne, Ogilvie of
Boyne 's; Birkenboge, Sir James Abercrombie 's; Park, Sir John Gordon 's; Durn,
Sir James Dunbar 's; Fotherglen, Sir Alexander Ogilvie 's; Rothemay, Mr. Gordon
's; Pittendrish, lately Lord Oliphant 's; Kinardie, Mr. Donaldson 's;
Castle-grant, the Lord of Grant 's; Crombie and Bracco, Duff of Duff 's; now
an Irish Peer; Glasshaugh, Abercromby Lord Semple 's; Balendalish and Carron,
the Lord of Grant 's; Torsken, Glengerask, Buskie and Achentoul, Gordon of
Gordon 's; Skeith, Mr. Abercromby 's; Kimminity, Sutherland of Sutherland 's;
Mapen, Mr. Abernethie 's; Rannes, Mr. Hay 's; Bognie, Morison 's of Morison.
Murray and Elgin. The chief Seats in both Shires are, Gordonstoun, Sir Robert
Gordon 's; Kilravock, Mr. Rose 's; Calder, Sir -- Campbel 's; Lethin and Brody,
Mr. Brodie 's; Muirton, Sir James Calder 's; Castle Forres, Dumbar 's of
Westfield; Castle-grant, Sir -- Grant 's; Tarnaway, Earl of Murray 's; Spynie,
late Bishop of Murray 's; Elgin, Duke of Gordon 's; -- Lord Duffo 's; Innes,
Sir H. Innes 's. Shire of Inverness. Castle-Urchart, Sir Ludowick Grant 's;
Glengary Castle, Macdonald 's; Dunvegan, Macleod 's; Duntulm, Sir Donald
Macdonald 's of Slate; Dalcross, Mackintosh 's; Done, Lord Lovat 's; Ercules,
Chisholm 's of Comeris; Glenmoriston, the Lord of Grant 's; Lochyel, Sir Ewen
Cameron 's, etc. Cromarty. Cromarty Castle; Sir Ken. Mackenzie; Castle-Leod,
Earl of Cromarty; New Tarbat, ditto; Castlehaven, ditto. Ross. Fowlis-Castle,
Monroe 's; Beaulieu, Lord Lovat 's; Milton, Innes; Balnagowan, Rosse 's;
Brahan-Castle, late Earl of Seaforth 's; Red-castle, Mr. Mackenzie 's;
Craig-house, Rosse of Kilraock 's; Innerbrochy, Sir William Gordon 's;
Pittonarchy, Mackenzie 's of Scatwel, etc. Ylendonen Castle, the King's. It has
a Garrison, and the Earl of Seaforth was Hereditary Constable of the Castle.
Sutherland and Caithness. The chief Families here are the Gordons, Sutherlands,
Murrays, Mackays, Crays, Clancummins, Seil-Thomas's, Seil-Johns, Seil-Phaleys.
Castle-Sinclair is the Seat of the Earl of Caithness. Earl of Braidalbin has
great Estates in Caithness. The Sinclairs once possessed Orkney and Shetland,
and were allied to the Royal House of Denmark, as I have observed before. The
Keiths and Mowats have Possessions in Caithness. Thurse-Castle was a Seat that
belonged to the Bishop of Caithness; Dumheath is Sir W. Sinclair 's of May;
Scelbo, Lord Duffus 's; Murkle, Earl of Caithness 's; Hemprigs, Sir W. Dunbar
's; Duren, Mr. Sinclair 's, etc.
LETTER V.
SIR,
I SHALL now present you with as brief and accurate an Account as I can give
you of the Islands of most considerable Note, lying adjacent, or belonging to
this Northern Part of the Island of Great Britain, beginning, first, with

The Western Isles of Scotland.
THese Islands lie in the Deucaledonian Sea, and were called, by some,
Hebrides. The most Southern of them is the Isle of MAN, which for several
Generations has belonged to Families, who have been Homagers to the Crown of
England for it: Wherefore I shall pass it by with these Remarks, That when it
became entirely subject to the English, it kept a distinct Bishop of its own,
whose Successors continued the Title of Episcopi Sodorenses, as well as added
that of Mannenses, as if they had been Bishops of the Isles also, whose
Cathedral was at Sodor; and as many of the Towns therein are called by Scots
Names, so at present it belongs to a Scots Peer, James Duke of Athol, who
lately succeeded to this Isle, as Heir at Law to his Cousin James Earl of Derby.

The Isles of BUTE and ARRAN I have already mentioned.

AILSA, or Islesay, in the Mouth of the Clyde, is a steep Rock, something
resembling the Bass in the Mouth of Forth, being inaccessible in all Places,
but only by one Pass, and not inhabited, except at one time of the Year, when a
great Fleet of Vessels come thither to fish for Cod. It abounds with Variety of
Sea-fowl, especially Solan Geese, and has Multitudes of Rabbets. It belongs to
the Earl of Cassil, who receives, by the Produce of Hogs, Fowl, Down, and Fish,
about 100 Marks Scots yearly from hence.

Near the Isle of Bute lie two Islands, called CUMBRA, the Greater and Lesser;
the first is about a Mile in length, has a Church in it, and a Well, the Waters
of which are reckoned, by the Natives, good against all Diseases: The other
Island is less, and both belong to Montgomery of Skelmerly; the larger is
fruitful in Corn, and the smaller abounds with Deer.

Near the Isle of Arran, is FLADA, a small Island, which abounds with Rabbets.

South-west from Bute lies MERNOCK, about a Mile long, and half a Mile broad,
fruitful in Corn.

About a Mile from the Promontory of Kintyre lies AVONA, which signifies, a
good Harbor. The Danes came hither with their Fleets, when they were Masters
of the Isles.

The next remarkable Island is GIGAIA, four Miles from Kintyre, six Miles in
Length, and a Mile and a half in Breadth. The Inhabitants are Protestants.
There is a Church in this Island, and a Sepulcher for the Macneils, the
Proprietors of it. Corkir, which dies a Crimson Color, and Crostil, which dies
a Philamote, grow upon the Stones here. The Soil is good for Pasture and
Arable. They have also a Medicinal Well, which they esteem a Catholicon.

A Quarter of a Mile South lies CARRY, about a Mile in Compass, has good
Pasturage, and abounds with Rabbets. It belongs to the Family of Macalister.

JURA lies twelve Miles from Gigaia, is 20 Miles long, and six or seven broad;
it belongs to the Duke of Argyll, and makes Part of the Shire of that Name.
This is very barren, but reckoned one of the wholsomest Places in Scotland:
Here Women seldom die in Childbed; and one Macrain died in the Reign of King
Charles II. who had been 180 Christmas's in one House. It abounds with many
Deer, has good Pasturage for other Cattle, has many good Springs, and one
against Nauseousness of the Stomach and Stone. Here are two very high
Mountains, called The Paps of JURA; which are noted Sea-marks for a very great
Way. From March to September the Air is perfectly pure. There are very good
Salmon in the Rivers of this Island. They have one Church here, called
Killearn. The Inhabitants, who speak Irish, and wear the Played and Bonnet, are
Protestants.

Two Miles from Jura lies SCARBA, four Miles long, and one broad; noted for its
extraordinary Tides, and the Longevity of its Inhabitants; one of whom, a
Woman, lived 140 Years.

Near to these lie many Islands of less Note, which I have not room to name.
LISMORE, or Lessimore, the Seat of the Bishop of Argyll, who from thence was
called Episcopus Lismorensis, is about eight Miles long, and two broad, and
lies Eastward from Mull in the Mouth of Lock-yol, which goes up to Innerlochy
in Lochaber.

BERNERA, formerly a Sanctuary in Popish Times, has a noble Wood of Yew. In
this Isle, which is five Miles in Circumference, and lies about two Leagues to
the South of Harries, were, as Mr. Toland relates, two Ravens, which beat off
all Birds of Prey; and when their Young are able to fly abroad, they expel them
also out of the Island; but not without many Blows, and a great Noise. In this
Island, moreover, there is a fresh water Lake, called Lochbruist, where many
Land and Seafowl build. There were, according to the same Author, a couple of
Ravens like the former in a small Isle near North-Vist; as also upon the Isle
of Troda near Sky.

South-west from Jura lies ILA, 24 Miles long, in some Places eight, and in
others sixteen broad; it abounds with Corn and Cattle, has Store of Deer and
Lead Mines, with Limestone in vast Quantities. It has several Rivers, that
abound with Salmon, and other Fish of several Sorts. In the Center of it lies
Lochfinlagan, three Miles in Circumference. It abounds with Salmon, Trouts, and
Eels, and has an Island in it, where Macdonald, King of the Isles, had his
Residence, and made it the Seat of his Government: The Ruins of whose Court are
still to be seen here. There are several fresh water Lakes in this Island, with
Forts upon them. It has also a Medicinal Well, much frequented by the Natives
for all Diseases. There are several Caves here, one of them capable of holding
200 Men. The Country is indifferently fruitful. It lies lower than Jura;
consequently is wetter and less wholesome. The Inhabitants are Protestants.
There are four Churches and a Chapel in this Island, the most remarkable of
which is St. Columbus's Church. It gives the Title of Earl to a Son of the
Family of Argyll; but Campbel of Calder is the chief Proprietor, and also
Steward of the Crown here.

There are many small Islands about this, which we cannot mention.

Two Leagues North (...) Ila lies COLONSA, separated from Oransa only (...) ^de
of Flood. It is four Miles in Length, and a (...) broad, not so fruitful as the
other. There is one Church besides two ruinous Chapels in this Isle; some
fresh water Lakes abounding with Trouts; and several Forts. The Proprietor is
the Duke of Argyll, and the Inhabitants Protestants.

ORANSA is four Miles in Circumference, and fruitful in Corn and Grass: It has
also a Church and a Chapel, and had formerly a Monastery dedicated to St.
Columbus. The Proprietor is Macduffi.

Farther West lies the small Isle of DOWHIRTA. The Natives have a Tradition
that Pygmies once lived here. The Duke of Argyll is Proprietor.

North-east from Ila lies the Isle of MULL, 24 Miles in Length, and near as
much in Breadth: It lies in the Shire of Argyll. The Air is temperate, cold,
and moist, but qualified by fresh Breezes from the Mountains. The Natives, when
the Season is moist, take a large Dose of Aquavitae for a Corrective, and chew
a Piece of Charmel Root when they intend to be merry, to prevent Drukenness.
This Island in general affords good Pasturage for Cattle of all Sorts. They
have a great many Deer, and abound with Wild-fowl, and very fine Hawks. Their
Horses are little, but very sprightly; their Black Cattle excellent Meat. Their
Corn is Barley and Oats. It formerly abounded with Wood, but most of it is now
cut. The Heaths, besides Pasturage for Cattle, afford good Fuel for the
Natives. The Bay of Duart, on the West Side, is a good Anchoring-place. Upon
this stands the Castle of Duart, the Seat of the Head of the ancient Family of
Maclean, who were the chief Proprietors of this Island; but Sir John Maclean
having forfeited, it is now possessed by the Duke of Argyll. There are two
other Castles, and several Anchoring-places about this Island. It has several
Rivers, which afford Salmon, and abound with black Muscles, which breed Pearl.
There are also some fresh water Lakes in it, which afford Trout, Eels, etc.
Several lesser Isles lie about it, and in its Bays, several of which are very
fruitful, and some are impregnable. The Bay called Lochleffan abounds with
Herring and Shellfish. The Inhabitants of this Isle profess Protestantism, and
have two Parish Churches, besides several ruinous Places, formerly used for
Devotion. In the Sound or Bay of Mull, betwixt this Isle and Lochaber, a great
Ship called the Florida, belonging to the Spanish Armada, was lost in the Year
1588. Persons from several Places have often dived for her, and found good
Account in the Guns, and other valuable Effects they have got out of her. I
have already mentioned, Page 235. the further Attempts of this Nature by
Captain Roe.

Near this lies the Island of ST. COLUMBUS, two Miles in Length, and about a
Mile broad: It abounds in all Things produced in this Climate, was noted for
ancient Monuments, and particularly as being the Residence of St. Columbus,
famous for his Discipline and Sanctity. It had two Monasteries, one for Men,
and another for Women, besides several Chapels endowed by the Kings of
Scotland, and of the Isles: It is called in the Irish Language I-colm-kil; some
call it Iona: It contains now about 30 poor Families. The Bishops of the Isl^^
had formerly their Seat here: This Island is famous in History for being a
Seminary of Ecclesiastics, and in a manner the Mother Church of all the
Dominions of the Scot and Picts; and though the Abbot was only a Presbyter, yet
all the Clergy of the Province, and Bishops themselves, were subject to him, as
is mentioned by Bid. The Church dedicated to St. Mary, is entirely demolished,
and overgrown with Grass and Weeds; nor is there any regular Place of Worship
in the whole Island. Here the Vicar of S^^^bee, as Dean of the Isles, used
three or four times a Year to catechize and preach to the People. The old
Monastery, or College of Monks, was a Place of great Sanctity and Privilege, of
which temporal Privileges the Abbot was Superior, and in many things exempt
from the Bishop, being subject only to the Pope, or his Delegates. The Bishops
of the Isles were called Episcopi Sodorenses, from Sodor, which is usually said
to have been a Village in this Island: But I very much question it; for some
Critics say, it should be Soterenses, from the Church dedicated (...), to our
Savior, which however seems too learned an Etymology for the Time of building
the Church; or from St. Ouren's Church, which, by Corruption, or an easy
Transition, might soon dwindle from Sant^urensis into Sodorensis. If this
Conjecture be true, then St. Ouren's was the Cathedral, and the Church in the
Abbey, Conventual only.

Six Miles West from this Island lies TYRE-TY, eight Miles long, and three
broad; it is reckoned to be the most plentiful of all the Islands in
Necessaries of human Life, abounding with Corn, Cattle, Fish, and Fowl. Here is
a fresh water Lake, with an Island and an old Castle in it, and an Harbor for
Long-boats, which are used in that Country. It formerly belonged to the Family
of Maclean, but now to the Duke of Argyll. There is one Church in this Island,
called Sorabi, whereof the Dean of the Isles was Minister. The People are
Protestants: they are not very healthy, as the Country lies low.

Near this are two Islands, called KERNIBERG, so strong by Nature, that a
little Art would make them impregnable.

About half a League to the North-east lies the Island of COLL, ten Miles long,
and two broad, and is very fruitful: It has several Rivulets, which afford
Salmon, and a fresh water Lake, that has Trouts and Eels. The Proprietor is a
Branch of the Family of Maclean. The Inhabitants are Protestants. They have a
Notion here, that Tyre-ty breeds more Women than Men, and Coll more Men than
Women; so that they may people each other without the Assistance of their
Neighbors. The Coasts of this Island abound with larger Cod and Ling, than are
to be found on the Coasts of the neighboring Isles and Continent.

North from this lies the Isle of RUM, six Miles long, and four broad: It is
mountainous and heathy, but the Coast is arable and fruitful: It is but thinly
inhabited, and the Sea Fowl lay their Eggs in such Quantities, that in the
Spring any one may gather what Number he pleases. The Rivulets of this Island
afford Salmon, and there is plenty of Land and Sea Fowl, especially those
called Puffins: There are also abundance of Deer in the Mountains. The
Proprietor is Maclean of Coll, and the Inhabitants are Protestants.

Half a Mile from Rum lies CANNEY, two Miles long, and one Mile broad,
surrounded with an high Rock, but plentiful in Corn and Grass, and the Coasts
abound with Cod and Ling. In the North-end there is a Rock of Loadstone, as
some think, because it disorders the Needle of the Compass, when any Ships come
near it. It has one Church, and good Anchorage on the North-east. The
Proprietor is one of the Macdonalds, and the Inhabitants Papists.

MUCK lies South-west of Rum, is about four Miles in Circumference, fruitful in
Corn and Grass, surrounded with Rocks, and noted for good Hawks.

EGG lies not far from Coll, is three Miles in Length, and a Mile and a half in
Breadth, and the Whole pretty good for Pasturage and Cultivation. On the
South-end of it is a Mountain, and on the Top of that a high Rock, of about 150
Paces in Circumference, with a fresh water Pool in the Middle of it; there is
only one Pass up to it, so that it is a natural Fort. On the South-west Side of
the Isle is a Cave, capable of containing some Hundreds of People, and there
are several Medicinal Wells in this Island. The Proprietors are some of the
Macdonalds: the Inhabitants bigoted Papists.

North from this lies SKY, 42 Miles long, and in some Places 20, in others 30
Miles broad. It is separated from the Shire of Inverness, to which it belongs,
by a Firth so narrow, that a Man may easily call from one Side to the other. It
is navigable by the largest Ships of War. The Current there is so violent, that
no Vessel is able to sail against it, though the Wind prove ever so fair, so that
the Tide must always be observed. The way of Ferrying Cows in the narrow Ferry,
called the Kyle, where the Tide is very rapid, is thus: They tie a With about
the Cow's Lower-jaw, and bind five of them together; after which, a Man in the
End of a Boat holds the With that ties the foremost, and rows over, carrying
in the Space of a few Hours, at Low Water, three or four Hundred Cows. The
Country is populous, the People handsome, and very healthy. Almost all the
Inhabitants of Sky are Protestants. None of them possess any Land. It is very
high Ground, as well on the Coast as up in the Country, where there are seven
lofty Mountains, which lie near one another, almost in the Center of the
Island. It has a great deal of arable Land, which yields a good Increase; so
that they supply the neighboring Continent with Barley and Oats. It has many
excellent Bays and Harbors for the Convenience of Fishing, and other Trade,
and about 30 Rivers, which afford Salmon.

ST. COLUMBUS's Lake has an Island and a Chapel in it. Most of the Bays abound
with Herrings all the Summer; the Natives dry, and preserve them without Salt
for eight Months, without any other Art than taking out their Guts, tying a
Rush about their Necks, and hanging them up by Pairs upon a Rope of Heath
across the House. Cod, Ling, Mackrel, Haddock, Whiting, Turbet, etc. abound on
this Coast, as do Oysters, and all other Sorts of Shellfish. There are many
large Caves in this Island, from the Roof of some of which there drops a Water,
which petrifies into a white limy Substance; one of them in Slate, called the
Golden Cave, is said to be seven Miles long. There are abundance of old Forts
on the Coast, which seem to have been erected by the Danes; they stand on
rising Grounds, and so near one another, that by a Beacon fired on any one of
them, the Notice of any approaching Danger by Invasion was immediately spread
through the whole Island. There are also several little Houses of Stone built
under Ground, for hiding People and their Goods in time of War; and others
above Ground capable only of holding one Person, which seem to have been
designed for Contemplation. There are several of the Druids Houses yet entire
in the Isle of Sky, and in some other Isles. The Vulgar in the Islands still
show a great Respect for these Houses, and never come to the ancient
sacrificing Carns, but they walk three times round them from East to West,
according to the Course of the Sun. The Cattle here are Horses, Cows, Sheep,
Goats, and Hogs; the Cows frequently feed on the Sea-weed, and observe the Tide
of Ebb for that End, as exactly as any Man can do. This Island abounds with
Land and Waterfowl of many Sorts, and among others they have Hawks and Eagles.
It belongs to Sir Alexander Macdonald, some of whose Ancestors were called
Kings of the Isles; the middle Parts belong to Mackinnon of that Ilk, and the
North-west Parts belong to Macleod; all three Chiefs of their several Clans.

SOTA-BRITIL lies a quarter of a Mile South of Sky, is five Miles in
Circumference, full of Bogs, and fitter for Pasturage than Cultivation. On the
West Side it is covered with Wood. The Coasts of this Island abound with Cod
and Ling.

On the North-side of Sky lies SCALPA, five Miles in Circumference: It has
Wood in several Parts of it, and is fruitful in Corn and Grass.

A little farther North lies RAARSAY, seven Miles long, and three broad; it has
much Wood, and is fitter for Pasture than Cultivation. On the East Side of it
is a Spring, which runs down from a Rock, and petrifies into a fine white Lime,
of which it yields great Quantities. Here is also a Quarry of good Stone. On
the West Side are abundance of Caves, where People lodge who go thither in the
Summer upon the Account of Fishing, or Grazing of Cattle. There are several
Forts in this Island, some of which are naturally very strong. The Proprietor
is a Cadet of the Family of Macleod, and is as much respected by the
Inhabitants, as if he were a Prince.

A Quarter of a Mile farther North lies RONA, three Miles in Length: It Is
fruitful in Pasturage, and the Rocks about it are of Hectic Stone.

ALSVIG lies on the South-west Corner of Sky, is two Miles in Circumference,
fruitful in Corn and Grass, and noted for the vast Shoals of Herrings about it,
which sometimes entangle the Fishing-boats.

FLADDA, two Leagues distant, is but two Miles in Compass, but much noted for
its Fishing of all Sorts, and for big Whales, which pursue the Fish on the
Coast of it. The Sea Fowl called Coulternebs, are very numerous here, and a
great Flock of Plovers come hither from Sky, in the Beginning of September,
and return again in April. There are several Rocks about this Island,
particularly one, called The round Table, about half a Mile in Circumference,
with a fresh water Spring, which makes an impregnable Fort, there being only
one Way to climb up to it, by one Man at a time. The Natives of Sky, and the
neighboring Islands have a peculiar way of curing the Distempers which are
incident to them, by Simples of their own Product, wherein they are successful
to a Miracle: They have also several Medicinal Wells; but I have not room to
insist upon these things.

Eighty Miles West from Sky lie nine Islands, the chief of which is VATERSA,
which beside many other Conveniences, has a large Harbor, capable of the
greatest Ships, where at stated times great Numbers of Fishermen meet from the
neighboring Countries.

Two Miles from Vatersa lies BARRA, seven Miles long, and three broad, called
so from St. Bar, the tutelar Saint: It is fruitful in Corn, and noted for its
Cod-fishing. The Sea enters this Island at a small Chanel, and afterward
inlarges itself into a round Bay, in which is an Island, with a very strong
Castle. It has a good Harbor on the North-east Side, where is Plenty of Fish;
and the Rivulets on the East Side abound with Salmon.

About a Quarter of a Mile South from Barra lies KISMUL, the Seat of Macneil of
Barra, which is encompassed with a Stone Wall two Stories high; within which
there is a Tower, a Hall, a Magazine, and other Houses. They have a Church in
this Island, and a Chapel, where the Macneils are buried. The Natives are
Papists, and generally very ignorant and superstitious.

Here are several other less Islands belonging to Macneil, some of them
fruitful enough in Corn and Grass, others left for Pasturage, and some of them
remarkable for fishing of Ling and Cod. The Inhabitants are very healthful and
hospitable: they have abundance of Sea-fowl, and when they kill any of them for
Use, they salt them with the Ashes of burnt Sea-ware, which preserves them from
Putrefaction. Macneil holds his Lands of Sir Alexander Macdonald of Slate, to
whom he pays 40 l. Scots, per Annum, and a Hawk, if required, and is obliged to
furnish him with a certain Number of Men on extraordinary Occasions.

Betwixt Barra and Vist lie fourteen small Islands, not very considerable.

A little North of Barra lies SOUTH-VIST, 21 Miles long, in some Places three,
and in others four Miles broad. The East Side is mountainous, but the West
plain and arable. The Island abounds with fresh water Lakes, which have plenty
of Fowl and Fish, particularly Trouts and Eels. In several of them are Islands
with Forts. There is one Lake three Miles long, into which the Sea has made its
way, though the People did all they could to hinder it. The Inhabitants are
healthy. One Man lately lived 130 Years, and retained his Understanding. The
Irish Tongue is here spoken in great Perfection. The Macdonalds, descended from
the ancient Kings of these Islands, are Proprietors, and with the Inhabitants
profess the Popish Religion. The Soil is generally sandy, but yields a good
Produce of Barley, Oats, and Rye. Ambergris is sometimes found upon the Coast.

Betwixt this Island and North-vist, two Miles North, lies BENBECULA: The
Ground is all plain and sandy betwixt them, except two little Channels about
Knee-deep at a Tide of Ebb; but the Whole is navigable by Boats at a Tide of
Flood, and there lie several small Islands on the East of these Channels.
Benbecula is three Miles long, and three broad: it has a Bay on the East Side
for small Vessels, where Herrings are sometimes taken. The East Part of this
Island is arable; it has several fresh water Lakes well stored with Fish and
Fowl, and some small Forts upon the Islands in those Lakes. The Natives are
Papists, and the Proprietor is one of the Macdonalds.

A little North of this Island lies North-vist, belonging to Sir Alexander
Macdonald, nine Miles long, and about thirty in Circumference. It is fitter for
Pasturage than Cultivation on the East Part, where it is mountainous; but the
West Side is plain and arable, and where it is not ploughed, is covered with
Clover, Daisy, and Variety of other Plants, very pleasant to the Sight, and of
a very fragrant Smell; and affords good Pasturage. The Grain here is Barley,
Oats, and Rye, which yields from ten to thirty-fold; and there is no doubt, but
Wheat would grow here very well. This Island has several Bays on the East Side,
where Ships may ride; the chief of which are Loch-eport, Loch-rona, and
Loch-maddes; the latter is capable of Hundreds of Vessels of the greatest Size:
400 Vessels have been laden with Herrings there in a Season. Cod, Ling, and
all Sorts of Fish, that frequent the Western Seas, are to be found here. There
is a small Island in this Bay, upon which a Magazine was erected for carrying
on a Fishery in the Reign of King Charles I. There is such a Number of
fresh water Lakes in this Island, as can hardly be believed; they are generally
well stored with Trouts and Eels, and, which is more strange, with Cod, Ling,
and other Seafish, brought in to them by the Spring-tides. These Lakes have
many small Islands, which abound with Variety of Land and Sea Fowl; and some of
them have Islands with Forts: It has also several Rivers, which afford Salmon,
and some of them speckled, with large Scales. The Inhabitants are Protestants.

There are several other lesser Islands, which lie on both Sides of North-vist,
the most remarkable of which is EOUSMIL, on the West, a Rock about a Quarter of
a Mile in Circumference, noted for its Seal-fishing about the End of October,
where three hundred and twenty are sometimes taken at once.

Three Leagues and a half farther West lie nine or ten more Rocks, which abound
with Sea Fowl, and great Numbers of Seals.

A little farther North lies BORERA, four Miles round; it has a fresh water
Lake well stored with large Eels. This Island affords the largest and best Sort
of Dulse. It is possessed by the Family of Maclean.

Half a League South from this lies LINGAY, which furnishes the neighboring
Islands with Peat for Fuel. It has abundance of Black Cattle, that make
excellent Meat; the Natives salt it in the Hides, which, they say, preserves
it, and makes it taste better than when salted in Casks. This Island abounds
also with Deer, Sea and Land Fowl of all Sorts; among the rest, with Hawks,
Eagles, and Swans. The Inhabitants of South and North-vist are generally well
proportioned and healthful, and many of them live to a great Age; they are very
hospitable and kind to Strangers.

The Isle of JEWS derives its Name from the Irish Word Leog, signifying a
Lake, with which this Island abounds; it is by the Islanders commonly called
the Long Island: it is near 100 Miles from North to South, and from 13 to 14 in
Breadth; it is reckoned part of the Shire of Ross; but the Isle of Jews,
properly so called, is but 36 Miles in Length, and 10 or 12 broad, belonging to
the Earl of Seaforth. It reaches from the North of Bowling-head to the South of
Hassiness. The Southern Part is named Harries. The Air is temperately cold and
moist, and the Natives use commonly a Dose of Usquebaugh for a Corrective. The
Island is healthful, especially in the Middle, from South and North; it is
arable on the West Side for about 16 Miles on the Coast, and is likewise plain
and arable in several Places in the East: It is fruitful in Corn, and yields a
good Increase; their common Grain is Barley, Oats, and Rye; and they have also
Flax and Hemp. There are several convenient Bays and Harbors here,
particularly Lochstornvay, on the East Side, in the Middle of the Island; the
Birkin Island, seven Miles Southward; Locheolmkil, three Miles farther South;
Lochsefort and Lochcarlvay, 24 Miles South-west. This Bay is remarkable for
great Numbers of Cod, Ling, and Whales, which frequent it; and all the Bays and
Coasts abound with Cod, Ling, Herring, and all other Sorts of Fish taken in the
Western Seas, besides Plenty of Shellfish of all Sorts, in such vast Numbers,
that the Inhabitants are not able to consume them. Coral and Pearl-shells are
also found in the Bays and Coasts. There are several extraordinary Springs and
Fountains in this Island, and abundance of Caves on the Coasts, which Otters,
Seals, and Fowl frequent in great Numbers. That Obelisk (if I may call it so)
in the Parish of Barvas in the Island of Jews, called The Thrushelstone, is
very remarkable; being not only above 20 Feet high, but likewise almost as much
in Breadth, which no other comes near. The Dun, or Fortification built on an
Eminence in St. Kilda, which is an old Fort, is about 18 Leagues distant from
North Vist, and 20 from the Middle of Jews, or Harries, to be seen only in a
very fair Day, like a blueish Mist; but a large Fire there would be visible at
Night, as the ascending Smoke by Day. In this same Isle (where are many such
Duns) North of the Village of Brago, is a round Fort composed of huge Stones,
three Stories high; that is, it has three hollow Passages one over another,
within a prodigious thick Wall quite round the Fort, with many Windows and
Stairs.

Here also, at the Village of Classerniss, is a Druidical Temple extremely
remarkable. The Circle consists of 12 Obelisks, about seven Feet high each, and
distant from each other six Feet. In the Center stands a Stone 13 Feet high, in
the perfect Shape of the Rudder of a Ship. Directly South from the Circle,
stand four Obelisks running out in a Line, another such Line due East, and a
third to the West; the Number and Distances of the Stones being in these Wings
the same: so that this Temple, the most entire that can be, is at the same time
both round and winged. But to the North, reach (by way of Avenue) two strait
Ranges of Obelisks, of the same Bigness and Distances with those of the Circle;
yet the Ranges themselves are eight Feet distant, each consisting of 19 Stones,
the 39th being in the Entrance of the Avenue. This Temple stands
astronomically, denoting the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, and the four principal
Winds, subdivided each into four others; by which, and the 19 Stones, on each
side the Avenue, representing the Cycle of 19 Years, it appears to have been
dedicated principally to the Sun, but subordinately to the Seasons, and the
Elements; particularly to the Sea, and the Winds, as is manifest by the Rudder
in the Middle.

This Island abounds with Cows, Horses, Sheep, Goats and Hogs; the Black Cattle
are small, but very prolifick, and make excellent Meat; the Horses are likewise
smaller than on the Continent, but as serviceable for all domestic Uses, and
live very hard, having little to feed upon in the Spring but Sea-ware. The
Inhabitants are well proportioned, and in general healthful and strong, and of
a sanguine Complexion; they are very quick of Apprehension, and Lovers of Poesy
and Music: They are dextrous at Swimming, Volting, and Archery, and make
stout, able Seamen.

In a little Island near the greater one of Jews, were a couple of Eagles,
which would never suffer any other of their Kind to continue in the Place;
driving away their own young ones, as soon as they were able to fly. The
Natives said, That those Eagles were so careful of their Habitation, that they
never killed any Sheep or Lamb in the Island, though the Bones of Lambs, Fawns,
and Wild-fowl, were frequently found in and about their Nests; so that they
made their Purchase in the opposite Islands, the nearest of which is a League
distant.

There are many other lesser Islands, which lie round this; the chief of which
are, GARVE, in the Mouth of Lochcarlvay, a high Rock, half a Mile in Compass,
affording good Pasturage, and naturally a strong Fort: the two BERNERA's, one
two Miles, and the other four Miles long, and four Miles broad; both fruitful
in Corn and Grass.

Near Carlvay Bay lie four small Islands, which belong to the Inhabitants of
Jews, who go thither every Summer, and bring from thence great Store of Fowls,
Eggs, Down, Feathers, and Quills; one of them is called the ISLAND OF PYGMIES,
because many little Bones, resembling those of Men, are dug out of the
Ground there.

Twenty Leagues from the Point of Nesse in Jews lies Rona, a Mile long, and
half a Mile broad: it has a Hill on the West Part, which makes it visible from
Jews in the Summertime. It was inhabited by about five Families, who had the
Island and the Fishery about it divided among them, and were very exact and
nice in their Properties; and when their Number increased, the Supernumeraries
were sent to their Landlord in Jews, who once a Year sends the Minister of his
Parish, and a Servant, to visit them, and bring his Rents, which are paid in
Barley-meal sewed up in Skins, Sea Fowl, and some Fish, etc. They have a Chapel
dedicated to St. Ronan, in which they repeat the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten
Commandments every Lord's Day. Buchanan says, That the Inhabitants were, in his
Opinion, the only People in the World, who never wanted any thing, and were
satisfied with their Condition, having Plenty of all that they desired; being
equally ignorant of Luxury and Avarice, and possessing, through their Freedom
from Vices, that Innocence and Tranquillity of Mind, which others can scarcely
attain unto by great Labor, and with the Help of the best Instructions. Mr.
Martin affirms, in his Description of the Western Islands, That ancient Race of
poor People was all destroyed about 40 Years ago, in the following manner:
First, A Swarm of Rats, none knows how, came into the Island, and eat up all
their Corn. In the next Place, some Seamen landed, and robbed them of what
Provisions they had left. By this means they all died before the usual Time of
the Arrival of the Boat from Jews; upon which another Colony was sent thither.

Four Leagues East from Rona lies SOULISKER, a Rock, a Quarter of a Mile in
Circumference, which abounds with vast Numbers of Sea Fowl, particularly Solan
Geese. On this Rock there builds one Fowl not found elsewhere, called Colk; it
is less than a Goose, and all covered with Down, but of different Colors,
which it casts when it hatches; it has a Tuft on its Head resembling that of a
Peacock, and a Train longer than that of a House-cock. There were formerly 24
Churches in Jews and Harries, and the Islands belonging to them: but, alas! to
our Shame may it be said, as Papists were prosecuted or discouraged,
Profaneness gained Ground of Superstition, and one sort of Ignorance succeeded
another; for few or no Ministers being sent with suitable Provision and
Encouragement, Places of religious Worship became ruinous, and the Service of
God, and the Edification of the People, very much neglected; so that several
Parishes in the Highlands and Isles, at present, are 20, 30, or near forty
Miles long, and very often without any Minister at all.

That Part which is called HARRIES, produces the same Sorts of Corn, but with a
greater Increase than Jews. The West Side is for the most part arable on the
Coast. It has a noble Harbor called Scalpa, a Mile and a half long, and a Mile
broad; and there are two other Harbors within three Leagues of it, which
abound with Oysters, and other Shellfish. They have excellent Springs here,
some of which are Medicinal; one particularly near Marvag is excellent for
restoring a lost Appetite, and one near Borve, good against the Colic and
Gravel. There are several Caves on the Mountains, and on each side of the
Coast, and in the middle of a high Rock, capable of holding 50 Men; has two
Wells, and but a narrow Pass to it by climbing up the Rock; so that in Time of
War it is an impregnable Fort. There are likewise several ancient Forts in this
Island. The Hills and Mountains abound with Deer, which none are allowed to
hunt without Leave from Macleod, the Proprietor. Metricks, a four-footed
Creature, about the Size of a large Cat, are pretty numerous here; their Skins
are very fine, of a brown Color, and make good Fur; and it is said, the Dung of
this Animal yields a Scent like Musk. There are abundance of Otters and Seals
here, great Plenty of Land and Sea Fowl, and among others, Eagles, and very
good Hawks. The Inhabitants both of Jews and Harries are Protestants.

There are other Islands of small Extent belonging to the Harries, the chief of
which are BERNERA, two Leagues to the South; it is five Miles in Circumference,
very fruitful in Barley and Rye, and yields sometimes from 20 to 30 Fold. There
are two Chapels in this Island.

Half a League from thence to the Westward lies PABBAY, three Miles in
Circumference, and fruitful in Corn and Grass: It has also two Chapels.

Half a League to the North lies SELLAY, a Mile in Circumference; it yields
extraordinary Pasture for Sheep, which it fattens very soon, and those bred
there have very large Horns.

TARANSAY, a League farther North, is three Miles round, fruitful in Corn and
Grass, and yields much yellow Talc.

There are several other Islands in the Neighborhood, of two or three Miles in
Circumference each, all tolerably fruitful in Corn and Pasturage; particularly
HERMATRA, where a Magazine for the Fishery was erected in the Reign of King
Charles I.

Eighteen Leagues West from North-vist, and 20 from Harries, lies the Island
called ST. KILDA, or HIRTA; as This Hirta is the most North-west, so Dow Hirta
is the most South-west of all the Scots Islands. The first, properly called St.
Kilda, is two Miles long and one broad, faced round with a steep Rock, except
at the Bay on the South-east, where Vessels enter. The Land rises high in the
Middle, and there are several Fountains of good Water on each side the Island.
Their Grain is Oats and Barley, the latter accounted the largest in the Western
Isles. The Inhabitants are about two hundred in Number, very well proportioned
and comely. They are Protestants, and very zealous, according to their
Knowledge, which is but small for want of Instruction. They are very regular
and just in their Conversation, and Strangers to Luxury and Excess, being
ignorant of the Use of Money. They have a Chapel, where they assemble on the
Lord's Day, to hear the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments; and neither
work themselves, nor will allow any Stranger to work, on that Day. It belongs
to the Lord of Macleod, the Chief of that ancient Clan, who commonly makes
some Cadet of his Family Steward of this Island, to receive his Rents, which
are paid in Fish, Fowl, Feathers, Wool, Butter, Cheese, Cattle, and Corn: and
the Steward's Deputy is, in his Absence, the chief Man of the Island; and
generally, except when a Minister is sent thither from Harries, baptizes and
marries. They have an Altar and Crucifix in their Chapel, which have continued
there since the Time of Popery; and though they pay no Worship to the Crucifix,
yet they swear decisive Oaths, by laying their Hands upon it, and take the
Marriage Oath in the same manner. Not long ago an illiterate Fellow, one of the
Natives, imposed upon their Ignorance, by pretending that St. John the Baptist,
and the Virgin Mary, had appeared to him, and taught him Sermons, Prayers, and
Hymns: the latter, he alleged, were effectual to secure Women against
Miscarriage; and his Price for teaching them was a Sheep. He told them of a
little Hill, where St. John and the Virgin appeared to him: And made them
believe, that if any of their Black Cattle or Sheep came near to taste the
Grass of that Hill, they must immediately be killed and eaten; and it was
necessary, that he himself should always partake of the Treat. He was
discovered at last by his lewd Attempts upon several Women; and being, by
Macleod's Order, transported from thence to Harries, he made public Confession
of his Imposture in several Churches, and seemed to be very penitent, but was
not allowed to return any more. Their Houses are low, built of Stone, and a
Cement of dry Earth, and covered with Turf, thatched over with Straw. They make
their Beds in the Walls of their Houses, and lie commonly on Straw, though they
have great Plenty of Feathers and Down. They live all together in a little
Village, on the East Side of the Island, in good Harmony; are very exact and
nice in their several Properties, and allow no Encroachment upon one another,
nor will they admit of it from their Landlord, or his Steward, but pay exactly
what they agree on. The Island is naturally strong, and, with a little Art,
might be made impregnable. There is an old Fort at the South-end of the Bay.

In the Island of St. Kilda is the House of a Druidess, built all of Stone,
without Lime, or Mortar, or Earth to cement it; it is also arched, and of a
conick Figure, but open at the Top, and a Fireplace in the Middle of the Floor.
It cannot contain above nine Persons, to sit easy by each other. From the Side
of the Wall go off three low Vaults, separated from each other by Pillars, and
capable of containing five Persons apiece.

Just such another House in all respects, but much larger, and grown over with
a green Sod on the Outside, is in Borera, an Isle adjacent to St. Kilda, which
was the Habitation of a Druid.

At the North-end of St. Kilda, were a couple of Eagles, who drove away all
others of the same Kind, even their own Progeny; and brought their Prey from
other Parts, without plundering the Place of their own Residence.

They have two other Islands which belong to them, one called SOA, about half a
Mile from the Westside of St. Kilda, a Mile in Circumference, and very high and
steep all round.

The other is called BORERA, lies about two Leagues North of St. Kilda, is
about a Mile in Circumference, and most of it surrounded with a high Rock. All
three afford good Pasturage, and abound with prodigious Numbers of Sea Fowl
from March till September. They have Solan Geese in such Numbers, that they
keep about 20,000 annually in little Stone Houses, built on purpose for them,
and for preserving their other Fowl, Eggs, etc. The latter they preserve some
Months in the Ashes of Peat, and they preserve their Fowl without Salt: They
eat the Solan Geese Eggs raw, and say they are good Pectorals. They have
another Bird here, called Fulmar, about the Size of a Moor-hen: it picks its
Food out of live Whales, and other Fishes. When any one approaches them, they
spout out pure Oil from their Bills, which the Natives have a way to catch,
when they surprise the Fowl; and make use of it for their Lamps, and likewise
as a Remedy against Rheumatick Pains, Aches, and other Distempers. It serves
them also for Vomits and Purges, for Swellings or Strains, and discussing of
Tumors; in all which Cases, they say, it is very successful. Both Sexes have a
Genius for Poesy, are very hospitable to Strangers, and charitable to their own
Poor, for whose Maintenance they all contribute in Proportion. They have but
one Boat belonging to the Island, in which every Man has a Share proportionable
to the Rent he pays. The Men are generally strong, are stout Rowers, and will
tug a long time at the Oar without Intermission. They use no Compass, but take
their Measure from the Sun, Moon, or Stars, and chiefly from the Courses of the
Flocks of the Sea Fowl, because they know very well to what Rocks or Islands
they resort. They are excellent at climbing of Rocks, being accustomed to it
from their Infancy, in order to catch the Fowl which build on them. They have
two Ropes, which belong to them in common for climbing the Rocks; they are 24
Fathoms in Length each, and covered with Cows Hides salted, to prevent their
being cut by the Rocks. The Men climb by turns, and bring home some Thousands
of Eggs and Fowls at a time. They also make Gins of Horse-hair, for catching
the Fowl; yet sometimes they lose their Lives by climbing. The richest Man in
the Isle has not above eight Cows, eighty Sheep, and two or three Horses. They
have no Money, but barter with one another for what they want.

Mr. Martin, to whom I am obliged for most of these Particulars relating to the
Islands, (for it cannot be supposed I could think of entering every one of them
in Person) gives an Account of that called the SECOND SIGHT, which, he says, is
a Representation, by way of Vision, of something to come, and makes such a
strong Impression upon the Seers, that they cannot see or think of any thing
else while the Vision lasts; and they appear cheerful, or otherwise, according
to the Nature of the Object represented; they use no previous Means to attain
it, and to most of them it is very troublesome. The Instances of the Truth of
this Second Sight, as it is called, are so many, and so frequent, that it can
scarcely be disputed. It Is certainly a strange Illusion; but I shall not
venture to give my Opinion about it; only observing, with others, that this
Faculty decays in Proportion as Christianity increases among them, and as they
improve in Knowledge. Some of the People, to whom those Visions have been
frequent, have learned by Experience, as we were told, to determine the Time
when the Things represented shall come to pass. The Reverend Mr. John Frazer,
the late Dean of the Isles, has writ a small Treatise upon this Subject, called
(...).

We shall conclude our Description of these Islands with an Extract from Mr.
Toland's Specimen of his History of the Druids; where he treats in general of
the Properties of all these Isles, whither, it seems, he had intended to have
traveled, in order to perfect his History, and rescue many valuable Pieces of
Antiquity from utter Oblivion.

It Is certain, says that Gentleman, no Country abounds more with the
Necessaries of Life, and at less Labor or Charge, than the Hebrides. In the
first place, there is known to be, in those Islands, a prodigious Plenty of
Flesh and Fish. Their Cattle of all Sorts (as Cows, Sheep, Goats, and Hogs) are
exceeding numerous and prolifick; small indeed of Size, as are likewise their
Horses, but of a sweet and delicious Taste. So are their Deer, which freely
range in Herds on the Mountains. No Place can compare with this for tame and
wild Fowl, there being of the latter nowhere in the World a greater Diversity,
many Sorts of them extremely beautiful, and rare, or utterly unknown,
elsewhere. The like may be said of their various amphibious Animals. Numberless
are their Fountains and Springs, Rivulets, Rivers and Lakes, very wholesome in
their Waters, and everywhere superabounding with Fish, especially the most
delicate, as Trout and Salmon: nor is it by Herrings alone that all Europe
knows no Seas to be better stored, nor with more Kinds, from the Shrimp to the
Whale; as no Harbors or Bays are superior, whether regard be had to Number or
Commodiousness. Add to this their Variety of excellent Roots and Plants,
particularly those of marine Growth, every one of them serving for Food or
Physic. Their Pastures are so kindly, that they might live on Milk alone, with
that inconceivable Quantity of Eggs they yearly gather off the desert Rocks and
Islets. Bread is plentiful enough. The Ground is generally allowed to be much
richer, than on the Scottish Continent, some Parts whereof are not seldom
supplied hence with Corn.

Jews is very fruitful; and though Barley, Oats, and Rye, be the only Grain sown
there at present, yet the Ground both in that, and most of the other Islands,
is fit to bear Wheat, and consequently Legumes of all sorts. It Is truly amazing
they have any Crop at all, considering how unskilful they are in Agriculture,
how destitute of the properest Instruments to till the Ground, and that they
scarce use any other Manure but Sea-wreck or Tangles. From the Ignorance of the
Inhabitants in these respects, as also in planting, enclosing and draining,
many fruitful Spots lie uncultivated; but they are abundantly supplied with
choice Eatables, and the most nourishing Shellfish.

In Bernera, near Harries, the Produce of Barley is many times from 20 to 30
fold. In Harries and South-vist one Barley-grain sometimes produces from 7 to
14 Ears, as in North-vist from 10 to 30 fold in a plentiful Year. At Corchattan
in Sky the Increase amounted once to 35. If the Ground be laid down for some
time, it gives a good Crop without Dunging, some Fields not having been dung'd
in 40 Years. A small Tract of Ground, at Skerry-breek, in the said Isle of
Sky, had yielded 100 fold. With regard to their Pastures, nothing is more
common than for an Ewe to have two Lambs at a time. Besides the ordinary Rent a
Tenant paid, it was a Custom in the Islands, if any of his Cows or Sheep
brought two young ones at a time, one of them was to go to the Landlord; who,
on his part, was obliged, if any of his Tenants Wives bore Twins, to take one
of them into his own Family. Even the wild Goats on the Mountains (for such
there are in Harries) are observed to bring forth their Young twice a Year.
From hence it is evident, that those Islands are capable of great Improvement,
as they abound likewise in many Curiosities, especially in Subjects of
Philosophical Observation. Nor is it less plain by the many ancient Monuments
remaining among them, and the Marks of the Plough reaching to the very Tops of
the Mountains, (which the artless Inhabitants think incapable of Culture) that
in remote Ages they were in a far more flourishing Condition than at present.
The Ruins of spacious Houses, and the numerous Obelisks, old Forts, Temples,
Altars, etc. undeniably prove this; besides that the Country was formerly full
of Woods, as appears by the great Oak and Firr-trees daily dug out of the
Ground, and by many other Tokens, there being several Woods and Coppices still
remaining in Sky, Mull, and other Places. The Inhabitants are not to be mended
in the Proportion of their Persons; no preposterous Bandages distorting them in
the Cradle, nor hindering Nature from duly forming their Limbs; which is the
Reason, that bodily Imperfections of any sort are very rare among them. Neither
does any over-officiously preventive Physic, in their Infancy, spoil their
original Constitution; whence they have so strong a Habit of Body, that one of
them requires treble the Dose, as will purge any Man in the South of Scotland.
But what contributes above all things to their Health and Longevity, is
constant Temperance and Exercise. Their Food is commonly fresh, and their Meals
two a Day, Water being the ordinary Drink of the Vulgar. They cure all
Disorders of the Body by Simples of their own Growth, and by proper Diet or
Labor. Hence they are stout and active, dextrous in all their Exercises; as
they are withal remarkably sagacious, choleric, but easily appeased, sociable,
good-natured, ever-chearful, and having a strong Inclination to Music. They
are hospitable beyond Expression, entertaining all Strangers, of what Condition
soever, gratis; the Use of Money being still in some of those Islands unknown,
and, till a few Ages past, in all of them. They have no Lawyers or Attorneys.
The Men and Women plead their own Causes; and a very speedy Decision is made by
the Proprietor, who is perpetual President in their Courts, or by his Bailiff,
as his Substitute.

The present (says Mr. Toland) is the 35th Lord of Barra by uninterrupted
lineal Descent, a thing whereof no Prince in the World can boast; and he is
regarded as no mean Potentate by his Subjects, who know none greater than he.
When the Wife of any of them dies, he has immediate recourse to his Lord,
representing first his own Loss in the Want of a Female Companion; and next,
that of Macneil, his Lord, himself, if he should not go on to beget Followers
for him. Hereupon Macneil finds out a suitable Match (neither Side ever
disliking his Choice, but accepting it as the highest Favor); and the Marriage
is celebrated without any Courtship, Portion or Dowry: but they never fail to
make merry on such Occasions, with a Bottle or more of Usquebaugh. On the other
hand, when any Woman becomes a Widow, she is, upon the like Application, soon
provided with an Husband, and with as little Ceremony. Macneil also supplies
any of his Tenants with as many Milch-cows, as he may chance to lose by the
Severity of the Weather; or by other Misfortunes. He takes likewise into his
own Family, and maintains to the Day of their Death, as many old Men, as through
Age or Infirmity become unfit for Labor, an House being built hard-by on
Purpose for them.

Of the Northern Isles of Scotland.
WE come now to the Isles of Orkney and Shetland. The Orkneys, called by the
Latins Orcades, have the Caledonian Ocean on the West, the German Ocean on the
East, the Sea that divides them from Shetland, on the North, and Pentland
Firth, 24 Miles long, and 12 Miles broad, which divides them from the main Land
of Scotland, on the South. Ancient Authors differ about their Number. Pliny
reckoned them Forty, Orosius Thirty-three; but it appears by later Discoveries,
that they are only Twenty-eight. They lie in Longitude 22 Degrees. 11 Min. Latitude
59 Degrees. 2 Min. The longest Day is 18 Hours and some odd Minutes: The Winters,
as in most small Islands, and indeed always near the Sea, are generally more
subject to Rain than Snow. The Frost and Snow do not continue long, but the
Wind is very boisterous; and it rains sometimes not by Drops, but by violent
Spouts of Water.

STROMA lies so near the Coast of Caithness, that it was always possessed by
the Earls of that County, and therefore not reckoned among the Orcades. This is
a small Island, but not unfruitful. Authors are not agreed as to the Reason of
giving the Name of Pentland Firth to that Straight, in Breadth about 12 Miles,
which lies between the Orcades and the main Land; some say, it is a Corruption
of the Word Pictland Firth, which was so called, because the Picts formerly
inhabited those Islands, and part of the neighboring Continent, and that many
of them perished here, when repulsed by the ancient Inhabitants of Orkney.
Others think Pentland Firth the proper Name, and it was so denominated from the
Highlands or Hills in the North of Scotland, by which it is bounded on one
Side, for the same Reason that the high Hills, which take their Rise some Miles
South-west of Edinburgh, are called Pentland Hills. This Firth is remarkable
for its swift, violent, and contrary Tides, occasioned by the Multitude of the
Isles, and the Narrowness of the Passage, which makes it very dangerous,
especially to Strangers; and, which is remarkable, the Whirlpools, with which
this Firth abounds, occasioned, as is thought, by some Hiatus's in the Earth
below, are most dangerous in a Calm, and whirl the Boats or Ships round, till
they swallow them up; but if there be any Wind, and the Boat under Sail, they
are passed without Danger. The Mariners, who use to carry Passengers between
the main Land and the Isles, if at any time they are driven near those
Whirlpools by the Tide, throw a Barrel, Oar, Bundle of Straw, or any other
bulky Thing that comes to hand, into the Whirlpools, which make them smooth
enough till the Vessel pass over them; and what is thus cast in, is generally
found floating again a Mile or two distant. The different Tides in this Firth
are reckoned twenty-four, and run with such impetuous Force, that no Ship under
Sail, with the fairest Wind, is able to make way against them; yet the Natives
on both Sides, who know the proper Seasons, pass this Firth every Day safely,
except when the Weather is tempestuous.

The first of the Orkney Islands is SOUTH RONALSA, six Miles long and five
broad, fruitful in Corn, and well inhabited; it has a safe Harbor on the
North-side, but the South-east has the dangerous Rocks called Pentland
Skerries; it abounds with Cattle, and has two united Parish Churches, whereof
the Dean was Minister.

A little to the South-west lies SWINNA, a small Island, fruitful in Corn,
capable of maintaining a few Husbandmen, and their Families; has a good Fishing
on its Coasts, and is noted for a good Slate Quarry. The Whirlpools near this
Island are called the Wells of Swinna.

Beyond Swinna lie WAYS and HOY, which are but one Isle, 12 Miles long, and
full of high Mountains: that Part called Ways is fruitful, and very well
inhabited. This Island has several good Harbors, particularly that called
North Hope, one of the best in the World, and properest for those who design a
Fishing-trade. That Part called Hoy, from which it is only separated by a
Springtide, has the highest Mountains in Orkney, and the deepest Valleys,
which strike a Terror into Strangers, who have Occasion to travel that Way. On
these Mountains there are many Sheep, which run wild, and are scarcely to be
caught by any Art. On Rorahead, a high and rugged Promontory in this Island, an
extraordinary Fowl, which the Inhabitants call Liar, builds its Nest; it is
about the Size of a Duck, and so fat, that it seems to be nothing else; the
Inhabitants admire it much, and venture their Lives to climb for it by Ropes,
etc. It is reckoned delicious Food, eaten with Vinegar and Pepper. On a barren
Heath in this Island lies an oblong Stone, in a Valley between two moderate
Hills, called, by way of Contraries, The dwarfy Stone. It is 36 Feet long, 18
Feet broad, and 9 Feet high. No other Stones are near it. It Is all hollowed
within, having a Door on the East Side two Feet square, with a Stone of the
same Dimension lying about two Feet from it, which was intended, no doubt, to
close this Entrance. Within there is cut out, at the South-end of it, the Form
of a Bed and Pillow, capable of holding two Persons; as at the North-end is
another Bed, both very neatly done. Above, at an equal Distance from both, is a
large round Hole, which is supposed not only to have been designed for letting
in Light and Air when the Door was shut; but likewise for letting out Smoke
from the Fire, for which there is a Place made in the Middle between the two
Beds. The Marks of the Workman's Tool appear everywhere; and the Tradition of
the Vulgar is, that a Giant and his Wife had this Stone for their Habitation;
though the Door alone destroys this Fancy, which is wholly groundless every way
besides. Just by it is a clear and pleasant Spring, for the Use of the
Inhabitant.

From the Top of these Hills the Sun is to be seen all Night about the Summer
Solstice. On the North Part of this Island are a Church, a Gentleman's Seat,
and several Farm-houses, as also diverse Lakes, which abound with Fish,
especially Trouts.

Three Miles from South Ronalsay lies BURRA, three Miles long, and one broad,
fruitful in Corn and Pasturage, and affords excellent Fuel. Stewart of Mains
built a noble and sumptuous Stone House here. This Isle abounds with Rabbets,
and has a Chapel, but belongs to the Parish of South Ronalsay.

West from this lies FLOTTA, 5 Miles long, and 3 and a half broad, most of it
encompassed with high Rocks; it has a Church and a Gentleman's Seat, and
abounds with excellent Land-fowl in its Heaths; but has little Corn-ground, and
not many Inhabitants.

Near this lie FAIRA, CAVA, and GRANSEY, fruitful and pleasant, though small
Islands.

We pass by several Holms, as they call them, which are left for Pasturage; and
come to POMONA, the largest of the Orkney Islands, and for that Reason called
The Main-land; it is 24 Miles long; in some Places nine, and in others six
Miles broad; it is very fruitful, and well inhabited; though there are no Trees
in all these Islands, but what grow in the Bishop's Gardens at Kirkwall, in
this Island, the only Town in Orkney, a Royal Borough, long possessed by the
Norwegians, pleasantly situated upon a Bay, near the Middle of it; it is about
a Mile in Length, and is the Seat of Justice, where the Sheriffs, etc. keep
their Courts. It consists of one Street, which is narrow; but the Houses are
well built, and most of them covered with Slate. The Crown had formerly a very
strong Castle here, which is now in Ruins. Near the Castle stands a stately
House, formerly the Bishop's Seat; and near to that a Palace, which was begun
by Patrick Stewart, Earl of Orkney, in the Year 1574. but not finished, because
of his untimely Death: Several Rooms of it have been curiously painted with
Scripture Stories. At the North-end of the Town is a Fort built by the English,
during Oliver Cromwell's Administration, ditch'd about with a Breastwerk, and
other Fortifications, on which they have some Canon planted, for the Defense of
the Harbor. There is a stately Cathedral Church here, called by the Name of
St. Magnus, who, the Natives say, was their first Apostle: it is very
magnificent for this Part of the World, and built of hewn Stone, excellently
polished; it has fourteen Pillars on each Side, and a Steeple erected on four
larger Pillars in the Middle, with fine Bells in it: there are so many
Turnings, that it is hard for a Stranger to find the same Way out or in. Here
is a public Grammar School; they have a Charter for two weekly Markets, and an
annual Fair, which holds three Days. The Town is governed by a Provost, four
Bailiffs, and a Common Council. This Island has nine Parish-churches, many
Promontories and Bays, and several Mines of good white and black Lead; it has
also several Gentlemen's Seats, and diverse Lakes and Rivulets, which abound with
Salmon and other Fish. It has four very good Harbors; viz. one at Kirkwall,
both large and safe; another at Deersound, very large, with good Anchorage, and
capable of receiving the greatest Fleets; the third is at Graham's Hall; and
the fourth at Kerston, which is very commodious and well fenced against all
Winds. In this Island are two Temples, where the Natives believe by Tradition,
that the Sun and Moon were worshipped; which Belief of theirs is very right,
since the lesser Temple is semicircular. The greater is 110 Paces diameter.
There are two green Mounts erected at the East and West End of it; and round
each of the Temples a Trench or Ditch is drawn, like that about Stone-kenge.
Many of the Stones are about 20 or 24 Feet in Height above the Ground, about
five in Breadth, and a Foot or two in Thickness. Some of them are fallen down;
and the Temples are one on the East, and the other on the West Side of the Lake
of Stennis, where it is shallow and fordable, there being a Passage over by
large stepping Stones. Near the smaller Temple (which is on the East Side of
the Lake, as the greater on the West) stand two Stones of the same Bigness with
the rest; through the Middle of one of which runs a large Hole, by which
Criminals and Victims were tied.

East from The Main-land lies COPPINSHA, a small Island, but fruitful in Corn
and Grass, has good Fishing, and abounds with Fowl; it is very conspicuous to
Seamen, as is the Holm to the North-east of it, called The Horse of Coppinsha.

North from The Main-land lies SHAPINSHA, five or six Miles long, and three
broad; it has a very safe Harbor, and a Parish Church.

To the South-east lies STRONSA, six Miles long, and three broad, well known,
because of its good Harbors, to those who frequent this Country and Shetland
for Fishing: it is very fruitful, and well inhabited, and has a Rock belonging
to it called Outkerrie, remarkable for its good Fishery.

A little North of it lies a little pleasant Isle, called PAPA STRONSA, very
fruitful, and well inhabited.

Farther North lies SANDA, about 12 Miles long, and eight Miles broad, well
inhabited, and has two Harbors; it abounds with Cattle, Hay, and Fish; but the
Inhabitants are obliged to bring their Fuel from EDA, which lies East of it:
It is ten Miles long, and in some Places five Miles broad; there is good Salt
made here, and it abounds with Fish and Fowl, but not with Corn and Grass.

Three Miles West from Kirkwall lies DAMSEY, a small, but fruitful Island, and
abounds with Fish.

To the North-west lies ROUSA, eight Miles long, and six broad; it has many
Promontories, and high Hills; but on the Coast is fruitful, and well inhabited;
it abounds also with Fowl, Fish, and Rabbets.

There are several other Islands in the Neighborhood, which are fruitful
enough for their Extent.

Eight Miles North from Kirkwall lies EGLISHA, three Miles long, and two broad;
it has a safe Road for Ships, is very pleasant and fruitful, and has a
Parish Church.

Five Miles North-east lies NORTH-FARA, three Miles long; it is but thinly
inhabited, but affords the common Commodities of the Country.

SOUTH-FARA, which lies near Burra, is much of the same Extent and Nature.

North from Eglisha lies WESTRA, eight Miles long, in some Places five, and in
others three Miles broad; it is well inhabited, abounds with Corn, Cattle, Fish
and Rabbets, has a strong Castle, with a convenient Harbor.

Two Miles North-east lies PAPA-WESTRA, three Miles long, a Mile and a half
broad, is well inhabited, has a good Harbor, and together with the other
Westra, makes up a Parish. In this Island stand, near a Lake, (now called St.
Tredwell's Loch) two Obelisks, in one of which is a Hole used by the Heathens
for the Tying of Criminals and Victims; and behind them, lying on the Ground, a
third Stone, hollowed like a Trough.

The People of the Orcades are generally healthful, stout, and well
proportioned; they are more numerous than can reasonably be imagined. Bleau, in
his Atlas, says, they mustered 10000 Men at once, near Kirkwall, fit to carry
Arms, besides those that were left to cultivate the Ground. The Commodities
which they export yearly, are Butter, Tallow, Hides, Barley, Malt, Oatmeal,
Fish, salted Beef, Pork, Rabbet-skins, Otter-skins, white Salt, Stuffs,
Stockens, Wool, Hams, Quills, Down, Feathers, etc. Molucca Beans, figured
Stones, and peculiar Sorts of Fish and Fowls are found here. The Claik Geese,
or Barnacles, which are reckoned to breed in the Trunks of Trees, or in the
Timber of old Ships, and have been so frequently seen about these and the
neighboring Islands, have occasioned abundance of Wrangling among the Learned.
Some of them have denied the Matter of Fact, and boldly asserted, there could
be no such thing in Nature, as that Birds should proceed from Trees; others,
who could not resist the Evidence of so many Persons of Credit, who had seen
and attested the hanging of Birds of that sort to the Trunks of Trees, etc.
have had recourse to such strange Philosophical Notions for explaining this
Phenomenon, as still made the thing more ridiculous and incredible. But there
are two ways to solve this Difficulty, found out by modern Authors, both of
which seem very probable: The first is the Concha Anatifera, mentioned by Sir
Robert Sibbald, in his Natural History of Scotland, Book III. Part ii. Cap. 12.
wherein he says, that those Shells stick to Sea-ware, or Logs of Fir, and suck
Nourishment from them; that the Animal contained in those Shells, is a Fish,
but unshapely, and sends out such a Multitude of Feet, as resemble Hair, which
the unwary Observer takes for Feathers; and of this Animal Sir Robert has given
us a Cut in the End of his Book. Dr. Wallis, in his Description of Orkney, has
done the like, and tells us, he has seen some Thousands of those Conchae,
sticking to Logs of Wood driven ashore in that Country. But the Solution given
by a late Author, in his Curiosities of Nature and Art in Husbandry and
Gardening, lately printed at London, p. 311. seems still to be more plain, if
the Fact be true, viz. That the Barnacles lay their Eggs as Fish do theirs, and
leave them at the Mercy of the Waves; and that as they float, they stick to
what they meet, especially rotten Wood, Sea-ware, and other maritime Plants,
upon which we may observe a glutinous Substance; and that they are hatched
there by the Heat of the Sun.

The People of the Orcades, generally speaking, are very civil and industrious,
hospitable, sober, and religiously disposed. Though the Air be sharp and cold,
yet it may be called temperate. They are generally long-lived, the Women
handsome, bearing Children sometimes at sixty Years. They are seldom afflicted
with Fevers, Stone, or Gout; but are often liable to the Scurvy, Agues, and
Consumptions. They generally speak the English Tongue after the Scots way; but
many ancient People of the poorer Sort, speak the Norn, or Norway, or old
Danish Tongue, which has been continued from the first Planters of these
Islands. They have plenty of Black Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Rabbets, Geese, and
several sorts of Fish. They export great Quantities of Oil, Butter, and salt
Flesh, which turn to good Account. Their Corn-land is everywhere enclosed; and
without these Enclosures their Sheep and Swine, and most of their Cattle, go
loose, without an Herdsman.

They formerly had their own Kings, after the Manner of the Picts, who were
harassed by the Romans; but by the Injury of Time, or Negligence of Writers,
only two are come to the Knowledge of Posterity, viz. Bladus, or Balus, and
Ganus, who was cotemporary with Caractacus, the 18th King of Scotland, in the
first Century.

These Isles, it is likely, were under their own Princes, (of the Pictish Blood)
till they were subdued by King Kenneth Macalpin, about the Year 840. But Anno
1099. Donald Bane having assigned them to the King of Norway, for assisting him
in his Usurpation, the Norwegians invaded them; and were Masters for about 164
Years, when Magnus, King of Norway, sold all again to Alexander, King of
Scotland, who gave the Property hereof to a Nobleman, surnamed Speire, an
Heiress of whose Family brought it to the Sinclairs, or St. Clares, one of whom
carried the Title of Prince of Orkney, Duke of Old^nburgh, etc. and married a
Daughter of the King of Denmark's. But one of his Successors having forfeited,
the Title and Estate fell to the Crown; though, in Truth, the Scots reaped but
little Profit by them, being often disturbed by the Kings of Denmark and
Norway, who claimed the Sovereignty; and, in some measure, continued possessed
of it, till the Marriage of King James III. with a Daughter of Denmark, when
they were first mortgaged for a great Sum, due then by the Contract; and
thereafter, upon her bringing forth a Son (afterward King James IV.) the
entire Right to them was surrendered to King James III. which was farther
confirmed to King James VI. upon his marrying Anne his Queen, the King of
Denmark's Daughter. The Earldom of Orkney, and Lordship of Zetland, continued
in the Crown, till Queen Mary, being to marry James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell,
by fatal Advice of her Privy Council, advanced him to the Dignity of Duke of
Orkney. After his Death, King James VI. created a natural Son of King James V.
Earl; which failing in his Son, it returned to the Crown: and, Anno 1647.
William Dowglass, Earl of Morton, having advanced, as he said, great Sums to
King Charles I. procured this Country in Mortgage for his Money; but it was
redeemed, and, by Act of Parliament, all re-annexed to the Crown, Anno 1669.
excepting what belonged to the Bishop; which Act suppressed the Office of
Sheriff, and erected one with a different Name, viz. to be called, The
Stewartry of Orkney and Zetland. But the said Country, by the Union-Parliament,
was dissolved from the Crown, and her late Majesty thereupon granted the same
to the then Earl of Morton, for Payment of the yearly Sum of 500 l. and
appointed him Steward and Justicier within the Bounds thereof. Under the
Stewards are some Judges of his Creation and Appointment, called Bailiffs: In
every Parish and Isle there is one. Their Office is to oversee the Manners of
the Inhabitants, to hold Courts, and to determine in Civil Matters, to the
Value of 10 l. Scots (16 s. 8 d. English); but if the Matter be above, it is
referred to the Steward, or his Deputy. Under and subservient to those
Bailiffs, are six or seven of the most honest and intelligent Persons within
the Parish, called Lawrightmen. These, in their respective Bounds, have the
Oversight of the People, in manner of Constables, and inform the Bailiff of
such Enormities as occasionally happen, which the latter punishes according to
the Importance and Circumstances of the Fault; and if it be above his Limits,
or the Extent of his Power, he sends the Delinquent to the Seat of Justice,
which is held, as we hinted, at Kirkwall, by the Steward, or his Deputy. These
Lawrightmen have a Privilege inherent to their Office, by the Custom of the
Country, which is not usual elsewhere; and this is, if there be any Suspicion
of Theft, they take some of their Neighbors with them, during the Silence of
the Night, and make Search for the Theft, which is called Ransacking, from
Ransaka, which is to make Inquiry, in the ancient Danish: they search every
House they come to, and seizing him upon whom the Theft is found, bring him to
the Seat of Justice.

The Christian Religion was not only preached, but planted very early in these
Isles: for we find Servanus (or St. Serf) was their Bishop, and Preceptor to
the famous Kentigern, (whom, in a familiar way, he called Mongah, or Mungo, in
his vulgar Tongue) who founded the Bishopric of St. Asaph in Wales about the
Year 560. and who had been also Bishop of Glasgow. And, Anno 1071. the People
of Orkney sent one of their Clergy to York, with Letters, desiring that
Archbishop (who was then, in Fact, possessed of a Jurisdiction over the Church
of Scotland) to consecrate him to be their Bishop. The last Popish Bishop was
Adam Hepburn, who conformed to the Reformation, and lived many Years after it.
He was an eminent Man in his Time, a Lord of Council and Session; he crowned
King James VI. was Father to the Lord Holy-rood-house, where he was Abbot, and
where his Tomb remains to this Day. The brave Lieutenant General George
Hamilton, Field Marshal of Great Britain, lately deceased, was Earl of Orkney.

Eighty Miles farther North lie the Isles of SHETLAND; betwixt them lies the
FAIR ISLE, which rises up in three high Promontories, and is seen both in
Orkney and Shetland. They lie in 61 and 62 Degrees of North Latitude, and have
Norway on the East, which is the nearest Part of the Continent of Europe. There
are in all Forty-six Islands, Forty Holms, or lesser Isles, left for Pasturage,
and Thirty Rocks frequented only by Fowl.

The first of these Islands, called THE MAINLAND, is 60 Miles long, and, in
some Places, 16 broad: it runs into the Sea with abundance of Promontories: it
is best inhabited, and cultivated, on the Shore; but the inner Part is
mountainous, and full of Lakes or Bogs, which makes traveling there to
Strangers dangerous. The Air is cool and piercing; yet many of the Inhabitants
live to a great Age. About the Summer Solstice they have so much Light all
Night, that they can see to read by it. The Sun sets between Ten and Eleven at
Night, and rises between One and Two in the Morning; and, on the other hand,
the Day is so much shorter, and the Night longer in the Winter; which, with the
Violence of the Tides, and the Tempestuousness of the Seas, deprives them of
all foreign Correspondence from October to April, during which Time they know
nothing of what passes in the other Parts of the World. A known Instance of
this was, that though the Revolution happened to begin in November, they knew
nothing of it till the May following, when a Fisherman, who arrived there, told
them of it; and then they imprisoned him, in order to try him for spreading
such News.

They are much subject to the Scurvy, by eating too much Fish; but Nature has
furnished them with great Quantities of Scurvygrass for an Antidote. They have
little Corn of their own Growth, and therefore import great Quantities from
Orkney. Their common Drink is Whey, which they barrel up, and keep in cold
Cellars; this makes it very strong, so that it quickly turns their Heads. Some
of them keep for their Drink Butter-milk mixed with Water, and this they call
Bland. The better Sort have good Beer and Ale, of which they are very liberal
to Strangers. They have abundance of the Fish of all Sorts on their Coasts for
most Part of the Year: those that abound most are Cod, Ling, and Herring. They
have also Shellfish of all Sorts, with Whales, Seals, Sea-calves, and Otters;
and in the Wintertime they burn Oil of Fish instead of Candle. They abound
with all Sorts of Fowl, except Heath-cocks; and other Fowls which frequent
Heaths, will not live there when brought thither, though they have abundance of
Heath. They have Store of Geese, and many Sorts of Ducks. They have Plenty of
little Horses, which they call Schelties, very fit for the Husbandman's Use,
and pace naturally. They make coarse Cloth, Stockens, and knit Gloves for their
own Use, and also for Sale to the Norwegians. Their Grain is Oats and Big, but
most of the latter. They have abundance of Black Cattle and Sheep. Their Ewes
are very prolifick, and for the most part bring forth two, and sometimes three
Lambs at once. Their Fuel is Turf, Peat, and Heath. Their chief Trade of
Export consists in Fish, by the Produce of which they pay their Rent, and
purchase Necessaries. Their native Language is old Gothic, or German, as was
also that of Orkney; but they generally now speak English. In their Customs and
Habit they much resemble the Germans, but the better Sort imitate the Scots
Lowlanders. Their Religion is Protestant, and they are generally, as well as
the Orkney-men, very devout. There were few or no Presbyterians in these Parts
before the Year 1700. when new Missionaries came, and ejected the old Clergy;
yet the People did not care to hear them, so long as they had any body else.
They make use of no Physicians; and if at any time they receive Wounds, they
cure themselves. There are two little Towns in this Island; the first and
oldest is Scalloway, on the West Side of the Island, where there is a Castle
four Stories high: the Inhabitants are about an hundred in Number. The second
and largest is Lerwick, which by their Fishing-trade is increased now to about
three hundred Families.

There are several ancient Monuments in these Islands, and particularly those
called Picts Houses, which we have not room to insist upon.

The Dutch, Hamburghers, etc. come hither to fish in June, and go away again in
August and September; and sometimes there are two thousand Busses fishing in
Brassa's Sound at once.

The most remarkable of the other Islands here, are, ZEAL, commonly called
YELL, eighteen Miles long, and nine broad: it has three Churches, and several
Chapels. And,

Farther North lies VUIST, much of the same Dimensions, plain, pleasant to the
Eye, fruitful, and well inhabited. It is the pleasantest of the Shetland Isles,
has three Churches, and as many Harbors. The Inhabitants say, no Cats will
live in it.

TRONDA lies over against Scalloway; it is three Miles long, and two broad.

A little North-east lies WALSEY, three Miles long, and as many broad.

On the East of Brassa's Sound lies GREAT RULE, eight Miles long, and two
broad: it has a good Harbor.

Six Leagues West from The Main-land lies FOULA, three Miles in Length.

More to the East lies BRASA, five Miles long, and two broad: it has some
arable Ground, and two Churches.

BURRAY is three Miles long, has good Pasturage, abounds with Fish on the
Coast, and has a Church in it. No Mice will live here; and, it is said, they
forsake the Place, wherever the Earth of it is brought.

Shetland is divided into twelve Parishes; but there are many more Churches and
Chapels in it. This Country, like Orkney, has no Wood in it; but they have some
Fish and Fowl peculiar to themselves. The Inhabitants are very bold in
venturing to Sea at all Seasons for Fish, and in climbing the Rocks for Fowl.

It has been debated among the Learned, whether these Islands, the Orcades, or
the North-east Coast of Scotland, was the THULE of the Ancients; but we have
not room to give an Account of the Arguments for the several Hypotheses, nor to
consider which of them are most conclusive; though it ought to be observed, that
Sir Robert Sibbald has in a manner demonstrated, that the North-eastern Parts
of Scotland were what the Ancients called so. For thus speaks Claudian, of
Theodosius, Father of the Emperor of that Name: Ille Caledoniis posuit qui
castra pruinis.
-- Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
In Caledonian Frosts encamped he stood,
When Orkney Isles were died with Saxon Blood:
Then THULE with the Pictish Gore grew hot,
Icy Strathern bemoaned each slaughtered Scot.


Silius Italicus takes notice, in Thule, of a Custom well known among the
ancient Britons and Caledonians: Coerulus haud aliter cum dimicat incola Thules,
Agmina falcifero circumvenit acta covino.
So, when the azure Son of Thule wars,
He circles Armies driven in pointed Cars.


The chief Families in Orkney and Shetland are the Bruces, Sinclairs, Mouats,
Nivets, Chyneys, Stuarts, Grahams, Moodies, Dowglasses, Honeymans, Trails,
Bakies, Southerlands, Craigies, Youngs, Buchanans, etc. But the most ancient,
and, I may say, original, are the Fletts, Hackrews, Richens, Feas, Skolas,
Grottes, etc.

In the Mouth of the River FORTH lie several Islands, the most considerable of
which is the MAY: it was formerly dedicated to St. Adrian, who was martyred
there by the Danes, and afterward a religious Place was built in Memory of
him. The Monks gave out, that barren Women, who came thither annually to
worship at St. Adrian's Shrine, would thereby be cured of their Barrenness; and
it was frequented upon that Account by Women in the Popish Times. But whether
St. Adrian or the Monks had the most Influence in curing their Barrenness, I
determine not. Yet that fond, silly Persuasion obtained so much Credit, that
Wood, of Largo, who was a noted Sea Captain, had a Charter of several Lands
from King James IV. to be in Readiness upon Call to attend his Majesty and the
Queen while they visited St. Adrian. This Island is a Mile long from North to
South, and about a Quarter of a Mile broad: it lies seven Miles from the Coast
of Fife, has a fresh water Spring, and a small Lake. There grows no Corn here;
but in the Summer it affords Pasturage for an hundred Sheep, and twenty Black
Cattle. The West Side is inaccessible, because of high Rocks; but the Eastside
is plain, and has four Places where Boats may arrive, one of them a safe
Harbor for Ships during a strong West Wind. Fish of all Sorts are numerous on
the Coast of this Island, and it abounds with Fowl, particularly those called
Skarts, Dunters, Gulls, Scouts, and Kittawaax; the latter is about the Size of
a Dove, and in July is preferred to a Partridge. The Scouts are somewhat less
than a Duck, but their Eggs are larger than those of a Goose, and being boiled
hard, eat very well with Vinegar and Parsley. This Island of May formerly
belonged to the Priory of Pittenweem, but was granted in Fee by King Charles I.
to Cunningham of Barns, with Liberty to build a Light-house there for the
Benefit of Ships; for the Maintenance of which they were to allow 2 d. per Tun.
A Tower of 40 Foot high is built there for that End, with a Fire every Night;
and the first Builder was cast away, in returning from thence to his House in
Fife, by a Tempest which some poor old Women were executed for raising.

The BASS lies next; but I have given an Account of it already.

Higher up in the Forth lies INCHKEITH, betwixt Fife and Lothian, a Mile and a
half long, and about half a Mile broad: the Soil is fat, and produces good
Grass, and abundance of physical Herbs. It has four fresh water Springs, and as
many Harbors, one toward each Quarter: it rises in the Middle, and has a
strong Stone Fort raised upon it by Queen Mary. There is a Stone Quarry here,
which sends forth a strong sulphurous Smell, when any Pieces are broken off,
but very fit for Building. There are great Shoals of Fish round the Coasts of
this Island, and abundance of Oysters during the Winter. This Island had its
Name from the noble Family of Keith, whose Founder had this Island, with the
Barony of Ceith-mareschal in Lothian, and the Hereditary Dignity of Earl
Marshall of Scotland conferred upon him by King Malcolm II. in the Year 1010.
for his Valor in the Battle against the Danes at Bar in Angus. It came
afterward to the Crown, and was given by King Robert II. to John Lord Lion of
Glames, the Chief of that Family, with the Barony of Kinghorn, upon his
marrying that Prince's Daughter. It is since in other Hands. It is observed,
that Horses grow fat here in a little time.

Higher up, within two Miles of Aberdour, lies an Island, called ST. COLM'S
INCH, as being dedicated to St. Columba: it had formerly a famous Abbey, with
large Endowments, but it is now ruined; and upon the Alienation of Abbey Lands,
was given to the Lord Downs, a Branch of the Family of Stuart.

Higher up lies INCHGARVY, between two Promontories, near the Queen's Ferry; it
was also fortified, and the Guns of the Forts could reach the Shore or both
Sides, so that no Ships could safely pass it without Leave.

On the Top of an high rocky Hill, at the Westend of the Islands of Orkney,
near the Village of Skeal, there is a sort of Pavement consisting of Stones
variously figured, some like an Heart, others like a Crown, a Leg, a Weaver's
Shuttle, etc. It takes up above a Quarter of a Mile in Length, and from 20 to
30 Feet in Breadth. In removing any of these Stones, the Figure is as neat on
the Underside, as the Upper, and being as big as the Life, all of one Color,
or a reddish Kind of Stone, pitched in a reddish Earth, and the Pavemen so very
long, it cannot be any of the tessellated or checkered Works of the Romans.
Part of a Garden Wall is decorated with these Stones, and many of them are
taken away by the neighboring Gentry, to set them up like Dutch Tiles in their
Chimneys; so that, at this rate, in less than a Century, this Pavement will in
all likelihood subsist only in Books.

It has been long observed, that the Islands of Scotland, especially the
Western, lie more conveniently for carrying on, and bringing the Fishing-trade
to Perfection, than any other Parts of Europe.

King Charles I. began the Experiment, in Conjunction with a Company of
Merchants; but that Design miscarried by the Civil War, which unhappily broke
out at that Time. The next Attempt was made by King Charles II. who also joined
with some Merchants; and this succeeded well for a Time. Mr. Martin assures us,
from such as saw the Fish that were caught by that Company, that they were
reputed the best in Europe of their Kind, and accordingly bore a greater Price.
But this Design was ruined thus: The King having Occasion for Money, was
advised to withdraw that which was employed in the Fishery; at which the
Merchants being displeased, and disagreeing likewise among themselves, they
also withdrew their Money, and that Design has never been renewed since that
Time.

But the Revival of this Undertaking will, in all Probability, be one of the
Blessings which this Island will reap by the late happy Union. What cannot
English Money, and Scottish Industry, effect!

The settling a Fishery in those Parts will raise a Nursery of stout and able
Seamen in a very short time, to serve the Government on all Occasions. A new
Colony need not be planted there; for the Inhabitants of the Western Isles are
reckoned to be about 50,000; many of whom have no Employment, and are generally
dextrous at the Oar, and only want to be furnished with proper Materials for
the Fishing-trade, which would encourage the setting up other Manufactures. The
Commodiousness and Safety of the numerous Bays and Harbors in those Isles seem
as if Nature had designed them for promoting Trade. They have such abundance of
Turf and Peat for Fuel, as would furnish Salt-pans with Fire all the Year
round. The Coast of each Island affords many thousand Loads of Sea-ware, which,
if preserved, might be successfully used for making Glass, and likewise Kelp
for Soap. Several of the Islands afford great Quantities of fine Clay; which,
if improved, might turn to a good Account in making Earthen-ware of all Sorts.
Cod and Ling, as well as lesser Fish, are to be had on the Coasts of the lesser
as well as the greater Islands; and what has been said of the Western Isles,
may be said likewise of the Isles of Orkney and Shetland.

Having thus concluded our Tour through the whole Island, we shall, in order to
render the same more complete, subjoin the following Articles, respecting as
well the Southern as Northern Parts thereof; and begin first with the following

Brief Abstract of the SEATS of the English Nobility and Gentry See Page 244.
in this Volume, for the Scottish Seats.
; togethe^ with the Number of Parishes, Market Towns, principal Rivers, etc. in
eac^ County of England and Wales.
BEDFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 73 Miles, contains 124 Parishes, and 4
Market Towns; the Shire-town, Bedford: principal Rivers, Ouse and Ivel. Seats
of the Nobility and Gentry: Woeburn-abby, Duke of Bedford 's; Wrest, Duke of
Kent 's; Houghton-park, Earl of Ailsbury 's; Hawnes, Lord Carteret 's;
Melchburn, Lord St. John 's; Bromham, Lord Trevor 's; Battleselden, Lord
Bathurst 's; Southill, Lord Torrington 's; Luton, Sir John Napier 's; Holcot,
Sir B. Charnock 's; Odell, Sir Rawl. Alston 's; Chicksand, Sir D'an^. Osborn
's; Wotton, Sir H. Monoux 's; Sutton, Sir R. Burgoigne 's; Ickwelbury, Mr.
Harvey 's; the Hasles, Mr. Kingsley 's; Stratton, Mr. Cotton 's.

BERKSHIRE.] Circumference 140 Miles, contains 140 Parishes, and 12
Market Towns; Town of most Note, Reading: chief Rivers, Thames and Kennet.
Seats: Wytham, Earl of Abingdon 's; Bill-hill, Lord Gower 's; Hamstead Marshall
and Ashdown-park, Lord Craven 's; Cavesham, Lord Cadogan 's; Aldermarston, Lord
Stawell 's; Radley, Sir J. Stonhouse 's; Hurly, Mrs. Williams 's; Bramsell, Sir
John Cope 's; Sunning, Lady Rich 's; Swallow-field, Mr. Pit 's; Billingbear,
Mr. Nevill 's; Coley, Col. Thomson 's.

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.] Circumference 138 Miles, contains 185 Parishes, and 15
Market Towns; Shire-town, Buckingham: chief Rivers, Tame, Ouse, Colin. Seats:
Bulstrode, Duke of Portland 's; Ashridge, Duke of Bridgwater 's; Cliefden,
Prince of Wales 's; Langley, Lord Massam 's; Stow, Lord Cobham 's; Denton,
Judge Denton 's; Chicheley, Sir John Chester 's; Denham-court, Sir W. Bowyer
's; Denham, late Sir R. Hill 's; Hartwell, Sir Tho. Lee 's; Wooton Underwood,
Mr. Greenville 's; Amersham Mount, Mr. Drake 's; Kingsey, Mr. Herbert 's;
Stoke, Mrs. Halsey 's.

CAMBRIDGESHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, contains 163 Parishes, and 8
Market Towns; Shire-town, Cambridge: principal Rivers, Ouse and Came. Seats:
Chevely, Duke of Somerset 's; Thornby-abbey, Duke of Beaufort 's;
Gogmagog-hills, Earl Godolphin 's; Wimple, Lord Hardwicke 's; Catlidge, late
Lord North and Gray 's; Maddingley, Sir J. Hynde Cotton 's; Gamlingay, Sir G.
Downing 's; Snalwell, Sir R. Clarke 's; Chippingham, Mr. Sandy 's; Dalham-hall,
Mr. Affleck 's; Exning, Mr. Shepherd 's; Potsam, Mr. Sheppard 's; Horse-heath,
Mr. Bromley 's.

CHESHIRE.] Circumference 112 Miles, contains 71 Parishes, and 13 Market Towns;
chief, Chester: principal Rivers, Dee and Weaver. Seats: Cholmondeley-hall,
Earl of Cholmondeley 's; Dunham Massey, Earl of Warrington 's; Rocksavage, Earl
of Barrymore 's; Woody, Earl of Dysert 's; Combermere, Sir R. S. Cotton 's;
Eaton, Sir R. Grosvenor 's; Aston, Sir T. Aston 's; Staney, Sir C. Bunbury 's;
Arley, Sir G. Warburton 's; Oulton, Mr. Egerton 's; Vale Royal, Mr.
Cholmondeley 's; Crew-hall, Mr. Crew Offley 's; Lyme, Mr. Leigh 's.

CORNWALL.] Circumference 230 Miles, contains 171 Parishes, and 27 Towns; chief
Town Launceston: principal Rivers, Tamer, Camel, and Fale. Seats: Truro and
Lanhidrock, Earl of Radnor 's; Godolphin, Earl Godolphin 's; Tregothan, Lord
Falmouth 's; Stow, Countess of Granville 's; Boconock, Mr. Pit 's; Trerise,
Lord Arundel 's; Trelowarren, Sir F. Vyvyan 's; Newton, Sir J. Coryton 's;
Pencarrow, Sir J. Molesworth 's; Trelawney, Sir J. Trelawney 's; Trebitch, Sir
B. Wrey 's; Clowance, Sir J. St. Aubin 's; Mount-Edgcomb, Mr. Edgcomb 's.

CUMBERLAND.] Circumference 168 Miles, contains 58 Parishes, and 15 Towns;
chief, Carlisle: principal River, Eden. Seats: Greystock-castle, Duke of
Norfolk 's; Drumbugh-castle, Ditto; Cockermouth-castle, Duke of Somerset 's;
Naworth, Earl of Carlisle 's; Kirk-Oswald, late Earl of Sussex 's;
D'Acre-castle, Ditto; Hutton-hall, late Sir George Fletcher 's, Bart.

DERBYSHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, contains 106 Parishes, and 9 Towns;
Shire-town, Derby: principal Rivers, Trent and Derwent. Seats: Chatsworth, Duke
of Devon 's; Hardwick, Ditto; Belvoir-castle, Duke of Rutland 's;
Belsover-castle, Duke of Newcastle 's; Haddon, Ditto; Bretly, Earl of
Chesterfield 's; Sutton, late Earl of Scarsdale 's; Stavely, Lord James
Cavendish 's; Kedleston, Sir J. Curson 's; Walton, Sir J. Jenkinson 's; Calke,
Sir John Harper 's; Longford, Mr. Cook 's; Melber, Ditto.

DEVONSHIRE.] Circumference 200 Miles, contains 394 Parishes, and 32 Towns;
chief, Exeter: Rivers, Tamer, Turridge, Ex, Taw, and Dart. Seats: Culliton, Sir
W. Young 's; Poudramcastle, Sir W. Courtney 's; Shute, Sir W. Pole 's;
Poltymore, Sir J. Bampfylde 's; Ash, Lady Drake 's; Colomb, Sir T. Ackland 's;
Ackland, Ditto; Werrington, Sir W. Morris 's; Pyne, Sir H. Northcote 's.

DORSETSHIRE.] Circumference 150 Miles, contains 248 Parishes, 19 Towns;
Shire-town, Dorchester: Rivers, Stowre, From, etc. Seats: Winburn St. Giles's,
Earl of Shaftsbury 's; Sherbourn, Lord Digby 's; Puddle-town, Lord Walpole 's;
Critchell, Sir W. Napier 's; Eastbury, Mr. Dodington 's; Charborough, Mr. Drax
's; Chettle, Mr. Chaffin 's; Kingston, Mr. Pit 's; Melbury, Col. Horner 's;
Stinsford, Ditto; Lichett, Col. Trenchard 's; Woolveton, Ditto;
Lullworth-castle, Mr. Weld 's; Smedmore, Mr. Clavell 's; Kingston-hall, Mr.
Banks 's; Bryanstone, Mr. Portman 's.

DURHAM.] Circumference 107 Miles, contains 118 Parishes, and 6 Towns; chief,
Durham: Rivers, Tyne, Ware, Derwent, Tees. Seats: Lumley-castle, Earl of
Scarborough 's; Ravensworth-castle, Sir H. Lyddal 's; -- Mr. Bows 's; Awkland,
Bishop of Durham 's.

ESSEX.] Circumference 146 Miles, contains 415 Parishes, and 21 Towns; chief
Town, Chelmsford: Rivers, Thames, Stowre, Coln, Chelmer, Lea, Crouch, Roding.
Seats: Audley-end, Earl of Suffolk 's; Moulsamhall, Earl Fitzwalter 's;
Shortgrove, Earl of Thomond 's; Wansted, Earl Tilney 's; near Chelmsford, late
Lord Barrington 's; Brentwood, Lord Petre 's; Ingatstone, Ditto; Copt-hall, Sir
T. Webster 's; Hill-hall, Sir Edw. Smith 's; Lowlayton, late Sir F. Tench 's;
Felix-hall, Sir A. T. Abdy 's; Albyn's, Sir R. Abdy 's; Little Leighs-hall, Sir
G. Alleyn 's; Liston-hall, Sir S. Barnardiston 's; Giddy-hall, Sir John Eyles
's; New-hall, Mr. Hoare 's; Hallingbury-hall, Mr. Houblon 's; Marcks, Mr.
Mildmay 's.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE.] Circumference 138 Miles, contains 280 Parishes, and 26
Towns; chief, Gloucester: Rivers, Severn, Wye, Stroud, Isis, Aven. Seats:
Badmington, Duke of Beaufort 's; Berkley-castle, Earl of Berkley 's;
Camden-house, Earl of Gainsborough 's; Kemsford, Lord Weymouth 's;
Barr's-court, Sir J. Newton 's; Rendcomb, Sir J. Guise 's; Elsmore, Ditto;
Sherburne, Sir J. Dutton 's; Durham, Mr. Blaithwaite 's; Fairford, Mr. Lamb 's;
Stoke, Mr. Berkley 's; King's Weston, Mr. Southwell 's; Siston-house, Mr.
Trotman 's; Barrington, Lord Hensol 's.

HANTS.] Circumference 100 Miles, contains 253 Parishes, and 16 Towns;
Shire-towns, South-ampton and Winchester: Rivers, Stowre, Avon, Itching, etc.
Seats: Hackwood, Duke of Bolton 's; Abbot's-stone, Ditto; Quicksett, Earl of
Salisbury 's; Down-husband, Lord Lymington 's; Chilton-candover, Sir R.
Worseley 's; Mottisfont, Sir R. Mills 's; Newton-berry, Ditto; Throekill, Mr.
Allaway 's; Hide-hall, Lady Miller 's; The Grange, Mr. Henley 's;
Stratfieldsea, Mr. Pit 's; Hermaid, Mr. Jervis 's; Soberton, Mr. Lewis 's;
Kelsey, Mr. Pointer 's; Moyle's-court, Mr. Lisle 's.

Isle of Wight, belonging to this County, is 60 Miles in Circumference,
contains 36 Parishes, and 3 Towns; chief Seat, Appledoor-comb, Sir Robert
Worsley 's, Bart.

HEREFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 102 Miles, contains 176 Parishes, and 8 Towns;
chief, Hereford: Rivers, Wye, Arrow, Lug, From. Seats: Brampton-bryan, Earl of
Oxford 's; Shopton-court, Lord Bateman 's; Hampton Court, Sir Michael Newton
's; Croft-castle, Sir Archer Crofts 's; Burhope, Sir Edward Goodyer 's;
Newport, Mr. Foley 's; Stoke, Mr. Auditor Foley 's; Heywood, Mr. Auditor Harley
's; Mockas-court, Mr. Cornwall 's.

HERTFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, contains 120 Parishes, and 18 Towns;
chief, Hertford: Rivers, Colm, Lea. Seats: Holywell, Duchess of Marlborough 's;
Hatfield, Earl of Salisbury 's; Cashiobury, Earl of Essex 's; Coley-green, Earl
Cowper 's; Hartingfordbury, Ditto; Langley, Lord Raymond 's; Gorrumbery, Lord
Grimston 's; Lammer, Sir S. Garrard 's; The Hoo, Mrs. Brand 's; Titenhanger,
Sir T. Pope Blunt 's; Cognedge, Sir J. Jennings 's; Beachwood, Sir F. Seabright
's; Offley, Sir H. Penrice 's; Bellbar, Lady Jekyll 's; Northall, Sir W. Lemon
's; Gubbins, Mr. Sambroke 's; Balls, late Gov. Harrison 's; Moore-park, Mr.
Style 's; Apston-hall, Mr. Freeman 's; Bennington, Mr. Caesar 's; Blakesware,
Mr. Plummer 's; Knebworth, Mr. Robinson 's; Widgell-hall, Mr. Gulston 's;
Ware-park, Mr. Bide 's; Stagny-hall, Mr. Heysham 's; Tuing-water, Mr. Heat 's;
Penly, Mr. Harcourt 's; Briggins, Mr. Chester 's; Berkhamstead magna, Mr. Roper
's.

HUNTINGDONSHIRE.] Circumference 67 Miles, contains 79 Parishes, and 6 Towns;
chief, Huntingdon: Rivers, Ouse, etc. Seats: Kimbolton-castle, Duke of
Manchester 's; Hinchinbroke, Earl of Sandwich 's; Great Gedding, Earl of
Rockingham 's; Bugden, Bishop of Lincoln 's; Stoughton, late Sir Baldwin
Conyers 's.

KENT.] Circumference 162 Miles, contains 408 Parishes, and 30 Towns; chief,
Canterbury: Rivers, Thames, Medway, Stowre, Darent, etc. Seats: Greenwich, a
Palace Royal; Rochester, Bp. of Rochester 's; Knowl, Duke of Dorset 's;
Eastwell, Earl of Winchelsea 's; Hothfield, Earl of Thanet 's; Penshurst, Earl
of Leicester 's; Chevening, Earl Stanhope 's; Fair-lawn, Lord Vane 's;
Leeds-castle, Lord Fairfax 's; Surrenden, Sir Edward Deering 's; Blackheath,
Sir Gregory Page 's; Mersham, Sir Windham Knatchbull 's; Leeds-abbey, Sir Roger
Meredith 's; Sutton, Sir Edward Filmer 's; Barham-downs, Sir Basil Dixwell 's;
Waldershire, Earl of Rockingham 's; Chilham-castle, Mr. Colebrooke 's;
Squirrels, Mr. Ward 's.

LANCASHIRE.] Circumference 170 Miles, contains 60 Parishes, and 26 Towns;
chief, Lancaster: Rivers, Mersey, Ribdle, Lon, Irk, Irwel. Seats: Stoney-hurst,
Duke of Norfolk 's; Ashtonhall, Duke Hamilton 's; Knowsley, Earl of Derby;
Dunkeyhalgh, Lord Petre 's; Haigh, Sir Roger Bradshaigh 's, Bart. Hough-end,
Sir John Bland 's; Heaton, Sir Edward Egerton 's; Latham, Thomas Bootle 's, Esquire

LEICESTERSHIRE.] Circumference 96 Miles, contains 200 Parishes, and 12 Towns;
chief, Leicester: Rivers, Stowre, Reek, Swift. Seats: Garenton, Duke of Montagu
's; Ashby-dela-Zouch and Dunnington-park, Earl of Huntingdon 's;
Stanton-Harold, Earl of Ferrers 's; Stanton-Brudenell, Earl of Cardigan 's;
Broad-gate, Earl of Stamford 's; Bosworth, Sir Wolstan Dixie 's; Stanford, Sir
Thomas Cave 's; Kirkby-Mallory, Sir Edward Noel 's.

LINCOLNSHIRE.] Circumference 180 Miles, contains 630 Parishes, and 35 Towns;
chief, Lincoln: Rivers, Weland, Trent, Humber, Nen, Wythem. Seats: Normanby,
late Duke of Buck 's; Grimsthorp and Earsby, Duke of Ancaster's; Belton, Lord
Tyrconnel 's; Nocton, Sir William Ellis 's; Doddington, late Sir Edward Hussy
's, Bart. Gunby, late Sir William Massenbeard 's; Gainsborough, Sir Willoughby
Hickman 's; Stanfield, Sir John Tyrwhit 's; Aswarby, Sir Francis Whichcote 's;
Ormsby, Mr. Massenbeard 's; Thoresby, Captain Wood 's; Harrington, Mr. Amcourt
's.

MIDDLESEX.] Circumference 81 Miles, contains 73 Parishes and 4 Towns; chief,
London: Rivers, Thames, Colne. Seats: Sion-house, Duke of Somerset 's; Duke of
Beaufort 's, and late Earl of Ranelagh 's Houses at Chelsey; Buckingham-house,
Duchess of Buckingham 's; Montagu-house, Duke of Montagu 's; Southampton-house,
Duke of Bedford 's; Berkley-house, Duke of Devonshire 's; Cannons, Duke of
Chandos 's; Marlborough-house, Duchess of Marlborough 's; Villa Carey
Parsons-green, Col. Mordaunt 's; Chiswick and Sutton-court, Earl of Burlington
's; Bushy-park, Earl of Halifax 's; Halenton, Earl of Holderness 's; Cranford,
Earl of Berkley 's; Bellsise, Earl of Chesterfield 's; at Chiswick, Earl of
Wilmington 's; Gunnersbury, Lord Hobard 's; Dawley, late Lord Bolingbroke 's;
Whitton, Lady Falkland 's; Kempton park, Sir John Chardin 's; Harrow, Sir John
Rushout 's; Oisterly-park, late Sir Francis Child 's; Harfield, Sir Edward
Newdigate 's; Sunbury, Sir Roger Hudson 's, and Mr. Turner 's; Bush-hall, Sir
Jeremy-Vanacker Sambrook 's; Hanworth, Lord Vere Beauclerk 's; Forty-hill, Mrs.
Wolstenholm 's; Holland-house, Mr. Edward 's; near Chiswick, Henry Barker 's,
Esquire

MONMOUTHSHIRE.] Circumference 80 Miles, contains 127 Parishes, and 7 Towns;
chief, Monmouth; Rivers, Monow, Wye, Usk, Rumney. Seats: Troy-house, Duke of
Beaufort 's; Llangibby, Sir John Williams 's; Tredegar, late Sir William Morgan
's; Pont-pool, Mr. Hanbury 's.

NORFOLK.] Circumference 140 Miles, contains 660 Parishes, and 31 Towns; chief,
Northampton: Rivers, Ouse, Waveny, Yare, Frin. Seats: Norwich Palace, Duke of
Norfolk 's; Paston-hall, late Earl of Yarmouth 's; Stifcay and Raynham, Lord
Townshend 's; Blickling, Lord Hobart 's; Houghton, Sir Robert Walpole 's;
Melton-Constable, Sir Jacob Ashley 's, Bart. Ranworth-hall, Col. Sidney 's;
Garboldisham, Sir Edmund Bacon 's; Kirby-Bedon, Sir Thomas Berney 's;
Oxborough, Sir Henry Bedingfield 's; Hunstanton, Sir Thomas L'Estrange 's.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.] Circumference 120 Miles, contains 326 Parishes, and 11
Towns; chief, Northampton: Rivers, Weland, Nen, Ouse. Seats: Boughton, Duke of
Montagu 's; Burleigh, Earl of Exeter 's; Castle-Ashby, Earl of Northampton 's;
Althorp, Duke of Marlborough 's; Easton, Earl of Pomfret 's; Easton-Maudit,
Earl of Sussex 's; Dean, Earl of Cardigan 's; Rockingham, Earl of Rockingham
's; Kirby, Lord Hatton 's; Drayton, Lady Betty Jermain 's; Findon, Sir John
Dolbin 's, Bart. Farthingoe, Sir Edward Egerton 's; Culworth, Sir John D'Anvers
's; Brampton, Sir William Norwich 's; Kelmarsh, Mr. Hanbury 's.

NORTHUMBERLAND.] Circumference 155 Miles, contains 46 Parishes, and 11 Towns;
chief, Newcastle: Rivers, Tweed, Tyne. Seats: Belsey, Sir William Middleton 's;
Gibside, George Bows 's, Esquire Elswick, Ralph Jenison 's, Esquire

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.] Circumference 90 Miles, contains 168 Parishes, and 9 Towns;
chief, Nottingham: Rivers, Trent, Iddle, etc. Seats: Nottingham-castle,
Haughton, and Welbeck-abbey, Duke of Newcastle 's; Thorsby and
Holmes-Pierre-point, Duke of Kingston 's; Woollaton-hall, Lord Middleton 's;
Kelham, late Lord Lexington 's; Newsted-abbey, Lord Byron 's; Warshop, Lord
Willoughby 's of Parham; Rufford, Sir George Savil 's; Bunny, Sir Thomas
Parkyns 's.

OXFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, contains 280 Parishes, and 15 Towns;
chief, Oxford: Rivers, Thames, Tame, Isis, Charwell, Windrush, Evenload. Seats:
Woodstock and Blenheim-castle, Duchess Dowager of Marlborough 's; Hethorp, Earl
of Shrewsbury 's; Ditchley, Earl of Litchfield 's; Cornbury, Earl of Clarendon
's; Rycott, Earl of Abingdon 's; Sherburne, Earl of Macclesfield 's;
North-brook, Sir Robert Dashwood 's; Water-stock, late Sir Henry Ashurst 's,
Bart. Chislehampton, Sir John D'oyle 's; Sarsdon, late Sir Robert Walter 's;
Waltone, Sir Robert Jenkinson 's; Wood-Perry, Mr. Moss 's; Kiddington, Sir
Charles Brown 's.

RUTLANDSHIRE.] Circumference 40 Miles, contains 48 Parishes, and 2 Towns;
chief, Oakham: Rivers, Weland, Wash. Seats: Burleigh on the Hill, Earl of
Winchelsea 's; Exton-brook, Earl of Gainsborough 's; Ashton, Earl of Cardigan's.

SHROPSHIRE.] Circumference 134 Miles, contains 170 Parishes, and 15 Towns;
chief, Shrewsbury: Rivers, Severn, Culm, Rea, Roden, Teme, Tern. Seats:
High-Ercal, Earl of Bradford 's; Haughton, Sir Hugh Brigge 's; Watlesborough,
Sir Edward Leighton 's; Longner, Sir Richard Corbet 's; Cond, Mr. Creswell 's;
Wallcot, Mr. Wallcot 's; Oakley-park, Mr. Herbert 's; Stoke-castle, Mr. Baldwin
's; Henly, Mr. Powis 's.

SOMERSETSHIRE.] Circumference 150 Miles; contains 385 Parishes, and 30 Towns;
chief, Bristol: Rivers, Severn, Avon, From, Parret, Torr, Tone. Seats: Hinton
St. George, Earl Powlet 's; Ham-house, Lord Stowell 's; Nettlecomb, Sir John
Trevelyan 's; Orchard-Wyndham, Sir William Wyndham 's; Brampton, Sir Philip
Sydenham 's; Ford-abbey, Mr. Gwyn 's; Orchard-Portman, Mr. Portman 's;
Fairfield, Mr. Palmer 's.

STAFFORDSHIRE.] Circumference 141 Miles, contains 150 Parishes, and 18 Towns;
chief, Stafford: Rivers, Trent, Churnet, Dove, Blithe, Line, Tean, Sow, Pink,
Manifold. Seats: Beaudesert, Earl of Uxbridge 's; Chartley-castle, Lord Ferrers
's; Drayton, Lord Paget 's; Trentham, Lord Gower 's; Dudley-castle, Lord Dudley
's, Tixell, Lord Aston 's; Ingstree, Lord Chetwind 's; Oakley, Sir Philip
Chetwood 's; Wrine-hall, Sir Edward Egerton 's; Pateshul, Sir John Astley 's;
Pillaton, Sir Edward Littleton 's; Wolseley, Sir Charles Wolseley 's;
Keel-hall, Mr. Sneyd 's; Okeover, Mr. Okeover 's.

SUFFOLK.] Circumference 165 Miles, contains 575 Parishes, and 30 Towns; chief,
Ipswich: Rivers, Stowre, Breton, Deben, Blithe, Orwell, etc. Seats:
Ewston-hall, Duke of Grafton 's; Ickworth, Earl of Bristol 's; Broom-hall and
Culford-hall, Lord Cornwallis 's; Milden-hall, Sir Thomas Hanmer 's, Bart. Long
Melford, Sir Cordell Fire-brass 's; Benhall, Mr. Tyrell 's; Pakenham, Sir
William Spring 's; Heringfleet, Sir Edmund Bacon 's; Ketton and Brightwell, Sir
Samuel Barnardiston 's, Bart. Glemham-hall, Mr. North 's.

SURRY.] Circumference 112 Miles, contains 140 Parishes, and 9 Towns; chief,
Southwark: Rivers, Thames, Mole. Seats: New Park, Lord Walpole 's; Claremont,
Duke of Newcastle 's; Wimbleton, Duchess of Marlborough 's; Weybridge, Earl of
Portmore 's; Albury, Earl of Aylesford 's; East-Clanden, Lord Onslow 's; Ockam,
Lord King 's; Epsom, Lord Gilford 's; Woodcote, Lord Baltimore 's; Sir Matthew
Decker 's, at Richmond; Beddington, Sir Hacket Carew 's, Bart. Sheen, Sir John
Buckworth 's; Wotton, Sir John Evelyn 's, Bart. Ashted, Lord Berkshire 's;
Wimbleton, Sir Theodore Janssen 's; Row-Hampton, Mr. Jeffery 's; Cashalton, Mr.
Scawen 's; Fetcham, Mr. Revel 's; Esher Place, Mr. Pelham 's; Rygate, Parsons
's, who died Lord Mayor of London, in 1741.

SUSSEX.] Circumference 158 Miles, contains 312 Parishes, and 16 Towns; chief,
Chichester: Rivers, Arun, etc. Seats: Petworth, Duke of Somerset 's; Haland and
Bishopstone, Duke of Newcastle 's; Arundel-castle, Duke of Norfolk 's;
Stoneland and Buckhurst, Duke of Dorset 's; Godwood, Duke of Richmond 's;
Stanstead, Earl of Scarborough 's; Eastborne-place, Earl of Wilmington 's;
Ashburnham, Earl of Ashburnham 's; Up-park, Earl of Tankerville 's; Cowdry,
Lord Montagu 's; Firle, Sir William Gage 's; Battle-abbey, Sir Thomas Webster
's; Ratton, Sir Walter Parker 's; Michel Grove, Sir John Shelly 's; Parkham,
Sir Cecil Bishop 's; Hursmonceaux, Mr. Hare 's, Son to the late Bishop; Den,
Mr. Eversfield 's; Stammer, Mr. Pelham 's; Slaugham, late Mr. Morton 's.

WARWICKSHIRE.] Circumference 110 Miles, 158 Parishes, and 17 Towns; chief,
Coventry: Rivers, Avon, etc. Seats: Tamworth-castle, Earl of Ferrers 's;
Newenham-paddox, Earl of Denbigh 's; Compton in the Hole, Earl of Northampton
's; Hewel-grange, Earl of Plymouth 's; Ettington, Earl of Ferrers 's;
Castle-Bromwich, Viscount Hereford 's; Stonely, Lord Leigh 's; Ragby and
Popham, Lord Conway 's; Warwick-castle, Lord Brook 's; Coleshill, Lord Digby
's; Newhold-hall, Sir Francis Skipwith 's; Arbury, Sir Edward Newdigate 's;
Tamworth, Mr. Archer 's; Rugly, Mr. Conway 's; Bagington, Mr. Bromley 's.

WESTMORLAND.] Circumference 110 Miles, contains 26 Parishes, and 8 Towns;
chief, Kendal: Rivers, Eden, Can, Eamon, Lon, etc. Seats: Pendragon-castle,
Earl of Thanet 's; Beltham-castle, Earl of Derby 's; Appleby-castle, Earl of
Thanet 's; Lowther-hall, Lord Lonsdale 's; Rydall, Sir George Fleming 's;
White-haven, Sir James Lowther 's.

WILTSHIRE.] Circumference 128 Miles, contains 304 Parishes, and 24 Towns;
chief, Salisbury: Rivers, Isis, Kennet, Avon, Willy, Nadde. Seats: Tokenham,
Duke of Somerset 's; Ednington, Duke of Bolton 's; Wilton, Earl of Pembroke 's;
Tylshead, Earl Godolphin's; Longleat, Lord Weymouth 's; Wardour-castle, Lord
Arundel 's of Wardour; Maiden-bradley, Sir Edward Seymour 's; Standlinch, Sir
Peter Vandeput 's; -- Sir Jacob Desbouverie 's; Stourton-castle, Mr. Hoar 's;
Madington, Mr. Drax 's; Barreford, Mr. Duncomb 's; Compton, Mr. Northey 's.

WORCESTERSHIRE.] Circumference 130 Miles, contains 152 Parishes, and 11 Towns;
chief, Worcester: Rivers, Severn, Avon, Team, etc. Seats: Grafton, Duke of
Shrewsbury 's; Crome, Earl of Coventry's; Great Whitley, Lord Foley 's;
Lenchwich, Lord Craven 's; Westwood, Sir Herbert-Perrot Pakington 's, Bart.
Hagley, Sir Thomas Lyttleton 's; Sodington, Sir Edward Blount 's; Ombersby, Mr.
Sandy 's.

YORKSHIRE.] Circumference 360 Miles; contains 563 Parishes, and 49 Towns;
chief, York: Rivers, Tees and Humber, which receives into it Air, Calder, Dun,
Derwent, Nile, Ouse, and Swall-youre-warf. Seats: Mulgrave-castle, late Duke of
Bucks 's; Sheffield Manor, Duke of Norfolk 's; Kiveton, Duke of Leeds 's;
Castle-Howard, Earl of Carlisle's Stainsborough and Wentworth-castle, Earl of
Strafford 's; Londesburgh, Earl of Burlington 's; Hornby-castle, Earl of
Holderness 's; Wentworth-house, Earl Malton 's; Snaith-hall, Lord Downs 's;
Temple-Newsam, Lord Irwin 's; Leadstone-hall, late Lady Betty Hastings 's;
Newby, Sir Edward Blacket 's, Bart. Constable-Burton, Sir Marmaduke Wyvil 's,
Bart. Great Ribston, Sir Henry Goodrich 's, Bart. Swillington, Sir William
Lowther 's; Spratborough, late Sir Godfrey Copely 's, Bart. Acklam, Sir William
Hustler 's; Angleby Manor, Sir William Fowls 's, Bart. Boynton, Sir William
Strickland 's; Scampston, Sir William St. Quintin 's; Wheatly, Sir G. Cook 's;
Albrough, Sir Roger Beckwith's; Calverley, Sir Walter Calverley 's; Nostell,
Sir Rowland Win 's; Nun Appleton-hall, Sir William Milner 's; Kirkleatham,
Mr. Turner 's; Whixley, Mr. Tancred 's; Gisborough, Mr: Chaloner 's; Hemsley.
Mr. Brown 's; near Beverley, Mr. Bradshaw 's.


In WALES are the following Counties:
ANGLESEY.] Circumference 60 Miles, contains 74 Parishes, and 2 Towns; chief,
Beaumaris: River, Menia. Seat: Lord Bulkeley 's, near Beaumaris.

BRECKNOCKSHIRE.] Circumference 106 Miles, contains 61 Parishes, and 4 Towns;
chief, Brecknock: Rivers, Hodney, Usk. Seats: Crickhowel-castle, and
Tretowre-castle, Duke of Beaufort 's.

CAERMARTHENSHIRE.] Circumference 102 Miles, contains 87 Parishes, and 8 Towns;
chief, Caermarthen: River, Towy. Seats: Golden Grove and Emlyn, Duke of Bolton
's; Edingsford, Sir Nicolas Williams 's; Newton, Sir John Price 's;
Alderglasney, Sir John Rudd 's.

CAERNARVONSHIRE.] Circumference 95 Miles, contains 68 Parishes, and 6 Towns;
chief, Caernarvon. CARDIGANSHIRE.] Circumference 94 Miles, contains 77
Parishes, and 4 Towns; chief, Cardigan: River, Tyevye. DENBIGHSHIRE.]
Circumference 116 Miles, contains 57 Parishes, and 4 Towns; chief Denbigh.
Seats: Chirk-castle, Mr. Myddelton 's; Llewenny, Sir Robert-Salisbury Cotton
's; Wynstay, Mr. Williams 's.

FLINTSHIRE.] Circumference 40 Miles, contains 28 Parishes, and 3 Towns; chief,
Flint: River, Elwy. Seats: Mostyn, Sir Roger Mostyn 's; Llanerch, Mr. Davies 's.

GLAMORGANSHIRE.] Circumference 112 Miles, contains 118 Parishs, and 9 Towns;
chief, Landaff. Seats: Swanzey-castle, Duke of Beaufort 's; Cardiff-castle,
Lord Windsor 's; Coyty-castle, late Earl of Leicester 's; Keven Malby, late Sir
Charles Keymis 's; Wenwoe, Sir William Thomas 's; Llantrithid, Sir John Aubrey
's; Margam, Lord Mansell 's; Hensol, Lord Talbot 's; St. Donat's, Sir Thomas
Stradling 's.

MERIONETHSHIRE.] Circumference 108 Miles, contains 37 Parishes, and 3 Towns;
chief, Harlech. MONTGOMERYSHIRE.] Circumference 94 Miles, contains 47 Parishes,
and 6 Towns; chief, Montgomery. Seats: Powis-castle and Buttington-hall,
Marquis of Powis 's; Llymore-lodge and Llyssin, Lord Herbert 's of Cherbury;
Vaynor, Lord Hereford 's; Lloydierd, Mr. Win 's; Garth, Sir Charles Lloyd 's.

PEMBROKESHIRE.] Circumference 93 Miles, contains 45 Parishes, and 9 Towns;
chief, Pembroke. Seats: Picton-castle, Sir Erasmus Phillips 's, Bart. Orielton,
Sir Arthur Owen 's; Pendergrass, Sir Thomas Stepney 's.

RADNORSHIRE.] Circumference 90 Miles, contains 52 Parishes, and 4 Towns;
chief, Radnor. Seats: Harnage-grange, Sir William Fowler 's; Maesyllwich, Sir
Humphry Howarth 's; Artlis and Harpton, Mr. Thomas Lewis 's.


A LIST of the PEERAGE of England; wherein the Christian Names being omitted,
it will be subjected to no other Fluctuations, than by the Extinction of
Families.
His Royal Highness the PRINCE of Wales. His Royal Highness the DUKE of
Cumberland. DUKES. Names Titles HOward Norfolk Sackville Dorset Fitzroy Grafton
Seymour Somerset Fitzroy Cleveland Lenox Richmond Somerset Beaufort Beauclerk
St. Albans Pawlet Bolton Osborne Leeds Russell Bedford Cavendish Devonshire
Spencer Marlborough Manners Rutland Montagu Montagu Bertie Ancaster Pierrepoint
Kingston Pelham Newcastle Bentinck Portland Campbell Greenwich Montagu
Manchester Bridges Chandos Egerton Bridgwater MARQUIS. Herbert Powis. EARLS.
Talbot Shrewsbury Stanley Derby Hastings Huntingdon Herbert Pembroke Clinton
Lincoln Howard Suffolk Cecill Salisbury Cecill Exeter Sidney Leicester Compton
Northampton Rich Warwick Fielding Denbigh Fane Westmorland Howard Berkshire
Mordaunt Peterb. etc. Gray Stamford Finch Winchelsea Stanhope Chesterfield
Tufton Thanet Montagu Sandwich Hyde Clarendon Capell Essex Brudenell Cardigan
Annesley Anglesea Howard Carlisle Boil Burlington Cooper Shaftsbury Lee
Litchfield Bruce Aylesbury Robarts Radnor Berkeley Berkeley Bertie Abingdon
Noel Gainsborough D'Arcy Holderness Hickman Plymouth Howard Stafford Lumley
Scarborough Booth Warrington Newport Bradford Zulestein Rochford Keppel
Albemarle Coventry Coventry Villers Jersey Auverquerque Grantham Poulett
Poulett Cholmondeley Cholmondeley Harley Oxford, etc. S^^ley Ferrers Wentworth
Strafford Leg Dartmouth Paget Uxbridge Watson Rockingham Bennet Tankerville
Finch Aylesford Godolphin Godolphin Hervey Bristol Montagu Halifax Yelverton
Sussex Cowper Cowper Stanhope Stanhope Sherard Harborough Parker Macclesfield
Farmer Pomfret Compton Wilmington Graham Graham Ker Ker Waldegrave Waldegrave
Mildmay Fitzwalter Ashburnham Ashburnham Howard Effingham Wentworth Malton.
Walpole Orford. Stanhope Harrington VISCOUNTS. Devereux Hereford Brown
Montacute Fiennes Say and Seal Bellasyse Fauconberg Townshend Townshend Thynne
Weymouth Hatton Hatton Lowther Lonsdale O'Brian Tadcaster St. John St. John
Temple Cobham Boscawen Falmouth Walop Lymington Harcourt Harcourt Bing
Torrington. BARONS. Nevill Abergavenny Touchett Audley Seymour Percy West
Delaware Fortescue Clinton Ward Dudley and W. Stourton Stourton Verney
Willoughby B. Willoughby of Parham North N. and Guilford Carry Hunsdon St. John
dit. of Bletsoe Petre Petre Gerrard Gerrard Arundell do. of Wardour Blythe
Clifton Dormer Dormer Roper Teynham Greville Brook Poulett Hinton Maynard
Maynard Bruce Bruce Leigh Leigh Byron Byron Langdale Langdale Berkeley dit. of
Stretton Cornwallis Cornwallis Arundell dit. of Trerice Craven Craven Clifford
Clifford Carteret Carteret Stawell Stawell Griffin Griffin Butler dit. of
Weston Thompson Haversham Vane Barnard Gower Gower Conway Conway Hervey Hervey
Boil Boil Hay Hay Windsor Montjoy Mansel Mansel Willoughby Middleton Trevor
Trevor Masham Masham Foley Foley Bathurst Bathurst Onslow Onslow Marsham Romney
Cadogan Cadogan Moreton Ducie Walpole Walpole King King Hobart Hobart Monson
Monson Coke Lovel Raymond Raymond York Hardwicke Talbot Hensol Murray Strange
Bromley Montfort How Chedworth Fox Ilchester. PEERESSES. Schulemburgh Duchess
of Kendal Schulemburgh Countess of Walsingham Carteret Countess of Granville
Coningsby Countess of Coningsby Walmoden Countess of Yarmouth -- L. Berners
Johnson L. Wentworth. There are Two Archbishopricks, and Twenty-four
Bishoprics; the Bishops whereof are Lords of Parliament. The Archbishopricks
are CANTERBURY and YORK. The Bishoprics, London Durham Winchester Worcester
Bath and Wells Lincoln Rochester Hereford Litchfield and Coventry Exeter
Peterborough Chester Chichester Sarum St. David's Ely Carlisle Gloucester Oxford
St. Asaph Norwich Bangor Bristol Llandaff


A LIST of the PEERAGE of Scotland.
His Royal Highness FREDERICK Duke of Rothsay, Edinburgh, etc. Prince Royal of
Great Britain. DUKES. Names Titles Hamilton Hamilton Scot Buccleugh Lenox Ditto
Gordon Gordon Dowglass Queensbury Campbell Argyll Dowglass Ditto Murray Atholl
Graham Montrose Ker Roxburgh. MARQUISES. Hay Tweedale Ker Lothian Johnston
Annandale. EARLS. Lindsay Crawford Hay Errol Sutherland Ditto Lesley Rothes
Dowglass Morton Erskine Buchan. Cuningham Glencairn Kennedy Cassils Sinclair
Caithness Stewart Murray Levingston Linlithgow Hume Ditto Drummond Perth
Fleming Wigton Lion Strathmore Hamilton Abercorn Erskine Kellie Hamilton
Haddington Stuart Galloway Maitland Lauderdale Hay Kinnoul Campbell Loudon
Creighton Dumfries Alexander Stirling Bruce Elgin Carnagie Southesk Stewart
Traquair Ker Ancram Weemys Ditto Ramsay Dalhousie Ogilvie Airley Ogilvie
Finlater, etc. Lesley Leven, etc. Hamilton Selkirk Carnegie Northesk Bruce
Kincardine Lindsay Balcarras Middleton Ditto Gordon Aboyn Boyd Kilmarnock
Cochran Dundonald Dowglass Dunbarton Keith Kintore Campbell Braidalbine Gordon
Aberdeen Murray Dunmore Hamilton Orkney Hamilton Rutherglen Dowglass March Hume
Marchmont Carmichael Hyndford Mackenzie Cromarty Dalrymple Stair Primrose
Roseberry Stewart Bute Hope Hoptoun Boil Glasgow Scot Deloraine Campbell Islay
Collier Portmore. VISCOUNTS. Carey Falkland Murray Stormont Arbuthnot Arbuthnot
Seton Kingston Mackgil Oxenford Ingram Irwin Levingston Kilsyth Osburn Dumblain
Drummond Strathallan Graham Preston Graham Dundee Primrose Ditto Crawford
Garnock. LORDS. Forbes Ditto. Frazer Salton Gray Ditto Cathcart Ditto Sinclair
Ditto Dowglass Mordington Semple Ditto, etc. Somerville Ditto Elphingston Ditto
Oliphant Ditto Montgomery Lisle Frazer Lovat Ross Ditto Sandilands Forpichen
Lesley Lindores Bothwell Holyroodho. Elphingston Balmerino Stuart Blantyre
Balfour Burleigh Cranston Ditto Napier Ditto Richardson Cromond Fairfax Cameron
Mackay Rae Forrester Ditto Forbes Pitsligo Macclelland Kirccudbright Hamilton
Bargeney Ogilvie Bamf Murray Elibank Galloway Dunkeld Ashton Ditto Falkner
Halkerton Hamilton Belhaven Rollo Ditto Colvil Ditto Rutherford Ditto Bellendon
Ditto Lesley Newark Kinnaird Ditto. Titles lately extinct, forfeited, or
immerged in other Families, etc. EARLS: Airth, Monteith, Dumfermling, Forfar,
Callendar, Newburgh, Marshall, Carnwarth, Nithisdale, Seaforth, Panmure,
Winton. VISCOUNTS: Dunbar, Frendraught, Newhaven, Kenmure. LORDS: Orchiltree,
Borthwick, Frazer, Cowper, Abercromby, Ruthven, Materdei, Macdonald, Aymouth,
Nairn, Dingwall, Duffus.
By the Articles of Union, all the English of the same Degree, at the Time of
the Union, are to have Rank and Precedence before all the Scots of the like
Order and Degree at the Time of the Union; but the present Peers of Scotland
are to have Precedence before all Peers of Great Britain of the like Order and
Degree, who may be created after the Union. BISHOPRICS before the REVOLUTION.
Archbishopricks of St. Andrews and Glasgow. Edinburgh, Bishopric Galloway
Dunkeld Ross Aberdeen Orkney Caithness, Bishopric The Isles Dumblane Brechin
Murray Lissimore, or Argyll.

A LIST of the English Shires, Cities, and Boroughs, which return Members to
Parliament.
BEDFORDSHIRE 4. Bedford
BERKSHIRE 9. New Windsor Reading Wallingford Abingdon
BUCKS, County 14. Buckingham Cheping Wicomb Aylesbury Agmondesham Wendover
Great Marlow
CAMBRIDGESHIRE 6. University Town of Cambr.
CHESHIRE 4. Cheshire
CORNWALL 44. Launceston Leskard Lestwithiel Truro Bodmyn Helston Saltash
Camelford Westlow Grampound Eastlow Penryn Tregony Bossiney St. Ives Fowey St.
Germans St. Michael Newport St. Maws Kellington
CUMBERLAND 6. Carlisle Cockermouth
DERBYSHIRE 4. Derby Town
DEVONSHIRE 26. Exeter Totness Plymouth Oakhampton Barnstaple Plympton Honiton
Tavistock Ashburton Dartmouth Beeralston Tiverton
DORSETSHIRE 20. Pool Dorchester Lyme Regis Weymouth Melcomb Regis Bridport
Shaftsbury Wareham Corf-castle
DURHAM County 4. City of Durham
ESSEX County 8. Colchester Malden Harwich
GLOUCESTERSHIRE 8. Gloucester Cirencester Tewksbury
HEREFORDSHIRE 8. Hereford Leominster Weobley
HERTFORDSHIRE 6. St. Albans Hertford
HUNTINGDONSHIRE 4. Huntingdon
KENT County 10. Canterbury Rochester Maidstone Queenborough
LANCASTER County 14. Lancaster Preston Newton Wygan Clitheroe Liverpoole
LEICESTERSHIRE 4. Leicester
LINCOLNSHIRE 12. Lincoln Boston Great Grimsby Stamford Grantham
MIDDLESEX 8. London, 4. Westminster
MONMOUTHSHIRE 3. Monmouth 1.
NORFOLK 12. Norwich Lynn Regis Great Yarmouth Thetford Castle-Rising
NORTHAMPTONSH. 9. Peterborough Northampton Brackley Higham Ferrers, 1.
NORTHUMBERLAND 8. Newcastle on Tyne Morpeth Berwick
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE 8. Nottingham East Redford Newark
OXFORDSHIRE 9. University Oxford City Woodstock Banbury, 1.
RUTLAND County 2.
SALOP County 12. Shrewsbury Bridgnorth Ludlow Wenlock Bishop's Castle
SOMERSETSHIRE 18. Bristol Bath Wells Bridgwater Minehead Ivelchester Milburn
Port
SOUTHAMPTON Cou. 26. Winchester Southampton Portsmouth Yarmouth Petersfield
Newport Stockbridge Newtoune Christ-church Lymington Whitchurch Andover
STAFFORDSHIRE 10. Litchfield Stafford Newcastle Tamworth
SUFFOLK County 16. Ipswich Dunwich Orford Alborough Sudbury Eye Berry
SURREY County 14. Guilford Southwark Blechingley Ryegate Gatton Haslemere
SUSSEX 20. Chichester Horsham Midhurst Jews Shoreham Bramber Steyning East
Grinstead Arundel
WARWICKSHIRE 6. Coventry Warwick
WESTMORLAND 4. Apulby
WILTSHIRE 34. New Sarum Wilton Downton Hindon Heytesbury Westbury Calne
Devizes Chippenham Malmsbury Crichlade Great Bedwin Lurgershall Old Sarum
Wotton Basset Marlborough
WORCESTERSHIRE 9. Worcester Droitwych Evesham Bewdley, 1.
YORKSHIRE 30. York Kingston on Hull Knaresborough Scarborough Rippon Richmond
Heydon Boroughbridge Malton Thirske Aldborough Beverley Northallerton Pontefract
CINQUE PORTS 16. Hastings Dover Sandwich Hythe Romney Rye Winchelsea Seaford

WALES 24. One for each of the following Counties and Towns.

ANGLESEY County. Beaumaris
BRECONSHIRE. Brecon
CAERMARTHENSHIRE. Caermarthen
CAERNARVONSHIRE. Caernarvon
CARDIGANSHIRE. Cardigan
DENBIGHSHIRE. Denbigh
FLINTSHIRE. Flint
GLAMORGANSHIRE. Cardiffe
MERIONETHSHIRE. Merioneth
MONTGOMERYSHIRE. Montgomery
PEMBROKESHIRE. Haverford West Pembroke
RADNORSHIRE. Radnor


A LIST of the Shires and Burghs that are privileged by the Union to return
Members to the British Parliament, for representing this Northern Part of the
Island of Great Britain.
1. THE Shire of Aberdeen. 2. The Shire of Air. 3. District of Burghs of Air,
Irvin, Rothsay, Inverary, and Campbel Town. 4. Shire of Argyll. 5. Shire of
Bamff. 6. District of Burghs of Bamff, Elgin, Cullen, Kintore, and Inverury. 7.
Shire of Berwick. 8. Shire of Bute. 9. Shire of Clackmannan. 10. Shire of
Dumbarton. 11. Shire of Dumfries. 12. Shire of Edinburgh. 13. City of
Edinburgh. 14. Shire of Elgin. 15. District of Burghs of Forress, Inverness,
Nairn, and Fortrose. 16. Shire of Fife. 17. District of Burghs of Pittenweem,
Anstruther Easter, Anstruther Wester, Craile and Kilrennie. 18. District of
Burghs of Inverkeithen, Sterline, Dumferline, Culross, and Queensberry. 19.
District of Burghs of Bruntisland, Dysert, Kirkaldie, and Kinghorns. 20. Shire
of Forfar. 21. District of Burghs of Dundee, Perth, St. Andrews, Cowpar, and
Forfar. 22. District of Burghs of Montrose, Aberdeen, Brochine, Aberbrothock,
and Inverbervy. 23. Shire of Haddington. 24. Shire of Inverness. 25. Shire of
Kincardine. 26. Stewartry of Kirccudbright. 27. District of Burghs of
Kirccudbright, Dumfreis, Lockmaban, Annan, and Sanquhar. 28. Shire of Lanerk.
29. District of Burghs of Lanerk, Linlithgow, Selkirk, and Peebles. 30. Shire
of Linlithgow. 31. Shire of Nairn. 32. Stewartry of Orkney, and Zetland. 33.
Shire of Peebles. 34. Shire of Perth. 35. Shire of Renfrew. 36. District of
Burghs of Renfrew, Glasgow, Ruglen, and Dumbarton. 37. Shire of Ross. 38.
District of Burghs of Dingwall, Tain, Dornock, Weick, and Kirkwall. 39. Shire
of Roxburgh. 40. District of Burghs of Jedburgh, Haddington, Dunbar, North
Berwick, and Lauder. 41. Shire of Selkirk. 42. Shire of Sterlin. 43. Shire of
Sutherland. 44. Shire of Wigtoun. 45. District of Burghs of Wigtoun, Whithorn,
New Galloway, and Stranrayer.
Representatives for England 473 For the Cinqueports 16 For Wales 24 513 To
which add, for Scotland 45 The Whole will be 558

The END of VOL. IV.
INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME.
A
ABer, Lake of, Page 204, 209, 218 Aberbrothock 182, 183 Abercorn Castle 136
Aberdeen 185 to 191 Aberdour 149, 150 Aberlady 59 Abernethy 151 Achaius, King,
founds the Order of the Thistle 27 Acts of Parliament relating to Scotland 31
so 39 St. Adrian 's Shrine 161, 297 Agricola, Julius, fixes the Bounds of the
Roman Empire in Britain 177, 178 Ailzye, Island 55, 233, 254 Air, River 108,
109 Air, Town 108 to 110 Albania 222 Alexander III. routs Acho, King of Norway
108, 113. Makes Innerbervy a Royal Burgh p. 184 Alexander Steuart, Earl of Mar
193 Alexander VI. Pope, grants large Privileges to the King's College at
Aberdeen 186 Allan, River 172 Alloway, 122, 131, 132, 173 Alnwick 44 Alserig
208 Alsvig, Isle 263 Amber, a great Piece of it 195 Andrew, the tutelar Saint,
his Order 27 St. Andrews 150, 162 to 168 Annan, River 97 Annand 98 Annandale,
Marquis of, his Seat 95 Anne, Queen, revives the Order of the Thistle 27, 28.
Restores the Green Ribband p. 135 Anstruther, Wester and Easter 150, 161
Aquinas, Thomas 46 Arbuthie 184 Ardmeanach 217 Ardock 171, 225 Argyll, Duke of,
defeats the Earl of Mar 172. His Rights 233 Argyll, Earl of, defeated 226
Argyll, its Dimension 231, 232 Arnold, Bishop 164 Arran, Earl of 234 Arran,
Isle ibid. Arthur 's Oven 136 Arthur 's Seat 88. Fatal Accident which befell a
Soldier there 93 Athol, Duke of, his Seat. 176. Opposes the Union 221. His
Power 222. And Grandeur 223 Atlantic Ocean 214 Aven, River 125 Augustus Fort
220 A^ona 254 Ay, River 44 Aymouth 45 Ayton 44
B
Balcanqual, Dr. his Hospital 75 Balfour, Sir Andrew 74, 167 Balgony p. 150,
168 Balmerinoch Monastery 168 Baltair 148 Bamf 193, 194 Banco, the Thane, his
History 219 Bannockbury Water 129 Barclay, Dr. William 187 Barnacles 288, 289
Barra, Isle 264 Bass, Rock 55 Beacon, Rock 50 Bean-castle 201 Beaulieu 217
Beilhaven 57 Belvenie 194 Benbecula, Isle 265 Benedict XIII. Pope, grants
Immunities to the University of St. Andrews 165, 166 Bernera, Isles 255, 256,
270, 272 Berth 169 Berwick 42, 43 Bethune, Archbishop 166, 167 Bethune,
Cardinal, his Cruelty, and bloody End 164 Birking, Island 268 Black Book of
Paisley 114 Blackness-castle 95 Blair-castle 222 Blair Drummond 224 Boethius,
Hector, the Historian 181 Bogy, River 190 Bohemian Protest, where lodged 79
Bon-accord 185 Borera, Isle 267, 275 Borrow-town-ness p. 96 Borwe 207 Bot^well,
Queen Mary 's Favorite 151 Bowling-head 267 Boyne 194 Braan Water 208 Brago
268 Braidalbin 222, 224, 226 Brasa, Isle 296 Brassa 's Sound 295, 296 Brechin
183, 224 Brochty-craig 181 Brodich-castle 234 Brora, Isle 235 Broxmouth 50
Bruce, Sir John Hope 152 Bruce, Sir William, the Architect 87, 152, 153
Bruntisland 50, 154 Buccleugh, Duke of, his House 144 Buchan County 192, 196
Buchanan, his Skull, 73. His Malice 88. Where educated 118. His Character 230
Buchanan-castle 228 Buchanness 192, 195 Buckhaven 160 Burleigh, Master of 147
Burra, Isle 284 Burray, Isle 296 Bute, Earl of 234 Bute, Isle 233, 234 Byng,
Sir George, Admiral 182
C
Caddel-castle 198 Caithness p. 196, 205, 208, 209 Caledonia p. 146
Calendar-house 126 Cambuskenneth Abbey 133 Cameron, where educated 118
Cameronians, what 55 Campbell, Daniel, Esquire 123, 124 Campbell Family 226, 227,
232 Campbel-town 231, 232 Camus 's Cross 183 Candida Casa 106 Canney, Isle 260
Cantyre, Mull of 233 Cardan, the Physician 162 Carlavrok-castle 100 Carrick 107
Carron, River 128, 133, 208 Carse of Gowry 179 Cart, River 114 Carry, Isle 255
Cassils, Earl of 166 Cassils, Earls of 107 Castle-William 219 Cattle, in
Scotland 11 Cava, Isle 285 Chancery of Ross 217 Chandos, James Duke of 167
Charles I. advances to the Borders of Scotland 47. Holds a Parliament at St.
Andrews 167. His Brass Statue 172. Promotes the Fishing Trade 300 Charles II.
ill-treated by the Covenanters 148. Promotes the Fishing Trade 300
Charmel-root, its Virtue against Drunkenness p. 257 Christian Religion, where
little known 216 Clackmanan 171 Clackmananshire 174 Claik Geese 288, 289 Clan
Chattau 151, 199 Clan Macduff 's Cross 151 Clasterniss 268 Clyde, Firth of 105,
107, 111, 114, 115, 116, 117, 125, 126, 136, 229, 230, 231, 233, 234 Clydsdale
137 Coal-pits 155 Cobberspath 48 Cobles, what 59 Cockburnspath 48 Cockenny 58,
59 Coil field 108 Coil, River ibid. Coldingham Monastery 45 Coldingham Moor
ibid. Coldstream 47 Colk, the Fowl 271 Coll, Isle 259 St. Colm 's Inch, or Isle
299 Colonsa, Isle 256 St. Columbus 's Isle 258, 259. His Lake 261 Combat
between an Englishman and Highlander 227 Connel, River 207 Convention of
Burghs, what 49 Coppingsha, Isle 287 Coulterneb, the Fowl 263 Cowpar 150, 168
Cows, how ferried over the Kyle 261 Crail p. 150, 161 Cramond 94 Crawford, Earl
of 125 Crawford Linsey ibid. Crawford-Moor 126, 138 Cromarty, Earl of 207
Cromarty Firth 189, 207 Cromarty, Shire and Burgh 207 Cromwell, Oliver, his
notable Victory 51. Builds a Castle at Leith 93, 94. A Citadel at Air 110. His
Conduct in Scotland 178. Storms Dundee 180. Builds a Citadel at Inverness 201.
A Fort at Pomona 285 Cullen 194 Culross 174 Cumbray Islands 234, 254 Cumin,
William, Earl of Buchan 194 Cunningham 111 Cunningham Family 113
D
Dalkeith 144 Damsey, Isle 287 Darnley, Lord, his Body found 88. Murdered 229
David I. founds Holy-rood-house 86. Incorporates the City of St. Andrews 168.
Makes Brechin an Episcopal See 183 Debateable Land, what 43 Dee, River 105,
185, 186 188 Deer, Ahbey of 194 Deer, in Scotland p. 11 Deersound 286 Dirleton
57 Diving, Experiments made of that Engine 234 to 236 Dogs, Massacre of them 90
Don, River 185, 188 Donald V. his various Fortune 22 Donald of the Isles,
defeated 193 Dornoch 205 Dovern, River 190, ^94 Douglas 125 Douglas, Family
138, 141, 151 Douglas, Lord, killed 141 Douglas, River 138 Dowhirta, Isle 257,
273 Downs, Lord, 299 Druidess, the House of one 275 Druids, their Houses 262,
275. A Temple of theirs 268, 269 Drumelzier 139 Drumlanrick 101, 102 to 104
Drummond-castle 226 Drumond, his Macaronick Poem 161 Duart Bay and Castle 257
Duff, King, his Body found 193 Duffus 150 Duffus, Lord 207 Dumbarton 129, 130
Dumblain 172 Dumfermling p. 147, 150 Dumfries 99 to 102 Dumfriesshire, its
Division 97 Dun, River 107, 109 Dunbar, Bishop Gawin 188 Dunbar, George de,
proscribed 48 Dunbar, Town 49, 50 Dunbarton 230, 231 Dunbriton Firth 126
Dundee, Lord Viscount, killed 176, 181 Dundee, Town and Harbor 179 to 181
Dundonald, Earl of, his Benefaction 118 Dune, Dr. 187 Dunglass 48 Dungsby-head
196, 210, 211, 214 Dunhill 51 Dunipace 134 Dunkeild 176, 177, 222
Dunoter-castle 183, 184 Dunrobin-castle 206 Duns Scotus, John 46 Duns, Town and
Castle 46, 67 Dunstafage-castle 232 Dunter, the Fowl 298 Duplin-castle 223, 224
Dwarfy Stone 284 Dysart 150, 155, 156
E
Eagles, great Numbers of them 205. Two remarkable ones 269, 270. Two others
275 Easter-Wemys 160 East-Lothian described p. 48 Ebba, Lady Abbess, her Story
45, 46 St. Ebb 's Head 46 Eccles 47 Edgar Atheling flies into Scotland 22
Edgar, King of Scotland, builds a Monastery 45 Edinburgh 62 to 89 Edward I. his
barbarous Treachery 109. Removes the wooden Chair and prophetic Stone to
Westminster 175. His Exploits in Scotland 178 Edward II. his Cruelty 58.
Utterly overthrown 129, 178 Edward VI. his Treaty of Marriage 62 Egg, Isle 260
Eglington-castle 113 Eglisha, Isle 287 Elgin 193, 196, 198, 199, 200 Elizabeth,
Queen, supports the Scottish Reformers 45 Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, where
born 148 Elphiston, Bishop 186 Ely 150, 160 Enconel-castle 232 Eousmil, Isle
266 Ereskine Families 133 Erigena 109 Ermengred, Queen 168 Ern, River 223, 225
Ern, Valley of 222 Errick-stone 137 Errol, Earl of 177, 192 Ersilton p. 47
Erskine, Earl of Mar 190 192 Esk, River 60, 97, 98 Eubo 206 Eugie, Water of 192
Eymouth 45
F
Faira, Isle 285 Fair-isle 210, 211, 293 Falkirk 126 Falkland 150 Families,
their Confusion 47 Farrar, River 217, 218 Farro-head 214 Fast-castle 46 Fergus
I. his Victory 108 Fergus Lake ibid. Fife 52, 146 Fifeness 162, 195 Findorn,
River 198 Firth, River 64, 94, 95, 149, 155, 160, 162, 174, 175 Fir-trees, many
planted in Scotland 52. Vast Woods of them 214 Fisheries, in Scotland 6 to 11
Fisher-raw 59 Flada, Isle 254, 263 Fleurs 142 Florida, a Ship, belonging to the
Spanish Armada, lost, and discovered 235, 238 Flotta, Isle 285 Forbes Lord
Forbes, and Forbes Lord Pitsligo 192 Fordun 's Scottish History p. 166, 185
Fordun, Town 184, 185 Forfar, Lord, killed 138 Forfar, Town 183 Forfichan 136
Forress 198 Forth, River 49, 54, 55, 57, 115, 122, 131, 132, 146, 149, 154,
161, 173, 297 Foula, Isle 296 Fowl, in Scotland 12 Francis II. marries Queen
Mary 62 Frazer, Dr. 186 Frazer Family 139, 192 Frazersburgh 192, 193, 194
French Fleet driven to Montrose Port 182 Fullerton Family 234 Fulmar, the Bird
275, 276 Fyfus 150
G
Galloway 101, 104, 105, 106, 107 Galloway Horses 106 Garioch 193 Garrow 209,
210 Garve, Isle 270 Genen-hill 139 George I. confirms the Statutes relating to
the Order of the Thistle 28. His Forces, how employed in Scotland 178 George
II. his Gift to the Assembly of Scotland 217 George, Earl Marshal 187 Gicht,
Bog of p. 193 Gigaia, Isle 254 Gillekranky 227 Glames Palace 171, 172 Glasgow
116 to 124 Glenco 219 Glenelebeg 217 Glenlion 225 Glenluce, Bay of 106
Gleurquhart 233 Goats, in Scotland 11 Golden Cave 262 Good-speed-all 59, 60
Goodtrees 64 Gordon, Duke of, his Castle and Family 190, 192, 193, 194
Gospatrick, Earl of Northumberland and March 47 Government, Civil, of Scotland
28 to 31 Government, Ecclesiastical, of Scotland 23 to 26 Gowrock 114 Graham 's
Dyke 126 Graham 's Hall 286 Grain, in Scotland 15 Grampian Hills 177, 222, 229
Gransey, Isle 285 Great Bear, its Tail, where seen 213 Great Rule, Isle 296
Greenlow 46 Greenock 114 Gregory, King, the Great, his Success against the
English 22 Gregory, Mr. James, Professor of Mathematics 167 Gull, the Fowl 298
H
Haddingtoun p. 53 Haddo, Lord of, beheaded 67 Hales 57 Hamilton 124, 125
Hamilton, Archbishop 164 Hamilton, Duke of 234 Mrs. Hare, her Benefaction 75
Harlow, bloody Battle there 193 Harries 267, 271, 272 Hassiness 267 Hawks, the
best 205 Hawthornden 95 Hay, Earl of 230 Hay, great Slaughter of that Family
224 Hay, the Peasnnt, and his Two Sons, their remarkable Valor 177 Haymouth 45
Hebrides 253 Hepburn, Adam, Bishop 292, 223 Hepburne, John, Prior of St.
Andrews 166 Hergust, King of the Picts 165 Hermatra, Isle 273 Herrings, great
Quantities, how taken 215 Highlanders 20, 21. Their military Glory falsely
transferred to the Irish 227, 228 Hirta, Isle 273 Hogs, in Scotland 11 Holy
Isle 234 Holy Wood p. 101 Hopton-house 95 Horn taken out of a Woman's Head 73,
74 Horses, in Scotland 11, 12 Hounam 141 Hoy, Isle 283 Hume 47 Huntingtour 222
Huntley, Marquis of 194
I
James I. confirms the University of St. Andrew 's Privileges 166 James II.
founds the University of Glasgow 117. Killed 141. Makes the Campbells Earls of
Argyll 232 James III. murdered 129. His Minions hanged 143 James IV. his fine
Palaces 150. Takes upon himself the Patronage of King's-College 186 James V.
his Character 27. His Body found 88. Restores the Order of St. Andrew, etc.
134, 135. His several Seats 150 James VI. unites the Crowns 42. His Conference
with the Lord of Lawder 56, 57. Founds the public Schools at Edinburgh 72.
Improves Glasgow University 118. Repairs the Palace of Linlithgow 134. His
Brass Statue 172. Creates the Earl of Strathbogy Marquis of Huntley p. 190
James VII. signs Statutes for the Order of the Thistle 27. Adorns
Holy-rood-house for the Knights 88, 165. Changes the Green Ribband to Blue 135.
His Residence in Scotland 153. His Brass Statue 172. His Esteem for the Earl of
Perth 226. Complimented ibid. Jed, River 141 Jedburgh 141, 142 Ila, Isle 256
Impostor in the Isle of St. Kilda 274 Inchdavanan, Isle 228 Inchgarvy, Isle 299
Inchkeith, Isle 298, 299 Inchmurin, Isle 228 Inchnolaig, Isle ibid.
Inchonnaugan, Isle ibid. Incurables, Hospital designed for them 76, 77
Infirmary, Royal 75, 76 Inglestown 94 Innerary, Shire of 231 Innerbervy 184
Innerkeithin 146, 147, 150 Innerkeithin Harbor 149 Innerlochy 220 Innerness
ibid. Innerury 193 Inverary 190 Inveresk 60 Inverlochy 219 Inverness 189, 197,
201 to 204 John a Grot 's House p. 212 Johnston 169 St. Johnston 223 Iron,
Filings of it, why hot, when held in the Hand 236 Irs Language 217 Irvin, River
109, 110 Irvin, Town 110, 111 Islands of Scotland 205 Jura, Isle 255
K
Kebercurnig 136 Keith, Earl Marshal, his Exploits 183 Keith, Earl Marshal, and
the General, his Brother, in the Russian Service 184 Keith, Family 192, 299
Keith, River 224 Keith, the Village 193 Kelso 142 Kennedy, James, Bishop of St.
Andrews 166 Kenneth, King, his Victory over the Picts 175, 176 Kenneth II. 150
Ker, Abbot, turns Protestant 143 Kermes-castle 233, 234 Kerniberg, Isle 259
Kerston 286 St. Kilda 268, 273 to 275 Kildrummy 192 Kildun-castle 218
Kill-ri-mount 165 Kilmaers 113 Kilmarnock-castle ibid. Kilmaronoch, Isle 228
Kilrinny p. 150 Kilsyth 126 Kincairn, Earls of, their Seat 174 Kincardin 184
Kincardin-castle 225 Kincase 110 Kinghorn 150, 155 Kinloss, Monastery of 193,
198 Kinnoul, Earl of 223 Kinross 150, 151 Kinross-house 152, 153 Kintail 217
Kintore, Earl of 190 Kintyre 231 Kips 136 Kirkaldy 92, 93, 150, 155
Kirkcudbright 104 Kirkentilloch 118 Kirk Michael 234 Kirkwall 285, 286, 288,
292 Kirsop Town and River 98 Kismul, Isle 264 Kittawaax, the Fowl 298 Kneapdale
232 Knug, the Bird 205 Kyle 108
L
Lady Isle 113 Lakes in Scotland 4, 5 Lambermoor 48 Lambertoun, Bishop 164
Lamlash 234 Lanark 137 Language of Scotland 21, 22, 23 Largis 113 Lauder, River
p. 142 Lauder, Town 143 Lauderdale 142 Lauderfort 143 Lawder, Lord of, his
Answer to James VI. 56, 57 Lead Mines 138 Leith, River 65, 93, 94 Leith Town
ibid. Lenox 229 Lenox, Earls and Dukes of 229, 230 Lermouth, the Poet 47
Lerwick 295 Lesley, General 46, 51, 168 Lessly 150, 153, 154 Leven, Earl of 168
Leven, River 151, 153, 160, 168, 229, 230 Levinsmouth 150 Jews, Isle 267, 268,
269, 272 Libertoun 64 Lindsay, great Slaughter of that Family 224 Linen
Manufacture 1^4 Lingay, Isle 267 Links, Downs so called 162 Linlithgow 134 to
136 Lismore, Isle 255 Lochaber 218, 219 Lochbrien 217 Lochbruist 256
Lochearlvay 268, 270 Lochcolmkil 268 Locheport 266 Lochern 22^ Lochew 217, 2^^
Lochfinlagan 25^ Lochfyn 232, 2^^ Lochgenen p. 139 Lochleffan 258 Lochlochy 218
Lochlomond 204, 228, 229 Lochmaddes 266 Lochmoy 199 Lochnavern 207 Lochness 218
Lochrain 106 Lochrona 266 Lochsefort 268 Lochskin 205 Lochstornvay 268 Lochyol
207, 218 Lochmabern, Town and Castle 98 Lomons, Mountains 175 Lorn 232 Lossie,
River 197, 198, 199 Lothian, Marquis of 143 Loudon-castle 113 Lough Leven 151
Lough Tay 169 Lowlanders 21 Lowland-house 133 Liar, the Fowl 282, 284
M.
Macbeth murders Banco 219 Macdonald, King of the Isles 256, 262 Macduff, his
Familys Privileges 151 Macfarlan, Lord of, his Seat 228 Mackenzie, his Bravery
108, 109 Mackenzie, Sir George, p. 167 Mackintosh, Lord of, his Seat 199
Macleod, Lord of 273 Mac Lewis Family 234 Macrain, his long Life 255 Magdalen,
Consort of James V. 162 Magdalene of Valois, Queen, her Body found 88 St.
Magnus 285 Main-land 285, 293 Maitland Family 142, 143 Malcolm Canmore, King 47
Malcolm Mac Kenneth, King, Monument of his Victory 198 Malcolm II. 150, 299,
Beats the Danes, etc. 183 Malcolm III. rewards the English 22. His Monument 148
Man, Isle of 253 Manufactures, Linen and Woollen in Scotland 12, 13, 14, 54
Mar, Earl of, his Seats 130, 131, 173. Defeated 172 March, the several Earls of
47, 48 Margaret, Princess, married to Malcolm III. 22 St. Margaret 's Bay 149
Mariners, ancient, their Mistake 212 Marlborough, Duke of, his Title of Baron
45 Mary, Queen, escapes to France 62. Defeated 115. Confined by the Reformers
151. Falsely accused of Lord Darnley 's Murder 229. Makes that Lord Duke of
Rothsay 234. Builds a Fort at Inchkeith 298 Mary of Gueldres, Queen, builds a
Collegiate Church 75 Mary-burgh 219 Maulsburgh 181 Mauls Mitre 137 May, Isle of
161, 195, 297, 298 May-bole 107 Melross Abbey 140, 141 Melvil 150, 168 Merlin,
where buried 139 Mernock, Isle of 254 Merns 184 Mid-land of Scotland 204
Mid-Lothian 143 Moffet 98 St. Monan 's 150 Monteith 229 Montrose, Duke of 119
Montrose, Marquis of, defeats the Covenanters 126. Put to Death 225 Montrose,
Town and Port 181, 182 Mordington 43 Mordington, Lord ibid. Morison, Dr. the
Botanist 78 Morton, Earl of, beheaded 140, 144. His Palace 150 Morton, the
present Earl of, his Seat p. 149 Mountains, in Scotland 15, 16 Muck, Isle 260
Mull, Isle 257 St. Mungo 118 Murray 196, 197 Murray, Brae of 199 Murray, Earl
of, his Murder and Character 135 Murray, Firth 189, 196, 200, 218 Murray, Sir
Robert 167 Muscovite Ambassador shipwrecked 195, 196 Musselburgh 59, 60, 62
N.
Nachastel, Isle 228 Nairn, Shire, Town, and River 198, 205, 206 Napier, Lord
167 Ness, River 201, 202, 204, 205, 207, 208, 209, 213 New-bigging 59, 60
Newbottle Abbey 143 Newbury on the Tay 150 Newyards 115 Nicolas V. Pope, his
Bull 117, 118 St. Ninian 106 Nith, River 97, 99, 101, 102, 103 Nithsdale, Earl
of 100, 104 North-Berwick 57, 59 North-Esk, River 144 North-Fara 288 North-Hope
Harbor p. 283 North-land of Scotland 204 North-Loch 89 North-Vist, Isle 266
O.
Oransa, Isle 257 Orcades, Isles 281. The People 288, 289, 290. Their ancient
Princes 290, 291. Government 291, 292. Religion 292 Orchil-hills 174, 225
Orkney, Earl of, his Palace 285 Orkney Isles 281 Ormistoun 57
P.
Pabbay, Isle 272 Paisley 114, 115 Paldykirk 184 Palladius, first Bishop of
Scotland ibid. Panmure, Earl of, his Palace 181. Attainted 224 Papa Stronsa,
Isle 287 Papa Westra, Isle 288 Pavement, an ancient one 299, 300 Peebles 138,
139 Peerage of England 317 Peerage of Scotland 320 Pentland Firth 196, 211,
212, 282 Pentland Skerries 283 Perth, Earl of, converts the Royal Apartments
into a Popish Chapel p. 87. Father and Son, Earls, banished 226 Perth, Town
169, 170, 171, 225 Peterhead 191, 192, 194 Pictland Firth 282 Pinkey 52, 60,
61, 62 Pitcairrn, Dr. 60. His Character 78 Pitsligo 195 Pittenweem 150, 161
Poans, what 229 Pollacks, what ibid. Pomona, Isle 285, 286 Porpoises, great
Numbers of them 155 Porteous, Captain, riotously murdered 80 to 84 Port-Patrick
105 Port-Seton 59 Portus Salutis 207 Precious Stones, etc. in Scotland 19, 20
Preston 59 Prestonpans ibid. Pretender escapes with the French Fleet 161, 162.
His Feats at Perth and Scone 170, 171. His short-lived Splendour 176. Arrives at
Dundee 181 Prophecy concerning the Union 139, 140 Puffin, the Fowl 260 Pygmies,
Island of 270
Q.
Queen's-ferry 94, 146
R
Raarsay, Isle p. 263 Ranalsha 211 Randal 's Trench 140 Ravens, Two remarkable
ones 256 Rea, Lord, his Seat 207 Redeloak 184 St. Regulus brings over St.
Andrew 's Relics 163 Renfrew 113, 114 Rivel 99 Rivers, in Scotland 5 Rob Roy
220 Robert Bruce, King 120, 190. His first Victory 193 Robert II. 299 Robert,
Bishop of St. Andrews 183 Rocking Stone 148, 149 Roger, Bishop of St. Andrews
164 Rona, Isle 263, 270, 271 Rora-head 283 Rosa 234 Rosbin 139 Roslin 95
Rossshire 214, 216, 217 Rothes, Earl of 151. His Palace 153 Rothsay 233
Rouglash, Isle 228 Round Table, Rocks so called 263 Rousa, Isle 287 Roxburgh
141 Roxburgh, Duke of 142 Ruglen p. 125 St. Rule, Chapel of 165 Rum, Isle 260
S
Sacro Bosco, Johannes de 101 Salmon, Plenty 212, 213 Salton 59 Saltoun, Earl
of, his new Pier and Bulwark 194 Salt-pans 155 Sanda, Isle 255 Sarvedrum
Promontorium 214 Scalloway 295 Scalpa, Isle 263 Scone 175, 176 Scot, Sir John
166 Scotland, Geographical Account of it 2, 3. Its Deficiencies 39, 40, 52, 53.
List of its Counties 41 Scott, Margaret, remarkable Inscription on her Tomb
144, 145 Scouts, Geese so called 56, 298 Seaforth, Earl of 109 Seats of the
Scottish Nobility and Gentry 244 to 252 Seats of the English Nobility and Gentry
302 to 316 Sea-ware, its Use 48 Second Sight, Account of it 276, 277 Sellay,
Isle 272 Seton 57, 58 Seton, Sir Alexander p. 58 Seymour, Edward, Duke of
Somerset, his Victory 62 Shapinsha, Isle 287 Sharp, Archbishop, his Monument
164 Sharp, Sir William ibid. Sheen, Dr. 166 Sheep, Damage sustained by
Exportation of their Wool, etc. 139. Wild ones 213 Sheriffmuir 133, 172
Shetland Isles 293 to 301 Shires, etc. which return Members to Parliament 323
to 328 Shrimps, great Quantities of them 160 Sibbald, Sir Robert, his Museum
74. Antiquities dug up in his Yard 94 Sinclair-castle 209 Sinclair, Earl of,
and Lord ibid. Skart, the Fowl 298 Sky, Isle 218, 261 Slanes, Cave of 192 Soa,
Isle 275 Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge in the Highlands 236 to 243
Sodor, Bishop of, whence so called 259 Solan Geese, the Natural History of them
55, 56 Soldiers, English, Advantages of their Settlement at Inverness 201, 202
Solway Firth 97, 98, 105 Sota-Britil, Isle 262 Soulisker Rock 271 Southesk,
River p. 183 Southfara, Isle 288 South-land of Scotland 204 South-Ronalsa 283
South-Vist, Isle 265 Soutra-hill 143 Sowna 211 Spey, River 193, 205
Spynie-castle 198 Stennis Lake 286 Sterling-bridge 172 Stewart, James, Regent
of Scotland 163 Stirling 129 to 133 Stonehyne 184 Storm, a terrible one 90 to
92. Storm of Thunder and Lightning 111 to 113 Straith-herin 199 Straithnairn
199, 200, 206, 207 Stranrawer 105 Strathave 194 Strathbogy 190, 197 Strathern
222, 223, 225 Strathmore 171, 179 Strathmore, Earl of, killed in the
Pretender's Service 171 Strathyla 193 Stroma 211, 282 Stronsa, Isle 287
Sutherland 205 Sutherland, Earl of, drives the Earl of Mar from Inverness 202,
206. His House 205 Sutherland Family 207 Sutherland, Mr. James 78 Swinna, Isle
283
T
Tantallon-castle p. 54, 55 Taransay, Isle 273 Tarbat, Promontory 216
Tarnaway-castle 198 Tay, River 149, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 175, 177, 178,
179, 180, 195, 204, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225 Tay, Upper 221 Tayne Bay and Town
216 Thistle, Order of the 27 Thread Manufacture 155 Thrushel-stone 268 Thule of
the Ancients, what Place 296, 297 Thurso 209 Tinningham 57 Tiviotdale 141
Tolard, his Account of the Hebrides 277 to 281 Toryburn 150 Traquair, Earl of,
his House, Character, and Misfortunes 140 St. Tredwell 's Loch 288 Trees,
useful Hint concerning them 50, 51 Troda, Isle 256 Tronda, Isle 295 Tullybardin
223 Tullybardin, Marquis of, attainted ibid. Turnbull, Archbishop 117 Tweed,
River 42, 43, 138, 139, 141, 142 Tweedale, Earl of, his Taste for Gardening,
and fine Park 51, 52 Tweedale Family p. 139 Tweedale, Marquis of 148 Tyne,
River 53, 54 Tyre-ty, Isle 259
V
Vatersa, Isle 264 Venison, Plenty of it 212 Virvedrum Promontorium 214 Union,
its Consequences 156 to 159 Unst, Island 212 Urie 184 Vuist, Isle 295
W
Wade, General, his commendable Diligence 220 Wall, Severus, or Adrian 's 126
to 128, 231 Wallace, Warden of Scotland 109, 110 Walsey, Isle 295 Wardlaw,
Bishop of St Andrews 165 Ways, Isle 283 Wedderburn, Sir John 166 Weemys 150
Weemys Family 151 Weich 209 Wemys, Earl of 159, 160 Wester-Wemys 159 Westra,
Isle 288 Westwater Lake 139 Whale cast on Shore 94 Whitecart, River 115
White-fish, their Number not proportionable to the Herrings p. 215 Whithern 106
Wigton 104, 105 Wilford, Sir George 53 William, King of Scotland 168. His
Monument 183 William III. King of Great Britain, keeps a Garrison at Inverness
202. His Soldiers commit a barbarous Massacre 219 William the Waster 209 Winton
57 Wirkworth 44 Wishart, George, burnt 164 Woods, in Scotland p. 16, 17 Wynds,
what 63
Y
Yell, Isle 295 Yester 51, 60, 61 Ylendoven-castle 217 Young 207
Z
Zeal, Isle 295 Zester 51
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by J. OSBORN, at the Golden Hall in Paternoster
Row.
1. PAMELA; or, Virtue rewarded* In a Series of familiar Letters from a
beautiful young Damsel to her Parents; and afterward in her exalted Condition,
between her and Persons of Figure and Quality, upon the most important and
entertaining Subjects in Genteel Life. Published in order to cultivate the
Principles of Virtue and Religion in the Minds of the Youth of both Sexes. In
Four Volumes. Price 12 s 2. PAMELA; ou, La Virtue Recompensee. Traduit de
l'Angloise. En Deux Tomes. Price 6 s. 3. Aesop's Fables. With instructive
Morals and Reflections, abstracted from all Party Considerations; adapted to
all Capacities; and designed to promote Religion, Morality, and Universal
Benevolence. Containing 240 Fables, with a Cut engraved on Copper to each
Fable. And the Life of Aesop prefixed. Price 2 s. 6 d. 4. LETTERS written to
and for particular Friends, on the most important Occasions, directing not only
the requisite Style and Forms to be observed in writing familiar Letters, but
how to think and act justly and prudently in the common Concerns of Human Life.
Containing 173 Letters. The second Edition. Price 2 s. 6 d. 5. A Treatise of
Education; proper for the different Capacities of Youth. Price 2 s. 6. The
History of Charles XII. King of Sweden; by Mr. de Voltaire. Translated from the
French. The seventh Edition. Price 3 s. 7. The Odes, Epodes, and Carmen
Seculare of Horace, in English Verse. To which is prefixed, the Life of Horace,
written by Suetonius. By Mr. Oldisworth, The third Edition. Price 1 s. 8. The
Works of Petronius Arbiter, in Prose and Verse. Translated by Mr. Addison. To
which are prefixed, the Life of Petronius, and a Character of his Writings, by
Mons. St. Evremont. Price bound 3 s. 9. The Works of Anacreon, translated into
English Verse, with Notes explanatory and poetical. To which are added, the
Odes, Fragments, and Epigrams of Sappho, by Mr. Addison. Price bound 3 s. 10.
The Works of Virgil, translated into English Verse, by the Right Honorable
Richard late Earl of Lauderdale. In Two Volumes. Price bound 4 s. 11. The Works
of Tacitus, in Four Volumes. To which are prefixed, Political Discourses upon
that Author, by T. Gordon, Esquire. The second Edition. 12. The Family Magazine: In
Two Parts Part I. containing Useful Directions in all the Branches of
Housekeeping and Cookery; particularly, showing how to buy-in the best of all
sorts of Provisions, as Poultry Ware, Butchers Meat, Fish, Fruit, etc. with
several hundred Receipts in Cookery, Pastry, Pickling, Confectionary,
Distilling, Brewing, Cosmeticks, etc. Together with the Art of making English
Wines, etc. Part II. containing a compendious Body of Physic, succinctly
treating of all the Diseases and Accidents incident to Men, Women, and
Children: with practical Rules and Directions for the preserving and restoring
of Health, and prolonging of Life. As also how to make all Kinds of Balsams,
Salves, Ointments, Elixirs, Cordials, Diet-drinks, Syrups, Electuaries,
Powders, etc. in a Method entirely new and intelligible; in which every Disease
is rationally and practically considered, in its several Stages and Changes;
and approved Recipes inserted under every Distemper, in alphabetical Order.
Being principally the Commonplace Book of a late able Physician; by which he,
successfully, for many Years, regulated his Practice. Price bound 5 s. 13. A
select Collection of Novels and Histories, in Six Volumes. Written by the most
celebrated Authors in several Languages, many of which never appeared in
English before; all new translated and compiled from the most authentic
Originals, by Dr. Samuel Croxall, Chaplain to his Majesty; and other eminent
Hands. The second Edition. With the Addition of Nine Novels and Histories; and
curious Cuts to each Vol. designed by Vanderbank and Highmore, and engraved by
Vandergucht. Price bound 15 s. 14. Memoirs of the Life and Adventures of Signor
Rozelli, late of the Hague, adorned with Cuts. The fourth Edition. In Two
Volumes 12 mo. Price bound 5 s. 15. The Voyages, Travels, and Adventures of
William-Owen-Gwin Vaughan, Esquire with the History of his Brother Jonathan, Six
Years a Slave in Tunis. Intermixed with the History of Clerimont, Maria,
Eleonora, and others, full. of various Turns of Fortune. In Two Volumes 12 mo.
Price 4 s. 6 d. 16. ROSALINDA: A Novel. Intermixed with a Variety of the most
affecting Scenes both of Distress and Happiness, by a Man of Quality.
Translated from the French. Price 4 s. 17. CUPID: A Collection of the most
beautiful Love Songs in the English Language, in Twelve Parts; suited to Twelve
different sorts of Lovers, viz. The Female Lover, the Admiring Lover, the
Slighted Lover, the Modest Lover, the Constant Lover, the Jealous Lover, the
Tender Lover, the Whining Lover, the Saucy Lover, the Merry Lover, the Pressing
Lover, the Happy Lover. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. 18. The Musical Miscellany: Being
a Collection of choice Songs, set to the Violin and Flute by the most eminent
Masters. In Six Volumes. Price 18 s. 19. Fore-warned fore-armed; or, The
Bachelor's Monitor: being a modest Estimate of the Expenses attending the
married Life; with a curious Copper-plate, designed and engraved by Gravelot.
Price 1 s. 20. The Ladies Advocate; or, An Apology for Matrimony. In Answer to
Fore-warned fore-arm'd; or, The Batchelor's Monitor. With a curious
Copper-plate, designed and engraved by Gravelot. Price 1 s. 21. Dr. Bundy's
Translation of Catrou and Rouille's Roman History. In Six Volumes Folio. This
Work is illustrated with Notes, historical, geographical, and critical; and
imbellished with Maps, and a great Number of authentic Medals; and to which is
prefixed, a new and connected Summary of the Work, and a general Index to the
Whole. 22. The Nightingale; containing a Collection of Four hundred and
Ninety-two of the most celebrated English and Scotch Songs, none of which are
contained in the other Collections of the same Size, called the Siren and Lark.
Price 2 s. 23. The Lark; containing a Collection of Four hundred and
Seventy-four of the best English and Scotch Songs, with an alphabetical
Glossary, to explain the Scotch Words. The second Edition, with Additions.
Price bound 2 s. 24. The Siren: A Collection of Four hundred and Thirty-two of
the most noted English and Scotch Songs. The third Edition, with Additions.
Price bound 2 s. 25. Batavia Illustrata; or, A View of the Policy and Commerce
of the United Provinces. Containing a particular Account of their Government,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical: Of the Office o^ Stadtholder; with Memoirs of
the Lives and Actions of the Princes of Orange who bore that Title: as also a
brief and impartial Account of the Cases of the famous Barnevelt and de Wits:
Of the Dutch Fisheries and Manufactures: Of the Rise and Progress of their East
and West India Companies: Of their Trade to Denmark, Sweden, Muscovy, and other
Parts of the North; also to Germany, to the Austrian Netherlands, to France,
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, to the Levant, Turkey, etc. and to the British
Dominions: Of their Alliances with the late Emperor, with France, with Spain,
and with Great Britain. Including, in the latter, a Comparison between the
Commerce of the English and Dutch, and the Articles in which the latter
interfere with, and exceed the former. With a brief Account of the Manner in
which the Dutch carry on the Herring-Fishery. The Whole illustrated with
historical Facts, and Observations of the highest Importance to the Trade and
Navigation of Great Britain. By Onslow Burrish, Esquire Secretary to his Majesty's
Commissaries for settling the Tariff at Antwerp. The Dutch are our Rivals in
Trade and Navigation; yet they must not be destroyed. They are really our
Out-guard upon the Continent, and yet we may do too much for them. See Page
569.
BOOKS printed for D. BROWN, at the Black Swan without Temple Bar.
1. THE Memoirs of Charles Lewis Baron de Pollnitz. Being the Observations he
made in his late Travels from Prussia through Poland Germany, Italy, France,
Spain, Flanders, Holland, England, etc. Discovering not only the Present State
of the most noted Cities and Towns, but the Characters of the several Princes
and Princesses, and of their most noted Generals, Ministers, and Favorites
both late and present. Interspersed with diverse curious and entertaining
Narratives, as well regarding Affairs of State as those of Love and Gallantry.
In Four Volumes. The second Edition. 2. Memoirs of the Duke de Ripperda, first
Ambassador from the States General to his most Catholic Majesty, then Duke and
Grandee of Spain; afterward Bashaw and Prime Minister to Mul^y Abda^^^.
Emperor of Fez and Morocco, etc. Containing a succinct A^^^unt of the most
remarkable Events which happened b^^ween 1715 and 1736. Interspersed throughout
with several ^urious Particulars relating to the Cardinals del Giudice, and
Alberoni, the Princess of Ursini, Prince Cellamere, the Marquis Beretti Landi,
M. de Santa Cruz, and other Persons of Distinction in the Spanish Court. As
also a distinct and impartial Detail of the D^fferences between the Courts of
London and Madrid. With many Memorials, and other valuable Papers. And an
Alphabetical Index. The second Edition, with the Addition of an Appendix. 3. A
Journey through the Austrian Netherlands; containing the modern History and
Description of all the Provinces, Towns, Castles, Palaces, etc. of that
fruitful populous Country, so long the Scene of Wars and dreadful Ravages, till
it was, by the Treaty of Utrecht, yielded to the Emperor of Germany; with an
Account of all the remarkable Battles and Sieges taken from the most authentic
Narrations; to which is prefixed an Introduction containing the ancient History
of the whole Seventeen Provinces. The second Edition. 4. The Jewish Spy; or, A
Translation of Lettres Juives: being a philosophical, historical, and critical
Correspondence by Letters, which lately passed between certain Jews in European
and Asiatick Turkey, with others of that Denomination traveling through Spain,
France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, the Netherlands, Great Britain, etc. Which
treat not only of ancient and modern Philosophy, History, and other Parts of
Learning; but of the Religion, Sects, and Ceremonies in the several Countries;
together with the Manners and Customs of the Courts and Cities which they
traveled through; interspersed with many curious and diverting Incidents of Love
and Gallantry, first translated from the Original Letters into French, by the
Marquis D'Argens, and now into English, with copious alphabetical Indexes. In
Five Volumes. 5. La Belle Assemblee, being a curious Collection of some very
Remarkable Incidents which happened to some of the first Quality in France:
interspersed with entertaining and improving Observations made by them on
several Passages in History, both Ancient and Modern, written in French for the
Entertainment of the King, by Madam de Gomez. Now translated into English,
adorned with Copper Plates. The fourth Edition. In Four Volumes. 6. Secret
Histories, Novels, and Poems, written by Mrs. Elizabeth Haywood. The third
Edition. In Four Volumes. 7. The Gentleman's Library; containing Rules for
Conduct in all Parts of Life. Written by a Gentleman. The third Edition,
corrected and enlarged. 8. Roma Illustrata; or, A Description of the most
beautiful Pieces of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture, antique and modern,
at and near Rome. The second Edition, corrected. 9. Walsingham's Manual; or,
Prudential Maxims for Statesmen and Courtiers. With Instructions for Youth,
Gentlemen and Noblemen, by Sir Walter Ralegh, Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and
Cardinal Sermonetta. The second Edition.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by, J. HODGES, at the Looking-glass, over against
St. Magnus Church, London Bridge.
1. THE Life of Lewis IV. King of France and Navarre: Containing an Impartial
Relation of the Battles, Sieges, Negotiations, and other material Events,
during that long and remarkable Reign. 2. The Life of Francis Eugene, Prince of
Savoy; and John Duke of Marlborough, Prince of Mindelheim. In Two neat Pocket
Volumes in 12 mo. Price 6 s. 3. The Life of Czar Peter the Great, Emperor of
all Russia, and Father of his Country, 12 mo. Price 3 s. 4. The History of
Charles XII. King of Sweden; illustrated with Plans of the Battles and Sieges.
Translated from the French. In Three Vols. 8 vo. Price 15 s. 5. A Cr^tical
Review of the Political Life of Oliver Cromwell, in 12 mo. Price 3 s. 6. The
Unfortunate Princess; or, The Life and Surpriseing Adventures of the Princess
of Ijaves. By Mrs. Elizabeth Haywood. Price stitched 1 s. 6 d. or bound 2 s. 7.
The Devil turned Hermit; or, The Adventures of Astaroth, banished from Hell.
Translated from the Original French Price bound 2 s. 6 d. 8. Miscellanies in
Prose and in Verse, by D. Bellamy. In 2 Vols. 12 mo. Price 5 s. 9. The
Curiosity; or, Gentleman's and Lady's Library. Price 2 s. 6 d. 10. The Peruvian
Tales, Related in One thousand and One Hours. 3 Vols. 12 mo. Price 9 s. N.B.
The third Volume may be had alone. Price 3 s.

11. Chinese Tales; or, The wonderful Adventures of the Mandarin Fum Hoam.
Related by himself, to divert the Sultana upon the Celebration of her Nuptials.
Translated by the Reverend Mr. Stackhouse. Adorned with Copper Plates. Price 2
s. 6 d. 12. Nature Delineated: Being a Philosophical Conversation, wherein the
wonderful Works of Providence in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Creation
are laid open. Translated from the French of Spectacle de la Nature. In 4 Vols.
12 mo. Illustrated with above 100 Copper Plates. Price bound 12 s. 13. A
complete History of China, by Lewis le Comte, 8 vo. Price 6 s. 14. The
Student's Law Dictionary; or, A complete English Law Expositor, 8 vo. Price 6
s. 15. Rules of Practice, Common-placed; with Remarks, 8 vo. Price 3 s. 6 d.
16. The Attorney's Pocket Companion. 2 Vols. 12 mo. Price 6 s. 17. The Attorney
and Solicitor's Companion; or, Complete Affidavit-man, 2 s. 18. Reading's
Clerk's Instructor. 2 Vols. 8 vo. Price 10 s. 19. Young Clerk's Magazine, 12
mo. Price 1 s. 6 d. 20. Le Drau's Observations in Surgery. Translated from the
French. Price 5 s. 21. Mr. Saviard's Observations in Surgery, relating to the
Female Sex, 8 vo. Price 4 s. 22. A new Discourse on Trade, by Sir Josiah Child.
Price 3 s. 23. A new History of Jamaica, 8 vo. Price 5 s. 24. Cure of Deism;
or, The Mediatorial Scheme, by Jesus Christ, the only true Religion. By the
Reverend Mr. Smith, M. A. In 2 Vols. 8 vo. 25. Forty-two Sermons on the most
important Concern of a Christian Life. By the Reverend Mr. Smith, M. A. In 2
Vols. 8 vo. 26. Boerhaave's Power of Medicine. Translated by Dr. Martin, 8 vo.
Bound, Price 5 s. 27. Mr. Banks's Miscellaneous Works. In 2 Vols. 8 vo. 28. The
History of Belles Lettres, and Arts and Sciences, 8 vo. 29. Mr. Bradley's Works
of Nature; adorned with curious Cuts, 8 vo.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by, A. MILLAR, at Buchanan's Head, over against
St. Clement's Church, in the Strand.
1. THE Works of Mr. Thomson. In 2 Vols. with Cuts. Containing the Seasons; A
Hymn; A Poem to the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton; Britannia, a Poem; and
Sophonisba, a Tragedy. Vol. II. Ancient and Modern Italy compared; Greece,
Rome, Britain, and the Prospect, being the Five Parts of Liberty, a Poem;
Agamemnon and Edward and Eleanora, Tragedies; and a Poem to the Memory of the
late Lord Chancellor Talbot. N.B. Either of the Volumes are to be had separate,
and most of the Pieces. 2. Eurydice, a Tragedy. Acted at the Theater Royal in
Drury lane. 3. Mustapha, a Tragedy. Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.
4. The Excursion, a Poem. In Two Books. To which is added William and Margaret,
a Ballad. 5. Of Verbal Criticism: An Epistle to Mr. Pope, occasioned by
Theobald's Shakespeare, and Bentley's Milton. 6. The Life of Francis Bacon,
Baron of Verulam, Viscount St. Alban, and Lord High Chancellor of England. In
this Work, besides an accurate Review of the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King
James I. the Characters of the most eminent Persons that flourished under both
those Princes, are occasionally drawn. The above Five by Mr. Mallet, which
complete his Works. 7. The Economy of Love. The third Edition. 8. The Works of
John Sheffield, Earl of Mulgrave, Marquis of Normanby, and Duke of Buckingham.
Containing all that was ever published of his Grace's, either in Prose or
Verse. In Two Volumes. The third Edition, with the Addition of his Grace's
Character, Last Will and Testament, etc 9. The History of the Adventures of
Joseph Andrews, and of his Friend Mr. Abraham Adams. Written in Imitation of
the Manner of Cervantes, Author of Don Quixote. In Two Volumes. 10. The History
of Nadir Shah, (formerly called Thamas Kuli Khan) the present Emperor of
Persia. Containing, 1. An Account of his Parentage, the Place of his Nativity,
and his first Rise in the Wo^ld. 2. The various Scenes of Fortune he has gone
through, the several Battles he fought with the Tartars, Asghans, and Turks,
till he usurped the Crown; and his Actions from that Time, until he invaded the
Moghol's Empire. 3. A Journal of his Expedition into India, and his
Transactions there. With an exact List of the Jewels, Treasure, and other
Effects he carried from thence. To which is prefixed,

A compendious History of the Moghol Emperors, from Temur (or Tamerlane) to the
Time of the Persian Invasion. With a Map of their Dominions, and a Print of the
present Emperor Mahomed Shah, curiously engraven from an original Picture. As
also,

An Account of the State of Affairs in that Empire before Nadir Shah's
Expedition, the Springs by which the said Invasion was brought about, and the
several Causes that concurred to render it successful.

The Whole interspersed with

Translations of some genuine Letters, and other curious Pieces; with
Explanatory Notes, critical and historical; in which several of the proper
Names and Terms are, for the Satisfaction of the Curious and Learned, expressed
in the original Characters, and afterward explained in English.

At the End is inserted,

A Catalogue of about 200 curious Manuscripts in the Persian and other Oriental
Languages, collected in the East. The second Edition. By James Frazer.


BOOKS printed for, and sold by, JOHN WHISTON, at Mr. Boyle's Head, in
Fleet Street.
1. A Beautiful and correct Edition of, The Works of John Lock, Esquire 3 Vols.
Folio. 2. Also his posthumous Pieces, published by Mr. Desmaizeaux, in the same
S^ze and Print, proper to bind up with the Works. 3. Complete Collection of all
the Sermons preached at the Lecture founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, in
Defense of Natural and Revealed Religion. In 3 Vols. Folio. 4. The Longitude
discovered by the Eclipses, Occultations, and Conjunctions of Jupiter's
Planets: with Descriptions of those Refracting and Reflecting Telescopes; and
of those Sectors, and that Quadrant, which are the Instruments necessary for
this Discovery both at Land and Sea, with an Appendix. Price 2 s. 6 d. 5. A new
Theory of the Earth, from the Original to the Consummation of all Things.
Wherein the Creation of the World in Six Days, the Universal Deluge, and the
General Conflagration, as laid down in the Holy Scriptures, are shown to be
perfectly agreeable to Reason and Philosophy. With a large Introduction,
concerning the genuine Nature, Style, and Extent of the Mosaic History of the
Creation. The fifth Edition. To which is added, (never before printed) an
Appendix, containing a new Theory of the Deluge. Price 6 s. 6. An Account of
the Daemoniacks; or, The Power of casting out Demons during the first 400
Years after Christ. To which is added, an Appendix, concerning the Tithes paid
by the first Christians. Price 1 s. 6 d. 7. The primitive Eucharist Revived;
or, An Account of the Doctrine and Practice of the Two first Centuries
concerning the Lord's Supper; occasioned by a late Treatise, entitled, A plain
Account of the Nature and End of the Lord's Supper. Price 1 s. 6 d. 8. An
Inquiry into the Evidence of Archbishop Cranmer's Recantation to Popery. Price
6 d. 9. Six Dissertations. 1. The Testimony of Josephus, concerning Jesus
Christ, John the Baptist, and James the Just, vindicated. 2. The Copy of the
Old Testament made use of by Josephus, proved to be that which was collected by
Nehemiah. 3. A Reply to Dr. Sykes's Defense of his Dissertation on the Eclipse
at Christ's Passion. 4. The Chronology of the sacred Scriptures, and the Truth
of their Predictions, confirmed by Eclipses and Astronomical Observations. V.
Remarks on Sir Isaac Newton's Observations on Daniel and the Apocalypse. VI. A
Demonstration that our Savior's Ministry continued at least Four Years. Price
4 s. 10. The Astronomical Year; or, An Account of the many remarkable celestial
Phenomenon of the great Year 1736; particularly of the late Comet, which was
foretold by Sir Isaac Newton, and appeared at its Conclusion. Price 6 d.
The seven last by William Whiston, M. A.

BOOKS printed for, and sold by J. ROBINSON, at the Golden Lion in
Ludgate Street, near the West End of St. Paul's.
1 THE System of the World, demonstrated in an easy and popular Manner: Being a
proper Introduction to the most sublime Philosophy. By the illustrious Sir
Isaac Newton. Translated into English. The second Edition, corrected and
improved. 2. Essays on Atheism, Writing, the Spleen, Future Felicity, and
Divine Love; containing a Variety of just and beautiful Sentiments on those
Subjects. By Sir Richard Blackmore, Knight. M. D. and Fellow of the Royal College
of Physicians. 3. Wisdom's Portrait; or, The Life and Moral Reflections of that
great and most excellent Emperor Marcus Antoninus. With Gataker's Preliminary
Discourse; containing a Comparison between the Principles of the Stoics with
those of the Peripateticks, the Academicks, and, more especially, the Epicurean
Sect; as likewise an Examination of the remaining Writings of the Stoic
Philosophers. To which is added, the Mythological Picture of Cebes the Theban.
4. The M^aneous Works of that fine Gentleman, and (...), Walter Moyle, Esquire
Containing his Essays, D^ssertat^ons, and Letters on a Variety of critical and
entertaining Su^jects. In 2 Vols. 5. The M^moirs and Miscellaneous Works of the
Right Honorable Charles, late Ea^ of Halifax, including the History of his
Lordsh^p's Times. 6 The Spirit of Antichrist displayed, in the History of the
English Martyrs, who were cruelly burnt, or otherwise put to Death, for
opposing the Romish Religion; from the Reign of King Henry IV. 1400. to the End
of the Reign of Queen Mary I. Collected from the most authentic Authors.
Whereunto is annexed, A short Account of some of ^he principal Errors taught
and practiced in the Church of Rome at this Day. The Time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think he does God good Service. John xvi.2. 7. The
Principles of Logic and Rhetoric, illustrated by Examples drawn from the most
approved Authors ancient and modern, in all the polite Languages. Translated
from the French of that learned and judicious Critic, Monsieur Bouh^urs. To
which are added, Parallel Instances from the most eminent English Writers in
Verse and Prose; calculated for the Reader's Improvement in all the various
Kinds of Thought and Expression. 8. The History of the Works of the Learned;
or, A general and compendious Library. Exhibiting a comprehensive View of the
State of Learning, and the Substance of the most valuable Books published at
Home and Abroad. Interspersed with original Dissertations on several curious
and entertaining Subjects; critical Reflections, and Memoirs of the most
eminent Writers in all Branches of polite Literature. 9. A Vindication of Mr.
Pope's Essay on Man, from the Misrepresentations of Mons. de Crousaz, Professor
of Philosophy and Mathematics in the University of Lausanne. In Seven Letters.
By the Reverend William Warburton, M. A Author of The Divine Legation of Moses
demonstrated.
Vide quam iniqui sunt divinorum Munerum Aestimatores etiam quidam PROFESSI
SAPIENTIAM.
