THE GROUNDS OF Criticism IN POETRY, CONTAINED In some New Discoveries never
made before, requisite for the Writing and Judging of Poems surely.

BEING A Preliminary to a larger Work designed to be published in Folio, and
Entitled, A Criticism upon our most Celebrated English Poets Deceased.

By Mr. DENNIS.

LONDON, Printed for Geo, Strahan at the Golden-Ball against the Exchange in
Cornhill, and Bernard Lintott, at the Middle Temple Gate, Fleet Street 1704.

THE Preface.
THE following Treatise is but a small part of a Volume of Criticism intended
to be published in Folio, in which in Treating of the works of the most
Celebrated English Poets Deceased, I designed to show both by Reason and
Examples, that the use of Religion in Poetry was absolutely necessary to raise
it to the greatest exaltation, of which so Noble an Art is capable, and on the
other side, that Poetry was requisite to Religion in order to its making more
forcible Impressions upon the Minds of Men.

And this I thought would be an effectual way of Reconciling People to a
Regulated Stage, in spite of the Grimaces of some Spiritual Comedians; who
have themselves a mind to be the only Actors in Vogue; and who in order to a
total suppression of the Stage, have endeavored to set up private Authorities
against the common Sense of Mankind, and the Errors of two or three Churchmen
against Divine Inspiration. For I appeal to any impartial Reader, whether the
constant practice in all Ages of the best and the bravest Nations in their most
flourishing States, may not pass for the common Sense of Men: And we know very
well that St. Paul, whom we believe to be divinely inspired, has made use of
Heathen Poets nay even Heathen Dramatick Poets, for the Reformation of Mankind.
Witness that famous passage, Evil Communications corrupt good manners; which
St. Paul makes use of in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, and which
Grotius informs us that he borrowed from the Thais of the famous Menander. Now
how that which was the Language of the Holy Ghost, in the Mouth of St. Paul,
comes to be the Language of the Devil in ours, I believe our Bigots will find
it a Difficult matter to show.

It it plain then that these Persons by designing totally to suppress the
Stage, which is the only encouragement that we have in these Islands of Poetry,
manifestly intended to drive out so noble and useful an Art from among us, and
by that means endeavored with all their might to weaken the power of Religion,
which has need of Poetry to make its utmost Impression upon the Minds of Men.

In short, almost all but the Ceremonial and Historical part of the old
Testament, was delivered in Poetry and that is almost Half of it. And a
considerable part of the Doctrine of the Gospel was delivered in Parables,
which, as my Lord Bacon has justly observed in his Advancement of Learning Lib.
2 Chap. I. are a kind of Divine Poesy. I might here very truly observe, that
not only Job and Solomon's Song and part of the Prophets, but several too of
our Saviors Parables, are though not Dramatick Poems, yet Poesy that is
Dramatical, that is Poesy in which Persons are introduced who are talking in
Dialogue.

From what has been said, this Consequence must undeniably follow, that either
they who delivered our Religion were mistaken in the manner of doing it, which
will by no means consist with our Belief of the Divinity of one of them, or the
Divine Inspiration of the Rest, or that our Religion must be most powerfully
propagated by the same means, by which it was at first delivered.

I believe that it would be an easy matter to prove, that it was the use of
exalted Poesy, such as the lofty Hymn of St. Ambrose, that blew up the Flame of
Christian zeal to such a transporting height, in the Primitive and Apostolical
times, and that the neglect of so Divine an art, has not only in these latter
Days considerably lessened the force of Religion, but has with some People
among us gone a very great way toward the making the Public Worship
contemptible. But I leave it to our Prelates and Pastors to consider, whether,
since they are satisfied that there is a necessity, for an Harmonious and a
Numerous Style, in some parts of our Public Worship, they ought so long to
have remained contented with the vile Meetre of Hopkins, and by that proceeding
to suffer the most Lofty and most Pathetick Divine Poetry to be Burlesqu'd and
Ridiculed in our Churches, which is all one, as if each Sunday they should
dress up a Bishop in some Antic Habit, and expose him in that merry Garb in
Order to raise the Veneration of the People.

That Poetry is necessary for the enforcing Religion upon the Minds of Men, may
I think appear very plainly from what has been said, and from what will be said
upon that Subject in the following Treatise. But since our Clergy by their
constant practice appear to be already satisfied of it, I leave it to them to
consider, whether they ought not rather to make it part of their business, to
set Poetry and consequently the Stage upon a good Foot, than to endeavor with
all their might to drive out both from among us.

Since I mentioned my Lord Bacon above, I desire the Readers leave to lay
before him a most Beautiful Passage of that great genius concerning the worth
and the use of Poetry, which he esteems to be the Second principal Bruanch of
Learning.

As for Narrative Poesy (says he in the 13 Chapter of the 2 Lib. of his Advancement
of Learning) or, if you please, Heroical, so you understand it of the Matter,
not of the Verse, it seems to be raised altogether from a noble Foundation,
which makes much for the Dignity of Man's Nature. For seeing the sensible World
is in Dignity inferior to the Soul of Man, Poesy seems to endow human Nature,
with that which History denies, and to give satisfaction to the Mind, with at
least the Shadow of things, where the Substance cannot be had. For if the
matter be thoroughly considered a strong Argument may be drawn from Poetry, that
a more stately Greatness of things, a more perfect Order, and a more beautiful
Variety, delights the Soul of Man, than can be any way found in Nature, since
the fall. Wherefore seeing the Acts and events, which are the Subject of True
History, are not of that amplitude as to content the Mind of Man, Poesy is
ready at Hand to fain Acts more Heroical. Because true History reports the
Successes of Business not proportionable to the merit of Virtues and Vices,
Poesy corrects it, and presents Events and Fortunes according to Desert; and
according to the Law of Providence. Because true History, through the frequent
Satiety and Similitude of things, works a Distaste and Misprision in the Mind of
Men, Poetry Cheereth and Refreshes the Soul; Chanting things rare and various,
and full of Vicissitudes, so as Poetry serves and conferreth to Delectation,
Magnanimity, and Morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly to have some
Participation of Divineness; because it does raise the Mind, and exalt the
Spirit with high Raptures, by proportioning the Shows of things to the Desires
pf the Mind, and not submitting the Mind to things, as Reason and History do.
And by these Allurements and Congruities, whereby it cherishes the Soul of
Men, joined also with Consort of Music, whereby it may more sweetly insinuate
it self, it has won such Access, that it has been in Estimation, even in Rude
Times, and Barbarous Nations, when other Learning stood excluded.

But because that Poetry which we call Heroic, has been but barely neglected
among us, and the great Cry has been against the Dramatick, let us see what the
same extraordinary Person says in Defense of that.

Dramatick or Representative Poesy, says he, which brings the World upon the
Stage, is of excellent use if it were not abused. For the instructions and
Corruptions of the Stage may be great; but the Corruptions in this kind abound;
the Discipline is altogether neglected in our times. For although in Modern
Commonwealths, Stage Plays be but esteemed a Sport or Pastime, unless they draw
from the Satyr and be mordant; yet the Care of the Ancients was, that the Stage
should instruct the Minds of Men unto Virtue. Nay, wise Men and great
Philosophers, have accounted it as the Archet or Musical Bow of the Mind. And
certainly it is most true, and as it were a Secret of Nature, that the Minds of
Men are more patent to Affections, and Impressions Congregate than Solitary.

In this last Observation which is perfectly Beautiful, my Lord Bacon has given
a very solid Reason, why the Drama must be more useful than History, and more
prevalent than Philosophy. And a little lower he has given two more, though he
has applied them to a sort of Poetry which is somewhat different, and those
are, that Dramatick Fables are more sensible than Arguments; and more fit than
Examples.

At the same time, that extraordinary Man declares like a most just and
discerning Judge, that the Modern Stage was but a Shadow of the Ancient, and an
imperfect Shadow; that it had something of its Show, but nothing of its
Reality; that is, that it was not only a vain and an empty, but a dangerous
Amusement. And he plainly taxes the Modern Policy with the Neglect of its
Discipline. Indeed in this as well as other things, there is as great a
difference between Ancient and Modern Policy, as there is between Ancient and
Modern Extent of Empire.

But the Wisdom of the Queen can never be too much extolled, who has vouchsafed
to take care of that which all Her Predecessors neglected.

That Discerning Princess is resolved to support the Stage, that it may be
instrumental to the Reforming Her People; and She is resolved to Regulate it,
that it may no longer be justly accused of corrupting their Manners.

The following Treatise, as has been said above, is but a small Portion of a
much larger which was designed for the Improvement of Modern Poetry, and of the
Drama particularly. And here I desire the Reader's Leave to do two things.
First to lay down the Design and Method of the larger Treatise, and then to
give an Account to the World why no more is Published.

The Design then, and the Method of the whole Treatise, as they were delivered
in the Second Proposal, are as follows.

THE PROPOSAL.
FIrst, The Design is To restore Poetry to all its Greatness, and to all its
Innocence.

That Poetry is miserably fallen, is, I suppose, granted: And, as there never
was more occasion for a just and impartial Criticism on account of the
generality of the Writers; so, there never was more necessity for one on
account of the Readers and the Spectators. For the taste of both the Readers
and the Spectators was never so debauched as if is at present; of which we have
given the Reasons in another place. Some of them would be thought to approve of
every thing that they either Read or See, and value themselves upon that; that
is, upon their want of Discernment to distinguish right from wrong: Others are
so squeamish, that they like nothing, and value themselves* even upon that too;
that is, upon the sickliness and the unsoundness of their Minds; because he who
likes nothing tastes nothing, and want of Taste is want of Sense. But this is
not all: even they who pretend to like nothing, will at the Play Houses be
pleased with every thing; and they who would be thought to approve of every
thing, like nothing long; For nothing but Truth can be long esteemed, and Truth
it self, to be long esteemed, must be distinguished from Falsehood. From these
random ways of Judging it comes to pass, that this Town, in the compass of ten
Years, happens to have one and the same Author in the greatest Admiration and
in the utmost Contempt; which is infinitely a greater Satyr upon the Town, than
it can be on the Author; for the Town is certainly in the wrong in one of the
Extremes at least, and perhaps in both; whereas the Authors, for the most part,
give no occasion for either of them. This random or this partial way of
Judging, has been the cause that Poetry is banished from the rest of Europe,
and is upon its last Legs in England.

The Design of the foresaid Treatise is, not only to retrieve so noble an Art,
and to fix the Rules both of Writing and of Judging, that both Readers and
Writers may be at some certainty; but, to raise it to a height which it has
never known before among us, and to restore it, as we said above, to all its
Greatness, and to all its Innocence.

But whereas several may imagine that the Design is chimerical, of restoring
Poetry either to its Greatness or to its Innocence, we think it proper to
satisfy the Reader, in as few words as we can, that both may be easily
effected.

1. Poetry may easily be restored to its former Greatness, because the
discovering the Cause of a Disease is more than half the Cure of it: but the
true and almost only Cause of the Declention of Poetry, that Cause which has
lain hid for so many Ages, has been already discovered in a little Tract that
was published two Years ago Advancement and Reformation of Modern Poetry*
, for which I have the Opinion of several of the best Judges in England, and
that matter will be set in so clear a Light in the beginning of the foresaid
Treatise, without repeating any thing that was said before, or at least as
little as may be, as may satisfy the most incredulous. But,

2. Poetry may easily be restored to its Innocence by taking a proper Method, a
Method that may be more prevalent with the Writers than either Law or
Philosophy, which have been used in vain. For let us but consider the Character
that Horace has given of a Poet, Vatis avarus
Non temere est animus, versus amet, hoc studet unum,
Detrimenta, fugas servorum; incendia ridet.


In short, a Poet will contemn every thing but the acquiring the Reputation of
a good Poet. This is what he makes his only Business, and the sole design of
his Life; and there is no Reprimand that you can give him, and no Remonstrance
that you can make him, that he will not laugh at, until you convince him that
he is an ill Poet. And indeed he is partly in the right; for an ill Poet is ten
times more ridiculous than a Blockhead of any other Profession: for an ill
Physician, or an ill Lawyer, know their own Ignorance, and make it their
business to be esteemed by the People: but, on the contrary, an ill Poet is
found out by every body, and admires himself, than which nothing can be more a
Jest. So that there is nothing he will refuse to do to avoid the Infamy of that
Reputation. From whence it follows that in the foresaid Criticism there is a
Motive that will work more strongIy upon them than the Censures of our
Reformers: for there we clearly show them, that Poetry, by losing its
Innocence, loses its very Nature; for if Poetry be more philosophical, and more
instructive, than History, as Aristotle is pleased to affirm of it, and no Man
ever knew the Nature either of Poetry, or of History, or of Philosophy, better
than he did; why then that Art, or rather that Artifice, with which a great
many Writers of Verses and Plays debauch and corrupt the People, is a thing to
which Poetry is as directly contrary, as a Virgin is to a Whore. And these
People are no more Poets, than those Empricks are Physicians who make their
Jack-Puddings swallow Potions to recommend them to the People,

In the foresaid Treatise we clearly show them, that Piety and Virtue was not
only the first Original, but that it has been, is and will be, the only solid
Basis, nay and the very Life and Soul of the Greater Poetry. That the farther
Poetry declines from that, the farther it recedes from its very Nature and
Essence; and that the true Poetry is as inconsistent and as incompatible with
Vice, as the Harmony, and Light, and Raptures of Heaven with the gloomy Horrors
of Hell; and the proving this in so clear a manner as we pretend to do, will
oblige those Poets who are never so profligate in their Inclinations, to be
virtuous at least in their Writings.

Both they and their Readers will then be satisfied, that the true Poetical
Genius is a great and a sacred thing; and, to quote an Admirable passage from
Milton, 'Is, wherever it is found, the inspired Gift of God, rarely bestowed,
but yet to some (says he) in every Nation, though most abuse it: and is of power,
beside the Office of a Pulpit, to imbreed and cherish in a great People the
Seeds of Virtue and public Civility, to allay the Perturbations of the Mind,
and set the Affections in a right Tune, to celebrate in glorious and lofty
Hymns the Throne and Equipage of God's Almightiness, and what he works, and
what he suffers to be wrought with high providence in his Church; to sing
victorious Agonies of Martyrs and Saints, the Deeds and Triumphs of just and
pious Nations, doing valiantly, through Faith, against the Enemies of Christ; to
deplore the general Relapses of Kingdoms and States from Justice and God's true
Worship. Lastly, Whatever in Religion is holy and sublime, in Virtue amiable or
grave, whatever has Passion or Admiration in all the changes of that which is
called Fortune from without, or the wily Subtleties and Refluxes of Man's
Thoughts from within; all these things with a solid and treatable Smoothness to
point out and describe; teaching over the whole Book of Sanctity and Virtue,
through all the instances of example, with such delight, to those especially of
soft and delicious temper, who will not so much as look upon Truth her self,
unless they see her elegantly dressed; that whereas the paths of Honesty arid
Good-life appear now rugged and difficult, though they be indeed easy and
pleasant, they would then appear to all Men both easy and pleasant, though they
were rugged and difficult indeed. And what a Benefit this would be to our Youth
and Gentry ( continues he) may be soon guest by what we know of the Corruption
and Bane which they suck in daily from the Writings and Interludes of
libidinous and ignorant Poetasters, who having scarce ever heard of that which
is the main Consistence of a true Poem, the Choice of such persons as they
ought to introduce, and what is moral and decent to each one, do for the most
part lap up vicious Principles in sweet Pills to be swallowed down, and make
the taste of virtuous Documents harsh and four.' Thus far goes Milton: And the
Reader may see that it was his Opinion, That tho Poetry was in the main
miserably sunk among us; yet, that it might be restored to its Innocence, and
its Greatness. In order then to the doing this we come to display,

Secondly, The Method that we follow in the forementioned Criticism We begin
then with a Criticism upon Poetry in general; in which we endeavor to show its
Nature, and its End, and the means which it ought to use for the attaining that
End. And then we come to, divide Poetry into its two great Branches, the
(Greater and the Less.

1. We treat of the Greater Poetry, show what its Nature and its End are; and
that the only certain Method for the attaining its End, is, the keeping
strictly up to its Nature, which seems to have been hitherto not very clearly
understood. And here we shall lay down some general Rules, which are both few
and short, but eternal and unalterable; and for the want of observing which, it
will appear throughout this whole Treatise, that the very best among the
Ancients, and among the Moderns, have not only made gross Mistakes, but have
deviated sometimes, in a great degree, from the Art.

And here too We endeavor to show the mutual Dependence that the Greater
Poetry has on Religion, and Religion on the Greater Poetry; and to make it
appear, that all those parts of the Old Testament which were writ id Verse,
ought to be translated in Verse, by Reasons which may have force enough to
convince us, that Verse translated into Prose is but half translated.

When we have done this, We come to Heroic Poetry; which being a Branch of the
Greater Poetry, must have the same End, and must participate of the same
Nature; and must besides, have something particular in its Nature to
distinguish it from the other two Branches, which are Tragedy, and the Greater
Ode. But because too much bare Speculation may prove tedious to several
Readers, we show what every Poet who writes an Epick Poem is obliged to do, to
make that Poem keep to the Nature of Epick Poetry in general, and to its own:
This, I say, we endeavor to show, not by laying down the Rules after the
common Method, but by showing what Virgil has done; because that great Poet is
so exact, that he may be said to have written a Criticism upon Epick Poetry by
Examples, and because he is now, by Mr. Dryden's Translation, to be reckoned
among our own Poets; and so comes within the compass of my Design.

When by doing this we have laid down the Rules, we come briefly to examine,
Whether those Rules are always to be kept inviolable; and if they are not, in
what parts, and by whom, they may be altered. Then we show how Spencer, by not
following those Rules, fell so very far short of the Ancients; And afterward
we endeavor to make it appear, how Milton, by daring to break a little loose
from them in some particulars, kept up in several others to the Nature of the
Greater Poetry in general, and of Epick Poetry in particular, better than the
best of the Ancients. After this we treat of the other English Poets, who have
written any thing that comes near to Heroic Poetry; and show of them all, as
we go along, how they differ from one another, how from the best of the Ancient
Poets, and the best of the Moderns of other Countries.

The Branch of the Greater Poetry which we consider next is Tragedy, which we
treat of after the same manner with Heroic Poetry, and show what every one who
writes a Tragedy is obliged to do, to make that Poem come up to the Nature of
the Greater Poetry in general, and of Tragedy in particular, by showing what
Sophocles has done in his OEdipus (which will be there translated) and for what
Reasons; where we endeavor to display the Beauties of his admirable Conduct,
and to clear the Moral by a very different Method from what Monsieur Dacier has
taken. And after that by doing this we have laid down the Rules, the first of
any length that were ever extant in English we by those examine the Plays of
our most celebrated Tragic Poets, in their Fables, Characters. Sentiments,
Expressions, Harmony; show what distinguishes them, from one another, from the
best of the Ancients, and the most famous Moderns of other Countries. And here
we make it our business to show how much the present English Stage is
degenerated from the Virtue and Greatness of the Ancient Tragedy, and what is
to be done to restore Modern Tragedy first to the Innocence, and secondly to
the Greatness of the Grecian Stage. And here we examine whether it is not
possible to advance English Tragedy to a greater Height than ever the Grecian
Poets arrived.

In the next place we descend to the third and last Branch of the Greater
Poetry, which is the Greater Ode, which we treat of after the same manner with
the two preceding, and show what the composer of such an Ode is obliged to do,
to make it keep up to the Nature of the Greater Poetry in general, and to its
own. And here we have occasion to take notice, that of these three Branches of
Poetry, the Ode is the most degenerated: For since the Nature of Poetry
consists in Passion; and that of the Greater Poetry in great Passion, as we
make it appear in the forementioned Crticism; and since that which we commonly
call Passion is very rarely to be found in the Greater Ode, it follows that the
excellence of the Greater Ode must consist in extraordinary Passion, which can
be nothing but strong Enthusiasm; but Religion is the greatest, noblest,
strongest source of Enthusiasm as we very clearly show; so that the Modern Ode,
by for saking Religion, and becoming for the most part profane, has parted
with that from which it derived its greatest excellence.

And that the excellence of the Greater Ode is derived from Religion, we make
appear not only by the Examples of those very few which are admirable among our
own, but by those of Pindar and Horace; and we show that the first of those
great Masters was so thoroughly convinced of this at the same time, that he was
obliged, by the desire of Gain, to celebrate the Triumphs of worthless Coachmen
and Jockeys, that his numerous extravagant Digressions are to be attributed, in
a great measure, to that Conviction joined with that Obligation. When we have
done this,

2. We descend to the other division of Poetry, which is the Less and shall
treat of those Branches of it in which our English Poets are most concerned,
after the same Method that we treated of those of the Greater. Where first we
shall speak of the Little Ode, and show for what Reasons our English Poets
have, for the most part miscarried in it. Then we shall give the Reader a large
Criticism upon Comedy, the first of any Moment that will be extant upon it in
any Language. And here we shall endeavor to make it appear, that as the
Moderns have apparently the advantage of the Ancients in Comedy, the English
have it of the rest of the Moderns.

We shall end with a Criticism upon Satyr, where we shall show the true
difference between that and a Libel or Lampoon; and the usefulness of the one,
and destructiveness of the other.

Thus have we laid before the Reader. the Design and Method of the Work. But
because the discerning Reader cannot but see, that it is impossible for any
Bookseller to make it worth the Undertaker's Trouble in employing so much Time
and Thought as so great and important a Design requires, the lovers of
Criticism are therefore desired, at least those who have Spirit enough to
promote so generous an Undertaking, to encourage it by their Subscriptions at
the Rate of a Guinea a Book, paying half a Guinea down at the time of
subscribing, and half at the delivery of the Book in Quires; the Undertaker at
the same time, promising, that not a Book shall be printed more than the number
subscribed.

For the greater variety, the Lives of the several English Poets will be added
in their proper places.

SPECIMEN.
Being the Substance of what will be said in the Beginning of the Criticism
upon Mil-ton.
THE next Poet of whom we shall treat is Milton, one of the greatest and most
daring Genius's that has appeared in the World, and who has made his Country a
glorious present of the most lofty, but most irregular Poem, that has been
produced by the Mind of Man. That great Man had (...) desire to give the World
something like an Epick Poem; but he resolved at the same time to break through
the Rules of Aristotle. Not that he was ignorant of them, or contemned them. On
the contrary, no Man knew them better, or esteemed them more, because no Man
had an Understanding that was more able to comprehend the necessity of them;
and therefore when he mentioned them in the little Treatise which he wrote to
Mr. Hartlib, he calls the Art which treats of them, a sublime Art. But at the
same time he had discrenemnt enough to see, that if he wrote a Poem which was
within the compass of them, he should be subjected to the same Fate which has
attended all who have wrote Epick Poems ever since the time of Homer; and that
is to be a Copyist instead of an Original. It Is true, the Epick Poets who have
lived since Homer, have most of them been Originals in their Fables, which are
the very Souls of their Poems; but in their manner of treating those Fables,
they have too frequently been Copyists, They have Copyed the Spirit and the
Images of Homer; even the great Virgil himself is not to be excepted. Milton
was the first, who in the space of almost 4000* Years, resolved, for his
Country's Honor and his own, to present the World with an Original Poem; that
is to say, a Poem that should have his own Thoughts, his own Images, and his
own Spirit. In order to this he was resolved to write a Poem, that, by virtue
of its extraordinary Subject, cannot so properly be said to be against the
Rules, as it may be affirmed to be above them all. He had observed, that
Aristotle had drawn his Rules which he has given us for Epick Poetry from the
Reflections which he had made upon Homer. Now he knew very well, that in Homer
the Action lay chiefly between Man and Man: For Achilles and Hector are
properly the Principals, and the Gods are but Seconds. He was resolved
therefore, that his Principals should be the Devil on one side and Man on the
other: and the Devil is properly his Hero, because he gets the better. All the
persons in his Poem, excepting two, are either Divine or Infernal. So that most
of the Persons and particularly one of the Principals, being so very different
from what Homer or Aristotle ever thought of, could not possibly be subjected
to their Rules, either for the Characters or the Incidents. We shall now show
for what Reasons the choice of Milton's Subject, as it set him free from the
Obligation which he lay under to the Poetical Laws, so it necessarily threw him
upon new Thoughts, new Images, and an Original Spirit. In the next place we
shall show, that his Thoughts, his Images, and by consequence too his Spirit,
are actually new, and different from those of Homer and Virgil. Thirdly, We
shall show, that besides their Newness, they have vastly the Advantage of those
of Homer and Virgil. And we shall make this appear from several things, but
principally from the Description of Hell, which has been described by those
three great Poets with all their Force and with all their Art. After that, we
shall proceed to say something of Milton's Expression and his Harmony; and then
we shall come to mark his Defects with so much the more exactness, because some
of them ought to be avoided with the utmost Caution, as being so great, that
they would be Insupportable in any one who had not his extraordinary
Distinguishing Qualities.

Thus have we laid before the Reader the Design and Method, and Specimen of the
larger Treatise, It now remains that I should give an Account why so small a
part of it is Published. As soon as I set about the Performance, I easily
foresaw that it would be a three Years Labor, and the Judicious Reader, upon
considering the Proposal, cannot but be convinced of it. Yet after I had been
for a whole Year Digesting my own Thoughts, and considering other Peoples, and
making all sorts of Preparations for the due Execution of so great a Design: I
saw that all the Persons who had Subscribed, were they whose Names the Reader
will find in the Order of their Subscribing.

PHilip Harman, Esquire Richard Norton, Esquire for Six. Henry Maxwell, Esquire The Hon.
Robert Bruce, Esquire Sir Thomas Aston. The Right Honorable the Lord Summers. The
Right Honorable the Lord Fanshaw. The Right Honorable the Lord Jefferies. Dr.
Gibbons. Craven Payton, Esquire Mr. Holloway. Mr. Row. Sir Richard Temple. Mr.
Thomas Walker. Mr. Hubbald. Mr. William Burton. John Sansom, Esquire His Grace the
Duke of Devonshire. James Vernon, Jun. Esquire William Welby, Esquire Mr. Paul
Docmenique. Richard Minshul, Esquire His Grace the Duke of Argyle. Mr. Earl. Mr.
Jubbs. Mrs. Manley. Mrs. Door. The Hon. William Walsh, Esquire The Honorable Coll.
Thompson. Mr. Tho. Walker. Anthony Henley, Esquire, for two. Doctor Garth. The
Right Honourble the Lord Huntington. The Right Honorable the Earl of Orrery.
Henry Blunt, Esquire The Right Honorable the Lord Wharton. Christopher Rich, Esquire
Dr. Colebatch. The Honorable Colonel Lewis Mordant. Francis Wilkinson, Esquire
Sir Mark Milbank. Sir John Crisp. Sir William Ramsden. William Spelman, Esquire
William Wild Esquire Captain Chapman. Sir Pincent Charnock. John Cox, Esquire Mr.
Blackbourn. Mr. John Rogers. The Right Honorable the Lord Winchelsea. The
Right Honorable the Lord North and Gray. Sir George Markam. The Lady
Broadgrave. Tho. Sergeant, Esquire. Sir Richard' Blackmore. Doctor Humphrey Brook.
Mr. Heath. Francis Ratcliff, Esquire The Right Honorable the Lord Bruce. Henry
Davenant, Esquire William Knapper, Esquire Sir John Cropley. Mr. Colclough. Mr.
Battersby. Mr. Motteux, for Two. Mr. Burnaby. The Right Honorable the Lord
Windsor, for Two. Sir John Cotton. Mr. Philemon Lloyd. Thomas Brown, Esquire Edward
Bullock, Esquire John Morley, Esquire Mrs. Fencill. John Kent, Esquire Mr. George Slay. Mr.
Ballam.
These are the Names of all the Persons who subscribed for a whole Year;
excepting four or five whose Names I never could know, and who Subscribed
either to Mr. Maxwell, or Mr. Welby, or Mr. Harman, which three Gentlemen, and
Doctor Garth appeared most active in the promoting of this Design, and if ten
more had undertaken it with the same Warmth that they did, the whole Design had
been actually now Finished. My Friends know very well that I was three Months
Employed about that Work, after the last Subscription came in, and I appeal to
them* if it was not then high time to lay it (...) side for something that
might be more Beneficial. I have Printed all that I had by me entire, to show
that I was in very good Earnest, and that it was not my Fault that I did not do
the rest. If I could but have Leisure to go through with it, there is nothing
that I could undertake with greater Satisfaction.

THE Grounds of Criticism IN POETRY.
CHAP. I. The Design of the following Treatise, is, the Reestablishment of
Poetry.
THE design of the ensuing Treatise, whether we consider the Importance or the
Extent of it, is perhaps the Greatest in this kind of Writing, that has been
conceived by the Moderns; for it is no less than an Attempt to restore and
reestablish the noblest Art in every Branch of it; an Art that by the Barbarity
of the Times is fallen and sunk in them all, and has been driven and banished
from every Country excepting England alone, and is even here so miserably
fallen for the most part by the extravagance of its Professors, and by the
unskilfulness of its Admirers, that we have reason to apprehend it to be
departing from hence too.

That Poetry is the noblest of all Arts, and by consequence the most
instructive and most beneficial to Mankind, may be proved by the concording
Testimony of the greatest Men, who have lived in every Age; the greatest
Philosophers, the greatest Heroes, and the greatest Statesmen, who have as it
were unanimously cherished, esteemed, admired it, and never has it been
disesteem'd or neglected by any but some pretenders to Wisdom, and by some
contemptible Politicasters, Persons who have got into the management of Affairs
only by the weakness of those who have employed them, and who have utterly
wanted Capacity to know what a glorious use may be made of it, for the benefit
of civil Society: But in the sequel of this Discourse, by discovering the
Nature of Poetry in general, (which seems to me to have been hitherto but
little understood) I shall clearly show its Excellence, and the Importance of
this Undertaking. And by laying down either the general Rules of it, or by
tracing out that sublime Art, which to make use of Milton's Expression, teaches
what the Laws are of a true Epick Poem, what of a Dramatick, what of a Lyrick,
what Decorum is, what is the grand Masterpiece to observe. I shall not only
lay a good Foundation for the judging of the Performance of the several Poets,
whose Works I have undertaken to examine, but shall as Milton says in his
Treatise of Education to Mr. Hartlip, soon make the World perceive what
despicable Creatures our common Rhymers and Play-Wrights are, and show them
what Religious, what Glorious and Magnificent Use may be made of Poetry, both
in Divine and in Human things.

CHAP. II. That Poetry is to be Established, by laying down Rules.
THAT an Art so Divine in its Institution, is sunk and profaned, and miserably
debased, is a thing that is confessed by all. But since Poetry is fallen from the
Excellence which it once attained to, it must be fallen either by the want of
Parts, or want of Industry, or by the Errors of its Professors. But that it
cannot be for want of Parts, we have shown clearly in the Advancement of modern
Poetry; nor can it be supposed to be for want of Industry, since so many of its
Professors have no other Dependence? It remains then that it must have fallen
by their Errors, and for want of being guided right. Since therefore it is for
want of knowing by what Rules they ought to proceed, that Poetry is fallen so
low, it follows then that it is the laying down of those Rules alone, that can
re-establish it. In short, Poetry is either an Art, or Whimsie and Fanaticism.
If it is an Art, it follows that it must propose an end to it self, and
afterward lay down proper Means for the attaining that end: For this is
undeniable, that there are proper Means for the attaining of every end, and
those proper Means in Poetry, we call the Rules. Again, if the end of Poetry be
to instruct and reform the World, that is, to bring Mankind from Irregularity,
Extravagance and Confusion, to Rule and Order, how this should be done by a
thing that is in it self irregular and extravagant, is difficult to be
conceived. Besides, the work of every reasonable Creature must derive its
Beauty from Regularity, for Reason is Rule and Order, and nothing can be
irregular either in our Conceptions or our Actions, any further than it swerves
from Rule, that is, from Reason. As Man is the more perfect, the more he
resembles his Creator: The Works of Man must needs be more perfect, the more
they resemble his Makers. Now the Works of God though infinitely various, are
extremely regular.

The Universe is regular in all its Parts, and it is to that exact Regularity
that it owes its admirable Beauty. The Microcosm owes the Beauty and Health
both of its Body and Soul to Order, and the Deformity and Distempers of both,
to nothing but the want of Order. Man was created like the rest of the
Creatures, regular, and as long as he remained so he continued happy; but as
soon as he fell from his Primitive State, by transgressing Order, Weakness and
Misery was the immediate Consequence of that Universal Disorder that
immediately followed.in his Conceptions, in his Passions and Actions.

The great design of Arts is to restore the decays that happened to Humane
Nature by the Fall, by restoring Order: The design of Logic is to bring back
Order, and Rule, and Method to our Conceptions, the want of which causes most
of our Ignorance, and all our Errors. The design of moral Philosophy is to cure
the disorder that is found in our Passions, from which proceeds all our
Unhappiness, and all our Vice; as from the due order that is seen in them,
comes all our Virtue and all our Pleasure. But how should these Arts
reestablish Order, unless they themselves were Regular? Those Arts that make
the Senses instrumental to the Pleasure of the Mind, as Painting and Music, do
it by a great deal of Rule and Order, since therefore Poetry comprehends the
force of all these Arts of Logic, of Ethics, of Eloquence, of Painting, of
Music; can any thing be more ridiculous than to imagine, that Poetry it self
should be without Rule and Order?

CHAP. III. What Poetry is, and that it attains its end by exciting of Passion.
WE have said above, that as Poetry is an Art, it must have a certain end, and
that there must be means that are proper for the attaining that end, which
means are otherwise called the Rules: But that we may make this appear the more
plainly, let us declare what Poetry is. Poetry then is an Art, by which a Poet
excites Passion (and for that very cause entertains Sense) in order to satisfy
and improve, to delight and reform the Mind, and so to make Mankind happier and
better; from which it appears that Poetry has two Ends, a subordinate and a
final one, the subordinate one is Pleasure, and the final one is Instruction.

First, The subordinate end of Poetry is to please, for that Pleasure is the
business and design of Poetry is evident, because Poetry unless it pleases, nay
and pleases to a height, is the most contemptible thing in the World; other
things may be born with if they are indifferent, but Poetry unless it is
transporting is abominable: nay it has only the Name of Poetry, so inseparable
is Pleasure from the very nature of the Thing.

But Secondly, The final End of Poetry is to reform the Manners; as Poetry is
an Art, Instruction must be its final End; but either that Instruction must
consist in reforming the Manners, or it cannot instruct at all, and
consequently be an Art; for Poetry pretends to no other Instruction as its
final End: But since the final End of Poetry is to reform the Manners, nothing
can be according to the true Art of it which is against Religion, or which runs
counter to Moral Virtue, or to the true Politics, and to the Liberty of
Mankind; and every thing which is against the last, tends to the Corruption and
Destruction of Mankind: And consequently every thing against the last, must be
utterly inconsistent with the true Art of Poetry.

Now the proper Means for Poetry, to attain both its subordinate and final End,
is by exciting Passion. First, The subordinate End of Poetry, which is to
please, is attained by exciting Passion, because every one who is pleased is
moved, and either desires, or rejoices, or admires, or hopes, or the like. As
we are moved by Pleasure which is Happiness, to do every thing we do, we may
find upon a little Reflection, That every Man is incited by some Passion or
other, either to Action, or to Contemplation; and Passion is the result either
of Action or of Contemplation, as long as either of them please, and the more
either of them pleases, the more they are attended with Passion. The
satisfaction that we receive from Geometry it self comes from the joy of having
found out Truth, and the desire of finding more. And the satiety that seises us
upon too long a Lecture, proceeds from nothing but from the weariness of our
Spirits, and consequently from the cessation or the decay of those two pleasing
Passions. But

Secondly, Poetry attains its final end, which is the reforming the Minds of
Men, by exciting of Passion. And here I dare be bold to affirm, that all
Instruction whatever, depends upon Passion. The Moral Philosophers themselves,
even the dryest of them, can never instruct and reform, unless they move; for
either they make Vice odious and Virtue lovely, or they deter you from one by
the Apprehension of Misery, or they incite you to the other, by the Happiness
they make you expect from it; or they work upon your Shame, or upon your Pride,
or upon your Indignation. And therefore Poetry instructs and reforms more
powerfully than Philosophy can do, because it moves more powerfully: And
therefore it instructs more easily too. For whereas all Men have Passions, and
great Passions of one sort or another, and whereas those Passions will be
employed, and whatever way they move, they that way draw the Man, it follows
that Philosophy can instruct but hardly, because it moves but gently; for the
violent Passions not finding their Account in those faint emotions, begin to
rebel and fly to their old Objects, whereas Poetry at the same time that it
instructs us powerfully, must reform us easily; because it makes the very
Violence of the Passions contribute to our Reformation: For the generality of
Mankind are apparently swayed by their Passions, nay, and perhaps the very best
and wisest of them. The greatest Philosophers and the greatest Princes are
influenced by their Favorites, and so are the wisest Magistrates. And it is for
this reason that not only the Devil, who must be supposed to understand human
nature, corrupts Mankind by their Passions; (for Temptation is nothing but the
inclining Men to such and such Actions, by the raising such and such Passions
in them) but God himself, who made the Soul, and best understands its nature,
converts it by its Passions: For whereas Philosophy pretends to correct human
Passions by human Reason, that is, things that are strong and ungovernable, by
something that is feeble and weak, Poetry by the force of the Passion,
instructs and reforms the Reason; which is the Design of the true Religion, as
we have shown in another place. So that we have here already laid down one
great Rule, necessary for the succeeding in Poetry: For since it can attain
neither its subordinate nor its final End, without exciting of Passion, it
follows, that where there is nothing which directly tends to the moving of
that, there can be no Poetry; and that consequently, a Poet ought to contrive
every thing in order to the moving of Passion, that not only the Fable, the
Incidents and Characters, but the very Sentiments and the Expressions, ought
all to be designed for that: For since Poetry pleases and instructs us more,
even than Philosophy it self, only because it moves us more, it follows, that
the more Poetry moves, the more it pleases and instructs; and it is for this
reason that Tragedy, to those who have a Taste of it, is both more pleasing and
more instructing, than Comedy. And this naturally brings us to the dividing
Poetry into the greater and the less.

1. The greater Poetry is an Art by which a Poet justly and reasonably excites
great Passion, that he may please and instruct, and comprehends Epick, Tragic,
and the greater Lyrick Poetry.

2. The less Poetry is an Art by which a Poet excites less Passion for the
forementioned Ends; and includes in it, Comedy and Satyr, and the little Ode,
and Elegiack, and Pastoral Poems. But first we shall treat of the former.

CHAP. IV. What the greater Poetry is, what Enthusiasm is.
THE greater Poetry then, is an Art by which a Poet justly and reasonably
excites great Passion, in order to please and instruct, and make Mankind better
and happier; so that the first and grand Rule in the greater Poetry is, that a
Poet must every where excite great Passion; but in some Branches of the greater
Poetry, it is impossible for a Poet every where to excite in a very great
degree, that which we vulgarly call Passion: As in the Ode for Example, and in
the Narration of the Epick Poem. It follows then that there must be two sorts
of Passion. First, That which we call Vulgar Passion, and Secondly, Enthusiasm.

First, Vulgar Passion or that which we commonly call Passion, is that which is
moved by the Objects themselves, or by the Idea's in the ordinary course of
Life, I mean that common Society which we find in the World. As for Example,
Anger is moved by an Affront that is offered us in our presence, or by the
relation of one; Pity by the sight of a mournful Object, or the relation of
one; Admiration or Wonder, (the common Passion I mean, for there is an
Enthusiastic Admiration, as we shall find anon) by the sight of a strange
Object, or the relation of one. But

Secondly, Enthusiastic Passion or Enthusiasm, is a Passion which is moved by
the Idea's in Contemplation or the Meditation of Things, that belong not to
common Life: Most of our Thoughts in Meditation, are naturally attended with
some sort and some degree of Passion, and this Passion if it is strong I call
Enthusiasm: Now, the Enthusiastic Passions are chiefly Six, Admiration,
Terror, Horror, Joy, Sadness, Desire, caused by Idea's occuring to us in
Meditation, and producing the same Passions that the Objects of those Idea's
would raise in us, if they were set before us in the same Light that those
Idea's give us of them. And here I desire the Reader to observe, that Idea's in
Meditation, are often very different from what Idea's of the same Objects are,
in the course of common Conversation. As for Example, the Sun mentioned in
ordinary Conversation, gives the Idea of a round flat shining Body, of about
Two Foot Diameter. But the Sun occurring to us in Meditation, gives the Idea of
avast and glorious Body, and the top of all the visible Creation, and the
brightest material Image of the Divinity. I leave the Reader therefore to
judge, if this Idea must not necessarily be attended with Admiration, and that
Admiration I call Enthusiasm. So Thunder mentioned in common Conversation,
gives an Idea of a black Cloud, and a great Noise, which makes no great
Impression upon us. But the Idea of it occurring in Meditation, sets before us
the most forcible, most resistless, and consequently the most dreadful
Phenomenon in Nature: So that this Idea must move a great deal of Terror in
us, and it is this sort of Terror that I call Enthusiasm. And it is this sort of
Terror, or Admiration, or Horror, and so of the rest, which expressed in Poetry,
make that Spirit, that Passion, and that Fire which so wonderfully please.

Thus there are two sorts of Passions to be raised in Poetry, the Vulgar and
the Enthusiastic, to which last, the Vulgar is preferable, because all Men are
capable of being moved by the Vulgar, and a Poet writes to all: But the
Enthusiastic are more subtle, and Thousands have no feeling and no notion of
them; but where the Vulgar cannot be moved in a great degree, there the
Enthusiastic are to be raised. Therefore in those parts of Epick Poetry, where
the Poet speaks himself, or the Eldest of the Muses for him, the Enthusiastic
Passions are to prevail, as likewise in the greater Ode. And the Vulgar
Passions are to prevail in those parts of an Epick and Dramatick Poem, where
the Poet introduces Persons holding Conversation together. And perhaps this
might be one Reason, for which Aristotle might prefer Tragedy to Epick Poetry,
because the Vulgar Passions prevail more in it, and are more violently moved in
it, and therefore Tragedy must necessarily both please, and instruct more
generally than Epick Poetry. We shall then treat of the Vulgar Passions when we
come to speak of Tragedy, in which Poem they ought most to prevail; We shall
then more particularly show the surest and most powerful ways of raising
Compassion and Terror, which are the true Tragical Passions.

We shall at present treat of the Enthusiastic Passions, and how they are to
be raised. We have taken notice above that they are to be moved by Idea's
occurring in Contemplation, that they are to be moved in a great degree, and
yet justly and reasonably. We shall now show that the strongest Enthusiastic
Passions, that are justly and reasonably raised, must be raised by religious
Idea's, that is, by Idea's which either show the attributes of the Divinity, or
relate to his Worship. And this we shall endeavor to prove, 1st. by Reason;
2ly. by Authority; 3ly. by Examples.

First, We shall endeavor to prove it by Reason. Since the foresaid Passions
are to be moved in a great Degree, and are to be moved by their Idea's, it
follows, That to be justly and reasonably moved, they must be moved by great
Idea's. And therefore the stronger the Enthusiasm is, the greater must the
Idea's be. Now those Idea's are certainly the greatest, which are worthiest to
move the greatest and the wisest Men: For there the Enthusiastic Passions in
Poetry are truly admirable, when the greater and more violent they are, the
more they show the largeness of Soul, and greatness of Capacity of the Writer.
For Men are moved for Two Reasons, either because they have weak Minds and
Souls, that are capable of being moved by little Objects, and consequently by
little and ordinary Idea's; or because they have greatness of Soul and
Capacity, to discern and feel the great ones; for the Enthusiastic Passions
being caused by the Idea's, it follows, That the more the Soul is capable of
receiving Idea's whose Objects are truly great and wonderful, the greater will
the Enthusiasm be that is caused by those Idea's; From whence it follows, that
the greater the Soul is, and the larger the Capacity, the more will it be moved
by religious Idea's; which are not only great and wonderful, but which almost
alone are great and wonderful to a great and wise Man; and which never fail to
move very strongly, unless it is for want of due Reflection, or want of
Capacity in the Subject.

Since therefore the Enthusiasm in the greater Poetry, is to hold Proportion
with the Idea's, and those Idea's are certainly the greatest, which are
worthiest to move the greatest and the wisest Men; and Divine Idea's or Idea's
which show the Attributes of God, or relate to his Worship, are worthiest to
move the greatest and the wisest Men; because such Idea's belong to Objects
which are only truly above them, and consequently truly Admirable, Desirable,
Joyful, Terrible, etc. it follows, That the greatest and strongest Enthusiasm
that can be employed in Poetry, is only justly and reasonably to be derived
from Religious Idea's.

But here we desire the Reader's leave to make this Observation, That since
Religious and Divine Idea's, or Idea's which show the Attributes, or relate to
the Worship of the Divinity, are the worthiest to move the greatest and the
wisest Men; and the greater and wiser the Men are, the more they must move and
raise them: As for Example, The greater and more comprehensive the Soul is,
which reflects upon the Idea of God, the more that Idea must fill that Soul
with Admiration; it follows, That as great Passion, only is the adequate
Language of the greater Poetry; so the greater Poetry, is only the adequate
Language of Religion; and that therefore the greatest Passion, is the Language
of that sort of Poetry; because that sort of Poetry is the worthiest Language
of Religion.

But Secondly, We shall proceed to prove by Authority, That the strongest
Enthusiastic Passions in Poetry, are only justly and reasonably to be raised
by Religious Idea's: And this we shall show by the Authority of the greatest
Critics among the Ancients, Aristotle, Hermogenes, and Longinus.

First, Aristotle says, in the third Book of his Rhetoric, Cap. II. and III.
That the frequent use of Metaphors, Dialects, Epithets, is a great deal fitter
for Poetry than it is for Prose, because they are the Language of Passion, and
Poetry is more Passionate or more Enthusiastic than Prose, for this Reason,
because the Persons and the Things of which Poetry treats, are many degrees
above those which are the Subjects of Prose. Now all the World knows that the
Graecians, treated of the greatest Human Persons and Things in their Prose, but
that Poetry was a Language which they reserved for their Gods, and for the
Things which related to them. And I am apt to believe, that Poetry from hence
was called, the Language of the Gods, because when ever the Graecians in the
Poetical times, introduced their God's Speaking, they were sure to speak in
Verse. But

Secondly, Hermogenes, in the VI. Chapter of the First Book of his Treatise,
concerning the Forms of Speech, tells us, That there are Four kind of Thoughts
or Idea's, or Conceptions, which were proper to give that elevation and gravity
to a Discourse, which by their union compose that quality in Writing which we
call Majesty.

1. The First and Principal of them are, all such Thoughts or Idea's of God, as
are worthy of the Divinity, not like some of the Homerical Conceptions of
Jupiter, which says Hermogenes, being more Human than Divine, and unworthy of
the Divinity, are contrary to true Majesty.

2. Next to these the Conceptions which give Elevation and Gravity, and
consequently Majesty to a Discourse, are such Thoughts or Idea's concerning the
Works of God, as are worthy the Divine Workmanship.

3. The Third sort of Conceptions are, of such Things as are indeed themselves
Divine, but they are such Emanations of Divinity, as are to be seen in Men, as
Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Nature, Law and the like, to which may be
added, Number, Power and Might.

4. The Fourth sort are, of Things that indeed are Human, but are reputed Great
and Illustrious, as, Conquest, Riches, Nobility, Place, etc. But here I desire
the Reader to observe, That Hermogenes is here speaking concerning Pieces of
Eloquence, and such Discourses as are writ in Prose; for it is certain, that
these last Idea's as they are of Things that are merely Human, can never afford
the greatest Spirit that can be employed in Poetry. For as the Objects
themselves are not truly great, because, as Longinuus says, A Man who has it in
his Power to possess them, shows himself Great by contemning them: It is
impossible that a Spirit that is very great, can flow from these Idea's,
because the Spirit that is very great, must hold proportion with its Idea's, as
the Idea's must with their Objects; and therefore these Idea's cannot be great,
because their Objects are not great. We ought now in the Third Place, to
proceed to the Authority of Longinus. But that we may Diversifie this Treatise
the more, and make it the more entertaining, we shall first show Examples of
the several kinds of the forementioned Thoughts, producing that sort of Spirit
in Poetry which we call Enthusiastic Admiration, and that we may show the
Reader more plainly how that Spirit is produced, we shall set before him as
near as we can, such kind of Thoughts as inspire the Soul with Admiration
alone, uncomplicated with Terror, or any other Passion.

These Thoughts, or Idea's, which produce that Enthusiasm which we call
Admiration, are Thoughts or Idea's which hold some proportion with such
Objects, as in their Nature are truly admirable. Those Thoughts or Idea's are
of Two sorts, Idea's of Sounds, and Idea's of Things. We shall then have
occasion to treat of Idea's of Sounds, when we come to speak of Terror, and
some of the other Enthusiastic Passions; we shall at present treat of such
Idea's of Things,, as are proper to excite Admiration.

We have shown that Hermogenes in the first Rank of these, reckons those
Thoughts and Idea's of God, that are worthy of the Creator: Such is the
Invocation of Milton, in the beginning of Paradise Lost.

And chiefly Thou, O Spirit! that do prefer
Before all Temples, the upright Heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know, Thou from the first
Wast present, and with Mighty Wings overspread,
Dove-like Sat'st brooding on the vast Abyss:
And made it pregnant what in me is Dark,
Illumin, what is Low raise and support,
That to the Height of this great Argument
I may assert, Eternal Providence;
And justify the Ways of God to Men.
And that it was these Divine Idea's, that raised his Soul and filled it with
Admiration, and with a noble Greatness, which Passion expressed, makes the
greatness of the Spirit, the Reader who goes back to the beginning of the Poem,
will find no manner of room to doubt. For Milton, like a Master, begins with a
gentle Spirit, which he continues for the Twelve first Lines: In the Thirteenth
where he speaks of the boldness of his Attempt, he begins to rise; and in the
Nineteenth, where he talks of the Power of the Holy Ghost, he is quite upon the
Wing.

Instruct me, for Thou know, Thou from the first.
And such are the Thoughts concerning God, which are spread through that Divine
Dialogue, between God and Adam, in the Eighth Book of the same Poem; I believe
the Reader, will pardon the length if I repeat it, which I am very much
inclined to do, not only because I challenge the most zealous admirers of
Antiquity, to produce any thing like it, from among all the Dialogues in Homer
and Virgil, that are between either a God or a Man, or between one God and
another: But because the Reader who sees the inequalities in it, will easily
see that it derives its greatness and its sublimity, from the becoming Thoughts
which it has of the Deity. That the Reader may thoroughly understand it, without
turning to the Book, the occasion of it is this. Adam, relating the History of
the Creation to the Angel Raphael, tells him, how after he had given Names to
the Birds and the Beasts, which God had brought before him for that purpose; he
who understood their Natures, and saw none of them was fit for his
Conversation, desired of God in the following Words, a Partner fit for Humane
Society.

O by what Name, for Thou above all these,
Above Mankind, or ought than Mankind higher
Surpassest far my Naming, how may I
Adore Thee? Author of this Universe,
And all this good to Man, for whose well being
So amply, and with Hands so liberal
Thou have provided all things. But with me
I see not who partakes; In Solitude
What Happiness? Who can Enjoy alone?
Or all Enjoying what Contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; And the Vision bright
As with a Smile more brightned, thus replied.
Here by the way, I desire the Reader to observe, how the Spirit of the Poem
sinks, when Adam comes from God, to himself; and how it rises again, when he
returns to his Creator: But let us proceed to God's reply.

What call'st thou Solitude? Is not the Earth
With various living Creatures, and the Air
Replenisht; and all these at thy Command
To come and Play before thee? Know thou not
Their Language and their Ways? They also know
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find Pastime, and bear Rule, thy Realm is large.
So spoke the Universal Lord, and seemed
So Ordering: I with leave of Speech implored,
And humble deprecation, thus replied.
Let not my Words offend Thee, Heavenly Power^
My Maker be propitious while I speak:
Have not thou made me here thy Substitute,
And these inferior far, beneath me set?
Among Unequals what Society
Can sort? What Harmony or true Delight,
Which must be mutual in proportion due,
Given and received; but in disparity
The one intense, the other still remiss,
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike; of fellowship I speak,
Such as I seek Fit to participate
All rational Delight; wherein the Brute
Cannot be humane Consort: They rejoice
Each with their Kind, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in Pairs thou have combined:
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Fowl
So well converse; nor with the Ox the Ape;
Worse then can Man with Beast and least of All.
Whereto the Almighty answered not displeased,
A nice and subtle Happiness, I see
Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No Pleasure, though in pleasure Solitary:
What think thou then of Me, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of Happiness or not, who am alone
From all Eternity? For none I know
Second to Me, or like, Equal much less:
How have I then, with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To Me Inferior infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee.
The Reader may easily see, that here is all that is great and sublime in
Reason, expressed with the Spirit of that just Admiration, with which such worthy
Thoughts of the Deity must naturally fill the Soul. But now let us see Adam's
Answer.

He ceased, I lowly answered, To attain
The height and depth of thy Eternal Ways,
All Humane Thoughts come short, Supreme of Things*
Thou in thy Self art perfect; and in Thee
Is no deficience found; not so is Man
But in degree, the Cause of his desire
By Conversation with his Like to help
Or solace his defects: No need that Thou
Should propagate already Infinite,
And through all Numbers absolute though One
But Man by Number is to manifest
His single Imperfection, and beget
Like of his Like, his Image multiplied.
In Unity defective, which requires
Collateral Love and dearest Amity:
Thou in thy Secresy although alone,
Best with thy Self accompanied, seekst not
Social Communication; yet so pleased,
Can raise thy Creature to what height thou will,
Of Union, or Communion DeiFi'd:
I by Conversing cannot these Erect
From Prone, nor in their ways complaisence find.
What Milton says of the Son of God Hymn'd by the Angels, in the Third Book of
that Poem, is very Lofty and Elevated.

Thee next they sang, of All Creation First
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous Countenance, without Cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines:
Whom else no Creature can Behold, on Thee
Impressed the Effulgence of his Glory abides:
Tranfus'd in Thee his ample Spirit rests,
He Heaven of Heavens, and all the Powers therein,
By Thee created, and by Thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations, Thou that Day
Thy Father's dreadful Thunder did not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming Chariot Wheels that shook
Heaven's everlasting Frame, while over the Necks
Thou drov'st of Warring Angels dis-array'd.
I have the rather mentioned these Verses, to show that Milton was a little
tainted with Socinianism, for by the first Verse it is evident, that he looked
upon the Son of God as a Created Being. The last Thing that I shall mention is,
what God says of Himself, in the Seventh Book, for speaking of Chaos, he says,
that is boundless because He is infinite.

Boundless the deep, because I Am who fill
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space,
Though I uncircumscrib'd my self retire,
And put not forth My Goodnese, which is free
To Act or not; Necessity and Chance
Approach not Me, and what I Will is Fate.
I could add an infinite number of Examples, if it were not altogether
needless, for what has been said, may suffice to show that a Poet who intends:
to give that Elevation, and that Gravity to his Poem; which Compose Majesty can
fetch his Ideas from no Object so proper as from God. For as great Elevation
must be produced by a great Admiration, as every Passion which the Poet
excites, ought to be just and Reasonable, and Adapted to its Object, it is
impossible that any one, who is not stupid, can seriously contemplate his
Maker, but that his Soul must be exalted and lifted up toward its Primitive
Objects, and be filled and inspired with the highest Admiration. For it is then
that the Enthusiasm in Poetry is Wonderful and Divine, when it shows the
Excellence of the Authors discernment, and the largeness of his Soul; now all
the Ideas of God are such, that the more large and comprehensive the Soul of a
Poet is; and the more it is capable of Receiving those Idea's the more is it
sure to be raised and filled and lifted to the Skies with wonder; The Spirit or
the Passion in Poetry ought to be proportioned to the Ideas, and the Ideas to
the Object, and when it is not so it is utterly false. And therefore when ever
in Poetry there is a great Spirit which is derived from Ideas, whose Objects
are unworthy to move the Soul of a great and a wise Man, there that Spirit is
either false or at least has nothing sublimely, admirable in it. But nothing
but God, and what relates to God, is worthy to move the Soul of a great and a
wise Man. But let us proceed to consider the glorious works of the Creator,
which next to Himself are worthy to move with Admiration, all who are worthy to
be called wise, because these when they are reflected upon, by the Great and
the Wise, never fail to declare his Eternal Power and Godhead. Our Religion
tells us that the first, the Greatest and most Glorious of His works are the
Angels, who whether we consider their Power, their Swiftness, their Science, or
their Sanctity, are fit Objects of our Admiration and Consequently of Lofty and
Elevated Poetry. Let us see then how Tasso describes the Angel Gabriel and his
descent, in the first Canto of the Hyerusalemme.

Stan. XIII.
Cosi parlogli, and Gabriel's accinse
Veloce ad essequir l'imposte cose.
La sua forma inuissibil d' Aria cinse,
Et al senso mortal la sottopose.
Humane membra, aspetto human si finse;
Ma di celeste maesta il compose,
Tra Giouane, e fanciullo eta confine
Prese, and orno diraggi il biondo crine.
Stan. XIV.
Ali bianche uesti, c'han d'or le cime
Infaticabilmente agili, e priest
Fend i uenti, e le nubi, e ua sublime
Soura la Terra, e soura il Mar con queste,
Cosi uestito indirizzossi a l' i am
Parti del mondo il Messggier Celeste,
Pria sul Libano monte ei si ritenne,
E si libro su Padeguate pen.
And thus it is translated by Fairfax, who though he by no means shows all the
Spirit and Beauty of the Original, yet even in his Antiquated Version, he
discovers something of them.

Stan. XIII.
This said, the Angel swift himself prepared,
To execute the Charge imposed aright,
In form of Aerie Members fair Embar'd,
His Spirits pure were subject to our sight,
Like to a Man in show and Shape he fared,
But full of Heavenly Majesty and Might,
A Stripling seemed he thrice five Winters old,
And radiant Beams adorned his Locks of Gold.
Stan. XIV.
Of Silver Wings he took a shining Pair,
Fringed with Gold, unwearied, nimble, swift
With these he parts the Winds, the Clouds, the Air,
And over Seas, and Earth himself does lift:
Thus Clad he cut the Spheres and Circles fair,
And the pure Skies with sacred Feathers cleft,
On Libanon at first his Foot he set,
And shook his Wings with Roary May-dews wet.
But let us now consider, Michael's Descent in the Night, in the Ninth Canto of
the Hierusalemme.

Stan. LXII.
Venia scotendo con l'eterne piume
La Caligine densa, e i cupi horrori;
S'indoraua la notte al divine lume,
Che spargea scintillando il uolto fuori;
Tale il Sol ne le nubi ha per costume,
Spiegar dopo la pioggia i bei colori;
Tal suol fendendo il liquido sereno
Stella cader de la gran madre in seno.
Which in English is as follows,

And as He flew, the darkness of his way,
And the Black Horrors of the Dreary Sky;
He shaking his Eternal Wings dispersed
Old Night, illustrated her dusky Face,
With Rays, which his Celestial Eyes diffused.
Thus breaking through a storm, the Lord of Day,
The Clouds with Purple and with Gold Adorns,
And thus a Star from the Nocturnal Heaven,
Into the Lap of our Great Mother falls.
Where the Reader may take notice, that the Comparison of the Sun, to Michael
the Prince of the Archangels, is extremely Just and Noble, because the top of
the Visible, is admirably liken'd to the top of the invisible Creation: But in
the two last Verses, Tasso has injudiciously been guilty of an Anticlimax. But
now let us see how Milton describes the Descent of Raphael to Paradise, in the
fifth Book of Paradise lost.

Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Aetherial Sky
ails between Worlds and Worlds, with steady Wing,
Now on the Polar Winds, then with quick Fann,
Winnows the Buxom Air, till within Soar
^f Towering Eagles, to all the Fowls he seems
(...) Phaenix, gazed by all, as that sole Bird
When to enshrine his Relics in the Suns
^right Temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies.
At once on the Eastern Cliff of Paradise:
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph winged, six Wings he wore to shade
His lineaments Divine, the Pair that clad
Each shoulder broad came Mantling over his Breast
With regal Ornament, the Middle Pair
Girt like a Starry Zone his wast, and round
^kirted his Loins and Thighs with downy Gold,
And Colors dipped in Heaven: The third his Feet
^hadowed from, either heel with feathered mail
Sky tinctured Grain, like Maias Son he stood,
And shoke his Plumes that Heavenly Fragrance filled
The circuit wide.
Thus the Reader may see by what has been said, that the Idea's of Angels are
exceeding proper to raise Enthusiastic Admiration, as being the most glorious
and Admirable Beings of the Creation, and which lead the Soul immediately to
its Creator. Next to these come the other Creatures of the Immaterial World as
Demons, Apparitions of all sorts, and more particularly the Spirits of Men
departed, then follow Prophecies, Visions, Miracles, Enchantments, Prodigies,
and all things which have an Immediate Relation to the wonders of another
World, of most of which we shall give examples, when we come to Speak of
Terror, because they are rather wonderful, than they are Admirable. We Name
those things wonderful which we Admire with fear.

The next Ideas that are most proper to produce the Enthusiasm of Admiration,
are the great Phenomenon of the Material World; because they too lead the Soul
to its Maker, and show, as the Apostle says, his Eternal Power and Godhead: As
the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the
immensity of the Universe, and the Motions of the Heaven and Earth. Witness
what Milton says, of the Sun when he describes the descent of Satan from Heaven
Gates to Paradise Lib. 3.

above them all
The golden Sun in Splendour likest Heaven
Allured his Eye, thither his course he bends
Through the calm Firmament, but up or down
By center or eccentrick, hard to tell
Or longitude, where the great Luminary
Aloof the vulgar Constellations thick
That from his Lordly Eye keep distance due
Dispences Light from far, they as they move
Their Starry Dance in numbers, that compute
Day's Months, and Years, toward his all chearing (Lamp
Turn swift their Various Motions or are turned
By his magnetic Beam that gently warms
The Universe.
But to show how very much these fall short of the Immaterial Creation, a Poet
that he may make them more Admirable contrives to give Spirit and Soul to them.

Where the great Luminarie
Aloof, the Vulgar Constellations thick,
That from his Lordly eye keep distance due
Dispences light from far.
And in that Noble Apostrophe to the Sun, the Devil makes in the beginning of
the Third Book.

O thou that with surpassing glory Crowned
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World, at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminisht Heads, etc.
And in that Admirable Passage in the Seventh Book, where Adam desires the
Angel to give him an account of the Creation.

If unforbid thou may unfold
What we, not to explore the Secrets, ask,
Of his Eternal Empire, but the more
To magnify His works, the more we know,
And the great light of Day yet wants to run
Much of his Race though steep, suspense in Heaven,
Held by thy Voice, thy Potent Voice he hears
And longer will delay to hear thee tell
His Generation and the Rising Birth
Of Nature, from the unapparent deep.
And in the Apostrophe to the Sun in the Fourth Aeneid.

Sol qui terrarum Flammis opera omnia lustras.
Which is in English.

Great God of Day, that with thy flaming Beams
View'st and illuminat'st at once a World.
And in what Milton says of the Moon, in the Fourth of Paradise Lost.

Hesperus, that led
The Starry Host, rode brightest, till the Moon
Rising in clouded Majesty, at length,
Apparent Queen unvailed her peerless Light,
And over the Dark her Silver Mantle threw.
For the Stars and the immensity of the Universe, I desire the Reader would
give me leave to bring an Example, from the Paraphrase upon the Te Deum, where
thus the Angel speaks to God.

Where ever at utmost stretch we cast our Eyes,
Through the vast frightful Spaces of the Skies,
Even there we find Thy Glory, there we gaze
On Thy bright Majesty's unbounded Blaze,
On Thy bright Majesty's unbounded Blaze,
Ten Thousand Suns prodigious Globes of Light,
At once in broad dimensions strike our Sight;
Millions behind in the remoter Skies,
Appear but Spangles to our wearied Eyes:
And when our wearied Eyes want farther strength,
To pierce the Void's immeasurable Length,
Our vigorous towering Thoughts still farther fly,
And still remoter Flaming Worlds descry:
But even an Angel's comprehensive Thought,
Cannot extend so far as thou have wrought:
Our vast Conceptions are by swelling, brought,
Swallowed and lost in Infinite, to naught.
The Idea of the World's immensity is very proper to produce Admiration, as
leading us to the Glory of the Creator, the use that Milton makes of it, in the
Eighth Book of Paradise lost.

And for the Heavens wide Circuit, let it speak
The Maker's high Magnificence, who Built
So spacious, and his Line stretched out so far,
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small Partition, and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
And Tasso finely makes use of that Noble Idea, to repress the Pride and
Ambition of Man. It Is in the 14th Canto of the Gierusalemme, where Hugo bids
Godfrey, who had been rapt up to Heaven in a Vision, look down from the
Firmament to the Earth.

Stan. IX.
China, poi disse, e gli addito la Terra,
Gli occhi a cio, che quel globo ultimo serra.
X.
Quanto e uil la cagion, ch'a la uirtude
Humana e cola giu premio, e contrasto:
In the picciolo cerchio, e fra che nude
Solitudini e stretto il uostro fasto.
Lei come Isola, il mare intorno chiude,
E lui, c'hor Ocean chiamat'e, hor uasto
Nulla eguale a tai nomi ha in se di magno,
Ma e bassa palude, e breue stagno.
Stan. XI.
Cosi l' un disse e l' altro in giuso i lumi
Volse, quasi sdegnoso, e ne sorrise;
Che uide un punto sol, mar, terre, e fiumi,
Che qui paion distinti in tante guise,
Et ammiro, che pur l' P ombre, a i fumi,
La nostra folle humanita s' affise,
Seruo Imperio cercando, e muta fama,
Ne miri il ciel, ch' a se n'inuita e chiama.
The following Verses of Milton, in the Eighth of Paradise Lost, concerning the
Magnitude and the Motions of the Heavens and Earth derive a Lofty Spirit from
their Subject for there says Adam.

When I behold this goodly Frame, this World,
Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute
Their magnitudes, this Earth a Spot, a Grain,
An Atom with the Firmament compared,
And all her numbered Stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Their distance argues, and their swift return
Diurnal)
I could here bring Examples of the same kind of Spirit, derived in due
Proportion from Ideas of Sublunary Things, as of the Four Elements Water,
Earth, Air, Fire, Winds and Meteors of all sorts, Seas, Rivers, Mountains, but
I am afraid of running into Length, and heaping too many Citations one upon
another. Besides it will be very convenient to make two or three Remarks here.

First, That the Wonders of the Universe, afford the more admirable Ideas and a
more admirable Spirit, the more they show the attributes of the Creator or
relate to his Worship. Secondly, That Na ural Philosophy is absolutely
necessary to a Poet, not only that he may adorn his Poem, with the useful
knowledge it affords, but because the more he knows the immense Phenomenon of
the Universe, the more he will be sure to admire them. For the more we know of
Things that are never to be comprehended by us, the more that knowledge must
make them appear wonderful. The Third Remark that I shall make is this, That
they to whom Nature has given that happy Elevation of Thought, which alone can
make a great Poet, will often be directed by that tendency to greatness, which
they have within them to Ideas, from which they may derive a lofty Spirit, yet
I shall show by the Example of Milton, that they may often very grossly fail,
for want of a certain knowledge of the Objects from which they are to draw
their Idea's, for it is for want of that knowledge that Milton has done the most
unartful thing that perhaps ever was done, in the two or three last Books of
the greatest Poem that ever was written by Man. For whereas in the First Eight
Books, he had by the Mouth of God or Angels, or of Man the Companion of Angels,
divinely entertained us with the wondrous Works of God, in the latter end of
his Poem, and more particularly in the last Book, he makes an Angel entertain
us with the Works of corrupted Man, from which it is very plain by what has
been delivered above, concerning the Nature of Enthusiastic Passion; that that
Angel could draw no sort of Enthusiasm, and least of all that of Admiration and
Terror, which give the principal Greatness and Elevation to, Poetry. For how
flat, how low and unmusical is the Relation of the Actions of fallen Man, in
the 10th. Lib. though delivered by the voice of Divinity.

On Adam, Last thus judgment He pronounced,
Because thou have hearkened to the Voice of thy Wife,
And eaten of the Tree, concerning which
I charged thee, saying, Thou shall not eat thereof,
Cursed is the Ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shall eat thereof all the days of thy Life:
Thorns also, and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Untilled, and thou shall eat the Herb of the Field:
In the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the Ground, for thou
Out of the Ground wast taken; know thy Birth,
For Dust, thou art, and shall to Dust return.
The Late Mr. Dryden, with a great deal of Injustice, used to attribute the
flatness of Milton, in this and some other Passages, to his getting into a
tract of Scripture, as he was pleased to express himself: Whereas the thing
that made him sink, was plainly the poorness and lowness of the Ideas. For how
could the Works of corrupted Man, afford any other to God or Angels? But what
lofty what glorious Ideas does a religious mention of the Works of God, afford
to Man in his primitive State in that incomparable Hymn in the Fifth Book of
the same Paradise Lost: A Hymn, which though it is entirely taken from Scripture,
for it is apparently the 148 Psalm, yet will always stand alone, the Phoenix of
Lofty Hymns, and nothing equal to it, no nor Second to it can ever be produced
from the Grecian Writers of Hymns. It is impossible I can do a greater Pleasure
to the Reader, who either has not read or does not remember Milton, than to
insert it here.

These are thy glorious Works, Parent of good
Almighty, Thine this Universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair, Thy Self how wondrous then,
Unspeakable, who sitst above these Heavens,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest Works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond Thought, and power Divine:
Speak ye who best can tell, ye Sons of Light
Angels, for ye behold Him, and with Songs
And Chorall Symphonies, Day without Night
Circle His Throne rejoicing, ye in Heaven
On Earth join all the Creatures, to extol
Him first, Him last, Him midst, and without end:
Fairest of Stars, last in the Train of Night,
If better thou belong not to the Dawn,
Sure Pledge of Day, that Crown'st the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise Him in thy Sphere,
While Day arises that Sweet Hour of Prime:
Thou Sun of this great World, both Eye and Soul
Acknowledge Him thy Greater, sound His praise
In thy eternal Course, both when thou climb'st
And When high-Noon have gained, and when thou fall'st:
Moon, that now meets the Orient Sun, now fliest
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies:
And ye Five other wandering Fires, that move
In mistick Dance not without Song, resound
His Praise who out of Darkness called up Light:
Air and ye Elements, the eldest Birth
Of Natures Womb, that in Quaternion run
Perpetual Circle multiform, and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceasless Change
Vary to our great Maker still new Praise:
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or Steaming Lake, dusky or gray,
Till the Sun paint your Fleecy Skirts with Gold,
In honor to the World's great Author rise,
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolour'd Sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling Showers;
Rising or falling still advance his Praise:
His Praise ye Winds that from Four Quarters blow,
Breath soft or loud, and wave your tops ye Pines
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave:
Fountains, and ye that warble as ye flow
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune His Praise:
^oin Voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds
That Singing up to Heaven Gates ascend;
Bear on your Wings, and in your Notes His Praise:
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk
The Earth and stately tread, or lowly creep,
Witness if I be silent Morn or Even,
To Hill or Valley, Fountain or fresh Shades;
Made Vocal by my Song, and taught His Praise:
Hail Universal Lord, be bounteous still,
To give us only Good, and if the Night
Have gathered ought of Evil or concealed,
Disperse it, as now Light dispels the Dark.
It Is easy to discern here, with how much more Divinity Milton makes a Man
speak concerning the Works of God, than he makes even the Creator Himself speak
concerning the Works of Man. But here if the Reader will pardon a Digression, I
shall make an Observation which may not be disagreeable to him. The Observation
is this, That all the Passages in Paradise Lost, where God is introduced
Speaking, are flat to the reserve of those in which he speaks of himself. Upon
enquiring into the Reason of it, I found, That according to the Account which I
have given of Poetical Enthusiasm, or of the Spirit of Poetry, it is nothing
but that Admiration and Terror, and the rest of those Enthusiastical Passions
which are produced by their proper Ideas, and which are to hold Proportion with
their Ideas, as their Ideas, must with their Objects. Now nothing is more
impossible than that God should either Fear or Admire His own Creatures. But
where Milton makes him speak concerning Himself, or His Infinite Power, there
he makes him speak with a great Spirit, as in that Passage of the Sixth Book
where He speaks to His Son.

Go then thou mightiest in thy Father's Might
Ascend My Chariot, guide the rapid Wheels,
That shake Heaven's Basis, bring forth all my War,
My Bow and Thunder, My Almighty Arms.
It Is plain that here the Poet is guilty of a Mistake, but indeed a Mistake
that is almost unavoidable, for it is the Admiration and Terror that make the
Spirit in the preceding Verses; and it is impossible to conceive the Ideas
without feeling the Passions; so that Milton while he was rapt with Admiration
and moved with Terror by the Ideas which he had conceived, shifts Persons
insensibly, and forgetting who speaks, expresses himself with those Passions
which indeed are proper enough in the Poet, but never can be so in the Deity.
For neither His Bow, nor His Almighty Arms, His Thunder, nor the rapid Wheels
that Shake Heavens basis, can be in the least Admirable or Terrible to the
Divinity, so that Mr. Cowley is certainly, in the right in his Notes upon his
Davideis, where he tells us, that God is to be introduced speaking simply. And
this puts me in mind of an extraordinary Argument of Monsieur Paschal, proving
the Divinity of our Savior by the simplicity of his Style; for says he, our
Savior speaks of the sublimest Subjects, even the glories of the Kingdom of
Heaven without being moved at all, which shows that he was really God; for
suppose a Peasant, says he, or an ordinary Man should be carried to the Court
of some Prince, as for Example the great Mogul, and there be shown all his
Riches, his Pomp and his Power; this Peasant at his return would certainly
speak of these Things in extravagant terms, in terms that would sufficiently
declare his transport. But if the Mogul himself was to speak of them, he who
had been always us;d to them, would speak without any emotion. So says Monsieur
Paschal, if any one else had delivered any Thing concerning the glories of the
Kingdom of Heaven, he would certainly have done it with transport, nay though he
had been a Fanatic or an Impostor; For let those Divine Ideas come how they
will, it is Impossible for Man to think of them without being Ravished by them.
But our Savior who was God, and who consequently had been used to them from
all Eternity, spoke of them unconcerned.

But let us come to the Third sort of Thoughts, which Hermogenes says, are
proper to give Elevation and Gravity to a Discourse, and those are Things which
indeed are Divine, says, but are often beheld in Men. These Emanations of
Divinity are the Virtues such as Temperance, Justice, Fortitude, Magnanimity;
or Nature, Law, Power and the like. And we should never make an end, if we
should give Examples of all the Passages, whose greatness of Spirit, is derived
from these Ideas. But for the Readers Entertainment we shall mention a few.

The Power of Ruling our own Minds, which may be referred to Temperance, gives
noble Ideas and consequently a noble Spirit, as we may see by the Second Ode,
of the Second Book of Horace.

Latius regnes avidum Domando
Spiritum, quam si Lybiam Remotis
Gadibus Jungas, and uterque Paenus
serviat uni.
Which in English is thus.

Thou a more absolute Command shall gain,
A larger nobler Empire shall obtain,
If thy wild Lust of Power thou can restrain:
Than if to Spain thy Conquernig Troops should join
The Moors that fry beneath the parching Line,
And both the Carthaginians should be thine.
And the Idea of Fortitude affords too a noble Spirit, as we may see in the
Twelfth of the Aeneis, where Turnus replies to AEneas who upbraids him with
Fear.

Non me tua feruida Terrent
Dicta ferox. Dij me terrent, and Jupiter Hostis.
It Is true I am afraid, but not of thee
Nor thy vain threatening Words, Insulting Man:
The Gods alone can frighten me, and Jove
Who now declares against me.
And that is a very remarkable Passage in the Fifteenth Stanza of the Fourth
Canto of the Gierusalemme, for after Pluto had demanded of the assembled
Fiends; if they will stand idle and suffer the Christian Armies to throw down
their Altars and destroy their Worship. He adds,

Ah non fia uer, che non sono anco estinti
^^i spirti in uoi di quel ual^r primiero,
^uando di ferro, e d' alte fiamme cinti
^^gnammo gia contra il celeste Impero;
Fummo (io no'l nego) in questo conflitto vinti,
Pur non manco uirtute al gran pensiero,
Hebbero i piu felici al hor uittoria
Rimase a noi d' inuitto ardir la gloria.
Which in English is thus.

Ah never let it be ye assembled Gods!
For still, we still the unconquered Spirit feel
Of that eternal Valor, when of old
Begirt with shining Arms and brighter Flames,
Against the Omnipotent we daring Fought.
It Is true we lost the Day, but not for want
Of Valor equal to the vast Design,
Fortune gave him the Field, the Immortal Fame
Was ours of having made the brave Attempt.
The Immortal Fame was ours, who still retain'
That Fire invincible with which we Fought,
And dared what never Angels durst before.
From which Milton has apparently borrowed Part of Lucifer's Speech, in the
First Book of Paradise Lost.

What though the Field be Lost?
All is not Lost; the unconquerable will,
And study of Revenge, Immortal hate,
And Courage never to submit or yield.
And in Armida's Speech to Godfrey, Canto 4th. Stanza 63. Tasso Derives a noble
Spirit from Godfrey's Power and Justice.

Tu, cui cocesse il Cielo, e dielti in fate
Voler'il giusto, e poter cio, che uuoi.
Which is in English.

Then for whom Dooming Heaven has made it Fate,
That thy Designs should still be Just, and Thou
Should never want Power to act those vast Designs.
And from the Magnanimity of Rinaldo, in the Fourteenth Stanza of the Fifth
Canto,

Onde cosi rispose, i primi gradi
Piu meritar, che conseguir desio,
Ne pur, che me le mia uirtu sublimi
Di scettri altezza inuidiar degg'io.
In English.

Rinaldo answered thus, the foremost Rank
I rather would deserve than would obtain:
And can contemn the Scepters held by all
Whose Fame to my Superior Virtue yields.
The Fourth sort of Thoughts which Hermogenes mentions, as Riches, Nobility,
Place, Office, Rank, and the like, we shall purposely pass by, without giving
Examples of them, because we shall have a particular occasion to do it
hereafter. Let us now pass to the next Enthusiastic Passion which is Terror;
than which if it is rightly managed, none is more capable of giving a great
Spirit to Poetry. This Passion scarce ever goes by itself, but is always more
or less complicated with Admiration. For every thing that is Terrible is great
at least to him to whom it is Terrible. It Is now our business to show two
Things. First, what this Enthusiastic Terror is? and Secondly, from what
Ideas it is chiefly to be derived.

First let us show what this sort of Enthusiasm is, and in order to that, let
us show as briefly as we can, what the Common Passion is which we call Terror.
Fear then or Terror is, a Disturbance of Mind proceeding from the apprehension
of an approaching evil; Threatening Destruction or very great trouble either to
us or ours. And when the disturbance comes suddenly with surprise, let us call
it Terror, when gradually Fear. Things then that are powerful, and likely to
hurt, are the causes of Common Terror, and the more they are powerful and
likely to hurt, the more they become the causes of Terror, which Terror, the
greater it is, the more it is joined with wonder, and the nearer it comes to
astonishment. Thus we have shown what Objects of the Mind are the causes of
Common Terror, and the Ideas of those Objects are the causes of Enthusiastic
Terror.

Let us now show from what Ideas this Enthusiastic Terror is chiefly to be
derived. The greatest Enthusiastic Terror then must needs be derived from
Religious Idea's, for since the more their Objects are Powerful, and likely to
hurt, the greater Terror their Idea's produce: What can produce a greater
Terror than the Idea of an Angry God? Which puts me in mind of that admirable
Passage of Homer, about the Fight of the Gods, in the Twentieth of the Iliads,
cited by Longinus in his Chapter of the Loftiness of the Conceptions.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which in English is thus.

Jove flung his dreadful Thunder from on high,
Mean while Majestic Neptune from below,
The Reeling Globe with his huge Trident struck,
Shook its vast Plains, and made its Mountains smoke,
Mount Ida trembled from his hoary Top,
And from his nethermost Foundations shook,
Troubling a Thousand Springs that from him flow,
Pluto, from lowest Hell both heard and felt,
And shivering started from his burning Throne,
Then striking his Infernal Breast cried out,
Least wrathful Neptune with another stroke,
Of his dread Trident should the Globe divide,
Should too, to the gaping Center let in Light,
To Mortals and Immortals should display
The dreadful Secrets of his dire Domain,
At the bare thought of which even Gods are wont to shake
Behold here says Longinus, the Earth laid open to the very Center, and Hell
about to be exposed to view, and all the vast Machine of the World demolished
and overturned, to show that in that important Conflict both Heaven and Hell,
both Mortal and Immortal Things, every thing in Nature engaged with the Gods,
and nothing was free from Danger.

And now I mention Longinus, this is the properest place, to show by his
Authority that Religious Ideas are the most proper to give greatness and
sublimity to a Discourse. And this I shall show First by his Examples and
Secondly by his Precepts.

First by his Examples: All the Examples which he gives of Sublimity in his
Chapter of the Loftiness of the Conceptions; of which the above mentioned
Passage is one, are taken from the Grecian Religion, as this.

Iliad V.
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which in English is thus.

As far as one who toward the Ocean looks,
Can from some lofty Promontory spy
Through the vast Deserts of a Cloudless Sky;
So far the Immortal Gods sonorous Steeds
Can at one Leap advance.
Where says Longinus, he measures the Length of their Leap by the extent of the
World. Who is it than says he, that might not with Reason cry out, that if the
Horses of the Gods would take a Second Leap, they would not find Space enough
in the Universe.

And what follows concerning Neptune, Descending from a Mountain in Thrace,

Iliad. XIII.
(...),
(...).
As from the shaggy Mountain he Descends,
The Mountain trembles, and the Forest bends.
And a little beyond.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
In English thus.

His golden Chariot Neptune now ascends
And as he drives along the watery Plain,
Huge Whales and all the Monsters of the Main,
Wallowing around him with unweildy gate,
Tempest the Ocean to salute their King;
Ocean rejoicing yawns before his March
And lets him through a dreadful Chasm.
And it was from this Passage, I make no doubt, that Spencer drew his Admirable
Picture of Neptune, in the Eleventh Canto of the Third Book of his Faery Queen.

Stan. XL.
Next unto him was Neptune pictured,
In his Divine resemblance wondrous like;
His Face was rugged and his hoary Head,
Dropped with Brackish Dew; his three fork't Pike
He sternly shook, and therewith fierce did strike
The Raging Billows that on every side,
They trembling stood,and made a long broad Dyke,
That his swift Chariot might have passage wide.
Which Four great Hippodames, did draw in Teem wise tied
Stan. XLI.
His Sea Horses did seem to snort amain,
And from their Nostrils, blow the briny stream,
That made the Sparkling Waves to smoke again,
And flame with Gold; but the white foamy Cream
Did shine with Silver, and shoot forth her Beam.
I now come to the Precepts of Longinus, and pretend to show from them, that
the greatest sublimity is to be derived from Religious Ideas. But why then,
says the Reader, has not Longinus plainly told us so? He was not ignorant, that
he ought to make his subject as plain as he could. For he has told us in the
beginning of his Treatise, that every one who gives Instruction concerning an
Art, ought to endeavor two things. The first is to make his Reader clearly
understand what that is which he pretends to teach. The second is to show him
how it may be attained. And he blames Cecilius very severely for neglecting the
Last, how then says the Objector comes he himself to have taken no care of the
First: Is it because Cecilius had done it before him? If so, it was a very
great fault in Longinus, to publish a Book which could not be understood but by
another Man's Writings; especially when he saw that those Writings were so very
defective that they would not probably last. But what, continues the Objector,
if Cecilius had not done it before him? For Longinus tells us that Cecilius
makes use of a multitude of Words to show what it is; now he who knows any
thing clearly may in a few Words explain it clearly to others; and he who does
not will make it obscure by many.

To this I answer, that though Longinus did by long Study, and habitude know the
Sublime when he saw it, as well as any Man, yet he had not so clear a knowledge
of the Nature of it as to explain it clearly to others. For if he had done
that, as the Objector says, he would have defined it, but he has been so far
from defining it, that in one place he has given an account of it that is
contrary to the true nature of it. For he tells us in that Chapter which treats
of the Fountains of Sublimity, that Loftiness is often without any Passion at
all. Which is contrary to to the true nature of it. The sublime is indeed often
without Common Passion, as ordinary Passion is often without that. But then it
is never without Enthusiastic Passion. For the Sublime is nothing else but a
great Thought, or Great Thoughts moving the Soul from it is Ordinary Situation
by the Enthusiasm which naturally attends them. Now Longinus had a notion of
Enthusiastic Passion; for he establishes it in that, very Chapter for the
second Source of Sublimity. Now Longinus by affirming that the Sublime may be
without not only that, but ordinary Passion, says a thing that is not only
contrary to the true Nature of it, but contradictory of Himself. For he tells
us in the beginning of the Treatise that the Sublime does not so properly
persuade us, as it Ravishes and Transports us, and produces in us a certain
Admiration mingled with astonishment and with surprise, which is quite another
thing than the barely Pleasing or the barely persuading; that it gives a noble
Vigor to a Discourse, an invincible force which commits a pleasing Rape upon
the very Soul of the Reader; that whenever it breaks out where it ought to do,
like the Artillery of Jove, it Thunders blazes and strikes at once, and shows
all the united force of a Writer. Now I leave the Reader to Judge, whether
Longinius has not been saying here all along that Sublimity is never without
Passion.

That the forementioned Disinition is just and good, I have reason to believe,
because it takes in all the sources of Sublimity which Longinus has
established. For first greatness of Thought supposes Elevation, they, being
Synonimous Terms: And secondly the Enthusiasm or the Pathetique, as Longinus
calls it, follows of course; for if a Man is not strongly moved by great
Thoughts, he does not sufficiently and effectually conceive them. And thirdly
the Figurative-Language is but a consequence of the Enthusiasm, that being the
natural Language of the Passions. And so is fourthly the nobleness of the
Expression, supposing a Man to be Master of the Language in which he Writes.
For as the Thoughts produce the Spirit or the Passion, the Spirit produces and
makes the Expression, which is known by experience to all who are Poets; for
never any one, while he was rapt with Enthusiasm or Ordinary Passion, wanted
either Words or Harmony, and is self evident to all who consider that the
expression conveys and shows the Spirit, and consequently must be produced by
it.

Thus the definition which we have laid down, being according to Longinus his
own Doctrine, the true definition of the Sublime, and showing clearly the thing
which he has not done, nor given any definition at all of it, it seems plain to
me, that he had no clear and distinct Idea of it; and consequently Religion
might be the thing from which it is chiefly to be derived and he but obscurely
know it; but that Religion is that thing from which the Sublime is chiefly to
be derived, let us show by the Marks which he has given of the latter; which
will further strengthen our Definition. First, says he, that which is truly
sublime has this peculiar to it, that it exalts the Soul and makes it conceive
a greater Idea of it self; filling it with Joy, and with a certain noble Pride,
as if it self had produced what it but barely Reads.

Now here it is plain, that the highest Ideas must most exalt the Soul, but
Religious Ideas are the highest.

The more the Soul is moved by the greatest Ideas, the more it conceives them,
but the more it conceives of the greatest Ideas, the greater Opinion it must
have of its own Capacity. By consequence the more it is moved by the Wonders of
Religion the more it values it self upon its own Excellences. Again, The more
the Soul sees its Excellence the more it Rejoices. Besides Religious Ideas are
the most Admirable, and what is most Admirable according to the Doctrine of
Aristrotle is most delightful. Besides Religious Ideas create Passion in such a
manner as to turn and incline the Soul to its primitive Object. So that Reason
and Passion are of the same side, and this Peace between the Faculties causes
the Soul to Rejoice, of which we shall have occasion to say more anon.

2. The Second Mark that Longinus gives of the Sublime, is when a Discourse
leaves a great deal for us to think. But now this is certain that the wonders
of Religion are never to be exhausted, for they are always new, and the more
you enter into them, the more they are sure to surprise.

3. The Third Mark is, when it leaves in the Reader an Idea above its
Expression. Now no Expressions can come up to the Ideas which we draw from the
Atributes of God, or from His wondrous Works, which only the Author of them
can comprehend.

4. The Fourth Mark is, when it makes an impression upon us, which it is
impossible to resist.

God who made Man for Himself, and for his own Glory, and who requires chiefly
his Heart; must by consequence have formed him of such a Nature as to be most
strongly moved with Religious Ideas if once he enters into them. So that the
Impressions which they make are Impossible to be Resisted.

5. The Fifth Mark is when the Impression lasts and is difficult to be defaced.
Now that the Impressions which Religion makes upon us are difficult to be
defaced is plain from this, that they who think it their Interest to deface
them can never bring it about.

6. The Sixth Mark is when it pleases universally, people of different Humors,
Inclinations, Sexes, Ages, Times, Climates. Now there is nothing so agreeable
to the Soul or that makes so universal an Impression as the wonders of
Religion. Some Persons are moved by Love and are not touched by Ambition,
others are animated by Ambition and only Laugh at Love. Some are pleased with a
brave Revenge, others with a generous Contempt of Injuries, but the Eternal
Power and the Infinite knowledge of God, the Wonders of the Creation, and the
beautiful brightness of Virtue make a powerful impression on all.

I must confess I have wondered very much upon Reflection, how it could happen
that so great a Man as Longinus, who whenever he met a passage in any Discourse
that was lofty enough to please him, had discernment enough to see that it had
some of the preceding Marks, should miss of finding so easy a thing as this,
that never any passage had all these Marks or so much as the Majority of them,
unless it were Religious.

But to return to Terror, we may plainly see by the foregoing Precepts and
Examples of Longinus, that this Enthusiastic Terror contributes extremely to
the Sublime, and Secondly that it is most produced by Religious Ideas.

First Ideas producing Terror contribute extremely to the Sublime. All the
Examples that Longinus brings of the loftiness of the Thought, consist of
terrible Ideas. And they are Principally such Ideas that work the effects,
which he takes notice of, in the beginning of his Treatise, viz. that Ravish
and Transport the Reader, and produce a certain Admiration mingled with
Astonishment and with Surprise. For the Ideas which produce Terror are
necessarily accompanied with Admiration, because every thing that is terrible
is great to Him to whom it is Terrible; and with Surprise without which Terror
cannot subsist; and with Astonishment, because every thing which is very
Terrible is Wonderful and Astonishing; and as Terror is perhaps the violent'st
of all the Passions, it consequently makes an impression which we cannot
resist, and which is hardly to be defaced, and no Passion is attended with
greater Joy than Enthusiastic Terror, which proceeds from our reflecting that
we are out of Danger at the very time that we see it before us. And as Terror
is one of the violentest lentest of all Passions if it is very great, and the
hardest to be resisted, nothing gives more force, nor more vehemence to a
Discourse. But Secondly, it is plain from the same Longinus, that this
Enthusiastic Terror is chiefly to be derived from Religious Ideas. For all
the Examples which he has brought of the Sublime, in his Chapter of the
Sublimity of the Thoughts consists of most Terrible and most Religious Ideas,
and at the same time every Man's Reason will inform him, that every thing that
is Terrible in Religion is the most Terrible thing in the World.

But that we may set this in a clearer Light, let us lay before the Reader the
several Ideas which are capable of producing this Enthusiastic Terror, which
seem to me to be those which follow, viz. Gods, Demons, Hell, Spirits and
Souls of Men, Miracles, Prodigies, Enchantments, Witchcrafts, Thunder,
Tempests, raging Seas, Inundations, Torrents, Earthquakes, Volcanos, Monsters,
Serpents, Lions, Tygres, Fire, War, Pestilence, Famine, etc.

Now of all these Ideas none are so terrible as those which show the Wrath and
Vengeance of an Angry God. For nothing is so wonderful in its effects, and
consequently the Images or Ideas of those effects must carry a great deal of
Terror with them, which we may see was Longinus his Opinion by the Examples
which he brings in his Chapter of the Sublimity of the Thoughts. Now of things
which are terrible those are the most terrible which are the most wonderful,
because that seeing them both threatening and powerful, and not being able to
fathom the greatness and extent of their Power, we know not how far and how
soon they may hurt us.

But further nothing is so terrible as the wrath of infinite Power, because
nothing is so unavoidable as the Vengeance designed by it. There is no flying
nor lying hid from the great universal Monarch. He may deliver us from all
other Terrors, but nothing can save and defend us from him. And therefore
Reason which serves to dissipate our Terrors in some other Dangers, serves but
to augment them when we are threatened by Infinite Power; and that Fortitude
which may be Heroic at other times is down right madness then.

For the other Ideas which we mentioned above, they will be found to be more
terrible as they have more of Religion in them. But we shall have so many
necessary occasions of giving Examples of them, in the Sequel of this Treatise,
that it will be altogether needless to do it now. But here it will be
convenient to Answer an Objection. For how come some of the forementioned Ideas
which seem to have but little to do with Religion, to be Terrible to great and
to wise Men, as it is plain that such when they read the Descriptions of them
in Homer and Virgil are terrified.

To which we Answer, that the care which Nature has inrooted in all of their
own Preservation, is the Cause that Men are unavoidably terrified, with any
thing that threatens approaching evil. It Is now our business to show how the
Ideas of Serpents, Lions, Tigers, etc. were made by the art of those great
Poets, to be terrible to their Readers at the same time that we are secure from
their Objects.

It Is very plain that it is the Apprehension of Danger which causes that
emotion in us which we call Terror, and it signifies nothing at all to the
purpose whether the Danger is real or imaginary; and it is as plain too, that
the Soul never takes the Alarm from any thing so soon as it does from the
Senses, especially those two noble ones of the Eye and the Ear, by reason of
the strict assinity which they have with the Imagination; and the Evil always
seems to be very near, when those two Senses give notice of it; and the nearer
the Evil is the greater still is the Terror. But now let us see how those two
Poets, did by Virtue of their Ideas, bring even absent, Terrible Objects,
within the reach of those two noble Senses. First then to bring an absent
Terrible Object before our Sight, they drew an Image or Picture of it; but to
draw an Image or Picture of a Terrible Object, so as to surprise and astonish
the Soul by the Eye, they never failed to draw it in violent Action or Motion;
and in Order to that they made choice of Words and Numbers, which might best
express the violence of that Action or Motion. For an absent Object can never
be set before the Eye in a true Light, unless it is shown in violent Action or
Motion. Because unless it is shown so, the Soul has leisure to reflect upon the
Deceit. But violent Motion can never be conceived without a violent agitation
of Spirit, and that sudden agitation surptises the Soul and gives it less time
to Reflect; and at the same time causes the Impressions that the Objects make
to be so Deep, and their traces to be so profound, that it makes them in a
manner as present to us as if they were really before us. For the Spirits being
set in a violent emotion, and the Imagination being fired by that agitation;
and the Brain being deeply penetrated by those Impressions, the very Objects
themselves are set as it were before us, and consequently we are sensible of
the same Passion that we should feel from the things themselves. For the warmer
the Imagination is, the less able we are to Reflect, and consequently the
things are the more present to us of which we draw the Images; and therefore
when the Imagination is so inflamed as to render the Soul utterly incapable of
reflecting there is no difference between the Images and the things themselves;
as we may see for example by Men in Raging Feavours. But those two great Poets
were not satisfied with setting absent Objects before our Eyes, by showing them
in violent motion; but if their motion occasioned any Extraordinary Sounds that
were terrifying; they so contrived their Numbers and Expressions, as that they
might be sure to ring those sounds in the very Ears of their Readers.

We ought now to treat of the other Enthusiastic Passions, as Horror, Grief,
Joy and Desire. But to the End that we may Diversifie this Treatise as much as
we can, and not tire out the Reader with too much Speculation at a time, we
shall omit speaking of them till we come to the Epick Poets.

CHAP. V. Recapitulation; and that Religion is the Basis and Foundation of the
greater Poetry.
BUT now let us Recapitulate: We have shown in the foregoing part of this
Discourse, that Passion is the Characteristical Mark of Poetry, and that all
Poetry is pathetick; and then we divided it into two Kinds, the greater and the
less; and showed that the greater Poetry, comprehends Epick, Tragic and the
greater Lyrick; and that our Design was in the first place to treat of that.
Then we proceeded to show, that as Passion is the Characteristical Mark of
Poetry, great Passion must be the Characteristical Mark of the greater Poetry,
and consequently that this last must have every where great Passion; but that
since what we commonly call Passion cannot be every where, there must be
something distinct from ordinary Passion, and that must be Enthusiasm. Then we
endeavored to discover what Enthusiasm is, and how many several sorts there
are of it; and that Admiration and Terror make the Principal greatness of
Poetry, and are the chief of the Enthusiastic Passions; that those two
Passions are to bear proportion with the Ideas from which they are derived, and
that consequently the greatest must flow from Religious Ideas. We shall show
too in the Sequel of this Discourse, that not only the remaining Enthusiastic
Passions, Horror, Sadness, Joy and Desire; but that even the Ordinary Passions
which contribute most to the greatness of Poetry as Admiration, Terror and
Pity are chiefly to be derived from Religion; but that the Passions of both
sorts, must for the most part flow greater from Revelation than from Natural
Religion, because all Revealed Religion whether true or pretended speaks to the
Senses, brings the wonders of another World more Home to us, and so makes the
Passions which it Raises the greater.

The Fundamental Rule then that we pretend to lay down, for the Succeeding, or
Excelling in the greater Poetry, is that the Constitution of the Poem, be
Religious that it may be throughout Pathetick.

And we pretend to prove undeniably that not only the Gentlemen, whose works we
design to examine, have succeeded and excelled no further than their Poems have
been so constituted; but that never any Poets of any Nation or any Age, ever
did or can excel without it. I have already proved in the Advancement of modern
Poetry, beyond all manner of doubt, to those who have Capacity enough to
comprehend the Arguments, that the Ancient Poets excelled the moderns in the
greatness of Poetry, for no other reason, but because their Subjects were
Religious in their constitution. And therefore all that I shall say of it here
is, that Poetry is the Natural Language of Religion, and that Religion at first
produced it, as a Cause produces its Effect. In the first Ages of writing among
the Graecians, there was nothing writ but Verse, because they wrote of nothing
but Religion which was necessary for the Cementing the Societies which in those
times were but just united, and Nature had taught them, that Poetry was the
only Language in which they could worthily treat of the most Important parts of
Religion, or worthily perform its most Important Duties: But as soon as
Religion was sufficiently imprinted in the Minds of Men, and they had jeisure
to Treat of Human things in their writings they, invented Prose, and invented
it in Imitation of Verse, as Strabo tells us in the first Book of his
Geography; but after that Prose was invented, by them; never any of them
treated of their Gods or their Religious matters, in Prose, before the Age of
Socrates, because they found that that way of writing, was by no means proper
for it. For the wonders of Religion naturally threw them upon great Passions,
and great passions naturally threw them upon Harmony, and Figurative Language,
as they most of Necessity do, any Poet as long as he continues Master of them.
Which is known by Experience to all who are Poets, for never any one while he
was rapt with Enthusiasm or with Ordinary Passion, wanted either Words or
Harmony, and therefore* Poetry is more Harmonious than Prose because it is more
Pathetick. Even in Prose your Orators and all who pretend to move the Passions,
have more Harmonious Periods than they who barely speak to the Reason. And in
Poetry they who write with a great deal of Passion are Generally very
Harmonious, whereas those who write with but little are not so Musical. Horace
is an Illustrious Example of this. No Man who has read his Odes can doubt of
the fineness and the Delicacy of his Ear; and therefore his Satyrs are often
Harsh and Rugged because the Spirit in them is mean and little. No Man can
believe that Juvenal had a finer Ear, than Horace, but yet his Satyrs are more
Musical because they have a greater Spirit in them. At the same time it is a
little odd to consider, that Passion which disturbs the Soul, should occasion
it to produce Harmony, which seems to emply the Order and Composure of it.
Whether this proceeds from the Secret Effort that the Soul makes, to Compose it
self or whatever the cause is, the Effect is certain. But as Passion, which is
the Disorder of the Soul; produces Harmony which is Agreement; so Harmony which
is Concord Augments and propagates Passion which is Discord. All who are
acquainted with Poetry or Music must be as sensible of this, as Mr. Waller was
fully convinced of it, Well sounding Verses are the Charm we use,
Heroic Thoughts and Virtue to infuse;
Things of deep Sense we may in Prose unfold,
But they move more in lofty Numbers told;
By the loud Trumpet which our Courage aids,
We learn that Sound as well as Sense persuades.


Thus we may see by Mr. Waller that Numbers are proper to move Passion, and for
that Reason are inseparable from Poetry which has no other Design. But we shall
have occasion to treat of Harmony more at large when we come to the particular
sorts of Poems, in the mean time let us Return to the business from which we
may seem to have digress'd.

As we have formerly undeniably proved in the advancement of Modern Poetry,
that the Ancient Poets derived that Advantage which they have over the Moderns
to the constituting their Subjects after a Religious manner; so I shall make it
appear in the sequel of this Discourse, that it was owing to the same thing
that the ancient Poets very often excelled themselves.

And I have Reason to believe that one of the Principal Reasons, that has made
the Modern Poetry so contemptible, is, that by divesting it self of Religion,
it is fallen from its dignity, and its original Nature and Excellence, and from
the greatest production of the Mind of Man, is dwindled to an extravagant and a
vain Amusement. For the Modern Poetry being for the most part Profane, has
either very little Spirit, or if it has a great one, that Spirit is out of
Nature, because it bears no manner of Proportion to the Ideas from which it is
forcibly denv'd, nor the Ideas very often to the Objects from which they are
taken; for as Mr. Waller says, In boundless Verse the Fancy soars too high
For any Object but the Deity.
What Mortal can with Heaven pretend to share
In the Superlatives of Wise and Fair?
A meaner Object when with these we grace
A Giant Habit on a Dwarf we place.


But that the Modern Poetry as miserably as it is fallen from the Dignity of
its original Nature, might gloriously arise and lift up its Head, surpassing
even that of the Ancients, if the Poets would but constitute their Subjects
Religious, I have formerly clearly shown in the Second Part of the Advancement
of Modern Poetry; by showing that the Design of the Christian Religion is the
very same, with that of Poetry, which can be said of no other Religion, that
the business of both is to delight and reform mankind, by exciting the Passions
in such a manner as to reconcile them to Reason, and restore the Harmony of the
humane Faculties. And therefore that I may repeat nothing at present that I
have formerly said there; I shall only add, that if it is Religion that gives
the warmth and the Passion to Poetry, it follows that the less mixture that
Religion has of any thing Profane and Humane in it, the greater warmth and
Passion it must give to Poetry; for that which moves us in effect in a false
Religion must be the Imagination of that which is true. As for Example in the
above mentioned passage of the wrath of Neptune; the Anger of Neptune is
Fiction, and so is the Stroke of His Trident; but that which moves us at the
bottom of this Fiction is true, which is, that the Anger of a Deity and the
effects of it are very terrible. The Reason why Religion moves the Soul so
extremely, is because the Soul was Created by God, to find its Happiness in
Him, and all Happiness consists in Pleasure, and all Pleasure in Passion. Now
the less mixture Religion has of any thing of Human Invention in it, the more
Divine it is and the nearer it brings us to God.

But that this may still appear the more clearly, we shall Endeavor to prove
it by two very Signal Examples, and shall produce two passages from Scripture;
the one from the Psalms and the other from Habbakuk; which we shall set against
the Two forementioned Passages which Longinus cited from Homer; the one of the
Wrath and the Other of the Power of Neptune; and his awful march through his
own Element; and in setting these Passages against one another we make no doubt
to show, that not only the Subjects are exactly the same, but that the
Advantage is clearly ours.

Let us begin with that Passage concerning the might of Neptune, and his
driving his Chariot through the Sea.

As from the shaggy Mountain He descends,
The Mountain Trembles and the Forest bends,
And anon.

His golden Chariot Neptune now Ascends,
And as He drives along the Watery Plain,
Huge Whales and all the Monsters of the Main
Tempest the Ocean to Salute their King,
Ocean Rejoicing yawns before his March
And lets him through a dreadful Chasm --
Now to this Passage let us oppose that of the Prophet Habbakuk exactly upon
the same occasion; only the Prophet says of the True God, what Homer says of
Neptune.

When the Almighty from Mount Paran came,
The brightness of his Glory with its blaze
Expanding filled the vast Abyss of Heaven
And the whole Earth Resounded with his praise
The Burning Pestilence before him marched,
And from his Feet a Fiery Whirlwind flew,
He stood and Measured the Extended Earth,
Scattering the Trembling Nations with a Look,
At which the Everlasting Mountains fled,
And shaking the perpetual Hills did bow,
Against the Floods was thy Fierce Anger then?
Against the Sea the burning of thy Wrath!
That thou did through it with thy Flaming Steeds
And with thy Chariots of Salvation drive?
The Rocks their Sommets beetled over their base
To view the Terrors of thy wondrous March;
Then Shivering shrunk from the amazing Sigh.
The Floods dividing showed a fearful Chasm,
And asthy Sounding Horses all on Fire,
Tro' Heaps of Congregated Waters flew,
The Deep his roaring Voice at all his. Mouths
Uttered, and lifted all his Arms on High.
But now let us come to the wrath of Neptune, and the effects of it, in the
Battle of the Twentieth of the Iliads, in which the Gods were engaged.

Jove flung his dreadful Thunder from on high,
Mean while Majestic Neptune from below,
The reeling Globe with his huge Trident struck,
Shook its vast Plains and made its Mountains smoke.
Mount Ida trembled from his Hoary Top,
And from his Nethermost Foundations Shook,
Troubling a Thousand Springs that from Him flow
Pluto from Lowest Hell, both Heard and Felt,
And shivering Started from his Burning Throne;
Then Striking his Infernal Breast Cried out,
Least wrathful Neptune, with another Stroke
Of his Dread Trident, should the Globe Divide,
Should to the Gaping Center, let in Light,
To Mortals, and Immortals should Display,
The Dreadful Secrets of his dire Domain,
At the bare thought of which Even Gods are wont (to shake,
As the necessity of the Subject has obliged us to repeat these Verses, so we
have the same Excuse for the Repeating the Reflection, of Longinus. Behold here
says Longinus, the Earth laid open to the very Center, and Hell about to be
Exposed to view, and all the vast Machine of the World; Demolished. and
overturned, to show that in that Important Conflict, both Heaven and Hell, both
Mortal and Immortal things, every thing in Nature Engaged with the Gods and
nothing was free from Danger. Now let us see the Psalmist Introducing the true
God, actually Demolishing and overturning the Machine of the World only with a
Word and with a Look.

In my Distress I called upon the Lord,
And to my God I cried, He from his Height
Above all Heights, Strait heard my Mournful Voice,
And to my loud Complaint inclined his Ear.
Strait the Earth trembled and her Entrails shook
As Conscious of her Great Creators Wrath.
The Mountains from their fixed Foundations ran,
And Frighted from their inmost Caverns Roared.
From out his Nostrils a Tempestuous Cloud
Of pitchy smoke in Spicy Volumes flew,
And from his Mouth there ran a Raging Flood
Of Torrent fire Devouring as it ran.
And then He Bowed the very Heaven of Heavens,
And armed with fearful Majesty came down.
Under his Feet He placed Substantial Night
Which awed the Nations with its dreadful Gloom
Upon the Flaming Cherubim He Rode,
And on the Wings of all the Winds He flew,
Still Darkness ushered his Mysterious way,
And a Black Night of Congregated Clouds
Became the Dark Pavillion of his Throne.
The Clouds his Brightness could no longer bear,
But vanishing Revered the Sacred sourse of Light,
And as the Congregated Clouds Dispersed
A Storm of Monstrous Hail came pouring: down,
Down the Red Lightning winged its Slanting way
But when his wrathful Voice was heard on High
Strait both the Poles Rebellow'd to the Sound,
In thicker sheets the Rattling Hail came down,
Down came the Lightning with repeated Flames
And Thunder bellowing through the boundless Space.
Astonished Nature with Redoubled Roars,
Earth could no longer bear the mortal fright
But shook it self from its perpetual Hinge
At thy Rebuke O Lord and at the Blast,
The Dreadful Blast of thy Revenging Breath,
Then upwards from the gaping Center cleav'd
With a prodigious wound;
The fixed Foundations of the World displayed,
Displayed the Ghastful Caverns of the Deep,
A sight that blasted even the World's Great Eye,
And made the Starting Sun recoil
From his Eternal way.
But here it will be Necessary to answer an Objection, for it may be urged
perhaps that Common Experience will Destroy these new Speculations. For several
of the Moderns have attempted Divine Poetry, and yet some of them have been
Contemptible to the last Degree, and not one of them has excelled the Ancients.

To which we answer that Milton has clearly the advantage of the Ancients in
several points, as shall be shown in its proper place; and if the rest of the
Moderns who have attempted Sacred Poetry have fallen so very much short of
them, it has been either for want of Genius or for want of Art to know how to
make use of Religion. For Sacred Poetry apparently requires a greater capacity
than the Profane does, because the greater the Ideas are, the greater must the
Capacity be that receives them. But Sacred Ideas are greater then the Profane,
as has been shown above. And therefore if the Rule of Horace be true, that a
Poet ought to proportion his Subject to his Strength, it follows that a Man may
Succeed pretty well in Human Poetry and yet be despicable in the Divine.
Besides as Religion supplies us with greater Ideas than any thing Human can do;
so it requires greater Enthusiasm and a greater Spirit to attend them, as has
been shown above too. So that Sacred Poetry requires not only a very great
Capacity, but a very warm and Strong Imagination; which is a happy mixture that
is to be met with in a very few, and even of those few not one in a Thousand
perhaps applies himself to sacred Poetry. And even of those rare ones who have
applied themselves hardly one of the Moderns has known the true use that ought
to be made of Religion in Poetry. Milton, indeed happened upon it, in his
Paridise lost, I say happened upon it, because He has erred very widely from it
in his Paradise Regained, as shall be shown in its proper place. The Rules for
Employing Religion in Poetry are Principally these which follow.

1. The First is, That the Religion ought to be one, that the Poet may be moved
by it, and that he may appear to be in earnest. And the not observing of this
Rule, was one Reason why Spencer miscarried as we shall show anon.

2. The Second Rule, That the Religion which the Poet Employs ought to be the
Reigning one, that both the Poet and the Readers may be moved the more by a
Religion in which they were bred. And this Rule may acquaint us with one of the
reasons why all who have translated Homer and Virgil, have succeeded so very
indifferently.

3. The Third is that it may run through and be incorporated with the Action of
the Poem, and consequently that it may always be a part of Action and
Productive of Action, for from the neglect of this Third Rule, strange
inequalities would follow in a Poem, as shall be shown more at large, when we
treat of Spencer and Cowley.

4. The Fourth Rule is, That the Religion may be managed so as to promote the
violence of the Enthusiastic Passions and their change and variety; and the
constituting his Subject contrary to this Rule, was one great reason why Milton
did not succeed in his Paradise Regained.

5. That it may not hinder the Violence of the ordinary Passions, nor the
Change and Variety of them; and the not constituting his Subject according to
this Rule is the chief reason, why Homer in his Odysses fell so far short of
his Iliads; and Milton of his Paradise Lost, in his Paradise Regained.

6. That the Religion be managed so as not to obstruct the violence of Action,
which is always attended by the violence of ordinary Passion; and the not
observing of this, was one great Reason of the miscarriage of Homer and Milton,
in the forementioned Poems.

7. That the Divine and Humane Persons if there be any, may have Inclinations
and Affections, which Tasso's Celestial Persons have not, nor as I Remember
Cowley's.

8. That they be fairly distinguished from one another, by those Inclinations
and Affections. And this is the great Advantage that the Grecian Machines, have
for the most part over those in our Religion. Yet Milton has pretty well
distinguished his Celestial Persons from one another, and his Infernal ones
admirably.

4. That they be fairly distinguished from the Human Persons, by the same
Inclinations and Affections. And here Milton in his Infernal Persons has
undeniably the Advantage, both of Ancients and Moderns. The Passions and
Inclinations of the Grecian Gods, are downright Human Inclinations and
Affections. The Passions of Miltons's Devils have enough of Humanity in them to
make them delightful, but then they have a great deal more to make them
admirable and may be said to be the true Passions of Devils; but the time to
speak more largely of this will be when we come to the Epick Poets.

But now as we have shown that the Religion Revealed in the Old and New
Testament is proper, nay Necessary to give the last force and Elevation to
Poetry; we shall now Endeavor to Convince the Reader that Poetry is proper if
not Necessary, to give force to that Religion. For indeed there are Duties in
this Religion, which cannot be worthily performed without the a ssistance of
Poetry. As the offering up Praise and Thanksgiving and several sorts of Prayer
to God; and the Celebrating the Wonders of his Might? Because if the Ideas
which these Subjects afford; are expressed with Passion equal to their greatness,
that which expresses them is Poetry, for that which makes Poetry to be what it
is, is only because it has more Passion than any other way of writing.

It is Ridiculous to Imagine that there can be a more proper way to Express
some parts and Duties of a Religion which we believe to be Divinely inspired,
than the very way in which they were at first delivered. Now the most Important
part of the Old Testament was delivered not only in a Poetical Style but in
Poetical Numbers. The most Important parts of the Old Testament to us are the
Prophesies. Because without them we could never be satisfied that Jesus is the
Messiah, For the Prophets were Poets by the Institution of their Order, and
Poetry was one of the Prophetic Functions, which were chiefly Three. 1.
Predicting or foretelling things to come. 2. Declaring the will of God to the
People. And 3. Praising God with Songs of the Prophets composing, accompanied
with the Harp and other Instrumental Music. From whence it came to pass, that
praising God upon such kind of Instruments, is often in the Scriptures called
Prophesying, as Mr. Mede has observed in his Diatribae; and has proved it from
several Passages of the Old Testament, and more particularly from the 3 First
Verses of the 25th Chapter of the Chronicles, which are as follows.

V. 1.Moreover David and the Captains of the Host, separated to the Service of
the Sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, such as should Prophecy with
Harps, with Psalteries and with Cymbals, and the Number of the Workmen
according to their service was

V. 2. Of the Sons of Asaph; Zaccar, and Joseph, and Nethaniah and Asarelah,
the Sons of Asaph; under the Hands of Asaph, which Prophesied according to the
Order of the King.

V. 3.Of Jeduthun, the Sons of Jeduthun, Gedaliah and Zeri and Jeshaiah,
Hashabiah, and Metithiah Six, under the Hands of their Father Jeduthun, who
Prophesied with a Harp, to give thanks and to praise the Lord.

Nor was their Poetical Talent confined to their Praise and thanksgiving, but
is to be seen in their Predictions too as we said before, and in their
declaring the Will of God to the People.

As the Prophets were Poets by their Institution, so when the Son of God
himself, came down from Heaven in order to reform the Earth, He who was a
Prophet as well as a Priest and a King, did by consequence discharge the Three
Prophetical Functions, of which the Poetical has been shown to be one. And
consequently though our Savior did not make use of a Style, that was Figurative
and Enthusiastic; because he Instructed the World as God, and as God He could
not feel either Admiration or Terror, or the rest of the Enthusiastic
Passions, yet we find that He not only praised God with spiritual Songs, but
that the Method of His Instruction was entirely Poetical, that is by Fables or
Parables, contrived and placed and adapted to work very strongly upon Human
Passions.

Thus the Prophets among the Jews were Poets, and the Divine Institutor of the
Christian Religion being a Prophet, by a Poetical method instructed and
reformed the World. And even the Grecian Poets pretending to discharge the
Three Prophetical Functions, were not only vulgarly reputed Prophets but were
ftyl'd so by St. Paul Himself, who quoting a verse out of Epimenides in the
Epistle which He wrote to Titus, calls that Cretensian Poet a Prophet. As one
of their own Prophets has said.

Thus we have made it very plain, that not only the Predictions but the Praise
and Thanksgiving, in the Inspired Writers were written in Verse; as were
likewise several of the Prayers, and the Instructions, and in short the Noblest
and mostImportant part of the Old Testament: Now if they were written in
Poetry, it could be for no other Reason, but because they who wrote them,
Believed that the Figurative Passionate Style, and the Poetical Numbers did by
Right of Nature belong to them, and Consequently were requisite to enforce them
upon the Minds of Men. And here we cannot as it were help observing, that for
the Scriptures to make all the Impression that they are Capable of making upon
Men of very good parts, and perhaps too upon others, all those parts of them
that were written in Verse ought to be translated in Verse; and by Persons who
are the most qualified to do it with Force and Harmony. For if the Passion and
Harmony were thought requisite by the Original Writers, who were Divinely
inspired to give force to the Hebrew; why should not Spirit and Passion and
Numbers in a Translation give a Proportionable force to that? For if Harmony of
it self is of force to lift up our Thoughts to Heaven, as our Clergy seem to
Emply by the use of it in our Churches; and may be gathered from what happened
to Elisha in the Second of Kings, when they would have had him Prophecy at a
time when the Spirit of Prophecy Chapter 3. v. 15. was not upon him. Where the
Prophet says, now bring me a Minstrel, and it came to pass as the Minstrel
played that the Hand of the Lord came upon him.

If Harmony I say is of it self so efficacious, what must it not be, when
Incorporated with a Religigious Sense, and a Poetical Style. There can
certainly be no better way to Reform the World than the reading of those
Writings which we believe to be divinely inspired; But this is as certain, that
the greater the pleasure is with which we Read them, we shall the more
frequently discharge that Duty, but to make us read them with more pleasure
than we do, they must have more of the agreableness of their Originals, that is
more Perspicuity, more Force and more Harmony. This would more particularly
attract the Gentry, and particularly those of the most Extraordinary Parts
among them, whose examples would influence the rest as the rest would influence
the People. For they of extraordinary Parts for the most part being Extremely
delighted with Poetry, and finding the greatest and most exalted Poetry upon
Religious Subjects, would by degrees become more used to be moved by Sacred
Ideas than they would by profane; that is would by degrees become reformed.
That this is by no means a Chimera, Experience may serve to convince us. For I
know several Gentlemen of very good Sense who are extremely moved by Miltons
Hymn in the fifth Book of Paradise lost, and hardly at all stirred with the
Translation of the 148 Psalm from whence that Hymn is taken. But if Men of very
good parts are more moved by the Hymn, it follows that they ought to be more
moved by it; because Men of very good Sense are only moved to that Degree by
things by which they ought to be moved. So that we may Conclude that the
Passion or Enthusiasm in that Hymn is exactly in Nature, that is, that the
Enthusiasm, or Passion, or Spirit call it what you will, flows from the Ideas,
and bears a just Proportion to them.

But from hence at the same time it follows, that since those Persons who are
so much moved by the Hymn, are not equally stirred by the Translated Psalm, the
Passion or Spirit is less in the latter and does not come up to the Ideas; and
therefore we may conclude that Milton by his Genius and Harmony has restored
that Spirit in Composing the Hymn, which had been lost by the weakness of the
Translation and the want of Poetical Numbers. Which last as we have said before
contribute very much to the raising of Passion.

What Milton has done in relation to the 148 Psalm, others may do in a less
proportion to other parts of the Old Testament, till the Favor of the Prince
and public Encouragement causes another Milton to arise and apply Himself to
so necessary and so noble a work. For this is certain that there are not
wanting great Genius's to every Age. But they do not equally appear in every
Age, sometimes for want of knowing themselves; and sometimes for want of
Encouragement and leisure to exert themselves. The business of the following
Treatise is to show them how they may try and know, and form themselves, which
is all that I am capable of attempting toward the Restoring so useful and so
noble an Art. If I were in a Condition to give them Encouragement too they
should not be long without it. If they who so much exceed me in Power, did but
equal me in Will, we should soon see Poetry raise up its dejected Head, and our
own might come to emulate the Happiest of Grecian and Roman Ages.

And thus much may suffice to show the Nature of Poetry, but chiefly of the
greater Poetry, and the Importance of this Design. For since Poetry has been
thought not only by Heathens, but by the Writers of the Old Testament, and
consequently by God Himself who inspired them, to be the fittest method for the
enforcing Religion upon the Minds of Men, and since Religion is the only solid
Foundation of all Civil Society, it follows, that whoever Endeavors to
Re-establish Poetry, makes a generous attempt to restore an Art, that may be
highly Advantageous to the Public, and Beneficial to Mankind.

FINIS.

