AN APOLOGY For the LIFE of Mr. T......... C....., Comedian. BEING A Proper
Sequel TO THE APOLOGY For the LIFE of Mr. Colley Cibber, Comedian. WITH An
Historical View of the STAGE to the Present YEAR. Supposed to be written by
HIMSELF. In the Style and Manner of the POET LAUREAT.

-- Of all the Assurances I was ever guilty of, this of writing my own Life is
the most hardy; impudent is what I should have said: Through every Page there
runs a Vein of Vanity and Impertinence, which no French Ensign's Memoirs ever
came up to: My Style unequal, pert, and frothy; low and pompous; crammed with
Epithets; strewn with Scraps of second-hand Latin; aiming at Wit without
hitting the Mark: My Subject below all Pens but my own, which, whenever I keep
to, is flatly daubed by one eternal Egotism. COLLEY CIBBER's Life, p. 26, 27.
-- Sequiturque Patrem non possibus Aequis. LONDON: Printed for J. MECHELL at
the King's-Arms in Fleet Street. 1740. [Price Two Shillings.]

TO A Certain Gentleman.
SIR,
BECAUSE I know You do not love to see your Name in Print, imagining it is used
in some impertinent Satire, though I was now writing the daintiest Dedication
of any modern Author, yet I would choose to conceal it.

Let me talk then just as it comes into my Head about You and to You this Way;
let me tell You of what I will, or how I will, You are under no Necessity of
taking it to Yourself: Nor when I boast of your Excellenc'es and Transactions,
need You blush that I have performed them in such a Manner as to claim the
complimental Homage of my Pen: Or I may now give You all the Attributes that
raise a cunning, intriguing Man to the highest Offices and Employments, and no^
be censured as one of your hireling Advocates, either by my own or your
Enemies. -- I place my own first, not because they are the greater Number, but
as in the Cer^monialia of Heraldrv, the most insignificant Personages begin the
Pomp, to introduce those of more elevated Consequence, I mentioned my Enemies
first, to introduce the Mention of yours. -- Yours (and such you have) for they
are not so well-bred as not to declare themselves) have carried on long, though
successless, Attacks against You: And, Sir, give me Leave to compare my little
Self to your great Honor, as there is no Hazard or visible Terror in an Attack
upon my defenseless Station, my Censurers, like Yours, have been Persons of an
intrepid Sincerity: But I shut the Door against them all, while I am thus
privately talking to You, and have little to apprehend from either of them.

Under this Shelter then, I may safely tell You that the greatest Reason I have
had to publish this Wo^l^ has arisen from the several Performances which I
published last Summer, and which you had Goodness enough to patronize: How far
indeed your good Nature to a young Politician, or your Reluctance to put the
Vanity of one of your new Authors out of Countenance may have carried you, I
cannot be sure: And yet Appearances give me stronger Hopes. For was not the
Complaisance of a whole Summer's Sufferance, to employ my Talents in your
Service, as much as an Author of more Importance ought to have expected: -- Why
then was he desired by Mr. P -- xt -- n to write second Gazeteers? Or, why was
I kept in the Service, to tell more of the same Stories? -- If these
Employments have made me vain, shall I say, Sir, you are accountable for them?
-- No, Sir, I will rather say that my own Forwardness, and dashing through
thick and thin, recommended me to the Notice of your Supervisor-General, for
Gazeteering and Pamphleteering: Or rather so far flatter myself, as to suppose
it possible, that You having been a Patron and Lover of Master Walsingham and
Dame Osborn (and one of those good Judges, who know the Use and Value of such
Writers, under a right Regulation) might incline You to think my Labors and
Lucubrations of more Consequence than they may naturally be to others of
different Sense, who may have less Concern or Taste for them. But be all this
as it may, As for this Apology for my Life, I have written it not only to show
my own Parts, and illustrate my own Story, but I have decorated it, with
several Remarks, Political, as well as Theatrical, and explained the Meaning of
some of my Writings, which were dedicated to your Service. Now, Sir, as my
apologetical Brat is born, rather than see it starve on bare Parish-Provision,
I choose clandestinely to drop it at your Door, that it may exercise one of your
many Virtues, your Charity, in supporting a very dull Dog of an Author.

Now, Sir, were the World to know into what Right Honorable Hands I have
thrown the following History, their Regard to its Patron might incline them to
treat it as one of his own Family. -- They might say such Things of it, as may
be improper for me to mention. -- For this Reason I conceal your Name, as that
must necessari^y lead me to descant on a Subject which might be ungrateful to
your Ears; for I am at characterising Friend or Foe, a very Devil at my Pen. --
In consciousness therefore of what I am, I choose not to say what You are. -- I
leave that for other Historians, and for Posterity to relate. -- However, as
your Equals in Rank have done public Justice to your Character, the
Concealment of your Name may be an unnecessary Diffidence. But am I, Sir, of
Consequence enough, in any Guise, to do Honor to Sir --? Were I to set You,
Sir, in the most true Lights that your Actions deserve, or your own Likeness
requires, yet my officious Mite would be lost in that general Character and
Regard which People of the first Consequence, even some of all Parties, even
some of your own Dependants, have a Pleasure of speaking of in Private.
Encomiums to Persons in your high Station, are liable to the Suspicion of
Flattery, and can add little Luster to what before was visible to the Public.
You are cloyed, without Doubt, by such Offerings: You have them almost daily
offered up to You in public and in private; at your L^v^e; at the T -- y; at
the Drawing Room, and Lobby of the Senate House; besides the zealous
Ejaculations which are offered for your Service in an inimitable Paper which is
distributed throughout the Kingdom gratis. -- But these Offerings, like Pagaa
Incense, evaporate on the Altar, and rather gratify the Priest than the Deity.

But You, Sir, are approached frequently and often in Terms of Common Sense; The
honest Oblation of Hearts which have just Sense enough to mix Reason with
Accusation. How really true, or whether the Zeal of such Devotees of Common
Sense are false, I shall not here examine: But, Sir, was I admitted, with all
my laughing Spirits about me, to be my idle Self, and to write what I could
write on that Subject, I should surely be distinguished by You from a Parcel of
dull Set of Rogues, whom your good Nature and Charity induce You to believe are
Wits. This Nakedness of Temper the World may place in what Rank of Vanity they
please; but till Wisdom shall point out a Way to make me more heartily happy
than your Favors, I am content to be gazed at as your Creature, as I am,
without lessening my Respect for You, and laugh at those whose Intellects may
be more soberly covered.

Yet, Sir, I will not deceive You; it is not the Luster of the Power You
possess, the immenseness of your Fortune, your Figure in Life, and the just
Rewards for your Services, which you had rather deserve than be told of, that
have made my plain honest Heart hang after You; these are but incidental
Ornaments that may be of Service to You; but my particular Esteem has risen
from a mere natural and more engaging Charm -- The agreeable Rewards which You
confer on your Creatures. -- Nor is my Vanity so much gratified in the Honor,
as my Convenience in the Delight of such pecuniary Felicities. To see You lay
aside your Superiority, and conser with a mean Author, give him Instructions,
and Gold, Vid. C. Cibber's Dedication.
it is then I ta^^e You! then Life runs high! I desire! I possess You!

Yet, Sir, it must be a farther Share of Pleasure to look on You with the
public Eye, and view your Intregrity. -- This, Sir, is a Theme Si mihi sint
centum Linguae, sint oraque centum. Had I an hundred Tongues this Theme to
raise,
Had I an hundred Mouths, -- to mouth thy Praise,
Those Tongues, these Mouths, that Praise could never tell
How You can All, and even Yourself excel;
None but YOURSELF can be your Parallel.
When I consider You in this View, and in the Height of Power, I could rejoice
mightily for You and Myself, to see You in this particular Light of Glory, and
Myself admitted to reflect the Beams of it throughout Great Britain.

If this Apology for my Life discourages You not to prevent my Design, I have
some Thought of writing an Apology for Yours: I think myself equal to the
Subject, and should be proud if You would, by this Exercitation of my Genius,
suffer me to approve myself,

SIR, Your most obedient, most obliged, and most humble Servant, T. C.
July 1. 1740.
AN APOLOGY For the LIFE of Mr. T -- C --, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. -- Reason for writing an Apology. -- The Author's Birth and
Family. -- Apromising Genius. -- Sent to Winchester School. -- An Occurrence
there. -- A Digression on Vanity and Ambition. -- Of Systems of Philosophy, etc.

AMONG all the Foibles incident to human Nature, none take a stronger
Possession of the Soul of Man than Ambition. There are, indeed, sundry Ways and
Arts to gratify this lofty Passion, which though it may divide itself into
different Channels, yet from the same Source various Streams take their Rise.
-- My Readers may be surprised at my setting out with so philosophical an
Apothegm; but it is a very proper Introduction to the following Apology, as it
was from an innate Thirst of Ambition that I undertook to publish these Memoirs
of my own Life: Some witty smart Gentlemen may call it Vanity: With all my
Heart; and to deal ingenuously with them, I frankly confess it was that Species
of Ambition which by hereditary Happiness descends to me, called Vanity. -- A
Vanity! for what? cries a more grave Annotator: To show there are two Coxcombs
in a Family? -- Must there be two Apologies for the Lives of two Fellows no one
cared a Halfpenny for? -- Why, perhaps merely to signalize myself, or perhaps
to imitate the laudable Steps of my worthy Parent, or perhaps to defend my
Conduct from some public Reproaches; I have thought proper to make an Aplogy
for my Life; and surely among the Majority of the World this Attempt will stand
uncensur'd, as they will be ready enough to allow the Life of no Man stood more
in Need of an Apology than mine. And to show my Readers what a candid impartial
Person I am, I will, in this Disquisition of myself, bring my own Heart to the
Bar, and try it without Favor or Affection: I shall consequently betray much
Folly, and talk much of myself, but I have very great Examples to authorize
such a Liberty. Old Mich. Montaign it seems in his Essays tattled more about
his own queer Body and Mind, his Cat, and an old Woman, than all the World
beside; so much had he set his Heart upon himself. The ingenious and modest Mr.
Colley Cibber has outdone Montaign, and not only talked a great deal of
himself, but has set so great a Value on himself, that after being so long
known, he will not let any one know what he really is, under a less
Consideration than a Guinea Since this was wrote, the Apology is sold for 5s.
But in these Memoirs of my humble Self, I shall, at a cheaper Rate, take the
Liberty to illustrate my Way of Thinking, Writing, and Acting, both as to my
theatrical and private Life, by the Apology which he has made for his own; nor
can I think the Public will be displeased to see what Kind of a Parallel will
be drawn between a Father and Son, who have on many Occasions so remarkably
distinguished themselves.

Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille
Qui minimis urgetur.
I shall therefore conclude this Introduction to my Story in his Words; "Upon
an honest Examination of my Heart, I am afraid the same Vanity which makes even
homely People employ Painters to preserve a flattering Record of their Persons,
has seduced me to print off this Chiaro Oscuro of my Mind." -- But as he hopes
immediately after, that no one will expect a Man of his hasty Head should
confine himself to any regular Method, I am in equal Hope that no Method, or
Connection, or Regularity will be expected from mine: I shall also make
Digressions in my Memoirs, when I think they begin to grow too heavy for the
Readers Digestion Vide C. Cibber's Life, p. 4.
: for Digressions it seems are in this Kind of Writing what Eggs are in a
Pudding, they lighten the Composition, and render it more palatable and
digestive. This is my Apology, and the best Apology I can make for becoming my
own Biographer.

I come to that customa^y and important Point in all Histories of Great Men,
their Birth, Parentage, and Education. So great a Curiosity is there in Mankind
to be informed of these Particulars, that almost every revolving Moon produces
illustrious Memoirs of Heroes and Heroines, whom dire Destiny has allotted to a
fatal End. As these Records are to preserve their Memories from more than
Lethaean Oblivion, every minute Circumstance of their entering into the first
Scenes of Life are related; the Name of the Parents, their Trade, and Calling,
and whether they sent them to School, and had them instructed in Reading and
Writing, are told with great Fidelity. These Things, on mature Deliberation,
may seem very trifling, and of no Signification to the World, whether they were
known or not. -- Very true. -- But yet there is such an Avidity in human Nature
for trifling, that these Tyburnian Memoirs are read by the Great Vulgar, and
the Small, with no little Delectation. Was there no other Excuse than this
Humor of Mankind, I know not how I could let my Birth be passed over in
Silence; but the Excuse my Father had made before me must stand for mine, which
is what my Brother Bays makes Prince Prettyman say in the Rehearsal, viz. I
only do it for fear I should be thought Nobody's Son at all. -- Though I cannot
think I use this Theatrical Wit with a Force equal to that which he quoted it;
for the public having long known my Father, they have unanimously paid him a
Compliment which all Fathers have not paid them, viz. -- That I am my Father's
own Son. -- But whose Son's Son I was, guess from the following Extract, from
the Apologist I imitate. -- His Paragraph of Lineage runs thus:

I was born in London, on the 6th of November 1671, in Southampton Street,
facing Southampton House. My Father Caius Gabriel Cibber, was a Native of
Holstein, who came into England sometime before the Restoration of King Charles
the Second, to follow his Profession which was that of a Statuary, etc. The
Basso Relievo in the Pedestal of the great Column in the City, and the two
Figures of the Lunaticks, the Raving and the Melancholy, over the Gates of
Bethlehem Hospital are no ill Monaments of his Fame as an Artist. My Mother was
the Daughter of William Colley, Esquire of a very ancient Family of Glaiston, in
Rutlandshire, where she was born. My Mother's Brother Edward Colley, Esquire (who
gave my Christian Name) being the last Heir-male of it, the Family is now
extinct. I shall only add, that in Wright's History of Rutlandshire, published
1684, the Colleys are recorded as Sheriffs and Members of Parliament from the
Reign of Henry VII. to the latter End of Charles I, in whose Cause chiefly Sir
Anthony Colley, my Mother's Grandfather sunk his Estate from three thousand to
about three Hundred Pounds per Annum.

Although I am very far from laying any Stress on the Pomp of Heraldry, and a
long Scroll of Family Descents, for well I know, my Pedigree, though traced,
(as I doubt not but it might be) to William the Conqueror, will confer no
intrinsic Value on me; for conscious I am, that any Regard to my Being, must be
beamed only by the Rays of Virtue; yet, in simple Truth, I must confess, that I
think I owe something to having good Blood in my Veins. -- For a Latin Poet
justly says;

"Qui viret in foliis venit a Radicilus humor,
"Et Patrum in natos abeunt cum femine mores.
Which I thus venture to translate,

The Leaves their Verdure from the Roots receive,
And Souls their Children have the Parents give.
Every one who has read Horace knows,

Fortes creantur Fortibus, etc. -- Still from the Valiant are the Valiant
sprung. -- I need make no Application; but if Valiant, why not Witty?

These Scraps of Latin may seem very unnecessary for some; they might still
seem more unnecessary, had not I translated them, for others. However, I cannot
think them in the least Bagatelle: They introduce very properly, the next Thing
I was to mention, which was my Education: Nay, when I have given such a Proof
of it, as to quote Latin and translate it, I think no farther need be given:
But however, as in my Apology I would be like another Apologist,

-- Longo sed PROXIMUS Intervallo, -- I shall follow his Manner.

About the Year 1716, or 1717, I was sent by my Father to Winchester School, in
order to be elected into Winchester College; for it seems, by my Father's
Mother's Side, I was descended from William of Wickham the Founder. -- In what
Branch, I am ingenuous enough to say I know not, yet from my Soul I contemn
that vile Insinuation which a certain Counselor, at a certain Trial, made,
that it was by some collateral Branch, as William of Wickham was a Churchman at
a Time when Matrimony was not allowed of. -- The Inference is evident. -- But I
will be bold to say, that glittering, glaring, glistering -- Witwou'd Flash, is
as unjust as unmannerly. -- It equally affects all those educated in Winchester
College (as well as he -- who was intended to be educated there;) as
Descendants from the Founder. -- But to return. -- In this School I received
the first and last Rudiments of Learning, as my Father did his at Grantham in
Lincolnshire; but if he has more Learning than me, it is to be observed, he
went from the lowest Form to the highest, and I did not proceed above half the
Way: Yet this Analogy appears between us. -- He says, C. Cibber's Life, p. 5.
"Even there I remember I was the same inconsistent Creature I have been ever
since, always in full Spirits, in some small Capacity to do Right, but in a
more frequent Alacrity to do Wrong." -- Just such a Creature was, have been,
and am -- am I. -- He gives us as the first remarkable Error of his Life, Vid.
p. 6.
jesting, and jeering, and joking on a School-fellow. I have also been thrash'd
unpitied for the same Thing; but such Circumstances, even though my Father's Pen
was to relate them, may be thought damned ridiculous. Be it enough that I was
always eager of Fame and Glory, and making an Ecclarisement about the Town: I
loved to make an Appearance, and remember in some extraordinary Adventure, the
taking another Boy's laced Hat to wear, occasioned me much posterior Anxiety.
But Vive Hodie was my Motto. -- Some immediate Satisfaction of my Passions,
which were always varying, sometimes to Dress, sometimes to Eating or Drinking,
etc. was my Desire from an Infant; and I am afraid some charitable Folk may
say, I retain too much of the same Temper now I am a Man. --

I very well remember, when I was a Child, I took an ambitious Liking to a
scarlet Cloak with Gold Trimmings, and wept most resolutely for the same, which
was the only Means I could think of for coming at my Ends; but my Mother
counterplotted me, and bribed away my Pride with a crooked Sixpence: And indeed
in those Days I would have dropped my most towering Aims for a Lump of gilded
Ginger-bread, or a Custard. Sometimes a Goosberry-Tart would cure a furious Fit
of Ambition. -- Once, I remember, when I had thrown myself on the Ground with a
Resolution to die, because my Father would not give me a Horse to ride, and
manage as I thought proper, being then full five Years old; but my Mother cured
this Ambition by showing me a Pair of new white Gloves, and a Handful of
Cherries.

I cannot pass by without throwing out some farther Reflections on these boyish
Tricks, " C. Cibber's Life, p. 6.
whether flat or spirited, new or common, false or true, right or wrong, they
will be still my own, and consequently like me; I therefore go on to show as
well the Weakness as the Strength of my Understanding."

By a Digression, therefore, to make this Tittle Tattle sit light on a Reader's
Digestion, I draw a Moral from it. -- Ambition, or Vanity, when uppermost, is
bad for either Man or Child; and as it makes Children naughty, it makes Men
Children.

I have often thought my childish Ambition for a scarlet Cloak, of the same
Stamp as we often meet with in higher Life: It is the same Principle which
swells the Hearts of the Great, as puffed up mine, and if a due Regard to
Nature be observed, it will be allowed so. For Instance, If a Man of the first
Quality, as the Duke of -- I had almost named his Title -- But, I say, suppose
a Man of the first Quality, who had lived to about his thirtieth Year,
despising to be distinguished by any public Gewgaw, opposing a Minister, from
a Supposition of his being an evil one, should all of a sudden run bowing to
that Minister's Levee, desert his Party, break with his Relations, and turn as
great a Slave as any he despised -- Would not any one think there must be some
great Power of Reason to cause so surprising a Change? But what if it should be
Ambition? Would they not think something very august was the Object of his
Soul? But if, after all, it was only a Red Coat, would not his Caprice of
Ambition prove as ridiculous as mine for a Red Cloak? -- I could illustrate my
other childish Appetites by more Examples, were I not afraid the Partiality
might give Offense to my Court-Friends; for however like my Passions and some
great Men's may, in fact, be, it is not my Interest nor Duty to make the
Comparisons -- Ex 'Pede Herculom. -- However, I may observe that the Variety of
my Desires in my Childhood (for there was a Time when I was a Child) are such
as are to be observed daily among Mankind: I have known a young Gentleman of
Fortune set out with all the hey-day Expenses of the Mode; yet when he found
himself over-weigh'd with Appetites, he grew restless, kicked up in the Middle
of the Course, and turned his Back upon his Frolicks: I have also known a very
witty young Fellow become a very grave Man, and yet, when he was in Company,
and was called to it, could still make himself the FIDDLE of it.

If I were capable of Envy, this last Gentleman's Character would incline me to
it; for to be wise, and at the same Time merry, is a State of Happiness in
Perfection. " C. C^bber's Life, p. 12.
When I speak of Happiness, I go no higher than that which is contained in the
World we now tread upon; and when I speak of being merry, I don't simply mean
what every Oaf is capable of, but that Kind of Mirth which not is more limited
than recommended by that indulgent Philosophy, "Cum Ratione insanire."

These Sentiments of my Philosophy I have expressed in the Words of that great
Author whom I imitate, and of whose Sect I confess myself a Disciple: And I
will here observe to the Reader, that through the whole Course of these
rhapsodical Memoirs, I shall quote from that incomparable Apologist whatever
may equally allude to myself; not only as my mean Style cannot reach his
Daintiness of Expression, but as this Method will the better show what an
Analogy there is between us. -- The Readers who are candid will say,

Ju^ta positi magis lucescunt. But as to my Philosophy; for this is making a
Digression in a Digression. -- I remember a merry, laughing, wit^y, compl^isant
Fellow, who was always the most obsequious humble Servant of some Man of
Fortune or other, compared himself once to a Philosopher, and the ^^under of a
new Sect: It was honest Gnatho in one of Terence's Plays, who said all the
Followers of his System should be called Gnathonici. -- I know not but from my
Father's Apology some new Philosophers may arise, and Posterity not give a
proper Title to their Sect, therefore I here mention that all who are of our
Opinion may distinguish themselves by the Name of CIBBERIANI -- To be a
reasonable Madman is what I always would be, though I have too often been said,
insanire sine Ratione. -- Some may say that I had better not be mad at all: --
But as my Father charmingly says, -- Is this a Time of Day for me to leave off
my Fooleries, and set up for a new Character? Can it be worth my while to waste
my Spirits, to bake my Blood with serious Contemplations, and perhaps impair my
Health in the fruitless Study of advancing myself into the better Opinion of
those very -- very few wise Men, who may think different from me. No; the Part
I have acted in real Life shall be all of a Piece.

-- Servetur ad imum
Qualis ab incepto processerit --
I can no more put off my Follies than my Skin: I have tried, but they stick
too close to me; and when I have seen others, whose Rank and Fortune have laid
a sort of Restraint upon their Liberty -- I have softly said to myself, --
Well, there is some Advantage in having neither Rank nor Fortune! -- Give me
the Joy I always took in the End of an old Song:

My Mind, my Mind is a Kingdom to me. Let the World call me any Fool but an
unchearful one! I live as I write; while my Way amuses ME, it is as well as I
wish it. -- The Man whose becalmed Passions know no Motion seems to be in the
quiet State of a green Tree; he vegetates it is true, but shall we say he lives?

O expressive Description! This is the ratione insanire in the very Style;
incomprehensibly sublime. -- O dainty Simile! A Tree, when it is green, and
vegetates, and flourishes, cannot be said, in our Philosophy, to live. --
Reader take heed! for I have a strong Impulse to talk impertinently, and show
myself in all my Lights. -- Here I could draw an imaginary Monarch, and dress
him in all the Mockery of Greatness, with all the cumbersome Robes of Majesty,
with all the Devastation of Ambition in his Thoughts, till my Imagination was
heated and fatigued in dressing up a Phantome of Felicity; -- and what then? --
Why prove he was not half so happy a Fellow as myself.

Let them be Converts to the Cibberian Sect who will; our Founder does not
impose these Laws, but follows them himself, and is followed by myself. -- If
we are misguided, it is Nature's Fault; We follow her, and reason good. --
Nature has distinguished us from the Brute-Creation by our Risibility: Homo
animal Risibile est. Her Design was, by our Os Sublime (our erected Faces) to
Lift up the Dignity of our Form, God gave to Man an upright Face that he
Might view the Stars --
[Corner of an Almanac* From this System, we may justly style ourselves
natural Philosophers.

But nevertheless, without divine Assistance, be we never so wise or foolish,
we cannot reach this merry Felicity: So that all my Parade and Grimace of
Philosophy, has been only making a Merit of following my own Inclination -- A
very natural Vanity! -- But this Vanity does not impose on me -- Vanity again!
-- However think it, Reader, Vanity or not Vanity, or this, or that, or the other
that has drawn me into this copious Digression, it is now high Time to drop it.
-- After playing the Philosopher in this Manner, I shall now return to School
again. -- A Place where some of my Witwou'd Enemies may say would be very
proper for me; but as I have forestalled their Jest, none but the dullest
Rogues will pretend to make it.

CHAP. II.
He that writes of himself not easily tired. Boys may give Men Lessons. --
Wrongly satiriz'd. -- On Satire. -- Wrote generally for Bread. -- His Thoughts
and Behavior when satiriz'd, etc.

AS my Pen is running over the Paper to form this Sentence, I am smiling, Sir
Reader, to think what an odly contented Coxcomb I am to set myself down to
write this Apology for my Life: But you know nothing gives a Coxcomb so much
Pleasure as to talk of himself, which sweet Liberty I am now enjoying -- This
Pleasure none but Authors as vain as myself can conceive. -- But to my Story.

However little worth Notice the Actions of a Schoolboy may seem, yet as they
act on the same Motives as Men, their Consequences are worth observing, because
it is some Kind of Satisfaction to hehold in what Degree the Dawn of a Genius
first appeared. For this Reason Mr. Colley Cibber Vide Apology, p. 20.
tells you, that at School he made an Oration on King Charles the II 's Death,
when all the Boys in his Form, out of Modesty, thought such a Performance above
his Capacity, and was laughed at, and jeered, and ha^ed as a pragmatical
Bastard: For this Reason he acquaints you, that with the least Restraint to
Modesty, he did what would have frightened a Boy of a meek Spirit from
attempting. -- He made an English Ode on King James's Coronation, and made it
in half an Hour. -- "The very Word Ode, then adds he, makes you smile, and so
it does me, not only because it still makes so many poor Devils turn Wits upon
it, but from a more agreeable Motive; from a Reflection that for half a Century
afterward I should be called upon twice a Year, by my Post, to make the same
Kind of Oblations."... Here the Reader sees, in the Puris Naturalibus, that
Dawn of Genius which bashful Modesty could never restrain from writing, and who
still makes such Odes which all the poor Devils of Wits cannot put him out of
Conceit of.... But to myself....

I cannot say that among my School-Fellows I made my great Figure, or raised
their Envy by any learned Compositions; yet, I know not how it was, I had then
an innate Kind of Propensity to Scribbling; and without any partial Flattery to
myself, I can affirm I chose, or rather accidentally struck into one Species of
Writing, in which I was not only then without an Equal, but have remained so
ever since.

Here, perhaps, I may again seem vain! But if the Facts are true, how can I
help it? If I have a tolerable Feature, will not that as much belong to my
Picture as my Imperfection? In a Word, the Story is this.

While I was at Winchester, there came some Prize-Fighters from the Bear-Garden
at London; and as I was always fond of Heroes and martial Deeds, I introduced
myself into the Company of these Knight-Errants of the Blade: It happened that
however brave the Heroes were, they were not very learned: In truth they could
neither write nor read. It was on this Occasion that they desired me being a
better Scholard, (Prizefighters Language) to pen their Challenges, which they
instructed me to indite...... Here I gave the first Demonstration of my Parts;
for having been used at London to read Playhouse Bills, and hear Tragedies, my
Father being Master of a Playhouse, I wrote their Bills of Challenge with such
Art, and expressed the Heroes Thoughts in such magnanimous Phraze, that they
alarmed the Soul of the Reader, and roused up a greater Desire for a
Gladiatorial Spectacle than all the Drums in Christondom..... These Challenges
of my inditing had wonderful Success; the People were amazed at the swelling
Pompousness of the Heroes Language, and consequently imagined that those who
were terribly courageous with their Pen, must be very Lions at the Sword: But
alas! it is one Thing Scribere, and another Agere: Their Valor did not near
equal the Nobleness of my Description; for the Battle they fought was a sham
one..... However, they returned their grateful Acknowledgments to me, and I was
Author of all their Challenges, which, with much Art, I diversified during
their whole Stay.

Well says some grave Annotator, who has not heard some private Anecdotes of my
Life, what do you infer from this Tale?.... Hear another, and take the
Inference of them both together..... Some Space of Time had elapsed since my
Heroes of the Blade left Winchester, when a Company of Hireling Actors arrived.
I soon made myself known to them, and was accordingly admitted to their
Rehearsals: One Morning I casually took up a Paper, which was a written Bill of
the Performance they were to exhibit in the Evening. I immediately found there
was something deficient, or at least something that might be altered to raise
the Expectation of the Populace, and bring a better Audience to the House: I
communicated my Thoughts very freely to the Master of the Company, and showed
such an uncommon Genius for writing and composing a Playhouse Bill, that, with
a complaisant Bow, he entreated me to write theirs. I complied with his
Request, and wrote them in such a promissory Way, (a Way which has been since
called Puffing) that they engrossed the Attention of the Town, and by an
attractive Quality, brought them several good Audiences.... I cannot pass by
one Thing; the Master of the Company, and his Roxana, were of an ambitious
Spirit, to indulge which, I ordered their Names to be printed six Times as
large as any of the Rest of the Performers: An Article of Stage-Vanity, which I
have since most frequently practiced with much Glee of Heart and
Pomp-Magnificent.

Now to apply these Stories: from such small Beginnings, my Genius soared to an
unequal Height; and I have had, for this Species of writing, no one hardy
enough to become my Competitor in Fame. With a pleasant Recordation of Mind I
think what Praises were bestowed on the Advertisements, and the Bills of the
Bear-Garden, while I had, for some Years, the Honor of writing them: They were
attributed to my Pen, and the most partial Witling that ever pretended to be
arch upon me, would allow that in this I was inimitable.... I shall not mention
what Degree of Excellence I have arrived to in Theatrical Bills, and
Advertisements, and Puffs, and Paragraphs: My Modesty will not suffer me to
give to Posterity, in these Memoirs, what the present Age says of them: Be it
enough, that there is that Something in them which no one can hit but myself.

From what I have mentioned, I would observe this; that wherever there is Merit
there is a heavy Tax laid on it; Envy and Malice will demand a considerable
Share of the Praise which is due to you: However great my Success has been in
the Species of Writing, I have described above, yet it has raised me many
Enemies; Persons who cannot bear to see any shining Parts in another, without
endeavoring, by a Cloud of intervening Darkness, to eclipse them. The little
Genius that I have, and which hereditarily descends to me from a paternal
Source of Wit, has often occasioned me, in the very Springtime of my Life, to
become the But of witless Censure and Invective; and the same Reason makes me
frequently the Object of Raillery in public Coffee-houses and public News
Papers. But as the greater Poll of Mankind would rather vote for Censure than
Commendation; Satire has a thousand Readers where Panegyric has one; therefore
when I see my Name, or Characteristick for my Name, in a Journal or Pamphlet, I
look on it as an Artifice of the Author to get a Dinner: He considers that my
Face and Name are more known than many thousands of more Consequence in the
Kingdom; that therefore, right or wrong, a Lick at poor THE', or the Young
Captain, or Ancient Pistol, or by what other Name soever they please, to
dignify and distinguish me, will be a sure Bait ad captandum Vulgus, to catch
little Readers, and gratify the Unlearned.... In almost these very Words the
Laureat Apologist makes his Complaint, on being satiriz'd with his Name at
length by Mr. Pope.... And I must add, that as Mr. Pope (for let him be as
great a Satyrist as he will I am not afraid to speak out) for the Sake of the
Pence, satyriz'd the inculpable Mr. C. Cibber. It was for that Reason, and that
Reason only, that Mr. Cibber's Son must be mentioned in his Rhymes.... What
else could provoke him to say,

-- Shall Cibber's Son without Rebuke,
Outswear a Lord? --
Pope's Imitation of Horace. -- Well they may say what they will of the
Cibbers, but it must be a Proof they have something very singularly exquisite
in their Ways and Manners, when their very Names carry a Joke in them. -- But
this Detraction of these Retailers of Wit is most admirably compared to Colley
Cibber's Life, p. 25.
Dung "thrown upon a Meadow, though it may at first seem to deform the
Prospect, in a little Time it will disappear of it self, and leave an
involuntary Crop of Praise behind it."To cope with such Antagonists would be
ridiculous; for as the same Author wittily says, "Would my bearing ill Language
from a Chimney-sweeper do me less Harm, than it would be to box him, though I
was sure to beat him."

As no Wit or Criticism can make me worse than I am, no serious Reply I can
offer will make me better. I have indeed sometimes been induced to give public
Answers, and public Appeals; but I think, in my own Judgment, and by
experimental Knowledge, that such a Proceeding is wrong: It is more eligible to
be severely strict to the Principle laid down by Mr. Cibber sen. which is to
join in the Laugh against myself, and honestly say of myself all may be said
against me. What he says on writing an Apology for his Life Vide Motto.
, is the Motto to mine; nor can I add any Thought of my own to so just and
impartial a Description. -- It may be said, that this being before Hand with
the Wits, is all Affectation in me, and my giving myself Airs of showing myself
my Father's own Son, is too true to make a Jest of. -- He quotes a Line on such
an Occasion, C. Cibber's Life, p. 27.
Cinna (or Cibber) Vide^^ Pauper vult, and est Pauper.

"When humble Cinna cries, -- I Am poor and low,
"Y^u may believe him -- He is really so.
I shall give the Latin Line a different Turn.

The Cibbers both themselves dull Rogues declare,
But what they say in Jest, in Truth they are.
Yet after all, what can all the Squirts and Popguns of Jest and Raillery avail
against the sevenfold Shield of Confidence and Contempt?

My Soul is like an ample Shield,
Can take in All, and Verge enough for more.
Who can make me more ridiculous than Nature has made me? If then, Sir Critic,
you attack this Apology to expose me, take Care you don't expose yourself; if
you write to snew your Parts, and Genius, and all that; why, you are as errant
a Fool and Coxcomb as me Ditto.
; "But perhaps you may want Bread: If that be the Case, even go to Dinner in
God's Name; whatever you intend me as a Disfavour, will fly back into your own
Face, as it happens to Children who squirt at their Play-fellows against the
Wind."

When a Person of any Spirits and Genius once gets into a Differtation on
himself, he is a good while before he can get to the End of the Chapter; the
pleasant Subject steals imperceptibly upon him, nor ever thinks he, while he is
not weary of writing, any one else may be weary of reading: I was saying to
show a Contempt for low Wit, and to laugh at it yourself was the readiest Way
to take the off the Laugh. -- Now, Reader, if you are not tired, I Will tell you
a Story. -- If you are, -- lay aside the Book, and come again when you have a
better Appetite.

In that Year when the Stage fell into great Commotions, and the Drury Lane
Company asserting the glorious Cause of Liberty and Property, made a Stand
against the Oppressions in the Patentees. In that memorable Year when the
Theatric Dominions fell in labor of a Revolution, under the Conduct of myself,
that Revolt gave occasion to several Pieces of Wit and satirical Flirts at the
Conductor of the Enterprise. I was attacked, as my Father had been before me,
in the public Papers and Journals; and the burlesque Character of Pistol was
attributed to me as a real one. Out came a Print of Jack Laquerres,
representing, in most vile designing, this Expedition of ours, under the name
of the Stage Mutiny; in which, gentle Reader, your humble Servant, in the
Pistol Character, was the principal Figure. This I laughed at, knowing it only
a proper Embellishment for one of these necessary Structures to which Persons
only out of Necessity repair. -- But now comes the grand Attack; a Summer
Company was at this Juncture performing at Covent Garden Theater; and our
Transactions, and my Character, were thought worthy to be represented on the
Stage. Accordingly a young Spark, who was just come from Trinity College at
Cambridge, to set up for an Author in Town, and who had just before wrote a
Farce, called the Mock-Lawyer, thought this a proper Time to exercise his
Genius. To work he went, and Pistol was to be his Hero: A Farce was wrote, and
performed, and the Bent of it was to ridicule poor me: Tone of Elocution, my
buskin Tread, my Elevation of Countenance, my Dignity of Gesture, and
expressive Rotation of Eye Balls: In short, all my Manner was burlesqu'd, and a
mock Pomp of Words, which were a Parody of Tragedy Speeches, and Pistol's
Bombast run through the Character. -- This I will say, the Thing was so well
timed, and the Person who mimick'd me did it so well, that it succeeded far
beyond any the least intrinsic Merit that was in it. -- But where am I again
digressing? -- How do you think I behaved on this Occasion? I knew if there was
any Thing smart upon me the Audience would very readily laugh at it, and indeed
at a Rehearsal I thought some Things smart enough. -- What then did I, but
placed myself in one of the Side-boxes, in the full Front of the House, and was
resolved, like Cibber's self, 'Sblood to stand them all. --
Epilogue to Nonjuror. Well, the Scene opened, and on Pistol's appearing there
was a thundering Clap, and all the Eyes in the House converted on me; every
Sentence that hit at me, the Joke was heightened by looking at me, who laughed
as much at them, and the Poverty of the Author's Wit, as the Author or the
Audience could possibly do at me, but seemed only to join the Chorus, and laugh
for mere good Humor. Toward the last Scene the Author had introduced a Sale
of theatric Goods, and one of the Properties put up to be disposed of, -- was
APOLLO 's cracked Harp, and withered Crown of Bays. -- Upon which a Character
on the Stage replied, -- Oh! Pray lay that aside for Mr. Pistol, he will claim
that by hereditary Right. -- This immediately put the whole House in a Roar, --
and Encore, Encore, was all the Cry. -- Here the whole Pit stood up and looked
at me. -- I joined the laughing Encore, and in the Repetition of the low
Witticism, clapped heartily. -- This joining with the Humor of the Multitude,
could give them no Pleasure; and what signifies being a little severe on one's
Self, to prevent other People's being so. -- This was my Way of Thinking:

Insuevit Pater optimus hoc me. This Art profound, this happy Thought,
My good, my modest Father taught.
I am always proud to show in what Steps I trod: Read the next quoted Paragraph.

" C. Cibber's Apology, p. 28.
In the Year 1730 there were many Authors, whose Merit wanted nothing but
Interest to recommend them to the vacant laurel, and who took it ill to see it
conferred on a Comedian, insomuch that they were resolved at least to show
Specimens of their superior Pretensions; and accordingly enlivened the public
Papers with ingenious Epigrams, and satirical Flirts at the unworthy Successor.
These Papers my Friends put into my Hands with a wicked Smile, and desired me
to read them fairly in Company. This was a Challenge I never declined, and to
do my doubty Antagonists Justice, I always read them with as much impartial
Spirit as if I had writ them myself: While I was thus beset on all Sides, out
steps a poetical Knight Errant to my Assistance, who was hardy enough to
publish some compassionate Stanza's in my Favor. These, you may be sure, the
Raillery of my Friends could say I had written to myself. To deny it I knew
would have confirmed their Suspicion: I therefore told them since it gave them
such Joy to believe them my own, I would do my best to make the whole Town
think so too. -- As the Odness of this Reply was, I knew, what would not be
easily comprehended, I desired them to have a Day's Patience, and I would print
an Explanation to it. To conclude, in two Days after I sent this Letter, with
some doggerel Rhimes at the Bottom."

To the Author of the Whitehall-Evening-Post.
SIR,
THE Verses to the Laureat in yours of Saturday last, have occasioned the
following Reply, which I hope you will give a Place in your next, to show we can
be quick as well as smart, upon a proper Occasion: And as I think it the lowest
Mark of a Scoundrel to make bold with any Man's Character in Print, without
subscribing the true Name of the Author; I therefore desire, if the Laureat is
concerned enough to ask the Question, that you will tell him my Name, and where
I live; till then I beg Leave to be known by no other Name than that of,

Your Servant, FRANCIS FAIRPLAY.
Monday, January 11, 1730.

These were the Verses.

I.
Ah! Hah! Sir Coll. Is that thy Way,
Thy own dull Praise to write?
And would thou stand so sure a Lay?
No, that is too stale a Bite.
II.
Nature and Art in thee combine,
Thy Talents here excel;
All shining Brass thou do outshine,
To play the Cheat so well.
III.
Who sees thee in Iago's Part,
But thinks thee such a Rogue,
And is not glad, with all his Heart,
To hang so sad a Dog.
IV.
When Bays thou play'st, thyself thou art
For that by Nature fit,
No Blockhead better suits the Part
Than such a Coxcomb Wit.
V.
In Wronghead too thy Brains we see,
Who might do well at Plough;
As fit for Parliament was He,
As for the Laurel Thou.
VI.
Bring thy protected Verse from Court,
And try it on the Stage,
There it will make much better Sport,
And set the Town in Rage.
VII.
There Beaux and Wits, and Cits and Smarts.
Where Hissing's not uncivil,
Will show their Parts to thy Deserts,
And send it to the Devil.
VIII.
But Ah! in vain against thee we write,
In vain thy Verse we maul!
Our sharpest Satire's thy Delight,
For -- Blood! thou wilt stand them all.
IX.
Thunder, it is said, the Laurel spares,
Naught but thy Brows could blast it;
And yet, -- Oh cursed provoking Stars!
Thy Comfort is, thou have it.
These doggrel Verses I have quoted with the same Design as the Laureat
published them in his Apology, to show you his particular Cast of Temper, and
consequently from what Fountain I have derived mine. I cannot lose this
Opportunity of mentioning another Analogy between us: As in our Tempers there
is a peculiar Similitude, so there is in our Faculties in Writing. C. Cilber's
Life, p. 31, 32.
He has too bold a Disregard for that Correctness which others set so just a
Value on;... and when he speaks any Thing that delights him he finds it
difficult to keep his Words within the Bounds of common Sense..... Even when he
writes, the same Failing gets the better of him, and Instances that well-known
Expression of his, That Mrs. Oldfield out-did her usual Outdoings...... Now
have not I in all my Writings, shown a thorough Disregard for pedant
Correctness: In all my Speeches on the Stage, have not I, in the fullness of my
Heart, broke through all Bounds of Common Sense?... Yet I must confess, though
I have given many flat Writers Occasion to be brisk upon my general Style, I
was never so floridly happy as to make one single Expression a Standard Jest
for ten Years together: I never hit on a Verb with so pleasant an Accusative
after it, as could have such an Effect Vide p. 32.
; for wherever the Verb OUT DO could be brought in, the pleasant Accusative OUT
DOING was sure to follow it; and, Deries repitita placeret, says the
Apologist..... It has been said of this very Sentence, that the pleasant
Accusative Outdoing is Nonsense, as it is not Grammar..... But pray let me ask
such Pedants, Is there not a Licentia of a Quidlibet Audendi, which all great
Genius's claim?... Let cold ph^^^matic Writers, like dull Pack-horses, keep to
the be^^en Path; Men of Fire and Spirit, like Nags that have Blood in their
Veins, will bounce out of the Road, start into full Speed, and show their
Mettle. -- Again: -- Is it not a Characteristick of Excellence to have a Style
so peculiarly singular, that in the reading half a Page you are sure of the
Author? Has not the great B^ntley gone on in this Principle, in all his most
erudite Castigations? -- Ca^^hing the Style of the Authors, has he not said of
Horace and Ter^nce, -- Sic scripsi^. -- Thus he wrote? -- Has he not said, --
Aut sic scripsisse debuit. -- Or so he should have wrote? -- Has he not boldly
asserted. -- Sic lege meo periculo. -- Read thus at my Peril? -- The same
Method he has taken with Milton. -- The amount of all this is, if a singular
Style is a Demonstration of a Genius, I will venture, without any Infringement
on Modesty, to affirm that the Cibberian Style is a Proof of very remarkable
Talents; and I know not but some future Critic will quote, that to hit on a
pleasant Verb, followed by a pleasant Accus^tive, is a Mark of Excellence: Nor
am I without Hopes, but that there are some rhetorical Boldnesses in my
Compontions, which may be admired by late Posterity. --

Now the Reader may think this is all said with Seriosity. -- No, Mr. Cibber,
sen. confesses that to outdo an Outdoing is a vile Jingle; nor can I deny that
there may be some few Expressions in my Writings which may perhaps raise a
Smile. -- But what then; it is our Happiness, though we write such Things
seriously, we can laugh at them jocosely, -- when others begin to laugh; and if
other good Writers cannot do the same, they want that good Sense which some
other People may be endowed with. -- If you write well, your C. Cibber's Life,
p. 33.
Work wi^^ go without Crutches; or would I Vide Ditto.
publicly put every A^gument to Death that appears against me. This were to be
an Executioner instead of a Gentleman. Praise is a v^luntary Tax paid by the
Public; they may choose whether they will pay it or not; but in the End Merit
will compel them to it.

To conclude, the Substance of all that I have said, might as well been said at
first, in two Lines of a great Author, and which, in a great Character I have
often spoke with Applause.

Two Lines in the Character of Pistol in Henry the 4th.
Si fortuna me tormento,
Sperato me contento.
CHAP. III.
The Author's several Chances for the Church, the Court, and the Army. --
Designed for the University. -- Took to the Stage. -- Political Thoughts, with
many others, which can be only known by the Reader's Perusal, etc. etc. etc.

AFTER the long Digression which I made in the last Chapter, and the Truant
which I have so long played from School, I am at a Loss for an Apology to
address the Reader: I left myself at Winchester School, not making the greatest
Eclat in Classical, Grammatical, and such Learning, yet distinguishing myself
by some puerile Excellencies: My Father, to be sure, had some great
Designations of me, of being a Bishop, or perhaps an Archbishop, he intending
me for the Church, as he himself had been intended. -- But to neither of us. --
Sic Dii Voluere. -- To introduce my Story in this third Chapter, I must quote
the Introduction to his. --

" Vide C. Cibber's Life p. 34.
I am now come to that Crisis of my Life when Fortune seemed to be at a Loss
what she should do with me: H^^ she favored my Father's first Designation of
me, he ^ight then perhaps have had as sanguine Hopes of my being a Bishop, as I
afterward conceived of being a General: Nay, I had a third Chance, of becoming
an Underpropper of the State. How I came to be none of these, the Sequel will
inform you."

My Father, as I before himed, had conceived great Designations of me; but
there was a Concatenation of Things, which occasioned me to follow the same
Tract which he had trod in before. I was not elected into Winchester College:
All the Reasons may not be altogether so proper to repeat: I unfortunately
mistook the Sense of a Line in Virgil: NISUS amore pio pueri, etc. However to
this Day I cannot think the making a false Comment on a Passage in a Heathen
Author, should be a Disqualification for Ecclesiastic Preferment. -- Be that
however as it will, it was, I think, about the Year 1720, when a Change of
Ministry was happening at London, and the Right Honorable Sir R -- W -- was
about to make that illustrious Figure in Europe, which we have since seen;
while the Nation was in Labor of such a Production, my Affairs also were in
Labor of some Event, when I happened to be sent up to London to my Father, to
be turned loose into the Bustle of the World. -- At this Juncture you cannot
but observe that the Fate of Sir R. W. and T. C. were at the same Time upon the
Anvil: In what shape they would afterward appear was only Guess-work: What
Characters we have since attained, all Europe knows in Regard to Him, all
Britain in Regard to Me.

But a still more remarkable Crisis happened to Mr. Colley Cibber, on his
Return from being a Candidate for Winchester College: Take his own Story. --
"The Nation now fell in Labor of the Revolution: The Prince of Orange was
landed in the West; my Father was in Arms under the Duke of Devonshire, but I
jumped into his Saddle, and he returned to Chatsworth, where he was at Work. At
this Crisis King James and the Prince of Orange, and that of so minute a Being
as myself, were at once upon the Anvil. In what Shape they would severally come
out, though a good Guess might be made, was not then demonstrable to the
deepest Foresight. -- But, adds he, if one Month sooner I had been at the
University, who knows but by this Time, that purer Fountain might have washed
my Imperfections into a Capacity of writing (instead of Plays and Annual Odes)
Sermons, and pastoral Letters."

And who knows, if I had attached myself to the Order of Priesthood, what a
Figure I might by this Time have made: I might, instead of writing Country
Correspondents, and Daily Gazetteers, have penned Characters of Queens, and
spoke Speeches from a Reverend Bench in Defense of Prime Ministers.

You must now consider me at a Period of Time which produced such a Change in
public Affairs, which, as I can now judge of them, were of great Consequence
to the Nation. When I think of this Era, being famous for a Change, that made
Sir R. Prime Minister; I naturally digress on Prime Ministers, and the Changes
they are wished to meet with. C. Cibber's Lise, p. 38.
"While great Men want great Posts, the Nation will never want seeming
Patriots; and no Ministers but will be heartily railed at. But I cannot forbear
thinking that they who have been longest railed at, must from that Circumstance
show in some Sort the Proof of a Capacity." If this Circumstance of being long
railed at is an undubitable Characteristick of a wise and able Minister, the
Right Honorable Gentleman, whose Crisis of Fortune was depending at the same
Time, as mine has been, the most able and wise Minister that ever managed the
Affairs of this Nation. Notwithstanding this Proof of Capacity, he and his
Measures have been talked of much in the same Manner as Mr. C. Cibber
politically remarks People did of King James and his Conduct. " C. Cibber's
Life, p. 39.
It is incredible (says that Historian) with what Freedom and Contempt the
common People in the open Streets talked of his wild Measures, yet we of the
Vulgar had no farther Notion of any Remedy for this Evil, than a satisfied
Presumption that our Numbers were too great to be mastered by his mere Will and
Pleasure; that though he might be too hard for our Laws, yet he could never get
the better of our Nature; and to drive all England into Slavery, he would find
would be teaching an old Lion to dance."

There are, I say, Men malecontent and weak enough to talk in this Manner of
Sir R -- and (to use the above el^g^nt and apt Simile) who think themselves too
old Lions to be taught to dance. -- But I don't see how they can help it; for,
to compare this great Man to what he has never yet been compared, he is like
another ORPHEUS, who can make these old Lions move to the Tun^ he plays, and
they must dance, while he (using another of the Laureat's Expressions) is the
Fiddle of the Nation.

These are a few of my political Notions, by which you may see what a Sort of a
Party-Man I am; but if talking of the Minister has drawn me at any Time ever so
far out of my Depth, I still flatter myself I have kept a simple, honest Head
above Water. And it is a solid Comfort, how insignificant soever I may seem,
that I have made One among many others, who have wrote Papers and Pamphlets, to
prove the happy Effects of this present Administration. -- Thus may I be said
to have become, in Reality, an Underpropper of the State, which my Father, not
getting a Place in the Vide C. Cibber's Life.
Secretary's Office, never arrived at.

But to recover the Clue of my History: I was now come from Winchester to
London, to turn out into the Bus^le of the World, in which, according to my
Rank of Life, I have made more Bustle than any one before me: My Father did not
know well what to do with me; for I had so remarkable a Genius, that I was fit
for any Thing, and yet fit for nothing. In this Vacancy of his Resolution,
being a forward Youth, I wanted to know something of the World, which Knowledge
I soon attained, and began to run into the hey-day Gallantries of a Man of
Mode: In short, I thought myself a very pretty Fellow. The clear Emannations of
Beauty struck me into a Regard for the fair Sex, that had something softer than
profound Respect. I could not resist its Power, which is efficacious on all;
for Beauty, like the Sun, shines into equal Warmth, the Peasant and the
Courtier: So good a Taste my first hopeful Entrance into Manhood set out with.
-- Vide Apology, p. 42.
My Father had the same Kind of Heart, which was ready to be shone into Warmth,
and he handsomely The same Page.
apologizes, that as he was waiting at Table on the present Duchess Dowager of
Marlborough, in the Year of the Revolution, these two Words, Litto, for this
Relation and these Phrases.
Some Wine and Water; -- These two Words only, that very single Sound, struck
upon his Senses, which were collected into his Eyes, by the clear Emanation of
her Beauty. -- This gay Spirit of mine gave some Uneasiness to my good Mother,
but my Father laughed at it, as a pleasing Recordation of himself: To hear of
some of my youthful Sallies, which were the Effects of great Spirits, and into
which none but your great Genii run; to see an honest Boldness, or modest
Assurance in Countenance and Speech, which none but Men conscious of Merit
have. This must give him a pleasing Recordation of Mind; then he might truly
cry out with Ecstasy, --

Motto to Cibber's Life.
"Hoc est
"Vivere bis, vita piss priore frui.
Which he since translates thus;

"When Years no more of active Life retain,
"It Is Youth renew' a to laugh 'em over again.
But which I translate, for I can translate as well as he, thus:

It Is to live twice, to see the Life you led
Again lived over by the SON you bred.
Or thus:

'Twas to live twice, -- Twice the same Acts enjoy,
To see the same still practiced by his Boy.
After this Interval of Idleness, some Views of Life were set before my Eyes,
as the Army or the City. The Army I liked tolerably; nay, so well, that I
partly took upon myself, and was partly complimented by my Companions, with the
News of Captain. -- And it is with some Pleasure I hear myself called the young
Captain to this Day. But a small Commission, however more honorable it might
seem, I began to know was not so profitable as the Profession of an Actor: And
though my Father, at the Revolution, had Thoughts of being a General-Officer,
Things were now changed; and I have often blessed my Stars for my preferring
the Theater to the Camp; on that I have been a Hero, strutted with a golden
Trun^h^on, nodded Command to Roman Legions, and old British Bands. In the Army
I might have still trail'd a Lieutenant's Half-pike, and in some Country
Quarters lived inglorious; for Years pacific rolled revolving round; the
Spirit-stirring Drum, the Earpiercing Fife, all Pride, Pomp, Circumstance of
glorious War have longed been lo^t in Peace, which long Farewell have told the
Soldier's Occupation lost. -- 'Twas ^n the S^age alone I promised myself much
Pleasure, much Income, and much Reputation: -- Nor is a ^heatric Profession so
contemptible as some affect to think. "Was a little foolish Prejudice laid
aside, C. Cibber's Life, p. 46.
Mr. C. Cibb^r truly says, that many a well-born younger Brothe^, and many a
Beauty of low Fortune would gladly have adorned the Theater, who, by their not
being able to brook such Dishonor to their Birth, have passed away Lives
decently unheeded and forgotten." In short, it is better to be this or that on
the Stage, so you get handsomely by it, than live in any Degree of Ignominy or
not Ignominy off from it; that is, there is no Ignominy on the Stage, or, if
you will, the Stage is above Ignominy.

See this Period: "I rememember (says Mr. Cibber C. Cibber's Life, p. 46.
) a Lady with a real Title, whose female Indiscretions had occasioned her
Family to abandon her, being willing to make an honest Penny of what Beauty she
had left, desired to be admitted an Actress: Her Relations opposed it for
Reasons easy to be guessed at: It was not our Interest to make an honorable
Family our Enemies, and she was refused. Here you find her honest Endeavor to
get Bread from the Stage, (i. e. to make an honest Penny of her Beauty) was
looked on as an additional Scandal to her former Dishonor; so that I am
afraid, had the Lady sold Patches and Pomatum in a Band-Box from Door to Door,
she might have starved with less Infamy, than relieved her Necessity by being
famous on the Stage." -- In short, it is no Ignominy to be la Damoiselle de
Plasir in a Theater. --

But notwithstanding all I have said, and my Father before me, the Profession
of a Player still continues, as by his Memoirs I find it has always done, to be
held by many Gentlemen and People of Quality in no great Esteem; and many
outrageous Insults have been committed by Persons, who would be thought
Gentlemen, on Actors, whom they dared not have used so in any other Place but a
Theater. But these Insulters of Audiences, as well as Players, are not to be
ruled, there is no contending with them; they are all Patriots, Liberty and
Property Men, who roar out to defend their Magna Charta, of doing what they
will in a Theater. This Usage of Players, Mr. Cibber says, "keeps young People
of Sense from coming on the Stage; they fear entering into a Society, whose
Institution if not abused, is an excellent School of Morality: But alas! as
Shakspear says:

"Where Is that Place where into sometimes
"Foul Things intrude not?
And really the Abuse of the Stage by the Actors, be it as great as it will, by
acting indiscreetly in their private Lives, it is not greater than the Abuse
that those noisy Rioters make of it by their public Disturbances: I cannot
apprehend what rational Authority this Society for the Reformation of
theatrical Manners can plead, to call an Actor to an Account on the Stage for
what he has done off it: Would any Judge pay less Regard for a Counsellor's
Argument at the Bar, because he may be an indiscreet, or even a bad Man at
home? -- But it is otherwise at our theatric Bar of Judgment; our Judges are
also Jury, and likewise Executioners; and though you appear there not as your
own Person, they make you the Culprit, put you immediately on your Trial, --
and G -- d send you a good Deliverance. -- But I may say what I will against
thse unjust, unlimited Insults, yet the Player who falls under such a Caprice
of public Displeasure, must be left adrift, and ride out the Storm as well as
he is able.

I would here speak of some Storms which poor I have been adrift in, and which
I have out-rode by that admirable Stage Apothegm, 'Sblood I Will stand you all.
But that Anecdote will fall under my Pen in a subsequent Chapter: To conclude
this; the View of rising some Time or other to live in that modish Affluence,
jovial Gaiety, and seeming Importance, in which my Father and some others I saw
lived, was the flattering Light by which I steered my Course: Such Temptations
were too strong for so warm a Vanity as mine to resist; on the Stage I came,
being entered, according to my Merit, at a very low Salary; and now, gentle and
most candid Reader, your Curiosity is from thence to expect a farther Account
of me.

CHAP. IV.
The Author follows Mr. Colley Cibber's Method of History. -- A short History
of the Stage and Actors, from the Restoration to the Revolution. -- Their
Characters. -- Why given, etc.

AS I have professed myself an humble Imitator of Mr. C. Cibber's peculiar
Manner of historical Narrations, I hope the Reader will not think frequent
Digressions from my own Actions and Life, any Way inconsistent; for though I
have only promised an Account of the material Occurrences of the Theater during
my own Time, yet a short History of the Theater, from the Restoration to the
Revolution, and from thence to the present Year 1740, may be worth more Notice
than giving the Public an Account of my youthful Adventures, for which, little
Apology, I am afraid, can be made. As in an Account of this Nature I cannot
make use of my own Knowledge and Judgment, I must claim the Privilege of all
Historians, of having Recourse to those Authors who have treated on the Subject
before: Nor shall I omit that Part, which modern History is much founded on,
Oral Tradition: To these I shall add such Intelligence as I could collate from
such ancient Records as still remain in the Archives of the Theater. But though
I may severally use all these Aids, the chief Support which I shall rely on,
will be the Memoirs which Mr. C. Cibber has, with great Authenticity and
Judgment, collected; and I shall also give a faithful Abstract of his
Theatrical Characters, because they will lead you into a clearer View of some
modern ones, which I myself, at a due Time and Place, shall venture to
pourtray: -- Before I enter on this Undertaking, I must premise, that many are
the inimitable Beauties in Style, in Thought, and Manner of the great
apologeti^al Original, which my Compendium will not allow me to introduce;
however the Reader may depend, my Abstract from it shall be so connected, that
I will give him the Quinta pars sui Nectaris. The very Quintessence of his
NECTAR. And this Chapter shall be, as it were, Ilias in Nuce, -- The Iliad in a
Nutshell. -- Without farther Preface or Apology.

The Civil War which was begun between King Charles the First, in Defense of
his Prerogative, and his People, in Defense of their Freedom, introduced, at
Length, all the Effects of Anarchy: Every Thing that was truly good and
virtuous was no longer in Esteem: Those pions Schools of Morality, the
Playh^uses, were no longer suffered; the Stage fell with Monarchy, and the
Peers of the Land with the Actors of the Theater: But as it fell with Monarchy,
it was with Monarchy restored; for at King Charles the 2d's Restoration, two
Patents were granted, one to Sir William D'avenant, and the other to Henry
Killegrew, Esquire according to Mr. Cibber's Account, or to Mr. Thomas Killegrew,
according to the Relation of that Theatric Annalist, John Downs, the old
Prompter. The Company under Sir William D'avenant, says Mr. Cibber, were called
the King's Servants, and acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane; the other
the Duke's Company, who acted at the Duke's Theater in Dorset Garden: -- But
Mr. Downs wrote an Account of the Stage during his own Time, called, Ros^ius
Anglicanus.
Downs says, "that on the Restoration, the scattered Remnant of six
Playhouses, which subsisted in King Charles the First's Time, upon the
Restoration framed a Company, and acted again at the Bull Playhouse, built them
a new Theater in Gibbon's Tennis-Court in Clare-Market, in which two Places
they continued acting all 1660, 1661, 1662, and Part of 1663. In this Time they
built them a new Theater in Drury Lane, Mr. Thomas Killegrew gaining a Patent
from the King, in order to create them the King's Servants, and from that Time
they called themselves, his Majesty's Company of Comedians in Drury Lane.

As to the Company acting under Sir William D'avenant, Downs gives this
particular Account of its first Rise and going to Dorset-Garden.

"In the Year one thousand six hundred and fiftynine General Monk marching then
his Army out of Scotland to London, Mr. Rhodes, a Bookseller, being Wardrobe
Keeper formerly, as I am informed, to King Charles the First's Company of
Comedians in Black-Fryars, geting a License from the then governing State,
fitted up a House for acting, called the Cookpit, in Drury Lane, and in a short
Time completed his Company.

In this Interim, Sir William D'avenant gained a Patent from the King, and
opened a House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, with new Scenes and Decorations, being
the first that were ever introduced into England; where they continued to act
till the Year 1671, when they opened a new Theater in Dorset-Garden, and
removed from Lincolns-Inn-Fields thither."

The Reader cannot but observe some Difference in these two great Historians;
to show my faithful Attachment to Truth I have given both Accounts; and, gentle
Reader,

Utrum* Horum Mavis Accipe. Of the King's Company, about ten were put on the
Royal Household Establishment, having each ten Yards of scarlet Cloth, with a
proper Quantity of Lace allowed them for Liveries; and in the Warrants from the
Lord Chamberlain they were styled, Gentlemen of the Great Chamber.

Both these Companies were in high Estimation; the long Interdiction of Plays
had given fresh Appe^^te to such Representations; besides, before now no
Actresses had been seen on the Stage. The Characters of Women, in Theaters,
were performed by Boys, or young Men of the most effeminate Aspect: And what
Grace, or Master-Stro^es of Action can we conceive such ungain H^ydens to have
been capable of? These two Theaters had another advantageous Rule, made by
themselves, which was, that no Play acted at one House should ever be attempted
at the other: This prevented a Sa^iety of the same Plays, and kept up the
Pleasure which might otherwise grow languid. -- For what Pleasure is not
languid to Satiety? -- The Neglect which has been had, for several Years past,
to this Management, Mr. C. Cibber thinks is the Occasion of the Degradation of
the present Theaters, by the Entertainments they exhibit; " C. Cibber's Life,
p. 56.
for when Plays are hackney'd out to the common People indifferently at any
Theater, the best Actors will soon feel the Town h^s enough of them:" Hence he
proves a Plu^al^^y of Playhouses detrimental to the Stage, unless a
proportionable Number of good Authors could rise to give them all different
Employments: "But while good Writers are so scarce, and undaunted Critics so
plenty, I am afraid a good Play and a blazing Star will be equal Rarities: This
indulging the Taste with several Theaters, will amount to the same Variety as
an Oeconomist would show, who would have two P^ldings and two Legs of Mutron
for the same Dinner."

Though this Simile has been inserted in many a Twopenny Jest-Book, yet, as it
is admirably introduced, I have again ventured to quote it. But to resume the
Thread of this History.

"These two excellent Companies were both prosperous for some Time, t^ll their
Variety of Plays began to be exhausted; then of Course the better Actors, which
the King's seem to have been allowed, could not fail of drawing greater
Audiences. Sir William D'avenant, therefore; Master of the Duke's Company,
introduced Music to Action, and a new Species of Plays, called, Dramatick
Opera's." -- I must here observe Mr. Cibber says Sir William was Master of the
Duke's Company, though in a Page before he said they were the King's: This
Inadvertance arises from his not rightly counting ONE, TWO: But he has too bold
a Disregard for Correctness, which others set a Value on: It is with a little
Compunction that I made this Remark, yet,

Amicus SOCRATES, Amicus PLATO, sed magis amica VENTAS. " C. Cibber's Life, p.
^7.
This sensual Supply of Sight and Sound, coming into the weaker Party, they
grew too hard for Sense and simple Nature; for more People can see and hear
than think and judge: This Change of Taste fell heavy on the King's Company;
they had Truth on their Side, and Praise for their Action; but it is cold
Comfort -- Laudatur and Alget. -- Unprofitable Praise can hardly give it a Soup
Maigre. -- In this Rivalship of the two Houses, Mohun and Heart growing old, and
the young Actors impatient to get into their Parts, and intractable, the
Audience likewise falling off at both Houses, the two Companies were united
into one, exclusive of all others, in the Year 1684." or according to Downes's
Chronology, 82. -- This Union, says the Apologist, was however so much in
Favor of the Duke's Company, that Heart left the Stage upon it. -- The old
Prompter says, " Downes's Roscius Anglicanuus.
Upon this Union, Mr. Heart, being the Heart of the Company under Mr.
Killegrew's Patent, never acted more by Reason of his Malady, being afflicted
with the Stone and Gravel, of which he died some time after, having a Salary of
forty Shillings a Week to the Day of his Death."

One Theater was now in Possession of the whole Town, and the united Patentees
imposed their own Terms on the Players: The Actors, who have always as quick a
Sense of Injuries, and as high and glorious a Love of Freedom as any People
whatever, appealed for Redress to the Lord Chamberlain, who was then my Lord
Dorset, who finding their Complaints just, procured from King William, in 1695,
a separate License for Mr. Congreve, Mr. Betterton, Mrs. Barry, Mrs.
Br^^^girdle, and others, to set up a new Company, calling it the New Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields; and they opened it the last Day of April, 1695, with a n^w
Comedy, called, Love for Love.

Mr. Colley Cibber begins his Account of the Actors from his entering upon the
Stage, 1690, which were the Remains of what was called the Duke's Company, but
is quite silent as to the King's Company, whom he allows to have been their
Superiors: I shall, therefore, in this Apology for my Life, be bold enough to
supply that Defect in the Apology for his: It may be said perhaps, "What, Is
this apologizing for your Lives? -- Well, Sir Critic! Suppose we call it so;
What then? But to the Purpose.

The Company acting under Mr. Killegrew consisted of the following Actors and
Actresses:

MEN.
Mr. Theophilus Bird, Mr. Heart, Mr. Mohun, Mr. Lacy, Mr. Burt, Mr. Ca^twright,
Mr. Chun, Mr. Shorterell, Mr. Kynaston, Mr. Wintersell, Mr. Griffin, Mr.
Goodman, Mr. Lyddoll.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Carey, Mrs. Marshall, Mrs. Uphill, Mrs. Knep, Mrs. Hughes.
And sometime after came into this Company Mrs. Bout^ll, Mrs. Ellen Gwin, Mrs.
James, Mrs. Rutter, Mrs. Knight.


These Actors and Actresses were professedly excellent, and who could have been
no Imitators but all Originals, for which Reason it may be much doubted if they
have been since equaled: It is impossible for me to give an Account of their
Perfections after the elaborate Manner Mr. Cibber has of some others who
succeeded them; but if any Regard is to be paid to the Judgment of the
Audi^nces and Authors of their Time, they must have excelled highly in Parts
which we see them cast to in the best Plays of that Time. Heart was the Standard
to which Mountford and Wilks endeavored, and with great Success, to arrive at;
yet are said not thoroughly to attain it. Mohun was formed for an artful
Sterness in Tragedy, and had great Talents in Comedy: He was the original
Ventidius in Mr. Dryden's All for Love, and was eminent for the Volpone of Ben
Johnson. Mrs. Marshall, Mrs. Ellen Gwin, and Mrs. Boutell were equally admired
in Tragedy and Comedy. To give the Reader, who has any Knowledge of Theatric
Performances the best Idea I am able of these Actors, I will transcribe the
Cast of two or three Plays, in which they peculiarly excelled, and which still
continue to be acted on the Stage.

The FOX.
Volpone, Major Mohun. Mosca, Mr. Heart. Corbacchio, Mr. Cartwright. Voltore,
Mr. Shatterell. Corvino Mr. Burt. Sir Politic Wou'dbe, Mr. Lacy. Peregrine,
Mr. Kynaston. Lady Wou'dbe, Mrs. Corey. Celia, Mrs. Marshall.
OTHELLO.
Othello, Mr. Heart. Brabantio, Mr. Cartwright. Cassio, Mr. Burt. Iago, Major
Mohun. Roderigo, Mr. Shatterell. Desdemona, Mrs. Hughes. Emilia, Mrs. Rutter.
Earl of ESSEX.
The Earl of Essex, Mr. Clark. The E. of Southampton, Mr. Griffin, Lord
Burleig^. Major Mo^un. Queen Elizabeth. Mrs. Gwin.
I come now to speak of, in the same transitory Manner Sir William D'avenant's
Company, and of the Persons who composed it. Mr. Rhodes, as I mentioned before,
formed a Company, of which the following Names is a complete List.

MEN.
Mr. Betterton, Sheppy, Lov^il, ^illison, Underhill, Turner, Dix^n, Robert
No^es,
These Six acted WOMEN'S Parts.
Mr. Kynaston, James Nokes, Angel, William Berterton, Mosely, Floyd.
On Sir William D'avenant's getting a Patent from the King, and forming this
odd Band into a more regular Manner, he took in these following Actors:

Mr. Harris, Mr. P^^^e, Mr. Richards, Mr. Blayden, Mr. S^ith, Mr. Sandford, Mr.
Medbourne, Mr. T^u^g, Mr. Norris.
To these he added the following Actresses, the four first of which he boarded
in his own House.

Mrs. D^v^nport, Mrs. Saunderson, Mrs. Gibbs, Mrs. Norris, Mrs. Davies, Mrs.
Long. Mrs. Holden, Mrs. Jennings.
Thus this Company stood in the Year 1662; but having lost several of the
Actors by Death, and some by Love, it was recruited in the Year 1673, by Mr.
Anthony Leigh, Mr. Jevon, Mr. Percival -- and Mr. Williams, who came in a Boy,
and served Mr. H^rris; and Mr. Boman, a Boy likewise: Among the new Women were
Mrs. Barry, Mrs. Currer, Mrs. Butler, and others.

Though I may seem impertinently prolix, yet, by some, this Theatric Chronology
will be thought not unnecessary; and it is, in fact, a proper Introduction to
that Part of Theatrical History, which Mr. C. Cibber has very copio^sly
related, and of which I shall here give a Sort of an Abstract; for this, with
my own Account, will make a perfect Compendium of Stage History. -- Thus he
writes --

"In the Year 1670, when I first came into this Company, the principal Actors
then at the Head of it were,

Of MEN.
Mr. Betterton, Mr. Mountford, Mr. Kynaston, Mr. Sandford, Mr. Nokes, Mr.
Underhill, and Mr. Leigh.
Of WOMEN.
Mrs. Betterton, Mrs. Barry, Mrs. Leigh, Mrs. Butler, Mrs. Mountford, and Mrs.
Bracegirdle.
Betterton was an Actor as Shakespeare was an Author, both without Competitors,
formed for the mutual Assistance, and Illustration of each other's Genius: The
one was born only to speak what the other only knew to write: But to give a
more clear Idea of him: You have seen a Hamlet, perhaps, who, on the first
Appearance of his Father's Spirit, has thrown himself into all the straining
Vociferations requisite to express Rage and Fury, and the House has thundered
with Applause, though the misguided Actor was tearing a Passion into Rags. Now
Betterton threw this Scene into another Light: He opened it with a Pause of
mute Amusement, then rising slowly to a solemn trembling Voice, he made the
Ghost equally terrible to the Spectator as to himself; and in the descriptive
Part of the natural Emotions which the ghastly Vision gave, the Boldness of his
Expostulations were still governed by Decency; manly, but not braving; his
Voice never rising into that seeming Outrage, or wild Defiance of what he
naturally revered.

A farther Excellence Betterton had was, that he could vary his Spirit to the
different Characters he acted: Those wild impatient Starts, that fierce and
flashing Fire which he threw into Hotspur never came from the unruffied Temper
of Brutus, (for I have seen, more than once, a Brutus as warm, as Hotspur.)
When the Betterton Brutus was provoked in his Dispute with Cassius, his Spirit
flew only to his Eye; his steady Look alone supplied that Terror which he
disdained an Intemperance of Voice should rise to. Thus with a settled Dignity
of Contempt, like an unheeding Rock he repelled upon himself the Foam of
Cassius: Perhaps the Words of Shakespeare will better let you into my Meaning.

Must I give Way and Room to your rash Choler?
S^all I be frighted when a Madman stares?
And a little after:

There is no Terror Cassius in your Looks, etc. But with whatever Strength of
Nature we see the Poet show, at once the Philosopher and the Hero, yet the
Image of the Actor's Excellence, unless Language could put Colors into our
Words to paint the Voice with, Et si vis Similem pingere, pinge Sonum,is an
Impossibility.

Besides these Characters, he showed an extraordinary Power in blowing
ALEXANDER into a Blaze of Almi^ation, yet the furious Fustian, and turged Rants
in that Character he was sensible gained a false Applause only; for he thought
no Applause equal to an attentive Silence; that there were many Ways of
deceiving an Audience into a loud one, but to keep them hu^^'d and quiet was an
Applause which only Truth and Merit could arrive at. But if Truth and Merit
were only applauded, how many noisy Actors would shake their Plumes with Shame,
who, from an injudicious Approbation of the Multitude, have strutted and bawled
in the Place of Merit. Betterton had a Voice of that Kind which gave more
Spirit to Terror than to the softer Passions, of more Strength than Melody: The
Rage and Jealousy of Othello became him better than the Sighs and Tenderness of
Castalio; for though in Castalio he only excelled others, in Othello he
excelled himself. The Person of this excellent Actor was suitable to his Voice;
more manly than sweet; not exceeding the middle Stature; inclining to the
Corpulent; of a serious, penetrating Aspect; his Limbs nearer the athletick
than the delicate Proportion; yet, however formed, there rose, from the Harmony
of the Whole, a commanding Mein of Majesty, which the fairer-fac'd Darlings of
his Time ever wanted something to be Masters of. The last Part he acted was
Melantius in the Maid's Tragedy, for his own Benefit, when being suddenly
seized with the Gout, he submitted, by extraordinary Applications, to have his
Foot so far relieved that he might be able to walk on the Stage in a Slipper,
rather than wholly disappoint his Audience: He was observed that Day to have
exerted a more than ordinary Spirit, and met with a suitable Applause; but the
unhappy Consequence of tampering with his Distemper was, that it flew into his
Head and killed him in three Days, in the 74th Year of his Age."

This is the chief Account which Mr. Cibber gives of Betterton; he has indeed
interspersed several Theatric Observations, which amount to no more than they
who write cannot read, and they who read cannot act: Mr. Dryden could not read
his own Amphitrion; yet Not. Lee, read his Scenes so well, that Mohun cried
out, -- Unless I were able to PLAY my Part as well as you READ it, to what
Purpose should I take it? -- Yet Not. Lee attempted to be an Actor, but soon
left the Stage in despair of making a profitable Figure there.

I could, on this Head, add several curious Anecdotes of my own, and from
Experience in the Stage Affairs prove, that as some who write cannot read, so
there are others who read that cannot write; and yet some who can both read,
act, and write. -- How far indeed these reading, writing, acting Qualifications
may be conjoined in one and the same Person, this Apologetical History, as well
as that of Mr. Colley Cibber, will be some humble kind of Demonstration of:
Some indeed may think, that by these Memoirs we may blaze to Pesterity in a
ludicrou^ Luster, and that our Observations and Digressions signify, roundly,
N^thing; yet to the Drum of the Ear will I as roundly rattle,

A FICO for thy Criticism, vile Wight,
You say we Print indeed, yet cannot Write.
I, myself I, and Father print indeed,
But what we print we wrote, and what we wrote you read.
-- But h^lt a little. -- I had something to say on the above Description of
Betterton: It may be in the greatest Part, or even in the whole, just; yet is
it not carrying the Elogium too far, to think, nor Heart, nor Mohun, nor any in
their Company, nor some before them equaled him, perhaps surpassed him? Mr.
Cibber says none has since arrived at his Perfections; this very possily may
be, yet very likely every succeeding Age will think in the same Manner of other
Actors: As Mr. Heart and Mohun's Excellencies were forgot by Degrees, Mr.
Betterton's arose; when his failed by his Death, Mr. Booth was thought to be a
very great Successor: In short, they who remember Betterton, shake their Heads
at Booth; they that are in full Memory of Booth, with pitiful Scorn see some
modern Performers, who, half a Century hence, may be highly admired in their
Turn, in Prejudice to Vide C. Cibber's Apology.
New Al^pts in the Profession: This, say what you will, is a prejudice of
Nature, the Impressions we first receive are so deeply affecting, that even,
having Judgment afterward, it imposes on it: Prejudices in theatrical Affairs
are as imperceptibly got, and as obstinately maintained as those in Religion;
and we may say of the first Representation we see, what (...) says of our first
Education.

By Education most Men are misled,
We so believe because we so were bred;
The Priest continues what the Nurse began,
And thus the Child imposes on the Man
But really Betterton, besides his Excellencies of Nature and Judgment, and
other great Advantages, for though he is called an Original, he had seen all
the old Players, who were very excellent, and those were remembered who were
Originals of Shakespeare. -- What Aid such Remembrance might be, take from the
following Anecdotes.

" Downs's Account of the Stage.
In the Tragedy of Hamlet, says old Downs, the Part of Hamlet was performed by
Mr. Betterton; Sir William D'avenant having seen Mr. Tailor of the Black-Fryars
Company act it, who was instructed by the Author, Mr. Shakespeare, taught Mr.
Betterton in every Article of it, which, by his exact Performance of it, gained
him Esteem and Reputation superlative to all other Plays."

Thus again this ancient, but faithful Memoirist delivers himself concerning
the Play of Henry the Eighth.

"The Part of the King was all new clothed in a proper Habit, and so right and
justly done by Mr. Betterton, he being instructed in it by Sir William
D'avenant, who had it from old Mr. Lowen, that had his Instructions from Mr.
Shakespeare himself, that I dare and will aver, none can or will come near him
in this Age, in the Performance of that Part.

The Reader will observe, that in theatrical Memoirists, a Simplicity of Style
in plain Narration too often occurs; but he will pardon this bold Disregard for
grammatical Correctness, if, through our Rapidity of Thought, he investigates the
Meaning: He will see then how in Hamlet Mr. Betterton came by that Judgment,
which Mr. Cibber takes up some Pages in extolling; he will find those Actors
who have been Originals in Parts, are thought to have excelled to the highest
Degree: And Mr. Betterton might have been as excellent in those Parts in which
he was an Original, as any other Actor before him; yet an Actor after him, who
has an original Part, and consequently thereby becomes an Origin^l, may be
thought so far to excel, that few Actors, while he is remembered, shall, with
any equal, judicious Approbation, succeed in that Part. -- On the whole,
original Parts make an Actor, and they who have seen a perfect set of Actors,
can only judge of succeeding ones by them: The

Laudator temporis acti Is not merely confined to old Men; by natural Prejudice
we catch this Apurtenance to old Age, when we have scarce passed the Verge of
Youth. But to conclude of Mr. Betterton, with a greater Compliment than any
other paid him, though the Epilogue to his last Benefit, wrote by Mr. Row, was
a very good one, take this Description of him from a Prologue of Dryden.

He, like the setting Sun, still shoots a glimm'ry Ray,
Like ancient Rome, majestic in Decay.
Mr. C. Cibber's long Digression has led me into this; but as, in his Account
of Betterton, his Sentiments on theatrical Ac^ion are chiefly expressed; I have
ventured to subjoin these Sentiments of mine to his Account, that I may not be
so tedious on this Subject in another Place. I shall now introduce his other
drawn Characters, and Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 71.
^ake use of the same Vehicles, which you will find waiting in the next
Chapter, to carry you through the rest of your Journey at Leisure, -- for all
know, that,

Placida narratio pro Vehiculo est. CHAP. V.
Theatrical Characters, Quotations, Dissertations, Annotations, Digressions,
Expressions, Allusions collated, imitated, and related, with A few Words to
critical Auditors.

IT was before observed, Women were not admitted on the Stage till after the
Restoration, yet, by the Lists I have given, you will find they were not so
very easily supplied; for in the Company where Betterton was engaged, they were
forced still to put young Men into female Characters; and Mr. Kynaston stands
first in that motley Cast; nor indeed had they any till Sir William D'avenant
brought them to that Company: On the contrary, the Old, or the King's Company
under Killegrew, had at first setting out some Women, who in the Summer of King
Charles the Second's Reign, even when the Companies were in their highest
Prosperity, were thought inimitable: How hard then is it to fix unlimited
Excellence to particular Persons!... But of these Male Women, Kynaston was
esteemed, being very young and handsome; and, according to Downes's Phrase
Downes's Roscius Anglicanus.
, a complete Female Stage-Beauty, performing his Parts so well, especially
Arthiope and Aglaura, Parts greatly moving Compassion and Pity, that it is
doubted whether any Woman that succeeded him, so sensibly touched the
Audience.... Behold the Doatage of servile Partiality!.... Mr. Cibber speaks of
his Beauty, and his performing Evadne in the Maid's Tragedy, to which he
subjoins a facetious Incident, which those Shifts once occasioned... Vide C.
Cibber's Apology, p. 73.
King Charles coming to a Tragedy sooner than usual, and was impatient to have
the Performance begin, and sent to know the Meaning of their Delay, the Master
of the Company came to the Box, and thinking the best excuse would be the
Truth, fairly told his Majesty, the Queen was not yet shaved. The King laughed,
and staid till her Majesty could be effeminated. -- But as for Kynaston, he was
so beautiful, that the Ladies of Quality prided themselves in taking him with
them in their Coaches in this theatrical Habit, after the Play, which in those
Days began at four of Clock; -- Such a Custom of the Ladies, of carrying such a
handsome young Fellow, though in Petticoats, in their Coaches with them,
without any Apprehension of Censure, is as strong an Instance as possible, to
what Height the modish Gallantry of that Time was carried!

But even on Mr. Kynaston's changing Sexes, that is, his Petticoats to the
Buskin, and his Stays to the Truncheon, he still remained famous: He had, it
seems, a formal Gravity in his Mein, which in some Characters became him. His
Eye was piercing, and in Characters of heroic Life, led, in his Tone of Voice,
an imperious Vivacity that truly depicted the Tyrant. In these two Parts,
Morat in Aurengzebe, and Muley Moloch in Sebastian, he had a fierce Lyon-like
Majesty, in his Utterance, that gave the Spectator a Kind of trembling
Admiration. -- In Henry the Fourth he was a Master of a different Majesty, but
of so true a Kind, that when he whispered the following Line to Hotspur,

Send us your Prisoner, or you will hear of it, He conveyed more Menace than the
loudest Intemperance of Voice could swell to: Kynaston, like Betterton,
strictly followed the Rules of Truth and Nature; yet, what seemed surprising,
they were as different in their Manner of acting as in their personal Form and
Features. He stayed too long on the Stage, till his Memory and Spirits failed
him; his latter Imperfections were not his own, but those of decaying Nature.

Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 76.
Mountsord was a younger Man, tall, well-made, of agreeable Aspect, fair, his
Voice clear, full, and melodious: In Tragedy a most affecting Lover; his Words
had that Softness, that

Like Flakes of feathered Snow,
They melted as they fell.
In Comedy he gave the truest Life to what we call the fine Gentleman: in
Scenes of Gaiety he never broke into the Regard that was due to the Presence of
equal or superior Characters, though inferior Actors played them: He filled the
Stage not by elbowing and crossing it before others, or disconcerting their
Action, but by surpassing them in Time and masterly Touches of Nature: He never
laughed at his own Jest, unless the Point of his Raillery required it: He had
besides, such a Variety of Genius, that he could throw off the Man of Sense for
the brisk, vain, rude, lively Coxcomb; hence he excelled in Sir Courtly Nice:
His whole Man, his Voice, Mein, and Gesture was no longer Mountsord, but
another Person; there the insipid soft Civility, the elegant and formal Mein,
the drawling delicacy of Voice; the stately Flatness of his Address, and the
empty Eminence of his Attitudes, were so nicely observed and guarded, that had
he not been an entire Master of Nature, had he not kept his Judgment, as it
were, a Sentinel upon himself, not to admit the least Likeness of what he used
to be, to enter into any Part of his Performance, he could not possibly have so
compleately finished it. He was killed in the thirty-third Year of his Age; the
Accidents that more particularly attended his Fall, are to be sound at large,
in the Trial of the Lord Mohun, printed among those of the State, in Folio.

Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 78.
Sandsord was what Mr. Cibber, sen. calls the Spagnolet of the Theater: An
excellent Actor in disagreeable Characters; that is, he was the Stage Villain;
but this happened not so much by his own Choice as Necessity; for having a low
crooked Person, such bodily Defects were too strong to be admitted into great
and amiable Characters; so that in any new or revived Play, if there was a
hateful or mischievous one, Sandsord had no Competitor for it. This personating
of bad Characters required as much Art and Judgment, as to have shone into the
Applause of the Spectators by all the Throws and Swellings of Ambition, yet it
was attended with this Dilemma, that an Audience never expected to see him in
any other: Nay, so far was this Prejudice carried which Mr. Cibber has heard
was Fact: A new Play came on the Stage, in which Sandford played an honest
Statesman; the Pit sat out three or four Acts in a quiet Expectation; that the
Honesty of Sandford should, from his diffembling it, (for they thought him a
Rogue at the Bottom) animate the Scenes to come with Confusion: But finding him
in Truth an honest Statesman, they fairly damned the Play, as if the Author had
imposed on them a most fruitless Absurdity. -- This oral Tradition has in it a
Proof (as ali oral Traditions have) that much Faith is required in the Reader:
Might not the last Act in this Play have some other Catastrophe in it than
Sandford's proving an honest Statesman? -- No, so the Story was heard, and so
it must be believed.

-- Credat Judaeus Apella
Non ego.

From Sandford's being so successful a Stage Villian, the inferior Actors
thought his Success owing to the Defects of his Person, and from thence, when
they appeared as Bravo's, and Murderers, made themselves as frightful and
inhuman Figures as possible. -- In King Charles's Time, says our ane^doring
Apologist, this low Skill was carried to such Extravagance, that the King, who
was black brow'd, and of a swarthy Complexion, passed a pleasant Remark on
observing the grim Murderers in M^cbeth, when turning to his People in the Box,
he said, Pray what is the Meaning that we never see a Rogue in a Play, but,
God'sfish, they clap him on a black Periwig? When it is well known one of the
greatest Rogues in the Kingdom always wears a fair one. -- The King's
Observation, says Mr. C. Cibber, was just, though the King had been as fair as
Adonis. -- What Complexion that pretty Fellow Adonis had, I will not determine;
yet I know not how it is, or what Ideas People conceive of Black; but it
certainly has a very Horror-moving Aspect: It may be a Trick of the Stage, and
as such laughed at, for I allow very great Rascals may have very black Hearts,
who wear very fair Perukes: Mr. C. Cibber thinks his swarthy Majesty alluded to
some great Man out of Power, and leave them to guess at him, who remember the
changing Complexion of his Ministers. -- This charming Observation shows the
Folly of Allusion; for suppose Somebody now living, 1740, had said the said
Sentence, who among the present Ministry would dare six on a Man who wore a
light Wig: Their Eyes might indeed naturally be converted to that great Man who
wore the greatest light-colour'd Wig, and so might guess at him -- who was a
very honest Man. -- But though political ministerial Inuendoes may be very justly
proved to mean something, yet theatrical Inuendoes are a mere Inanity of
Thought. -- But to digress from this Digression, -- and to enter into another.
-- Many Actors and Actresses have made it a Point to play a Character flatly
written, because they stood in the favorable Light of Honor and Virtu^. -- A
Lady, Vide C. Cibber's Apology. p. 56.
Mr. Cibber, sen. says, who was a Damoselle de Plasir on the Stage, acted a
Part of impregnable Chastity, and bid the Ladies

Study to live the Character I play. Yet this good Creature made Faut Paux; she
had some illegitimate Issue, and her Chastiry off the Stage was not
impregnable. Many are the same Kind of theatric Prudes now living, who are like
enough to think that to seem virtuous is sufficient for an Audience, and would
make it a Point to be for half an hour most pure Virgins on the Stage, whatever
kind, coming, dear consenting Creatures they might prove after the Curtain had
dropped. -- I could enumerate some dainty modern Proofs of this theatric
Prudery; but give me Leave to change an old Apothegm

De vivis nil nisi bonum. To return to C. Cibber's Description of Sandford; his
'Manner of Speaking varied from those before described: His Voice was acute,
and had a piercing Tone, which scruck every Syllable distinctly upon the Ear,
and in his Look he marked to an Audience what he thought worth more thon their
ordinary Notice: Had he lived in Shakespeare's Time, I am confident his Judgment
must have chose him to have played Richard ill, for without considering his
Person; he had an un^outh Stateliness in his Motion; a harsh sullen Pride in
his Speech; a meditating Brow; a stern Aspect, occasionally changing into an
almost l^dicrous Triumph over Goodness and Virtue: from thence falling into a
most assuasive Sullenness and soothing Candoar of a designing Heart.'

This Actor Mr. C. Cibber inmated closely, and hit his Manner so true in
Richard the Third, that Sir John Vanbrugh said, on his playing that Part, --
You have his very Look, Gait, and Speech, and every Motion of him; and have
borrowed them all only to serve you in that Character. -- They who remember Mr.
Cibber in that Part have a Copy of Sandsord:

-- Ex pede Herculem. -- To describe the low Comedians, Mr. Cibber makes a
peculiar Apology, yet thus, after it is over, he goes on:

Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 85.
N^kes had a Genius different from any read, heard of, or seen, since or before
his Time; his Excellence a plain palpable Simplicity of Nature, that he was as
unaccountably diverting in his common Speech as on the the Stage. This
Simplicity, so easy to Nokes, no one could ever catch: Leigh and Underhill have
been well copied, though not equaled, by others: But not all the mimical Skill
of Estcourt, nor my own, could reach the vis Comica of Nokes, though I never
saw an Actor beside himself whom I could not at least so far imitate as to give
a more than tolerable Notion of his Manner. -- The Characters he shone in were,
Sir Martin Mar-all, Gomez in the Spanish Friar, Sir Nicholas Cully in Love in a
Tub, Sofia in the Amphitrion, etc. etc. etc. -- This was the Effect of his
Action; he never entered the Stage but he was received with an involuntary
Applause, not by Hands, for they might be prostituted and bespoken, but by a
Laughter (which if bespoken could not be prostituted) which his Sight provoked,
and Nature could not resist: -- His Person was of the middle Size; his Voice
clear; his natural Countenance grave and sober; when he spoke, that seriousness
of Joakery was discharged, and a dry drolling Levity took such full Possession
of him, that I can only refer the Idea of him to your Imagination: In his low
Characters that became it, he had a shuffling Shame in his Gait, with so
contented an Ignorance in his Aspect, and awkward Absurdity in his Gesture,
that had you not known him, you could not have believed he had a Grain of
common Sense. In a word, I am tempted to sum up the Character of Nokes, as a
Comedian, in a Parody of what Shakespeare's Mark Antony says of Brutus as a
Hero,

His Life was Laughter, and the Ludicrous
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up
And say to all the World -- This was an Actor.
Leigh was of the mercurial Kind, not a strict Imitator of Nature; yet not so
wanton in his Performance as to be wholly out of her Sight: In Humor he loved
to take a full Career, but was careful to stop short when just upon the
Precipice: He so excelled in the Spanish F^yar, that the Duke of Dorset had his
Picture drawn in a whole Length in that Character by Kneller, and the whole
Portrait is extremely like him: He was much admired by King Charles, who used
to call him his Actor. -- He died of the Fever a Week after Montford, in
December 1692.

Underhill was a natural Comedian, whose Excellence lay in Characters of still
Life, the stiff, the heavy, and the stupid; in some of these he looked as if it
were not in the Power of human Passions to alter a Feature of them: A
Countenance of Wood could not be more fixed than his, when the Blockhead of a
Character required it: His Face was full and long; from his Crown to End of his
Nose was the shorter Half of it; so that the Disproportion of his lower
Features, when soberly composed, with an unwandering Eye hanging over them,
threw him into the most lumpish moping Mortal that ever made Beholders merry;
not but at other Times he could be awakened into Spirit equally ridiculous: --
In the coa^se rustic Humor of Justice Clodpole in Epsom Wells he was a
delightful Bru^e. His Age obliged him to leave the Stage some Years before he
died; he appeared once indeed in a Part he had been famous for, the
Grave-digger in Hamlet, but ceasing to be what he had been, his Infirmities
were dismissed with Pity: He soon after died a superannuated Pensioner of the
Theater. Thus far Mr. C. Cibber.

The Characters of these Actors are an Extract from the Apology of Mr. C.
Cibber, and were the Impressions he received in his Youth: How far he may, or
may not entertain a Prejudice from thence, I shall not here examine: They might
be so very excellent, as he says of Betterion, to excel themselves: But might
not as great Descriptions be given of the chief Performers in Heart and Mo^un's
Company by some other Historian? Or might not some modern History give much
such Characters of our present Actors who are most in Vogue with the Town?
Surely such an Attempt might not regret the present or the future Reader: I
shall therefore in a future Chapter undertake so bold a Province, though the
Flatness of my Characters may be unequal to those of the great Apologist, which
are said to be of the prosound Sublime: The same Liberty which I have taken
with Mr. Cibber's Gentlemen I shall take with his Ladies, and for the same
Reason I have before given: After saying Powell, Verbruggen, and Williams were
not worth speaking of, he comes to

Mrs. Barry, who was in Possession of most of the chief Parts of Tragedy: How
she excelled in them you may judge from Mr. Dryden's saying in his Preface to
Cleomenes, she had gained a Reputation beyond any Woman he had seen on the
Stage; which Mr. Cibber corroborates with his own Judgment. Mrs. Barry, it
seems, did not arrive at this Maturity of Power and Judgment till she was more
than a little past her Youth; whence our Apologist observes, that the short
Life of 'Beauty is not long enough to form a complete Actress. The Fame Mrs.
Barry arrived to, is a Proof of the Difficulty in judging with Certainty
whether any young People will ever make any great Figure in a Theater; for Mrs.
Barry was discharged at the End of the Year as an useless Expense. Mrs.
Oldfield had been above a Year before she gave any Hope of her being an
Actress, so unlike to all Manner of Propriety was her speaking: But however,
both made themselves complete Mistresses of their Art, by the Prevalence of
their Understanding."

Mrs. Barry, in Characters of Greatness, had a Presence of elevated Dignity;
her Mein and Motion, superb, and gracefully majestic; her Voice full, clear,
and strong, so that no Violence of Passion could be too much for her: And when
Distress or Tenderness possessed her, she subsided into the most affecting
Melody and Softness: Of the former of these Excellencies she gave the most
delightful Prooss in all the heroic Plays of Dryden and Lee; and in the latter,
in the softer Passions of Otway's Monimia and Belvidera. In Scenes of Anger,
Defiance, and Resentment, while she was impetuous and terrible, she poured out
the Sentiment with enchanting Harmony. She was the first Person whose merit was
distinguished by the Indulgence of having an annual Benefit Play, which was
granted to her in King James the 2d's Time, and became not in common to others
till the Division of the Company after the Death of King William's Queen Mary:
This great Actress died toward the latter End of Queen Ann: The Year, says our
Historian, you may guess at, by an Expression which fell from her in Blank
Verse when she was delirious:

Ha! ha! and so they make us Lords by Dozens! Mrs. Betterton was, in the Year
1690, when Mr Cibber senior first came upon the Stage, far advanced in Years,
yet so great a Mistress of Nature, that even Mrs. 'Barry, who acted Lady
Macbeth after her, could not, in that Part, with her superior Strength and
Melody of Voice, throw out those quick and careful Strokes of Terror from the
Disorder of a guilty Mind, which the other gave us with a Facility in her
Manner, that rendered them at once tremendous and delightful: Time could not
impair her Skill, though it had brought her Person to Decay: She was to the
last the Admiration of all true Judges of Nature and Shakespeare, in whose Plays
she chiefly excelled without a Rival: She was a Woman of an unblemished sober
Life, and had the Honor to teach Queen Anne, when Princess, the Part of
Semandra in Mith^idates, which she acted at Court in K -- g Charles's Time:
After the Death of Mr. (...), her Husband, that Princess, when Que^n, ordered
her a Pension for Life, but she lived not to receive but one half Year of it.

Mrs. Leigh, the Wife of Mr. Leigh the Comedian beforementioned, had a droll
Way of dressing the pretty Folbles of superannuated Beauties: She had in
herself a good Deal of Humor, and knew how to infuse it into the affected
Mothers, Aunts, and affected sta^e Maids, that had missed their Market: In
these she was extremely entertaining, and painted, in a lively Manner, the
blind Side of Nature.

Mrs. Butler was recommended to the Stage by King Charles: She was the Daughter
of a decayed Knight, and proved a good Actress, and was besides in those Days
allowed to Sing and Dance in Perfection: In speaking her sweet-ton'd Voice,
with her naturally genteel Air, and her sensible Pronunciation, rendered her
wholly Mistress of the Amiable in many serious Characters: In Parts of Humor
she had a Manner of blending her assuasive Softness, even with the Gay, the
Lively, and Alluring; as in the second Constantia in the Chances, in which Mrs.
Oldfield's lively Performance did not equal ^ers: She having only 40 Shillings
a Week, and being denied the Addition of ten more, she went with Mr. Ashbury to
Dublin, who offered her any Conditions.

Mrs. Montford, whose second Marriage gave her the Name of Verbruggen, was a
Mistress of more Variety of Humor than I ever knew in any one Woman Actress:
This Variety was attended with equal Vivacity, which made her excellent in
Characters extremely different. Nothing, though ever so barren, if within the
bounds of Nature, could be flat in her Hands: She was fond of Humor, in what
low Part s^^ver found, and would make no Scruple of defacing her fair Form to
come heartily into it; for when she was eminent in several desirable Characters
of Wit and Humor, she would descend from high Life into low Characters with as
much Fancy as when triumphing in all the Airs and vain Gr^ces of a fine Lady:
In a Play of D'urfey's, called the Western Lass, which Part she acted, she
transformed her whole Being, Body, Shape, Voice, Language, Look, and Features
into almost another Animal, with a strong Devonshire Dialect, a broad laughing
Voice, a poking Head, round Shoulders, an unconceiving Eye, and the most
bedizz'ning dowdy Dress, that ever covered the untrain'd Limbs of a Joan Troit.
To have seen her here you would have thought it had been impossible the same
Creature could ever have been recovered, to what was easy to her, the gay, the
lively and desirable. Nor was her Humor limited to her Sex, for while her
Shape permitted, she was a more adroit She was thought so excellent in these
Characters and Dr^ss, that Mr. Southern wrote the Comedy called Sir Anthony
Love (which Character she performed) on purpose for her.
pretty Fellow than is usually seen upon the Stage: Her easy Air, Action, Mein
quite changed from the Coif to the cocked Hat and Cavalier in Fashion. People
were so fond of seeing her a Man, that when the Part of Bays in the Rehearsal
had for some Time lain dormant, she was desired to take it up, which she acted
with all true coxcombly Spirit and Humor, that the Sufficiency of the
Character required.

After an Apology which the Apologist makes for describing Mrs. Bracegirdle now
living, he introduces her into his Apology, which is sufficient Authority for
me to give an Abstract of that Paragraph in mine.

Mrs. Bracegirdle was now [1690] blooming to her Maturity, her Reputation as an
Actress gradually rising with that of her Person: Never was any Woman in such
general Favor, which to the last Scene of Dramatick Life she maintained by not
being unguarded in her private Character. -- This Discretion made her the Cara,
the Darling of the Theater: She had indeed no greater Claim to Beauty than the
most desirable Brunette might pretend to; but her Youth and lively Aspect threw
out such a Glow of Health and Cheerfulness, that on the Stage few Spectators
that were not past it, could behold her without Desire. In all the chief Parts
she acted, the Desirable was so pred^minant, that no Judge could be cold enough
to consider from what other particular Excellence she became delightful. -- To
speak critically of an Actress, extremely good, were as hazardous as to be
positive in ones Opinion of the best Opera Singer: We can only appeal to Taste,
and of Taste there can be no disputing: I shall therefore only say, that most
eminent Authors always chose her for their favorite Character, and shall leave
that Proof of her Merit to its own Value.

She retired from the Stage in the Height of her Favor, when most of her
Cotemporaries she was bred up with were declining, in the Year 1710. She played
once after the Part of Angelica in Love for Love, for the Benefit of her old
Friend Mrs. Betterton.

Here Mr. Colley Cibber closes his Account of these memorable Actors, of which
I have given a Quotation of great Fidelity, as to the Matter of Fact chiefly
contained; but many are the Prettinesses, Daintinesses, Rhetorical Flowers,
vivisying Images, Floods of fine Language, and Rapidities of Wit, which are all
like his clear Emanation of Beauty, they strike you into a Regard that has
something different from Respect. As I am so greatly indebted to him for this
Chapter, I shall follow my old Way, and, till we settle Accounts, still run
myself more into his Books; therefore, what he says from his Word to the
critical Auditors, I will borrow a (...) or Two, and then again digress to
myself.

"Th^s Account may inform or assist the Judgment of ^uture Spectators, it may
be of Service to their public Entertainment^; for as their Hearers are, so
will the Actors be, worse or better, as true or false Taste applauds or
discommends them. Hence only can our Theaters improve or must degenerate: Yet
there is another Point which I recommend to the Consideration, which is, that
the extreme Severity with which they damn a bad Play, seems so terrible a
Warning to those whose untried Genius might hereafter give them a good one: But
the Vivacity of our modern Critics is of late grown so riotous, an
unsuccessful Author has no more Mercy shown him than a notorious Cheat in the
Pillory: Every Fool, the lowest Member of the Mob, becomes a Wit^ (...) this is
the Case, while the Theater is so turbulent a Sea, and so infested with
Pirates, what Poetical Merchant of any Substance would venture to trade in it.
In a Word, these Critics seem to me like the Lions Whelps in the Tower, who
are so boisterously gamesome at their Meals they dash down their Bowls of Milk
brought for their own Breakfast."

I have a Word also to give to these critical Auditors, these Lion-Cubs, these
Pirates in our Seas; but that will fall more naturally in some subsequent
Chapter.

CHAP. VI. A State of the Stage continued.
HAVING resolved to make these Memoirs in some Manner contain the Utile Dulci,
what by Abstracts from Mr. Cibber's History, and what by my own History, the
Readers will find a succinct Account of the Stage, from the Year 1660 to 1740.
I shall not indeed prove so descanting an Author as that great Man, yet my
compendious Breviary may be of some Use and Entertainment: Of his elaborate
Lucubrations mine are but an Epitome: Let him be the Trogus Pompeius of the
Stage, I am contented to be the Justinus.

I am now entering into that Part of the History, where the Theater fell
frequently in Labor of Revolutions. In 1690 the Stage was under the Government
of united Patentees, who had under them so complete a Set of Actors as has been
described: yet they were weak enough, or the Taste of the Public was so weak,
as to Force them to it, to exhibit Spectacle; and the Expenses they were at in
Dioclesian and King Arthur (though seemingly successful) were so great that
they run into Debt, which found Work for the Court of Chancery twenty Years
following: These Exhibitions of Spectacle made Plays of Course neglected,
Actors hold cheap and slightly dressed, while Singers and Dancers were better
paid and embroidered: These Measures of Course created Murmurings on one Side,
and ill Humo^r and Contempt on the other. When it became necessary to lessen
the Charge, Resolution was taken to begin with the Players Salaries. Nokes,
Montford and Leigh all died this same Year, yet they chose rather to distress
the surviving Actors than encourage them. To bring this about, some of
Betterton's Parts were given to Powell, and some of Mrs. Barry's to Mrs.
Bracegirdle. -- Powell accepted Betterton's, but Mrs. Bracegirdle denied
Barry's. Betterton on this formed one Ass^ciation and the Patentees another.
During these Contentions, Treaties of Peace were offered by the Actors, but
haughtily refused by the other. The Public, naturally more b^ass'd to the
Actors, whom they see and are pleased by, than Patentees whom they never see,
supported their Interest; and Persons of the highest Distinction entertained
the King in his Circle about Affairs of the Theater. About this Time Queen Mary
died, and on such Occasion^ all public Diversions cease. Betterton and his
Adherents had now Leisure to solicit Redress, and collected a Company, the
Patentees being forced to a^cept such Actors as were the Leavings of Betterton.
On this the Patentees engaged Powell and Verbr^gg^n, and raised them from two
to four Pounds a Week; and besides the other Leavings were Mr. C. Cibber; yet
they were forced to recruit, and beat up for Volunteers in distant Counties,
which brought Johnson and Bull^ck into the Service of the Theater Royal: Forces
thus raised, they opened the Campaign: Betterton by Subscription at the
Lincolns-Inn-Fields Tennis-Court, the Pa^^n^ees at Drury Lane, who took the
Field first, Mr. Ci^ber writing their opening Prologue, having no better Poet:
"That memorable Day being, as he says, the Day his Muse brought forth her first
Fruit that was ever made public; how good or how bad imports not, but he
received for it two Guineas, not being suffered to speak it himself." The
Patentees went on but lamely against the new Colony of Actors, who were like
the Commonwealth of Holland divided from the Tyranny of Spain: -- But the
Simile, according to the Apologist, is but very little farther a Simile, for
they found in a short Time they were never worse governed than when governed by
themselves: They began to consult private Interest more than the general Good;
and though some Deserence was paid to Betterton, several wanted to govern in
their Turns: -- C. Cibber's Apology.
But is not the same Infirmity in States? -- Dogget could not with Patience
look on the costly Trains and Plumes of Tragedy, in which knowing himself to be
useless, he though a vain Extravagance; which when he could not oppose he came
over to Drury Lane. -- Betterton's Company began at last to lose Ground, nor
was Drury Lane Company in very great Prosperity; yet the Patentees had found
out a Remedy against a thin House, viz. Ditto, p. 134
Never to pay their People when the Money did not come in, nor then neither but
in such Proportion as suited their Convenience.

Such was the Fortune of both Companies, when our Mr. R -- b, Father of the
present Master of C -- Garden Theater.
Master, who had practiced the Law, and therefore loved a Storm better than
fair Weather, thinking the Quality rather preferred the other Company than ours,
resolved to ingratiate himself with their Domestics, and opened a Gallery for
the Footmen gratis, who were never before admitted into it till the fourth Act
was over: This he thought would get us a good Word in their respective
Families, and incite them to come all Hands aloft into the Crack of our
Applauses. Hence arose this Custom, which ripened into Right, and became the
most disgraceful Nuisance that ever depreciated a Theater.

About this Time Mr. Wilks came from the Dub^in Company to Drury Lane Theater:
He first commenced an Actor by performing in a private Play at Dublin, of which
Country he was a Native: He had been on Drury Lane Stage before, but qu^tted it
to go to Ireland, not rising ^n Parts there according to his Ambition: On his
Return, in 1696, Montford was dead, and Powell in his chief Parts, and the only
Actor that stood in Wilks's Way: They soon became avowed Rivals, and without
quoting their every Quarrel for Parts, be it sufficient to say, that Wilks by
Industry, Care, and Sobriety, gained the Favor of the Public, which Powell,
with more Merit, by his Neglect and Intemperance forseited.

On this Narration the Apologist observes, that an Actor is disesteemed or
favored on the Stage, more or less, according as he has or has not a due
Regard to his private Life and Reputation: Nay, false Reports shall affect him,
and become the Cause or Pretense of using him injuriously: He gives this
Instance in Regard to himself.

" C. Cib^^r's Apology, p. 141.
After the Success of the Beggars Opera, I was so stupid to attempt, the
following Year, something of the same Kind, on a quite different Foundation, to
recommend Virtue and Innocence: My newfangled Performance was called, Love in a
Riddle, and was as vilely damned and hooted at, as so vain a Presumption in the
idle cause of Virtue could deserve: I will grant the Beggars Opera had more
skilfully gratified the public Taste than all the brightest Authors before
him. The same Author wrote a Second Part to his Beggars Opera, and transported
his Hero beyond Sea; but this was forbid to come on the Stage. Soon after this
Prohibition my Performance was to come on the Stage: Great Umbrage was taken
that I was permitted to have the whole Town to m^self, by this absolute
Forbiddance of what they had more Mind to be entertained with. And some Days
before my Bawble was acted, I was informed a strong Party would be made against
it: A Report, it seems had ran against me, that to make Success for my own
Play, I had privately found Means or Interest that the Second Part of the
Beggars Opera should be suppressed; as if I, a Comedian, had been of
Consequence enough to influence a great Officer of State to rob the Public of
an innocent Diversion (if it were such) that none but that cunning Comedian
might entertain them: -- But against blind Malice, and staring Inhumanity,
whatever is upon the Stage has no Defense! There they knew I stood helpless and
exposed. -- I had not considered, poor Devil, that from the Security of a full
Pit Dunces might become Wits, Cowards valiant, and Prentices Gentlemen. Whether
such were concerned in the Murder of my Play I am not certain; I never
endeavored to discover any of my Assassins; I cannot afford them a better
Name, from their unmanly Manner of destroying it: It faintly held up its
wounded Head till the second Day, and would have spoke for Mercy, but was not
suffered: The Presence of the Royal Heir apparent could not protect it. I
therefore, to stop their Clamor, quitted the Actor for the Author, and told
them, That since they were not inclined this Play should go farther, I gave
them my Word that after this Night it should never be acted again; but that in
the mean Time I hoped they would consider in whose Presence they were, and for
that Reason at least would suspend what farther Marks of Displeasure they might
think I had deserved. -- After a dead Silence and some little Pause, some few
Hands signified their Approbation. -- When the Play went on I observed about a
dozen Persons, of no extraordinary Appearance, sullenly walked out of the Pit,
after which every Scene of it met with Applause -- But it came too late: Peace
to its Manes. Now though this was the only Tumult that I had known to have been
so effectually appeased, in fifty Years, by any Thing that could be said to an
Audience in the same Humor; yet it was no Merit in me, because, when like me
you submit to their doing you all the Mischief they can, they will at any Time
be satisfied."

I have been more particular in the Length of this Question, as it contains a
curious Anecdote on damning Love in a Riddle, and carries this Moral, that a
Suspicion of an Actor's doing a base Action, may lay him open to very severe
and unjust Punishments from an Audience: This unjust Treatment, not three
Seasons ago, became a certain Actor's Fortune to meet: The Affair was of a
private Nature, and therefore was thought a public Audience had no Right to
take it under their Cognizance: The Affair was this.

There was a certain Lady, -- a very fine Lady, -- to whom an Actor was once so
fatally allied that the Law gave her a Privilege to call him Husband. --
Husband! -- O fatal Name! This Lady was young, beautiful, sensible, and
virtuous when this Actor fell in Love with her: She had appeared on the Stage
as a Singer, and was esteemed an admirable one. This Actor, who was at that
Time at the Head of the theatric Revolution, which brought back the old
Drury Lane Actors to their old House at Drury Lane, thought this young Woman
had so much of the amiable and virtuous in her, that without any other
Consideration, made her his Wife. What connubial Love and Harmony subsisted
sometime between them, those only can judge of whose Hearts have felt the
inexpressible Delights of a sincere and mutual Union. -- But alas, how short is
all human Happiness! -- The Lady began to grow more cool in her Affections to
her Husband than her Duty, her Honor, or her Interest, ought to have suffered
her. -- Her Heart was estranged, and foreign Inclinations contaminated her
Soul. -- What can be said, when so much Innocence should plunge suddenly and
rashly into Vice! -- But alas!

Frailty, thy Name is Woman! This domestic Unhappiness of the Actor brought on
others: Negligent of every Thing, his Affairs grew worse, and he was at last
compelled to banish himself to another Kingdom, till Measures were taken to
make his Creditors easy. During his Absence this bad Woman carried on a
Correspondence of the most criminal Nature, and spread every false Report to
injure him in the tenderest Point, his Honor, that witty Malice could invent,
or the damnedst Fiend perpetrate; it was reported her Husband was not only
privy to, but the willing, procuring, pandering Promoter of her Crimes, and his
own Infamy. -- Good God! -- What will not Iniquity suggest, and
Uncharitableness believe? -- Although

Vide Motto to Letters from a Husband to a Wife, etc. published by Mr. T. C.
It is a Kind of Slander to trust Rumor. Yet this vile Notion too far
prevailed, as you will immediately see. -- The Season of acting was now pretty
far advanced, and this Actor, as returned to his Employment, was to do his
Duty, and get his Livelihood at the Theater. The Night came on he was to
appear; and though it had been bruited about the Town, that because he was a
willing Cuckold, there was a very virtuous Party formed to drive him off the
Stage, and not suffer him to appear again; he paid little Regard to this
Rumor, conscious of his Innocence. But the poor Devil found himself mistaken.
The House was very early crowded, and the harmonious discordant Concert of
Catcals, Whistle, etc. etc. began to play before the Curtain drew up. -- Well,
-- though the Actors were all frightened, the Play began with Calmness and
Applause; but this was only a Prelude to the Battle: When the Scene came in
which he was to appear, there was a dead Silence, till he popp'd his poor Head
from behind the Scenes, then at once the Hurley-Burley began, Volleys of Apples
and Potatoes, and such vile Trash, flew about his Ears. He retired, the Storm
subsided; he advanced, it began again. -- In the most humble Gesture and
Address, he made a Motion to be heard; it was all in Vain, and he was once more
pelted off. -- But what can describe, in those dreadful Moments, the Anguish of
his Heart? Who can conceive the various Agitations of his Soul? -- Grief, Rage,
Resentment, Horror, Despair mixed with Resolution, were all at once fermenting
in his Bosom. -- But determined to go through the Play, he went through it
amidst the greatest Uproar that ever was heard so long a Space in a Theater,
and by a confident Heart he surmounted what many of less Resolution would have
sunk under.

For some time after, every Joke in a Part he himself spoke, or if, when he was
on the Stage, any Thing was said that alluded to Cuckoldom, the Joke was made
allusive to him, and the Audience had their Laugh. This could be born, and he
knew it would die away of itself. But on a Trial in Relation to his Wife's
Infamy, something gave Offense to a noble C. M^ret -- n.
Colonel in the Army, who, to revenge a supposed Affront, raised a Posse
against the Actor, and from the Boxes began a new Attack, and were determined
he should appear no more on the Stage, till he had given the Gentleman
Satisfaction, by making a public Recantation: All Attempts were made to get
over this; some of the Royal Family came, but their Presence was not thought of
Sanction enough to curb the Insolence of some People, and an obscure Thing of
an Actor performing his Part. He was at last forced, out of prudential Reasons,
not from any Conviction of his Error, to give the Colonel the Satisfaction of a
public Recantation; and so that Affair dropped.

I could enumerate several other Instances of my own, where my private Conduct
and Character have laid me under a public Censure; but as the two Instances I
have quoted are the most material, and fresh in every one's Memory, they may be
thought sufficient to prove that the Public, or rather some of the Public,
will assume a Liberty over a Player's private Life and Actions.

But now, Reader, let your Memory return some Page or two back, and, to carry
on a Connection, remember the Reason why Wilks gained a Superiority over Powell
C. Cibber's Apology, p. 151.
"There are other Instances, says the apologetical Historian, of the Reward and
Favor which in a Theater, Diligence and S^briety seldom fail: Mills the elder,
grew into the Friendship of Wilks, with not a great deal more than their useful
Qualities to recommend him: With this Assiduity, and this Friendship, he was
advanced to a larger Salary than any Man-Actor, during my Time on the Stage The
Contempt and Distresses of Powel struck Booth with such a Terror of his
Example, that though he had been a frank Lover of his Bottle, he immediately
reformed, for which, both in his Fame and Fortune, he enjoyed the Reward and
Benefit."

I must here add a living Instance of what Care and indefatigable Industry will
do: The younger Mills, not to take from him the Merit he has, is not equal to
the late Mr. Mills: When he was a young Actor he followed his Father's Steps,
and being endowed with a prodigious Memory, would get Parts of very great
Length, which then he had not a distant View of ever performing: This Talent,
and his Application to his Business, made him, in a Course of Time, become
useful, which in a Theater is the best Recommendation. On his succeeding to
many of Mr. Wilks's Parts, the Town looked on him in a very indifferent Light;
but his being always thoroughly perfect, and improving by Encouragement and
Application, many Prejudices insensibly wore away, and now he is seen in Mr.
Wilks's Parts not without Approbation.

I must here speak of myself: When I first came on the Stage the Town had very
little Hopes of me, nor did I fling out the Proffer of any great Genius, yet I
was industrious and observant of my Business on the Stage, and did all in my
Power to become any Way useful. I remember, that for Want of a better
Performer, I undertook to be the Harlequin, and as few knew who it really was,
I was received with more Applause than I could have imagined; sufficient
enough, if I had not had an inborn Contempt for such Mummery, to have raised my
Vanity: Nor was this my only Success in Pantomime; every one who remembers
Doctor Faustus at Drury Lane, must remember the Statue: All the Pantomimical
Motions of this magic Statue had a good Effect in that Scene; they surpised,
they elevated, they pleased, and were applauded: I had the Honor to animate
that Statue, yet as the Applause I received was false, I received it not as a
Tribute to the Merit of an Actor, but the Tricks of a Scaramouch, or Sadler's
Wells Tumbler: As I had set my Father, and other first Rate Actors for my
Exemplar, before my Eyes, I had Ambition enough to attempt their Parts, and say
to Posterity,

Exegi monumentum aere perennius. I have from this Principle all along pushed
forward for the Goal of theatric Fame, and throughout my Character, as an
Actor, have kept to the sibi constet; for what other Failures and Follies
soever I might be guilty propria persona, yet in my persona personata on the
Stage, I have done every Endeavor to please; nor can my Enemies say that I
ever came before an Audience imperfect, or inebriated: If I have sometimes
mistook my Talents, and appeared in Characters to which I was unequal, I hope
and believe the Candor of the Town will excuse that Ambition, if in some
others I give them any Pleasure.

To digress from this Apology to my theatric chronological History, to
understand which, after so many intervening Paragraphs, see the succinct
Account. From 1660 to 1684, the King and Duke's Companies had various Fortunes
till they united: After that, the Actors Characters in 1690 are given; a
Revolution happened again in 1695, and after various Changes of theatric
Ministers, Stage Cabals, Patentee Oppressions, (too numerous to be extracted
from Mr. C. Cibber's History, as they consist chiefly of Chit-Chat, and
l'Amusements and Gayete de Ceur) they united at the Union C. Cibber's Apology.
. -- " Hold, let me see. -- Ay, it was so: I am right in my Chronology, for the
Play of Hamlet being played, soon after, Estionst, who then took upon him to
say any Thing, added a fourth Line to Shakespeare's Prologue to the Play in that
Play, which originally consisted but of three; but Estionst made it run thus.

"For us, and for our Tragedy,
" Thus stooping to your Clemency,
" [This being a Year of Unity]
"We beg your Hearing patiently.
The private Policies, Lawsuits, Conversations, etc. etc. etc. I pass over,
and come to the Patent which was granted to Mr. Colley Cibber, Mr. Wilks, Mr.
Booth, and Sir Richard Steel, after the Accession of his late Majesty, not
only for the Reason I mentioned before, but because I have much to say in my
own History of the same Kind on those Subjects in which I was the Vide C.
Cibber's Account of Wilks.
Bustle Master-General, as Wilks had been some few Years before: And if in my
Relations there are any close Resemblances of Passages to Mr. Cibber's Apology,
I shall continue to quote them, to illustrate mine, as I before promised.

Well then, in the Year 1718, the Patent was given, whereby the Stage came
under the sole Management of three Actors, and a Gentleman who had long been
acquainted with theatric Affairs. Under this auspicious Triumvirate,.... A new
theatric golden Age arose.

Redeunt Saturnia Regna. An acting Author now was a Judge of Dramatic Authors.

Tuus jam regnat Apollo. Oh, ye Gods! give me, give me, this great Boon.
That I over Bards may rule, and rule alone.
Then may I follow my great Examplar

-- Passibus Aequis:
O mihi tam longae maneat pars ultima Vitae
Spiritus and quantum sat erit MEA dicere facta,
Non me Carminibus, etc.
Quo me BACCHE rapis tui plenus, etc. Gentle Reader, you will excuse this
Rhapsody when I tell you I am writing it at One o'Clock this Morning, the 20th
of May, 1740, after hearing something relating to Drury Lane, of which you may
hear more hereafter. But to the Patentee-Actors let us turn our View: They had
now gained all they wished for, as to their Power and Management at Drury Lane:
But at the same Time the present Mr. Rich's House in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields was
opened, which not only terrified the Managers at Drury Lane, but was in fact,
for a great Time, a Draw-back to their Profits; however, both Patents have
since subsisted a Company with various Fortune: I find nothing after of any
Consequence in the theatric History worthy of Notice during the Triumvirate:
They long went forward in a settled Course of Prosperity, which Mr. Cibber
attributes to their " C. Cibber's Apology.
visible Errors of former Managements; from them they at last found the
necessary Means to bring our private Laws and Orders into a general Observance
and Approbation of our Society. Diligence and Neglect were under an equal Eye,
the one never failed of its Reward, and the other, by being rarely excused, was
less frequently committed."

Yet sure there must be some Partiality in these Menagers, and some Jealousy of
young Actors; for several whom they slighted became at the other. Stage good
Actors, and were in high Esteem with a great Part of the Town; and several in
their own House have since been thought excellent, who in their Menagement
seldom or ever appeared. But Appearance, as well as Applause, is the warm
Weather of a Theatrical Plant. This Observation, and several others, will show
that I write as an Historian ought, without Favor or Affection.

One Reformation which the Apologist. and his Co-Rulers introduced deserves
Attention, as the present Stages stand in need of such another.

" Ditto.
Among other necessary Reformations, says he, what not a little preserved to us
the Regard of our Auditors was the Decency of our clear Stage, from whence we
had many Years shut out those idle Gentlemen, who seemed more delighted to be
pretty Objects themselves, than capable of any Pleasure from the Play: Who took
their daily Stands where they might best Elbow the Actor, and come in for their
Share of the Auditor's Attention. In many a labored Scene of the warmest
Humor, and of the most affecting Passion, have I seen the best Actors
disconcerted, while these buzzing Muscatoes have been fluttering round their
Eyes and Ears. How was it possible an Actor so embarrass'd should keep his
Impatience from entering into that different Temper, which his personated
Character might require him to be Master of."

This Nuisance of having Crowds behind our Scenes is now as intolerable as ever,
both to the judicious Spectator and careful Player; and nothing but the Auri
Sacra Fames of the Managers would induce them to indulge such an Abuse of the
Stage: They may say indeed it has been so long a Custom that young Gentlemen of
Distinction will not be denied, nor is it their Interest to deny them. -- Pray
good Master Manager let me ask you a Question: -- Will a dozen Crowns
compensate the Affront given to a whole Audience of a hundred or a hundred and
fifty Pounds? Will or can a few young Men of Quality support your Interest like
the Ladies in the Boxes, the Gentlemen of the Inns of Court in the Pit, or the
more grave Citizens in the first Gallery? -- Well, but you answer, if such a
Custom was now denied, there would be Uproars in the House, which of late have
been of such fatal Consequence, that it would be dangerous to hazard them
again. -- That might be, Sirs, as your Conduct proved: It has been experienced,
if you give proper Notice to the Town, None will be admit^ed behind the Scenes,
and your Servants execute those Orders with the greatest Complaisance, yet
determined Resolution, the Evil might be soon remedied, as it is an Evil which
no Pretense can defend, and all the Town will support an Alteration of: The
Spectators would think themselves injured as well as you; and the Town very
lately supported a Manager in suppressing another Nuisance, the noisy Insolence
and Impertinence of the Footmen: In short, were they resolved to give up a few
pecuniary Pittances, they might, in a Week, keep the Scenes as clear from these
Squirts and Puffs of Foplings as ever. Besides, as Ars est Celare artem, it
would be politic not to let them see the Backside of our Tapestry; for many an
Actor and Actress may seem but ordinary Stuff on strict Examination, who from a
front Prospect on the Stage may seem very well: Mr. Rich, indeed, when his own
important Action is depending, has some Regard to this Rule, and the Scenes are
kept clear because Persons then admitted might impede the Scenery; and the
Beaus and Impertinents are satisfied with this Reason. -- Is not then the
Reason the same in Relation to the Actors, and the Scenery of a Play, as to a
Pantomime: -- Res ipsa loquitur. -- This Nuisance is besides a Disencouragement
to an Actor's Performance; for when all who appear well dressed are admitted
behind the Scenes, may it not, as it has sometimes happened, give an
Opportunity to a Monster dire, hated by Gods and Men, a Catchpole called, under
this Form, to touch, with magic Spell, the Shoulder Blade of some plumed
buskined Hero, and -- O! vile Shame! -- compulsive force him into Durance
base; where, by coercive Power, he is restrained, till Bail of Manager shall
set him free. -- Such Apprehensions must alarm an Actor who may not be the best
Oeconomist; and I am sure I have often seen Faces that have given me the
Palpitation of the Heart.

Mr. Cibber complains justly of another Distress the Managers of a Theater are
under, which, as I have myself experienced when I was the deputed Manager for
Summer Companies at Drury Lane, and a real one at the Theater in the
Hay-Market, I shall consider this Particular There is no greater Persecution in
the Government of a Playhouse, than the Persecution of bad Authors: The
Managers think their Case hard, and the Authors think so of theirs: Indeed it
would move Pity when an ingenious Indigent has been laboring, invita Minerva,
to heap up a Pile of Stuff which he calls Poetry, and to depend on it for more
Months Support than he has been scribbling it, yet after all to find it
rejected. But though rejected in the mildest Manner, and for the justest Cause,
yet the Manager must fall under severe Censure, and can have no Taste for good
Writing, nor knows what is Sense: He must be a Blockhead convict: Out comes an
Epigram or a Satire, and we are stigmatized as Fools, because we will not
exhibit a Piece which we are sure we must loose by. But, pray, if we have Pity
for a Gentleman's Circumstances, is our good Nature to carry us such Lengths as
will injure ourselves? No. Charity begins at home; and I see no Reason why a
theatrical Trader should not have the same Privilege as his Majesty's other
Liege Subjects in Trade, to buy or refuse what he pleases: The Managers ought
to be allowed this Liberty of judging Plays, etc. before they are brought on
the Stage; for when they are brought on, the Audience will claim the Freedom of
judging of them as they think proper: They damn many which are brought on, but
they would have nothing else to do the Year throughout, were the Managers of a
Theater to exhibit all the theatrical Lumber which is brought to them: To give
a Refusal to these Sparks is difficult, and practiced differently by different
Persons: Mr. Wilks would show the utmost Complaisance on these Occasions, and
by paying the Author Compliments on his Piece, that there were many pretty
Things in it, but it would not do as it stood then, or that it might be altered
for the better: By this, I say, he soothed the Poet's Anger, who though he went
not away satisfied, did not go away enraged. Mr. C. Cibber was more short: He
returned a Piece with, It is not fit for our Stage, Sir, it is not Theatrical.
-- Mr. Rich is more laconic still; for he only says, or writes, -- It will not
do. -- Mr. Fletewood took a different Way from them all; he being a Gentleman
of Rank by Birth, piqu'd himself on treating Authors as Gentlemen: He would see
them, excuse his not having had Time to peruse their Pieces, treat them with
great Deference, and desire them to call again: -- Though this was a wrong
Method, and gave him much unnecessa^y Trouble, yet, Courtier-like, he was
pleased with a great Number of Dependants, to all of whom he gave as much
Favor as he could, and when he had kept them in Suspense sometimes too long,
he dismissed them with much Complaisance and good Nature. -- As for myself, on
such Occasions, I followed my Father's Track; if I read a Piece and found it
was not Theatrical, I returned it to the Author, and told him so roundly.
Perhaps the Spark, with a mifty Air, walked off and wrote against me: But what
cared I --

Demens Judicio Vulgi, Sanus Meo. But the most pleasant Way of returning an
Author a refused Play, was that of Quin's: This Anecdote is worth relating.
When Mr. James Quin was a managing (...) under Mr. Rich, at
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, he had a (...) Heap of Plays brought him, which he put in
a Drawer in his Beauroe: An Author had given him a Play behind the Scenes,
which I suppose he might lose, or mislay, not troubling his Head about it. Two
or three Days after Mr. Bays waited on him to know how he liked his Play: Quin
told him some Excuse for its not being received, and the Author desired to have
it returned. -- "There, says Quin, there it lies on that Table." -- The Author
took up a Play that was lying on a Table* but on op^ning found it was a Comedy,
and his was a Trag^dy, and told Quin the Mistake: -- "Faith then, Sir, said he,
I have lost your Play" -- Lost my Play! cries the Bard -- "Yes by G -- d I
have, answered the Tragedian, but here is a Drawer full of both Comedies and
Tragedies, take any two you will in the Room of it." -- The Poet left him in
high Dudgeon, and the Hero stalked across the Room to his Spaw Water and
Rhenish with a negligent Felicity.

But to drop the Cutrain of this Chapter, which shall close with Mr. Cibber's
last Speech.

" C. Cibber's Apology, p. 345.
During our last four Years, there happened so very little like what has been
said before, that I shall conclude with barely mentioning those unavoidable
Accidents that drew on our Dissolution: The first that for some Years had led
me the Way to greater, was the continued ill State of Health which rendered
Booth incapable of appearing on the Stage. The next was the Death of Mrs.
Oldfield, which happened on the 23d of October, 1730. About the same Time Mrs.
Porter, then in her highest Reputation for Tragedy, was lost to us by the
Misfortune of a dislocated Limb, from the overturning of a Chaise; and our last
Stroke was the Death of Wilks, in September the Year following, 1731.

Notwithstanding such irreparable Losses, whether, when these favorite Actors
were no more to be had, their Successors might not be better born with than
they could possibly have been while the other were in Being; or that the
Generality of Spectators, from their Want of Taste, were easier to be pleased
than the Few that knew better; or that at worst our Actors were still
preferable to any other Company of the several then subsisting; or to whatever
Cause it might be imputed, our Audiences were far less abated than our
Apprehensions had suggested; so that though it began to grow late in Life with
me, having still Health and Strength enough to have been as useful on the Stage
as ever, I was under no visible Necessity of quitting it: But so it happened,
that our surviving Fraternity having got some chimaerical, and, as I thought,
unjust Notions into their Heads, which, though I knew they were without much
Difficulty to be surmounted, I chose not, at my Time of Day, to enter into new
Contentions; and as I found an Inclination in some of them to purchase the
whole Power of the Patent into their own Hands, I did my best, while I stayed
with them, to make it worth their while to come up to my Price, and then
patiently sold out my Share to the first Bidder, wishing the Crew I had left in
the Vessel a good Voyage.

What Commotions the Stage sell into the Year following, or from what
Provocations the greatest Part of the Actors revolted, and set up for
themselves in the Little Theater in the Hay-Market, lies not within the
Province of my Title Page to relate: Or as it might set some Persons living in
a Light they might possibly not choose to be seen in, I will be rather thankful
for the involuntary Favor they have done me, than trouble the Public with
private Complaints of fancied or real Injuries."

Thus ends Mr. Colley Cibber's History of his own Times, and from this Era I
shall, as a Supplement to his Apology, continue mine. The View of the Stage for
Nine Years past, in which I have had a large Share of Action, may seem a proper
Appendix to his more copious and laborious History.

But before I conclude this Chapter, I must do Justice to another compendiary
Historian, old Downs, the Prompter, who has given the Characters of the Actors
in 1706, the Year of the Union. There is a Particuliarity in his Style and
Manner, and a turgid Pompousness in his Epithets; yet it is not to be wondered
at, having been so many Years conversant with theatric Phrases, and elevated
Elocution: His Style nor Manner are not copious and digressive as that of Mr.
Colley Cibber, yet there is a Something in it, by which the judicious Reader
will discern some Affinity of Genius. Take his Characters in their own Order
and Orthography.

Mr. Wilks, proper and comely in Person; of graceful Port, Mein, and Air; void
of Affectation; his Elevations and Cadences just; congruent to Elocution,
especially in genteel Comedy; not inferior in Tragedy; the Emission of his
Words free, easy, and natural, attracting attentive Silence in his Audience (I
mean the Judicious) except were there are unnatural Parts, as

-- I Will mount the Sky,
And kick the Gods like Footbals, as I fly;
As Poet Durfey has it. Which puts the Voice to such obstraperous Stretch,
Requires the Lungs of a Smith's Bellows to reach.
He is indeed the finished Copy of his famous Predecessor Mr. Heart.

Mr. Cibber, a Gentleman of his Time, ha^ arrived to an exceeding Perfection in
hitting justly the Humor of a starched Bea^ or Fop to the Lord Foppington, Sir
Fopling and Sir Courtly, equaling in the last, the late eminent Mr. Mounford,
not much inferior in Tragedy, had Nature given him Lungs strenuous to his
finished Judgment.

Mr. Estcourt, Histrio natus; he has the Honor (Nature endowing him with an
easy, free, unaffected Mode of Elocution) in Comedy always to laetificate his
Audience, especially Quality (witness Sergeant Kyte:) He Is not excellent only
in that, but a superlative Mimick.

Mr. Booth, a Gentleman of liberal Education, of Form venust, of mellifluent
Pronunciation, having proper Gesticulations, which are graceful Attendants to
true Elocution, of his Time a most complete Tragedian.

Mr. Johnson. He Is skilful in the Art of Painting, which is a great Adjument
very promovent to the Art of true Elocution, which is all requirable in him
that bears the Name of an Actor: He has the Happiness to gain Applause from
Court and City, witness Morose, Corbacchio, Mr. Hothead, and several others: He
is a true Copy of Mr. Underhill, whom Sir William D'avenant judged 40 Years ago
in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, the truest Comedian in his Company.

Mr. Dogget. On the Stage he is very aspectabund, wearing a Farce in his Face;
his Thoughts deliberately framing, his Utterance congruous to his Looks: He is
the only comic Original now extant.

Mr. Pinkethman, he is the Darling of Fortunatus, has gained more at the
Theaters and Fairs in twelve Years, than those that has tug'd at the Oar of
acting these 50.

Next Mr. Mills, Mr. Powel, Mr. Bullock; the two first excel in Tragedy, the
other in Comedy.

I must not omit Praises due to Mr. Betterton, the first, and now only Remain
of the old Stock of the Company, of Sir William D'avenant in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields: He, like an old stately spreading Oak, now stands fixed
environed round with brave, young, growing, flourishing Plants.

Mr. Dryden, a little before his Death, rend'ring him this Praise; "He, like
the setting Sun, still shoots a glimmering Ray,
"Like ancient Rome, majestic in Decay.
Having through this historic Narrative rather made use of History already
compiled than wrote my own, the next Scenes will open with great Events, in
which I was a principal Actor; what a Kind of a Part I play, or how well I
performed it, I must submit, as I ever shall all my other theatrical Actions,
to the Censure or Approbation of the Public.

CHAP. VII.
The Author's Ambition in the remarkable Year 1^^0. -- His commencing Author.
The Reasons for it. The Author and Alexander compared. Mr. Colley Cibber
privately takes away King John from Drury Lane Theater. -- The Author's Speech
as a theatrical Patriot. -- The Drury Lane Company r^volt from Highmore, and go
to the Hay-market. The A^t of Parl^^ment for licensing the Stage considered by
the Author a^^ Mr. Colley Cibber. -- Reflecti^ns on the Author ^^ Pasquin. -- A
theatrical State Secret.

THE Theater has, with Humor and Propriety been compared to a Political State,
but the Nature of its Government has never been fixed: Some affirm the natural
Constitution of a Theater is a Republic; some say it is a limited, others an
unlimited Monarchy: What is the best, or what the original Form of Government
was, or what future Kind of Government it may have, the most shrewd theatric
Politician cannot affirm. Whatever my Notions may be as to national Government,
yet, as to a Theatrical State, I must ingenuously confess myself
Anti-monarchical: I am for a Government by a few; a Triumvirate* and I will
tell you roundly, Reader, my Reason. The Stage never succeeded better than under
the Triumvirate; and as I can never be a sole Monarch, this is the best Form I
can think of, which would give me Power equal to a Monarch, though not the
titular Honor; for my Copartners in Empire should be little more than
Ciphers, ^^gnifying, roundly, Nothing. They might indeed be Triumvirs; but
then, like Duke Trincalo in the Play, I would Triumvir over them. This may seem
too vain a Conjecture of my own Parts, and too vain a Contempt of the
Understanding of others; but in the Sequel of this Story you will find, that as
I was the Bustle-master General, I was also the Commander-General, and
Treaty-master General; if with all these Commissions I could not secure to
myself as much or more Power than most Monarchs in fact have, I ought to be
stigmatized for the errantest Dolt that ever pretended to Machiavelism.

But after this Pro-aemium let me introduce Matters of Fact, for which it will
be necessary to premise some few Things regarding myself before the Triumvirate
was dissolved, and Mr. Colley Cibber sold his Share in the Patent, as they will
the better connect what Relations, Observations, Contemplations, Ruminations,
Quotations, and Argumentations which may ensue.

From the little hopes which the Public conceived of me as an Actor who would
make any Figure, by Industry, Application, and what joined to them is (...),
the All in All, Genius, I rose into a gradual Esteem of the Town: But lest my
Significance as an Actor should not be glaring enough, I was resolved, young as
I was, at a Time when the whole Nation was in a Bustle, to make my Share in it.
In the Year 1720, when all Men thought of raising Estates, and bubbling the
World out of what Money they could, I had a violent Ambition of getting much
Money, and making much Noise. Would you think it, but I will confess the
Simplicity of my Heart: I thought then that were I a South Sea Director, That I
would do -- Ye Gods! -- What I would do! But as I was, resolved I was to act
something adventrous within my Sphere; and, unlike the other Projectors, I
built my Scheme on a valuable Foundation; and, according to City Phrase, I had
the Credit of the best Man in England to make use of: In short, as all were
commencing great Men, I was resolved to commence Author, and accordingly
altered a Play of Shakespeare's and had it brought on the Stage; nor was the
Success of it much unequal to my Hopes. This indeed was thought striking a bold
Stroke; to alter Shakespeare was a Task that some Persons, merely bigoted to
Antiquity, shudder'd at the Name, they calling it sacrificing, violating,
affronting, and I don't know what, the Manes of that Bard: But sure all
unprejudiced Persons will not deny, that some historical Plays of Shakespeare
want what we now call Jeau de Theater, that is, a --, a -- something necessary
to make Shakespeare be.... more... more, in brief more Jeu de Theater. My
parental Exemplar had altered Richard the IIId before, that is, he had culled
the Flowers of two or three Plays, and had bunch'd them up into a Nosegay, for
the Devil a Line did he write himself; some indeed he altered, but some say for
the worse: In this Manner I altered Henry the Sixth; and that the present and
future Age might know that I had altered it, I printed it with my own Name, in
capital Letters, in the Title Page. This is mentioned to show that I did
patrassare in my first setting out in a Theater; but here I allow non passibus
aequis. From this Instance, however, the Public saw there was some Spirit of
Audacity, and the Dawn of Genius in me. From this notable Era I became more
singularly remarkable both on and off the Stage: I had some few small Parts
given me, in which I succeeded beyond Expectation; but as by this Time I knew
so much of a Theater, that I was sensible Original Parts made the strongest
Influence in the Audience, I endeavored to get all the little, sprightly, or
humourous Parts which I thought I could hit; the first in which I was more
particularly taken Notice of, was the Country Footboy in the Conscious Lovers.
The Part was but a few Lines, yet I, without Affectation say, that I struck in
to the aukwardly-pert cunning of such an unlick'd Cub, so naturally, that I had
as many Claps as Speeches. I valued not the Length of a Part so much as its
Humor, and if I had Applause when I was on the Stage, I was better satisfied
than being on the Stage longer, and having no Applause at all: Other young
Actors of the House thought in regard to me, what Wilks and Powel did as to Mr.
Cibber, sen. -- Coiley Cibber's Apology, p. 123.
"They generally measured, says he, the Goodness of a Part by the Length of it:
I thought none bad by being short, that were closely natural, nor any the
better for being long, without that Quality. But in this I doubt as to their
Interest they judged better than myself, for I have generally observed, that
those who do a great deal not ill, have been preferred to those who do but
little, though never so masterly." As to the latter Part of the Sentence,
Experience has proved equally, that to act much tolerably, and not so much
masterly, are the Ways to rise to the Top of a Theater: Mr. Cibber was himself
a Master of a Company, and it is no very great odds, but Mr. T. C. may succeed
to the same Post of honorable Profit.

As I rose into some Degree of Approbation, I succeeded Mr. Norris, commonly
called Dicky Norris in several of his Parts; which, with several others, which
I was well received in, put me a little upon my Mettle; and I began to think,
as I had heard my Father say, he was taken Notice of most for being an Author
as well as an Actor, that I would pursue the same Measures. I soon came to a
Resolution, for Ambition in great Souls acts with incredible Rapidity. -- Aut
Caesar aut nullus, I thought an excellent Apothegm; Nec mora, nec requies, Pen,
Ink, Paper, a Collection of Plays, etc. being prepared, to Work went I. When I
had thought of a Plot, struck out Hints for some Characters, and fixed in the
Name of a Comedy, I communicated, at a proper Opportunity, my Design to my
Father. He heard me with an indolent Air, and gave me no Answer, but lolling
back in his great Chair, took a Pinch of Snuff, and fell asleep. -- It is
impossible to conceive the tumultuous Passions that then agitated my whole
human Frame: Quick beat my Heart, my Pulse ran high,
And Vengeance darted from my Eye;
Upon my Brow sat lowering Care,
And all the Horror of Despair.
-- Yet I waited till he awoke, and repeated to him my Design of writing a
Comedy. -- "A Comedy, Boy! Thou write a Comedy!" -- Yes, Sir, says I, why not?
You wrote a Comedy before you was my Age. -- "True, Child; but, my Dear, I hope
you don't think of this Affair seriously." -- Yes, Sir, I have thought on it,
and have begun it, and half wrote it -- "Well, but harkye, Sir, What has put
you on this Exploit? Fame, Fame, I suppose, and Parnassian Glory: Pr'ythe stick
to thy Business as an Actor, and don't show yourself in a double Capacity a
moxcomb." -- Saying this, he took a Pinch of Snuff, and walked off. -- Reader,
you may believe I was not in a little Confusion, and you may equally credit me,
when I tell you I thought my Father as errant a conceited pragmatical
self-sufficient Coxcomb as ever he represented. However, on I went with my
Play, and when I had finished three Acts, I accidentally happened to be with
him alone, when he surpised me, by saying, "Well, Boy, What is become of this
Comedy of thine? Have thou wrote a favorite Scene yet?" I told him what
Progress I had made, when, taking a Pinch, and smiling, "Pr'ythe, says, he,
what dest thou mean? What a Gad's Name, THE' inspires you in this Attempt?" --
That Principle, Sir, said I, that most of the World act upon, Interest. You
know, Sir, I have not been the most frugal Oeconomist; my Finances low, my
Debts high, and my Creditors impatient; a Comedy, Sir, from me would set all
right: I am sure it will do; my writing it would make it run: The Name would
raise a Curiosity..... "Yes, Sir, answered he, thy Name, for my Namesake would
secure your being damned.... However, as this is the State of the Case, let me
see your Play when you have finished it, and I will let you know more of my
Mind. I like the Reason you give for writing, and therefore shall not oppose
it.".... Now my Heart bounded with Joy, and what will not the Gratification of
our Desires work upon our Heart? I began to love my Father; I looked on him in
another Light, and instead of thinking him a Coxcomb, thought he talked like a
very sensible Man. In a Fortnight my Play was finished, and I brought it him,
and read it: He told me it was a rough Pebble, yet might do with a little
polishing; for it was a tolerable good first Play: In brief, it pleased him so
much, that he licked the rude Poetic Cub into that Form in which it afterward
appeared. On his Consent it should be brought on the Stage immediately, I could
not help ruminating on the Happiness of my Case as an Author; for there was not
one Author then living could have brought a Performance on the Stage without
infinite Trouble, Vexation, Charge and Interest. I took Care it should get into
Rehearsal at the Time the Managers had appointed, who were so civil as to
compliment me with the prime Part of the Season. It may smell pragmatical in
the Nostrils of Gravity, yet I cannot here help remarking what Ideas the Thirst
of Fame and Interest will raise in a generous Mind. The Reader will think,
Alexander the Great and I, can have no Analogy on this Occasion: But though my
Character is not parallel to him, my Soul may. The Minds of two Men, though
they are placed at some Distance, if they think in a right Way, will and must
meet in one and the same Thought; so every one knows two parallel Lines, the
least inclining to one another in the Progression, must and will meet in one
and the same Point; as then an Analogy between Me and Alexander may be
mathematically proved, I Will show it also by Example. The Maccdonian when he had
meditated in Youth high Exploits, and noble Feats of Arms, his Breast all
swelling with the Heaves and Throws of Ambition, he set before his Eyes the
Acts of Achilles; inspired by these he shook his brandished Falchion; on
Conquest he resolved;... resolved and conquered: so I ruminating on dramatic
Fame, Parnassian Glory, and three third crowded Nights, set before my Eyes the
Writings of Colley Cibber; inspired by those, I brandished high my Pen, hurling
Defiance in vile Critick's Teeth. On Triumph I resolved.... resolved and
triumphed... Now some smart theatrical Wou'dbe will say this Comparison proves
me no more like Alexander the Great, than that of Fluellin's i^ Henry the Fifth
does him like Alexander the Pig: This would give me no Pain.

Odi profanum vulgus and arceo. But as to my Play: When it began to mellow in
Rehearsal, and was almost ripe enough for the Stage; a pestilential Blast of
Envy had like to have destroyed it, and with it all my fair Hopes: A Rumor had
gone abroad, that truly this Comedy was none of mine, but my Father's; and that
he, not willing to stand the Bears any more, brought it out under my Name. As
ridiculous as this was, it gained Belief among many, therefore it was thought
necessary that I should make a previous Apology to the Town to set Matters in a
true Light, and to take off Prejudice: Accordingly I wrote a Letter to the
Town, and printed it in one or more of the public Papers, in which I told them
that, upon my Word and Credit, it was all my own Doings, and that my Father
never wrote a Line of it, or saw it. Notwithstanding this Letter, and the
intrinsic Value of the Comedy, there was great Opposition made to the Play, and
damned it had surely been, if the Epilogue spoke by my first Wife Jenny Cibber
and me had not saved it; for my Father knowing how it would be, wrote an
Epilogue as a Dialogue, between me and Jenny, in which she told me I was a
Bloc^head to write, and that I was my Father's own Son; all which were strong
Jokes with the Audience. I put on a pitiful Face, told her I wrote to pay my
Debts, and that I would for the future, prove a good and loving Husband, if she
would save my Play: The Audience being won by her Entreaty, to "Give us, at
least, an honest Chance to live, The Play lived nine Nights. -- This being the
chief Incident of my Life as an Author, I have been somewhat prolix in the
Account of it; and have yet some more Observations to make. I mentioned that I
wrote a Letter to the Town previous to the Performance of my Play: Now there is
a Parallel to this in the Conduct of Mr. Colley Cibber, which is not mentioned
in his Apology, his Apology not reaching to that Time. Every one must remember
that three Years ago Mr. Colley Cibber brought to Drury Lane Theater his Play,
altered from Shakespeare, called King John: It was no sooner in Rehearsal, but
slap the Critics were at him directly; Letters, Epigrams, Odes, Jokes, and all
the Ribraldry of Grubstreet flew about in the Papers, and it was said the
Templars, and their Posse Legislatus, were engaged to damn it. On this Mr.
Cibber wrote a Letter, directed, To the Students of the Inns of Court, and very
handsomely and mighty civilly desired them to do no such Thing. This Letter was
new Fuel to the Flame; they fell soul of the Letter immediately, from whence he
might easily conjecture how they would use his Play: But what could he do; the
Play was just ready to be performed, the Actors perfect, Scenes painted, and
much Time had been spent which the Master of the House would otherwise have
been using to his Interest, therefore he could not fairly withdraw it: However,
he was resolved it should not be damned; and fearing the Master might insist on
its being played, what does he, but at a Rehearsal, seeing his Play lying on
the Prompter's Table, he takes up the Copy, and puts it up into his Pocket
snug, and decently walked off with it, resolving he would not run the Risque of
so precarious a Fortune.

I shall here, while I think of it, speak of a Theatrical Conduct lately
practiced, nor can I speak of it in any Place more proper than in this: I mean
that of Persons belonging to a Theater addressing the Town by Letters.

I must confess, that I and my Father first practiced this Art, with the same
Success: It laid us open to the Criticism of Coffee-house Wits, who thought
soberly on what we wrote hastily: There was such canvassing the Style; this was
not Grammar, and that was not Sense; one Thing was false English, another a
Cibberism: But besides the Jokes, which if nothing else are nothing at a^l,
they debated the Point over, and formed themselves into Parties, which we
experienced were not to our Advantage. I have, indeed, since the Time of my
Play, addressed the Town, and with the same Success; for I find by our Theatric
Squabbles and Altercations we make as much Amusement to the Town in a Morning,
as by our Performance in an Evening. The Contentions for the Part of Polly
between Mr. Clive and my late -- I was going to say Wife; -- but a late Woman
who was called by my Name: That Contest, I remark, furnished a copious Topic
for Conversation, Argument, and Publication, and ended with Noise and Uproars
in the Playhouse: There has been the same Thing practiced by Monsieur Denoyer
and Mademoiselle Roland, and before by Monsieur Poitier and Mademoiselle
Roland, versus Messieurs Quin and Fleetwood, and yet another, which made not a
little Noise, between the two Harlequins, Messieurs Philips and Woodward. The
Consequence of all these Addresses has been this; the Town is called into the
Playhouse, as the dernier Resort, to judge of Things which the Master of the
House is only Judge of: When the Judges come to this mixed Court of Judicature,
where all present may pass Sentence, they are divided in Opinion, and then the
Question must be decided by Noise and Tumult, and they who are the greatest
Rioters carry it. I do not find that any of these epistolary Addresses to the
Town from theatric Performers have done them any Service, nor would I advise,
on any Occasion, to have Recourse to such Expedients: However, there is no Rule
without Exception. Mr. Rich, who has never suffered his People to make Appeals,
nor ever made them himself, was at last drawn in by mere Necessity. A little,
trifling, pragmatical, obscure 'Pothecary, that lives in some bye Street or
Alley about Covent Garden, one J -- H -- ll, publishes a Thing called the Opera
of Orpheus, and in a scurrilous Preface to it, abuses Mr. Rich for having stole
his Entertainment of Orpheus and Eurydice from his Orpheus, and instigated the
Public to do Justice for so notorious a Fraud; nor was this Pamphlet his only
Attack: He run about the Town, made Parties, and People from his
Representations, thought him really injured: Now it became necessary for Mr.
Rich likewise to appeal to the Town, and to set the Affair in a true Light, and
plainly narrate downright Matters of Fact: To this H -- ll replied, with all
the scoundrel Scurrility his little Wit could afford; and I also became an
Object of his Malice. There was a candid Answer printed to his Pamphlet the
Night before the Entertainment came out: This Address to the Public, from Mr.
Rich, was necessary, and had the desired Effects: The first Night the
Entertainment was crowded, and was received with general Applause; and the
World has never since heard of that J -- H -- ll, who sunk into that Obscurity
from whence he emerg'd.

But to return, Reader, to that Station in the Theater from whence I digress'd.
After having wrote my Play called the Lover, I began to think myself every Day
of more and more Consequence; and having got an Insight into the Manner of
Managing, I began to think I ^^s Equal to the Management of a young Company to
play in the Summer Season. Accordingly I got Leave from Mr. Wilks, and the
other Masters, to form a young Company, and, to play during the Vacation: This
was no bad Thing for the Masters, nor the inferior Players; for the first
received a settled Payment for the Use of a few old Scenes and Clothes, and the
latter generally five or six Days pay per Week for two Days Performance.
Besides, I generally brought out some new Pieces and Farces, which not only
turned to our immediate Account, but to the Good of the Actors, as Actors, and
to the Masters, by becoming very gainful Performances the Winter or two
following. To Instance this, I need say no more than that George Barnwell, the
Devil to pay, the M^ck Doctor, and the Beggars Opera, the Part of Polly by Mrs.
Clive, were first performed under my Management of Summer Companies: From these
young Companies see what Performers have been chiefly sprung; Mrs Clive, Mrs.
Buttler, and, though last, not least in Love -- MYSELF. This Custom I continued
till the Revolution of the whole Company under my Conduct, of which more
hereafter. This Management of mine was an undoubted Proof of my Abilities, and
I did imagine I might become a Manager in my own Right: But, alas! how frail
are all human Hopes! On the Death of Mr. Wilks, Mr. Cibber, sen. sold out, at a
proper Opportunity, his Share of the Patent to Mr. Highmore, a Gentleman who
had a great liking to theatrical Affairs, and who had played some Parts on the
Stage, merely, I suppose, to show what a Judge he was of acting, and
consequently of Actors. The Parts he played were H^tspur and L^thario. This
Gentleman, besides his Liking to theatrical Affairs, had chiefly a Liking to
theatrical Gain: He had heard, and partly seen what Profits the Managers had
made for a long Course of Years, and had a Mind to purchase what he thought
would prove so fine an Income: How his Expectations were answered, you will
find related. Here I must disclose a Secret; When Mr. Cibber, sen. sold out his
Share in the Patent, I was desperataly alarmed, and looked on it as a Piece of
Injustice done to myself: For I thought his Share, or at least the major Part
of his Share, would have devolved upon me as an Inheritance; therefore I looked
on myself as a disinberited Son, and that Highmore had bought, clandessinely,
my Birthright, or rather by sinister Means deprived me of it. This may serve
for a Reason why I so heartily entered into the Measures I afterward
prosecuted: On Mr. Booth's Death the Patent became invested to the Property of
Mr. Highmore, the Widow Booth, and the Widow Wilks. The whole Company began to
murmur at being ruled by so motley a Kind of Government as they were now
falling under, viz. A Man who knew nothing of the Business, and two Women unfit
for such a Province: Mr. Ellis was indeed deputed to act for Mrs. Wilks, b^t I
believe that did not much better the Affairs: Mr. Ellis, however, became not
only a Deputy to Mrs. Wilks, but Prime-Minister and Fac-Totum to Highmore. This
could be no pleasant Situation for the other Actors, who had been so many Years
laboring in the Theater, and bo^e the Burden of the Day; such as the elder
Mills, Mr. Johnson, Miller, Griffin, and some others, who, though younger, had
some Claim, as Mills, jun. and ^^self: I found this an admirable Time to put in
Execution a Design I had plan'd, which was, at a proper Opportunity, to fling
off the Yoke, and set up for Masters and Managers ourselves: At one of our
private Meetings all were complaining, yet no one proposed a Method of Redress,
when I got up from my Chair and thus delivered myself.

Gentlemen,
MY Heart never beats with a stronger Joy than when I have a Power of thinking
and acting right: I think the Glow that now warms my Bosom is raised by Truth
and cherished by Sobriety. Long have you complained of the Tyranny you groan
under, and long have looked with Indignation on your Chains: But what, O ye
Gods! can avail lugubrious Lamentations? Of what Force is such female
Rhetoric?... If you think you receive Injuries, deliver yourselves from them:
If you would not be Slaves, be free: If you have a Will to be so, you have
Power. Under what Bonds are you consined? By what Allegiance are you
restrained? You have a glorious Cause: You may be the Asserters of the Cause of
Liberty. What though your Enemies have got the Patent, you have your own
Talents, your own Endowments of Nature, and Acquisitions of Art. What is the
Great Seal to you? You may say of that, as was said by a great and bold Man of
Magna Charta, it was a Magna Farta. If you have Spirits, Resolution, and
Conduct, a fair Road invites to Wealth, Fame, and Freedom. You may take their
House of some of the Renters, and get Possession of it by Artifice, and set up
yourselves: A Stratagem in War is no Crime: Or, failing in that, you may, pro
tempore, take the little Hay-market House: Your Company will be better than
theirs, and Novelty of Places will be changing the Scene, and give Success.
Perhaps it may be objected we have no Exchequer, no Scenes, no Clothes, with a
long Et caetera. What then? You may have Credit enough.... Though some among
you have not much Credit in a private Capacity, yet in a public Capacity, as a
Body corporate, as it were, much Credit will be given: There are monied Men who
will adventure Sums on such a Proceeding: Therefore, Sirs, no longer show this
Inanity of Complaint; the Means of Freedom are in your own Possession, which,
if you refuse, may you be perpetual Slaves, and be sold like a Herd of Sheep
from one Purchaser to another: If you dare be otherwise, by this honest Heart I
will risque my Life and Fortune with you, and prove to you, that I cannot only,
Fari quae sentio sed Agere quae Sentio, speak what I think, but act accordingly.

This Harangue had all the Success that I could wish; They resolved no longer
to bear the galling Yoke of Tyranny, but assert that Liberty and Property which
all true Britons are so tenacious of. When the Season was quite over, we
thought it a proper Time, having gained some of the Renters to our Side, to
endeavor to gain Possession of the Theater; but in this we failed, though we
attacked it, Vi and Armis. On this Disappointment, we all agreed, that the only
Place we could pitch our Tents at, and open our theatrical Campaign, must be at
the little House in the Hay-market. Several Objections were made to the
Situation of the Place, and the Smallness of the Theater; but, as I had the
Revolution strongly at Heart, I talked them and persuaded them out of all their
Objections. At Length it was resolved, in a full Council of War, that we would
encamp at the Hay-market; we accordingly took the House of one Potter, a
Carpenter, who was the Landlord, b^spoke all our dramatick Equipages and
Furniture, and held frequent Councils to settle the Operations of the ensuing
Campaign. At the Fair of Bartholomew we gained some Recruits; but besides those
Advantages over the Enemy, I myself went there in Person, and publicly exposed
myself: This was done to fling Defiance in the Patentees Teeth; for on the
Booth where I exhibited, I hung out the Stage-Mutiny, with Pistol at the Head
of his Troop, our Standard bearing this Motto, -- We Eat. -- In a few Days
after, the Patentees opened with Aesop, to which they added an occasional
Scene, written formerly by Sir John Vanbrugh, on a prior De^ertion of Actors,
wherein they thought they did great Service to the Patentees, and cast a severe
Ro^^^ction on us: They next attacked us by another old, worn-out, rh^psodical
Affair of one Feildings, called the Author's Farce, in which I and my Father
were daily ridiculed: But all this I laughed at in my Sleeve, well considering,
that joking on the Cibbers could not hurt us. On the contrary, we opened with
Love for Love, and got up all the strongest Plays with a diligent Expedition.
Our Company consisted of the old Veterans, who were allowed by the Town to be
greatly superior to our Antagonists; for excepting Mrs. Clive and Mrs. Horton,
there was not one in their Company but was the contemptible Refuse of the
Theater. We had also received an additional Force, by receiving Mr. Milward,
who having left Mr. Rich on some Disgust, joined our Forces. The Patentees
imagined that much depended on the Number of their Troops, and they had tried
considerable Reinforcements from strolling Companies; but being all awkward and
undisciplined, they were no more to compare to us than the County Militia to
the King's Body-Guards Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 116.
. -- "What rude, riotous Havoc was made of all the late dramatic Honors of
our Theater! All became at once the Spoil of Ignorance and Self-Conceit!
Shakespeare was tortured and defaced in every single Character. Hamlet and
Othello lost in one Hour all their good Sense, their Dignity, and Fame. Brutus
and Cassius became noisy Blusterers, with bold unmeaning Eyes, mistaken
Sentiments, and turgid Elocution: Not young Lawyers in hired Robes and Plumes
at a Masquerade, could be less what they could seem, or more aukwardly
personate the Character they belonged to." This exclamatory Invective of Mr.
Colley Cibber, on the Revolution which Betterton made, is so apropos to my
Revolution, I could not forbear quoting it. As we met with much Success, and
the Patentees with none at all, they thought to effect by Policy what they
could not obtain by Force: They endeavored therefore to silence us, not by the
Authority of the Lord Chamberlain, but that of an Act of Parliament, by which
they would prove us Vagabonds. To effect this* Mr. Harper was taken up as a
Vagabond, and was committed to Bridewell: But on the Trial of the Legality of
his Commitment, it appeared that he was not within the Description of the Act
of the Twelfth of Queen Ann, against Vagabonds, he being a Housekeeper, and
having a Vote for the Members of Parliament for Westminster: He was therefore
discharged, and conducted through the Hall, amidst the triumphant Acclamations
of his theatric Friends. Having carried this important Point, we had nothing to
fear from the Patentees, knowing now that our Success depended solely on our
own good Conduct, and the Favor of the Public. I cannot but confess that we
had dismal Apprehensions of the Force of the Act, which would have so fixed the
Power of the Patent, that we must invitis animis have returned to the Dominions
of our former Masters: We had indeed got a specious Color of a License, and
put at the Top of our Bill, By License of the Master of the Revels; for which
titular Honor we paid him handsomely; yet we did this rather to induce the
Public to think we played by a legal Authority and under the Sanction of the
Court, than for any Right which we thought it conferred on us. We could not be
ignorant that Mr. Giffard's Company at Goodman's Fields was then playing
against all the Opposition that could be made to it, against the Power of the
City of London, and even their Remonstrances to the Court that it was a
Nuisance. In short, it was not then thought in the Power of the Crown to
suppress a Playhouse, though acting without Royal License and Permission,
because it was not evidently an illegal Thing. But the Case is now altered by a
late Act of Parliament, which has fixed all Power in regard to Theaters and
theatrical Affairs in the Lord Chamberlain for the Time being: As this Act is
of such Importance to the Theaters, and the passing it caused great Debates in
both Houses, it may be proper to consider the Cause and Reasons given for
having it enacted; in relating which, I may give some curious Anecdotes, and
State-Secrets, which Mr. C. Cibber has omitted; yet I shall open my Narrative
in his Words, as they are an Invective against a certain Person, for whom also
I have a Word or two in Petto.

" Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 164.
These tolerated Companies gave Encouragement to a broken Wit to collect a
fourth Company, who for sometime acted Plays in the Hay Market, which House the
united Drury Lane Comedians had quited. This enterprising Person, I say, (whom
I do not choose to name, unless it could be to his Advantage, or that it was of
Importance) had Sense enough to know, that the best of Plays with bad Actors
would turn but to a very poor Account, and therefore found it pecessary to give
the Public some Pieces of an extraordinary Kind, the Poetry of which he
conceived ought to be so strong, that the greatest Dunce of an Actor, could not
spoil it. He knew too, that as he was in haste to get Money, it would take up
less Time to be intrepidly abusive, than decently entertaining; that to draw
the Mob after him, he must rake the Chanel, and pelt their Superiors; that to
show himself Somebody, he must come up to Juvenal's Advice, and stand the
Consequence.

"Aude aliquid brevibus gyaris and carcere dignum
"Si vis esse aliquis. --
Juv. Such then was the mettlesome Modesty he set out with; upon this Principle
he produced several frank and free Farces that seemed to knock all Distinctions
of Mankind on the Head. Religion, Laws, Government, Priests, Judges, and
Ministers were all laid flat at the Feet of this This is to be taken in a
double Sense, the Person struck at having since called himself Hercules
Vinegar, and is the notorious Author of the Champion.
Herculean Satyrist. This Drawcansir in Wit, that spared neither Friend nor
Foe; who, to make his Fame immortal, like another Erostratus, set Fire to his
Stage by writing up to an Act of Parliament to demolish it. I shall not give
the particular Strokes of his Ingenuity a Chance to be remembered, by reciting
them; it may be enough to say, in general Terms, they were so openly flagrant,
that the Wisdom of the Legislature thought it high Time to take Notice of them."

The Person of whom Mr. Cibber only gives the Outside Lines of his Pourtrait,
is at present well known by those only: but that Posterity may know this
iniquitous Son of Wit, who has fell under this heavy Censure of the Laureat for
satirizing the just Measures of the present all-just, all-wise, and
all-powerful Minister; I will subscribe the Name of H -- y F -- d -- g, Esquire
Author of Pasquin, the historical Register, Eurydice hissed, and others of the
same political Cast. To these Farces, which were allegorical Satires on the
Administration, the Town run with the utmost Avidity of Defamation and Scandal:
He drew the Mob after him from Grov^s^or, Cavendish, Hanover, and all the other
fashionable Squares, as also from 'Pall Mall, and the Inns of Court: I call
them as the Apologist I quoted calls them, Mob; for there may be your Mobs of
Quality as well as Mob^ of Raggimuffins; your Magnum vulgus and imum -- Your
great Vulgar and the small. -- Well -- These Mobs or Multitudes, or Concourse,
or Audiences, call them what you will, resorted nightly to hear these Farces,
and were dull enough not only to think they contained Wit and Humor, but Truth
also. It could not but regret me to see some noble Peers and Gentlemen I had
entertained a very good Opinion of, as to their Parts and Capacities, sitting
in the Side-boxes, and seemingly delighted with the Performance: But I have
Charity enough for these Gentlemen to think they did all this more out of
Party-Zeal, and to bias the Mob, than from any Conviction, there was, in those
Farces, either Sense, Humor, or Truth. -- But what will not Men prostitute in
a Party-Cause! -- The Successes of these dramatic Pieces made the M -- r not a
little uneasy, nor could the merry droll Mortal his Brother keep his Temper;
for let some Men be as facetions as they please, and love a Laugh as much as
they will, they don't like the Laugh to be always on them. I and my Father, who
can bear as much laughing at, and have had as much laughing at as any two
Persons in the Kingdom, not excepting the two honorable Gentlemen I just now
mentioned; yet though we carry it off in Company, it stings, it hurts our
Hearts to be the standing Objects of Raillery; and I will not say, but if we
could as well avenge the Insults on us, as the M... r could against him, but We
might perform it.... But to the Point. From these farcical Satires, a dainty
Opportunity offered itself to the great Man, not only to suppress those, but to
bring all Stages, and all Stage-writings under such a Restriction, that nothing
should be exhibited for the future that should give him the least Uneasiness.
Here was an admirable Proof of deep Policy and Sagacity, to make the Satire of
his Enemies be the Tools of his Interest: A Scheme was laid to accomplish his
Design, it was put in Execution, and it succeeded.

I must here enter the Verge of private History, and by the following Anecdote
show, that I have that great Talent of an Historian, not to dare to speak
false, and not afraid to speak Truth.

Mr. Giffard had removed about this Time from Goodman's Fields to Lincoln's End
Fields House, which he had hired of Mr. Rich; His Removal had not answered his
End, and his Affairs began to grow desperate. He had never as yet given any
prejudicial Offense to the Court, yet was s^ppos'd not to have such Obligations
to it, as to deny, at this Juncture, the performing a Farce which might bring
him a large Sum of Money. At this same Time, in a most vile Paper, called
Common Sense, there was a libellous Production called the Golden Rump, which
the Town and the Mob were Fools enough to think Wit and Humor: Now as the
hitting in with the Humor of the multitudinous Mob is very advantageous to a
Theater, a Dramatick Piece was wrote on the Golden Rump Subject, and called the
Golden Rump, which was given Mr. Giffard to be performed; but before it was
rehearsed it so happened, no Matter how or why, but so it happened, that Mr.
Giffard went to Downing-Street with this Satirical Farce in his Pocket, which
was delivered to a great Man for his Perusal; and it was found to be a
scurrilous, ignominious, traitorous, scandalous, etc. etc. etc. Libel against
Majesty itself. It was immediately carried to... shown to... explained to...
and remonstrated to... that if there was not an immediate Act of Parliament to
stop such Abuses, not Regal Dignity was safe from them. -- Actum est. -- 'Twas
done. -- The Point gained in a Moment, and a proper Act ordered to be got. --
Well, now, says some impatient Reader, What of all this? What Secret is this?
By what Inference or Inuendo does this show the M......'s Policy or Finesse?...
Prithee don't be so mifty, and let me ask you a Question by Way of a Suppose.
-- Suppose Sir, this same Golden Rump Farce was wrote by a certain great Man's
own Direction, and as much Scurrility and Treason larded in it as possible. --
Suppose Giffard had a private Hint how to act in this Affair, and was promised
great Things to play a particular Part in this Farce. -- Suppose he was
promised a separate License, or an Equivalent: -- You may then suppose the
M....... a thorough Politician, who knew to manage bad Things to the best
Advantage. -- O! but, say you, I will not found my Belief on Supposes -- Truth
may be supposed: Suppose this Truth and you may be right. -- If you are so
ungenteel to require Proof demonstrative I have done with you, and can only
refer you to the Author and Negociators of the Golden Rump. -- This, however,
is notoriously certain, that the Farce of the Golden Rump was carried to a
great Man, and the Master of the Playhouse, who carried it, was promised
something, which he has been some Time in a vain Expectation of, but will now,
in all Probability, end in nothing at all.

But, laying aside private Anecdotes of the obtaining the late Playhouse Act, I
must mention what was known to all: The Masters of the two Houses acting under
the Patent made no Opposition to this Bill; they did all in their Power to
promote it, because it would suppress, for the present, all Theaters but their
own: They were so full of this Prospect, that they did not perceive they were
at the same Time becoming absolute Dependants on a M -- r; for the Bill
contained a Clause, that the Lord Chamberlain should have a Power of licensing
other Theaters, if he so thought proper, within the City and Liberties of
Westminster. The Actors were indeed alarmed, and imagined this Act would lay
them under Oppressions, from which they could gain no proper Redress; for the
constant immemorial Way of redressing Grievances, in the Government of a
Theater, is to raise a Revolt, and bring about a Revolution: But the Security
of the Masters of the Playhouses, and the Alarm of the Actors were both
illfounded, as I shall, in the subsequent Narration, make appear. If the Lord
Chamberlain can grant another License, why then should not the Actors, who may
be aggrieved by the present Masters, endeavor to gain one? I only ask that
Question here; I may explain it in another Place.

Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 165.
Mr. C. Cibber has made a copious and florid Dissertation, as well political as
theatrical, on this Law: He proves Satire on a Minister, when represented on
the Stage, is stronger than any Satire can be that is read in the Closet,
therefore to license the Stage could bear no Analogy with licensing the Press:
He lays it down also, "that a theatrical Insult to the present Minister, is
equal to the Stab Guiscard gave the late Lord Oxford:"Then adds, "Was it not as
high Time to take this dangerous Weapon of mimical Insolence and Defamation out
of the Hands of a mad Poet, as to wrest the Knife from the lifted Hand of a
Murderer?" -- In short, the Laureat has shown himself a profound Politician, by
becoming a voluntary Champion for that Law: He says, he writes on this Subject
to show the true Pourtrait of his Mind, and to show how far he is or is not a
Blockhead: Perhaps this was not the only Motive; if he had another Design than
merely to give his shallow Reasons a little Exercise, and if it should succeed,
the World must admire at the Depth of his Speculations. I shall illustrate this
Remark when I come to descant on some Transactions of a very late Date,
thinking it now Time to return to that Part of my History from whence I
digress'd.

By the Release of Harper, we gained a complete Conquest over the Pattentees;
they indeed carried on the Campaign, but with such Losses and Disadvantage,
that Mr. Highmore, the chief Sharer and Director, began to think it the most
prudent Method to make the best Retreat he could: Upon my Soul, though as an
Enemy in the Field I could not be displeased with his Distress; yet, as he paid
so many thousand Pounds to my Father, my honest Heart could not but feel for
his being plunged in an Affair he knew nothing of. I cannot blame my Father for
so advantageously selling out; and, was my hereditary Claim laid aside, he
acted prudently, and consequently honestly. But let that go: He made me some
amends by giving Highmore no assisting Advice how to conduct his Theater,
which, if he had, must have greatly injured us; for no one knows that Province
but myself and him. The new Purchaser therefore being left to himself, and his
Prime Minister Mr. E-ll-s, Singers, Dancers, Tumblers, and other exotic
Performers were hired at extraordinary Rates. This was but of very little
Service, and the Posture of his Affairs grew daily into a worse and worse
Situation.

I cannot but here observe to the Reader how different our Conduct was at the
Hay-market: I must ingenuously confess, though we kept our simple Heads above
Water, we had got out of our Depth; for after our first Run of Novelty and
Interest was over, our Audiences grew thin, which Deficiency we supplied by
Orders of our own; for in the Theaters, as in Shops, the Appearance of Business
brings Customers. Nevertheless, we found large Deficiencies in the Office; and
by the Accounts in our Books we had contracted a very considerable Debt; yet we
concealed the State of our Case as much as possible, resolving to beat our
Antagonists our of the Field, and by such a Conquest set every Thing right. If
the Patentees at Drury Lane had either known our Condition, or had Prudence and
Courage enough to bear with their own for another Season, I know not what the
Consequences might have been: I may say it now, I believe we should have been
forced to a Cessation of Arms, and capitulated on the best Terms we could have
got.

Mr. Rich had either gained better Intelligence of the State of our Affairs, or
from the State of those at Drury Lane, had found the Patentees were heartily
tired of their expensive instead of lucrative Offices: From one of these
Reasons, or both, he had formed a Scheme, which, had it been carried into
Execution, must have proved very gainful to the Patentees, and very agreeable
to the Town, as it would have given them the best Plays, played by the best
Performers in England: But as well concerted as it was for these Intentions, it
was destructive of the natural and legal Liberty of the Actors: They would have
become mere Servants to two co-join'd Patentees; nor could have had, on any
Disgust or Affront, any Power to revolt. The Scheme was for to have Drury Lane
Patent purchased of the Patentees who were tired of it, at a cheap Rate, and
then the Patentees of Covent Garden and Drury Lane to enter into a joint
Partnership, and engage the best Actors, who should act occasionally at both
Houses, performing always a Comedy at one House and a Tragedy at the other.
There were several other Conditions which would have proved beneficial to the
Masters, which are needless to enumerate.

This Plan, though it has been long thought a new Finesse in theatric Policy,
yet Cibber's Apology shows it is an old Stage-Cunning, practiced, in some
Measure, by Mr. R -- h's Father, and Mr. Owen Swinney. This Design, however,
could not be carried into Execution by Mr. R -- h alone: There was wanting the
Primum Mobile, the Sine qua non; the Purchase Money: On this Occasion he
applied to Mr. Fl -- t -- d, who was his Friend, and proposed his purchasing
the Patent, and to enter into a Sort of Partnership: This Proposal was set in
so advantageous a Light, and such fair Hopes offered themselves, that Mr. Fl --
t -- d came into this Scheme, and purchased the Patent of Mr. Highmore and the
other Patentees. On this Turn in Affairs, We at the Hay-market were under a
most terrible Consternation; we looked on ourselves as Persons who were never
to enjoy that Liberty we had so strenuously endeavored to obtain: For this
Conjunction of the Patentee Masters must have compelled us to have returned
under their Management, our Affairs being in a very sad Posture, and daily
growing worse: But, very happily for us, a Breach happened between Mr. R -- h
and Mr. Fl -- t -- d at a Time we could have least suspected it, and that gave
us all we wanted, an Opportunity to make the best Terms with the latter, get
rid of our Stock-Debt, and return to Drury Lane: I shall not enter into the
Reasons for this Breach of Friendship between the two Masters, as that Affair
has been so differently represented; but Mr. R -- h has been chiefly censured
as having drawn a Gentleman into an Affair, which he would not otherwise have
thought to have embarked in, and then leaving him to conduct his new
Undertaking as he might: But let their Quarrel be what it would, it was
advantageous to us; for Mr. Fl -- t -- d being worked into the highest
Resentment, was resolved to make up the best Company, and to hurt R -- h by
getting from him his chief Actors, and most necessary People: Mr. Quin was soon
gained, but on such Terms as no hired Actor had before received. At the same
Time Mr. Fl -- t -- d had entered into a Treaty with us at the Hay-market, and
agreed to allow all the managing Actors two hundred Pounds a Year each, and to
some a clear Benefit, and to others a Benefit at a lower Rate than usual. As in
all the Transactions of that Affair I was Treaty-Master General, and negociated
that important Peace with the Patentee, it may be expected I should enter into
a long detail on that Subject. My Conduct in this Respect may be somewhat
singular, but I can give some Reasons as an Apology for it: As this will be
entering on a new Scene, I will halt a little as well to give my Reader a
little Relief as myself; for I don't know how it is, but I begin to perceive
myself somewhat dull, and perhaps some People may have perceived it a great
while ago. If then, Sir Reader, your Patience and good Nature are worn out,
fling down the Book, that you may, when you think proper, begin the next
Chapter with a better Temper, and a Spirit more alert and lively, -- and all
that.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Nature of writing Apologies: The Author's Proof against Scandal. -- His
Negociations and those of H -- o W -- e compared. -- His Conduct and the Duke
of A -- le's paralleled. -- Obligations received are no Reason for Gratitude.
-- The Company fixed at Drury Lane: Some Remarks on it, and a Digression.

WELL, courteous Reader, you venture then to travel on, maugre all the Things I
can say to my own Dispraise: If I, like my Father, tell you, about every sixth
Page, I am a Blockhead or a Coxcomb, yet you still away with my Nonsense; and
as my Vanity is not quite jaded, you read on in Hopes to meet with some fresh
Instances of it. But perhaps those who may peruse this Apology for my Life may
expect that I would enter into some very illustrious and renowned Acts of my
private Conduct which have been very publicly talked of: To such Personages I
shall answer, they are not to imagine a Man would set down in cool Blood and
write the Devil of a Satire against himself: That would be dainty apologizing
indeed: No; the Thing is to say nothing harsh against your own dear Self, but
as many severe Things and Reflections as possible against other People. Mr.
Colley Cibber, whose apologetical Talents are admirable, has shown this Species
of writing in Perfection: A great many People, on the Publication of his
Apology, cried, An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber! Well, now we shall
see what he can say in Regard to this, and that, and the other -- Things which
related to Gaming, or Gallantry, or a thousand Things not so very proper to be
mentioned: But they were all out; not a Syllable of his private Character; not
a Word for exc^sing, palliating, or defending little foolish Acts which merely
related to Religion or Morality. I can guess what may be expected from me; what
Defense of particular Conduct. I may make; but I shall relate only such Things
as may show my Parts, my theatrical Character, and, in short, what I think
proper, not what every impertinent Person may want to know: Nor is this so
unfair a Proceeding as some may imagine: No Man can be obliged to accuse
himself: I write to put a Gloss upon my Acts and Deeds, not place them in the
most odious Light, and erect myself in an historical Pillory. It would also be
an endless Work to vindicate all the simple Accusations which have been brought
against me, and which no Persons have any Business to trouble their Heads
about. Should Men say, for Instance, I used my first dear and well-beloved
Wife, of ever blessed Memory, J -- n -- y C --, with ill Usage: Should they
affirm, that when her all pale and breathless Corpse was in the Coffin laid, and
I, with Sobs and Tears and interjected Sighs, had moaned to many a Witness, my
too unhappy Fate, yet that same Night had a Brace of Drurian Doxies vile in the
same House. -- Again, should base Defamation whisper in my Ear I sold and
bartered away my present most virtuous Spouse, and that I was a voluntary
Cuckold on Record: Should Scandal with her hundred-tongu'd cursed Mouth, rumor
it up and down, that neither common Honor nor common Honesty were lodged
within the Center of my Soul. -- Should even all this be said, calm and
unruff^ed would I contemn it all, and look on such Reports in the cool Light of
mild Philosophy. There are indeed a Set of People who will be Busy-Bodies: To
such I would answer very pithily, sometimes, What is that to ME, sometimes,
What is that to YOU. To illustrate what a Propriety there is in curbing such
Kind of Impertinence by a Laconic Sentence, I will tell you a short Story.

A great Lawyer, who now makes one of the most illustrious Figures in
Westminster Hall, was as remarkable for his Amors as his Pleadings: What was
his Gallantry to any Body? Yet was he often censured and made the Object of Wit
for this Foible. It happened his Lady, his Chambermaid, and Cousin all lay-in
at the same Time: A Friend of his took an Occasion to speak to him on this
Subject by Way of Raillery, in this Manner: They say, my L -- d, your Lady is
brought to Bed. -- She is so. -- They say your Cousin and Chambermaid are also
brought to Bed. -- What Is that to ME. -- But they say you are the Father. --
What Is that to YOU. -- Upon which, turning on his Heel, my L -- d left Mr.
Impertinent with a proper Indignation. -- What Is that to You, is the sole
Answer I shall give to any defamatory Scurrility, and if any Person is not
satisfied with such a Reply, he may get a more satisfactory one if he knows
how. -- After this Observation it may be proper to resume my theatrical Story,
which I left off at the Treaty with Mr. Fl -- t -- d, to return to Drury Lane
House, and act under his Patent.

As I had been the chief Person in raising our theatrical Revolt, and being of
a daring pushing Temper, I was resolved to have the principal Share in the
Restoration of the Company to Drury Lane: I accordingly got myself nominated as
Plenipo', and began my Negociations with Mr. Fl -- t -- d: How happy I was in
my Negociations the Event proved; and as I had to deal with a Person of Honor
and Generosity, I managed the Conduct of the whole Affair in such a Manner as
to make it turn out to myself. In short, I got a good round Sum of Money out of
him; for why should I negociate and negociate and get nothing myself. Some
People may smile to see me, on this Occasion, compare myself to another great
Negociator, and wonder how I and H -- ce W -- e can have any Analogy. But pray
do you think that he for so many Years has run from Court to Court; now at the
Hague, now at Paris; negociating here and negociating there, and all for a Joke
only? Would any Man do this without the pleasing Recordation of Place and
Pension? In Truth my Friend H --, as well as myself, was a little moved by Self
Interest: Besi^^s, our Negociations have been some what alike; for mine, in
sact, was a patched up Affair, and I did not so much consult the Interest of my
Master, as to serve a Turn for that Time: I botched up a Peace, but I knew it
would not last many Years: If there is any Pre-eminence in our Talents, I hope
I shall not seem immodest, when I frankly own I think the Balance turns in my
Favor; for I am now more for War than Peace.

" C. Cibber's Apology p. 326.
Thus we see, as Mr. C. Cibber truly observes, let the Degrees and Ranks of Men
be ever so unequal, Nature throws out their Passions from the same Motives;
it is not the Eminence or Lowliness of either that makes us the Difference. If
this familiar Style of talking should, in the Nostrils of Gravity and Wisdom,
smell a little too much of the Presumptuous or the Pragmatical, I will at least
descend lower in my Apology for it, by calling to my Assistance the old humble
Proverb, viz. It Is an ill Bird that, etc. Why then should I debase my
Prosession by setting it in valgar Lights, when I may show it to more
favorable Advantages? Or why, indeed, may I not suppose that a sensible Reader
will rather laugh than look grave at the Pomp of my Parallels."

When I had concluded this Treaty with Mr. Fl -- t -- d, so advantageous for
the Company, and more particularly in a private Manner to myself, we removed
Bag and Bagage from the Hay-Market and returned to our old Camp at Drury Lane:
Our Government was then thought to be fixed in a peaceable Manner; every Thing
went on with great Success, and I took Care to be so much in the Master's
Favor, that in the Direction of the Theat^e I was a kind of Prime Minister: I
say a kind of Prime Minister, for even then there was another Person shared
amply in his Confidence, and by whom he was chiefly advised. When I found out
this, I was not a little nettled; a Jealousy raised various Sentiments in my
Breast; for, like Pompey the Great, my Soul disdained the Thought of an Equal.
Glory and Power are the darling Passions of my Heart; and not to enjoy either
of them was, to so jealous an Ambition, a mere Shade to my Laurels. My
Competitor was the Person who had been concerned for Mrs. Wilks, and who
thought himself to have an admirable Talent for theatric Affairs. This Talent
was to compose Pantomimes, furbish up old Tricks, and make what he called
Entertainments: As a Specimen of what Notion he had of the Dignity of the
Stage, I must observe, that his Genius turned to the monstrous and the
mavelous; for which Reason nothing could be brought to Town to be exhibited
to the Vulgar, but he was for having it exhibited on the Stage: There was a
Fellow of an enormous Height came from Germany to be shown for a Sight, called
Mynheer Cajanus: Such a Spectacle, proper enough for a Smithfield or Moorfields
Booth, was thought a proper Personage to grace the Theater Royal. Accordingly
Negociations were begun; but to my Honor be it spoke, I had no Concern in
them: I was kept out of the Secret, nor was I much affected that I was so. I
and his Grace the Duke of A -- le, in this Respect, may be said to have the
same Notion of Things: His late Speech on the State of the Nation shows that he
was out of the Secret, in Regard to the Conduct of Affairs, and, as he thinks
them wrong, was proud that none of them could be laid to his Charge: though I
and that illustrious Person differ in other Sentiments in Regard to the present
Ministry, yet I am proud that in this Point he agrees with me. -- But to the
History: Mynheer soon agreed to some very advantageous Terms proposed to him;
was with all Secrecy conveyed into Drury Lane Theater, and was soon shown
arising from a Trap-Door, to the no small Admiration of the Spectators, and the
no small Joy of my Co-Rival. Nothing could give me and my Brethren, both of the
Buskin and the Sock, who had any Regard for that School of Honor and Virtue,
the Stage, more secret Indignation than to see it prostituted in so ignominious
a Manner: And what still added to our Resentment was the consummate Folly of
the Town, who crowded to the House a great Number of Nights to see the Tall
Man. But I had yet other Reasons to be no Friend to this Tall Man. It regretted
my Soul, frequently and often, when on Buskins a Foot and a half high I was to
personate a great Hero, and had my wavy Plume high over my Brow, Nod ever and
anon with tragic Grace; yet was I thought diminutively great, and raised the
Audience to a mock Laugh, while he -- that Orion, that Polephemus of a Man,
with an Inanity of Voice and Gesture, excited Wonder and Applause. -- Pudet
haec opprobria Nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse reselli.
After this tall Man was gone, we had a tall Woman, and after that Sadler's
Wells Tumbling. It is true, this pleased the Mob, and brought Money, nor was
this Custom new. Did not the late Mr. R -- h act in the same Manner by this
Humor: " C. Cibber's Apology, p. 195.
In this Notion, says Mr. Cibber, he kept no Medium, for in my Memory he
carried it so far, that he was some Years before this Time, actually dealing
for an extraordinary large Elephant, at a certain Sum, for every Day he might
think fit to show the tractable Creature's Genius of that vast quiet Creature,
in any Play or Farce in the Theater (then standing) in Dorset Garden: But from
the Jealousy so formidable a Rival had raised in the Dancers, and by his
Bricklayer's assuring him, that if the Walls were opened wide enough for his
Entrance, it might endanger the Fall of the House, he gave up his Project: But
at the same Time of being under this Disappointment, he put in Practice another
Project of as new, though not of so bold a Nature, which was introducing a Set
of Rope Dancers into the same Theater; for the first Day of whose Performance
he had given out some Play in which I had a material Part: But I was hardy
enough to go into the Pit and acquaint the Spectators near me, that I hoped
they would not think it a Disrespect to them if I declined acting upon any
Stage that was brought to so low a Disgrace as ours was like to be by that
Day's Entertainment. My Excuse was so well taken that I never after found any
ill Consesequences, or heard the least Disapprobation of it: And the whole Body
of Actors protesting against such an Abuse of their Profession, our cautious
Master was too much intimidated to repeat it."

Now I was not hardy enough to make any public Remonstrances on this Occasion;
for I had a Point to carry, which was to fix my Wife's Character as an Actress,
whose first Performance was to be closed with these Sadler's Wells Tumblers: On
this Account it was my Business to be as well with the Master as possible; and,
though I from my Soul abhorred such Measures, yet no one was more bustling and
commendatory in the Design than myself: By this I not only showed an Attachment
to his Interest, but kept myself on good Terms with the other Minister: But had
I thought it would have been any Gain to me, to have distressed the Master by
making any Remonstrances, my Father's Hardiness should not have come up to
mine; for I would not have gone sneaking into the Pit in hugger-mugger: Not I
truly; But bounce upon the Stage, with blustering Mood, have stalked and made a
speech, which, with pathetick Air in Words and Action, had represented our
Disasters dire; and though they had hissed again and yet again, I Would have stood
'em all till they had heard me out. -- On this ingenuous Confession of how I
did act or how I would have acted, some may say, Are these Principles
honorable? Is not this servile Flattery, and that scandalous Injustice? -- Are
not Favors received strong Obligations for Gratitude? -- Well, Sir Casuist,
what of all this? Honor and Gratitude, and this and that and the other are quite
different Things, according to the received Notions of different Places; for
what is dishonorable and immoral in England, may be thought quite otherwise
among the Hottentots: A Man in London may be thought odd if he offers his Wife
for his Friend's Service, yet it is well known several Nations of Negroes
practice it even to Strangers. If Morality is local, as I have fully proved, I
have proved also there may be much Difference between theatrical Honor and
common Honor: Now my Notion of theatrical Honor is to act only for your own
Convenience, and you can do no Injustice if you serve yourself. If I should now
be pertly asked, -- What THE', where are thy Morals? Have thou no Conscience?
Yes, I have, but what then? That I have embraced the Philosophy of Mr. Colley
Cibber, I told the Reader in a prior Chapter; and what does that great and good
Man say in his three hundredth Page, -- "I did it against my Conscience; and
had not Virtue to starve by opposing a Multitude that would have been too hard
for me. -- Had Harry the Fourth of France a better Excuse for changing his
Religion? I was still in my Heart on the Side of Truth and Sense, but I had
their Leave to quit them when they could not support me; for what Equivalent
could I have found for my falling a Martyr to them." -- O most admirable
Doctrine! The Plea of Convenience is a full Answer for a Breach of Conscience.
-- Is not this a Doctrine that Machiavel himself might have boasted? Having
here observed on what Maxims I and my Father act, some of our late Conduct,
which shall be considered in a subsequent Chapter, may now be easily accounted
for. Though our Notions may be exploded by some, Mr. Colley Cibber has, among
M^nkind, more Disciples than Mr. George Whitfield; and this I am sure of, their
Zeal is stronger, as there are many who die Martyrs to his Doctrine every
Sessions at the Old-Bailey, having lived in a full Faith, that to do what they
think convenient, is to do right.

There is a private Anecdote of my Life, which is a Proof how early I imbibed
this convenient Opinion; I have indeed often related it to my theatrical
Acquaintance with much Glee of Heart, and boastful Satisfaction; but as I would
be by this Apology, Toto notus in orb Theophilus, I cannot resist the
Temptation of inserting it in these my Memoirs. You must know, Reader, that
even by the Time I had reached my eighth Year, my Papa said I was a sad young
Dog, and upon some Prank I had played, I was in some Disgrace: It happened I
went into his Chamber, to endeavor a Reconciliation one Morning; and as he had
gone to Bed in his Cups over Night, he had, I supposed, dropped a couple of
Guineas out of his Breeches; be that how it will, I saw the two pretty
sparkling Rogues lie at the Edge of the Carpet, by his Bedside: What does I,
but Slap runs to the happy Spot, fell on my Knees, and, like a good and dutiful
Child, cried out, in a devout Tone, Pray, Father, bless me, and pray to G -- d
to bless me, and make me his true and faithful Servant for ever and ever, Amen.
-- He, surprised at such a sudden Strain of filial Duty, (for I don't believe I
ever asked him Blessing twice before in my whole Life) stroak'd me down the
Head, and bid me rise, by which Time I had, by Slight of Hand, touched the
Spankers, and conveyed them snug into my Pocket; -- and he will never have
heard of them since, till he reads this Apology for such an Action; that, as I
thought they would be a Convenience to me, my Conscience was not too dainty to
take them. -- E minimis majora. --

All this Harangue on my Philosophy is necessary, though it may seem odd to
many Readers, because it is an apologetical Defense for every Action of my Life
at once: I may indeed illustrate it by more Instances in the Sequel of my
Story, but shall now return where this Digression began. -- The Company went on
under Mr. F -- d with very great Success, equal to the greatest under Cibber,
Wilks, and 'Booth: As for me, I was occasionally more or less in his Favor and
Interest as it suited my own Convenience; for he showed me many Instances of
his Readiness to serve me, and was on all Occasions prompt and ready to do Acts
of Friendship and good Nature. The Stage was then as well ruled by my
Assistance, as a Gentleman not brought up to it, could rule it; yet as it was
my Opinion, and several other Players, that no Gentleman is proper for the
Master of a Theater, we were not absolutely contented, and we did not want for
Grumbletonians in a theatric Government. We knew indeed that our Master had
redeemed us from a thousand Inconveniences we had labored under, gave us our
own Terms, but yet we did not look upon him with an equal Eye, and thought that
Actors were the only proper and fit Persons to rule over Actors, and receive
all the Profits of a Theater. These, I say, were Maxims that the chiefest
Actors embraced, and inculcated into others, as the fundamental Rights of our
Constitution: On this the Company became uneasy, and formed themselves into
little Factions, and Cabals, but which could not then have been attended with
any ill Consequences to the Patentee. But these little Murmurings were greatly
heightened by the following Event. On the late Act for licensing the Number of
Stages taking Place, Mr. Giffard's Company acting then at Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,
to whom Mr. Rich had let it, were obliged to break up, and provide for
themselves in the acting Companies as well as they could: Mr. F -- d on this
Occasion took severa! into Drury Lane, and to make Way for them, dismissed
several, who had long been appertaining to that Theater. Mrs. Giffard and Mr.
Giffard were themselves likewise afterward engaged. This gave new Uneasiness
to the old Stock, for we looked on them in a contemptible Light; and when the
Season came on, and Parts were cast to these exotic Actors, still more and more
murmuring Taunts and Jealousies arose. The Master favored several of these
additional Recruits in a particular Manner, and seemed to make them his
Confidents and Favorites. This still made more Faction in our State, till at
last it was divided into two Parties, the Riff-Raffs, and the Scabs. The first
were the Master's Party, the latter mine; his were as the present Courtiers,
and mine as the Patriots. The Titles may seem coarse to the Ears of Delicacy,
but why not as good and significant as the present Names of Distinction in
Sweden, the Hats and the Night-Caps, or indeed as our own Whig and Tory.
Another notable Mark of Distinction was, the Master's Party instituted a famous
Club of Riff-Raffs, called the Ox-Cheek-Club; and this was erected on the Ruins
of a Club, which the old Drury Lane Company had formerly erected. These
Party-Divisions are in a theatrical Government as prejudicial to the public
Good, as in a political one. The Business of the Stage was not followed with
that Spirit and Alacrity as when Unanimity reigns in the Hearts of the People.
I did, I frankly confess, what a theatrical Patriot should do, foment all the
Discord, raise all the Jealousies, in order, at a proper Time and Season, to
raise a Rebellion, and bring about a new Revolution; and these Sentiments of
Patriotism have been since very serviceable to me in another Respect, for in my
political Essays, which I had the Honor to write in Defense of the Present
Administration, I have charged all these Maxims home upon the Gentlemen in the
Country-Party, for my Father has proved the Rules for the Stage and State are
the same in Parallel, so also must be those of Patriotism. About this Time also
I found the Wings of my Power clipped in Relation of presiding over Rehearsals,
and brought on one Morning a round Quarrel between Q -- n and Me; for I had
long looked on him as a proud imperious Blockhead, and he on me as a vain
impertinent Coxcomb; and perhaps we might both be somewhat right in our
Conjectures. In this Contest I valued nothing so much as his Contempt of Me;
for on my smart cutting Repartees on him, he cried, with a Laugh, Quarrelling
with such a Fellow, is like sh -- t -- g on a T -- d, walking off as cool as a
Cucumber. -- And that was the Sire of the Rencounter we afterward had at the
Bedsord Coffee-House. All these Affairs happening, and my Trial not turning out
to my Favor, my Soul became chagrin'd both with the Place and my Master: I was
therefore resolved to leave that Stage, and for such Reasons as you will meet
with in the Sequel of my Story. Therefore as soon as my Benefit was over, I
determined, according to an old Practice I had got, of being of no more Service
to the Master that Season, to appear no more that Year, and indeed no more at
all, while he was concerned there. -- Retiring therefore from Covent Garden
into the more agreeable and convenient Air of Charing Cross, I flung off the
Comedian, and commenced Politician; but as by entering on that Subject, I shall
begin a new Farce, it would be more proper to let the Curtain of this Chapter
drop here.

CHAP. IX.
The Author steps out of his Way: Turns M-n-st-r-l Writer. -- The Reasons why.
Some chimerical Thoughts of making the Stage useful.

"A Quiet Time in History, says Mr. Colley Cibber, like a Calm in a Voyage,
leaves us but in an indolent Station: To talk of our Affairs when they were no
longer ruffled by Misfortunes, would be a Picture without a Shade, a flat
Performance at best." This is his Apology for the Relation of his stepping out
of the Way, and turning Pleader at the Bar; nor can I make any better for
telling how I became a M -- al Writer. The Affairs at Drury Lane went on too
successful for me to carry some Views I had into immediate Execution, therefore
I thought it would be best to pave my Way to my Project by engaging the Favors
of the Minister, and becoming his Advocate in Print. In this I thought to kill
two Birds with one Stone, as I could at the same Time take an Opportunity of
revenging myself to the full on Mr. Fl -- t -- d, by satirizing him, not only
as to his theatrical Affairs, but with Regard to his private Economy.
Accordingly I went to work and wrote a Pamphlet called the Country
Correspondent, in which I have shown a Specimen of my moral, theatrical,
political, and gallant Character. Some People immediately knew the Author, for
we great Authors are soon found out let us take what Care we will to conceal
ourselves. If I, or Mr. Pope, or my Father were to write any Thing without
setting our Names to it, we should be discovered in six Lines reading; the
Style, the Manner, the Thoughts would all glare out Perfection, and the
inimitable Ja ne scai quoy would distinguish the Author. On my publishing the
Country Correspondent, and being known for its Sire, many were the Criticisms
upon it: Some called me a Coxcomb for writing so much upon myself: Some called
me a base impudent Fellow for publishing such Invectives against Mr. Fl -- t --
d, who had been my Friend: Others fell foul on me because I had openly, boldly,
and strenuously espoused the Cause of the Minister. As for being called a
Coxcomb, I had been so long used to it that it seemed as natural to me as my
own Name; nor did the Accusations against me for libelling Mr. Fl -- t -- d
give me any Pain: They who had odd Notions of Honor and Honesty said that I
was an ungrateful Rascal, and this and that and the other; but they might as well
have sung Psalms to a Cow, for my Philosophy could away with it. What I did was
conveniently necessary, and if from being an obliged Friend I became a mortal
Enemy, what more is it than what frequently happens among Ministers of State
and Rulers of Empires. Augustus and Antony had their fierce Contest for the
World; and what was the Cause of the Quarrel between Sir R -- t W -- e and Mr.
P -- y, but Ambition in the one, and a Disregard of his Claims in the other. In
all theatrical as well as political Divisions, to succeed in your Design you
must go through thick and thin; the Sword of Defiance is drawn, and the
Scabbard must be thrown away: Every one who has read Machiavel knows these
Tenets are justifiable: therefore whatever Falsehood, Scandal, Infamy, and
Ingratitude my Country Correspondent might have contained against Mr. Fl -- t
-- d, yet it being consistent with my private Views, no one who knows Men and
Things can blame me; for I shall explain myself by giving some Reasons which
were then in Embrio, why I so acted. I had determined to be as well with the M
-- st -- y as possible, and to merit something from them, I undertook first to
be a Kind of an Informer of what they called theatrical Secrets. Our Master had
publicly espoused the Party in Opposition to the M -- st -- r, and was firmly
attached to the Interest of the P -- of W --: This Conduct I heard was resented
by the M -- st -- r, with whom he had once been on very good Terms: I thought
therefore any private Intelligence against the Master, if I could possibly make
it a political Concern, would be an Introduction to his Favor, and assist my
future Scheme. An Incident happened as favorable as I could wish: A certain
Irish Author was writing a Tragedy, which was, by his Friends, who were
reckoned the tiptop Critics in Town, said to be a Performance of such
extraordinary Merit, that no Tragedy since Shakespeare's Time could equal it,
either for the Sublimity of the Ideas, the Dignity of the Style, the Nobleness
of the Subject, and the Conduct of the Scene: That it was wrote in the Defense
of Freedom, and had such Speeches that at that Crisis of Time it would run as
long as Cato had at another particular Crisis. This dainty Tragedy was the much
noised, much subscribed for GUSTAVUS VASA, written by HENRY BROOK, Esquire The
Master had great Expectations from it; and though it had been often read in
private Company before it was brought to the House; yet I knew little of it
till then, as I was looked upon as a Malecontent to the Master, and
consequently out of the Secrets of the Ministry. But as soon as it had been
read in the Green-Room, and the Parts delivered out to the Actors, and I was
acquainted perfectly with the Play, I was determined I would take such Measures
that it should not be acted; which would show to the Minister what Zeal I had
for his Service, and at the same Time, indulge that Spirit of Revenge which I
had against the Master. Now what does I, but represented to Mr. -- no Matter
for his Name -- but it was the proper Person to make such an Information to,
that this same Tragedy of Gustavus Vasa was a scandalous Libel against the
Government, and some Lines in the Praise of Liberty were so introduced as to
make strong Inuendoes that the Liberty of England was in Danger: This I
represented with such a Vehemence of Words and Action, that it gained Credit,
and before it was ready to be performed, it was prohibited by my Lord
Chamberlain. The Prohibition opened the Mouths and Hearts of the Admirers of
this Tragedy, and they talked roundly about the Injustice and Oppression the
Author and the Master of the Playhouse met with, which they attributed to the
Fear the Ministry had of its being performed on the Stage. Now to give my own
impartial Thoughts on this Affair, I avow that I believe there was no Harm in
the Play, nor do I think it would have met with that great Success as was
expected from it; for on the Publication it was not judged near equal to the
Character that had been given it. However I cannot but make this Observation,
that from the Action on the Stage, and the Assistance of the Scenes and Actors,
it might have received such additional Strength, that it might, by the further
Aid of a Party, have had a Run of ten Nights. And here I must observe again,
that it was with great Policy and Prudence, that the Minister obtained the
Licensing Act, for though the Liberty of the Press allows a refused Play to be
printed, yet the Reading of it in the Closet will not convey an adequate Idea
to the Representation on a Theater: Mr. Colley Cibber, who is a most strenuous
Champion for the Licensing Act, has fully considered this Difference between a
Performance printed only, and when it is acted. -- Thus he argues C. Cibber's
Apology, p. 169.
-- "It was said that this Restraint upon the Stage would not remedy the Evil
complained of: That a Play refused to be licensed would still be printed with
double Advantage, when it should be insinuated that it was refused for some
Strokes of Wit, and would be more likely then to have its Effect among the
People: However natural this Consequence may seem, I doubt it will be very
difficult to give a printed Satire, or Libel, half the Force or Credit of an
acted one. The most artful or notorious Lie, or strained Allusion that ever
slandered a great Man, may be read by some People with a Smile of Contempt, or
at worst it can but impose on one Person at once. But when the Words of the
same plausible Stuff shall be repeated on a Theater, the Wit of it among a
Crowd of Hearers is liable to be overvalued, and may unite and warm a whole
Body of the Malicious and Ignorant into a Plaudit: Nay, the, partial Claps of
only twenty ill-minded Persons among several hundred of silent Hearers, shall,
and often have been mistaken for a general Approbation, and frequently draw
into their Party the Indifferent or the Inapprehensive, who rather than not be
thought to understand the Conceit, will laugh with the Laughers, and join in
the Triumph! But alas! the quiet Reader of the same ingenious Matter, can only
like for himself, and the Poison has a much slower Operation upon the Body of a
People, when it is so retail'd out, than when told to a full Audience by
Wholesale: The single Reader too may happen to be a sensible, unprejudiced
Person, and then the merry Dose, meeting with the Antidote of a sound Judgment,
perhaps may have no Operation at all: With such a one the Wit of the most
ingenious Satire will only, by its intrinsic Truth or Value, gain upon his
Approbation, or, if it be worth an Answer, a printed Falsehood may positively be
confounded by printed Proofs against it. But against Contempt and Scandal
heightened by the Skill of an Actor, ludicrously infusing it into a Multitude,
there is no immediate Defense to be made, or equal Reparation to be had, for it
would be but a poor Satisfaction at last, after lying long patient under the
Injury that Time only is to show which would probably be the Case, that the
Author of it was a desperate Indigent, that did it for Bread: How much less
dangerous and offensive then, is the written than the acted Scandal? The
Impression the Comedian gives it, is a Kind of double Stamp in the Poet's
Paper, that raises it ten Times to the intrinsic Value. Upon the whole; if the
Stage ought ever to have been reformed; if to place a Power somewhere of
restraining its Immoralities was not inconsistent with the Liberties of a
civilized People, (neither of which any moral Man of Sense can dispute) might
it not have shown a Spirit too poorly prejudiced to have rejected so rational a
Law, only because the Honor and Office of a Minister might happen, in some
small Measure, to be protected by it."



I must annotate, that all that is said here in Reference to comic Satire, and
the Comedian, is, vice versa, equally applicable to the Tragedy and Tragedian:
For when a mad brained tragic Author has streamed into a Patriotic Style,
pompously rolling into vilifying Periods, signifying roundly nothing, but
Invectives against a Minister, the pompous Buskins and Plumes of Tragedy,
together with the Aspect and Elocution of the Tragedian, so speak and play with
the Imagination, that they deceive the Judgment, and win over many Spectators
who might have thought them scandalous Bombast, had they been read soberly in
the Closet. This, as I observed, was the Fate of Gustavus Vasa, Esquire for after
the Prohibition, the Author published Advertisements for a Subscription, aad in
those Advertisements made his Cause the Cause of the Public, insinuating it
was refused for some Strokes of Liberty, which were disagreeable to People in
Power: This indeed answered his Ends in point of Profit, for being the first
Play refused since the Commencement of the Act, People's Curiosity were raised
not only by wanting to see the prohibited Play, out of political Reasons, but
because it was said by common Rumor to be a most excellent Tragedy: The Profit
of the Subscription was equal to what his most sanguine Hopes might have
promised him from the Stage. As this may be the most proper Place for it, I
must insert another Remark on refused Plays. After this Success of the
Subscription of Gustavus Vasa, all the tragic Bards who were under the
Influence of Mr. L -- tt -- t -- n, Prime Minister at N -- rf -- k House, threw
into bombast Scenes all the Patriot-Liberty Flights their own little Geniuses
could suggest, or their Patron and Court of Assistants could muster up! Some
indeed say they did not, on this Occasion, insert any Thing new, but that they
had all from the first, wrote according to their Instructions, and had filled
their Scenes with the worn-out, unfashionable Notions of Liberty and public
Spirit: The next refused Plays were the Edward and Eleonara, of Mr. Thompson at
Covent Garden, and a Tragedy wrote by Mr. Pattison at Drury Lane, both of which
were published by Subscription, and advertised that they fell the Martyrs to
Freedom, public Spirit, and the Devil and all: But, as the homely Proverb
says, Enough is as good as a Feast: The Public had been crammed by Esquire Gustavus
to Satiety; and Satiety, from a natural Effect it has on the Generality of
Stomachs of Mankind, will not allow an Avidity for more; for, as Mr. Colley
Cibber philosophically and beautifully observes C. Cibber's Apology, p. 79.
, What Pleasure is not languid to Satiety Ditto, p. 171.
..... Satiety puts an End to all Taste that the Mind of Man can delight in:
Therefore their Subscriptions fell short of Mr. Brooks's considerably; and I
believe the Patriot-Poets begin now to feel the ill Consequences of an
Opposition to a certain great Man as much as the Merchants: The Merchants would
have a War, and they have had their Hearts full of it: The Poets would write up
to a Refusal, and I believe they begin heartily to repent it: We of the Court
have, I gad, given them their Bellies full: I and Sir R... t play all the Game,
and let us shuffle the Cards theatrically, or patriotically, we still turn up
Knave.... But halt a little, most gracious Reader, in the Fullness of my Heart I
have digress'd so long, that I don't know where I digress'd from: But that is
just my Father's Way, for as we write, so we do but write on, it is sufficient;
as for Method and Connection, we leave them to your little Geniuses; our
Irregularity in writing, like our Irregularity in living, is more beautiful
from its Deformity: Were we not singularly eminent, we might die unnoted by
Fame; but it is our Extravaganzas in Life which mark us out to the Gaze and
Wonder of the present Age; and the inexpressible Somewhat in our Apologies will
record us the most notable Par nobile of the Year 1740, excepting, with due
Submission, that great Par nobile Fratrum, who in A..... str...... n and
Negotiation have so eminently distinguished themselves to all Europe.

But seriously to recover the Clue of my History; from having given Reasons why
I abused Mr. F.... d in my ministerial Essays, I digress'd to my turning
Informer about Gustavus Vasa, and so deduced some historical Anecdotes
concerning that dainty Piece, and added some political Remarks from Cibber's
Apology, in Defense of the licensing Act.... Let me see... Ay, it was so. -- I
will now draw the Back Scene of my Proceedings, and still enlarge the Prospect:
It was in the Vacation of last Summer, when having retreated from
Covent Garden, I retired to Charing Cross. My Enemies gave out, that I went
there for some trifling Sums I had run in Debt for at Mrs. St -- w -- d's, and
some other fashionable reputable Bawdy-Houses in Covent Garden Piazzas.... Vile
Insinuation! How weak the Understanding of Man to account for Conduct of great
Men, when they are ignorant upon what Principles they move. -- What reflective
Witticisms and Inuendoes have been flung at Sir -- about this secret
Expedition, which has been so long fitting out: What Things have been said
about a Suspension, or Cessation of Arms, and I don't know what, when, at the
same Time, the great Man acts upon other Measures than they guess, and intends
to proceed on other Motives than they imagine. -- I was used in the same Manner
as to my secret Expedition to Charing Cross: And as it is now over, and to put
such fruitless Revilers to the Blush, I will tell them my Motives to it:
Imprimis, as I was going to commence M -- al Writer, it was proper I should
live near the M -- r, not only for more easily attending his Levees, but to be
more readily sent for to attend a private Conference, and receive Instructions
whom I was to lash, what I was to defend, what gainsay, when to give the
evasive, and when the downright Lie: All which Things are necessary for a
Writer to know, who has such a Patron to defend. -- As for the Frequency of my
private Conferences, and the Nature of my Instruction, I shall prudently be
silent; Instructions given to Ambassadors, though moved for by Members of the
House of C -- s to be laid before them, are not to be revealed in such a
Manner: But as to my frequenting a Levee in Downing-street, that is notoriously
known; and I can say, with some Elevation of Heart, few in his Circle were more
distinguished for their Sense, Learning, Virtue, Honor, Policy, Ability, and
Eloquence, than your little humble Servant T. C. -- But besides these Reasons,
my Printer and Publisher lived at that Place, and it is best for an Author to
confer with his Printer very often; as how the Sale goes on, and whether any
Cash is become due, without mentioning the Necessity of correcting the Sheets
from the Press; for what a sad Figure an Author makes in Print who don't know
how to make his Stops: I therefore always stop my Works myself: though as for
the Spelling I leave that to the Printer's Boy. Sure then these are sufficient
Reasons to take off the Obloquy that was cast on me, that vile Catchpoles drove
me to a Place which I out of mere Policy retired to. -- Well, there it was I
composed my Country Correspondents, in all which I continued my Attack on Mr.
Fl -- t -- d; and in a miscellaneous rhapsodical Way defended the P -- M -- r
Tooth and Nail: In Taverns I eat for him, drank for him, talked for him, and
when I went home about Four o'Clock in the Morning I wrote for him.

Aurora Musis Amica. Then would I write about it and about it. I continued this
zealous and satirical Fury for the whole Summer, nor did I write County
Correspondents only, but sometimes occasional Gazetteers, in both which Kinds
of Writing I equally succeeded.

This strenuous Attachment of mine to the Administration, drew on me the Abuse
of the Country Party; and I was libelled under the Character of Pistol in a
scandalous Paper called Common Sense. The Author of that Journal is a
profligate forging Fellow; for he inserted Letters from Pistol, with an
Insinuation (as I go by the Name of Pistol) that they came from me, which was
as notorious a Fib as his Predecessor Mist told of Colley Cibber; and I take
this Opportunity to avow to the whole World that I never had any thing to do
with Common Sense, nor ever will: Fron my Soul I heartily despise it; and from
this Moment, till Atropos with fatal Shears shall snip the spinning Thread of
vital Life, Common Sense and I are Enemies, and so, Mr. Common Sense, your
humble Servant. -- But it seems my great Apologist himself was droll'd upon for
his State-writings: I mean the Comedy of the Non-Juror, and Myn^^er Keyber was
a standing Joke till at last Mist fairly killed him. -- Take the Story in his
own Words.

"Soon after the Non-Juror had received the Favor of the Town, I read, in one
of Mist's Journals, the following short Paragraph: Yesterday died Mr. Colley
Cibber, late Comedian of the Theater Royal, notorious for writing the
Non-Juror. The Compliment in the latter Part I confess I did not dislike,
because it came from so impartial a Judge; and it really so happened that the
former Part was very near true; for I had just that very Day crawled out, after
having been some Weeks laid up with a Fever: However I saw no Use in being
thought to be thoroughly dead before my Time, and therefore had a Mind to see
whether the Town cared to have me alive again. So the Play of the Orphan being
to be acted that Day, I quickly stole myself into the Part of the Chaplain,
which I had not been seen in for many Years before. The Surprise of the
Audience at my unexpected Appearance on the very Day I had been dead in the
News, and the Paleness of my Looks seemed to make it a Doubt whether I was not
the Ghost of my real Self departed: But when I spoke their Wonder eased itself
by Applause, which convinced me they were then satisfied that my Friend Mist
had told a Fib of me. Now if simply to have shown myself in broad Life, and
about my Business, after he had notoriously reported me dead, can be called a
Reply, it was the only one which his Paper, while alive, ever drew from me: But
my particular, Offense of writing the Non-Juror has made me more honorable
Friends than Enemies; the latter of which I am not unwilling should know that
that Part of the Bread I now eat was given me for having writ the Non-Juror."

This shows that though we State Writers are jok'd upon, yet Reward makes up
for these Squibs of Drollery. I may be asked why I was so voluntary a Champion
for the M -- r, and why I relate this Account of State Writing, and intersperse
political Memoirs and Remarks in this Apology, as they do not immediately
relate to the History of the Stage. Some John Trot may sagely reply, that I
write in this Manner merely to imitate the Manner of Colley Cibber. -- But, Mr.
Trot, you are mistaken; Colley Cibber interspersed Defenses of Lord
Chamberlain's Power, and Licensing Act, for the same Reason that I wrote
Country Correspondents and Gazetteers, to create Merit with the M -- y, which
we, at a proper Time, migh: make use of: The private Reason of writing these,
and abusing Mr. Fl -- t -- d all tended to the same Point: I have often
promised to tell them to the Reader, and the Secret shall lie no longer a
Burden to me, but out it shall.

Mr. Colley Cibber retired from the Stage, having patiently sold his Share of
the Patent to Mr. Highmore, when he had managed him so that he had got his own
Price, and then he wished the Crew he left in the Vessel a good Voyage; yet,
says he, "though it began to grow late in Life with me, having Health and
Strength enough to have been as useful on the Stage as ever, I I was under no
visible Necessity of quitting of it." As an undoubted Proof of that, he has
several Seasons since, on very valuable Considerations from Mr. F -- d,
performed occasionally on the Stage. But though he had quitted the Theater, and
sold his Share in it, when he had staid with new Patent^^^, and made them think
it worth their while to come up to his Price; yet the sweet Profits of the
Management of a Theater remained strongly in his Mind; and notwithstanding all
his Professions of the Love of Retirement, he would gladly have been reinstated
in the Government of a Theater, could he have obtained such an Office, and not
to have cost him any Thing. Now as he knew that I was a strong Malecontent at
Drury Lane, and was sensible what Torrents of Ambition rolled tumultuously over
my Soul, having derived their Source from his own Spring, he was assured that I
would come into any Scheme that would sooth my Ambition, and put me at the Head
of a Company ^ver which I was to have any profitable Share of the Management;
for Ambition will be but an inglorious Passion if not founded upon Interest: It
is the Utile Dulci should govern the Thoughts and Actions of the rational Part
of Mankind. Acquainted with my Principles, and having seen what an Achitophel I
was in theatric Policy; how adroit in raising Commotions, stirring up Revolts,
heading Rebellions, and bringing about Revolutions, he thought proper to
communicate to me a Design of gaining over to his Interest some principal
Players of Drury Lane Company, and then setting up a new Company under a
License, which he did not doubt, for his great Merit and Services, he could
easily obtain. -- This Scheme jumped with my own Way of Thinking, and I came
into it with Heart and Hand; nor did he omit hinting to me that his only Motive
to such a Design, when it began to grow late in Life with him, was purely to
retrieve the Honor of the British Theater, and leave me handsomely provided
for. Now though I knew he did not care a Rush for me, nor would, out of pure
Love, give me a Farthing to keep me from the Gallows, yet I had learned Art
enough to disguise my real Opinion, and give his Proposal the Turn he would
have it take. Having resolved on this Design, we did secretly all we could to
bring it about; for your important Schemes cannot be executed as soon as
plan'd, and therefore we were obliged to wait a proper Opportunity, which was,
while the Articles of some of the principal Actors under Mr. Fl -- t -- d were
expired. In the mean Time, last Summer, to deserve something from the M -- y
when I should petition for any Favor, more Paterno, I took up my Pen, wrote
Country Correspondents and Gazetteers in Defiance of Common Sense and all its
Adherents. -- So, Mr. Reader, you now know for what Reason I commenced
Politician: -- Well, methinks I hear some John Trot object and say, -- Is
writing Country Correspondents, and Gazetteers of such Consequence? -- Yes,
Sir, to write as I did, and lay about me like a Drawcansir, and all that, Sir,
is looked on as meritorious; and Merit is to be rewarded. -- All that Summer
was chiefly spent in Politics and Amors; for I, as well as Sir --, or --,
must have my Relaxations and Divertisements after the Concerns of a Nation have
been pothering in my Brain: -- I remember the old Maxim:

Interpone tuis interdum gaudia Curis. Which I thus render:

Sometimes the Cares of Empire to remove,
Retreating to your Miss, indulge your Love.
A Maxim I always follow, when fatigued either with the Affairs of the State,
or the Stage, and the Example of my Betters keep me in Countenance, when I make
this public Confession of it. -- To return: -- That my Politics would not
support me, I soon found out, though had a particular Right Honorable
Gentleman taken me more particularly under his Patronage, it might have been
worth his While, as well as mine; I might have been of great Service to him,
for I could have made as good a Bustle-Master-General in St. St -- s's Chapel,
as behind the Scenes: Of this I gave him a Hint in one of my Pamphlets, and
told him with what an Air the young Captain could Ioll in his Chariot, while it
rolled down to the House, and that he could make Speeches to a Senate, as well
as to an Audience. -- But if People cannot take a Hint, whose Fault is that?
Perhaps he wanted more explicit Explanation, but my consummate Modesty not
suffering me to make such an Attempt, it may have been my Disappointment. --
However I have this Consolation, I am not the first Man of Merit who have
suffered by that simple Virtue -- As I was not taken such Notice of as my
Vanity had suggested I deserved, I retreated from the Service. -- The Practice
of all great Men on such Occasions. -- Scipio, and others have done it. -- As I
was resolved not to act with Mr. F -- d again, and he equally resolved not to
let me, I engaged with Mr. Rich; and appeared on Covent Garden Theater. -- I so
managed Matters, that I soon became Bustle-Master-General there, and made the
Under-Actors and Under-Servants of the Theater know who they had got among
them. As my Enemies will allow I am a clever Fellow in my Way, I must here
mention the Success I met with in my theatrical Way; I had long sighed to
perform the Character of Bays in the Rehearsal, but my own Fears, and my
Father's inimitable Action, still so fresh in every Memory, clipped the Wings of
my Ambition: However I was resolved to make a Push at it, and proposed to my
new Master the getting up the Rehearsal. -- Rehearsal, said he, -- umph! And
who can do Bays? O! Sir, says I, you need not have asked that Question, when
you have taken me into your Company. -- Umph! says he, -- and took a Pinch of
Snuff, and remained silent. -- I urged the Thing, and what Houses it would
bring, if I had the Management of getting it up.... His Answer came from him by
half Sentences, and Inuendoes, and Pinches of Snuff, as,... No,... 'Twont
do.... [Snuff] The Character.... The Character of Bays supported it.... 'Twas
a Hazard.... 'Twou'd be an Expense.... Would advise me not to think of it....
[Snuff] My Father indeed to have played it might do something.... The Town
would make Comparisons.... Perhaps not for my Advantage.... The Expenses, in
short, would be too considerable.... (Here it was easy to understand him) I
therefore proposed to him to add such a ludicrous Spectacle, as, by his Advice
and Assistance, might bring great Audiences, though a Thing of a trivial
Nature.... Here I knew I should tickle him: In short, I proposed to reinforce
Bayes's Troops, and, with a new Set of Hobby Horses, raise two new Regiments,
who should Exercise in martial Order upon the Stage, and by their capering and
prancing like menag'd War-Horses, divert the Multitude; and that the Captandum
vulgus he knew was the sine qua non in the Theater.... This did all I wanted;
he came into my Scheme, and was so very full of the additional Troops, that he
undertook to raise them himself, which he not only did, but attended at all
their Exercises and Musters, and Reviews, was Riding-Master, Adjutant-General,
and Generalissimo.... When it was performed I met with an Applause might
satisfy the greatest Vanity; and my Hobbyhorse Regiments had as great Applause
as myself: The remaining Part of the Season went on with great Success to the
Master, by my Rehearsal, and my additional Troops had as many Spectators at
Covent Garden as his M -- 's Household Troops at a Review in Hyde-Park: This
continued till the Master brought his Orpheus and Eurydice on the Stage, after
which there was no Occasion for Mr. Bays; the Twinkum Twankum of Mr. Orpheus,
and the Metamorphoses of Monsieur Harlequin, put my Troops to the Rout. However
at the Close of the Season, I made a Rally, and brought myself and my Army for
one Night more into the Field.... To explain; I prevailed with Mr. Rich to let
me have another Benefit the last Night but one of performing on the Theater for
this last Season: I say another having had about four others within the Year.

The Frequency of my having Benefits demands some Consideration in this
Apology, as some Persons have given themselves Airs to censure me for it, and
besides it may bring out some theatrical Anecdotes and Rules necessary for
future and less experienced Actors. As the having Benefits is supposed to raise
a Sum of Money to reward an Actor, and as it is raising it in an honest Way,
what Crime is it if an Actor could get a Benefit-Play every Week?... O, but
cries Mr. Oeconomist, who will buy but one Pit-Ticket in a Season? This is an
Imposition on the Public, and severe Tax on your Tradesmen, your Acquaintance,
and your Acquaintence's Acquaintance? Ay, it might seem so indeed, if they were
all, as for myself, but I have more Modesty to make unreasonable Requests... In
short, Sir Wisacre, there is an Art to conduct such Things with a Gloss, and an
Art of which I am the original Inventor: I shall illustrate this by Matters of
Fact, as I practiced them.... When I engaged in that notorious Trial of my
Cuckoldom, I stood in Need of the Essence of Law, for Money is the Sinews of
Law, as well as War; and to raise it, the easiest and only Way was by having a
Benefit. I asked Mr. F... d this as a Favor, and a good natured Office, to
enable me to obtain Justice for my Heartwracking Injuries: Though this was at a
very good Part of the Season, he, compassionating my Necessities, complied: Now
comes the Thing; I thought at that Crisis, having a Benefit in my own Name
might be not so proper, and without it, you will say, how could you get a full
House?.... Why, I found out a Way to have a Benefit, and a full House, and
Nobody know it: Not to keep you in Suspense, I got my Father to play for me,
and Mr. F... d to let me have the House, so it was done at once.... You Will say
this was very friendly of the Master,... but that is allover.... Two Months
after I had a Benefit in my own Name; that was mine by right, and I need say no
more on it.... But about three Months after I wanted another Benefit, which was
in the Summer-Season.... Then I was engaged to Mr. Rich, and got Leave for the
House, and some Brother-Actors, to play gratis.... But I did not tell the
Public it was my Benefit: No, I knew better; I touched them in a tender Point,
and told them it was to support my dear Infant Children which I had left by my
first Wife Jenny... And so put at the Top of the Bills, For the Benefit of Miss
Betty and Miss Molly, etc.... Some indeed saw through this Artifice, but it
passed current enough with the Majority.... At Christmas I was to have had
another, but the Weather prevented it: I have had another in my Course among
the Actors, and another after them, because I did not get enough by the
former.... I must observe, that on these Occasions I always find some Topic to
display my Oratory on, which I print at the Bottom of my Bills, either as
Advertisements or Remonstrances, or Petitions, or something or other, and
circulate them, among the Gentry and Nobility, Tradesmen, Acquaintance and
Strangers: Besides which, I generally speak an Epilogue of Jo. Haynes's riding
on an Ass; and to show how I can laugh at Persons calling me by Mock-Names, I
advertised it, to be spoke by the young Captain in his Regimentals, riding on
an Ass.... This may seem a trifling Story to the untheatrical Reader; but I
write this to instruct Posterity, who are engaged in a Theater, by what Means
they may manage their Affairs; and I hope from these Hints some future Genius
may find much Profit and Emolument.

The Season being closed, I again retired to Charing Cross, but not to write
Politics, if the Reader has any Curiosity to know what important Affair I went
thither for, that I might safely negociate it, let him peruse the Beginning of
the subsequent Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The Situation of Affairs at Drury Lane Theater. -- The Scheme to get a new
License explained. -- The Reason for the Publication of Mr. C. Cibber's Apology
given. -- The Scheme miscarries. -- A most heroic Rhapsody. -- A Dissertation
on Property. -- An Apology for writing another Chapter.

I Am now entering on a Theme which will surprise the Public, because it is
such a Piece of secret History, as will be a Key to several elaborate
Digressions in the Apology of Mr. Colley Cibber: I must previously observe,
that in his historical Part of the Stage he was very well versed in the
Rebellions, Revolts and Revolutions of his Time, till he had fixed the
Government of the Stage under a Triumvirate, of which he himself was one; and
from the Time of his quiting his Share in the Patent, no one is better versed
in Rebellions, Revolts, Revolutions, Factions, Oppositions, etc. etc. than
myself: Two Persons of such Experience might bring about great Things in a
theatrical State, more especially if the People were divided, and Heats and
Animosities were fomented among them. I have acquainted the Reader of some
great Design which was in Embrio, and which we only wanted an Opportunity to
execute: This was for my Father, after having raised Uneasinesses and
Jealousies among Mr. F -- d's Company, to obtain a License for a new Company.
-- Some private Affairs of Mr. F -- d's gave us the Opportunity we so much
desired. -- For as through the Confusion Things were at Drury Lane Theater, and
through a violent Distemper, he could not appear himself; and a Report
prevailing, which we industriously rumored as Truth, that he would never
return to the Management of his Theater again, we could not only the better
solicit the Actors, but even the Chamberlain, and with less Opposition: To work
we went, and indeed we at first met with such hopeful Success, that I was not a
little elate, and formed much imaginary Triumph in my Heart. However, Mr. F --
d took such Measures as to the Actors, that he thought, maugre all our
Projects, he should be able to retain a good Company at Drury Lane: To traverse
this Design, and with a specious View of acting justly, Mr. C... y C... r
represented to the L.. d Ch.... n, that there was an absolute Necessity for
having another Company formed, as Mr. F.. d had very injuriously treated his
chief Actors, and that there were very large Arrears due to them: To impose
still the more on the Ch... n, there were some Actors waited on the L.. d Ch...
n, introduced by Mr. C. C. and made such Remonstrances as were thought proper:
Thus we carried on the Solicitation, which occasioned an Order to be sent to
Mr. C..... d, Prompter of the Theater, that none of the Company should engage
in any other Company, or elsewhere, without his Knowledge and Permission. This
we looked, in a Point, gained in our Favor, to prevent any Actors making fresh
Agreements, which Mr. F -- d thought some Persons viewed it in another Light,
and imagined it was to prevent any Actors going from him. When these
Negociations were thus carrying on, we had, we thought, another favorable
Incident: Mr. F -- d was taken extremely ill of the Gout, and he was in such
Danger that his Life was despaired of: Nay, it was reported one Night that he
was dead, and it was inserted as Truth in the public Papers of next Day. I
first heard it at the Tavern, and that was the Occasion of my Bacchinalian
Transports Quo me Bacche rapis, etc. in a prior Chapter. But though this Report
was false, yet so dangerous an Illness prevented his b^stling about as he might
otherwise have done; yet he managed so well, that our Representation of the
Affairs of Drury Lane Theater lost considerably of their Weight, as great Part
was, on Examination, found not to be strictly true, and that Mr. C. C. had
notoriously uttered several Fibs both of the State of Drury Lane, and the
Menager of it.

It may be objected that Mr. C. C. and myself, and others, were very great
Scoundrels to take such an Advantage of a Gentleman, being in a desperate
Illness, and who had, at a vast Expense, purchased the Patent, and had redeemed
the Hay-market Company from the desperate State they labored under: Some
added, that, not only taking such an Advantage was unjust, but that telling
Fibs were more so. -- But pray let me answer all Objectors. Is not in the
transacting all State Affairs between Kings and Potentates all advantageous
Opportunities to be taken? Does not Policy require, when any Thing offers which
may prove beneficial, that without any Qualm of Conscience, the Prime M... r of
any Kingdom is to make Use of it, be it never so unjust or detrimental to a
Rival Power? Suppose the taking of Carthagena, or even the Island of Cuba would
break the haughty Heart of the Queen of Spain, Is our Ministry to desist
gaining Part of her Dominions for Fear of being the Death of her?... Not many
People would think so:... Though perhaps that tender-heartedness of the M... r
may be the Reason why Admiral Vernon was not supported with Landforces....
But... Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam.... Then, Sir, as for telling a few Fibs, what
mighty Matter is there in that, when the Fibs may go a great Way to carry the
Cause? In all caballing, theatrical or political Fibs are the most Essential
requisite; and moreover it is known in Fibbing you must fib roundly: If it is
not discovered, you, ten to one, impose on those you represent the State of the
Case to, and carry your Views: And if you are discovered, it is only pleading
that you yourself have been imposed on by 17 others: Were all the Fibbers in a
Court to take Shame to themselves for practicing such an Art, we might soon see
some very great Men in Disgrace: Then, why may not the Fibbers (or.. ibbers) of
a Theater take the same Scheme, without any Reflection of Scandal. I am so far
from my thinking an Excellence in this Practice is any Reproach, that as for my
Part I value myself on it mightily, and intend, for the public Good, to write
an Essay on the Art of Fibbing, which I design to publish next Winter by
Subscription. But a thorough Answer to all moral Objections, is mine and Mr.
Colley Cibber's Philosophy; if our Conscience can away with it, we may lay our
Hands to our honest Hearts, and vow we have acted like Men of Honor; and who
can gainsay us?...

The Reader, now acquainted with these Anecdotes concerning Mr. Colley Cibber,
may, if they have read his Apology, account not only for his political Essays
on the Stage, his chimaerical Thoughts for the Improvement of it, but also for
so true a Publication of it at the Time he was soliciting a new License. As I
am a candid Historian, I will not conceal some Remarks which I have heard made
when his History and his Conduct have been compared, as if they were
inconsistent with one another: He is said, throughout his Apology, to have
endeavored to prove, that the Multiplicity of Theaters is contrary to the
useful Consequences which may accrue from a wellgovern'd Stage... True... "I
know it is a common Opinion, says he, that the more Play Houses the more
Emulation: I grant it; but what has this Emulation ended in? Why a daily
Contention, who shall surfeit you with the best Plays? So that when what ought
to please can no longer please, your Appetite is again to be raised by such
monstrous Presentations as Dishonor the Taste of a civilized People. If indeed
to our several Theaters we could raise a proportionable Number of good Authors,
to give them all different Employment, then perhaps the Public might profit
from their Emulation: But while good Writers are so scarce, and undaunted
Critics so plenty, I am afraid a good Play and a blazing Star, will be equal
Rarities." * Vide C. Cibber's Apology, p. 56.
... This has been urged as a Reason why Mr. Colley Cibber should not have
solicited a License to have set up a new Company, and that it was against his
own Maxims: But pray not so fast: He remains in this Opinion still against the
Multiplicity of Play Houses in the Main; and if he had set up another, it would
have been only in ordine ad, to have ruined Mr F... d's Company, and to have
reduced the Number to two again: To effect this, he is such a Judge of Taste,
he would have given no monstrous Presentations, but such as might have done an
Honor to a civilized People: But then say you, this, he says himself, could
not be done without good Authors; and good Writers are very scarce..... They
are so, but would there not have been HIMSELF and MYSELF to have entertained
the Town, so that all these sutile Objectio^s fall to the Ground. Again, says
Mr. Objector, after Mr. Colley has entered himself a voluntary Champion for
restraining the Number of Playhouses, and given the Public a Pourtrait of his
Mind, to let them see how far he is or is not a Blockhead, when he pretends to
talk of serious Matters above his Capacity, he thus strengthens his Arguments;
"And now we have seen the Consequence of what many People contend for, Variety
of Play Houses! How was it possible so many could subsist on what was to be
seen? How could the same Stock of Plays supply four Theaters, which not well
support two?.. Had this Law been made seven Years ago, I should not have parted
with my Share in the Patent under a thousand Pounds more than I received for
it. -- So that as far as I am able to judge, both the Public, as Spectators,
and the Patentees as Undertakers, are, or might be in a Way of being better
entertained, and more considerable Gainers by it." All this amounts to no more,
than as this Law prohibits an unlicens'd Number of Playhouses, the Value of the
Direction of a Theater may increase, and that Mr. Colley Cibber might have been
a very considerable Gainer, if he obtained a License to have been an Undertaker
of another: We had such sanguine Hopes of Success, that we had fixed on the
Place to have encamped in, and have opened our Campaign: It was the Opera-house
in the Hay-market, where the Revolters of his own Time fixed, but which he
would have had altered to the Plan of Drury Lane; this is hinted at in several
Parts of the Apology; but in Page 184, he proves it a proper Spot, and the
Hopes that such a Project might succeed, "From the vast Increase of the
Buildings [Grosvenor-Square, etc.] I have mentioned, the Situation of that
Theater has received considerable Advantages; a new World of People of
Condition are nearer to it than formerly; and I am of Opinion that if the
Auditory Part were reduced, a little more to that of the Model of Drury Lane,
an excellent Company of Actors would now find a better Account in it, than in
any other House in this populous City. Let me not be mistaken; I say an
excellent Company, and such as might be able to do Justice to the best Plays,
and throw those latent Beauties in them, which only excellent Authors can
discover, or give Life to: If such a Company were now, there they would meet
with a quite different Set of Auditors than other Theaters have been lately
used to." -- Here, in his own Words, you have the Groundwork of our Scheme:
And who is there can doubt, but under his Direction and mine, the Morals of a
Theater must have been reformed, for what by our known Virtues, and experienced
Knowledge of Goodbreeding, we should have made our Theater the School of
Manners, Virtue, and Politeness.... For has he not in his Chap. II.
Chimaerical Thoughts of making the Stage useful, built a Theater in the Air,
to prove Apology, p. 24. K 2
his Concern that the Theaters have not a better Pretense to the Care and
further Consideration of those Governments where they are tolerated. -- There
WAS a Time, adds he, and not yet out of many Peoples Memory, when it subsisted
upon its own rational Labors; when even Success attended an Attempt to reduce
it to Decency; and when Actors themselves were hardy enough to hazard their
Interest in the Pursuit of so dangerous a Reformation. -- Now as all know what
WAS may be again, we flattered ourselves that we should have brought about a
theatric Reformation: And more especially from the Publication of the Apology,
having laboriously and zealously shown in it, what " C. Cibber's Apology, p.
206.
Regard was always paid to the Power of a Lord Chamberlain, and what Influence
and Operation that Power must naturally have in all theatric Revolutions."

But oh! thou cursed, inconstant, fickle -- B -- ch;
Thou Strumpet Deity, FORTUNA hight;
Thou, thou with painted Looks and Eyes alluring,
Who smiled delusive on my fairest Hopes;
Just, just upon the Brink of full Enjoyment,
With jilting Mein thou turn'st thy Backside on me,
And smil'st indignant at my aimed Embrace!
Curse on my wayward Fate! -- Curse on my Stars! --
Under what Star theatric was I born? --
Ye Gods! why gave ye to me such a Soul
That swells and pants with such ambitious Throws,
Yet Torture it with Disapointments vile?
Fl -- d's superior Genius has undone me;
HE, Eagle like, over me -- a mere Tom-Tit --
Towers 'yond my Sight, and mocks my aching View --
-- But it is Well. -- Anon, and yet anon
The Goddess, Fair Occasion, called, may smile,
And I will catch her by her Forelock fast;
For so the Fair is gained: -- And so I sink
Into the calmer Thoughts of mild Philosophy. --
-- Oh! gentle Reader, excuse this heroic Agitation of my Soul; the Thoughts of
what I am going to tell you, hit the Cause that touched my Brain, and threw me
into this passionate Rhapsody: After all our Hopes, after all our Negociations,
Solicitations, Representations, Lucubrations, and Apologies, the Theater
Colle^ Cibber built in the Air, must still remain in Nubibus, though Ditto, p.
208.
it was in a much better Taste than any he had seen; and we have only now Leave
to play with the Project in Fancy. -- In plain English, my Lord Chamberlain
denied us a License, on so foolish a Reason (begging my Lord's Pardon for the
Expression) as, he would not consent, without any Foundation of Reason, for us
to invade a Gentleman's Property: But my Lord has another Way of thinking, as
to moral Obligations, than C... y C... r; and however he may approve of him as
an entertaining Companion, he has no Opinion of him as a Moral Philosopher. It
is not becoming in me to call his Grace's Parts into Question; nor do I: They
are above the Description of my Pen, though that can sometimes soar such
Heights, as may be beyond the Ken of common Understanding: But I may ask this
digressive Question, What is PROPERTY? -- It is merely having the Possession of
a Thing, which Possession gives a just Right to it till dispossessed thereof:
For as Possession is universally allowed to be Nine Parts of the Law out of
Ten, it is to be supposed it is Nine Parts of Justice out of Ten; and
consequently should be the Balance of every Man's Actions. -- As for Instance,
If a Tradesman, viz. a Woollen Draper, Haberdasher, If a Tradesman, viz. a
Woollen Draper, Haberdasher, Mercer, Laceman, etc. had particular Goods in
their Shops, their Goods during that Time are their Properties: They are so.
Well, the Tailor purchases some of them from the several Shops, and they become
his. Now if I order the Tailor from those Goods to make me a handsome Suit of
Clothes, and he makes them and delivers them to me, will any one say they are
the Property of the Woollen-Draper, Haberdasher, Laceman, etc. or Tailor? No,
they are mine. -- Ay, says Sir Sneerer, if you have paid for them. -- Ay, Sir,
if I have not paid for them too. -- The Clothes, durante possessione, are
legally mine; and as my Property I wear them. -- The Tailor indeed may bring
his Action at Law; and then I play least in Sight; but still wear the Clothes.
-- He forces me to the Verge of the Law; I still wear the Clothes; and, till he
is able to beat me out of all my strong Holds, I make no Consideration of his
Claim to them, or an Equivalent for them. -- Property fluctuates and changes
Masters: It Is a quick Inheritance: Hae^es Haeredem velut unda supervenit undam.
Forgive the Lowness of my Illustration, and making myself an Example: But Truth
is Truth, however mean the Object may be that demonstrates it. If you would
have a more elevated Idea, behold the fluctuating Property of the greatest
Empires and Kingdoms of the World: Your Medes and your Persians are no longer
governed by their Cyrus's and Darius's. -- Alexander's Family are not in
Possession of the territorial Property which he himself took from others. --
But why need I be prodigal of my historical Learning. -- Does not the
illustrious Kouli Kan, at this very Day, make the Dominions of the Sophi of
Persia his Property; and has he not made the vast Riches and Provinces of the
Great Mogul his Property; and is he not meditating to make other Provinces of
the Ottoman Empire his Property? -- But you say this is Injustice, and that he,
in fact, is an Usurper, -- A Fico for Distinction of Names; while he is in
Possession of his Territories, and at the Head of his Armies, he is a Prince.
-- I only wish I could be the Kouli Kan of the Theater, and the Mobile might
give me whatever Name or Title they pleased besides to distinguish me by. --
But do not our European Potentates act on the same Principle: If they can once
gain Possession, by Fraud or Force, of a convenient Island, or Tract of Land,
or Dominion, do they not think they have a just Right to it, and that it
becomes their Property? -- Would any good Englishman doubt our indisputable
Right to Gibraltar, Minorca, Jamaica, -- or Hispaniola and all the American
World if we could take them from the Spaniards, and afterward keep them. --
If, therefore I, either Vi or Fraud, could get any Part of the theatric
Dominions, am I to blame? -- Or if I, the young Captain at Land, meeting with a
rich trading Tailor, should plunder him of a laced Suit of Cloath^, why am I to
be censured more than another Captain at Sea, who plunders a Caracca S^^p? O
but, says my Opponent, I suppose -- the public Property of Nations, and the
private Property of Subjects are differently to be considered. -- I am your
humb^e Servant for that, my Dear: By my Philosophy I look upon the State of
Nature as a State of War; all is sair Play in this Scramble for the Goods of
the World; and I think myself, in this Respect, acting in as just Principle as
any Potentate living. Why was not I the Twentieth by Descent,
From a long restive Race of droaning Kings!
Ye Gods! why gave ye me a Monarch's Soul,
And crusted it with base Plebeian Clay?
Dryden's Spanish Friar What a Bustle-Master General would I have made among
the Princes of the World, and elbow'd all the Monarchs round about me. -- But,
non sic Dii voluere. -- Therefore in mimic Parallel among the Plumes of
Tragedy, and Struts of Ambition, I show a Dawn of what, had I been a Prince, I
should have acted. --

But to return from this Digression on Property. -- Our Hopes were frustrated,
as to forming a new Company by the Sanction of a License from the Lord
Chamberlain; and Mr. Colley Cibber's Ambition and private Views have the same
Fare as mine. -- He, indeed, may please himself with his Follies, having a
plentiful Provision for Life, and still have the Joy he took in the End of an
old Song.

My Mind, my Mind is a Kingdom to me. He like a loose Philosopher may again
say, Me while my laughing Follies can deceive,
Blessed in the dear Delirium let me live,
Rather than wisely know my Wants and grieve.
But, for my Part, I must again submit to return to the Stage a Servant instead
of a Manager; which had I known some Weeks ago, this Apology had not, as yet,
have been wrote, nor my Father's would not, as yet, have been published: But as
I am drawn into this historical Narration of the Stage, which is, in fact, a
true and necessary Appendix to his, I will make it as complete as possible; for
which Reason, I shall enter on another Chapter, that I may give the theatrical
Characters of the principal Actors now living, not only as it will be in Mr.
Colley Cibber's Manner, which I promised to follow in my Title Page, but, in
fact, as this Apology will not be, An Historical View of the STAGE during my
OWN TIME, without them: The drawing Characters is the most difficult Province
of a Historian; and very few, either ancient or modern, have succeeded in them:
They who sneer at Cibber's Apology in general, approve of his characterizing
his Co-temporaries; they own the Draught is masterly, and the Coloring
entertaining. I am sensible therefore how hard the Task must be to give the
Pourtrait of living Players, when all the Town is acquainted with the
Originals: However, as I am of a strong Opinion this Apology, as well as the
other, may live to late Posterity, I am not willing my Co-temporaries should be
buried in Oblivion; and perhaps there may be no Apologist theatrical hardy
enough to succeed me: My Friends of the Stage will therefore excuse my Manner,
Partiality, and Expressions, and what they may not approve, as being too free,
pass over with a Smile of Contempt; for, to conclude, I shall be as free with
Mr. C. Cibber and myself as any of them, whose Characters I shall draw up as
Parallels to one another: As I have given you, Reader, the Bill of Fare of the
next Chapter, it is in your own Option whether you will set down to the Meal.

CHAP. XI, and Last.
The several theatrical Characters of some of the present Actors. -- A Parallel
between the Author and Mr. Colley Cibber. -- The Conclusion.

AS I am now entering on a Province which is esteemed the most difficult for an
Historian to succeed in, I am under some Apprehensions that this Chapter may
not only be the least entertaining, but may give Offense, when I have no Manner
of Design that it should. To draw Characters requires not only a great
Judgment but great Art, though you describe Persons that have lived some Years
or Centuries before you write: But to draw the Characters of Persons living --
Hic Labor, hoc Opus est. -- Equally to avoid Flattery or Censure, and to keep
strictly to a judicious Narration, is what few Historians have succeeded in at
all; but to characterize your Cotemporaries, then living, requires such an
honest Impartiality that still sewer have attempted it. -- On these
Considerations I would have waved giving any Characters of my theatrical
Brethren; but on the Remonstration of some Friends that my History would not be
complete without them, I must, in Part, enter on this arduous Undertaking:
Jacta est Alea, as Caesar said, -- The Die is cast, -- We'll pass the Rubicon:
Proceed I must and will; therefore in the Conclusion of this prefatory
Paragraph I shall choose the Motto of another great Man, Fari que Sentiat; and
so, Mr. Reader, and Sir Actor, I hope you will peruse the Rest of this History
with Candor, if my Pictures are such as you in Truth know them to be: For, as
the Gazetteer says, "Most Writers seem to have it more in View to display their
own Parts, or make their Court to the Person uncharacterized, to his Relations,
Friends, and Dependants, than to draw him truly such as he was; and of many
such it may be said as was said of the Painter who excelled in Coloring and
Proportion, That his Pictures had every Excellence but Likeness." -- It may be
wondered why I quote this Author; but I am willing to pay all Deference to an
Author who has been engaged in the same Cause with myself, and perhaps my
individual SELF: I only wish my Pictures may have some Likeness, which will, I
believe, a^tone for the Want of other Excellencies, presuming this Attempt may
be neither disagreable to the Curious, or the Frequenters of a Theater, take it
without any farther Preface.

In the Year 1740, the principal Actors, or whom I think the principal Actors,
may be thus impartially and concisely portrayed.

As Tragedians claim, from their costly Plumes and Trappings, a Superiority of
Merit over the Comedians, I shall begin with them; and taking the Liberty of
deviating from Cicero, Salust, Clarendon, and all other Historians, except
Colley Cibber, shall describe them just as I think proper.

Q -- n at Drury Lane House, and D-l-ne at Covent Garden, are the Personae
Dramatis which are without Competitors: They both play the chief Characters in
the same Cast, therefore I shall consider their different Characters together.
Q -- n has been many Years on the Stage, and has gradually rose up to that
Height of Reputation he at present enjoys: When Drury Lane Theater was under
the Direction of the late Mr. Rich, he was in the inferior Class; and the
Lieutenant of the Tower in Cibber's Alteration of Richard the Third was one of
the principal Parts he performed: The Cast of several Plays in Print fully
prove his Abilities were then thought but very insignificant; however, on a new
Company setting up at Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, he was engaged in it, and has ever
since, but more especially on the Death of Boheme, gradually rose to a great
Degree of Favor with the Public: Mr. Booth's quitting the Stage still set him
in a fairer Light, and indeed left him without a Rival: He had for some Time
appeared without any Competitor, when, all on a sudden, there appeared at
Goodman's-Fields a young Tragedian from Dublin: This was D.. l.. ne. Novelty,
Youth, a handsome Figure, etc. took off from any severe Criticism on his
Elocution and Action. In short, though so far from the polite End of the Town,
he drew to him several polite Audiences, and became in such a Degree of Repute,
that Comparisons were made between him and Q -- n; nor was he without Admirers
of both Sexes who gave him the Preference: He was not insensible of this, and
determined to leave Goodman's-Fields, and indulge his Ambition at one of the
Theaters Royal: Q... n just at that Time left Covent Garden for Drury Lane, and
he engaged with Mr. Rich at Covent Garden; and in two or three Years on the
Stage gained that Station on it, which most of the other Actors could not in
many Years attain to. Q... n has the Character of a just Speaker, but then it
is confined to the solemn declamatory Way: He either cannot work himself into
the Emotions of a violent Passion, or he will not take the Fatigue of doing it:
The Partiality of his Friends says he can touch the Passions with great
Delicacy if he will; but general Opinion affirms he has neither Power of Voice
or Sensation to give Love or Pity, Grief or Remorse their proper Tone and
Variation of Features. D.. l.. ne is also esteemed a just Player; and though he
has often a more loud Violence of Voice, yet, either from an Imitation of Q...
n, or his own natural Manner, he has a Sameness of Tone and Expression, and
drawls out his Lines to a displeasing Length: But that loud Violence of Voice
is useful to him when Anger, Indignation, or such enraged Passions are to be
expressed; for the shrill Loudness marks the Passion, which the sweet Cadence
of Q... n's natural Voice is unequal to. In such Parts, especially Alexander,
D.. l.. ne pleases many; for the Million, as C. C. says, are apt to be
transported when the Drum of the Ear is soundly rattled: But on the contrary,
Q... n's solemn Sameness of Pronunciation, which conveys an awful Dignity, is
charmingly affecting in Caio. D.. l.. ne is young enough to rise to greater
Perfection; Q... n may be said now to be at the Height of his: If D.. l.. ne
has the more pleasing Person, Q... n has he more affecting Action: Both might
soon appear with more Advantage if they were on the same Stage: The Rivalship
of D.. l.. ne would give a spirited Jealousy to Q... n, and force him to exert
himself; and Q... n's Judgment would improve the unfinished Action of D.. l..
ne; but they are the Caesar and Pompey of the Theaters, and one Stage would be
incompatible with their Ambition; Q... n could bear no one on the Footing as an
Equal, D.. l.. ne no one as a Superior.

M... lw... d is an Actor with all the Happiness of Voice that can be imagined,
and a Personage very well turned for the Lover or the Hero; nor, when he is
not indolently negligent, does he often betray a Want of Judgment: His Voice is
sweet, with an uncommon Strength; and in the Decadence of it, there is a
Softness which adapts it to touch the Passions of Grief, Love, Pity, or
Despair. In Comedy the Easiness of his Dialogue in the genteel Characters seems
very amiable; and though in his Action and Speech he does not imitate that
quick snip-snap Catch of the late Mr. Wilks, to express Spirit and Vigor; yet
his Voice and Gesture show such a Vivacity as are the just Effects of Nature:
In low Comedy he has been seen to succeed beyond Expectation; and to speak all
in a Word, according to Mr. Cibber's Description of Mountford, he is, or might
be, the true Representative of him.

Of Mr. William M... ls I have said something in a preceding Chapter; all I
shall add here is, that he is not excellent in Tragedy, the Inanity of his
Voice being unequal to the Swellings and Throws of the Sublime: In Comedy he
succeeded to Mr. Wilks's Parts; has caught something of his Catch in the Voice;
is always very busy on the Stage; and, what all Actors ought to value
themselves upon, very perfect.

Griffin and Joe Miller being dead, I shall give no Descriptions of them, nor
of those who have succeeded to their Parts; for if I should speak of their
Excellencies, I should be tempted to mention the comparative Inequality of
their Successors. -- Like the great Apologist's Method of treating Verbruggen,
Keen, Boheme, etc. etc. etc. I shall pass over the Rest of the present Players
as Princes of pett^ Fame: I shall therefore only speak of two Actresses, and
Myself, and Colley Cibber in Parallel.

Mrs. Cl... e is esteemed by all an excellent Comic Actress; and as she has a
prodigious Fund of natural Spirit and Humor off the Stage, she makes the most
of the Poet's on it. Nothing, though ever so barren, even though it exceeds the
Limits of Nature, can be ^^at in her Hands: She heightens all Characters of
Humor she attempts; nor is she confined only to the H^yden Miss or pert
Chambermaid, but in spiritous gay Characters of high Life, she always appears
with such Air, Mein, and Action, as speak the Gay, the Lively, and the
Desirable. She has been, by Persons who remember both, compared to Mrs.
Mountsord; and, by their natural Talents for the Stage, I am apt to believe the
Comparison not unjust: I must however observe, Mrs. Mountford appeared with
great Success, en Cavalier, and made an adroit pretty Fellow: Mrs. Cl... e does
not appear in these Characters, the concealing Petticoat better suiting with
her Turn of Make than the Breeches: It is not from want of Spirit or Judgment
to hit off the Fop or the Coxcomb, as she has evidently proved in the Ballad
she Sings, called the Life of a Beau, in which her Action and Gesture is as
pleasing as in any Part she performs: I could wish she would never attempt
serious Characters in Comedy; and to resign the Part of Ophelia in Hamlet, in
which she is very unequal to herself: -- Yet all will allow, that take her all
in all, she has such Talents as make her an excellent Actress.

Though Mrs. Cl... e is by far the most excellent Actress of the Drury Lane
Company, and to speak out the severe Judgment of experienced Critics, the only
Actress who has any Excellence in it, yet she has a Competitor in Fame at
Covent Garden: Mrs. H... t... n stands in the same Degree of Superiority on
this latter Stage, as Mrs. Cl... e does on the former; but I must observe, that
their Talents, Manner, Air, Gesture, and Cast of Parts are very different.

Mrs. H... t... n, though past the heyday of her Beauty, yet betrays so little
decay of Youth, that an inexpressible Somewhat in her Air, Face, and Mein
throws out such a Glow of Health and Cheerfulness, that, on the Stage, few
Spectators that are not past it, can behold her without Desire; and, in the
Fullness of my Heart I may venture to confess, that the Desirable is so
predominant in her that my Soul has a Taste or Tender for Mrs. H... t... n. To
speak critically of her as an Actress, in all Parts of a gay Impertinent, or
the Coquette, she has all the Female Foppery that a giddy, lively, fantastic
Creature can be affected with. -- The Language, Dress, Motion, and Manners of a
Millamant seem naturally her own; and I may say of her, what the great
Apologist said of Mrs. Bracegirdle in that Part; that " C. Cibber's Apology, p.
103.
when she acts Millamant, all the Faults, Follies, and Affectation of that
agreeable Tyrant were venially melted down into so many Charms and Attractions
of a conscious Beauty." -- But besides these Foibles of the Fair Sex, she can
rise into the decent Dignity of a fine Lady, and charm with the innocent
Reserve of an Indiana, as by the fluttering Je ne scai quoy of a Millamant. In
Tragedy, since the Death of Mrs. Hallam, she stands without any equal
Competitor; for she has that Grace in her Presence, that clear Melody in her
Voice, with Strength enough to express the Violence of some Passions, and
Softness to subside into the Harmony of others, that no Actress now performing
on either Stage can, in this Light, be compared to her. -- There are some
indeed, at both Houses, who throw out some Proffers of a Genius, yet cannot be
ranked in any Degree of Perfection; for either they heavily drag the Sentiment
along, with a long-ton'd Voice, absent Eye, and Inanity of Gesture, or else
with an impetuous Velocity of Voice, staring Eye, and unmeaning Superfluity of
Action, make the Performance come out odly disguised, or somewhere defectively
unsurprising to the Hearer. -- As I mention no particular Persons, no
particular Persons can take Offense: In Justice to my own Judgment I must
acknowledge, that I unwillingly acquiesce in the Observation of many Judges,
that the two Theaters never had, at any Time, so indifferent a Set of Actresses
as at present; and among the younger Actresses I have not seen one who has
shown the least Genius for the Stage, which may ever make its Way toward
Perfection. It may seem a Matter of Wonder to some, why they who have been
excellent in a Theater, as Cibber, Wilks, and Booth, did not bring up young
Actors to succeed them; and this was indeed objected to their Administration:
-- " C. Cibber's Apology p. 324.
And this, says the Apologist, was a Matter as easy as planting so many
Cabbages. -- "True it is, indeed, good Actors and good Cabbages are not with
equal Plenty produced: However, if there is a natural Materia in the Actor as
there is in the Cabbage, I can see no Reason why he should not sprout as well
as the Cabbage: Indeed he will afterward require some Care to bring him to
Perfection; so does the Cabbage: This cannot do without the enlivening Warmth
of the Sun, and the young Actor requires to be cheered by such little Parts as
may gain him some little Applause; for C. Cibber's Apology, p. 157.
Public Approbation is the warm Weather of a theatrical Plant: -- But it seems
this would be too much Trouble for our theatrical Gardiners; they were not for
turning Nursery Men of dramatick Cabbages, but to have bought them at Market;
for, says the metaphorical Apologist, " Ditto, p. 324.
Let it be our Excuse then for that mistaken Charge against us, that since
there was no Garden or Market where accomplished Actors grew, or were to be
sold, we could only pick them up by Chance. -- "As for myself, I was a young
Sprout from so admirable a Stem, that Nature threw out in me several
Perfections, which I may rather call hereditary than acquired; and whether I am
considered in a theatrical, poetical, political, or moral Capacity, the Reader
will observe, through the Course of this History, there is some Truth in my
Motto. -- Scquiturque Patrem -- Though through Modesty I am forced to add, non
passibus Aequis, which give me Leave to render into a paraphrastick Couplet. --

His Father's Steps he follows to be great,
But not with equal Pace or equal Fate.
Some future Historian may thus write of us: The Father indeed had more of the
Sal Atticum in his Genius, but then the Son excelled him in an open hardy
Confidence of Behavior: COLLEY'S Conduct in Life was more on the Reserve than
THE'S; but by THE'S making a Bustle in the World, he showed a superior
Greatness of Soul: COLLEY had the cool Calmness of a designing Courtier; THE'
the frank rash Spirit of a young Captain; The Father was the greater Hypocrite,
the Son was the greater Madman. -- COLLEY rendered himself remarkable by his
Fopperies, THE' by his Extravagancies: Yet their private Virtues, public
Modesty, and Sentiments of Morality were, in fact, in the one and the other the
same, though their public Conduct was extremely different. -- COLLEY had
rather be immoral than be esteemed so; THE' thought it more Glory, the more he
acquired the Character of being so. -- The Reputation of the one was only
founded on private Rumor, but that of the other is on public Record. In
short, the Father had few Equals, the Son not one.

Having brought the History of the Stage down from the Time my Father left it
to the present Vacation, 1740, I can only add, after my Exploits, Hopes, and
Ambition, I must return to Mr. Rich, as an hired Actor, and wait in dudgeon
some more favorable Opportunity to make my Attempts on the theatric Dominions
more successful: However those Attempts occasioned this Apology, which will
transmit my Name and Character to late Posterity; and I may conclude as Ovid
does:

Jamque opus exegi quod nee Jovis Ira nec Ignes
Terram nec poterit nee Edax ab^lere Vetustas, etc.
And now I Have done a Work which neither JOVE,
Ner all his Wrath, nor Thunderbolts above,
Nor ruthful Steel, nor all-devouring Time,
Shall ever destroy this History sublime.
FINIS.
ERRATUM.
I^ P^ge ^6, for Li^ionst read Es^court.


