AN ACCOUNT OF THE VOYAGES UNDERTAKEN BY THE ORDER OF HIS PRESENT MAJESTY FOR
MAKING Discoveries in the Southern Hemisphere, And successively performed by
COMMODORE BYRON, CAPTAIN WALLIS, CAPTAIN CARTERET, And CAPTAIN COOK, In the
DOLPHIN, the SWALLOW, and the ENDEAVOR: DRAWN UP From the JOURNALS which were
kept by the several COMMANDERS, And from the Papers of JOSEPH BANKS, Esquire

By JOHN HAWKESWORTH, LL.D.

IN THREE VOLUMES. Illustrated with CUTS, and a great Variety of CHARTS and
MAPS relative to Countries now first discovered, or hitherto but imperfectly
known.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for W. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL in the Strand.

MDCCLXXIII.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
AFTER the great improvements that have been made in Navigation since the
discovery of America, it may well be thought strange that a very considerable
part of the globe on which we live should still have remained unknown; that it
should still have been the subject of speculation, whether a great portion of
the Southern Hemisphere is land or water; and, even where land had been
discovered, that neither its extent nor figure should have been ascertained.
But the cause has probably been, that sovereign Princes have seldom any other
motive for attempting the discovery of new countries than to conquer them, that
the advantages of conquering countries which must first be discovered are
remote and uncertain, and that ambition has always found objects nearer home.

It is the distinguishing characteristic of Your Majesty to act from more
liberal motives; and having the best fleet, and the bravest as well as most
able navigators in Europe, Your Majesty has, not with a view to the acquisition
of treasure, or the extent of dominion, but the improvement of commerce and the
increase and diffusion of knowledge, undertaken what has so long been neglected;
and under Your Majesty's auspices, in little more than seven years, discoveries
have been made far greater than those of all the navigators in the world
collectively, from the expedition of Columbus to the present time.

To have been appointed to record them, and permitted to inscribe the narrative
to Your Majesty, is an honor, the sense of which will always be retained with
the warmest gratitude, by

YOUR MAJESTY's Most faithful, and most obliged Subject and Servant, JOHN
HAWKESWORTH.
BROMLEY, KENT, 1st May 1773.
CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION. Page i An Explanation of the Nautical Terms not
generally understood which occur in this Work. Page xxiii A Description of the
Cuts. Page xxxv
COMMODORE BYRON's VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. The Passage from the Downs to Rio de Janeiro. 3 CHAP. II. Passage
from Rio de Janeiro to Port Desire; with some Description of that Place. 8
CHAP. III. Course from Port Desire, in Search of Pepys' Island, and afterward
to the Coast of Patagonia, with a Description of the Inhabitants. 23 CHAP. IV.
Passage up the Straight of Magellan, to Port Famine; with some Account of that
Harbor, and the adjacent Coast. 33 CHAP. V. The Course back from Port Famine
to Falkland's Islands, with some Account of the Country. 41 CHAP. VI. The
Passage through the Straight of Magellan as far as Cape Monday, with a
Description of several Bays and Harbors, formed by the Coast on each Side. 58
CHAP. VII. The Passage from Cape Monday, in the Straight of Magellan, into the
South Seas; with some general Remarks on the Navigation of that Straight. 75
CHAP. VIII. The Run from the Western Entrance of the Straight of Magellan, to
the Islands of Disappointment. 86 CHAP. IX. The Discovery of King George's
Islands, with a Description of them, and an Account of several Incidents that
happened there. 97 CHAP. X. The Run from King George's Islands to the Islands
of Saypan, Tinian, and Aguigan; with an Account of several Islands that were
discovered in that Track. 107 CHAP. XI. The Arrival of the Dolphin and Tamar at
Tinian, a Description of the present Condition of that Island, and an Account
of the Transactions there. 115 CHAP. XII. The Run from Tinian to Pulo Timoan,
with some Account of that Island, its Inhabitants and Productions, and thence
to Batavia. 123 CHAP. XIII. Transactions at Batavia, and Departure from that
Place. 131 CHAP XIV. The Passage from Batavia to the Cape of Good Hope, and
from thence to England. 135
CAPTAIN WALLIS's VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. The Passage to the Coast of Patagonia, with some Account of the
Natives. 363 CHAP. II. The Passage through the Straight of Magellan, with some
further Account of the Patagonians, and a Description of the Coast on each
Side, and its Inhabitants. 379 CHAP. III. A particular Account of the Places in
which we anchored during our Passage through the Straight, and of the Shoals
and Rocks that lie near them. 410 CHAP. IV. The Passage from the Straight of
Magellan, to King George the Third's Island, called Otaheite, in the South Sea,
with an Account of the Discovery of several other Islands, and a Description of
their Inhabitants. 419 CHAP. V. An Account of the Discovery of King George the
Third's Island, or Otaheite, and of several Incidents which happened both on
board the Ship, and on Shore. 433 CHAP. VI. The Sick sent on Shore, and a
regular Trade established with the Natives; some Account of their Character and
Manners, of their Visits on board the Ship, and a Variety of Incidents that
happened during this Intercourse. 454 CHAP. VII. An Account of an Expedition to
discover the inland Part of the Country, and our other Transactions, till we
quitted the Island to continue our Voyage. 472 CHAP. VIII. A more particular
Account of the Inhabitants of Otaheite, and of their domestic Life, Manners,
and Arts. 480 CHAP. IX. Passage from Otaheite to Tinian, with some Account of
several other Islands that were discovered in the South Seas. 490 CHAP. XI The
tenth Chapter is by mistake numbered XI.
. Some Account of the present State of the Island of Tinian, and our Employment
there; with what happened in the Run from thence to Batavia. 498 CHAP. XII.
Transactions at Batavia, and an Account of the Passage from thence to the Cape
of Good Hope. 507 CHAP. XIII. An Account of our Transactions at the Cape of
Good Hope, and of the Return of the Dolphin to England. 513
CAPTAIN CARTERET's VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. The Run from Plymouth to Madeira, and from thence through the
Straight of Magellan. 525 CHAP. II. Passage from Cape Pillar, at the Western
Entrance of the Straight of Magellan, to Masafuero; with some Account of that
Island. 537 CHAP. III. The Passage from Masafuero to Queen Charlotte's Islands;
several Mistakes corrected concerning Davis's Land, and an Account of some
small Islands, supposed to be the same that were seen by Quiros. 557 CHAP. IV.
An Account of the Discovery of Queen Charlotte's Island, with a Description of
them and their Inhabitants, and of what happened at Egmont Island. 568 CHAP. V.
Departure from Egmont Island, and Passage to Nova Britannia; with a Description
of several other Islands, and their Inhabitants. 584 CHAP. VI. Discovery of a
Straight dividing the Land called Nova Britannia into two Islands, with a
Description of several small Islands that lie in the Passage, and the Land on
each side, with the Inhabitants. 595 CHAP. VII. The Passage from Saint George's
Channel to the Island of Mindanao, with an Account of many Islands that were
seen, and Incidents that happened by the Way. 602 CHAP. VIII. Some Account of
the Coast of Mindanao, and the Islands near it, in which several Mistakes of
Dampier are corrected. 611 CHAP. IX. The Passage from Mindanao to the Island of
Celebes, with a particular Account of the Straight of Macassar, in which many
Errors are corrected. 622 CHAP. X. Transactions off Macassar, and the Passage
thence to Bonthain. 630 CHAP. XI. Transactions at Bonthain, while the Vessel
was waiting for a Wind to carry her to Batavia, with some Account of the Place,
the Town of Macassar, and the adjacent Country. 638 CHAP. XII. Passage from
Bonthain Bay, in the Island of Celebes, to Batavia: Transactions there, and the
Voyage round the Cape of Good Hope to England. 649
CHART of part of the SOUTH SEA, Showing the Tracts and Discoveries made by His
MAJESTYS Ships Dolphin, Commodore Byron, and Tamer, Capn. Mouat, 1765. Dolphin,
Capn. Wallis, and Swallow, Capn. Carteret, 1767. and Endeavor, Lieutenant
Cook, 1769.

Engraved by W. Whitchurch, Pleasant Row, Islington.

Note

The shaded Lands are new Discoveries, except a part of the West side of New
Zeeland, which was seen by Ta^man in 16^2.

Those without Shade are copied from Charts.

Places where the Longitude is settled by Astronomical Observations.



GENERAL INTRODUCTION.
HIS Majesty, soon after his accession to the crown, formed a design of sending
out vessels for making discoveries of countries hitherto unknown, and in the
year 1764, the kingdom being then in a state of profound peace, he proceeded to
put it into execution. The Dolphin and the Tamar were dispatched under the
command of Commodore Byron, and the best account of his Majesty's motives and
design that can be given, will be found in the following preamble to Commodore
Byron's instructions, which are dated the 17th of June in that year.

Whereas nothing can redound more to the honor of this nation, as a maritime
power, to the dignity of the Crown of Great Britain, and to the advancement of
the trade and navigation thereof, than to make discoveries of countries
hitherto unknown; and whereas there is reason to believe that lands and islands
of great extent, hitherto unvisited by any European power, may be found in the
Atlantic Ocean, between the Cape of Good Hope and the Magellanic Straight,
within the latitudes convenient for navigation, and in climates adapted to the
produce of commodities useful in commerce; and whereas his Majesty's islands
called Pepys' Island, and Falkland's Islands, lying within the said tract,
notwithstanding their having been first discovered and visited by British
navigators, have never yet been so sufficiently surveyed as that an accurate
judgment may be formed of their coasts and product; his Majesty taking the
premises into consideration, and conceiving no conjuncture so proper for an
enterprise of this nature, as a time of profound peace, which his kingdoms at
present happily enjoy, has thought fit that it should now be undertaken.

The Dolphin was a man of war of the sixth rate, mounting twenty-four guns: her
complement was 150 men, with three Lieutenants, and thirty-seven petty officers.

The Tamar was a sloop, mounting sixteen guns: her complement was ninety men,
with three Lieutenants, and two and twenty petty officers, and the command of
her was given to Captain Mouat.

Commodore Byron returned in the month of May in the year 1766, and in the
month of August following, the Dolphin was again sent out, under the command of
Captain Wallis, with the Swallow, commanded by Captain Carteret, in prosecution
of the same general design of making discoveries in the southern hemisphere.
The equipment of the Dolphin was the same as before. The Swallow was a sloop
mounting fourteen guns; her complement was ninety men, with one Lieutenant, and
twenty-two petty officers.

These vessels proceeded together till they came within sight of the South Sea,
at the western entrance of the Straight of Magellan, and from thence returned
by different routs to England.

In the latter part of the year 1767, it was resolved, by the Royal Society,
that it would be proper to send persons into some part of the South Sea to
observe a transit of the planet Venus over the sun's disk, which, according to
astronomical calculation, would happen in the year 1769; and that the islands
called Marquesas de Mendoza, or those of Rotterdam or Amsterdam, were the
properest places then known for making such observation.

In consequence of these resolutions, it was recommended to his Majesty, in a
memorial from the Society, dated February 1768, that he would be pleased to
order such an observation to be made; upon which his Majesty signified to the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty his pleasure that a ship should be
provided to carry such observers as the Society should think fit to the South
Seas; and in the beginning of April following the Society received a letter
from the Secretary of the Admiralty, informing them that a bark of three
hundred and seventy tons had been taken up for that purpose. This vessel was
called the Endeavor, and the command of her given to Lieutenant James Cook, a
gentleman of undoubted abilities in astronomy and navigation, who was soon
after, by the Royal Society, appointed, with Mr. Charles Green, a gentleman who
had long been assistant to Dr. Bradley at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich,
to observe the transit.

While this vessel was getting ready for her expedition, Captain Wallis
returned; and it having been recommended to him by Lord Morton, when he went
out, to fix on a proper place for this astronomical observation, he, by letter,
dated on board the Dolphin, the 18th of May 1768, the day before he landed at
Hastings, mentioned Port Royal harbor, in an island which he had discovered,
then called George's Island, and since Otaheite: the Royal Society therefore,
by letter, dated the beginning of June, in answer to an application from the
Admiralty to be informed whither they would have their observers sent, made
choice of that place.

The Endeavor had been built for the coal trade, and a vessel of that
construction was preferred for many reasons, particularly because she was what
the sailors call a good sea boat, was more roomy, would take and lie on the
ground better, and might be navigated by fewer men than other vessels of the
same burden.

Her complement of officers and men was Lieutenant Cook the Commander, with two
Lieutenants under him, a Master and boatswain, with each two mates, a surgeon
and carpenter, with each one mate, a gunner, a cook, a clerk and steward, two
quarter masters, an armourer, a sail-maker, three midshipmen, forty-one able
seamen, twelve marines, and nine servants, in all eighty-four persons, besides
the Commander: she was victualled for eighteen months, and took on board ten
carriage and twelve swivel guns, with good store of ammunition and other
necessaries. The Endeavor also, after the astronomical observation should be
made, was ordered to prosecute the design of making discoveries in the South
Seas. What was effected by these vessels in their several voyages, will appear
in the course of this work, of which it is now necessary to give some account.

It is drawn up from the journals that were kept by the Commanders of the
several ships, which were put into my hands by the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty for that purpose: and, with respect to the voyage of the Endeavor,
from other papers equally authentic; an assistance which I have acknowledged in
an introduction to the account of her voyage.

When I first undertook the work, it was debated, whether it should be written
in the first or third person: it was readily acknowledged on all hands, that a
narrative in the first person would, by bringing the Adventurer and the Reader
nearer together, without the intervention of a stranger, more strongly excite
an interest, and consequently afford more entertainment; but it was objected,
that if it was written in the name of the several Commanders, I could exhibit
only a naked narrative, without any opinion or sentiment of my own, however
fair the occasion, and without noting the similitude or dissimilitude between
the opinions, customs, or manners of the people now first discovered, and those
of nations that have been long known, or remarking on any other incident or
particular that might occur. In answer to this objection, however, it was said,
that as the manuscript would be submitted to the Gentlemen in whose names it
would be written, supposing the narrative to be in the first person, and
nothing published without their approbation, it would signify little who
conceived the sentiments that should be expressed, and therefore I might still
be at liberty to express my own. In this opinion all parties acquiesced, and it
was determined that the narrative should be written in the first person, and
that I might notwithstanding intersperse such sentiments and observations as my
subject should suggest: they are not indeed numerous, and when they occur, are
always cursory and short; for nothing would have been more absurd than to
interrupt an interesting narrative, or new descriptions, by hypothesis and
dissertation. They will however be found most frequent in the account of the
voyage of the Endeavor, and the principal reason is, that although it stands
last in the series, great part of it was printed before the others were
written, so that several remarks, which would naturally have been suggested by
the incidents and descriptions that would have occurred in the preceding
voyages, were anticipated by similar incidents and descriptions which occurred
in this.

Some particulars that are related in one voyage will perhaps appear to be
repeated in another, as they would necessarily have been if the several
Commanders had written the account of their voyages themselves; for a digest
could not have been made of the whole, without invading the right of each
navigator to appropriate the relation of what he had seen: these repetitions
however taken together will be found to fill but a few pages of the book.

That no doubt might remain of the fidelity with which I have related the
events recorded in my materials, the manuscript account of each voyage was read
to the respective Commanders at the Admiralty, by the appointment of Lord
Sandwich, who was himself present during much the greatest part of the time.
The account of the voyage of the Endeavor was also read to Mr. Banks and Dr.
Solander, in whose hands, as well as in those of Captain Cook, the manuscript
was left for a considerable time after the reading. Commodore Byron also,
Captain Wallis and Captain Carteret, had the manuscripts of their respective
voyages to peruse, after they had been read at the Admiralty in their presence,
and such emendations as they suggested were made. In order thus to authenticate
the voyage of Captain Cook, the account of it was first written, because it was
expected when his journal was put into my hands, that he would have sailed on
the voyage he is now making in less than five months.

It will probably be thought by many Readers, that I have related the nautical
events too minutely; but it must be remembered, that minutely to relate these
events was the great object of the work. It was in particular thought necessary
to insert the situation of the ship at different hours of the day, with the
bearings of different parts of the land while she was navigating seas, and
examining shores that hitherto have been altogether unknown, in order to
ascertain her track more minutely than could be done in any chart, however
large the scale, and to describe with critical exactness the bays, headlands,
and other irregularities of the coast; the appearance of the country, its
hills, valleys, mountains, and woods, with the depth of water, and every other
particular that might enable future navigators easily to find, and safely to
visit every part of it. I was not indeed myself sufficiently apprised of the
minuteness that was necessary in this part of the work, so that I was obliged
to make many additions to it, after I had prepared my manuscript. It is however
hoped, that those who read merely for entertainment will be compensated by the
description of countries which no European had before visited, and manners
which in many instances exhibit a new picture of human life. In this part, the
relation of little circumstances requires no apology, for it is from little
circumstances that the relation of great events derives its power over the
mind. An account that ten thousand men perished in a battle, that twice the
number were swallowed up by an earthquake, or that a whole nation was swept
away by a pestilence, is read in the naked brevity of an index, without the
least emotion, by those who feel themselves strongly interested even for
Pamela, the imaginary heroine of a novel that is remarkable for the enumeration
of particulars in themselves so trifling, that we almost wonder how they could
occur to the author's mind.

This work is illustrated and adorned by a great number of cuts, from which
every class of readers, whether their object is knowledge or pleasure, will find
equal advantage, as they consist not only of maps and charts, drawn with great
skill and attention, but of views and figures, designed and executed by the
best artists in this country.

The most effectual way to prevent obscurity and confusion in relating events,
is to range them in order of time, which however cannot be done in an unbroken
series when the complicated and multifarious objects of history are to be
recorded; but as each of the narratives in this work is a single thread, the
transactions of every day are set down in a regular succession, and the time
noted in the margin.

Great care has been taken to make the charts and the nautical part of the
narrative coincide; if there should be any difference, which it is hoped will
not be the case, the charts are to be confided in, as of unquestionable
authority. By the charts, as well as by the narrative, especially by that on
which the tracks of the several vessels are marked, it will be seen how far the
existence or non existence of a southern continent is already ascertained, and
what land has in the course of these voyages been first discovered. The charts
also will at one view prevent any mistake which might arise from the same name
having been given to different islands by the several Commanders in these
voyages, without the trouble of comparing the latitudes and longitudes assigned
them in the narrative.

As it is but a very few years since the existence of a race of men above the
common stature upon the coast of Patagonia, was the subject of eager dispute
among all ranks of people in this country, I have brought together the whole of
the evidence on the question, as I find it in a collection of voyages lately
printed in France, under the title of "Histoire des Navigationes aux Terres
Australes."

"It must be acknowledged, that the contrariety of the reports that have been
made, by ocular witnesses, concerning a fact easy to be determined, does not
deviate less from the common course of things than the gigantic stature of the
people in question. It appears, that during an hundred years, almost all
navigators, of whatever country, agree in affirming the existence of a race of
giants upon the coast of Patagonia; and that during another century, the much
greater number agree in denying the fact, treating their predecessors as idle
fabulists, and imputing their reports either to the terror which the rude
fierceness of a savage people inspired, or to the natural propensity of mankind
to assume importance, by pretending to have seen wonderful things. That men
have a strange propensity to the marvelous cannot be denied, nor that fear
naturally magnifies its object; but though it be allowed that the accounts of
the Patagonians have in some instances been exaggerated, it is certain, that
all who have affirmed their stature to be gigantic, were not under the
influence of fear; and it is very strange, that nations who have an hereditary
hatred to each other, and an acknowledged opposition of interest, should agree
in asserting an evident falsehood.

"In the first place, it is well known to have been an opinion long
established, both in our ancient world and in America, that there was once a
race of giants upon earth who distinguished themselves by violence and guilt.

"Barbenais was told by the inhabitants of South America, that a deluge having
laid Peru under water, the Indians retired to the mountains till the flood
should subside, and that when they came again down to the plain, they found
there men of an enormous stature, who attacked them with great ferocity,
killing many, and driving the rest to the caves of the rocks; but that having
continued in their hiding places many years, they saw in the air a young man
who destroyed the giants by thunderbolts, and thus restored to them the
possession of their country. His guides also showed him many marks upon a rock
which they said were impressed by the thunderbolts, and many bones of an
extraordinary size, which they believed to be remains of the giants; but they
did not pretend to know when the deluge happened.

"The Ynca Garcilasso de la Vega, in his history of Peru, relates, Pedro de
Cieca, chap. 52. Garcilasso, Hist. du Perou. live. 9. chap. 9.
that according to a tradition universally received, a number of vessels or
junks came to Point Saint Helena with a company of giants on board, of a
stature so enormous that the natives of the country were not higher than their
knees: that their eyes were as broad as the bottom of a plate, and their limbs
proportionably large: that some of them were naked, and others slightly covered
with the skins of beasts. That when they came on shore, they dug a pit of an
astonishing depth in the rock, and each of them consuming as much provisions as
would be sufficient for fifty men, the country was soon exhausted, and they
were obliged to live upon fish: that they seized the women of the country, to
whom their brutality was fatal, and afterward giving themselves up to worse
vices, the whole race was destroyed by fire from heaven, which however left
their bones unconsumed, as a lasting memorial of Divine vengeance. Bones of an
amazing size are said to have been found in this country, and fragments of
teeth, which, if they were whole, must have weighed half a pound.

"Those who wish to know all the particulars of these American traditions may
satisfy their curiosity by reading Torquemado, lib. 1. chap. 13 and 14. where
they will find that these fables are very similar to those relative to the same
subject in other parts of the world. The bones, said to have been the bones of
giants, which have been found in America, and which were shown at Mexico and
other places in the year 1550, are probably the bones of some animal unknown;
and indeed nothing less than the sight of such a race of human beings, or of an
entire skeleton, can be admitted as a proof of their existence. Turner, the
naturalist, reports, that in the year 1610, the thigh bone of a man was shown
in London, who must have been of an enormous size; but this testimony is not
decisive, though the author adds, that he had himself seen near the river
Plata, upon the coast of Brasil, a race of giants who went stark naked; that
the hinder part of their heads was flat, and not round; that the women had long
black hair, as coarse as a horse's mane; that the men were excellent archers,
and, besides their bow and arrows, carried two massive balls or bullets, each
fastened to one end of a thong, a weapon which they used with great dexterity
and force, either by striking with it, or throwing it like a stone from a
sling. One of these giants, he says, was twelve feet high; but acknowledges
that he saw no other so tall.

"Of this fact there are other ocular witnesses who perhaps may be thought more
worthy of credit; among the Spaniards, Magellan, Loaisa, Sarmiento, and Nodal;
among the English, Cavendish, Hawkins, and Knivet; among the Dutch, Sebald, de
Noort, le Maire, and Spilberg; and among the French, those who went in the
expedition from Marseilles, and Saint Maloes. Those who bear testimony to the
contrary, are Winter, the Dutch Admiral Hermit, Froger in de Gennes's
narrative, and Sir John Narborough. Winter, after having himself seen the
inhabitants of Patagonia, says in direct terms, that the accounts of their
being giants are falsehoods invented by the Spaniards; and it must be confessed
that the testimony of these navigators at least counterbalances the evidence on
the other side, especially as they were best acquainted with the Straight of
Magellan, and the neighboring country. Such navigators as have visited this
country, and are silent with respect to the stature of the inhabitants,
particularly Sir Francis Drake, must be considered as witnesses against the
fact in question; for their silence is a proof that they saw nothing
extraordinary. It must however be observed, in the first place, that the
greater part of those who hold the affirmative in this question, speak of
people that inhabited the desert coast of Patagonia to the east and west; and
that, on the contrary, those who hold the negative, speak of those who inhabit
the Straight upon the sides of the utmost point of America to the north and
south. The nations of these two districts are certainly not the same; and if
the first have sometimes been seen in the Straight, it cannot be thought
strange, considering how short the distance is from Port Saint Julian, which
appears to be their ordinary habitation. Magellan, and his people saw them
there very often, and trafficked with them sometimes on board his ships, and
sometimes on shore: nor was this all, he seized two of them, and kept them
prisoners in his vessel, one of whom was baptized some time before his death,
and taught several words of his language to Pigafette, who formed them into a
little dictionary: these are facts than which nothing can be more positive, or
less subject to illusion.

"I affirm, says Knivet, that when I was at Port Desire I measured several dead
bodies that I found buried there, which were from fourteen to sixteen spans
high, and saw tracks in the sand which must have been left by people of nearly
the same stature. I have also frequently seen at Brazil, one of the Patagonians
who had been taken at Port Saint Julian, and though he was but a youth, he
measured no less than thirteen spans: and our English prisoners at Brazil have
assured me that they had seen many men of the same stature upon the coasts of
the straight." Sebald de Were says, that when he was in the Straight, he saw
giants of the same bulk, who tore up trees by the roots, that were a span in
diameter, with great facility; he also saw women that were gigantic, and others
of the common stature. Oliver de Noort reports, that he saw savages of a
gigantic stature at Port Desire, but does not call them giants: that he took
six of them prisoners, and carried them on board his ship, one of whom
afterward told him that the country was inhabited by many different nations,
four of which were of the ordinary stature; but that farther within the land,
in a territory called Coin, there was a gigantic people, distinguished by the
name of Tiremenen, who were continually making war upon the other nations.
Spilberg relates, that he saw a man of an extraordinary stature upon the coast
of Terra del Fuego, but that the sepulchers which he found, had received men of
the common height. Aris-Clasz, who was on board La Maire's fleet in the
character of Commissary, a man well worthy of credit, declares, that having
visited the sepulchers which he discovered upon the coast of Patagonia, he
found the bones of men who were between ten and eleven feet high, which
convinced him that the reports of former navigators were true; and here it must
be confessed that the examination was made in cold blood, when it cannot be
pretended that the object was magnified by fear. Some others, particularly
Nodal and Sir Richard Hawkins, content themselves with saying that these
savages were a head taller than the inhabitants of Europe, and of such a
stature that the people on board their vessels called them giants. Such is the
evidence of past times; we shall now consider that of the age in which we live.
In 1704, the Captains Harrington and Carman, who commanded two French vessels,
one from Saint Maloes, and the other from Marseilles, saw at one time seven of
these giants in Possession Bay, at another time six, and at a third time they
had an interview with a company of more than four hundred men, part of whom
were gigantic, and part of the common stature. That Harrington and Carman
reported this fact, is attested by M. Frezier, superintendant of the
fortifications of Bretagne, a man well known, and universally esteemed. Frezier
never saw any of these savages himself, but he says, that being upon the coast
of Chili, Don Pedro Molina, Governor of the isle of Chiloe, and many other
eyewitnesses, told him, that there was at a considerable distance within the
country, an Indian nation, called by their neighbors Caucohues, who sometimes
came down to the Spanish settlements, that were more than nine feet high, and
were the same race with the Patagonians who live on the eastern coast, and have
been mentioned in former relations. We are told by Reaveneau de Lussan, that
the Spaniards who live upon the sea coast in South America, report that certain
white Indians inhabit part of Chili, with whom they are always at war: that
they are of an enormous bulk and stature, and that whenever they take a
Spaniard prisoner, they force up the breast bone, as they would the shell of a
tortoise, and tear out his heart. Narborough, on the contrary, though he agrees
that the Indians who inhabit the mountains near the Spanish settlements at
Chili, and perpetually commit hostilities against them, are tall, expressly
denies that their stature is gigantic. He had often measured the skulls and the
prints of the feet of the savages on the coasts of the Straight of Magellan,
which, he says, were of the common size: he had also several times seen
numerous companies of them even at Port Saint Julian, and these he declares not
to be taller or bigger than other men. Narborough is certainly a credible
witness, and his evidence is directly to the point: it is confirmed by that of
L'Hermite, who says, that the people he saw upon the coast of Terra del Fuego,
though they were robust and well-proportioned, were not larger than the
inhabitants of Europe; and lastly. M. de Gennes bears testimony that none of
the people he saw at Port Famine were six feet high.

"Those who diligently consider these different relations will find reason to
believe, that all the parties have spoken truth, each of them faithfully
reporting what he saw, and therefore that the existence of a gigantic race in
these parts is a real fact, not to be questioned merely because they were not
seen by every mariner that visited the country.

"It appears to be well established, that the inhabitants of the two borders of
the Straight are of the common stature; and that the race distinguished by the
name of Patagonians, made their constant residence upon the desert coasts,
either in some miserable hovels in the depth of the woods, or in some caverns
of the rocks, scarcely accessible to any but themselves: and it appears from
the account of Oliver de Noort, that when the Straight began to be frequented
by European vessels, they hid themselves as soon as the ships were in sight,
which accounts both for their not being seen, and for the recent marks of
inhabitants upon a coast that appeared to be desert. Perhaps the frequent
appearance of our ships upon this coast, at length determined them to quit it
as a settled habitation, returning only at particular seasons of the year, and
taking up their constant residence in the interior part of the country. Lord
Anson was of opinion, that they resided statedly on the western side of the
Cordeliers, and visited the eastern side occasionally, but not often: so that
if they have been rarely seen by the vessels which have touched at the coast of
Patagonia for the last hundred years, the reason probably is, that being, like
other Indian nations, desirous to conceal themselves from strangers, they
retired to the mountains. It is indeed to be regretted, that no skeleton of
these people has been brought into Europe; and it may at first seem strange,
that no such evidence of their uncommon stature should have been produced, as
it is known that several of them who had been made prisoners by the Commanders
of European vessels, died on board soon after they came into a hot climate; but
the wonder will cease, when it is considered that all mariners have a
superstitious opinion that the compass will not traverse if there is a dead
body on board the vessel." Upon the whole, it may reasonably be presumed, that
the concurrent testimony of late navigators, particularly Commodore Byron,
Captain Wallis, and Captain Carteret, Gentlemen of unquestionable veracity, who
are still living, and who not only saw and conversed with these people but
measured them, will put an end to all the doubts that have been hitherto
entertained of their existence.

Having thus brought together the whole of the evidence for and against a fact
which has long been the object both of popular and philosophical curiosity, I
shall not anticipate any opinion that the Reader may form concerning future
navigations in the track which has been described by any of the vessels whose
voyages are here related, except that although it is the opinion of Commodore
Byron, who spent seven weeks and two days in passing through the Straight of
Magellan, that it may be passed in three weeks at the proper season; yet the
passage cost Captain Wallis near four months, though he performed it precisely
at the time recommended by the Commodore, having reached the eastern entrance
about the middle of December.

I cannot however dismiss my Readers to the following narratives, without
expressing the regret with which I have recorded the destruction of poor naked
savages, by our firearms, in the course of these expeditions, when they
endeavored to repress the invaders of their country; a regret which I am
confident my Readers will participate with me: this however appears to be an
evil which, if discoveries of new countries are attempted, cannot be avoided:
resistance will always be made, and if those who resist are not overpowered,
the attempt must be relinquished. It may perhaps be said, that the expense of
life upon these occasions is more than is necessary to convince the natives
that further contest is hopeless, and perhaps this may sometimes have been
true: but it must be considered, that if such expeditions are undertaken, the
execution of them must be entrusted to persons not exempt from human frailty;
to men who are liable to provocation by sudden injury, to unpremeditated
violence by sudden danger, to error by the defect of judgment or the strength
of passion, and always disposed to transfer laws by which they are bound
themselves; to others who are not subject to their obligation; so that every
excess thus produced is also an inevitable evil.

If it should be said, that supposing these mischiefs to be inevitable in
attempting discoveries, discoveries ought not to be attempted; it must be
considered, that upon the only principles on which this opinion can be
supported, the risk of life, for advantages of the same kind with those
proposed in discovering new countries, is in every other instance unlawful. If
it is not lawful to put the life of an Indian in hazard, by an attempt to
examine the country in which he lives, with a view to increase commerce or
knowledge; it is not lawful to risk the life of our own people in carrying on
commerce with countries already known. If it being said that the risk of life
in our own people is voluntary, and that the Indian is brought into danger
without his consent, the consequence will still follow; for it is universally
agreed, at least upon the principles of Christianity, that men have no more
right over their own lives than over the lives of others, and suicide being
deemed the worst species of murder, a man must be proportionably criminal in
exposing his own life, for any purpose that would not justify his exposing the
life of another. If the gratification of artificial wants, or the inrease of
knowledge, are justifiable causes for the risk of life, the landing by force on
a newly discovered country, in order to examine its produce, may be justified;
if not, every trade and profession that exposes life for advantages of the same
kind is unlawful; and by what trade or profession is not life exposed? Let us
examine all the multitudes that art has employed, from the refiner who sweats
at the furnace to the sedentary artificer who grows pale at the loom, and
perhaps none can be found in which life is not in some degree sacrificed to the
artificial necessities of civil society. But will it therefore be said, that
civil society, to which this sacrifice is made, is for that reason a
combination contrary to the great original principles of morality, which are
the basis of all duty? Will it be said, that to exercise the faculties which
are the distinguishing characteristics of our nature is unnatural? and that
being endowed with the various powers which in civil societies only can be
brought into action, it was incongruous to the will of our Creator that any
such society should be formed, and that it would be pleasing to him if, still
continuing in a savage state, these powers should lie torpid in our nature,
like life in an embrio, during the whole of our existence? This surely must
appear extravagant and absurd in the highest degree, especially as it must be
allowed, that although commerce and arts in some instances expose life, in
others they preserve it; they supply the wants of Nature, without rapine and
violence, and by producing a common interest, they prevent the inhabitants of
the same country from being divided into different clans, which among savages
are almost perpetually committing hostilities against each other, with a
ferocious cruelty which is not to be found where civil government and literary
knowledge have meliorated the manners of mankind. Upon the whole, therefore, it
seems reasonable to conclude, that the increase of knowledge and commerce are
ultimately common benefits; and that the loss of life which happens in the
attempt, is among the partial evils which terminate in general good.

I have now only to request of such of my Readers as may be disposed to censure
me for not having attributed any of the critical escapes from danger that I
have recorded, to the particular interposition of Providence, that they would,
in this particular, allow me the right of private judgment, which I claim with
the greater confidence, as the very same principle which would have determined
them to have done it, has determined me to the contrary. As I firmly believe
the divine precept delivered by the Author of Christianity, "there is not a
sparrow falls to the ground without my Father," and cannot admit the agency of
chance in the government of the world, I must necessarily refer every event to
one cause, as well the danger as the escape, as well the sufferings as the
enjoyments of life: and for this opinion, I have, among other respectable
authorities, that of the Bible. Shall we, says Job, "receive good from the hand
of God and shall we not receive evil?" The Supreme Being is equally wise and
benevolent in the dispensation of both evil and good, as means of effecting
ultimate purposes worthy of his ineffable perfections; so that whether we
consider ourselves as christians or philosophers, we must acknowledge that he
deserves blessing not more when he gives than when he takes away. If the fall
of a sparrow, as well as its preservation, is imputed to providence, why not
the fall as well as the preservation of a man? and why should we attribute to
Providence only what appears to be good in its immediate effect, when we
suppose that the whole concatenation of events, whether the preservation or
destruction of particular parts, tends ultimately to the good of the whole? The
same voice commissions the winds to plough up the deep, which at the appointed
time rebukes them, saying, "Peace, be still." If the adorable Author and
Preserver of Nature was such a being as Baal is represented to have been by the
prophet, when he derided his worshippers; if he was sometimes on a journey, and
sometimes asleep, we might with propriety say that a fire happened to break
out, or a storm to rise, but that by the interposition of providence life was
preserved, expressions which imply that the mischief had one origin, and the
remedy another; but such language certainly derogates from the honor of the
great Universal Cause, who, acting through all duration, and subsisting in all
space, fills immensity with his presence, and eternity with his power.

It will perhaps be said, that in particular instances evil necessarily results
from that constitution of things which is best upon the whole, and that
Providence occasionally interferes, and supplies the defects of the
constitution in these particulars: but this notion will appear not to be
supported by those facts which are said to be providential; it will always be
found that Providence interposes too late, and only moderates the mischief
which it might have prevented. But who can suppose an extraordinary
interposition of Providence to supply particular defects in the constitution of
nature, who sees those defects supplied but in part? It is true that when the
Endeavor was upon the rock off the coast of New Holland, the wind ceased, and
that otherwise she must have been beaten to pieces; but either the subsiding of
the wind was a mere natural event or not; if it was a natural event, providence
is out of the question, at least we can with no more propriety say that
providentially the wind ceased, than that providentially the sun rose in the
morning. If it was not a mere natural event, but produced by an extraordinary
interposition, correcting a defect in the constitution of nature, tending to
mischief, it will lie upon those who maintain the position, to show, why an
extraordinary interposition did not take place rather to prevent the ship's
striking, than to prevent her being beaten to pieces after she had struck: a
very slight impulse upon the ship's course would have caused her to steer clear
of the rock, and if all things were not equally easy to Omnipotence, we should
say that this might have been done with less difficulty than a calm could be
produced by suspending the general laws of Nature which had brought on the gale.

I have, however, paid my homage to the Supreme Being, consonant to my own
ideas of his agency and perfections; and those who are of opinion that my
notions are erroneous, must allow, that he who does what he thinks to be right,
and abstains from what he thinks to be wrong, acquits himself equally of moral
obligation, whether his opinions are false or true.

AN EXPLANATION of the NAUTICAL TERMS not generally understood which occur in
this WORK.
A.
ABACK, the situation of the sails when their surfaces are flatted against the
masts by the force of the wind. The sails are said to be taken aback, when they
are brought into this situation, either by a sudden change of the wind, or by
an alteration in the ship's course. They are laid aback, to effect an immediate
retreat, without turning to the right or left; in order to avoid some danger.
ABAFT, the hinder part of a ship. AFT, behind, or near the stern of the ship.
ANCHOR, the principal are the sheet anchor, the best bower and the small bower,
so called from their situation in the ship's bows. The smaller anchors, are the
stream anchor, the kedge anchor, and the grappling. AWNING, a canopy of canvass
extending over the decks of a ship in hot weather. AZIMUTH-COMPASS, an
instrument employed to discover the magnetical azimuth or amplitude of any
heavenly object. This operation is performed at sea, to find the exact
variation of the magnetical needle.
B.
To BALANCE, to contract a sail into a narrower compass, in a storm, by
retrenching or folding up a part of it at one corner. BEAMS, strong thick
pieces of timber, stretching across the ship from side to side, to support the
decks, and retain the sides at their proper distance. On the weather beam, is
on the weather side of the ship. To BELAY, to fasten a rope by winding it
several times round a cleat, belaying-pin, or kevel. BENDING a sail, fastening
it to its yard or stay. BIGHT, the double part of a rope when it is folded, in
contradistinction to the end. BIGHT, is also a small bay between two points of
land. BULGE, or BILGE, that part of the floor of a ship, on either side of the
keel, which approaches nearer to an horizontal than to a perpendicular
direction, and on which the ship would rest if laid on the ground: or more
particularly, those parts of the bottom which are opposite to the heads of the
floor-timbers amidships on each side of the keel. Hence, when a ship receives a
fracture in this place, she is said to be bilged. BIRTH, the station in which a
ship rides at anchor. BIRTH, also signifies the room or apartment where any
particular number of the officers or ship's company usually mess and reside.
BOARD, the line over which the ship runs between tack and tack, when she is
turning to windward, or sailing against the direction of the wind. BOW, the
rounding part of a ship's side forward, beginning at the place where the planks
arch inwards, and terminating where they close at the stem or prow. BREAKERS,
billows that break violently over rocks lying under the surface of the sea. To
BRING-TO, to check the course of a ship when she is advancing, by arranging the
sails in such a manner as that they shall counter-act each other, and prevent
her either from retreating or moving forward. In this situation the ship is
said to lie-by, or lie-to. BULK-HEADS, certain partitions, or walls, built up
in several places of a ship between two decks, either lengthways or across, to
form and separate the various apartments. BUOY, a sort of close cask, or block
of wood, fastened by a rope to the anchor, to determine the place where the
anchor is situated.
C.
CABLE 's-length, a hundred and twenty-fathom. CAP, a strong, thick block of
wood, used to confine two masts together, when the one is erected at the head
of the other, in order to lengthen it. It is for this purpose furnished with
two holes perpendicular to it is length and breadth, and parallel to its
thickness; one of these is square, and the other round; the former being
solidly fixed upon the upper-end of the lower-mast, whilst the latter receives
the mast employed to lengthen it, and secures it in this position. CAPSTERN, or
CAPSTAN, a strong, massy column of timber, formed like a truncated cone, and
having its upper extremity pierced with a number of holes to receive the bars
or levers. It is let down perpendicularly through the decks of a ship, and is
fixed in such manner, that the men, by turning it horizontally with their bars,
may perform any work which requires an extraordinary effort. CASTING, the
motion of falling off, so as to bring the direction of the wind on either side
of the ship after it had blown for some time right ahead. CHAINS, strong links
or plates of iron, the lower ends of which are bolted through the ship's side
to the timbers. They are placed at short distances from each other on the
ship's outside, as being used to contain the blocks called dead-eyes, by which
the shrouds of the masts are extended. CHEEKS of the mast, the faces or
projecting parts on each side of the masts, used to sustain the frame of the
top, together with the topmast, which rests immediately upon them. CLAWING, or
CLAWING-OFF, the act of beating or turning to windward from a lee shore, so as
to acquire a sufficient distance from it, to escape the dangers of shipwreck.
CLEATS, pieces of wood of different shapes, used occasionally to fasten ropes
upon in a ship. CLENCH, or CLINCH, that part of a cable, or other rope, which
is fastened to the ring of the anchor. CLOSE upon a wind, or CLOSE-HAULED, the
general arrangement or trim of a ship's sails, when she endeavors to make a
progress in the nearest direction possible toward that point of the compass
from which the wind blows. To CLEW, or CLUE-UP, to truss the sails up to the
yards by tackles fastened to their lower corners, called their clues.
COCKSWAIN, or COXEN, the officer who manages and steers a boat, and has the
command of the boat's crew. COMPANION, a sort of wooden porch placed over the
entrance or stair case of the master's cabin in a merchant-ship. COURSES, a
name by which the principal sails of a ship are usually distinguished, viz. the
main-sail, fore-sail, and mizen. CRANK, the quality of a ship which for want of
a sufficient quantity of ballast or cargo, is rendered incapable of carrying
sail without being exposed to the danger of overturning.
D.
Half-DECK, a space under the quarter deck of a ship of war, contained between
the foremost bulkhead of the steerage and the forepart of the quarter deck.
DRIVING, the state of being carried at random along the surface of the water,
by a storm or current: it is generally expressed of a ship when broken loose
from her anchors or moorings.
E.
To EDGE away, to decline gradually from the shore, or from the line of the
course which the ship formerly steered.
F.
FALL, the loose end of a tackle; or that part upon which the people pull, or
hoist, to produce the required effect. To FILL, to brace the sails in such a
manner, as that the wind, entering their cavities from behind, dilates them so
as to advance the ship in her course. FISH, is a long piece of oak, unequal on
one side, and concave on the other. It is used to fasten upon the outside of
the lower masts, as an additional security, to strengthen them when it becomes
necessary to carry an extraordinary pressure of sail. The fishes are also
employed for the same purpose on any yard, which happens to be sprung or
fractured. FLAW, a sudden breeze, or gust of wind. FLOOR, the bottom of a ship.
FOOT of a sail, lower edge or bottom. FOOT-ROPE, the rope to which the foot of
a sail is sewed. FORE, all that part of a ship's frame and machinery which lies
near the head.
G.
GAFF, a sort of boom or pole, used to extend the upper edge of the mizen. The
foremost, or inner extremity of it, is furnished with two cheeks forming a
semicircle, which enclose the after part of the mast so as to confine the gaff
close to its respective mast whilst the sail is hoisting or lowering. GANGWAY,
a narrow platform, or range of planks, laid horizontally along the upper part
of a ship's side, from the quarter deck to the forecastle, for the convenience
of walking more expeditiously fore and aft, than by descending into the waist.
GANGWAY, is also that part of a ship's side, both within and without, by which
the passengers enter and depart. It is for this purpose provided with a
sufficient number of steps, or cleats, nailed upon the ship's side, nearly as
low as the surface of the water; and sometimes furnished with a railed
accommodation-ladder, whose lower end projects from the ship's side, being
secured in this position by iron braces, so as to render the ascent and descent
convenient. GRAPPLING, a small anchor, fitted with four or five flukes or
claws, commonly used to ride a boat or other small vessel. GUNNEL, or GUNWALE,
the upper edge of a ship's side.
H.
HANDING the sails, rolling them up close to the yard or mast to which they
belong. HAMMACOES, the same with hammoc. To HAUL, an expression peculiar to
seamen, implying to pull a single rope, without the assistance of blocks, or
other mechanical powers. To HAUL the wind, to direct the ship's course nearer
to that point of the compass from which the wind arises. HAWSER, a large rope
which holds the middle degree between the cable and tow-line. HEAVING- short,
is the drawing so much of the cable into the ship, by means of the capstern or
windlass, as that by advancing, she will be almost perpendicularly above the
anchor, and in a proper situation to set sail. HEAVING- taught, the act of
heaving about the capstern, till the rope applied thereto becomes straight and
ready for action. To HEEL, to stoop or incline to either side. HUMMOCK, a
little hill.
J.
JERKED, cured with salt. GIB, or JIB-BOOM, a boom run out from the extremity
of the bowsprit, parallel to its length, and serving to extend the bottom of
the jib, and the stay of the fore-top-gallant-mast.
K.
KEDGE, a small anchor, used to keep a ship steady whilst she rides in a
harbor or river. False KEEL, a strong, thick piece of timber, bolted to the
main keel to preserve its lower-side. KNEE, a crooked piece of timber, having
two branches or arms and generally used to connect the beams of a ship with her
sides or timbers.
L.
LAGOON, a lake. LARBOARD, the left side of a ship when the eye of a spectator
is directed forward. LASHING, a piece of rope employed to fasten or secure any
moveable body in a ship, or about her masts, sails, and rigging: also the act
of fastening or securing any thing by means of the rope used for this purpose.
LOG, a machine used to measure the ship's head-way, or the rate of her velocity
as she advances through the sea. It is composed of a reel and line, to which is
fixed a small piece of wood, forming the quadrant of a circle. The term log
however is more particularly applied to the latter. The log, is generally about
a quarter of an inch thick, and five or six inches from the angular point to
the circumference. It is balanced by a thin plate of lead, nailed upon the
arch, so as to swim perpendicularly in the water, with about impressed under
the surface. The line is fastened to the log by means of two legs, one of which
passes through a hole at the corner, and is knotted on the opposite side;
whilst the other leg is attached to the arch by a pin, fixed in another hole,
so as to draw out occasionally. By these legs the log is hung in equilibrio,
and the line, which is united to it, is divided into certain spaces, which are
in proportion to an equal number of geographical miles, as a half minute or
quarter minute is to an hour of time. LUG-SAIL, a square sail, hoisted
occasionally on the mast of a boat, or small vessel, upon a yard which hangs
nearly at right angles with the mast.
M.
To MAKE the land, is to discover it from a distant situation, in consequence
of approaching it after a sea-voyage. MIZEN, the aftermost or hindmost of the
fixed sails of a ship. MOORING, the act of confining and securing a ship in a
particular station, by chains or cables, which are either fastened to the
adjacent shore, or to anchors in the bottom.
N.
NEAPED, the situation of a ship which is left aground on the height of a
springtide, so that she cannot be floated off till the return of the next
spring.
O.
OFFING, implies out at sea; or at a competent distance from the shore, and
generally out of anchor-ground. OPEN, is expressed of any distant object, to
which the sight or passage is not intercepted by something lying, or coming
between. Thus, to be open with any place, is to be opposite to it; as the entry
of a port, road, or haven. OVER-HAULING, the act of opening and extending the
several parts of a tackle, or other assemblage of ropes, communicating with
blocks, or dead-eyes. It is used to remove those blocks to a sufficient
distance from each other, that they may be again placed in a state of action,
so as to produce the effect required.
P.
PAINTER, a rope employed to fasten a boat either alongside of the ship to
which she belongs, or to some wharf or key. PALM of the anchor, the same with
fluke, the broad barbed ends of the two arms at the bottom of the shank.
PARCELING, certain long narrow slips of canvas, daubed with tar, and frequently
bound about a rope, in the same manner as bandages are applied to a broken limb
in surgery. To PAY, to daub or anoint the surface of any body, in order to
preserve it from the injuries of the water and weather, etc. PORTS, the
embrasures or openings in the side of a ship of war, wherein the artillery is
ranged in battery upon the decks above and below. HALF-PORTS, are what stops
that part of the port which when the gun is pushed out is left open. PURCHASE,
any mechanical power employed in raising or removing heavy bodies, or in fixing
or extending the ship's rigging.
Q.
QUARTER, that part of a ship's side which lies toward the stern.
QUARTER-CLOTHS, long pieces of painted canvas, extended on the outside of the
quarter-neting from the upper part of the gallery to the gangway.
R.
RANGE, a sufficient length of the cable, drawn up on the deck, before the
anchor is cast loose from the bow, to let it sink to the bottom, without being
interrupted, that the flukes may be forced the deeper into the ground, by the
additional weight which the anchor acquires in sinking. REEF, a certain portion
of a sail, comprehended between the top or bottom, and a row of eyelet-holes
parallel thereto. To REEF, is to reduce the surface of the sail in proportion
to the increase of the wind. REEF also implies a chain of rocks, lying near the
surface of the water. RIGING, a general name given to all the ropes employed to
support the masts; and to extend or reduce the sails, or arange them to the
disposition of the wind. RIGHTING, the act of restoring a ship to her upright
position, after she has been laid on a careen. A ship is also said to right at
sea when she rises, with her masts erected, after having been pressed down on one
side by the effort of her sails, or a heavy squall of wind.
S.
SCARFING, when two pieces of timber are to be joined together by the ends, if
the ends are cut square, another piece is laid upon, and fastened to both, and
this is called scarfing. SETING, the act of observing the situation of any
distant object by the compass, in order to discover the angle which it makes
with the nearest meridian. SHEET, a rope fastened to one or both the lower
corners of a sail to extend and retain it in a particular station. SHROUDS, a
range of large ropes extended from the mast-heads to the right and left side of
the ship, to support the masts, and enable them to carry sail. SKIDS, or
SKEEDS, are long compassing pieces of timber, formed so as to answer the
vertical curve of a ship's side. They are notched below so as to fit closely
upon the wales; and as they are intended to preserve the planks of the side,
when any weighty body is hoisted or lowered, they extend from the main wale to
the top of the side; and they are retained in this position by bolts or
spike-nails. SPRING, a crack or breach running transversely or obliquely
through any part of a mast or yard, so as to render it unsafe to carry the
usual quantity of sail thereon. SPRING is also a rope passed out of one
extremity of a ship and attached to a cable proceeding from the other, when she
lies at anchor. It is usually done to bring the ship's broadside, or battery
of cannon, to bear upon some distant object. SPRITSAIL, a sail attached to a
yard which hangs under the bowsprit. SQUALL, a sudden and violent blast of
wind, usually occasioned by the interruption and reverberation of the wind from
high mountains. STANCHION, a sort of small pillar of wood or iron used for
various purposes in a ship; as to support the decks, the quarter-rails, the
netings, and awnings. STANDING, the movement by which a ship advances toward a
certain object, or departs from it. STARBOARD, the right side of a ship when
the eye of the spectator is directed forward. To STAY, the same as to tack; the
contrary to wear, which see; hence the phrase to miss stays when she fails in
the operation. STIFF, the quality by which a ship is enabled to carry a
sufficient quantity of sail, without hazard of oversetting. STREAKS, or
STRAKES, the uniform ranges of planks on the bottom and sides of a ship. To
STRIKE, to run ashore, or to beat upon the ground in passing over a bank or
shallow. STUDDING-SAILS, certain light sails extended, in moderate and steady
breezes, beyond the skirts of the principal sails, where they appear as wings
upon the yard-arms. SURF, the swell of the sea which breaks upon the shore, or
any rock lying near the surface of the water. SWEEPING, the act of dragging the
bight, or loose part of a small rope, along the surface of the ground, in a
harbor or road, in order to hook and recover some anchor, wreck, or other
material, sunk at the bottom. It is performed by fastening the two ends of this
rope to the sides of two boats which are abreast of each other, at some
distance. To the middle of the rope are suspended two cannon shot, or something
which weighs heavy, in order to sink it to the ground: so that, as the boats
advance by rowing ahead, the rope drags along the bottom, to hook any thing for
which they are searching. SWEEPS, are long oars sometimes used on board a ship
to pull her round.
T.
TACK, a rope used to confine the foremost lowest-corners of the courses and
stay-sails in a fixed position, when the wind crosses the ship's course
obliquely. TACK-CHAIN plates, strong links or plates of iron, the lower ends of
which are bolted through the ship's side to the timbers, for the purpose of
holding the rope called a tack. MAIN-TACK, the tack of the main-sail. TAFFAREL,
the upper part of a ship's stern, being a curved piece of wood, usually
ornamented with sculpture. TAUGHT, the state of being extended or stretched
out. It is usually applied to a rope or sail, in opposition to slack. TENDING,
the movement by which a ship turns or swings round her anchor in a tide-way, at
the beginning of the flood or ebb. THWART, the seat or bench of a boat whereon
the rowers sit to manage the oars. TILER, the bar or lever employed to turn the
rudder in steering. TIMBERS, the ribs of a ship. TRANSOMS, certain beams or
timbers extended across the stern-post of a ship to fortify her after-part, and
give it the figure most suitable to the service for which she is calculated.
TRUSSEL or TRESTLE-TREES, two strong bars of timber fixed horizontally on the
opposite sides of the lower mast-head, to support the frame of the top, and the
weight of the topmast. TRIM, the state or disposition by which a ship is best
calculated for the several purposes of navigation. To TREND, to run off in a
certain direction. TRIPING, the movement by which an anchor is loosened from
the bottom by its cable or buoy-ropes.
V.
VEERING, the same as wearing, which see. To VEER away the cable, is to slacken
it, that it may run out of the ship.
W.
WAKE, the print or track impressed by the course of a ship on the surface of
the water. WALES, an assemblage of strong planks extending along a ship's side,
throughout her whole length, at different heights, and serving to reinforce the
decks, and form the curves by which the vessel appears light and graceful on
the water. WARP, a small rope employed occasionally to remove a ship from one
place to another, in a port, road or river. And hence To WARP, is to change the
situation of a ship, by pulling her from one part of a harbor, etc. to some
other, by means of warps. WASH-BOARD, a broad thin plank fixed occasionally on
the top of a boat's side, so as to raise it, and be removed at pleasure. It is
used to prevent the sea from breaking into the vessel, particularly when the
surface is rough. To WEATHER, is to sail to windward of some ship, bank, or
headland. To WEAR, the same as to veer, to perform the operation by which a
ship, in changing her course from one board to the other, turns her stern to
windward; it is the opposite to tacking, in which the head is turned to the
windward and the stern to the leeward. WINDLASS, a machine used in
merchant-ships to heave up the anchors. It is a large cylindrical piece of
timber, supported at the two ends by two frames of wood, placed on the opposite
sides of the deck near the foremast, and is turned about as upon an axis, by
levers called handspecs which are for this purpose thrust into holes bored
through the body of the machine. WOOLDING, the act of winding a piece of rope
about a mast or yard, to support it in a place where it may have been fished or
scarfed; or when it is composed of several pieces united into one solid.
Y.
YARD, a long piece of timber suspended upon the masts of a ship. to extend the
sails to the wind. YAW, the movement by which a ship deviates from the line of
her course toward the right or left in steering.
A DESCRIPTION of the CUTS.
I. A view of the Indians of Terra del Fuego in their hut. II. A view of
Matavia Bay in Otaheite; called by Captain Wallis, Port Royal Harbor in King
George the Third's Island. The view is taken from One Tree Hill, and the tree
is a new species of the Erythrina. III. A view in the Island of Ulietea, with a
double canoe and a boat-house. IV. A view of the Island of Otaheite, with
several vessels of that island. V. A view in the Island of Otaheite; with the
house or shed called Tupapow, under which the dead are deposited, and a
representation of the person who performs the principal part in the funeral
ceremony in his peculiar dress; with a man climbing the bread-fruit tree to get
out of his way. VI. A view in the Island of Huaheine; with the Ewharra no
Eatua, or House of God; a small altar with its offering; and a tree called
Owharra with which the houses are thatched. VII. A view of the inside of a
house in the Island of Ulietea, with the representation of a dance to the music
of the country. VIII. A military gorget worn in the South Sea Islands. IX. The
first two figures, reckoning from the left hand, are ohissels or gouges; the
third an adze of the smaller kind; the fourth, the instrument with which the
bread-fruit is beaten into paste; the fifth, the nasal flute; the sixth, a
thatching needle; the seventh, the instrument used for beating the cloth, over
which is a square representing the end of it, to show the different size of the
grooves on the four sides, the number of which is expressed in figures. X. The
first figure, reckoning from the left hand, is an adze of the larger size; the
second and third are different representations of the upper part of it, to show
the manner of tying the stone to the handle; the smaller figures are tattowing
instruments, to pierce the skin, of different sizes with and without their
handles; the last is the instrument with which they are struck for that
purpose. XI. A branch of the bread-fruit tree with the fruit. XII. The middle
figure represents a fly-flap of the Island Ohiteroa; the two side figures,
handles of the same instruments made in Otaheite. N.B. the figures in the
plates IX. X. and XII. are according to a scale of one third of an inch to an
inch.

XIII. The head of a New Zealander, with a comb in his hair, an ornament of
green stone in his ear, and another of a fish's tooth round his neck. XIV.
Bludgeons, used as weapons by the New Zealanders, and called Patoo-patoos, as
seen on the side, the edge, and the end. They are from fourteen to eighteen
inches long, and broad and thick in proportion. XV. A chest of New Zealand, as
a specimen of the carving of that country. XVI. A war canoe of New Zealand,
with a view of Gable End Foreland. XVII. A view of a perforated rock in Tolaga
Bay in New Zealand. XVIII. A fortified town or village, called a Hippah, built
on a perforated rock at Tolaga in New Zealand. XIX. A view of Endeavor River,
on the coast of New Holland, where the ship was laid on shore, in order to
repair the damage which she received on the rock. XX. An animal found on the
coast of New Holland called Kanguroo. XXI. A representation of the interview
between Commodore Byron and the Patagonians. XXII. A representation of the
attack of Captain Wallis in the Dolphin by the natives of Otaheite. XXIII. A
representation of the surrender of the island of Otaheite to Captain Wallis by
the supposed Queen Oberea.
ERRATUM.
Vol. I. page 534. line 18. for I, read he.

DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THE CUTS AND CHARTS.
VOLUME I.
CHART of part of the South Seas, showing the Track and Discoveries made by all
the ships, To front the Title Page. Chart of the Straight of Magellan, Chart of
Port Famine, Wood's Bay, Port Gallant and Fortescue Bay, and Cordes's Bay and
Harbor, Chart of Saint David's Cove, Island Bay, Swallow Harbor, Puzzling
Bay, Cape Providence, Cape Upright Bay, and Dolphin Bay, Chart of Elizabeth
Bay, Saint David's Bay, and from York River to Three Island Bay and Harbor,
To front Commodore Byron's Voyage. No. 23. facing Page 27 A chart of Hawkins's
Maiden Land, and Falkland's Sound, to face Chapter V. Page 41 No. 21. facing Page
443 No. 22. to face Page 462 Views of Sir Charles Saunders's Island, Osnaburg
Island, Boscawen's Island, Admiral Keppel's Island, and Wallis's Island, Page
491 Chart of Coco's Island, and Traytor's Island, to face Page 492 Chart of
Wallis's Island, to face Page 496 View of the N.W. side of Masafuero, to face
Page 553 A chart and views of Pitcairn's Island, to face Page 561 Queen
Charlotte's Islands, to face Page 568 The north side of the largest of Queen
Charlotte's islands, Swallow Bay, and Byron's Harbor, to face Page 577 Nova
Hibernia, with a view of the Island of Saint John, and six others, to face Page
588 A chart of Captain Carteret's Discoveries at New Britain, to face Page 595
Three views of the Admiralty Isles, and some others, to face Page 605 A
dangerous shoal, Joseph Freewell's Island, and the south end of Mindanao, to
face Page 609 A Draught of Bonthain Bay, Page 637
VOLUME II.
A view of part of the N.E. side of Terra del Fuego, with three other views, a
Plan of Success Bay in Straight la Maire, and a chart of the S.E. part of Terra
del Fuego, Page 39 No. 1. facing Page 55 Chart of the Island of Otaheite, Page
79 No. 2. No. 11.
facing Page 80 No. 4. No. 8.
facing Page 185 No. 12. facing Page 185 No. 10. facing Page 191 No. 9. facing
Page 212 No. 5. facing Page 234 Chart of the Society Islands, Matavai Bay in
Otaheite, Ohameneno Harbor in Ulietea, Owharra Harbor in Huaheine, and Oopoa
Harbor in Ulietea, Chart of all the Islands,
Page 249 No. 6. facing Page 252 No. 3. facing Page 258 No. 7. facing Page 265
Chart of New Zealand, facing Book II. Chap. i. Page 281 No. 17. facing Page 318
River Thames, and Mercury Bay in New Zealand, Bay of Islands, and Tolaga Bay,
Page 323 No. 18. facing Page 341 Chart of Cook's Straight in New Zealand,
facing Page 385
VOLUME III.
No. 13. facing Page 453 No. 15. No. 16.
facing Page 463 No. 14. facing Page 466 A chart of New South Wales on the east
coast of New Holland, Entrance of Endeavor River in New South Wales, and
Botany Bay, facing
Page 481 No. 19. facing Page 557 No. 20. facing Page 561 Chart of part of the
coast of New South Wales from Cape Tribulation to Endeavor Straight, Page 589
The Second Volume ends at page Page 410 and Vol. 3d. begins at page Page 411
Errata in the Description of the Cuts.
For Plate XXI. read Plate XXIII. For XXII. read XXI. For XXIII. read XXII.
A CHART of the STRAIGHTS OF MAGELLAN, in which are Inserted THE OBSERVATIONS
AND DISCOVERIES, of Captn. Byron, Captn. Wallis and Captain Carteret.


PORT FAMINE


WOODS BAY


PORT GALLANT and FORTESCUE BAY


CORDS BAY and HARBOR


St. David's Cove


ISLAND BAY




Swallow Harbor


Puzling Bay


Cape Providence with the Bay and Anchoring Places to the N.N.E. of it.


CAPE UPWRIGHT BAY


DOLPHIN BAY


Elizabeth Bay


A Bay under the Islands Opposite York R^ad


St. David's Bay


FROM YORK BAY to THREE ISLAND BAY and HARBOR


AN ACCOUNT OF A VOYAGE round the WORLD, IN THE YEARS MDCCLXIV, MDCCLXV, and
MDCCLXVI. By the Honorable COMMODORE BYRON, In his Majesty's Ship the DOLPHIN.

CHAP. I. The Passage from the Downs to Rio de Janeiro.
[The longitude in this voyage is reckoned from the meridian of London, west to
180 degrees, and east afterward.]
ON the 21st of June 1764, I sailed from the Downs, deserts, a name which has
been given them from their barren and desolate appearance: guns,

Having completed our water, and procured all the refreshment I was able for
the companies of both the ships, every man having twenty pounds weight of
onions for his sea stock,

In the morning of the 27th, of which, as it is very violent, and blows
directly in,

On Thursday the 2d of August,

On Wednesday the 8th,

No event worthy of notice happened till Tuesday the 11th of September, the
great Road of Rio de Janeiro.

The people in my own ship, who had as much fresh meat and greens as they could
eat every day, were very healthy, but there being many sick on board the Tamar,
I procured a place for them on shore, where they soon recovered. I also engaged
a number of Portuguese caulkers, as the seams of both the ships were very open,
who, after having worked some time, rendered them perfectly tight.

While we lay here, Lord Clive, in the Kent Indiaman, came to the port. This
ship had sailed from England a month before us, and had not touched any where,
yet she came in a month after us; so that her passage was just two months
longer than ours, notwithstanding the time we lost in waiting for the Tamar,
which, though the Dolphin was by no means a good sailer, sailed so much worse,
that we seldom spread more than half our canvas. The Kent had many of her
people down in the scurvy.

On Tuesday the 16th of October, we weighed anchor,

CHAP. II. Passage from Rio de Janeiro to Port Desire; with some Description of
that Place.
ON Monday the 22d,

We continued our course till Monday the 29th, 35 50 S. and found the weather
as cold as it is at the same season in England,

On Friday the 2d of November, and the next morning had fifty-two fathom with
the same ground:

On Monday the 12th, out on purpose to seek it. And I am sure,

The next day, at four o'clock in the afternoon, again,

At half an hour past four in the morning of Thursday the 15th of November,

The next day I shaped my course by the chart in the account of Lord Anson's
voyage, was now almost midsummer in these parts, the weather was, the wind
blowing off the land very hard,

We continued to stand along the shore all day as near as possible, and in the
evening we saw an island at the distance of about six leagues; especially as
the descriptions that have been given of this place, by the few who have
already visited it,

The Tamar worked into the harbor with the tide of flood,

During all this night and the next morning the wind blew with great violence;
and then dropped it again,

The next day we sounded the harbor higher up,

On the 24th, upon slack water, could be sent after him,

On the 25th, last, but could not find the least rill:

On the 27th, I went on shore: the river, as far as I could see,

On the 29th, we completed our ballast, much contemptuous neglect as the lion
did the knight of La Mancha,

On the 1st of December,

On Wednesday the 5th of December, ten minutes;

CHAP. III. Course from Port Desire, in Search of Pepys' Island, and afterward
to the Coast of Patagonia, with a Description of the Inhabitants.
AS soon as we were out of the bay, we steered for Pepys' Island, which is said
to lie in latitude 47 S. Our latitude was now 47 22 S., longitude 65 49 W.;
Port Desire bore S. 66 W. distant twenty-three leagues; and Pepys' Island,
according to Halley's Chart, E. N. distant thirty-four leagues. The variation
here was 19 E.

We continued our course the next day with a pleasant gale and fine weather,
the wind blew so hard he could not get into it, find, especially as the season
was advancing very fast,

The storm continued with unabated violence the whole night, but about eight in
the morning, began to subside. next morning,

At break of day, on the 20th,

The next morning, No. 23.

to be white handkerchiefs, alone, boot, with a short pointed stick fastened to
each heel, as glass resembles a diamond; I soon found that they had no tobacco
among them; anomalous;

CHAP. IV. Passage up the Straight of Magellan, to Port Famine; with some
Account of that Harbor, and the adjacent Coast.
SOON after I returned on board, I got under way,

At three in the morning, of the 22d, Indian upon the south shore,

In the morning of the 23d,

The next morning, painted geese.

On the 25th, At the full and change of the moon,

On the 26th, at eight o'clock in the morning, we weighed,

The next day at noon, having had little wind, and calms, so that we had no
need to take the trouble of cutting green. which is distant about four leagues,
is extremely fine;

While we lay here, I went one day to Cape Forward, and when I set out I
intended to have gone farther; but the weather became so bad, with heavy rain,
that we were glad to stop there, and make a great fire to dry our clothes,
which were wet through. From the place where we stopped, the Indians had been
gone so lately, that the wood, which lay half burnt, where they had made their
fire, was still warm; and soon after our fire was kindled, we perceived that
another was kindled directly opposite to it, on the Terra del Fuego shore;
probably as a signal, which, if we had been Indians, we should have understood.
After we were dried and refreshed at our fire, the rain having abated, I walked
cross the Cape, to see how the Straight ran, which I found to be about W. N. W.
The hills, as far as I could see, were of an immense height, very craggy, and
covered with snow quite from the summit to the base. I made also another
excursion along the shore to the northward, and found the country for many
miles exceedingly pleasant, the ground being, in many places, covered with
flowers, which were not inferior to those that are commonly found in our
gardens, either in beauty or fragrance; and if it were not for the severity of
the cold in winter, this country might, in my opinion, be made, by cultivation,
one of the finest in the world. I had set up a small tent at the bottom of this
bay, close to a little rivulet, and just at the skirts of a wood, soon after
the ship came to an anchor, where three men were employed in washing: they
slept on shore; but soon after sunset were awakened out of their first sleep by
the roaring of some wild beasts, which the darkness of the night, and the
solitariness of their situation in this pathless detail,

At this place, not far from where the ship lay, there is a hill that has been
cleared of wood, and we supposed this to be the spot where the Spaniards
formerly had a settlement See some account of this settlement in the Voyage of
Captain Wallis, chap. iii. p. 411.
. One of the men, as he was passing over this hill, perceived that, in a
particular part, the ground returned the sound of his foot, as if it was
hollow: he therefore repassed it several times, and finding the effect still
the same, he conceived a strong notion that something was buried there; when he
came on board, he related what he had remarked to me, and I went myself to the
spot, with a small party, furnished with spades and pickaxes, and saw the spot
opened to a considerable depth, but we found nothing, nor did there appear to
be any hollow or vault as was expected. As we were returning through the woods,
we found two very large skulls, which, by the teeth, appeared to have belonged
to some beasts of prey, but of what kind we could not guess.

Having continued here till Friday the 4th of January,

A Chart of HAWKINS's MAIDENLAND, Discovered by Sr. Richard Hawkins in 1574 and
FALKLAND SOUND, so called by Capn. John Strong of the Farewell from London who
Sailed through it in 1689.
map

CHAP. V. The Course back from Port Famine to Falkland's Islands, with some
Account of the Country.
WE weighed anchor at four o'clock in the morning,

At one o'clock the next morning, we weighed, but in less than half an hour,

This bank, which has not been mentioned by any navigator who has passed the
Straight, is extremely dangerous; especially as it lies directly in the fair
way between Cape Virgin Mary and the first Narrow, and just in the middle
between the south and north shores. It is more than two leagues long, and full
as broad; in many places also it is very steep. When we were upon it, Point
Possession bore N. E. distant three leagues; and the entrance of the narrow S.
W. distant two leagues. I afterward saw many parts of it dry, and the sea
breaking very high over other parts of it, where the water was shallow. A ship
that should ground upon this shoal in a gale of wind, would probably be very
soon beaten to pieces.

About six o'clock in the morning, we anchored in fifteen fathom, the shoal
bearing N. N. W. W. at the distance of about half a mile. At noon, we weighed
with a light breeze at N. E. and worked with the ebb tide till two, but finding
the water shoal, we anchored again in six fathom and an half,

The next morning, about eight o'clock, we weighed, eight the next morning,

On the 9th,

On the 10th,

On the 11th, W. 2 S. distant seventy leagues; the variation was now 19 E. we
had been embayed:

On Monday the 14th, then were sixteen fathom, with rocky ground, in honor of
the earl, our people grew tired of them: it was a common thing for a boat to
bring off sixty or seventy fine geese, without expending a single charge of
powder and shot, for the men knocked down as many as they pleased with stones:
wood however, is wanting here, except a little that is found adrift along the
shore, which I imagined came from the Straight of Magellan. Among other
refreshments, which are in the highest degree salutary to those who have
contracted scorbutic disorders, during a long voyage, here are wild celery, and
wood sorrel, in the greatest abundance; nor is there any want of mussels,
clams, cockles, and limpets: the seals and penguins are innumerable, so that it
is impossible to walk upon the beach without first driving them away: and the
coast abounds with sea lions, many of which are of an enormous size. We found
this animal very formidable; I was once attacked by one of them very
unexpectedly, and it was with the utmost difficulty that I could disengage
myself from him: at other times we had many battles with them, and it has
sometimes afforded a dozen of us an hour's work to dispatch one of them; I had
with me a very fine mastiff dog, and a bite of one of these creatures almost
tore him to pieces. Nor were these the only dangerous animals that we found
here, for the Master having been sent out one day to sound the coast upon the
south shore, reported, at his return, that four creatures of great fierceness,
resembling wolves, ran up to their bellies in the water to attack the people in
his boat, and that as they happened to have no firearms with them, they had
immediately put the boat off into deep water. The next morning after this
happened, I went upon the southern shore myself, where we found one of the
largest sea lions I had ever seen: as the boat's crew were now well armed, they
immediately engaged him, and during the contest one of the other animals was
seen running toward us: he was fired at before he came up, and was presently
killed, though I afterward wished that we had endeavored to take him alive,
which, if we had been aware of his attack, I dare say might easily have been
done. When any of these creatures got fight of our people, though at ever so
great a distance, they ran directly at them; and no less than five of them were
killed this day. They were always called wolves by the ship's company, but
except in their size, and the shape of the tail, I think they bore a greater
resemblance to a fox. They are as big as a middle-sized mastiff, and their
fangs are remarkably long and sharp. There are great numbers of them upon this
coast, though it is not perhaps easy to guess how they first came hither, for
these islands are at least one hundred leagues distant from the main: they
burrow in the ground like a fox, and we have frequently seen pieces of seal
which they have mangled, and the skins of penguins, lie scattered about the
mouth of their holes. To get rid of these creatures, our people set fire to the
grass, so that the country was in a blaze as far as the eye could reach, for
several days, and we could see them running in great numbers to seek other
quarters. I dug holes in many places, about two feet deep, to examine the soil,
which I found first a black mould, and then a light clay. While we lay here, we
set up the armourer's forge on shore, and completed a great deal of iron work
that was much wanted. Our people had every morning an excellent breakfast made
of portable soup, and wild celery, thickened with oatmeal: neither was our
attention confined wholly to ourselves, for the Surgeon of the Tamar surrounded
a piece of ground near the watering-place with a fence of turf, and planted it
with many esculent vegetables as a garden, for the benefit of those who might
hereafter come to this place. Of this harbor, and all the neighboring
islands, I took possession for his Majesty King George the Third of Great
Britain, by the name of FALKLAND's ISLANDS; and there is I think little reason
to doubt that they are the same land to which Cowley gave the name of Pepys's
Island.

In the printed account of Cowley's voyage, he says, we held our course S. W.
till we came into the latitude of forty-seven degrees, where we saw land, the
same being an island, not before known, lying to the westward of us: it was not
inhabited, and I gave it the name of PEPYS's ISLAND. We found it a very
commodious place for ships to water at, and take in wood, and it has a very
good harbor, where a thousand sail of ships may safely ride. Here is great
plenty of fowls, and, we judge, abundance of fish, by reason of the grounds
being nothing but rocks and sands.

To this account there is annexed a representation of Pepys's Island, in which
names are given to several points and head lands, and the harbor is called
Admiralty Bay; yet it appears that Cowley had only a distant view of it, for he
immediately adds, the wind being so extraordinary high that we could not get
into it to water, we stood to the southward, shaping our course S. S. W. till
we came into the latitude of 53; and though he says that it was commodious to
take in wood, and it is known that there is no wood on Falkland's Islands,
Pepys's Island and Falkland's Islands may notwithstanding be the same; for upon
Falkland's Islands there are immense quantities of flags with narrow leaves,
reeds and rushes which grow in clusters, so as to form bushes about three feet
high, and then shoot about six or seven feet higher: these at a distance have
greatly the appearance of wood, and were taken for wood by the French, who
landed there in the year 1764, as appears by Pernetty's account of their
voyage. It has been suggested that the latitude of Pepys's Island might, in the
M. S. from which the account of Cowley's voyage was printed, be expressed in
figures, which, if ill made, might equally resemble forty-seven, and fifty-one;
and therefore as there is no island in these seas in latitude forty-seven, and
as Falkland's Islands lie nearly in fifty-one, that fifty-one might reasonably
be concluded to be the number for which the figures were intended to stand:
recourse therefore was had to the British Musaeum, and a manuscript journal of
Cowley's was there found. In this manuscript no mention is made of an island
not before known, to which he gave the name of Pepys's Island, but land is
mentioned in latitude forty-seven degrees, forty minutes, expressed in words at
length, which exactly answers to the description of what is called Pepys's
Island in the printed account, and which here, he says, he supposed to be the
islands of Sebald de Were. This part of the manuscript is in the following
words: January 1683, This month we were in the latitude of forty-seaven
degrees and forty minnetts, where we espied an island bearing west from us,
we having the wind at east north east, we bore away for it, it being too late
for us to go on shore, we lay by all night. The island seemed very pleasant
to the eye, with many woods, I may as well say the whole land was woods. There
being a rock lying above water to the eastward of it, where an innumerable
company of fowls, being of the bigness of a small goose, which fowls would
strike at our men as they were aloft: some of them we killed and eat: they
seemed to us very good, only tasted somewhat fishly. I sailed along that island
to the southward, and about the south west side of the island there seemed to
me to be a good place for ships to ride; I would have had the boat out to have
gone into the harbor, but the wind blew fresh and they would not agree to go
with it. Sailing a little further, keeping the lead, and having six and twenty,
and seven and twenty fathoms water, until we came to a place where we saw
the weeds ride, having the lead again, found but seven fathoms water. Fearing
danger went about the shipp there, were then fearful to stay by the land any
longer, it being all rocky ground, but the harbor seemed to be a good place
for ships to ride there; in the island seeming likewise to have water enough,
there seemed to me to be harbor for five hundred sail of ships. The going in
but narrow, and the north side of the entrance shallow water that I could see,
but I verily believe that there is water enough for any shipp to go in on the
south side, for there cannot be so great a lack of water, but must needs scowre
a channel away at the ebb deep enough for shipping to go in. I would have
had them stood upon a wind all night, but they told me they were not come out
to go upon discovery. We saw likewise another island by this that night,
which made me think them to be the Sibble D'wards.

The same night we steered our course again west south west, which was but
our south west, the compass having two and twenty degrees variation
eastwardly, keeping that course till we came in the latitude of three and
fifty degrees.

In both the printed and manuscript account, this land is said to lie in
latitude forty-seven, to be situated to the westward of the ship when first
discovered, to appear woody, to have an harbor where a great number of ships
might ride in safety, and to be frequented by innumerable birds. It appears
also by both accounts, that the weather prevented his going on shore, and that
he steered from it W. S. W. till he came into latitude fifty-three: there can
therefore be little doubt but that Cowley gave the name of Pepys's Island after
he came home, to what he really supposed to be the island of Sebald de Were,
for which it is not difficult to assign several reasons; and though the
supposition of a mistake of the figures does not appear to be well grounded,
yet, there being no land in forty-seven, the evidence that what Cowley saw was
Falkland's Islands, is very strong. The description of the country agrees in
almost every particular, and even the map is of the same general figure, with a
straight running up the middle. The chart of Falkland's that accompanies this
narrative, was laid down from the journals and drawings of Captain Macbride,
who was dispatched thither after my return, and circumnavigated the whole
coast: the two principal islands were probably called Falkland's Islands by
Strong, about the year 1689, as he is known to have given the name of
Falkland's Sound to part of the straight which divides them. The journal of
this navigator is still unprinted in the British Musaeum. The first who saw
these islands is supposed to be Captain Davies, the associate of Cavendish, in
1592. In 1594, Sir Richard Hawking saw land, supposed to be the same, and in
honor of his mistress, Queen Elizabeth, called them HAWKINS's MAIDEN LAND.
Long afterward, they were seen by some French ships from Saint Maloes, and
Frezier, probably for that reason, called them the Malouins, a name which has
been since adopted by the Spaniards.

Having continued in the harbor which I had called Port Egmont till Sunday the
27th of January, we were scarcely got out of the Port before it began to blow
very hard, at Port Egmont;

The next morning, and therefore I tacked and stood to the northward;

CHAP. VI. The Passage through the Straight of Magellan as far as Cape Monday,
with a Description of several Bays and Harbors, formed by the Coast on each
Side.
WE continued to make sail for Port Desire till Wednesday the 6th of February,

The next morning, being on shore. They were got off,

On Wednesday the 13th, the store-ship being ready for sea, should come up with
her long before she got thither,

The next morning we accordingly put to sea,

On Saturday the 16th,

On the 17th,

On the 18th we passed the first Narrow, but seeing the stranger get under way,

At six o'clock in the evening, I made the signal and weighed; we worked
through the second Narrow, and at ten o'clock passed the west end of it: at
eleven, we anchored in seven fathom off Elizabeth's Island; and the French ship
at the same time anchored in a bad situation, to the southward of Saint
Bartholomew's Island, which convinced me that she was not acquainted with the
channel.

At six o'clock the next morning, water.

Here we continued till Monday the 25th,

We steered S. S. W. with little wind, along the shore, five miles;

At six o'clock the next morning,

From Cape Gallant to Passage Point, which are distant about three leagues, the
coast lies W. by N. by compass. Passage Point is the east point of Elizabeth's
bay, and is low land, with a rock lying off it. Between this and Cape Gallant
there are several islands, some of them are very small; but the eastermost,
which is Charles's Island, that has been just mentioned, is two leagues long;
the next is called Monmouth's Island, and the westermost, Rupert's Island:
Rupert's Island lies S. by E. of Point Passage. These islands make the Straight
narrow; between Point Passage and Rupert's Island it is not more than two miles
over, and it is necessary to go to the northward of them all, keeping the north
shore on board: we sailed within two cables' length of it,

At two o'clock in the afternoon, of Thursday the 28th,

At five o'clock the next morning, the wind being northerly, was open,
delighted.

At five o'clock, in the morning of the 2d, we weighed, more moderate,

At six o'clock the next morning,

At six o'clock on the 5th, I sent an officer to the westward to look out for a
harbor, but he did not succeed. we had just left,

At seven o'clock the next morning, seven, we had a very hard squall, bay there
is a basin,

We continued here till Friday the 15th, and during all that time had one
continued storm, with impenetrable fogs, and incessant rain.

At eight o'clock in the morning of the 15th, once more abreast of Cape Monday,
and at five,

At six o'clock the next morning, we weighed,

In the morning,

The wind continued W. and W. N. W. without any tide to the westward, all the
18th and 19th, on the north shore,

CHAP. VII. The Passage from Cape Monday, in the Straight of Magellan, into the
South Seas; with some general Remarks on the Navigation of that Straight.
AT eight the next morning we weighed,

At three o'clock in the morning of the 24th, I sent a boat,

The next morning I sent the boats again to the westward, at the distance of
about three leagues. and expected every moment to be among the breakers.

In the afternoon of the day following,

At seven o'clock in the morning of the 29th, and twenty fathom of it off,

The next morning, the best bower,

At six in the evening, we had strong gales at W. N. W. with violent squalls
and much rain, and continued in our station till the morning of the 3d,

The cutter returned the next morning at six o'clock, without any dressing:

About eight o'clock, we made sail, and found little or no current. At noon,
Cape Upright bore W. S. W. distant three leagues; and at six in the evening, we
anchored in the bay, on the southern shore, which lies about a league to the
eastward of the Cape, and had fifteen fathom water.

While we were lying here, and taking in wood and water, seven or eight Indians
in a canoe came round the western point of the bay, and having landed opposite
to the ship, made a fire. We invited them to me on board by all the signs we
could devise, but without success; I therefore took the jolly boat, and went on
shore to them. I introduced myself by making them presents of several trifles,
with which they seemed to be much gratified, and we became very intimate in a
few minutes: after we had spent some time together, I sent away my people, in
the boat, for some bread, and remained on shore with them alone. When the boat
returned with the bread, I divided it among them, and I remarked with equal
pleasure and surprise, that if a bit of the biscuit happened to fall, not one
of them offered to touch it till I gave my consent. In the mean time some of my
people were cutting a little grass for two or three sheep which I had still
left on board, and at length the Indians perceiving what they were doing, ran
immediately, and tearing up all the weeds they could get, carried them to the
boat,

On Sunday the 7th, the current,

This day, and not before, the Tamar's boat returned from the westward: she had
been within two or three leagues of Cape Pillar, and had found several very
good anchoring-places on the south more.

At one o'clock the next morning,

At six o'clock, fine steady gale sprung up at S. E. to which I spread all the
sail that it was possible for the ship to bear,

It is probable, that whoever shall read this account of the difficulties and
dangers which attended our passage through the Straight of Magellan, will
conclude, that it ought never to be attempted again; but that all ships which
shall hereafter sail a western course from Europe into the South Seas ought to
go round Cape Horn. I, however, who have been twice round Cape Horn, am of a
different opinion. I think that at a proper season of the year, not only a
single vessel, but a large squadron might pass the Straight in less than three
weeks; and I think, to take the proper season, they should be at the eastern
entrance some time in the month of December. One great advantage of this
passage, is the facility with which fish is almost every where to be procured,
with wild celery, scurvy grass, berries, and many other vegetables in great
abundance; for to this I impute the heathiness of my ship's company, not a
single man being affected with the scurvy in the slightest degree, nor upon the
sick list for any other disorder, notwithstanding the hardship and labor which
they endured in the passage, which cost us seven weeks and two days, as we
entered the Straight on Sunday the 17th of February,

CHAP. VIII. The Run from the Western Entrance of the Straight of Magellan, to
the Islands of Disappointment.
HAVING cleared the Straight, we pursued our course to the westward, as appears
by the track in the chart, till Friday, April the 26th,

We bore away for Masafuero, and at sunset, being within about seven leagues
of it, we brought to, and afterward kept the wind all night. to which there
was a fine fall of fresh water;

At seven o'clock in the morning, of nearly the same size,

This evening, the surf running very high, the gunner and one of the seamen who
were on shore with the waterers, were afraid to venture off, and the boat
therefore, when she came on board the last time, left them behind her.

The next day we found a more convenient watering-place,

As soon as this was reported to me, I sent another boat to inform them that
as, by the appearances of the weather, there was reason to believe it would
soon blow hard, in his room, and gave Mr. Kendal, one of the mates of the
Dolphin, a commission as Second Lieutenant of the Tamar.

On the 30th,

On the 10th,

On the 14th,

On the morning of the 16th,

On the 22d, being in latitude 20 52 S.,

On the 26th, we saw two large birds about the ship,

On the 28th,

On the 31st,

We saw no land however till one o'clock in the morning of Friday the 7th of
June,

I stood for the small island, which as we drew near it had a most beautiful
appearance; it was surrounded by a beach of the finest white sand, and within,
it was covered with tall trees, which extended their shade to a great distance,
and formed the most delightful groves that can be imagined, without underwood.
We judged this island to be about five miles in circumference, and from each
end of it we saw a spit running out into the sea, upon which the surge broke
with great fury; there was also a great surf all round it. We soon perceived
that it was inhabited; for many of the natives appeared upon the beach, with
spears in their hands that were at least sixteen feet long. kind from the power
which fancy is perpetually exerting to aggravate the calamities of life. and
would fain have fired upon them;

At six o'clock in the morning of the 8th, gestures to prevent their landing,

At half an hour after ten, we bore away and made sail to the westward, finding
it impossible to procure at these islands any refreshment for our sick, whose
situation was becoming more deplorable every hour, and I therefore called them
the ISLANDS OF DISAPPOINTMENT.

CHAP. IX. The Discovery of King George's Islands, with a Description of them,
and an Account of several Incidents that happened there.
AT half an hour after five o'clock in the afternoon of the 9th. we saw land
again, scarcely a ship's length wide,

About noon, finding there was no anchorage here, I bore away and steered along
the shore to the westermost point of the island: the boats immediately followed
us, and kept founding close to the beach, but could get no ground.

When we came to the westermost point of this island, must have cost those who
made them infinite labor.

As the surf which broke very high upon the shore rendered it impossible to
procure refreshments for the sick in this part of the island, I hauled the
wind, and worked back to the inlet, being determined to try once more what
could be done there.

I recovered that station in the afternoon, and immediately sent the boats to
sound the inlet again, but they confirmed the account which had been made
before, that it afforded no anchorage for a ship. While the boats were absent,
I observed a great number of the natives upon the point near the spot where we
had left them in the morning, and they seemed to be very busy in loading a
great number of large canoes which lay close to the beach. As I thought they
might be troublesome, and was unwilling that they should suffer by another
unequal contest with our people,

Just before the evening closed in, our boats landed, and got a few cocoa-nuts
which they brought off, but saw none of the inhabitants. In the night, during
which we had rain and hard squalls, I stood off and on with the ships, and at
seven o'clock in the morning brought to off the inlet.

Our people,

Close to the houses of these people, we saw buildings of another kind, which
appeared to be burying-places, and from which we judged that they had great
veneration for their dead. They were situated under lofty trees, that gave a
thick shade; the sides and tops were of stone; and in their figure they
somewhat resembled the square tombs,

We sent off several boat-loads of cocoa-nuts, and a great quantity of
scurvy grass, with which the island is covered; refreshments which were of
infinite service to us, as by this time I believe there was not a man among us
wholly untouched by the scurvy.

The fresh water here is very good, but it is scarce; the wells which supply
the natives are so small, that when two or three cocoa-nut shells have been
filled from them, they are dry for a few minutes; but as they presently fill
again, if a little pains were taken to enlarge them, they would abundantly
supply any ship with water.

We saw no venomous creature here; but the flies were an intolerable torment,
they covered us from head to foot, and filled not only the boat, but the ships.
We saw great numbers of parrots and parroquets, and several other birds which
were altogether unknown to us; we saw also a beautiful kind of dove, so tame
that some of them frequently came close to us, and even followed us into the
Indian huts.

All this day the natives kept themselves closely concealed, and did not even
make a smoke upon any part of the islands as far as we could see; probably
fearing that a smoke might discover the place of their retreat.

This part of the island lies in latitude 14 29 S., longitude 148 50 W. and
after I got on board, I hauled a little way farther from the shore, intending
to visit the other island in the morning, which had been seen to the westward
of that before which the ship lay, and which is distant about sixty-nine
leagues from the Islands of Disappointment, in the direction of W. S.

The next morning, which they did, it to them;

To these two islands, I gave the name of KING GEORGE's ISLANDS,

CHAP. X. The Run from King George's Islands to the Islands of Saypan, Tinian,
and Aguigan; with an Account of several Islands that were discovered in that
Track.
WE pursued our course to the westward the same day,

From the western extremity of this island, we steered N. 82 W. and at noon on
the 16th, were in latitude 14 28 S., this day we had lost:

The next day, ground between them.

The reef of rocks which we first saw as we approached these islands, lies in
latitude 10 15 S., longitude 169 28 W. and it bears from Prince of Wales's
Island N. 76 48 W. distant 352 leagues. The islands bear from the reef W. N.W.
distant nine leagues: I called them the ISLANDS OF DANGER, and steered from
them N. W. by W. allowing for the variation.

After having seen the breakers soon after it was light in the morning, I told
my officers that I apprehended we should have frequent alarms in the night; at
night, therefore, every body was upon the watch, which a very hard squall of
wind, with rain, rendered the more necessary. About nine o'clock, having just
gone down into my cabin, I heard a great noise above,

Nothing worthy of notice happened till Monday the 24th, that this island was
the same that in the Neptune Francois is called Maluita,

We continued our course till the 29th,

On Tuesday the 2d of July, south west side of it, and cheerfulness in their
countenances that is very striking.

I sent out the boats to sound soon after we brought to off the island, and
when they came back, they reported that there was ground at the depth of thirty
fathom, within two cables' length of the shore; but as the bottom was coral
rock, and the soundings much too near the breakers for a ship to lie in safety,
I was obliged again to make sail, without procuring any refreshments for the
sick. This island, to which my officers gave the name of BYRON's ISLAND, 1 18
S.,

In our course from this place, we saw, for several days, abundance of fish,
but we could take only sharks, which were become a good dish even at my own
table. Many of the people now began to fall down with fluxes, which the Surgeon
imputed to the excessive heat, and almost perpetual rains.

By the 21st,

On the 18th, we were in latitude 13 9 N., longitude 158 50 E.,

CHAP. XI. The Arrival of the Dolphin and Tamar at Tinian, a Description of the
present Condition of that Island, and an Account of the Transactions there.
ON the 28th, spot where Lord Anson lay in the Centurion.

As soon as the ship was secured, I went on shore, to six upon a place where
tents might be erected for the sick, which were now very numerous; not a single
man being wholly free from the scurvy, and many in the last stage of it. We
found several huts which had been left by the Spaniards and Indians the year
before; for this year none of them had as yet been at the place, nor was it
probable that they should come for some months, the sun being now almost
vertical, and the rainy season set in. After I had fixed upon a spot for the
tents, six or seven of us endeavored to push through the woods, that we might
come at the beautiful lawns and meadows of which there is so luxuriant a
description in the Account of Lord Anson's Voyage, and if possible kill some
cattle. The trees stood so thick, and the place was so overgrown with
underwood, that we could not see three yards before us, we therefore were
obliged to keep continually hallooing to each other, to prevent our being
separately lost in this trackless wilderness. As the weather was intolerably
hot, we had nothing on besides our shoes, except our shirts and trowsers, and
these were in a very short time torn all to rags by the bushes and brambles; at
last, however, with incredible difficulty and labor, we got through; but, to
our great surprise and disappointment, we found the country very different from
the account we had read of it: the lawns were entirely overgrown with a
stubborn kind of reed or brush, in many places higher than our heads, and no
where lower than our middles, which continually entangled our legs, and cut us
like whipcord; our stockings perhaps might have suffered still more,

The next day our people were employed in setting up more tents, getting the
water-casks on shore, violence, and broke so high upon the reef, that I was
obliged to put to sea for a week; for if our cable had parted in the night, and
the wind had been upon the shore, which sometimes happens for two or three days
together, the ship must inevitably have been lost upon the rocks.

As I was myself very ill with the scurvy, I ordered a tent to be pitched for
me, and took up my residence on shore; where we also erected the armourer's
forge, and began to repair the iron-work of both the ships. I soon found that
the island produced limes, four oranges, cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit See a
particular description of the bread-fruit, vol. ii. p. 80.
, guavas, and paupaus in great abundance; but we found no water-melons,
scurvy grass, or sorrel.

Notwithstanding the fatigue and distress that we had endured, and the various
climates we had passed through, neither of the ships had yet lost a single man
since their sailing from England; but while we lay here two died of fevers, a
disease with which many were seized, though we all recovered very fast from the
scurvy. I am indeed of opinion that this is one of the most unhealthy spots in
the world, at least during the season in which we were here. The rains were
violent, and almost incessant, and the heat was so great as to threaten us with
suffocation. The thermometer, which was kept on board the ship, generally stood
at eighty-six, which is but nine degrees less than the heat of the blood at the
heart; and if it had been on shore it would have risen much higher. I had been
upon the coast of Guinea, in the West Indies, and upon the island of Saint
Thomas, which is under the Line, but I had never felt any such heat as I felt
here. Besides the inconvenience which we suffered from the weather, we were
incessantly tormented by the flies in the day, and by the musquitos in the
night. The island also swarms with centipieds and scorpions, and a large black
ant, scarcely inferior to either in the malignity of its bite. Besides these,
there were venomous insects without number, altogether unknown to us, by which
many of us suffered so severely, that we were afraid to lie down in our beds;
nor were those on board in a much better situation than those on shore, for
great numbers of these creatures being carried into the ship with the wood,
they took possession of every birth, and left the poor seamen no place of rest
either below or upon the deck.

As soon as we were settled in our new habitations, I sent out parties to
discover the haunts of the cattle, some of which were found, but at a great
distance from the tents, and the beasts were so shy that it was very difficult
to get a shot at them. Some of the parties which, when their haunts had been
discovered, were sent out to kill them, were absent three days and nights
before they could succeed; and when a bullock had been dragged seven or eight
miles through such woods and lawns as have just been described, to the tents,
it was generally full of fly-blows, and stunk so as to be unfit for use: nor
was this the worst, for the fatigue of the men in bringing down the carcass,
and the intolerable heat they suffered from the climate and the labor,
frequently brought on fevers which laid them up. Poultry however we procured
upon easier terms: there was great plenty of birds, and they were easily
killed; but the flesh of the best of them was very ill-tasted, and such was the
heat of the climate that within an hour after they were killed it was as green
as grass, and swarmed with maggots. Our principal resource for fresh meat, was
the wild hog, with which the island abounds. These creatures are very fierce,
and some of them so large that a carcass frequently weighed two hundred pounds.
We killed them without much difficulty, but a Black belonging to the Tamar
contrived a method to snare them, so that we took great numbers of them alive,
which was an unspeakable advantage; for it not only ensured our eating the
flesh while it was sweet, but enabled us to send a good number of them on board
as sea-stores.

In the mean time we were very desirous of procuring some beef in an eatable
state, with less risk and labor, and Mr. Gore, one of our Mates, at last,
discovered a pleasant spot upon the north west part of the island, where cattle
were in great plenty, and whence they might be brought to the tents by sea. To
this place therefore I dispatched a party, with a tent for their accommodation,
and sent the boats every day to fetch what they should kill; sometimes however
there broke such a sea upon the rocks that it was impossible to approach them,
and the Tamar's boat unhappily lost three of her best men by attempting it. We
were now, upon the whole, pretty well supplied with provisions, especially as
we baked fresh bread every day for the sick; and the fatigue of our people
being less, there were fewer ill with the fever: but several of them were so
much disordered by eating of a very fine looking fish which we caught here,
that their recovery was for a long time doubtful. The Author of the Account of
Lord Anson's Voyage says, that the people on board the Centurion thought it
prudent to abstain from fish, as the few which they caught at their first
arrival surfeited those who eat of them. But not attending sufficiently to this
caution, and too hastily taking the word surfeit in its literal and common
acceptance, we imagined that those who tasted the fish when Lord Anson first
came hither, were made sick merely by eating too much; whereas, if that had
been the case, there would have been no reason for totally abstaining
afterward, but only eating temperately. We however bought our knowledge by
experience, which we might have had cheaper; for though all our people who
tasted this fish, eat sparingly, they were all soon afterward dangerously ill.

Besides the fruit that has been mentioned already, this island produces cotton
and indigo in abundance, and would certainly be of great value if it was
situated in the West Indies. The Surgeon of the Tamar enclosed a large spot of
ground here, and made a very pretty garden; but we did not stay long enough to
derive any advantage from it.

While we ^ay here, I sent the Tamar to examine the island of Saypan, which is
much larger than Tinian, rises higher, and, in my opinion, has a much
pleasanter appearance. She anchored to the leeward of it, at the distance of a
mile from the shore, and in about ten fathom water, with much the same kind of
ground as we had in the road of Tinian. Her people landed upon a fine sandy
beach which is six or seven miles long, and walked up into the woods, where
they saw many trees which were very fit for topmasts. They saw no fowls, nor
any tracks of cattle; but of hogs and guanicoes there was plenty. They found no
fresh water near the beach, but saw a large pond inland, which they did not
examine. They saw large heaps of pearl oyster-shells thrown up together, and
other signs of people having been there not long before: possibly the Spaniards
may go thither at some seasons of the year, and carry on a pearl fishery. They
also saw many of those square pyramidal pillars which are to be found at
Tinian, and which are particularly described in the Account of Lord Anson's
Voyage.

On Monday the 30th of September,

CHAP. XIII. The Run from Tinian to Pulo Timoan, with some Account of that
Island, its Inhabitants and Productions, and thence to Batavia.
WE continued our course till Thursday the 10th,

On the 18th, These birds appeared to have been blown off some island to the
northward of us,

The needle continued to point due north till the 22d,

On the 24th,

At seven o'clock the next morning, some refreshments are to be procured,

The next day I landed to see what was to be got,

These people are of a small stature, but extremely well made, and of a dark
copper color. We saw among them one old man who was dressed somewhat in the
manner of the Persians; but all the rest were naked, except a handkerchief,
which they wore as a kind of turban upon their heads, and some pieces of cloth
which were fastened with a silver plate or clasp round their middles. We saw
none of their women, and probably some care was taken to keep them out of our
fight. The habitations are very neatly built of slit bamboo,

The island is mountainous and woody, but we found it pleasant when we were
ashore; it produces the cabbage and cocoa-nut tree in great plenty, but the
natives did not choose to let us have any of the fruit. We saw also some rice
grounds, but what other vegetable productions Nature has favored them with, we
had no opportunity to learn, as we staid here but two nights and one day. In
the bay where the ship rode there is excellent fishing, though the surf runs
very high: we hauled our seine with great success, but could easily perceive
that it gave umbrage to the inhabitants, who consider all the fish about these
islands as their own. There are two fine rivers that run into this bay, and the
water is excellent: it was indeed so much better than what we had on board,
that I filled as many casks with it as loaded the boat twice. While we lay
here, some of the natives brought down an animal which had the body of a hare,
and the legs of a deer; one of our officers bought it, and we should have been
glad to have kept it alive, but it was impossible for us to procure for it such
food as it would eat; it was therefore killed, and we found it very good food.
All the while we lay here, we had the most violent thunder, lightning and rain,
that I had ever known; and finding that nothing more was to be procured, we
sailed again on Thursday morning, we had nothing but light airs, calms, and
tornados, with violent rain, thunder and lightning.

At seven o'clock in the morning of Sunday the 10th,

At one o'clock the next morning,

At ten o'clock in the morning of Tuesday the 12th,

The next day, at four in the afternoon, colors.

The next morning, Point, on the Sumatra shore, S. W. to avoid a shoal,

In the morning the current or tide set to the S. E. at the rate of three
knots; at five we weighed,

On the 19th,

CHAP. XIII. Transactions at Batavia, and Departure from that Place.
THE next day, which by our account was the 28th,

There is always lying here a Dutch Commodore belonging to the Company, who,
among his countrymen, is a person of very great consequence. This gentleman
thought fit to send his boat on board of me, with only the cockswain in her,
who was a very dirty ragged fellow: as soon as he was brought to me, he asked
whence I came, whither I was bound, and many other questions, which I thought
equally impertinent, at the same time pulling out a book, and pen and ink, that
he might set down the answers; but as I was impatient to save him this trouble,
he was desired immediately to walk over the ship's side, and put off his boat,
with which he was graciously pleased to comply.

When we came to this place, we had not one man sick in either of the ships;
but as I knew it to be more unhealthy than any other part of the East Indies,
as the rainy season was at hand, and arrack was to be procured in great plenty,
I determined to make my stay here as short as possible. I went on shore to wait
upon the Dutch Governor, but was told that he was at his country house, about
four miles distant from the town. I met however with an officer, called a
shebander, who is a kind of master of the ceremonies, and he acquainted me,
that if I chose to go to the Governor immediately, rather than wait for his
coming to town, he would attend me; I accepted his offer, and we set out
together in his chariot. The Governor received me with great politeness, and
told me, that I might either take a house in any part of the city that I should
like, or be provided with lodgings at the hotel. This hotel is a licensed
lodging-house, the only one in the place, and kept by a Frenchman, an artful
fellow, who is put in by the Governor himself. It has indeed more the
appearance of a palace than a house of entertainment, being the most
magnificent building in Batavia; nor would a small edifice answer the purpose,
for as there is a penalty of five hundred dollars upon any person in the city
who shall suffer a stranger to sleep a single night at his house, the strangers
who make it their residence are never few: all the houses indeed have a stately
appearance on the outside, and are elegantly fitted up within, and we were told
that the Chinese, of whom there are great numbers at this place, were the
architects. The city is large, and the streets well laid out, but they have
greatly the appearance of those in the cities of Holland, for a canal runs
through most of them, with a row of trees planted on each side: this is
convenient for the merchants, who have every thing brought up to their own
doors by water, but it probably contributes to the unhealthiness of the place;
the canal, indeed, as the city is built in a swamp, might be necessary as a
drain, but the trees, though they have a pleasant appearance, must certainly
prevent the noxious vapors that are perpetually arising, from being dispersed,
by obstructing the circulation of the air.

The number of people here is incredible, and they are of almost every nation
in the world, Dutch, Portuguese, Chinese, Persians, Moors, Malays, Javanese,
and many others: the Chinese, however, have a large town to themselves, without
the walls, and carry on a considerable trade, for they have annually ten or
twelve large junks from China; and to these the opulence of the Dutch at
Batavia is in a great measure owing. The beef here is bad, and the mutton
scarce, but the poultry and fish are excellent and in great plenty. Here are
also the greatest variety and abundance of the finest fruit in the world, but
the musquitos, centipieds, scorpions, and other noxious vermin, which are
innumerable, prevent all enjoyment, and even rest, as well by night as by day.
The roads, for many miles about the city, are as good as any in England: they
are very broad, and by the side of them runs a canal, shaded by tall trees,
which is navigable for vessels of a very large size: on the other side of the
canal are gardens, of a very pleasant appearance, and country houses of the
citizens, where they spend as much of their time as possible, the situation
being less unwholesome than the city; and there are so few of them who do not
keep a carriage, that it is almost a disgrace to be seen on foot.

At this place I continued from the 28th of November to the 10th of December,
when, ships' companies eat any thing else.

CHAP. XIV. The Passage from Batavia to the Cape of Good Hope, and from thence
to England.
WE continued our course,

I stood in for the land, and when I was within about two leagues of it, I saw
a great smoke rising from a sandy beach. I imagined the smoke to be made by the
Hottentots; yet I was astonished at their choosing this part of the coast for
their residence, for it consisted of nothing but sand banks as far as we could
see, without the least bush or a single blade of verdure, and so heavy a sea
broke upon the coast, that it was impossible to catch any fish.

On Wednesday the 12th, at three o'clock in the afternoon, Island and Green
Point,

The next morning, shore. When I heard this melancholy account, I could only
regret that I had not known it before, for I would then certainly have made
every effort in my power to have found these unhappy wretches, and taken them
from a place where now, in all probability, they must miserably perish.

The Cape is certainly a most excellent place for ships to touch at; it is a
healthy climate, a fine country, and abounds with refreshments of every kind.
The Company's garden is a delightful spot, and at the end of it there is a
paddock belonging to the Governor, in which are kept a great number of rare and
curious animals, and among others, when I was there, were three fine ostriches,
and four zebras of an uncommon size. I gave all the people leave to go on shore
by turns, and they always contrived to get very drunk with Cape wine before
they came back. Many ships came in while we lay here; some were Dutch, some
French, some Danes, but all were outward bound.

Having continued here three weeks, and during that time refreshed our men, and
completed our water, I took leave of the good old Governor on the 6th of March,
and on the 7th,

On Sunday the 16th, at six in the morning, fears,

On the 25th,

Pursuant to these orders, the Tamar parted company with us on the 1st of
April, run us into latitude 48 N., longitude 14 W.

AN ACCOUNT OF A VOYAGE round the WORLD, IN THE YEARS MDCCLXVI, MDCCLXVII, and
MDCCLXVIII. By SAMUEL WALLIS, Esquire Commander of his Majesty's Ship the DOLPHIN.

CHAP. I. The Passage to the coast of Patagonia, with some account of the
Natives.
[The longitude in this voyage is reckoned from the meridian of London.]
HAVING received my commission, which was dated the 19th of June 1766,

The ship was fitted for the sea with all possible expedition, during which the
articles of war, and the act of parliament were read to the ship's company:

On the 19th I received my sailing orders, he said would in that case be of
great service, if room could be found to flow them in; I therefore gave him
leave to put them into my cabin, the only place in the ship where they could
be received, as they consisted of three large boxes.

On the 22d,

We proceeded in our voyage, without any remarkable incident, till Sunday the
seventh of September,

About five o'clock we ran between this end of the island and the Deserters. On
the side next the Deserters is a low flat island, and near it a needle rock;
the side next to Madeira is full of broken rocks, and for that reason it is not
safe to come within less than two miles of it.

At six in the evening we anchored in Madeira Road, about two-thirds of a mile
from the shore, in 24 fathom with a muddy bottom: about eight the Swallow and
Prince Frederick also came to an anchor; and I sent an officer on shore to the
Governor, to let him know that I would salute him, if he would return an equal
number of guns, which he promised to do;

Having taken in a proper quantity of water at this place, with four pipes and
ten puncheons of wine, some fresh beef, and a large quantity of onions, we
weighed anchor on the 12th,

At six o'clock in the morning, of Tuesday the 16th,

On the 20th we tried the current,

In the night between the 21st and 22d we lost our companion the Swallow,

On the next day,

At noon the south-end of the island St. Iago bore S. W. by W. distant four
leagues; and the north-end N. W. distant five leagues. At half an hour after
three we anchored in Port Praya, in that island, in company with the Swallow
and Prince Frederick, in eight fathom water, upon sandy ground. We had much
rain and lightning in the night, and early in the morning I sent to the
commanding-officer at the fort,

We soon learnt that this was the sickly season, and that the rains were so
great as to render it extremely difficult to get any thing down from the
country to the ships: it happened also, unfortunately, that the smallpox,
which is extremely fatal here, was at this time epidemic; so that I permitted
no man to go ashore who had not had that distemper, and I would not suffer even
those that had to go into any house.

We procured, however, a supply of water and some cattle from the shore, and
caught abundance of fish with the seine, which was hauled twice every day: we
found also in the valley where we got our water, a kind of large purslain,
growing wild in amazing quantities: this was a most welcome refreshment both
raw as a sallad, and boiled with the broth and pease; and when we left the
place we carried away enough of it to serve us a week.

On the 28th,

This day I ordered hooks and lines to be served to all the ship's company,
that they might catch fish for themselves; but at the same time I also ordered
that no man should keep his fish more than four and twenty hours before it was
eaten, for I had observed that stale, and even dried fish, had made the people
sickly, and tainted the air in the ship.

On the first of October,

On the 20th, our butter and cheese being all expended,

On the 22d we saw an incredible number of birds,

On the 24th I ordered the ship's company to be served with brandy, and
reserved the wine for the sick and convalescent. carried away her
fore-top-sail-yard. To supply this loss we gave her our
sprit-sail-top-sail-yard, which we could spare, and she hoisted it immediately.

On the 27th she again made signals of distress,

On the eighth of November,

On the 11th, the surgeon on board her with some medicines for the sick. This
day, having seen some albatrosses, turtles, and weeds, we sounded, but had no
ground with 180 fathom.

On the 12th, being now in latitude 30 south,

We continued to see weeds and birds on board the ship, but had no ground till
the 18th,

On the 19th, about eight o'clock in the evening,

On the 21st we had no ground with 150 fathom.

On the 22d we had soundings again at 70 fathom,

Our soundings continued from 40 to 70 fathom, till the eighth of December,
Blanco bore W. N. W. distant six leagues, and a remarkable double saddle W. S.
W. distant about three leagues. We had now soundings from 20 to 16 fathom,
sometimes with coarse sand and gravel, sometimes with small black stones and
shells. At eight in the evening the Tower rock at Port Desire bore S. W. by W.
distant about three leagues; and the extremes of the land from S. by E. to N.
W. by N. At nine, Penguin Island bore S. W. by W. W. distant two leagues; and
at four o'clock in the morning of the ninth,

At noon Penguin island bore S. by E. distant 57 miles; our latitude being 48
56 S. longitude 65 6 W. This day we saw such a quantity of red shrimps about
the ship, that the sea was colored with them.

At noon the next day, Wednesday the 10th,

At noon, on Thursday the 11th,

We continued our course till Saturday the 13th, the extremes of the land bore
from N. to S. S. W. W. and the ship was about five or six miles distant from
the shore. Cape Beachy-head, the northermost cape, was found to lie in latitude
50 16 S. and Cape Fairweather, the southermost cape, in latitude 50 50 S.

On Sunday the 14th, at four in the morning,

At eight o'clock in the morning, of Monday the 15th, distant about four miles.
At noon Cape Fairweather bore W. N. W. W. distant six leagues, and a large
hummock S. W. W. distant seven leagues. At this time our lat. was 51 52 S.
long. 68 W.

At one o'clock, being about two leagues distant from the shore, the extremes
of three remarkable round hills bore from S. W. by W. to W. S. W. At four, Cape
Virgin Mary bore S. E. by S. distant about four leagues. At eight, we were very
near the Cape, and upon the point of it saw several men riding, who made signs
for us to come on shore. In about half an hour we anchored in a bay, close
under the south side of the Cape, in ten fathom water, with a gravelly bottom.
The Swallow and store-ship anchored soon after between us and the Cape, which
then bore N. by W. W. and a low sandy point like Dungeness S. by W. From the
Cape there runs a shoal, to the distance of about half a league, which may be
easily known by the weeds that are upon it. We found it high water at half an
hour after eleven, and the tide rose twenty foot.

The natives continued abreast of the ship all night, making several great
fires, and frequently shouting very loud. As soon as it was light, to some
distance: they immediately complied,

Each of these people, both men and women, had a horse, with a decent saddle,
stirrups, and bridle. The men had wooden spurs, except one, who had a large
pair of such as are worn in Spain, brass stirrups, and a Spanish cimeter,
without a scabbard; but notwithstanding these distinctions, he did not appear
to have any authority over the rest: the women had no spurs. The horses
appeared to be well made, and nimble, and were about 14 hands high. The people
had also many dogs with them, which, as well as the horses, appeared to be of a
Spanish breed.

As I had two measuring rods with me, puncho, a square piece of cloth made of
the downy hair of the guanico, through which a hole being cut for the head, the
rest hangs round them about as low as the knee. The guanico is an animal that
in size, make, and color, resembles a deer, but it has a hump on its back, and
no horns. These people wear also a kind of drawers, which they pull up very
tight, and buskins, which reach from the mid-leg to the instep before, and
behind are brought under the heel; the rest of the foot is without any
covering. We observed that several of the men had a red circle painted round
the left eye, and that others were painted on their arms, and on different
parts of the face; the eyelids of all the young women were painted black. They
talked much, and some of them called out Ca-pi-ta-ne; but when they were spoken
to in Spanish, Portuguese, French, and Dutch, they made no reply. Of their own
language we could distinguish only one word, which was chevow: we supposed it
to be a salutation, as they always pronounced it when they shook hands with us,
and when,

While we stayed on shore, we saw them eat some of their flesh meat raw,
particularly the paunch of an ostrich, without any other preparation or
cleaning than just turning it inside out, and shaking it. We observed among
them several beads, such as I gave them, and two pieces of red baize, which we
supposed had been left there, or in the neighboring country, by Commodore
Byron.

After I had spent about four hours with these people, I made signs to them
that I was going on board, and that I would take some of them with me if they
were desirous to go. As soon as I had made myself understood, above an hundred
eagerly offered to visit the ship; few beads, a comb, and a looking-glass, word
from another.

When the boat returned on board, I sent her off again with the master, to
sound the shoal that runs off from the point: he found it about three miles
broad from north to south, and that to avoid it, it was necessary to keep four
miles off the Cape, in twelve or thirteen fathom water.

CHAP. II. The Passage through the Straight of Magellan, with some further
account of the Patagonians, and a description of the Coast on each side, and
its Inhabitants.
ABOUT one o'clock, on Wednesday the 17th of December,

When we got about two leagues to the west of Dungeness, and were standing off
shore, we fell in with a shoal upon which we had but seven fathom water at half
flood: this obliged us to make short tacks, and keep continually heaving the
lead. At half an hour after eight in the evening, we anchored about three miles
from the shore, in 20 fathom, with a muddy bottom: Cape Virgin Mary then
bearing N. E. by E. E.; Point Possession W. S. at the distance of about five
leagues.

About half an hour after we had cast anchor,

As we saw great numbers of the natives on horseback abreast of the ship, and
as Captain Carteret informed me that this was the place where Commodore Byron
had the conference with the tall men, I sent the lieutenants of the Swallow and
the store-ship to the shore, but with orders not to land, as the ships were at
too great a distance to protect them. When these gentlemen returned, they told
me that the boat having lain upon her oars very near the beach, the natives
came down in great numbers, whom they knew to be the same persons they had seen
the day before, with many others, particularly women and children; that when
they perceived out people had no design to land, they seemed to be greatly
disappointed, and those who had been on board the ship waded off to the boat,
making signs for it to advance, and pronouncing the words they had been taught,
"Englishmen come on shore," very loud, many times; that when they found they
could not get the people to land, they would fain have got into the boat, and
that it was with great difficulty they were prevented. That they presented them
with some bread, tobacco, and a few toys, pointing at the same time to some
guanicoes and ostriches, and making signs that they wanted them as provisions,
but that they could not make themselves understood; that finding they could
obtain no refreshment, they rowed along the shore in search of fresh water, but
that seeing no appearance of a rivulet, they returned on board.

At six o'clock the next morning, we weighed,

From this time, to the 22d,

In the morning of the 23d, we made sail, sometimes backing, bores sometimes
came down, with immense quantities of weeds, that we expected every moment to
be adrift.

The next day, made, with many fresh shells of muscles and limpets lying about
them: they saw also several wigwams or huts, consisting of young trees, which,
being sharpened at one end, and thrust into the ground in a circular form, the
other ends were brought to meet, and fastened together at the top; but they saw
none of the natives.

From this place we saw many high mountains, bearing from S. to W. S. W.;
several parts of the summits were covered with snow, though it was the midst of
summer in this part of the world: they were clothed with wood about three parts
of their height, and above with herbage, except where the snow was not yet
melted. This was the first place where we had seen wood in all South America.

At two o'clock in the morning of the 26th, we weighed, from the north shore,

About four o'clock we anchored in Port Famine Bay, in 13 fathom, and there
being little wind, sent all the boats, and towed in the Swallow and Prince
Frederick.

The next morning,

On the 28th we unbent all the sails,

During our whole stay in this place, we caught fish enough to furnish one meal
a day both for the sick and the well: we found also great plenty of celery and
pea-tops, which were boiled with the pease and portable soup: besides these, we
gathered great quantities of fruit that resembled the cranberry, and the leaves
of a shrub somewhat like our thorn, which were remarkably sour. When we
arrived, all our people began to look pale and meagre; many had the scurvy to a
great degree, and upon others there were manifest signs of its approach; yet in
a fortnight there was not a scorbutic person in either of the ships. Their
recovery was effected by their being on shore, eating plenty of vegetables,
being obliged to wash their apparel, and keep their persons clean by daily
bathing in the sea.

The next day we set up the forge on shore;

In the mean time, a considerable quantity of wood was cut, and put on board
the store-ship, to be sent to Falkland's island; and as I well knew there was
no wood growing there, I caused some thousands of young trees to be carefully
taken up with their roots, and a proper quantity of earth; and packing them in
the best manner I could, I put them also on board the store-ship, with orders
to deliver them to the commanding officer at Port Egmont, and to sail for that
place with the first fair wind, putting on board two of my seamen, who being in
an ill state of health when they first came on board, were now altogether unfit
to proceed in the voyage.

On Wednesday the 14th of January,

After several attempts to sail, the master returned from his expedition. The
master reported that he had found four places, in which there was good
anchorage, between the place where we lay and Cape Froward: that he had been on
shore at several places, where he had found plenty of wood and water close to
the beach, with abundance of cranberries and wild celery. He reported also,
that he had seen a great number of current bushes full of fruit, though none of
it was ripe, and a great variety of beautiful shrubs in full blossom, bearing
flowers of different colors, particularly red, purple, yellow, and white,
besides great plenty of the winter's bark, a grateful spice which is well known
to the botanists of Europe. He shot several wild ducks, geese, gulls, a hawk,
and two or three of the birds which the sailors call a Race-Horse.

At five o'clock in the morning of Sunday the 18th,

In the morning of Monday the 19th, the mountains, for the land he^^ is of a
stupendous height. Cape Holland bore W. S. W. W. distant two miles, and Cape
Froward E. Our latitude, by observation, was 53 58 S.

The next morning we got off some water,

Having completed our wood and water,

At six the next morning, deepened to 16 fathom. In the afternoon I sent out
the master to examine the bay and a large lagoon; and he reported that the
lagoon was the most commodious harbor we had yet seen in the Straight, having
five fathom at the entrance, and from four to live in the middle; that it was
capable of receiving a great number of vessels, had three large fresh water
rivers, and plenty of wood and celery. We had here the misfortune to have a
seine spoiled, by being entangled with the wood that lies sunk at the mouth of
these rivers; but though we caught but little fish, we had an incredible number
of wild ducks, which we found a very good succedaneum.

The mountains are here very lofty, and the master of the Swallow climbed one
of the highest, hoping that from the summit he should obtain a fight of the
South Sea; but he found his view intercepted by mountains still higher on the
southern shore: before he descended, however, he erected a pyramid, within
which he deposited a bottle containing a shilling, and a paper on which was
written the ship's name and the date of the year; a memorial which possibly may
remain there as long as the world endures.

In the morning of the 24th we took two boats and examined Cords bay,

In this place we saw an animal that resembled an ass, but it had a cloven
hoof, as we discovered afterward by tracking it, and was as swift as a deer.
This was the first animal we had seen in the Straight, except at the entrance,
where we found the guanicoes that we would fain have trafficked for with the
Indians. We shot at this creature, but we could not hit it; probably it is
altogether unknown to the naturalists of Europe.

The country about this place has the most dreary and forlorn appearance that
can be imagined; the mountains on each side the Straight are of an immense
height: about one fourth of the ascent is covered with trees of a considerable
size; in the space from thence to the middle of the mountain there is nothing
but withered shrubs; above these are patches of snow, and fragments of broken
rock; and the summit is altogether rude and naked, towering above the clouds in
vast crags that are piled upon each other, and look like the ruins of Nature
devoted to everlasting sterility and desolation.

We went over in two boats to the Royal Islands, and sounded, but found no
bottom: a very rapid tide set through wherever there was an opening; and they
cannot be approached by shipping without the most imminent danger. Whoever
navigates this part of the Straight, should keep the north shore close on board
all the way, and not venture more than a mile from it till the Royal Islands
are passed. The current sets easterly through the whole four and twenty hours,
and the indraught should by all means be avoided. The latitude of Cape Gallant
road is 53 50 S.

We continued in this station, taking in wood and water, and gathering muscles
and herbs, distant half a mile, and the white patch on Charles's island S. E.
by S. We had fresh gales and heavy flaws off the land; and at two o'clock the
west point of Cape Gallant bore E. distant three leagues, and York Point W. N.
W. distant five leagues. At five, we opened York road, the Point bearing N. W.
at the distance of half a mile: at this time the ship was taken a-back, and a
strong current with a heavy squall drove us so far to leeward, that it was with
great difficulty we got into Elizabeth bay, and anchored in 12 fathom near a
river. The Swallow being at anchor off the point of the bay, and very near the
rocks, I sent all the boats with anchors and hausers to her assistance, and at
last she was happily warped to windward into good anchorage. York Point now
bore W. by N. a shoal with weeds upon it W. N. W. at the distance of a cable's
length, Point Passage S. E. E. distant half a mile, a rock near Rupert's isle
S. E. and a rivulet on the bay N. E. by E. distant about three cable's length.
Soon after sunset we saw a great smoke on the southern shore, and another on
Prince Rupert's island.

Early in the morning I sent the boats on shore for water, with a keen appetite
and great seeming satisfaction.

When the boat returned she brought three of them on board the ship, but they
seemed to regard nothing with any degree of curiosity except our clothes and a
looking-glass; the looking-glass afforded them as much diversion as it had done
the Patagonians, and it seemed to surprise them more: when they first peeped
into it they started back, first looking at us, and then at each other; they
then took another peep, as it were by stealth, starting back as before, and
then eagerly looking behind it: when by degrees they became familiar with it,
they smiled, and seeing the image smile in return, they were exceedingly
delighted, and burst into fits of the most violent laughter. They left this
however, and every thing else, with perfect indifference, the little they
possessed being to all appearance equal to their desires. They eat whatever was
given them,

When they left the ship I went on shore with them, and by this time several of
their wives and children were come to the watering-place. I distributed some
trinkets among them, with which they seemed pleased for a moment, and they gave
us some of their arms in return; they gave us also several pieces of mundic,
such as is found in the tin mines of Cornwall: they made us understand that
they found it in the mountains, where there are probably mines of tin, and
perhaps of more valuable metal. As this seems to be the most dreary and
inhospitable country in the world, not excepting the worst parts of Sweden and
Norway, the people seem to be the lowest and most deplorable of all human
beings. Their perfect indifference to every thing they saw, which marked the
disparity between our state and their own, though it may preserve them from the
regret and anguish of unsatisfied desires, seems, notwithstanding, to imply a
defect in their nature; for those who are satisfied with the gratifications of
a brute, can have little pretension to the prerogatives of men. When they left
us and embarked in their canoes, they hoisted a seal skin for a sail, and
steered for the southern shore, where we saw many of their hovels; and we
remarked that not one of them looked behind, either at us or at the ship, so
little impression had the wonders they had seen made upon their minds, and so
much did they appear to be absorbed in the present, without any habitual
exercise of their power to reflect upon the past.

In this station we continued till Tuesday the 3d of February. on a reef of
rocks; the wind however suddenly shifted,

In the morning, stumps of trees at the bottom of the river. We then went
ashore, where we saw many wigwams of the natives, and several of their dogs,
who, as soon as we came in sight, ran away. We also saw some ostriches, but
they were beyond the reach of our pieces: we gathered muscles, limpets,
sea-eggs, celery, and nettles in great abundance. About three miles up this
river, on the west side, between Mount Misery and another mountain of a
stupendous height, there is a cataract which has a very striking appearance: it
is precipitated from an elevation of above four hundred yards; half the way it
rolls over a very steep declivity, and the other half is a perpendicular fall.
The sound of this cataract is not less awful than the sight.

In this place, contrary winds detained us till 10 o'clock in the morning of
Saturday the 14th,

Here we remained till five o'clock in the morning of the 17th, drove so close
to the rock,

About one o'clock the boats returned, having found an anchoring place in a
small bay, to which we gave the name of Butler's bay, it having been discovered
by Mr. Butler one of the mates. It lies to the west of Rider's bay on the south
shore of the Straight, which is here about two miles wide. We ran in with the
tide which set fast to the westward, and anchored in 16 fathom water. The
extremes of the bay from W. by N. to N. W. are about a quarter of a mile
asunder; a small rivulet, at the distance of somewhat less than two cables'
length, bore S. W. and Cape Quod N. at the distance of four miles. At this time
the Swallow was at anchor in Island bay on the north shore, at about six miles
distance.

I now sent all the boats out to sound round the ship and in the neighboring
bays; and they returned with an account that they could find no place fit to
receive the ship, neither could any such place be found between Cape Quod and
Cape Notch.

In this place we remained till Friday the 20th, little of the gale, but that
she had been very near being lost,

We continued here eight days, during which time we completed our wood and
water, dried our sails, and sent great part of the ship's company on shore, to
wash their clothes and stretch their legs, which was the more necessary, as
the cold, snowy, and tempestuous weather had confined them too much below. We
caught muscles and limpets, and gathered celery and nettles in great abundance.
The muscles were the largest we had ever seen, many of them being from five to
six inches long: we caught also great plenty of a fine, firm, red fish, not
unlike a gurnet, most of which were from four to five pounds weight. At the
same time, we made it part of the employment of every day to try the current,
which we found constantly setting to the eastward.

The master having been sent out to look for anchoring places, returned with an
account that he could find no shelter, except near the shore, where it should
not be sought but in cases of the most pressing necessity.

On Sunday the first of March,

About three o'clock in the afternoon, there being little wind, we anchored,
with the Swallow, under the north shore, in a small bay, where there is a high,
steep, rocky mountain, the top of which resembles the head of a lion, for which
reason we called the bay Lion's Cove. We had here 40 fathom, with deep water
close to the shore, and at half a cable's length without the ship, no ground.
We sent the boats to the westward in search of anchoring places, and at
midnight they returned with an account that there was an indifferent bay at the
distance of about four miles, and that Goodluck bay was three leagues to the
westward.

At half an hour after 12 the next day, as the wind was southerly, and blew
fresh, she was in great danger, for the Cove was not only small, but full of
rocks, and open to the south-easterly winds.

All the day following,

I ordered these jackets to be made very large, allowing, one with another, two
yards and thirty-four inches of the cloth to each jacket. I sent also seven
bales of the same cloth to the Swallow, which made every man on board a jacket
of the same kind; and I cut up three bales of finer cloth, and made jackets for
the officers of both ships, which I had the pleasure to find were very
acceptable.

In this situation we were obliged to continue a week, during which time, I put
both my own ship, and the Swallow, upon two-thirds allowance, except brandy;
but continued the breakfast as long as greens and water were plenty.

On Sunday the 15th, about noon,

At nine o'clock the next morning, returned with an account that they could
find none: at nine we had fresh gales, and at midnight Cape Upright bore S. S.
W W.

At seven the next morning,

As a great swell came on about noon, we hauled over to the north shore. We
soon found ourselves surrounded with islands, but the fog was so thick, that we
knew not where we were, nor which way to steer. Among these islands the boats
were sent to cast the lead, but no anchorage was to be found; we then
conjectured that we were in the bay of islands, and that we had no chance to
escape shipwreck, but by hauling directly out: this, however, was no easy task,
for I was obliged to tack, almost continually, to weather some island or rock.
At four o'clock in the afternoon, it happily cleared up for a minute, just to
show us Cape Upright, for which we directly steered, and at half an hour after
five anchored, with the Swallow, in the bay. When we dropped the anchor, we
were in 24 fathom, and after we had veered away a whole cable, in 46, with a
muddy bottom. In this situation, a high bluff on the north shore bore N. W. N.
distant five leagues, and a small island within us S. by E. E. Soon after we
had anchored, the Swallow drove to leeward, notwithstanding she had two anchors
ahead, but was at last brought up, in 70 fathom, about a cable's length
a-stern of us. At four o'clock in the morning I sent the boats, with a
considerable number of men, and some hausers and anchors, on board her, to
weigh her anchors, and warp her up to windward. When her best bower anchor was
weighed, it was found entangled with the small one; I therefore found it
necessary to send the stream cable on board, and the ship was hung up by it. To
clear her anchors, and warp her into a proper birth, cost us the whole day, and
was not at last effected without the utmost difficulty and labor.

On the 18th we had fresh breezes,

The next morning, hook and line, I gave them a hatchet or two, with some
beads,

While we lay here, we sent out the boats, as usual, in search of anchoring
places, and having been 10 leagues to the westward, they found but two: one was
to the westward of Cape Upright, in the Bay of Islands, but was very difficult
to enter and get out of; the other was called Dolphin bay, at 10 leagues
distance, which was a good harbor, with even ground in all parts. They saw
several small coves, which were all dangerous, as in them it would be necessary
to let go the anchor within half a cable's length of a lee shore, and steady
the ship with halsers fastened to the rocks. The people belonging to one of the
boats, spent a night upon an island, upon which, while they were there, six
canoes landed about thirty Indians. The Indians ran immediately to the boat,
and were carrying away every thing they found in her: out people discovered
what they were doing, just time enough to prevent them. As soon as they found
themselves opposed, they went to their canoes, and armed themselves with long
poles, and javelins pointed with the bones of fish. They did not begin an
attack, but stood in a threatening manner: our people, who were two and twenty
in number, acted only on the defensive, and by parting with a few trifles to
them, they became friends, and behaved peaceably the rest of the time they
staid.

For many days, we had hail, lightning, rain, and hard gales, with a heavy sea,
so that we thought it impossible for the ship to hold, though she had two
anchors ahead, and two cables an end. The men, however, were sent frequently
on shore for exercise, which contributed greatly to their health, and procured
an almost constant supply of muscles and greens. Among other damages that we
had sustained, our fireplace was broken to pieces, we therefore found it
necessary to set up the forge, and employ the armourers to make a new back; we
also made lime of burnt shells, and once more put it into a useful condition.

On Monday the 30th,

The day following,

On Thursday, the second of April, Cape Tamer,

This day two canoes came on board, with four men and three young children in
each. The men were somewhat more decently dressed than those that we had seen
before, but the children were stark naked. They were somewhat fairer than the
men, who seemed to pay a very tender attention to them, especially in lifting
them in and out of the canoes. To these young visitors I gave necklaces and
bracelets, with which they seemed mightily pleased. It happened that while some
of these people were on board, and the rest waiting in their canoes by the
ship's side, the boat was sent on shore for wood and water. The Indians who
were in the canoes, kept their eyes fixed upon the boat while she was manning,
and the moment she put off from the ship, they called out with great
vociferation to those that were on board, who seemed to be much alarmed, and
hastily handing down the children, leaped into their canoes, without uttering a
word. None of us could guess at the cause of this sudden emotion, but we saw
the men in the canoes pull after the boat with all their might, hallooing and
shouting with great appearance of perturbation and distress. The boat outrowed
them, and when she came near the shore, the people on board discovered some
women gathering muscles among the rocks. This at once explained the mystery;
the poor Indians were afraid that the strangers, either by force or favor,
should violate the prerogative of a husband, of which they seemed to be more
jealous than the natives of some other countries, who in their appearance are
less savage and sordid. Our people, to make them easy, immediately lay upon
their oars, and suffered the canoes to pass them. The Indians, however, still
continued to call out to their women, till they took the alarm and ran out of
sight, and as soon as they got to land, drew their canoes upon the beach, and
followed them with the utmost expedition.

We continued daily to gather muscles till the 5th,

The weather being still tempestuous and unsettled, we remained at anchor till
10 o'clock in the morning of Friday the 10th, the other. At noon,

Our latitude, by observation, was 52 38 and we computed our longitude to be 76
W.

Thus we quitted a dreary and inhospitable region, where we were in almost
perpetual danger of shipwreck for near four months, having entered the Straight
on the 17th of December 1766, and quitted it on the 11th of April 1767; a
region where, in the midst of summer, the weather was cold, gloomy, and
tempestuous, where the prospects had more the appearance of a chaos than of
Nature, and where, for the most part, the valleys were without herbage, and the
hills without wood.

CHAP. III. A particular Account of the Places in which we anchored during our
Passage through the Straight, and of the Shoals and Rocks that lie near them.
HAVING cleared the Straight, we steered a western course. But before I
continue the narrative of our voyage, I shall give a more particular account of
the several places where we anchored, plans of which are deposited in the
Admiralty Office for the use of future navigators, with the shoals and rocks
that lie near them, the latitude, longitude, tides, and variation of the
compass.

I. CAPE VIRGIN MARY. The bay under this Cape is a good harbor, when the wind
is westerly. There is a shoal lying off the Cape, but that may easily be known
by the rock weed that grows upon it: the Cape is a steep white cliff, not
unlike the South Foreland. Its latitude, by observation, is 52 24 S. and its
longitude, by account, 68 22 W. The variation of the needle, by the medium of
five azimuths and one amplitude, was 24 30 E. In this place we saw no
appearance either of wood or water. We anchored in 10 fathom, with coarse sandy
ground, about a mile from the shore, Cape Virgin Mary bearing N. by W. W.
distant about two miles, and Dungeness Point S. S. W. distant four miles. We
anchored here on the 17th of December, and sailed the next day. There is good
landing, on a fine sandy beach, all along the shore.

II. POSSESSION BAY. In sailing into this bay, it is necessary to give the
point a good birth, because there is a reef that runs right off it about a
short mile. The soundings are very irregular all over the bay, but the ground
is every where a fine soft mud and clay, so that the cables can come to no
damage. The Point lies in latitude 52 23 S. longitude, by account, 68 57 W.:
the variation is two points easterly. In the bay the tide rises and falls
between four and five fathom, and runs at the rate of about a mile an hour; in
the mid-channel without the bay, it runs nearly three miles an hour. In this
place we saw no appearance either of wood or water. The landing appeared to be
good, but we did not go on shore. We anchored here on the 19th of December, and
sailed again on the 22d.

III. PORT FAMINE. At this place, the Spaniards, in the year 1581, built a
town, which they called Phillippeville, and left in it a colony, consisting of
400 persons. When our celebrated navigator, Cavendish, arrived here in 1587, he
found one of these unhappy wretches, the only one that remained, upon the
beach: they had all perished for want of subsistence, except twenty-four;
twenty-three of these set out for the river Plata, and were never afterward
heard of. This man, whose name was Hernando, was brought to England by
Cavendish, who called the place where he had taken him up, Port Famine. It is a
very fine bay, in which there is room and convenience for many ships to moor in
great safety. We moored in nine fathom, having brought Cape St. Anne N. E. by
E. and Sedger River S. W. which perhaps is the best situation, though the whole
bay is good ground. In this place there is very good wooding and watering; we
caught many fine small fish with a hook and line off the ship's side, and
hauled the seine with great success, in a fine sandy bay, a little to the
southward of Sedger River: we also shot a great number of birds, of various
kinds, particularly geese, ducks, teal, snipes, plover, and race-horses, and we
found wild celery in great plenty. The latitude of this place is 53 42 S.
longitude, by observation, 71 28 W.; the variation is two points easterly. We
anchored here the 27th of December 1766, and sailed again the 18th of January
1767.

IV. CAPE HOLLAND BAY. There is no danger in sailing into this bay, and there
is good anchoring ground in every part of it. We lay at about three cables'
length from the shore, in 10 fathom, the ground coarse sand and shells, Cape
Holland bearing W. S. W. W. distant three miles, Cape Froward a little to the
N. of the E. Right abreast of the ship there was a very fine rivulet, and
close under Cape Holland a large river, navigable for boats many miles: the
shore also affords fire wood in great plenty. We found abundance of wild celery
and cranberries, muscles and limpets, but caught very little fish, either with
hook and line, or the seine. We killed some geese, ducks, teal, and
race-horses, but they were not plenty. This bay lies in latitude 53 57 S.
longitude, by account, 72 34 W.; the variation is two points easterly. The
water rose about eight feet; we found, however, no regular tide, but for the
most part a strong current setting to the eastward. We anchored here on the
19th of January, and sailed again on the 23d.

V. CAPE GALLLANT BAY. In this bay, which may be entered with great safety,
there is a fine large lagoon, where a fleet of ships may moor in perfect
security. There is a depth of four fathom in every part of it, with a soft
muddy ground. In the bay, the best anchoring is on the east side, where there
is from six to ten fathom. Here is good watering from two rivers, and plenty of
wood. The lagoon abounded with wild fowl, and we found wild celery, muscles,
and limpets in plenty. We did not haul the seine, having torn one to pieces,
and the other being unpacked, but if we had, there is reason to believe that we
should have been well supplied with fish. The landing is good. The latitude of
the bay and lagoon is 53 50 S. longitude, by account, 73 9 W.; the variation is
two points easterly. I observed the water to rise and fall about nine feet, but
the tide was very irregular. We anchored here the 23d of January, and sailed
again the 28th.

VI. ELIZABETH's BAY. At the entrance of this bay there are two small reefs,
which appear above water. The most dangerous lies off the east point of the
bay, but this may easily be avoided, by keeping at the distance of about two
cables' length from the point. There is good landing all round the bay, but it
is much exposed to the westerly winds. The best place for anchoring is Passage
Point, at half a mile distance, bearing S. E. and the river bearing N. E. by E.
distant three cables' length; in this situation, a bank or shoal, which may be
known by the weeds, bears W. N. W. distant a cable's length: the ground is
coarse sand, with shells. Sufficient wood is to be procured here for the use of
ships, and there is good watering at a small river. We found a little celery
and a few cranberries, but neither fish nor fowl. The latitude of this place is
53 43 S. the longitude, by account, 73 24 W.; the variation is two points
easterly. We anchored here the 29th of January, and sailed the 4th of February.

VII. YORK ROAD. The only danger of sailing into the bay, that is formed by two
points in this road, arises from a reef that runs off to about a cable's length
from the western point, which once known, may be easily avoided. To anchor in
this bay, it is safest to bring York Point E. S. E. Bachelor's River N. by W.
W. the west point of the bay or reef N. W. W. and St. Jerome's Sound W. N. W. at
the distance of half a mile from the shore. There is good watering about a mile
up Bachelor's River, and good wooding all round the bay, where the landing also
is, in all parts, very good. We found plenty of celery, cranberries, muscles,
and limpets, many wild fowl, and some fish, but not enough to supply the ship's
company with a fresh meal. The latitude here is 53 39 S. longitude, by account,
73 52 W.; the variation two points easterly. The water rises and falls about
eight feet, but the tide is irregular. The master, who crossed the Straight
many times to examine the bays, frequently found the current setting in three
different directions. We anchored here on the 4th of February, and sailed again
the 11th.

VIII. BUTLER's BAY. This is a small bay, entirely surrounded by rocks, so that
no ship should anchor here if she can possibly avoid it. We found, however,
sufficient wood and water to keep up our stock, muscles and limpets in plenty,
some good rock-fish, and a few wild fowl, but celery and cranberries were very
scarce. This bay lies in latitude 53 37 S. longitude, by account, 74 9 W.; the
variation is two points easterly. The water rises and falls here about four
feet, but the current always sets to the eastward. We anchored here the 18th of
February, and sailed the 1st of March.

IX. LION COVE. This is a small bay, and surrounded by rocks. The water is
deep, but the ground is good. It is not a bad place for one ship, nor a good
one for two. Here is good watering up a small creek, but no wood. There is good
landing at the watering-place, but no where else. We found no refreshment but a
few muscles, limpets, and rock-fish, with a little celery. The latitude is 35
26 S. longitude, by account, 74 25 W.; the variation was two points easterly.
The water, as far as we could judge by the appearance of the rocks, rises and
falls about five feet, and the current sets at the rate of about two knots an
hour. We anchored here on the 2d of March, and sailed the next day.

X. GOOD-LUCK BAY. This is a small bay, and like several others in this
Straight, entirely surrounded by rocks. The ground is very coarse, and the
cable of our best bower anchor was so much rubbed, that we were obliged to
condemn it, and bend a new one. At this place there is a little wood, and
plenty of good water, but the rocks render it very difficult of access. No man
that sees this part of the coast, can expect to find any kind of refreshment
upon it; and indeed we caught nothing except a few rock-fish, with hook and
line. There may be circumstances in which it may be good luck to get into this
bay, but we thought it very good luck to get out of it. It lies in latitude 53
23 S. longitude, by account, 74 33 W.; the variation is two points easterly.
The water rises and falls between three and four feet, though whenever we had
an opportunity of trying the current, we found it run easterly. We anchored
here the 3d of March, and sailed the 15th.

XI. SWALLOW HARBOR. This harbor, when once entered, is very safe, being
sheltered from all winds, but the entrance is narrow and rocky; the rocks,
however, may be easily avoided by keeping a good look-out, as there are large
bunches of rock-weed upon them all. We found here a sufficient supply of wood
and water, the wood however was very small. As the water is constantly smooth
here, the landing is every where good; but we found no supply of provisions,
except a few muscles and rock-fish. The mountains round it have the most horrid
appearance, and seem to be altogether deserted by every thing that has life.
The latitude is 53 29 S. the longitude, by account, 74 35 W.; the variation is
two points easterly, and the tide rises and falls between four and five feet.
We anchored here the 15th of March, and left the place the next day.

XII. UPRIGHT BAY. This bay may be safely entered, as there is no obstruction
but what is above water. The wood here is very small, but we found sufficient
to keep up our stock. The water is excellent, and in great plenty. As to
provisions, we got only a few wild fowl, rock-fishes, and muscles. The landing
is bad. The latitude of this place, is 53 8 S. longitude 75 35 W.; the
variation two points easterly. The water rises and falls about five feet, but
the tide or current is very irregular. We anchored here on the 18th of March,
and sailed again on the 10th of April.

There are three very good bays a little beyond Cape Shut-up, which we called
RIVER BAY, LODGING BAY, and WALLIS's BAY. Wallis's bay is the best.

About half way between Elizabeth's bay and York road, lies Muscle bay, where
there is very good anchorage with a westerly wind. There is also a bay, with
good anchorage, opposite to York road, and another to the eastward of Cape
Cross-tide, but this will hold only a single ship. Between Cape Cross and Saint
David's Head, lies Saint David's Sound, on the south side of which we found a
bank of coarse sand and shells, with a depth of water from 19 to 30 fathom,
where a ship might anchor in case of necessity; and the Master of the Swallow
found a very good small bay a little to the eastward of Saint David's Head. A
little to the eastward of Cape Quod, lies Island bay, where the Swallow lay
some time, but it is by no means an eligible situation. The ground of Chance
bay is very rocky and uneven, and for that reason should be avoided.

As all the violent gales by which we suffered in this navigation, blew from
the westward, it is proper to stand about a hundred leagues or more to the
westward, after sailing out of the Straight, that the ship may not be
endangered on a lee shore, which at present is wholly unknown.

The following table shows the courses and distances, from point to point, in
the Straight of Magellan, by compass.

Courses and Distances from Point to Point, in the Straight of Magellan, by
Compass.
Cape Virgin Mary lies in latitude 52 24 S. and longitude 68 22 W.
From Courses Miles Latitude Long. Cape Virgin Mary to Dungeness Point S. by W.
5 52 28 68 28 Dungeness Point to Point Possession W. S. 18 52 23 68 57 Point
Possession to the S. side of the 1st Narrows S. W. S. 27 52 35 69 38 The N. to
the S. end of the Narrows S. S. W. 9 The S. end of the Narrows to Cape Gregory
W. S. W. W. 25 52 39 70 31 Cape Gregory to Sweepstakes Foreland S. 30 W. 12
Cape Gregory to Dolphin's Foreland S. W. W. 14 52 43 70 53 Dolphin's Foreland
to the N. end of Elizabeth's island S. W. 14 52 56 71 6 The N. end of
Elizabeth's island to St. Bartholomew's island E. N. E. 1 52 56 71 4 The N. end
of Elizabeth's island to St. George's island S. E. 8 The N. end of Elizabeth's
island to Porpuss Point S. by W. 12 53 6 71 17 Porpuss Point to Fresh Water bay
S. E. 22 Fresh Water bay to Cape St. Ann, or Port Famine S. S. E. E. 13 53 42
71 28 Cape St. Ann to the entry of a great sound on the south shore N. E. Cape
St. Ann to Cape Shut-up S. by E. 12 53 54 71 32 Cape Shut-up to Dolphin's
island S. S. W. 7 53 59 71 41 Dolphin's island to Cape Froward, the southermost
in all America S. 47 W. 11 54 3 71 59 Cape Froward to Snug bay Point W N. 8
Snug bay Point to Cape Holland W. by S. 13 53 57 72 34 Cape Holland to Cape
Gallant W. S. 21 53 50 73 9 Cape Gallant to Elizabeth bay W. N. W. W. 11 53 43
73 24 Elizabeth's bay to York Point W. N. W. W. 6 53 39 73 32 York road to Cape
Cross-tide W. S. 10 York road to Cape Quod W. S. 21 53 33 74 6 Cape Quod to St.
David's Head S. E. 4 Cape Quod to Butler's bay S. W. 4 53 37 74 9 Cape Quod to
Chance bay S. S. W. 5 Cape Quod to Great Mussel bay S. W. S. 6 Cape Quod to
Snow Sound W. S. W. W. 10 Cape Quod to Lion's Cove W. N. W. W. 12 53 26 74 25
Lion's Cove to Good-Luck bay W. N. W. W. 6 53 23 74 33 Cape Quod to Cape Notch
W. N. W. W. 21 53 22 74 36 Cape Notch to Swallow harbor S. S. E. 7 53 29 74 36
Cape Notch to Piss-pot bay W. S. 23 Cape Notch to Cape Monday W. 28 53 12 75 20
Cape Monday to Cape Upright W. by N. 13 53 6 75 38 Cape Monday to a great Sound
on the N. shore N. 7 Cape Upright to Cape Providence N. by W. W. 9 52 57 75 37
Cape Upright to Cape Tamer N.W by W. W. 18 Cape Upright to Cape Pillar W. N. 50
52 43 76 52 Cape Pillar to Westminster island N. E. N. 15 Cape Pillar to Cape
Victory N. W. N. 28 Cape Pillar to the Islds. of Direction W. N. W. 23 52 27 77
19

CHAP. IV. The Passage from the Straight of Magellan, to King George the
Third's Island, called Otaheite, in the South Sea, with an account of the
Discovery of several other Islands, and a description of their Inhabitants.
AS we continued our course to the westward,

At eight in the morning of the 22d,

By the 24th,

On the 26th, at four in the afternoon, the variation, and wheat boiled with
portable soup, every morning for breakfast, and all the ship's company had as
much vinegar and mustard as they could use; portable soup was also constantly
boiled in their pease and oatmeal.

The hard gales, with frequent and violent squalls, and a heavy sea, soon
returned, and continued with very little intermission. The ship pitched so
much, that we were afraid she would carry away her masts, and the men were
again wet in their beds.

On the 30th,

On the third of May,

At six o'clock in the morning, of Friday the eighth of May, azimuth was 6 34
E. and in the morning of the 11th,

On the 14th of May, the variation, by four azimuths,

At four in the afternoon of the 16th, the variation,

The carpenters were now employed in caulking the upper works of the ship, and
repairing and painting the boats, and on the 18th,

On Wednesday the 20th, we found our longitude,

On the 22d, our longitude, by observation,

The people who had been recovering from colds and fevers, now began to fall
down in the scurvy, upon which, at the surgeon's representation, wine was
served to them: wort was also made for them of malt, and each man had half a
pint of pickled cabbage every day. The variation from 4 to 5 E.

On the 26th we saw two grampuses; on the 28th we saw another,

Our men now began to look very pale and sickly, and to fall down very fast in
the scurvy, notwithstanding all our care and attention to prevent it. They had
vinegar and mustard without limitation, wine instead of spirits, sweet wort and
salop. Portable soup was still constantly boiled in their peace and oatmeal;
their birth and clothes were kept perfectly clean; the hammocks were constantly
brought upon the deck at eight o'clock in the morning, and carried down at four
in the afternoon. Some of the beds and hammocks were washed every day; the
water was rendered wholesome by ventilation, and every part between decks
frequently washed with vinegar.

On Sunday the 31st of May,

The next day,

On the 3d, very far distant.

When we were within about five miles of this island, we saw another, bearing
N. W. by W. About three o'clock in the afternoon, being very near the island
that was first discovered, we brought to, and I sent Mr. Faurneaux, my second
lieutenant, my first lieutenant being very ill, with the boats manned and
armed, to the shore. As he approached it, we saw two canoes put off, and paddle
away with great expedition toward the island that lay to leeward. At seven in
the evening the boats returned, and brought with them several cocoa nuts, and a
considerable quantity of scurvy grass; they brought also some fish hooks, that
were made of oyster-shells, and some of the shells of which they were made.
They reported that they had seen none of the inhabitants, but had visited three
huts, or rather sheds, consisting only of a roof, neatly thatched with cocoa
nut and palm leaves, supported upon posts, and open all round. They saw also
several canoes building, but found no fresh water, nor any fruit but cocoa
nuts. They sounded, but found no anchorage, and it was with great difficulty
that they got on shore, as the surf ran very high. Having received this
account, I stood off and on all night, anchor;

When we came under the lee of the other island, I sent Lieutenant Furneaux,
with the boats manned and armed, to the shore, where I saw about fifty of the
natives armed with long pikes, and several of them running about with
firebrands in their hands. I ordered Mr. Furneaux to go to that part of the
beach where we saw the people, and endeavor to traffic with them for fruit
and water, or whatever else might be useful; at the same time, being
particularly careful to give them no offense. I ordered him also to employ the
boats in sounding for anchorage. About seven o'clock he returned, and told me
that he could find no ground with the line, till he came within half a cable's
length of the shore, and that there it consisted of sharp rocks, and lay very
deep.

As the boat approached the shore, the Indians thronged down toward the beach,
and put themselves upon their guard with their long pikes, as if to dispute the
landing. Our men then lay upon their oars, and made signs of friendship,
showing at the same time several strings of beads,

I stood off and on with the ship all night, by two other canoes at the west
end of the island.

The inhabitants of this island were of a middle stature, and dark complexion,
with long black hair, which hung loose over their shoulders. The men were well
made, and the women handsome. Their clothing was a kind of coarse cloth or
matting, which was fastened about their middle, and seemed capable of being
brought up round their shoulders.

In the afternoon, I sent Lieutenant Furneaux with the boats again on shore. He
had with him a mate and twenty men, who were to make a rolling way for getting
the casks down to the beach from the well. I gave orders that he should take
possession of the island, in the name of King George the Third, and give it the
name of QUEEN CHARLOTTE's ISLAND, who were enfeebled by the scurvy, to take a
walk.

In the morning, board.

When we sailed, we left a union jack flying upon the island, with the ship's
name, the time of our being here, and an account of our taking possession of
this place, and Whitsun Island, in the name of his Britannic Majesty, cut on a
piece of wood, and in the bark of several trees. We also left some hatchets,
nails, glass bottles, beads, shillings, sixpences, and halfpence, as presents
to the natives, and an atonement for the disturbance we had given them. Queen
Charlotte's Island is about six miles long, and one mile wide, lies in latitude
19 18 S. longitude, by observation, 138 4 W. and we found the variation here to
be 4 46 E.

We made sail with a fine breeze, and about one o'clock, saw an island W. by S.
Queen Charlotte's Island, at this time bearing E. by N. distant 15 miles. At
half an hour after three, we were within about three quarters of a mile of the
east end of the island, and ran close along the shore, but had no soundings.
The east and west ends are joined to each other by a reef of rocks, over which
the sea breaks into a lagoon, in the middle of the island, which, therefore,
had the appearance of two islands,

At one o'clock, on the 11th, one mile to one quarter of a mile broad, I gave
the name of GLOUCESTER ISLAND,

At five o'clock in the morning,

At daybreak, on Saturday the 13th,

Soon after daylight, on the 17th,

At five in the evening,

The next morning, the men,

CHAP. V. An Account of the Discovery of King George the Third's Island, or
Otaheite, and of several Incidents which happened both on board the Ship, and
on Shore.
AT two o'clock, the same day, we bore away, hour, one of them by signs: while
he was thus engaged,

As we had no anchorage here, we stood along the shore, sending the boats at
the same time to sound at a less distance. As none of these canoes had sails,
they could not keep up with us, and therefore soon paddled back toward the
shore. The country has the most delightful and romantic appearance that can be
imagined: toward the sea it is level, and is covered with fruit trees of
various kinds, particularly the cocoa nut. Among these are the houses of the
inhabitants, consisting only of a roof, and at a distance having greatly the
appearance of a long barn. The country within, at about the distance of three
miles, rises into lofty hills, that are crowned with wood, and terminate in
peaks, from which large rivers are precipitated into the sea. We saw no shoals,
but found the island skirted by a reef of rocks, through which there are
several openings into deep water. About three o'clock in the afternoon, we
brought to, abreast of a large bay, where there was an appearance of
anchorage. The boats were immediately sent to sound it, and while they were
thus employed, I observed a great number of canoes gather round them. I
suspected that the Indians had a design to attack them, and as I was very
desirous to prevent mischief, I made the signal for the boats to come aboard,
and at the same time, to intimidate the Indians, I fired a nine pounder over
their heads. As soon as the cutter began to stand toward the ship, the Indians
in their canoes, though they had been startled by the thunder of our nine
pounder, endeavored to cut her off. The boat, however, sailing faster than the
canoes could paddle, soon got clear of those that were about her; but some
others, that were full of men,

The officers who had been sent out with the boats, informed me that they had
sounded close to the reef, and found as great a depth of water as at the other
islands: however, as I was now on the weather side of the island, I had reason
to expect anchorage in running to leeward. I therefore took this course, but
finding breakers that ran off to a great distance from the south-end of the
island, I hauled the wind, and continued turning to windward all night, in
order to run down on the east side of the island.

At five o'clock in the morning, we made sail, shore,

The boats continued sounding till noon, when they returned with an account
that the ground was very clear; that it was at the depth of five fathom, within
a quarter of a mile of the shore, but that there was a very great surf where we
had seen the water. The officers told me, that the inhabitants swarmed upon the
beach, and that many of them swam off to the boat with fruit, and bamboos
filled with water. They said that they were very importunate with them to come
on shore, particularly the women, who came down to the beach, and stripping
themselves naked,

In the afternoon, I sent the boats again to the shore, with some barecas, or
small casks, which are filled at the head, and have a handle by which they are
carried, to endeavor to procure some water, of which we began to be in great
want. In the mean time, many of the canoes continued about the ship, but the
Indians had been guilty of so many thefts, that I would not suffer any more of
them to come on board.

At five in the evening, the boats returned with only two barecas of water,
which the natives had filled for them; and as a compensation for their trouble,
they thought fit to detain all the rest. Our people, who did not leave their
boat, tried every expedient they could think of to induce the Indians to return
their water vessels, but without success; and the Indians, in their turn, were
very pressing for our people to come on shore, which they thought it prudent to
decline. There were many thousands of the inhabitants of both sexes, and a
great number of children on the beach, when our boats came away.

The next morning, See a description of this fruit in the Account of the Voyage
of the Endeavor.
, plantains, a fruit resembling an apple only better, fowls, and hogs, which we
purchased with beads, nails, knives, and other articles of the like kind, so
that we procured pork enough to serve the ship's company two days,

When the boats returned, they brought us only a few calibashes of water, for
the number of people on the beach was so great, that they would not venture to
land, though the young women repeated the allurements which they had practiced
the day before, with still more wanton, and, if possible, less equivocal
gestures. Fruit and provisions of various kinds were brought down and ranged
upon the beach, of which our people were also invited to partake, as an
additional inducement for them to leave the boat. They continued, however,
inexorable, and showing the Indians the barecas on board, made signs that they
should bring down those which had been detained the day before: to this the
Indians were inexorable in their turn, and our people therefore weighed their
grapplings, and sounded all round the place, to see whether the ship could come
in near enough to cover the waterers, in which case they might venture on
shore, in defiance of the whole island. When they put off, the women pelted
them with apples and bananas, shouting, and showing every mark of derision and
contempt that they could devise. They reported, that the ship might ride in
four fathom water, with sandy ground, at two cables' length from the shore, and
in five fathom water at three cables' length. The wind here blew right along
the shore, raising a great surf on the side of the vessel, and on the beach.

At daybreak, mast-head, and immediately bore away for it,

We now stood off, and the boats being sent to leeward, found that the reef ran
down to the westward about a mile and a half, and that beyond it there was a
very good harbor. The master, after having placed a boat at the end of the
reef, and furnished the longboat with anchor and hausers, and a guard to
defend her from an attack of the Indians,

The place where the ship struck appeared, upon farther examination, to be a
reef of sharp coral rock, with very unequal soundings, from six fathom to two;
and it happened unfortunately to lie between the two boats that were placed as
a direction to the ship, the weathermost boat having 12 fathom, and the
leewardmost nine. The wind freshened almost as soon as we got off, and though
it soon became calm again, the surf ran so high, and broke with such violence
upon the rock, that if the ship had continued fast half an hour longer, she
must inevitably have been beaten to pieces. Upon examining her bottom, we could
not discover that she had received any damage, except that a small piece was
beaten off the bottom of the rudder. She did not appear to admit any water, but
the trussle-trees, at the head of all the masts, were broken short, which we
supposed to have happened while she was beating against the rock. Our boats
lost their grapplings upon the reef, but as we had reason to hope that the ship
was sound, they gave us very little concern. As soon as the ship was secured, I
sent the master, with all the boats manned and armed, to sound the upper part
of the bay, that if he found good anchorage we might warp the ship up within
the reef, and anchor her in safety. The weather was now very pleasant, a great
number of canoes were upon the reef, and the shore was crowded with people.

About four in the afternoon the master returned, and reported, that there was
every where good anchorage; I therefore determined to warp the ship up the bay
early in No. 21.

the morning, and in the mean time,

At six o'clock the next morning, stones, coming off of others.

Having now no reason to fear any further interruption, we warped the ship up
the harbor, and by noon, we were not more than half a mile from the upper part
of the bay,

Soon after the master had brought me this account, I sent Mr. Furneaux again,
with all the boats manned and armed, the marines being also put on board, with
orders to land opposite to our station, and secure himself, under cover of the
boats and the ship, in the clearest ground he could find. About two o'clock the
boats landed without any opposition, and Mr. Furneaux stuck up a staff, upon
which he hoisted a pendant, turned a turf, and took possession of the island in
his Majesty's name, in honor of whom he called it KING GEORGE THE THIRD's
ISLAND: he then went to the river, and tasted the water, which he found
excellent, and mixing some of it with rum, every man drank his Majesty's
health. While he was at the river, this ceremony,

At night, soon after it was dark, we heard the noise of many drums, with
conchs, and other wind instruments, and saw a multitude of lights all along the
coast. keeping close along the shore. their fortune in a second attack.

At two o'clock in the afternoon, they had left upon the beach for them,

The next morning I sent the boats on shore, word of all that he had said,
endeavored to convince him,

CHAP. VI. The Sick sent on Shore, and a regular Trade established with the
Natives; some Account of their Character and Manners, of their Visits on board
the Ship, and a Variety of Incidents that happened during this Intercourse.
MATTERS being thus happily settled, they all ran away:

As I foresaw that a private traffic would probably commence between such of
our people as were on shore, and the natives, and that if it was left to their
own caprice, perpetual quarrels and mischief would ensue, I ordered that all
matters of traffic should be transacted by the gunner, on behalf of both
parties, and I directed him to see that no injury was done to the natives,
either by violence or fraud, and by all possible means to attach the old man to
his interest. This service he performed with great diligence and fidelity, nor
did he neglect to complain of those who transgressed my orders, which was of
infinite advantage to all parties; for as I punished the first offenders with a
necessary severity, many irregularities, that would otherwise have produced the
most disagreeable consequences, were prevented: we were also indebted for many
advantages to the old man, whose caution kept our people perpetually upon their
guard, and soon brought back those who straggled from the party. The natives
would indeed sometimes pilfer, but by the terror of a gun, without using it, he
always found means to make them bring back what was stolen. A fellow had one
day the dexterity and address to cross the river unperceived,

At this time, the people on board were employed in caulking and painting the
weather-work, over-hauling the rigging, stowing the hold, and doing other
necessary business, but my disorder, which was a bilious cholic, increased so
much, that this day I was obliged to take to my bed; my First Lieutenant also
still continued very ill, and the Purser was incapable of his duty. The whole
command devolved upon Mr. Furneaux, the Second Lieutenant, to whom I gave
general directions, and recommended a particular attention to the people on
shore. I also ordered that fruit and fresh provisions should be served to the
ship's company as long as they could be procured, and that the boats should
never be absent from the ship after sunset.

Sunday the 28th was marked by no incident;

While the gunner was trafficking for provisions on shore, we sometimes hauled
the seine, but we caught no fish; we also frequently crawled, but with no
better success: the disappointment, however, was not felt, for the produce of
the island enabled our people to "fare sumptuously every day."

All matters continued in the same situation till the 2d of July, when our old
man being absent, serve most of the messes, reserving plenty for the sick and
convalescent.

On the 3d,

On Sunday the 5th,

While our people were on shore, several young women were permitted to cross
the river, who, though they were not averse to the granting of personal
favors, knew the value of them too well not to stipulate for a consideration:

On Tuesday the 7th, that refreshments might there be bought at the original
price;

The commerce which our men had found means to establish with the women of the
island, rendered them much less obedient to the orders that had been given for
the regulation of their conduct on shore, than they were at first. I found it
necessary therefore, to read the articles of war, and I punished James Proctor,
the corporal of marines, who had not only quitted his station, and insulted the
officer, but struck the Master at Arms such a blow as brought him to the ground.

The next day,

From this time, our market was very ill supplied,

On Saturday the 11th, grace,

The next morning I went on shore for the first time, No. 22.

roof being open. As soon as we entered the house, little trouble as it would
have cost me to have lifted over a child if I had been well.

The next morning I sent her by the gunner,

On the 14th, bitterly:

The next morning, I sent the Second Lieutenant, but did not seem willing to
part with any of the provisions which our people were most desirous to
purchase:

On Thursday the 16th, the First Lieutenant was not yet recovered,

Accordingly the next morning she came down to the beach, and soon after a
great number of people,

In the afternoon of the next day,

The next morning,

On the 20th, we continued to trade with good success, the gauntlet thrice
round the deck:

On the 21st, upon which she burst into tears, and it was not without great
difficulty that she was pacified.

The next morning,

On the 23d, we had very heavy rain,

The next day, I sent the old man,

In the morning of the 25th,

Hours. Min. Seconds. The immersion began, by true time, at 6 51 50 The
emersion, by true time, was at 8 1 0 The duration of the eclipse was 1 9 10

The latitude of the point, on which the observation was made, was 17 30 S. the
sun's declination was 19 40 N. and the variation of the needle 5 36 E.

After the observation was taken, I went to the queen's house, and showed her
the telescope, which was a reflector. After she had admired its structure, I
endeavored to make her comprehend its use, and fixing it so as to command
several distant objects, with which she was well acquainted, but which could
not be distinguished with the naked eye, I made her look through it. As soon as
the saw them, she started back with astonishment, and directing her eye as the
glass was pointed, stood some time motionless and silent; she then looked
through the glass again, and again sought in vain, with the naked eye, for the
objects which it discovered. As they by turns vanished and re-appeared, her
countenance and gestures expressed a mixture of wonder and delight which no
language can describe.

In the evening our people returned from their excursion, and came down to the
beach, upon which I put the queen and her attendants into the boats, and sent
them on shore. As she was going over the ship's side, she asked, by signs,
whether I still persisted in my resolution of leaving the island at the time I
had fixed; and when I made her understand that it was impossible I should stay
longer, she expressed her regret by a flood of tears, which for a while took
away her speech. As soon as her passion subsided, she told me that she would
come on board again the next day; and thus we parted.

CHAP. VII. An Account of an Expedition to discover the inland Part of the
Country, and our other Transactions, till we quitted the Island to continue our
Voyage.
AFTER the mate came on board,

"At four o'clock in the morning, of Saturday the 25th of June, I landed, with
four midshipmen, a sergeant and twelve marines, and twenty-four seamen, all
armed, besides four who carried hatchets and other articles of traffic, and
four who were loaded with ammunition and provisions, the rest being left with
the boat: every man had his day's allowance of brandy, and the hatchet men two
small kegs, to give out when I should think proper.

"As soon as I got on shore, I called upon our old man, and took him with us:
we then followed the course of the river in two parties, one marching on each
side. For the first two miles it flowed through a valley of considerable width,
in which were many habitations, with gardens walled in, and abundance of hogs,
poultry, and fruit; the soil here seemed to be a rich fat earth, and was of a
blackish color. After this the valley became very narrow, and the ground
rising abruptly on one side of the river, we were all obliged to march on the
other. Where the stream was precipitated from the hills, channels had been cut
to lead the water into gardens and plantations of fruit trees: in these gardens
we found an herb which had never been brought down to the waterside, and which
we perceived the inhabitants eat raw. Calleloor, though its leaf was very
different. The ground was fenced off so as to make a very pretty appearance;
the bread-fruit and apple trees were planted in rows on the declivity of the
hills, and the cocoa nut and plantain, which require more moisture, on the
level ground: under the trees, both on the sides and at the foot of the hills,
there was very good grass, but no underwood. As we advanced, the windings of
the stream became innumerable, the hills on each side swelled into mountains,
and vast crags every where projected over our heads. Traveling now became
difficult, and when we had proceeded about four miles, the road for the last
mile having been very bad, we sat down to rest ourselves, and take the
refreshment of our breakfast; we ranged ourselves upon the ground under a large
apple tree, in a very pleasant spot; but just as we were about to begin our
repast, we were suddenly alarmed by a confused sound of many voices, and a
great shouting, and presently afterward saw a multitude of men, women, and
children upon the hill above us; our old man seeing us rise hastily, and look
to our arms, beckoned to us to sit still, and immediately went up to the people
that had surprised us. As soon as he joined them they were silent, and soon
after disappeared; in a short time, however, they returned, and brought with
them a large hog ready roasted, with plenty of bread-fruit, yams, and other
refreshments, which they gave to the old man, who distributed them among our
people. In return for this treat, I gave them some nails, buttons, and other
things, with which they were greatly delighted. After this we proceeded up the
valley as far as we could, searching all the runs of water, and all the places
where water had run, for appearances of metal or ore, climbing we flattered
ourselves that from the top we should command the whole island, what
difficulties we might meet with before we got back to the ship,

About 10 o'clock, the Gunner sent off near thirty hogs, enough to go with us;

At break of day, on Monday the 27th, people made it fast.

At noon, the harbor from which we sailed bore S. E. E. distant about twelve
miles. It lies in latitude 17 30 S. longitude 150 W. and I gave it the name of
Port Royal Harbor.

CHAP. VIII. A more particular Account of the Inhabitants of Otaheite, and of
their domestic Life, Manners, and Arts.
HAVING lain off this if island from the 24th of June to the 27th of July,

The inhabitants of this island are a stout, well-made, active, and comely
people. The stature of the men, in general, is from five feet seven to five
feet ten inches, though a few individuals are taller, and a few shorter; that
of the women from five feet to five feet six. The complexion of the men is
tawney, but those that go upon the water are much redder than those who live on
shore. Their hair in general is black, but in some it is brown, in some red,
and in others flaxen, which is remarkable, because the hair of all other
natives of Asia, Africa, and America, is black, without a single exception. It
is generally tied up, either in one bunch, in the middle of the head, or in
two, one on each side, but some wear it loose, and it then curls very strongly:
in the children of both sexes it is generally flaxen. They have no combs, yet
their hair is very neatly dressed, and those who had combs from us, made good
use of them. It is a universal custom to anoint the head with cocoa-nut oil, in
which a root has been scraped that smells something like roses. The women are
all handsome, and some of them extremely beautiful. Chastity does not seem to
be considered as a virtue among them, for they not only readily and openly
trafficked with our people for personal favors, but were brought down by their
fathers and brothers for that purpose: they were, however, conscious of the
value of beauty, and the size of the nail that was demanded for the enjoyment
of the lady, was always in proportion to her charms. The men who came down to
the side of the river, at the same time that they presented the girl, showed a
stick of the size of the nail that was to be her price, and if our people
agreed, she was sent over to them, for the men were not permitted to cross the
river. This commerce was carried on a considerable time before the officers
discovered it, for while some straggled a little way to receive the lady, the
others kept a look-out. When I was acquainted with it, I no longer wondered
that the ship was in danger of being pulled to pieces for the nails and iron
that held her together, which I had before puzzled myself to account for in
vain, the whole ship's company having daily as much fresh provision and fruit
as they could eat. Both men and women are not only decently but gracefully
clothed, in a kind of white cloth, that is made of the bark of a shrub, and
very much resembles coarse China paper. Their dress consists of two pieces of
this cloth: one of them, a hole having been made in the middle to put the head
through, hangs down from the shoulders to the mid-leg before and behind;
another piece, which is between four and five yards long, and about one yard
broad, they wrap round the body in a very easy manner. This cloth is not woven,
but is made, like paper, of the macerated fibers of an inner bark, spread out
and beaten together. Their ornaments are feathers, flowers, pieces of shells,
and pearls the pearls are worn chiefly by the women, from whom I purchased
about two dozen of a small size: they were of a good color, but were all
spoiled by boring. Mr. Furneaux saw several in his excursion to the west, but
he could purchase none with any thing he had to offer. I observed, that it was
here a universal custom both for men and women to have the hinder part of their
thighs and loins marked very thick with black lines in various forms. These
marks were made by striking the teeth of an instrument, somewhat like a comb,
just through the skin, and rubbing into the punctures a kind of paste made of
foot and oil, which leaves an indelible stain. The boys and girls under twelve
years of age, are not marked; but we observed a few of the men whose legs were
marked in chequers by the same method, and they appeared to be persons of
superior rank and authority. One of the principal attendants upon the queen,
appeared much more disposed to imitate our manners than the rest; and our
people, with whom he soon became a favorite, distinguished him by the name of
Jonathan. This man, Mr. Furneaux clothed completely in an English dress, and it
sat very easy upon him. Our officers were always carried on shore, it being
shoal water where we landed, and Jonathan, assuming new state with his new
finery, made some of his people carry him on shore in the same manner. He very
soon attempted to use a knife and fork at his meals, but at first, when he had
stuck a morsel upon his fork, and tried to feed himself with that instrument,
he could not guide it, but by the mere force of habit his hand came to his
mouth, and the victuals at the end of the fork went away to his car.

Their food consists of pork, poultry, dog's flesh, and fish, bread-fruit,
bananas, plantains, yams, apples, and a four fruit which, though not pleasant
by itself, gives an agreeable relish to roasted bread-fruit, with which it is
frequently beaten up. They have abundance of rats, but, as far as I could
discover, these make no part of their food. The river affords them good mullet,
but they are neither large nor in plenty. They find conchs, muscles, and other
shellfish on the reef, which they gather at low water, and eat raw with
bread-fruit before they come on shore. They have also very fine cray-fish, and
they catch with lines, and hooks of mother of pearl, at a little distance from
the shore, parrotfish, groopers, and many other sorts, of which they are so
fond that we could seldom prevail upon them to sell us a few at any price. They
have also nets of an enormous size, with very small meshes, and with these they
catch abundance of small fish about the size of sardines; but while they were
using both nets and lines with great success, we could not catch a single fish
with either. We procured some of their hooks and lines, but for want of their
art we were still disappointed.

The manner in which they dress their food is this: they kindle a fire by
rubbing the end of one piece of dry wood upon the side of another, in the same
manner as our carpenters whet a chissel; then they dig a pit about half a foot
deep, and two or three yards in circumference: they pave the bottom with large
pebble stones, which they lay down very smooth and even, and then kindle a fire
in it with dry wood, leaves, and the husks of the cocoa-nut. When the stones
are sufficiently heated, they take out the embers, and rake up the ashes on
every side; then they cover the stones with a layer of green cocoa-nut-tree
leaves, and wrap up the animal that is to be dressed in the leaves of the
plantain; if it is a small hog they wrap it up whole, if a large one they split
it. When it is placed in the pit, they cover it with the hot embers, and lay
upon them bread-fruit and yams, which are also wrapped up in the leaves of the
plantain; over these they spread the remainder of the embers, mixing among them
some of the hot stones, with more cocoa-nut-tree leaves upon them, and then
close all up with earth, so that the heat is kept in. After a time proportioned
to the size of what is dressing, the oven is opened, and the meat taken out,
which is tender, full of gravy, and, in my opinion, better in every respect
than when it is dressed any other way. Excepting the fruit, they have no sauce
but salt water, nor any knives but shells, with which they carve very
dexterously, always cutting from them. It is impossible to describe the
astonishment they expressed when they saw the Gunner, who, while he kept the
market, used to dine on shore, dress his pork and poultry by boiling them in a
pot, having, as I have before observed, no vessel that would bear the fire,
they had no idea of hot water or its effects: but from the time that the old
man was in possession of an iron pot, he and his friends eat boiled meat every
day. The iron pots which I afterward gave to the queen, and several of the
Chiefs, were also in constant use, and brought as many people together, as a
monster or a puppet-show in a country fair. They appeared to have no liquor for
drinking but water, and to be happily ignorant of the art of fermenting the
juice of any vegetable, so as to give it an intoxicating quality: they have, as
has been already observed, the sugarcane, but they seemed to make no other use
of it than to chew, which they do not do habitually, but only break a piece off
when they happen to pass by a place where it is growing.

Of their domestic life and amusements, we had not sufficient opportunity to
obtain much knowledge, but they appear sometimes to have wars with each other,
not only from their weapons, but the scars with which many of them were marked,
and some of which appeared to be the remains of very considerable wounds, made
with stones, bludgeons, or some other obtuse weapon: by these scars also they
appear to be no inconsiderable proficients in surgery, of which indeed we
happened to have more direct evidence. One of our seamen, when he was on shore,
run a large splinter into his foot, and the Surgeon being on board, one of his
comrades endeavored to take it out with a penknife; but after putting the poor
fellow to a good deal of pain, was obliged to give it over. Our good old
Indian, who happened to be present, then called over one of his countrymen that
was standing on the opposite side of the river, who having looked at the
seaman's foot, went immediately down to the beach, and taking up a shell, broke
it to a point with his teeth; with this instrument, in little more than a
minute, he laid open the place, and extracted the splinter; in the mean time
the old man, who, as soon as he had called the other over, went a little way
into the wood, returned with some gum, which he applied to the wound upon a
piece of the cloth that was wrapped round him, and in two days time it was
perfectly healed. We afterward learned that this gum was produced by the apple
tree, and our Surgeon procured some of it, and used it as a vulnerary balsam
with great success.

The habitations of these happy people I have described already; and besides
these, we saw several sheds enclosed within a wall, on the outside of which
there were several uncouth figures of men, women, hogs, and dogs, carved on
posts, that were driven into the ground. Several of the natives were from time
to time seen to enter these places, with a slow pace and dejected countenance,
from which we conjectured that they were repositories of the dead. The area
within the walls of these places, was generally well paved with large round
stones, but it appeared not to be much trodden, for the grass every where grew
up between them. I endeavored, with particular attention, to discover whether
they had a religious worship among them, but never could find the least traces
of any.

The boats or canoes of these people, are of three different sorts. Some are
made out of a single tree, and carry from two to six men: these are used
chiefly for fishing, and we constantly saw many of them busy upon the reef:
some were constructed of planks, very dexterously sewed together: these were of
different sizes, and would carry from ten to forty men. Two of them were
generally lashed together, and two masts set up between them; if they were
single, they had an out-rigger on one side, and only one mast in the middle.
With these vessels they sail far beyond the sight of land, probably to other
islands, and bring home plantains, bananas, and yams, which seem also to be
more plenty upon other parts of this island, than that off which the ship lay.
A third sort seem to be intended principally for pleasure and show: they are
very large, but have no sail, and in shape resemble the gondolas of Venice: the
middle is covered with a large awning, and some of the people sit upon it, some
under it. None of these vessels came near the ship, except on the first and
second day after our arrival; but we saw, three or four times a week, a
procession of eight or ten of them passing at a distance, with streamers
flying, and a great number of small canoes attending them, while many hundreds
of people ran abreast of them along the shore. They generally rowed to the
outward point of a reef which lay about four miles to the westward of us, where
they stayed about an hour, and then returned. These processions, however, are
never made but in fine weather, and all the people on board are dressed; though
in the other canoes they have only a piece of cloth wrapped round their middle.
Those who rowed and steered were dressed in white; those who sat upon the
awning and under it in white and red, and two men who were mounted on the prow
of each vessel, were dressed in red only. We sometimes went out to observe them
in our boats, and though we were never nearer than a mile, we saw them with our
glasses as distinctly as if we had been upon the spot.

The plank of which these vessels are constructed, is made by splitting a tree,
with the grain, into as many thin pieces as they can. They first fell the tree
with a kind of hatchet, or adze, made of a tough greenish kind of stone, very
dexterously fitted into a handle; it is then cut into such lengths as are
required for the plank, one end of which is heated till it begins to crack, and
then with wedges of hard wood they split it down: some of these planks are two
feet broad, and from 15 to 20 feet long. The sides are smoothed with adzes of
the same materials and construction, but of a smaller size. Six or eight men
are sometimes at work upon the same plank together, and, as their tools
presently lose their edge, every man has by him a cocoa nut-shell filled with
water, and a flat stone, with which he sharpens his adze almost every minute.
These planks are generally brought to the thickness of about an inch, and are
afterward fitted to the boat with the same exactness that would be expected
from an expert joiner. To fasten these planks together, holes are bored with a
piece of bone that is fixed into a stick for that purpose, a use to which our
nails were afterward applied with great advantage, and through these holes a
kind of plaited cordage is passed, so as to hold the planks strongly together:
the seams are caulked with dried rushes, and the whole outside of the vessel is
paid with a gummy juice, which some of their trees produce in great plenty, and
which is a very good succedaneum for pitch.

The wood which they use for their large canoes, is that of the apple tree,
which grows very tall and strait. Several of them that we measured, were near
eight feet in the girth, and from 20 to 40 to the branches, with very little
diminution in the size. Our carpenter said, that in other respects it was not a
good wood for the purpose, being very light. The small canoes are nothing more
than the hollowed trunk of the bread-fruit tree, which is still more light and
spongy. The trunk of the bread-fruit tree is six feet in girth, and about 20
feet to the branches.

Their principal weapons are stones, thrown either with the hand or sling, and
bludgeons; for though they have bows and arrows, the arrows are only fit to
knock down a bird, none of them being pointed, but headed only with a round
stone.

I did not see one turtle all the while I lay off this island, but upon showing
some small ones which I brought from Queen Charlotte's Island, to the
inhabitants, they made signs that they had them of a much larger size. I very
much regretted my having lost our he-goat, which died soon after we left Saint
Iago, and that neither of our she-goats, of which we had two, were with kid. If
the he-goat had lived, I would have put them all on shore at this place, and I
would have left a she-goat here if either of them had been with kid; and I
doubt not, but that in a few years they would have stocked the island.

The climate here appears to be very good, and the island to be one of the most
healthy as well as delightful spots in the world. We saw no appearance of
disease among the inhabitants. The hills are covered with wood, and the valleys
with herbage; and the air in general is so pure, that, notwithstanding the
heat, our flesh meat kept very well two days, and our fish one. We met with no
frog, toad, scorpion, centipied, or serpent of any kind: and the only
troublesome insects that we saw were ants, of which there were but few.

The south-east part of the island seems to be better cultivated and inhabited
than where we lay, for we saw every day boats come round from thence laden with
plantains and other fruit, and we always found greater plenty, and a lower
price, soon after their arrival, than before.

The tide rises and falls very little, and being governed by the winds, is very
uncertain; though they generally blow from the E. to the S. S. E. and for the
most part a pleasant breeze.

The benefit that we received while we lay off this island, with respect to the
health of the ship's company, was beyond our most sanguine expectations, for we
had not now an invalid on board, except the two Lieutenants and myself, and we
were recovering, though still in a very feeble condition.

It is certain that none of our people contracted the venereal disease here,
and therefore, as they had free commerce with great numbers of the women, there
is the greatest probability that it was not then known in the country. It was,
however, found here by Captain Cook, in the Endeavor, and as no European
vessel is known to have visited this island before Captain Cook's arrival, but
the Dolphin, and the Boudeuse and Etoil, commanded by M. Bougainville, the
reproach of having contaminated with that dreadful pest, a race of happy
people, to whom its miseries had till then been unknown, must be due either to
him or to me, to England or to France; and I think myself happy to be able to
exculpate myself and my country beyond the possibility of doubt.

It is well known, that the Surgeon on board his Majesty's ships keeps a list
of the persons who are sick on board, specifying their diseases, and the times
when they came under his care, and when they were discharged. It happened that
I was once at the pay-table on board a ship, when several sailors objected to
the payment of the Surgeon, alleging, that although he had discharged them from
the list, and reported them to be cured, yet their cure was incomplete. From
this time, it has been my constant practice when the Surgeon reported a man to
be cured, who had been upon the sick list, to call the man before me, and ask
him whether the report was true: if he alleged that any symptoms of his
complaint remained, I continued him upon the list; if not, I required him, as a
confirmation of the Surgeon's report, to sign the book, which was always done
in my presence. A copy of the sick list on board the Dolphin, during this
voyage, signed by every man in my presence, when he was discharged well, in
confirmation of the Surgeon's report, written in my own hand, and confirmed by
my affidavit, I have deposited in the Admiralty; by which it appears, that the
last man on board the ship, in her voyage outward, who was upon the sick list
for the venereal disease, except one who was sent to England in the Store ship,
was discharged cured, and signed the book on the 27th of December 1766, near
six months before our arrival at Otaheite, which was on the 19th of June 1767;
and that the first man who was upon the list for that disease, in our return
home, was entered on the 26th of February 1768, six months after we left the
island, which was on the 26th of July 1767, so that the ship's company was
entirely free fourteen months within one day, the very middle of which time we
spent at Otaheite; and the man who was first entered as a venereal patient, on
our return home, was known to have contracted the disease at the Cape of Good
Hope, where we then lay.

Sir Charles Saunders Island Latitude 17-28 South Longitude 150-24 West of
London.
Osnaburgh Island Latitude 17-51 South Longitude 147. 00. West

Boscawens Island Latitude 15-50 South Long. 174-30.

view

Adml. Keppels Island Latitude 15-55. South Longitude 174-33 West of London.
view

Wallis's Island Latitude 13-18 South Longitude 176-20 West of London.
view

CHAP. IX. Passage from Otaheite to Tinian, with some Account of several other
Islands that were discovered in the South Seas.
HAVING made sail from King George the Third's Island,

At daylight, the next morning, we saw land,

On the 29th, the variation of the compass, by azimuth, by breakers.

In the afternoon, we saw land bearing W. by N. and stood for it. At five
o'clock, we saw breakers running a great way out to the southward, and soon
after, low land to the S. W. and breakers all about it in every direction.

We turned to windward all night, and as soon as it was light, crowded sail to
get round these shoals. At nine we got round them, and named them SCILLY
ISLANDS.

We continued to steer our course westward, till daybreak on the 13th of
August,

At two o'clock, being about two miles distant from Boscawen's Island, we saw
several of the inhabitants; but Keppel's Isle being to windward, and appearing
more likely to afford us anchorage, we hauled up for it. At six, it was not
more than a mile and an half distant, and, with our glasses,

At four o'clock the next morning,

Having received this account,

In consequence of this resolution, at noon I bore away, and passed Boscawen's
Island without visiting it. It is a high round island, abounding in wood, and
full of people; but Keppel's Isle is by far the largest and the best of the two.

Boscawen's Island lies in latitude 15 50 S. longitude 175 W. and Keppel's Isle
in latitude 15 55 S. longitude 175 3 W.

We continued a W. N. W. course till 10 o'clock in the morning of Sunday the
16th, map we saw a few huts,

The boats rowed close along the shore, and found it rocky, with trees growing
close down to the waterside. These trees were of different sorts, many of them
very large, but had no fruit: on the lee-side, however, there were a few
cocoa-nuts, but not a single habitation was to be seen. They discovered several
small rills of water, which, by clearing, might have been made to run in a
larger stream. Soon after they had got close to the shore, several canoes came
up to them, each having six or eight men on board. They appeared to be a
robust, active people, and were quite naked, except a kind of mat that was
wrapped round their middle. They were armed with large maces or clubs, such as
Hercules is represented with, two of which they sold to the Master for a nail
or two, and some trinkets. As our people had seen no animal, either bird or
beast, except seafowl, they were very desirous to learn of the natives whether
they had either, but could not make themselves understood. It appears that
during this conference, a design was formed to seize our cutter, for one of the
Indians suddenly laid hold of her painter, and hauled her upon the rocks. Our
people endeavored, in vain, to make them desist, till they fired a musket
cross the nose of the man that was most active in the mischief. No hurt was
done; but the fire and report so affrighted them, that they made off with great
precipitation. Both our boats then put off, but the water had fallen so
suddenly that they found it very difficult to get back to the ship; for when
they came into deep water they found the points of rocks standing up, and the
whole reef, except in one part, was now dry, and a great sea broke over it. The
Indians probably perceived their distress, for they turned back, and followed
them in their canoes all along the reef till they got to the breach,

About six in the evening, it being then dark, the boats returned, and the
Master told me, that all within the reef was rocky, but that in two or three
places, at about two cables' length without it, there was anchorage in 18, 14,
and 12 fathom, upon sand and coral. The breach in the reef he found to be about
60 fathom broad, and here, if pressed by necessity, he said a ship might anchor
or moor in 8 fathom; but that it would not be safe to moor with a greater
length than half a cable.

When I had hoisted the boats in, I ran down four miles to leeward, where we
lay till the morning; and then, finding that the current had set us out of
sight of the island, I made sail. The officers did me the honor to call this
island after my name.

As the latitudes and longitudes of all these islands are accurately laid down,
and plans of them delivered in to the Admiralty, it will be easy for any ship,
that shall hereafter navigate these seas, to find any of them, either to
refresh or to make farther discoveries of their produce.

I thought it very remarkable, that although we found no kind of metal in any
of these islands, yet the inhabitants of all of them, the moment they got a
piece of iron in their possession, began to sharpen it, but made no such
attempt on brass or copper.

We continued to steer N. westerly, and many birds were from time to time seen
about the ship till the 28th, WALLIS's ISLANDS.
map and was web-footed. We also saw several plantain leaves, and cocoa-nuts,
pass by the ship.

On Saturday the 29th,

On Thursday the 3d of September,

At eight o'clock, the islands which I judged to be two of the Piscadores, bore
from S. W. by W. to W. and to windward, from N. by E. to N. E. and had the
appearance of small flat keys. They were distant about three leagues; but many
others, much farther off, were in sight. The latitude of one of those islands
is 11 N. longitude 192 30 W.; and the other 11 20 N. longitude 192 58 W.

On the 7th, we saw a curlieu and a pewit,

On the 17th, we saw two gannets, the afternoon,

CHAP. XI. Some Account of the present State of the Island of Tinian, and our
Employment there; with what happened in the Run from thence to Batavia.
AS soon as the ship was secured, I sent the boats on shore to erect tents, and
bring off some refreshments; and about noon they returned, with some
cocoa-nuts, limes, and oranges.

In the evening, the tents being erected, I sent the Surgeon, and all the
invalids on shore, with two months provisions, of every kind, for forty men,
the smith's forge, and a chest of carpenter's tools. I then landed myself, with
the First Lieutenant, both of us being in a very sickly condition, taking with
us also a mate, and twelve men, to go up the country and hunt for cattle.

When we first came to an anchor,

At six in the evening,

Early the next morning,

In this place we got beef, pork, poultry, papaw apples, bread-fruit, limes,
oranges, and every refreshment that is mentioned in the account of Lord Anson's
voyage. The sick began to recover from the day they first went on shore: the
air, however, was so different here from what we found it in King George's
Island, that flesh meat, which there kept sweet two days, could here be
scarcely kept sweet one. There had been many cocoa-nut trees near the
landing-place, but they had been all wastefully cut down for the fruit, and
none being grown up in their stead, we were forced to go three miles into the
country before a single nut could be procured. The hunters also suffered
incredible fatigue, for they were frequently obliged to go ten or twelve miles
through one continued thicket, and the cattle were so wild that it was very
difficult to come near them, so that I was obliged to relieve one party by
another; and it being reported that cattle were more plenty at the North end of
the island, but that the hunters being quite exhausted with fatigue when they
got thither, were not able to kill them, much less to bring them down, I sent
Mr. Gore, with fourteen men, to establish themselves in that part of the
island, and ordered that a boat should go every morning, at daybreak, to bring
in what they should kill.

At break of day, on Friday the 16th,

While we lay at anchor in this place, we had many observations for the
latitude and longitude, from which we drew up the following table: Latitude of
the ship, as she lay at anchor 14 55 N. long. 214 15 W. Latitude of the
watering-place 14 59 N. Longitude of the body of Tinian 214 W. Longitude of
Tinian Road 214 8 W. Medium of longitude, observed at Tinian 214 7

We continued a westerly course, inclining somewhat to the North,

On the 23d, we had much thunder, lightning, and rain,

The next morning, we saw several ducks and shags,

On the 27th, the darkness, rain, and tempest continuing, which we found to be
20 50 N. and the ship appeared to be fifty minutes North of her reckoning.

The weather now became more moderate. At noon, on the 28th,

From this time, to the 3d of November,

The first shoal lies in latitude 11 8 N.; longitude, from Bashee Islands, 8 W.

The second shoal lies in latitude 10 46 N.; longitude of the N. E. end, from
Bashee Islands, 8 13 W.

We saw much foul ground to the S. and S. S. E. but had no bottom with 150
fathom. Before one, however, we saw shoal water on the larboard bow, and
standing from it, passed another ledge at two. At three, we saw a low sandy
point,

At seven in the morning, of Wednesday the 4th,

The latitudes and longitudes of these islands and shoals, appear by the
following table: Lat. N. Long. W. Sandy Isle 10 40 247 12 Small Key 10 37 247
16 Long Island 10 20 247 24 New Island 10 10 247 40 First Shoal 10 14 247 36
Second Shoal 10 4 247 45 Third Shoal 10 5 247 50

Soon after we saw another reef in latitude 10 15, longitude 248.

The next day, we found the ship,

We continued our course, often sounding, but finding no bottom. On the 7th,

We now altered our course; and the next morning,

On the 10th,

On the 16th,

The next morning, and lay by till we could see about us. The two islands
proved to be Pulo Tote, and Pulo Weste; and having made sail till one o'clock,
we saw the Seven Islands. We continued our course till two the next morning,

At six, the weather having cleared up, we saw a sail at anchor in the E. S.
E.; and at noon, we saw land in the W. N. W. which proved to be Pulo Taya, Pulo
Tote bearing S. 35 E. Pulo Weste S. 13 E. At six in the evening, we anchored in
fifteen fathom, with sandy ground; and observed a current running E. N. E. at
the rate of five fathom an hour.

At six in the morning, we weighed and made sail,

At six o'clock the next morning, the current being slack, becoming strong,

We were,

CHAP. XII. Transactions at Batavia, and an Account of the Passage from thence
to the Cape of Good Hope.
WE found here fourteen sail of Dutch East India ships,

I sent an officer on shore, to acquaint the Governor of our arrival, to obtain
his permission to purchase refreshments, and to tell him that I would salute
him, if he would engage to return an equal number of guns. The Governor readily
agreed; and at sunrise, on Tuesday the 1st of December,

On the 2d, I sent the boatswain and the carpenter, fit for our use they should
be bought.

Among other necessaries, we were in want of an anchor, having lost two, and of
three inch rope for rounding the cables; but the officers whom I had sent to
procure these articles, reported, that the price which had been demanded for
them was so exorbitant, that they had not agreed to give it. On Saturday the
5th,

Soon after I returned on board,

As I heard nothing more of the anchor and rope for which I had been in treaty,

On the 11th,

On Monday the 14th,

While we lay here, one of the seamen fell from the main yard into the barge,
which lay along side the ship. His body was dreadfully bruised, and many of his
bones were broken: it happened also, that in his fall he struck two other men,
feet water in a watch;

By the 10th of January,

On the 17th,

On the 24th,

On the 26th and 27th,

At six in the evening, of the 30th of January,

Our run from Prince's Island to the Cape was, by our reckoning, 89 degrees
longitude, which makes the longitude of the Cape 345 W.; but the longitude of
the Cape being, by observation, 342 4, it appeared that the ship was three
degrees to the Eastward of her reckoning.

CHAP. XIII. An Account of our Transactions at the Cape of Good Hope, and of
the Return of the Dolphin to England.
AS soon as the ship was at anchor, I sent an officer on shore, with the usual
compliments to the Governor, who received him with great civility, telling him
that we were welcome to all the refreshments and assistance that the Cape
afforded, and that he would return our salute with the same number of guns.

We found riding here a Dutch Commodore, with sixteen sail of Dutch East
Indiamen, a French East India ship, and the Admiral Watson, Captain Griffin, an
East India packet boat, for Bengal. We saluted the Governor with thirteen guns,
and he returned the same number; the Admiral Watson saluted us with eleven
guns, and we returned nine; the French ship afterward saluted us with nine
guns, and we returned seven.

Having got off some mutton for the ship's company, with plenty of greens, I
sent the Surgeon on shore to hire quarters for the sick, but he could procure
none for less than two shillings a day, and a stipulation to pay more, if any
of them should take the smallpox, which was then in almost every house, in
proportion to the malignity of the disease. The first expense being great, and
it appearing, upon enquiry, that many of our people had never had the
smallpox, so that the increase was likely to be considerable, besides the
danger, I requested the Governor's permission to erect a tent upon a spacious
plain, at about two miles distance from the town, called Green Point, and to
send my people on shore thither during the day, under the care of an officer,
to prevent their straggling. This permission the Governor immediately granted,
and gave orders that they should suffer no molestation.

In this place, therefore, I ordered tents to be erected, and the Surgeon and
his mate, with proper officers, to attend; at the same time strictly charging
that no man should be suffered to go into the town, and that no liquor should
be brought to the tents. All the sick, except two, left the ship early in the
morning, with their provisions and firing; and for those that were reduced to
great weakness, I ordered the Surgeon to procure such extraordinary provisions
as he should think proper, particularly milk, though it was sold at an
excessive price. About six in the evening, they returned on board, and seemed
to be greatly refreshed. At the same time, being extremely ill myself, I was
obliged to be put on shore, and carried about eight miles up the country, where
I continued all the time the ship lay here; and when she was ready to sail,
returned on board without having received the least benefit.

No time, however, was lost in refitting the vessel: the sails were all unbent,
the yards and top-masts struck, the forge was set up, the carpenters were
employed in caulking, the sail-makers in mending the sails, the cooper in
repairing the casks, the people in over-hauling the rigging, and the boats in
filling water.

By the 10th of February, the watch had orders to give such as brought
provisions of any kind, water sufficient to dress it, and a proper quantity
also to such as brought tea and coffee.

On the 25th,

On the 7th,

On the 13th,

At six o'clock in the evening, of Wednesday the 16th, and we returned the same
number.

By noon the next day, our water was completed,

On the 21st, in the evening,

On Monday the 28th, we crossed the equator,

On Wednesday, the 13th of April,

At five o'clock in the morning of Sunday the 24th,

No incident worth recording happened till about noon on the 11th of May, being
strongly against her, I detained her, in order to be sent to England.

At half an hour after five, on the 13th,

A TABLE OF THE LATITUDES and the LONGITUDES West of LONDON, with the Variation
of the Needle, at several Ports, and Situations at Sea, from Observations made
on board his Majesty's Ship the DOLPHIN; and her Nautical Reckoning during the
Voyage which she made round the World in the Years 1766, 1767, 1768, under the
Command of Captain SAMUEL WALLIS.
NAMES of PLACES. Time when. Latitude in. Longitude supposed. Longitude
observed by Dr. Masculine's Method. Variation. 1766. Lizard August 22. 50 0 N.
5 14 W. 21 0 W. Funchall Road, Madeira Sept. 8. 32 35 N. 18 0 W. 16 40 W. 14 10
W. Port Praja, St. Jaga Sept. 24. 14 53 N. 23 50 W. 8 20 W. Port Desire Dec. 8.
47 56 S. 67 20 W. 66 24 W. 23 15 E. Cape Virgin Mary Dec. 17. 52 24 S. 70 4 W.
69 6 W. 23 0 E. Point Possession Dec. 23. 52 30 S. 70 11 W. 69 50 W. 22 40.E.
Point Porpass Dec. 26. 53 8 S. 71 0 W. 71 30 W. 22 50 E. Port Famine Dec. 27.
53 43 S. 71 0 W. 71 32 W. 22 30 E. 1767. Cape Froward Jan. 19. 54 3 S. 22 40 E.
Cape Holland Jan. 20. 53 58 S. 22 40 E. Cape Gallant Jan. 23. 53 50 S. 22 40 E.
York Road Feb. 4. 53 40 S. 22 30 E. Cape Quod Feb.17. 53 33 S. 32 35 E. Cape
Notch March 4. 53 22 S. 23 0 E. Cape Upright March 18. 53 5 S. 22 40 E. Cape
Pillar April 11. 52 46 S. 76 0 W. 23 0 E. At Sea April 21. 42 30 S. 96 30 W. 95
46 W. 12 0 E. At Sea May 4. 28 12 S. 99 0 W. 96 30 W. 6 0 E. At Sea May 20. 21
0 S. 110 0 W. 106 47 W. 5 0 E. At Sea May 23. 20 20 S. 116 54 W. 112 6 W. 5 0
E. At Sea June 1. 20 38 S. 132 0 W. 127 45 W. 5 9 E. At Sea June 3. 19 30S. 132
30W. 129 50W. 5 40E. Whitsunday Island June 7. 19 26 S. 141 0 W. 137 56 W. 6 0
E. Queen Charlotte's Island June 8. 19 18 S. 141 4 W. 138 4 W. 6 20 E. Egmont
Island June 11. 19 20 S. 141 27 W. 138 30 W. 6 0 E. D. of Glocester's Island
June 12. 19 11 S. 143 8 W. 140 6 W. 7 10 E. D. of Cumberland's Island June 13.
19 18 S. 143 44 W. 140 34 W. 7 0 E. Prince William Henry's Isl. June 13. 19 0
S. 144 4 W. 141 6 W. 7 0 E. Osnaburgh Island June 17. 17 51 S. 150 27 W. 147 30
W. 6 0 E. King George IIId's Island S. E. End June 19. 17 48 S. 151 30 W. 149
15 W. 6 0 E. King George S. E. End IIId's Island N. W. End July 4. 17 30 S. 152
0 W. 150 0 W. 5 30 E. Duke of York's Island July 27. 17 28 S. 152 12 W. 150 16
W. 6 0 E. Sir C. Saunders's Island July 28. 17 28 S. 153 2 W. 151 4 W. 6 30 E.
Lord Howe's Island July 30. 16 46 S. 156 38 W. 154 13 W. 7 40 E. Scilly Island
July 31. 16 28 S. 157 22 W. 155 30 W. 8 0 E. Boscawen's Island August 13. 15 50
S. 177 20 W. 175 10 W. 9 0 E. Augustus Keppel's Island August 13. 15 53 S. 177
23 W. 175 13 W. 10 0 E. Wallis's Island August 17. 13 18 S. 180 0 W. 177 0 W.
10 0 E. Piscadores Islands South End Sept. 3. 11 0 N. 195 0 W. 192 30 W. 10 0
E. Piscadores Islands North End 11 20 N. 195 35 W. 193 0 W. 10 0 Tinian Sept.
30. 14 58 N. 215 40 W. 214 10 W. 6 20 E. At Sea Oct. 17. 16 10 N. 218 0 W. 216
25 W. 5 15 E. Grafton's Island Oct. 29. 21 4 N. 241 0 W. 239 0 W. 1 3 W. Pulo
Aroe Nov. 15. 2 28 N. 258 0 W. 255 0 W. 1 0 W. Lucipara Nov. 26. 4 10 S. 254 46
W. None. Batavia Dec. 1. 6 8 S. 254 30 W. 1 25 W. Prince's Island Dec. 16. 6 41
S. 256 0 W. 256 30 W. 1 0 W. 1768. At Sea Jan. 26. 34 24 S. 328 0 W. 323 30 W.
24 0 W. At Sea Jan. 27. 34 14 S. 324 0 W. 323 13 W. 24 0 W. Cape of Good Hope
Feb. 11. 34 0 S. 345 0 W. 342 0 W. 19 30 W. At Sea March 15. 16 44 S. 3 0 W. 2
0 W. 13 0 W. At Sea March 15. 16 36S. 2 0W. 2 5W. 12 50 W. St. Helena March 19.
15 57 S. 5 49 W. 5 40 W. 12 47 W. Ascension March 23. 7 58 S. 14 18 W. 14 4 W.
9 53 W. At Sea March 24. 7 28 S. 14 30 W. 14 38 W. 10 0 W. At Sea April 8. 15 4
N. 30 0 W. 34 30 W. 4 48 W. At Sea April 11. 21 28 N. 36 0 W. 36 37 W. 4 30 W.
At Sea April 21. 33 55 N. 32 0 W. 33 0 W. 11 34 W. At Sea April 23. 36 15 N. 30
0 W. 29 31 W. 14 30 W. At Sea May 10. 49 43 N. 6 0 W. 7 52 W. 22 30 W. At Sea
May 11. 48 48 N. 7 30 W. 8 19 W. St. Agnus's Light-house May 13. 49 58 N. 7 14
W. 7 8 W. 20 0 W.

AN ACCOUNT OF A VOYAGE round the WORLD, IN THE YEARS MDCCLXVI, MDCCLXVII,
MDCCLXVIII, and MDCCLXIX. By PHILIP CARTERET, Esquire, Commander of his
Majesty's Sloop the SWALLOW.

CHAP. I. The Run from Plymouth to Madeira, and from thence through the
Straight of Magellan.
[The longitude in this voyage is reckoned from London westward to 180, and
eastward afterward.]
SOON after I returned from a voyage round the world with the Honorable
Commodore Byron, which I knew by experience would be of the utmost importance,
if it was intended that I should make another voyage round the world; but I was
told that the vessel and her equipment were very fit for the service she was to
perform, and none of the requisites for which I applied were allowed me. I was
therefore confirmed in my opinion, that, if the Dolphin was to go round the
world, it could never be intended that I should go farther than Falkland's
Islands, where the Jason, a fine frigate, which was, like the Dolphin, sheathed
with copper, and amply equipped, would supply my place. I was however deficient
in junk, an article which is essentially necessary in every voyage, and for
this I applied when I got to Plymouth, but I was told that a quantity
sufficient for both the ships had been put on board the Dolphin.

On Friday the 22d of August,

While I lay at this place, not being yet acquainted with my destination, I
represented my want of junk, and the reply that had been made to my application
for a supply by the commissioner at Plymouth, in a letter to Captain Wallis,
who sent me five hundred weight. This quantity however was so inadequate to my
wants, that I was soon afterward reduced to the disagreeable necessity of
cutting off some of my cables to save my rigging.

On the 9th, very early in the morning, get a skinful of liquor,

We sailed again on the 12th,

I was now convinced that I had been sent upon a service to which my vessel and
her equipment were by no means equal,

We proceeded on our voyage without any remarkable event till we anchored off
Cape Virgin Mary, where we saw the Patagonians, of which I have given some
account in a letter to Dr. Matty, which was published in the sixtieth volume of
the Transactions of the Royal Society, and which it is not necessary here to
repeat, as it is in general the same as those which have been given by
Commodore Byron and Captain Wallis.

When we entered the Straight, I was ordered to keep ahead of the Dolphin and
the storeship, to pilot them through the shoals; but my ship worked so ill,
that we could but very seldom make her tack without the help of a boat to tow
her round: however, with much labor, and at no inconsiderable risk, we
anchored in Port Famine on Friday the 26th of December.

After many difficulties and dangers,

We continued therefore for some time to navigate the Straight together, and as
I had passed it before, I was ordered to keep ahead and lead the way, with
liberty to anchor and weigh when I thought proper; but perceiving that the bad
sailing of the Swallow would so much retard the Dolphin as probably to make her
lose the season for getting into high southern latitudes, and defeat the
intention of the voyage, I proposed to Captain Wallis, that he should lay the
Swallow up in some cove or bay, and that I should attend and assist him with
her boats till the Straight should be passed, which would probably be in much
less time than if he continued to be retarded by my ship, and I urged as an
additional advantage that he might complete not only his stock of provisions
and stores, but his company, out of her, and then send her back to England,
with such of his crew as sickness had rendered unfit for the voyage: proposing
also, that in my way home, I would examine the eastern cost of Patagonia, or
attempt such other discoveries as he should think proper. If this was not
approved, and my knowledge of the South Seas was thought necessary to the
success of the voyage, I offered to go with him on board the Dolphin, and give
up the Swallow to be commanded by his First Lieutenant, whose duty I would
perform during the rest of the voyage, or to make the voyage myself with only
the Dolphin, if he would take the Swallow back to Europe; but Captain Wallis
was still of opinion that the voyage should be prosecuted by the two ships
jointly, pursuant to the orders that had been given.

The Swallow was now become so foul, that with all the sails she could set she
could not make so much way as the Dolphin, April, when the western entrance of
the Straight was open,

At noon, to our unspeakable comfort,

The little bay where we were now at anchor, lies about three leagues E. by S.
from Cape Pillar: it is the first place which has any appearance of a bay
within that Cape, and bears S. by E. about four leagues from the island which
Sir John Narborough called Westminster Hall, from its resemblance to that
building in a distant view. The western point of this bay makes a very
remarkable appearance, being a perpendicular plane like the wall of a house.
There are three islands about two cables' length within its entrance, and
within those islands a very good harbor, with anchorage in between twenty-five
and thirty fathom, with a bottom of soft mud. We anchored without the islands,
the passage on each side of them being not more than one-fourth of a cable's
length wide. Our little bay is about two cables' length broad, the points
bearing east and west of each other: in the inner part there is from sixteen to
eighteen fathom, but where we lay it is deeper; we had one anchor in seventeen
fathom, and the other in forty-five, with great over-falls between them, and
rocks in several places. Here we rode out a very hard gale, and the ground
being extremely uneven, we expected our cables to be cut in two every minute,
yet when we weighed, to our great surprise, they did not appear to have been
rubbed in any part, though we found it very difficult to heave them clear of
the rocks. The land round this bay and harbor is all high, and as the current
sets continually into it, I doubt not but it has another communication with the
sea to the south of Cape Deseada. The Master said he went up it four miles in a
boat, and could not then be above four miles from the Western Ocean, yet I
still saw a wide entrance to the S. W. The landing is every where good, there
is plenty of wood and water, and muscles and wild geese in abundance.

From the north shore of the western end of the Straight of Magellan, which
lies in about latitude 52 S. to latitude 48, the land, which is the western
coast of Patagonia, runs nearly north and south, and consists wholly of broken
islands, among which are those that Sharp has laid down by the name of the Duke
of York's Islands; he has indeed placed them at a considerable distance from
the coast, but if there had been many islands in that situation, it is
impossible but that the Dolphin, the Tamar, or the Swallow, must have seen
them, as we ran near their supposed meridian, and so did the Dolphin and the
Tamar the last voyage. Till we came into this latitude, we had tolerable
weather, and little or no current in any direction, but when we came to the
northward of 48, we found a current setting strongly to the north, so that
probably we then opened the great bay, which is said to be ninety leagues deep.
We found here a vast swell from the N. W. and the winds generally blew from the
same quarter; yet we were set every day twelve or fifteen miles to the
northward of our account.

On Wednesday the 15th, the sea run more regularly from the S. W. and the wind
soon after coming from S. S. W. to S. S. E. we had by noon got a pretty good
offing,

CHAP. II. The Passage from Cape Pillar, at the Western Entrance of the
Straight of Magellan, to Masafuero; with some Account of that Island.
I TOOK my departure from Cape Pillar,

In the middle of the night of the 16th, violent,

From the time of our clearing the Straight, and during our passage along this
coast, we saw a great number of sea birds, particularly albatrosses, gannets,
sheerwaters, and a thick lumpish bird, about as big as a large pigeon, which
the sailors call a Cape of Good Hope hen: they are of a dark brown or blackish
color, and are therefore sometimes called the black gull: we saw also a great
many pintado birds, of nearly the same size, which are prettily spotted with
black and white, and constantly on the wing, though they frequently appear as
if they were walking upon the water, like the peterels, to which sailors have
given the name of Mother Carey's chickens; and we saw also many of these.

In the evening of Monday the 27th, it died away, and we had a dead calm for
six hours. as well as on several other occasions,

Notwithstanding this wind was fair, we durst not venture to put the ship
before it, for if in wearing, any of these enormous seas had broken on her
side, it would inevitably have carried away all before it. After some time,
however, it became more moderate, and we then got up our yards and made sail,
steering N. by W.; and now the men having been up all night, and being wet to
the skin, I ordered every one of them a dram.

By the next morning, the 2d of May,

On the 3d,

On the 5th, west, which at once threw all our sails aback,

The gale continued in this direction till eight in the morning of the 7th,
many times to let fly our top-sail sheets,

During all this time I hoisted no colors, having none but English on board,
which at this time I did not think it proper to show.

As I was disappointed of wood and water at this place, and of the
refreshments, of which, after the dangers and fatigue of our voyage through the
Straight, and our passage from it, to get some water,

The next morning, as soon as it was light,

We continued here till the 15th, at daybreak, and then,

At daybreak,

At four o'clock in the morning, the island bore west of us, rate: board; for
they were frequently stopped by high steep bluff points,

On the 18th, I sent the cutter for a load of water, evening,

The wind blew very hard the next morning, out; the weather became more
moderate, A View of the N. W. side of MAS-A-FUERA
view Mas-a-fuera bearing N.W. distant about 23 Leagues.
view was for a while obliterated by the joy of our escape from those that were
past.

From the 16th, when we were first driven from our anchoring ground, to this
time, we suffered an uninterrupted series of danger, fatigue, and misfortunes.
The ship worked and sailed very ill, the weather was dark and tempestuous, with
thunder, lightning, and rain, and the boats, which I was obliged to keep always
employed, even when we were under sail, to procure us water, were in continual
danger of being lost, as well by the hard gales which constantly blew, as by
the sudden gusts which frequently rushed upon us with a violence that is
scarcely to be conceived. This distress was the more severe as it was
unexpected, for I had experienced very different weather in these parts about
two years before with Commodore Byron. It has generally been thought, that upon
this coast the winds are constantly from the S. to the S. W. though Frazier
mentions his having had strong gales and high seas from the N. N. W. and N. W.
quarter, which was unhappily my case.

Having once more got my people and boats safe on board, I made sail from this
turbulent climate, and thought myself fortunate not to have left any thing
behind me except the wood, which our people had cut for firing.

The island of Masafuero lies in latitude 33 45 S., longitude 80 46 W. of
London. Its situation is west of Juan Fernandes, both being nearly in the same
latitude, and by the globe, it is distant about thirty-one leagues. It is very
high and mountainous, and at a distance appears like one hill or rock: it is of
a triangular form, and about seven or eight leagues in circumference. The south
part, which we saw when we first made the island, at the distance of three and
twenty leagues, is much the highest: on the north end there are several spots
of clear ground, which perhaps might admit of cultivation.

The author of the account of Lord Anson's voyage mentions only one part of
this island as affording anchorage, which is on the north side, and in deep
water, but we saw no part where there was not anchorage: on the west side in
particular there is anchorage at about a mile from the shore in twenty fathom,
and at about two miles and a half in forty, and forty-five fathom, with a fine
black sand at the bottom. This author also says, that "there is a reef of rocks
running off the eastern point of the island about two miles in length, which
may be seen by the sea's breaking over them;" but in this he is mistaken, there
is no reef of rocks, or shoal running off the eastern point, but there is a
reef of rocks and sand running off the western side, near the south end of it.
He is also mistaken as to the distance of this island from Juan Fernandes, and
its direction, for he says the distance is twenty-two leagues, and the
direction W. by S., but we found the distance nearly one-third more, and the
direction is due west, for, as I have before observed, the latitude of both
islands is nearly the same. The goats that he mentions we found upon it in the
same abundance, and equally easy to be caught.

On the south west point of the island there is a remarkable rock, with a hole
in it, which is a good mark to come to an anchor on the western side, where
there is the best bank of any about the place. About a mile and a half to the
northward of this hole, there is a low point of land, and from this point runs
the reef that has been just mentioned, in the direction of W. by S. to the
distance of about three quarters of a mile, where the sea continually breaks
upon it. To anchor, run in till the hole in the rock is shut in, about a
cable's length upon this low point of land, then bearing S. by E. E. and anchor
in twenty and twenty-two fathom, fine black sand and shells: there is anchorage
also at several places on the other sides of the island, particularly off the
north point, in fourteen and fifteen fathom, with fine sand.

There is plenty of wood and water all round the island, but they are not to be
procured without much difficulty, a great quantity of stones, and large
fragments of the rock have fallen from the high land all round the island, and
upon these there breaks such a surf that a boat cannot safely come within a
cable's length of the shore; there is therefore no landing here but by swimming
from the boat, and then mooring her without the rocks, nor is there any method
of getting off the wood and water but by hauling them to the boat with ropes:
there are however many places where it would be very easy to make a commodious
landing by building a wharf, which it would be worth while even for a single
ship to do if she was to continue any time at the island.

This part of Masafuero is a very good place for refreshment, especially in the
summer season: the goats have been mentioned already, and there is all round
the island such plenty of fish, that a boat may, with three hooks and lines,
catch as much as will serve an hundred people: among others we caught excellent
coal fish, cavallies, cod, hallibut, and crayfish. We took a king-fisher that
weighed eighty-seven pounds, and was five feet and an half long, and the sharks
were so ravenous, that when we were sounding one of them swallowed the lead, by
which we hauled him above water, but as he then disgorged it, we lost him. The
seals were so numerous, that I verily think if many thousands of them were
killed in a night, they would not be missed in the morning: we were obliged to
kill great numbers of them, as, when we walked the shore, they were continually
running against us, making at the same time a most horrible noise. These
animals yield excellent train oil, and their hearts and plucks are very good
eating, being in taste something like those of a hog, and their skins are
covered with the finest fur I ever saw of the kind. There are many birds here,
and among others some very large hawks. Of the pintado birds, our people, as I
have before observed, caught no less than seven hundred in one night. We had
not much opportunity to examine the place for vegetable productions, but we saw
several leaves of the mountain cabbage, which is a proof that the tree grows
here.

CHAP. III. The Passage from Masafuero to Queen Charlotte's IsIands; several
Mistakes corrected concerning Davis's Land, and an Account of some small
Islands, supposed to be the same that were seen by Quiros.
WHEN we took our departure from Masafuero, we had a great sea from the N. W.
with a swell of long billows from the southward, and the wind, which was from
the S. W. to the W. N. W. obliged me to stand to the northward, in hope of
getting the south east trade-wind, for the ship was so dull a sailer, that
there was no making her go without a strong wind in her favor. Having thus run
farther to the northward than at first I intended, and finding myself not far
from the parallel of latitude which has been assigned to two islands called
Saint Ambrose, and Saint Felix or Saint Paul, I thought I should perform an
acceptable service by examining if they were fit for shipping to refresh at,
especially as the Spaniards having fortified Juan Fernandes, they might be
found convenient for Great Britain, if she should hereafter be engaged in a
Spanish war. These islands are laid down in Green's charts, which were
published in the year 1753, from latitude 26 20, to 27 S. and from 1 to 2 W. of
Masafuero; I therefore hauled up with a design to keep in that latitude, but
soon afterward consulting Robertson's Elements of Navigation, I found the
island of Saint Ambrose there laid down in latitude 25 30 S., and 82 20
longitude west of London, and supposing that islands of so small an extent,
might be laid down with more exactness in this work than in the chart, I bore
away more northward for that latitude; the event, however, proved that I should
not have trusted him so far: I missed the islands, and as I saw great numbers
of birds and fish, which are certain indications of land not far off, there is
the greatest reason to conclude that I went to the northward of them. I am
sorry to say that upon a farther examination of Robertson's tables of latitudes
and longitudes, I found them erroneous in many particulars: this censure,
however, if I had not thought it necessary to prevent future mischief, should
have been suppressed.

Upon examining the account that is given by Wafer, who was Surgeon on board
Captain Davis's ship, I think it is probable that these two islands are the
land that Davis fell in with in his way to the southward from the Gallapago
islands, and that the land laid down in all the sea charts under the name of
Davis's Land, has no existence, notwithstanding what is said in the account of
Roggewein's voyage, which was made in 1722, of land that they called Eastern
Island, which some have imagined to be a confirmation of Davis's discovery, and
the same land to which his name has been given.

It is manifest from Wafer's narrative, that little credit is due to the
account kept on board Davis's ship, except with respect to the latitude, for he
acknowledges that they had like to have perished by their making an allowance
for the variation of the needle westward, instead of eastward: he tells us also
that they steered S. by E. E. from the Gallapagos, till they made land in
latitude 27 20 S. but it is evident that such a course would carry them not to
the westward but to the eastward of the Gallapagos, and set them at about the
distance of two hundred leagues from Capiapo, and not five hundred leagues as
he has alleged, for the variation here is not more than half a point to the
eastward now, and it must have been still less then, it having been increasing
to the eastward on all this coast. The course that Davis steered therefore, if
the distance between the islands of St. Ambrose and St. Felix, and the
Gallapagos, as laid down in all our sea charts, is right, must have brought him
within sight of St. Ambrose and St. Felix, when he had run the distance he
mentions. The truth is, that if there had been any such place as Davis's Land
in the situation which has been allotted to it in our sea charts, I must have
sailed over it, or at least have seen it, as will appear in the course of this
narrative.

I kept between the latitude 25 50 and 25 30, in search of the islands I
intended to examine, till I got five degrees to the westward of our departure,
and then seeing no land, and the birds having left us, I hauled more to the
southward, and got into latitude 27 20 S. where I continued till we got between
seventeen and eighteen degrees to the westward of our departure. In this
parallel we had light airs and soul winds, with a strong northerly current,
which made me conjecture that we were near this Davis's Land, for which we
looked out with great diligence, but a fair wind springing up again, we steered
west by south, which gradually brought us into the latitude of 28 S. so that it
is evident I must have sailed over this land, or at least have seen it if there
had been any such place. I afterward kept in the latitude of 28 for forty
degrees to the westward of my departure, or, according to my account, 121
degrees west of London, this being the highest south latitude the winds and
weather would permit me to keep, so that I must have gone to the southward of
the situation assigned to the supposed continent called Davis's Land in all our
charts.

We continued our search till Wednesday the 17th of June,

It was now the depth of winter in these parts, and we had hard gales and high
seas that frequently brought us under our courses and low sails: the winds were
also variable, and though we were near the tropic, the weather was dark, hazey,
and cold, with frequent thunder and lightning, sleet and rain. The sun was
above the horizon about ten hours in the four and twenty, but we frequently
passed many days together without seeing him; and the weather was so thick,
that when he was below the horizon the darkness was dreadful: the gloominess of
the weather was indeed not only a disagreeable but a most dangerous
circumstance, as we were often long without being able to make an observation,
and were, notwithstanding, obliged to carry all the sail we could spread, day
and night, our ship being so bad a sailer, and our voyage so long, to prevent
our perishing by hunger, which, with all its concomitant horrors, would
otherwise be inevitable.

A CHART AND VIEWS OF PITCAIRN^S ISLAND. Latitude 25.02. S. Long: 133.30 W.
map bearing N W distance 15 leagues.
view bearing N N W distance 6 or 7 leagues.
view bearing N W by N distance 4 or 5 leagues.
view bearing N N W distance 3 leagues.
view

We continued our course westward till the evening of Thursday the 2d of July,

While we were in the neighborhood of this island, the weather was extremely
tempestuous, with long rolling billows from the southward, larger and higher
than any I had seen before. The winds were variable, but blew chiefly from the
S. S. W. W. and W. N. W. We had very seldom a gale to the eastward, so that we
were prevented from keeping in a high south latitude, and were continually
driving to the northward.

On the 4th, and turbulent seas,

On Saturday the 11th, There is another island of this name, among those that
were discovered by Captain Wallis.
.

On the 12th, with great fury. We found no anchorage,

From this time, to the 16th, longitude 75 30 W. of our departure: the
variation was here 6 E.

On the 22d,

When I got into latitude 16 S. and not before, that,

From the latitude 14 S., longitude 163 46 W. we had a strong gale from the S.
E. which made a great sea after us, and from that time I did not observe the
long billows from the southward till we got into latitude 10 18 S., longitude
177 30 E. and then it returned from the S. W. and S. S. W. and we found a
current setting to the southward, although a current in the contrary direction
had attended us almost all the way from the Straight of Magellan; I conjectured
therefore that here the passage opened between New Zealand and New Holland. The
variation here was 11 14 E. On the 5th,

About this time we found our stock of log-lines nearly expended, though we had
already converted all our fishing lines to the same use. I was some time in
great perplexity how to supply this defect, but upon a very diligent enquiry
found that we had, by chance, a few fathom of thick untarred rope. This, which
in our situation was an inestimable treasure, I ordered to be untwisted; but as
the yarns were found to be too thick for our purpose, it became necessary to
pick them into oakham: and when this was done, the most difficult part of the
work remained; for this oakham could not be spun into yarn, till, by combing,
it was brought into hemp, its original state. This was not seamen's work, and
if it had, we should have been at a loss how to perform it for want of combs;
one difficulty therefore rose upon another, and it was necessary to make combs,
before we could try our skill in making hemp. Upon this trying occasion we were
again sensible of the danger to which we were exposed by the want of a forge:
necessity, however, the fruitful mother of invention, suggested an expedient.
The armourer was set to work to file nails down to a smooth point, with which
we produced a tolerable succedaneum for a comb; and one of the Quartermasters
was found sufficiently skilled in the use of this instrument to render the
oakham so smooth and even that we contrived to spin it into yarn, as fine as
our coarse implements would admit; and thus we made tolerable log-lines,
although we found it much more difficult than to make cordage of our old
cables, after they had been converted into junk, which was an expedient that we
had been obliged to practice long before. We had also long before used all our
sewing sail twine, and if, knowing that the quantity with which I had been
supplied was altogether inadequate to the wants of such a voyage, I had not
taken the whole quantity that had been put on board to repair the seine into my
own custody, this deficiency might have been fatal to us all.

CHAP. IV. An Account of the Discovery of Queen Charlotte's Islands, with a
Description of them and their Inhabitants, and of what happened at Egmont
Island.
THE scurvy still continued to make great progress among us, and those hands
that were not rendered useless by disease, were worn down by excessive labor;
our vessel, which at best was a dull sailer, had been long in so bad a
condition that she would not work; and on the 10th, QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S ISLANDS
map map watering-place, and speak to them,

Having considered this account, and finding that a swell, which came round the
eastern part of the bay, would render watering troublesome and inconvenient,
exclusive of the danger that might be apprehended from the natives, if they
should attack us from ambushes in the wood, I determined to try whether a
better situation could not be found.

The next morning, therefore, as soon as it was light, or upon shore,

Soon after I had dispatched the cutter on this expedition, I sent the longboat
with ten men on board well armed to the shore, who before eight o'clock brought
off a tun of water. About nine, I sent her off again, but soon after seeing
some of the natives advancing along the shore toward the place where the men
landed, I made the signal for them to return, not knowing to what number they
would be exposed, and having no boat to send off with assistance if they should
be attacked.

Our men had not long returned on board, when we saw three of the natives sit
down under the trees abreast of the ship. As they continued there gazing at us
till the afternoon, as soon as the cutter came in sight, not caring that both
the boats should be absent at the same time, I sent my Lieutenant in the
longboat, with a few beads, ribbons, and trinkets, to endeavor to establish
some kind of intercourse with them, and by their means with the rest of the
inhabitants; these men, however, before the boat could reach the shore, quitted
their station, and proceeded along the beach. As the trees would soon prevent
their being seen by our people who were making toward the land, we kept our
eyes fixed upon them from the ship, and very soon perceived that they were met
by three others. After some conversation, hospitality,

Such was the story of the Master, who,

As the expedition to find a better place for the ship had issued thus
unhappily, I determined to try what could be done, where we lay; the next day
therefore, was in tolerable health,

The next morning, fired several vollies of small arms into that part of the
wood from which the arrows came,

Hitherto, though I had been long ill of an inflammatory and bilious disorder,
I had been able to keep the deck; but this evening, the symptoms became so much
more threatening that I could keep up no longer, and I was for some time
afterward confined to my bed. The Master was dying of the wounds he received
in his quarrel with the Indians, the Lieutenant also was very ill, the Gunner
and thirty of my men incapable of duty, among whom were seven of the most
vigorous and healthy, The North side of the largest of Queen Charlotte's
Islands as it appeared running along shore to the Westward.
view The South side of a Vulcano, 6 Leagues North of the shore.
view map Byron's Harbor.
map is the best anchoring-place, bore from us S. by E. E. and the Volcano
Island bore N. W. W. and at the entrance, at least, After crossing the first
entrance, like all the rest of the people whom we had seen upon this island,
quite naked. His canoe was very small,

We found this place to be the western extremity of the island on the north
side, and that it lay in exactly the same latitude as the eastern extremity on
the same side. The distance between them is about fifty miles due east and
west, and a strong current sets westward along the shore.

I was still confined to my bed, and it was with infinite regret that I gave up
the hopes of obtaining refreshments at this place, especially as our people
told me they saw hogs and poultry in great plenty as we sailed along the shore,
with cocoa-nut trees, plantains, bananas, and a variety of other vegetable
productions, which would soon have restored to us the health and vigor we had
lost, by the fatigue and hardships of a long voyage; but no friendly
intercourse with the natives could now be expected, and I was not in a
situation to obtain what I wanted by force. I was myself dangerously ill, great
part of my crew, as I have already observed, was disabled, and the rest
dispirited by disappointment and vexation, and if the men had been all in
health and spirits, I had not officers to lead them on or direct them in any
enterprise, nor even to superintend the duties that were to be performed on
board the ship. These disadvantages, which prevented my obtaining refreshments
at this island, prevented me also from examining the rest that were near it.
Our little strength was every minute becoming less; I was not in a condition to
pursue the voyage to the southward, and was in danger of losing the monsoon, so
that no time was now to be lost; I therefore gave orders to steer northward,
Nova Britannia. I shall, however, give the best account I can of the appearance
and situation of the islands that I left behind me.

I gave the general name of QUEEN CHARLOTTE's ISLANDS to the whole cluster, as
well to those that I did not see distinctly, as to those that I did; and I gave
several of them particular names as I approached them.

To the southermost of the two, which when we first discovered land were right
ahead, I gave the name of LORD How Is ISLAND, ISLAND. Edgcomb's Island has a
fine pleasant appearance,and lies in latitude 11 10 S., longitude 165 14 E. The
latitude of Ourry's Island is 11 10 S., longitude 165 19 E. The other islands,
of which there were several, I did not particularly name.

The inhabitants of Egmont Island, whose persons have been described already,
are extremely nimble, vigorous, and active, and seem to be almost as well
qualified to live in the water as upon the land, for they were in and out of
their canoes almost every minute. The canoes that came out against us from the
west end of the island, were all like that which our people brought on board,
and might probably, upon occasion, carry about a dozen men, though three or
four manage them with amazing dexterity: we saw, however, others of a large
size upon the beach, with awnings or shades over them.

We got two of their bows, and a bundle of their arrows, from the canoe that
was taken with the wounded man; and with these weapons they do execution at an
incredible distance. One of them went through the boat's washboard, and
dangerously wounded a midshipman in the thigh. Their arrows were pointed with
flint, and we saw among them no appearance of any metal. The country in general
is woody and mountainous, with many valleys intermixed; several small rivers
flow from the interior part of the country into the sea, and there are many
harbors upon the coast. The variation here was about 11 15 E.

CHAP. V. Departure from Egmont Island, and Passage to Nova Britannia; with a
Description of several other IsIands, and their Inhabitants.
WE made sail from this island in the evening of Tuesday the 18th of August,

On the 20th, the name of CARTERET's ISLAND.

rom the time of our leaving Egmont Island, we had observed a current setting
strongly to the southward, and in the neighborhood of these islands we found
its force greatly increased: this determined me, when I sailed from Gower's
Island, to steer N. W. fearing we might otherwise fall in with the main land
too far to the southward; for if we had got into any gulf or deep bay, our
crew was so sickly, and our ship so bad, that it would have been impossible for
us to have got out again.

About eight o'clock in the morning of the 22d,

In the night of Monday the 24th,

One of these islands is of considerable extent,

We went to the northward of these islands, and steered W. by S. with a strong
south westerly current. At eleven o'clock at night, we fell in with another
island of a considerable extent, flat, green, and of a pleasant appearance; we
saw none of its inhabitants, but it appeared by the many fires which we saw in
the night to be well peopled. It lies in latitude 4 50 S. and bears west
fifteen leagues from the northermost of the Nine Islands, and we called it SIR
CHARLES HARDY's ISLAND.

At daybreak the next morning,

About ten o'clock in the morning of the 26th, current set us into a deep bay
or gulf,

On the 28th,

We anchored here only to wait till the boats could find a fit place for our
purpose, and several very good harbors being discovered not far distant, we
now endeavored to weigh anchor, but, with the united strength of our whole
company, were not able: this was an alarming proof of our debility, and with
heavy hearts we had recourse to an additional purchase; with this assistance,
and our utmost efforts, we got the anchor just clear of the bottom, but the
ship casting in shore, it almost immediately hooked again in foul ground. Our
task was now to begin again, and though all The Island of St. Jolm, bearing
N.N.W. 12 leagues.
view Cape St. George, from w. by N. 81 W. distant 3 leagues.
view Cape Orford, bearing S.W. distant 18 leagues.
view view Cape Buller, bearing from S.S.W. W. to N.W. by N. distant 10 or 12
leagues.
view Lord Sandwichs Island distant 2 leagues.
view The Isle of Man, bearing W.S.W. W. distant 6 leagues.
view The Mother and two Daughters, bearing S.W. distant 5 leagues.
view NOVA HIBERNIA
map hands that were able to move applied their utmost force,

From this place we sailed to a little cove about three or four miles distant,
to which we gave the name of ENGLISH COVE: here we anchored, and immediately
began to get wood and water, which we found in great plenty, besides ballast; I
also sent the boat out every day to different places with the seine, but though
there was plenty of fish, we were able to catch very little; a misfortune which
was probably owing in part to the clearness of the water, in part to the
rockiness of the beach, and perhaps in some degree also to our want of skill:
we plied this labor day and night, notwithstanding the want of success, and at
the same time had recourse to the hook and line, but to our great mortification
not a single fish would take the bait. We saw a few turtle, but they were so
shy that we could not catch one of them; here therefore we were condemned to
the curse of Tantalus, perpetually in the sight of what our appetites most
importunately craved, and perpetually disappointed in our attempts to reach it.
We got, however, from the rocks at low water, a few rock oysters, and cockles
of a very large size; and from the shore some cocoa-nuts, and the upper part of
the tree that bears them, which is called the cabbage: this cabbage is a white,
crisp, juicy substance, which, eaten raw, tastes somewhat like a chestnut, but
when boiled is superior to the best parsnip; we cut it small into the broth
that we made of our portable soup, which was afterward thickened with oatmeal,
and made a most comfortable mess: for each of these cabbages however we were
forced to cut down a tree, and it was with great regret that we destroyed, in
the parent stock, so much fruit, which perhaps is the most powerful
antiscorbutic in the world; but necessity has no law. This supply of fresh
vegetables, and especially the milk, or rather the water of the nut, recovered
our sick very fast. They also received great benefit and pleasure from the
fruit of a tall tree, that resembles a plum, and particularly that which in the
West Indies is called the Jamaica plum; our men gave it the same name; it has a
pleasant tartish taste, but is a little woody probably only for want of
culture: these plums were not plenty, so that having the two qualities of a
dainty, scarcity and excellence, it is no wonder that they were held in the
highest estimation.

The shore about this place is rocky, and the country high and mountainous, but
covered with trees of various kinds, some of which are of an enormous growth,
and probably would be useful for many purposes. Among others, we found the
nutmeg tree in great plenty, and I gathered a few of the nuts, but they were
not ripe: they did not indeed appear to be the best sort, but perhaps that is
owing partly to their growing wild, and partly to their being too much in the
shade of taller trees. The cocoa-nut tree is in great perfection, but does not
abound. Here are, I believe, all the different kinds of palm, with the
beetle-nut tree, various species of the aloe, canes, bamboos, and rattans, with
many trees, shrubs and plants altogether unknown to me; but no esculent
vegetable of any kind. The woods abound with pigeons, doves, rooks, parrots,
and a large bird with black plumage, that makes a noise somewhat like the
barking of a dog; with many others which I can neither name nor describe. Our
people saw no quadruped but two of a small size that they took for dogs; the
carpenter and another man got a transient glimpse of them in the woods as they
were cutting spars for the ship's use, and said that they were very wild, and
ran away the moment they saw them with great swiftness. We saw centipieds,
scorpions, and a few serpents of different kinds; but no inhabitants. We fell
in however with several deserted habitations, and by the shells that were
scattered about them, and seemed not long to have been taken out of the water,
and some sticks half burnt, the remains of a fire, there is reason to conclude
that the people had but just left the place when we arrived. If we may judge of
the people by that which had been their dwelling, they must stand low even in
the scale of savage life; for it was the most miserable hovel we had ever seen.

While we lay here, having cleared and lightened the ship, we heeled her so as
to come at her leak, which the carpenter stopped as well as he could; we found
the sheathing greatly decayed, and the bottom much eaten by the worms, but we
paid it as far as we could get at it with a mixture of hot pitch and tar
boiled together. The carpenter also cut down many spars, for studding-sail
booms, having but few left of those which he had brought from England.

English Cove lies N. E. N. three or four miles from Wallis's Island; there is
a small shoal on the starboard hand going in, which will be easily seen by the
sea's breaking upon it. The water ebbs and flows once in four and twenty hours;
the flood came in about nine or ten o'clock, and it was high water between
three and four in the afternoon, after which it ebbed all night, and was low
water about six in the morning. The water rises and falls between eight or nine
feet, sometimes more, sometimes less; but I doubt whether this fluctuation is
not rather the effect of the sea and land breeze, than of a regular tide. We
anchored here with our best bower in twenty-seven fathom water, with a bottom
of sand and mud; we veered into the cove a cable and a half from the anchor,
moored head and stern with the stream anchor, and steadied with hawsers on each
bow; the ship then lay in ten fathom, at the distance of a cable's length from
the shore at the bottom of the Cove, Wallis's Point bearing S. W. S. distant
about three or four miles. At this place there is plenty of excellent wood and
water, and good shingle ballast. The variation was 6 E.

On Monday the 7th of September, was of such importance to the sick,

To this place we gave the name of CARTERET's HARBOR; it is about W. N. W.
four leagues from English Cove, and formed by two islands and the main; the
largest, which is to the N. W. we called COCOA-NUT ISLAND, and the other, which
is to the S. E. we called LEIGH's ISLAND.

A CHART of Captn. Carteret's Discoveries at NEW BRITAIN, with part of Captn.
Cooke's Passage through ENDEAVOR STREIGHTS, and of Captn. Dampier's Tract and
Discoveries in 1699, and 1700, at NEW GUINEA and NEW BRITAIN.

Engraved by W Whitchurch Pleasant Row. Islington

NOTE. The shaded Parts are New Discoveries. The Coast with double Lines were
seen by D^mp^er.

map

CHAP. VI. Discovery of a Straight dividing the Land called Nova Britannia into
two Islands, with a Description of several small Islands that lie in the
Passage, and the Land on each Side, with the Inhabitants.
WHEN we got about four leagues off the land,

Before it was dark, we found this channel divided by a pretty large island
which I called the DUKE OF YORK's ISLAND, and some smaller islands that were
scattered about it. is level, and has a delightful appearance: east variation;
notwithstanding, formed of a single tree; been some time with us,

The peak upon Sandwich Island lies in latitude 2 53 S., longitude 149 17 E.
After the Indians had left us, we steered nearly west, and soon after saw a
point of land, which proved to be the south west extremity of New Ireland, to
which I gave the name of CAPE BYRON:

We steered westward all night, be a much better and shorter passage,

Queen Charlotte's Foreland, the south west part of New Hanover, lies in
latitude 2 29 S., longitude 148 27 E.; and the middle of Portland's Islands in
latitude 2 27 S., longitude 148 3 E. The length of this straight or channel,
from Cape Saint George to Cape Byron, the south west extremity of New Ireland,
is above eighty leagues; the distance from Cape Byron to Queen Charlotte's
Foreland is about twelve leagues, and from the Foreland to Portland's Islands
about eight leagues; so that the whole length of Saint George's Channel is
about one hundred leagues, or three hundred miles.

Though we cleared the Straight in the morning of Sunday the 13th of September,
we had no observation of the sun till the 15th, which I could not but greatly
regret, as it prevented my being so exact in my latitude and longitude as might
be expected. The description also of the country, its productions and people,
would have been much more full and circumstantial, if I had not been so much
infeebled and dispirited by sickness, as almost to sink under the duty that for
want of officers devolved upon me, being obliged, when I was scarcely able to
crawl, to keep watch and watch, and share other duties with my Lieutenant,

CHAP. VII. The Passage from Saint George's Channel to the Island of Mindanao,
with an Account of many Islands that were seen, and Incidents that happened by
the Way.
AS soon as we had cleared Saint George's Channel, we steered westward, and the
next day we discovered land bearing W. N. W. and hauled up for it; it proved to
be an island of considerable extent, and soon afterward we saw another to the
north east of it, but this appeared to be little more than a large rock above
water. As I had here strong currents, and for several days had not been able to
get an observation of the sun, I cannot so exactly ascertain the situation of
these islands as I might otherwise have done. As we proceeded to the westward,
we discovered more land, consisting of many islands lying to the southward of
the large one which we had first discovered. As the nights were now moonlight,
we kept on till eleven o'clock, and the Lieutenant, who was then officer of the
watch, finding that the course we were steering would carry us among them, and
not being willing to awaken me till it was my turn to watch, hauled off S. by
E. and S. S. E. I came upon deck about midnight, toward the ship: one of them,
with seven men on board, our rhetoric was to no effect,

These Indians were the same kind of people that we had seen before on the
coast of New Ireland, and at Egmont Island: they were of a very dark copper
color, nearly black, with woolly heads. They chew beetle-nut, and go quite
naked, except the rude ornaments of shells strung together, which they wear
round their legs and arms: they were also powdered Three Views of the ADMIRALTY
ISLES
views Two Islands seen 24th. September 1767.
view Seen the 26 of September 1767 Joseph Freewills Islands.
view An Island seen from the mast head and this View taken there September
29th. 1767 S 50. W.
view An Island seen from the mast head and this View taken there October 12th.
1767. Current Island N.E. E.
view Seen only from the mast head* where this View was taken October 15* 1767.
St. Andrews Islands.
view Th^^e Islands seen from our anchoring place in the Bay* at the South end
of Mindan^o.
view like our last visitors, and had, besides,

Having disengaged ourselves from this fierce and unfriendly people, we pursued
our course along the other islands, which are between twenty and thirty in
number, and of considerable extent; one in particular would alone make a large
kingdom. I called them the ADMIRALTY ISLANDS, articles of trade,

Having passed these islands, we continued our course W. by N. with a fine
eastern breeze, and smooth water. On the 16th in the morning,

On Saturday evening the 19th,

On the 24th, we saw two small islands to the south west,

On the 25th, we saw land ahead, Parram, and they made us understand, by signs,
that a ship like ours sometimes touched at their islands for refreshment. I
gave one of them three pieces of an old iron hoop, each about four inches long,
which threw him into an ecstasy little short of distraction: I could not but
sympathize in his joy, nor observe, without great pleasure, the changes of
countenance, and extravagance of gesture, by which it was expressed. All these
people indeed appeared to be more fond of iron than any we had seen before, and
I am sure, that for iron tools, we might have purchased every thing upon the
islands which we could have brought away. They are of the Indian copper color,
the first of that complexion that we had seen in these parts, A Dangerous Shoal
seen Septr. the 28, 1767.
map Joseph Freewills Islands.
map THE SOUTH END OF MINDANAO
map killed his countrymen when they could catch them out at sea.

I now steered N. W. by N. to get from under the sun, and had light winds at E.
S. E. with which almost any ship but the Swallow would have made good way, but
with every possible advantage she went at a heavy rate. We now found our
variation begin again to decrease, as will appear by the following table:
Longitude from Queen Charlotte's Fore-land. Variation. 40 S. 8 36 W. 4 40 E.
Upon the line. 9 40 W. 4 17 E. 30 N. 10 30 W. 3 10 E. 2 N. 11 40 W. 2 30 E. 2
50 N. 12 10 W. 2 E.

On the 28th,

In the evening, we discovered from the mast-head another island to the
southward of us: the east end of it seemed to rise in a peak, and had the
appearance of a sail, but we did not go near enough to see any thing of it from
the deck. I suppose its latitude to be about 2 50 N., and its longitude, east
of London, about 136 10 E.

We continued to have a current to the northward, till Monday the 5th of
October,

On Monday the 12th, I called SAINT ANDREW's ISLANDS:

CHAP. VIII. Some Account of the Coast of Mindanao, and the Islands near it, in
which several Mistakes of Dampier are corrected.
ON the 26th, we discovered land again, I determined to try what could be
procured in a bay which Dampier has described as lying on the south east part
of the island, bay, which we supposed had been dispatched from the town,

As I was now farther convinced that it was necessary to dispose of our little
force to the greatest advantage, we began the next day by getting the guns up
from the hold, before. after the Dutch fashion. After this interchange of
cravats, to a part of the beach which was clear of wood,

The next morning therefore,

I shall now give a more particular account of our navigating the sea that
washes the coasts of this island, the rather as Dampier's description is in
several particulars erroneous.

Having seen the north east part of the island on the twenty-sixth of October,
without certainly knowing whether it was Mindanao or Saint John's, we got
nearer to it the next day, and made what we knew to be Saint Augustina, the
south eastermost part of the island, which rises in little hummocks, that run
down to a low point at the water's edge; it bears N. 40 E. at the distance of
two and twenty leagues from a little island, which is distinguished from the
other islands that lie off the southermost point of Mindanao by a hill or
hummock, and which for that reason I called HUMMOCK ISLAND. All this land is
very high, one ridge of mountains rising behind another, so that at a great
distance it appears not like one island but several. After our first discovery
of the island, we kept turning along the east side from the northward to Cape
Saint Augustina, nearly S. by W. W. and N. by E. E. for about twenty leagues.
The wind was to the southward along the shore, and as we approached the land,
we stood in for an opening which had the appearance of a good bay, where we
intended to anchor; but we found that it was too deep for our purpose, and that
some shoals rendered the entrance of it dangerous. To this bay, which lies
about eight or ten leagues N. by E. from Cape Saint Augustina, the south east
extremity of the island, I gave the name of DISAPPOINTMENT BAY. When we were in
the offing standing in for this Bay, we observed a large hummock, which had the
appearance of an island, but which I believe to be a peninsula, joined by a low
isthmus to the main; this hummock formed the northermost part of the entrance,
and another high bluff point opposite to it formed the southermost part;
between these two points are the shoals that have been mentioned; and several
small islands, only one of which can be seen till they are approached very
near. On this part of the coast we saw no signs of inhabitants; the land is of
a stupendous height, with mountains piled upon mountains till the summits are
hidden in the clouds: in the offing therefore it is almost impossible to
estimate its distance, for what appear then to be small hillocks, just emerging
from the water, in comparison of the mountains that are seen over them, swell
into high hills as they are approached, and the distance is found to be thrice
as much as it was imagined; perhaps this will account for the land here being
so ill laid down, and in situations so very different as it appears to be in
all our English charts. We found here a strong current setting to the southward
along the shore, as the land trended. The high land that is to the north of
Saint Augustina, becomes gradually lower toward the Cape, a low flat point in
which it terminates, and off which, at a very little distance, lie two large
rocks. Its latitude is 6 15 N. and the longitude by account 127 20 E.

From this Cape the land trends away W. and W. by S. for six or seven leagues,
and then turns up to the N. W. making a very deep bay, the bottom of which, as
we crossed it from Saint Augustina to the high land on the other side, which is
not less than twelve leagues, we could not see. The coast on the farther side
of it, coming up from the bottom, trend first to the S. and S. S. W. and then
to the S. W. by W. toward the south extremity of the island.

Off this southern extremity, which Dampier calls the south east by mistake,
the south east being Saint Augustina, at the distance of five, six, and seven
leagues, lie ten or twelve islands, though Dampier says there are only two, and
that together they are about five leagues round. The islands that I saw could
not be contained in a circuit of less than fifteen leagues, and from the number
of boats that I saw among them I imagine they are well inhabited. The largest
of these lies to the S. W. of the others, and makes in a remarkable peak, so
that it is first seen in coming in with the land, and is indeed visible at a
very great distance. Its latitude I make 5 24 N. and its longitude by account
126 37 E. This island, which I called HUMMOCK ISLAND,

I passed between these Islands and the main, and found the passage good, the
current setting to the westward. Dampier has placed his Bay and Savannah four
leagues N. W. from the eastermost island, and there I sought it, as indeed I
did on all the S. E. part of the island till we came to the little creek which
ran up to the town.

All the southern part of Mindanao is extremely pleasant, with many spots where
the woods had been cleared for plantations, and fine lawns of a beautiful
verdure: this part also is well inhabited, as well as the neighboring islands.
Of the town I can give no account, as the weather was so thick that I could not
see it; neither could I sufficiently distinguish the land to set off the
points, at which I was not a little mortified.

When I came to open the land to the westward of the southermost point, I found
it trend from that point W. N. W. and N. W. by W. forming first a point at the
distance of about seven or eight leagues, and then a very deep bay running so
far in to the N. and N. E. that I could not see the bottom of it. The
westermost point of this bay is low, but the land soon rises again, and runs
along to the N. W. by W. which seems to be the direction of this coast, from
the southermost point of the island toward the city of Mindanao.

To the westward of this deep bay, the land is all flat, and in comparison of
the other parts of the island, but thinly wooded. Over this flat appears a peak
of stupendous height, which rises into the clouds like a tower. Between the
entrance of this bay and the south point of the island there is another very
high hill, the top of which has the funnel shape of a volcano, but I did not
perceive that it emitted either fire or smoke. It is possible that this deep
bay is that which Dampier mentions, and that it is misplaced by an error of the
press; for, if instead of saying it bore N. W. four leagues from the eastermost
of the islands, he had said it bore N. W. fourteen leagues from the westermost
of the islands, it would correspond well with his description, the bearings
being the same, and the land on the east side of it high, and low on the west:
he is also nearly right in the latitude of his islands, which he makes 5 10 N.;
for probably some parts of the southermost of them may lie in that latitude;
but as I did not go to the southward of them, this is only conjecture.

Between Hummock Island, which is the largest and westermost of them, and the
islands to the eastward of it, which are all flat and even, is a passage
running north and south, which appears to be clear. The north eastermost of
these islands is small, low, and flat, with a white sandy beach all round it,
and a great many trees in the middle. East, or north east of this island, there
are shoals and breakers; and I saw no other appearance of danger in these
parts. Neither did I see any of the islands which are mentioned by Dampier, and
laid down in all the charts, near Mindanao in the offing: perhaps they are at a
more remote distance than is commonly supposed; for without great attention
navigators will be much deceived in this particular by the height of the land,
as I have observed already. As I coasted this island, I found the current set
very strong to the southward along the shore, till I came to the south end of
it, where I found it run N. W. and N. W. by W. which is nearly as the land
trends. We had the winds commonly from S. W. to N. W. with light airs, frequent
rain, and unsettled weather.

We now bid farewell to Mindanao greatly disappointed in our hope of obtaining
refreshments, which at first the inhabitants so readily promised to furnish. We
suspected that there were Dutchmen, or at least Dutch partisans in the town;
and that, having discovered us to be English, they had dispatched an armed
party to prevent our having any intercourse with the natives, who arrived about
two hours after our friendly conference, and were the people that defied us
from the shore.

CHAP. IX. The Passage from Mindanao to the Island of Celebes, with a
particular Account of the Straight of Macassar, in which many Errors are
corrected.
AFTER leaving Mindanao, there are two rocks, which, though they are above
water,

On the 21st of November, or Stroomen Point, Vanloorif, and the other, on which
are placed two islands, Harigs; but these shoals and islands have certainly no
existence, as I turned through this part of the passage from side to side, and
sailed over the very spot where they are supposed to lie. In the same chart
seven small islands are also laid down within half a degree to the northward of
the line, and exactly in the middle of the narrowest part of this passage; but
neither have these islands any existence, except upon paper, though I believe
there may be some small islands close to the main land of Borneo: we thought we
had seen two, which we took to be those that are laid down in the charts off
Porto Tubo, but of this I am not certain. The southermost and narrowest part of
this passage is about eighteen or twenty leagues broad, with high lands on each
side. We continued laboring in it till the 27th, daily increased: the weather
was still unsettled, despondency was reflected from one countenance to another,
especially among those who were not able to come upon the deck. In this
deplorable situation we continued till the 10th,

On Saturday the 12th, Spera Mondes, and had the mortification to find that the
westerly monsoon was now set in,

The next day, Our latitude,

Between the Three Brothers, and the main of Celebes, there is another island,
much larger than either of them, called the Island of Tonikiky; but none of
them are inhabited, though there are a few huts belonging to fishermen upon
them all. The passage between the shoal and this island is clear and good, with
from ten to thirteen fathom, and a sandy bottom; but the soundings are to be
kept on the side of the island in twelve fathom, and never under ten: it is,
however, very difficult and dangerous for ships to fall in with the land this
way without a pilot on board, for there are many shoals and rocks under water.
I ran in by a chart in the English East India Pilot, which upon the whole I
found a good one, though the names of the islands, points, and bays, differ
very much from those by which they are now known. When we got near to the
Celebes shore, we had land and sea breezes, which obliged us to edge along the
coast, though our strength was so much reduced, that it was with the utmost
difficulty we could work the stream anchor.

In the evening of Tuesday the 15th,

I have been the more particular in my description of as much as I saw of this
Straight, because all the charts, both English and French, that I consulted,
are extremely deficient and erroneous,

CHAP. X. Transactions off Macassar, and the Passage thence to Bonthain.
THE same night that we came to an anchor,

The next morning, came by his express order to fetch it; and disease,

We passed all the remainder of this day, and all the night, in a state of
anxiety, not unmixed with indignation, that greatly aggravated our distress;
and very early the next morning, mounted eight carriage-guns,

Very soon after we had got under sail, a handsome vessel, with a band of
music, and several gentlemen on board, made up to us, and told us that they
were sent by the Governor, but could not come aboard if we did not drop our
anchor again; our anchor therefore was immediately dropped, and the gentlemen
came on board: they proved to be Mr. Blydenburg, the fiscal, Mr. Voll, the
shebander, an officer called the license master, or master of the port, and Mr.
Douglas the writer, who has been mentioned already. They expressed some
surprise at my having got under sail, and asked me what I intended to have
done; I told them that I intended, neither more nor less than to fulfill the
declarations I had made the day before; that justified by the common rights of
mankind, which were superior to every other law, I would, rather than have put
again to sea, where our destruction either by shipwreck, sickness, or famine,
was inevitable, have come up to their walls, and either have compelled them to
furnish the necessaries we wanted, or have run the ship on shore, since it was
better to perish at once in a just contest, than to suffer the lingering misery
of anticipating the perdition that we could not avoid. from this place, before
the return of the season, nothing better then bad salt meat,

The next morning the Shebander was sent to acquaint me, A Draught of BONTHAIN
BAY situated about 30 Leagues to the S E of MACASSAR in the ISLAND of CELEBES.
Lat. 5 34 So.
map also, that he had considerable property in England, and, said the
Shebander, he has also money in my hands, with which I will purchase such
things as you want from Macassar, and see that they are sent after you. Having
specified what these articles were to be, and agreed with him for the quantity
and the price, we parted.

The next day, in the afternoon, I received a letter,

Soon after, the Ensign M. le Cerf, the Secretary of the Council, and a pilot,
came on board to attend us to Bonthain. Le Cerf was to command the soldiers who
were on board the guard-boats; and the Secretary, as we afterward discovered,
was to be a check upon the resident, whose name was Swellingrabel. This
Gentleman's father died Second Governor at the Cape of Good Hope, where he
married an English lady of the name of Fothergill. Mr. Swellingrabel, the
Resident here, married the daughter of Cornelius Sinkclaar, who had been
Governor of Macassar, and died about two years ago in England, having come
hither to see some of his mother's relations.

CHAP. XI. Transactions at Bonthain, while the Vessel was waiting for a Wind to
carry her to Batavia, with some Account of the Place, the Town of Macassar, and
the adjacent Country.
THE next morning at daybreak we sailed,

I immediately waited upon the Resident, Mr. Swellingrabel, who spoke English
but very imperfectly, and having settled with him all matters relating to money
and provisions, a house was allotted me near the seaside, and close to a
little pallisadoed fort of eight guns, the only one in this place, which I
converted into an hospital, under the direction of the Surgeon; to this place I
immediately sent all the people who were thought incapable of recovering on
board, and reserved the rest as a security against accidents. As soon as our
people were on shore, a guard of thirty-six private men, two Sergeants, and two
Corporals, all under the command of Ensign Le Cerf, was set over them; and none
of them were suffered to go more than thirty yards from the hospital, nor were
any of the country people allowed to come near enough to sell them any thing;
so that our men got nothing of them, but through the hands of the Dutch
soldiers, who abused their power very shamefully. When they saw any of the
country people carrying what they thought our invalids would purchase, they
first took it away, and then asked the price: what was demanded signified
little, the soldier gave what he thought proper, which was seldom one fourth of
the value; and if the countryman ventured to express any discontent, he gave
him immediately an earnest of perfect satisfaction, by flourishing his
broad-sword over his head; this was always sufficient to silence complaint, and
send the sufferer quietly away; after which the soldier sold what he had thus
acquired for profit of sometimes more than a thousand per Cent. This behavior
was so cruel to the natives, and so injurious to us, that I ventured to
complain of it to the Resident, and the other two Gentlemen, Le Cerf and the
Secretary. The Resident, with becoming spirit, reprimanded the soldiers; but it
produced so little effect that I could not help entertaining suspicions that le
Cerf connived at these practices, and shared the advantages which they
produced. I suspected him also of selling arrack to my people, of which I
complained, but without redress, and I know that his slaves were employed to
buy things at the market which his wife afterward sold to us for more than
twice as much as they cost. The soldiers were indeed guilty of many other
irregularities: it was the duty of one of them by rotation to procure the day's
provision for the whole guard, a service which he constantly performed by going
into the country with his musket and a bag; nor was the honest providetor
always content with what the bag would contain, for one of them, without any
ceremony, drove down a young buffalo that belonged to some of the country
people, and his comrades not having wood at hand to dress it when it was
killed, supplied themselves by pulling down some of the pallisadoes of the
fort. When this was reported to me, I thought it so extraordinary that I went
on shore to see the breach, and found the poor black people repairing it.

On the 26th,

On the 28th a fleet of more than an hundred sail of the small country vessels,

No event worthy of notice happened till the 18th of January,

On Friday the 19th of February, Le Cerf, any body stirring in the ship.

The letter acquainted me, that a design had been formed by the Dutch, in
conjunction with the King of Bony, to cut us off: that the Dutch however were
not to appear in it: that the business was to be done by a son of the King of
Bony, who was, besides a gratuity from the Dutch, to receive the plunder of the
vessel for his reward, and who, with eight hundred men, was then at Bonthain
for that purpose: that the motive was jealousy of our forming a connection with
the Buggueses, and other people of the country, who were at enmity with the
Dutch and their allies, and driving them out of the island; or at least a
suspicion that, if we got back to England, some project of that kind might be
founded upon the intelligence we should give, no English man of war, as I have
already observed, having ever been known to have visited the island before.

This letter was a new subject of surprise and speculation.

The Resident; Mr. Swellingrabel, was at this time absent twenty miles up the
country upon the Company's business, but had told me, that he should certainly
return on the 1st of April, a day which I now expected with great impatience,
especially as an old drunken Sergeant was the most respectable person at the
fort. him, that we should, at all events,

On the 16th, in the morning, the Resident sent me word,

The season now approached in which navigation to the westward would be again
practicable, which gave us all great pleasure; especially as putrid diseases
had begun to make their appearance among us, and a putrid fever had carried off
one of our people.

On the 7th of May, able.

At daybreak on Sunday the 22d of May,

Bonthain is a large bay, where ships may lie in perfect security during both
the monsoons: the soundings are good and regular, and the bottom soft mud; nor
is there any danger coming in, but a ledge of rocks which are above water, and
are a good mark for anchoring. The highest land in sight here is called
Bonthain hill, and when a ship is in the offing at the distance of two or three
miles from the land, she should bring this hill north, or N. W. and then run in
with it and anchor. We lay right under it, at the distance of about a mile from
the shore. In this bay there are several small towns; that which is called
Bonthain lies in the north east part of the bay, and here is the small
pallisadoed fort that has been mentioned already, on which there are mounted
eight guns that carry a ball of about eight pounds weight: it is just
sufficient to keep the country people in subjection, and is intended for no
other purpose: it lies on the south side of a small river, and there is water
for a ship to come close to it. The Dutch Resident has the command of the
place, and of Bullocomba, another town which lies about twenty miles farther to
the eastward, where there is such another fort, and a few soldiers, who at the
proper season are employed in gathering the rice, which the people pay as a tax
to the Dutch.

Wood and water are to be procured here in great plenty; we cut our wood near
the river, under Bonthain hill: our water was procured partly from that river,
and partly from another; when from the other, our boat went above the fort with
the casks that were to be filled, where there is a good rolling way; but as the
river is small, and has a bar, the boat, after it is loaded, can come out only
at high water. There are several other small rivers in the bay, from which
water may be got upon occasion.

We procured plenty of fresh provisions all the while we lay here at a
reasonable rate: the beef is excellent; but it would be difficult to procure
enough of it for a squadron. Rice may be had in any quantity, so may fowls and
fruit: there are also abundance of wild hogs in the woods, which may be
purchased at a low price, as the natives, being Mahometans, never eat them.
Fish may be caught with the seine, and the natives, at times, supplied us with
turtle; for this, like pork, is a dainty which they never touch.

Celebes is the key of the Molucca, or spice islands, which, whoever is in
possession of it, must necessarily command: most of the ships that are bound to
them, or to Banda, touch here, and always go between this island and that of
Solayer. The bullocks here are the breed that have the bunch on the back,
besides which the island produces horses, buffaloes, goats, sheep, and deer.
The arrack and sugar that are consumed here are brought from Batavia.

The latitude of Bonthain hill is 5 30 S., longitude by account 117 53 E. The
variation of the compass while we were here was 1 16 W. The tides are very
irregular; commonly it is but once high water and once low water in four and
twenty hours, and there is seldom six feet difference between them.

CHAP. XII. Passage from Bonthain Bay, in the Island of Celebes, to Batavia;
Transactions there, and the Voyage round the Cape of Good Hope to England.
WHEN we left Bonthain Bay, we kept along the shore, damage:

In the afternoon of the 25th, its longitude west of Tonikaky 4 4,

In the afternoon of the 26th,

In the evening of Sunday the 29th,

On Thursday the 2d of June, in the afternoon of the next day,

We found here eleven large Dutch ships, besides several that were less, one
Spanish ship, a Portuguese snow, and several Chinese junks.

In the afternoon, I waited upon the Governor, and acquainted him with the
condition of the ship, desiring liberty to repair her defects, to which he
replied, that I must petition the Council.

On the 6th therefore, hoped they would allow me the use of such wharfs and
storehouses as should be necessary. Governor of that place, might be punished.
hope, and not written in the style of request, which had been invariably
adopted by all merchants upon the like occason: I replied, that no offense was
intended on my part, and that I had used the first words which occurred to me,
as proper to express my meaning. Thus we parted, and I heard nothing more of
them till the afternoon of the 9th, when the shebander, his authority for the
requisition he had made:

After this, I waited in a fruitless expectation till the 15th, and urged, in
more pressing terms,

On the 18th, the shebander came again to me,

After this I was supplied, for my money, with every thing I could desire, from
the Company's stores, without any further difficulty.

A pilot was ordered to attend me, and on the 22d,

Under the hands of these people the ship continued till Tuesday the 16th of
August. if her bottom was opened it might be found still worse than it was
thought, bawse, or master carpenter, would not consent, except I would certify
under my hand, that what should be done to the ship was not according to his
judgment but my own, which he said was necessary for his justification, if,
after such repairs only as I thought fit to direct had been made, the ship
should come short of her port. As I thought this a reasonable proposition, I
readily complied; but as I was now become answerable for the fate of the ship,
I had her carefully examined by my own carpenter and his mate, myself and
officers always attending. The but ends of the planks that joined to the stern
were so open, that a man's hand might be thrust in between; seven chain-plates
were broken and decayed, the iron work, in general, was in a very bad state;
several of the knees were loose, and some of them were broken.

While I remained here, two ships belonging to our India Company put into this
port, and we found, among other private ships from India, one called the Dudly,
from Bengal, which had proved so leaky that it was impossible to carry her
back. Application had been made to the Governor and Council for leave to careen
her, which had been granted; but as the wharfs had been kept in continual use,
she had been put off above four months. The Captain, not without reason, was
apprehensive that he might be kept here till the worms had eaten through the
bottom of his vessel, and knowing that I had received particular civilities
from Admiral Houting, applied to me to intercede for him, which I was very
happy to do with such success, that a wharf was immediately allotted her. M.
Houting is an old man, and an Admiral in the service of the States, with the
rank of Commander in Chief of their marine, and the ships belonging to the
Company in India. He received his first maritime knowledge on board an English
man of war, speaks English and French extremely well, and does honor to the
service both by his abilities and politeness: he was so obliging as to give me
a general invitation to his table, in consequence of which I was often with
him, and it is with pleasure that I take this opportunity of making a public
acknowledgment of the favors I received from him, and hearing this testimony
to his public and private merit: he was indeed the only officer belonging to
the Company from whom I received any civility, or with whom I had the least
communication; for I found them, in general, a reserved and supercilious set of
people. The Governor, although the servant of a republic, takes upon himself
more state, in some particulars, than any sovereign prince in Europe. Whenever
he goes abroad, he is attended by a party of horse guards, and two black men go
before his coach, in the manner of running footmen, each having a large cane in
his hand, with which they not only clear the way, but severely chastise all who
do not pay the homage that is expected from people of all ranks, as well those
belonging to the country as strangers. Almost every body in this place keeps a
carriage, which is drawn by two horses, and driven by a man upon a box, like
our chariots, but is open in front: whoever, in such a carriage, meets the
Governor, either in the town or upon the road, is expected not only to draw it
on one side, but to get out of it, and make a most respectful obeisance while
his Excellency's coach goes by; nor must any carriage that follows him drive
past on any account, but keep behind him, however pressing be the necessity for
haste. A very mortifying homage, of the same kind, is also exacted by the
members of the Council, called Edele Heeren, for whoever meets them is obliged
to stop his coach, and, though not to get out, to stand up in it, and make his
reverence: these Edele Heeren are preceded by one black man with a stick, nor
must any person presume to pass their carriage any more than that of the
Governor. These ceremonies are generally complied with by the Captains of
Indiamen, and other trading ships; but having the honor to bear his Majesty's
commission, I did not think myself at liberty to pay to a Dutch Governor, any
homage which is not paid to my own Sovereign: it is, however, constantly
required of the King's officers; and two or three days after I came hither, the
landlord of the hotel where I lodged told me, he had been ordered by the
shebander to let me know that my carriage, as well as others, must stop, if I
should meet the Governor or any of the Council; but I desired him to acquaint
the shebander that I could not consent to perform any such ceremony; and upon
his intimating somewhat about the black men with sticks, I told him that if any
insult should be offered me, I knew how to defend myself, and would take care
to be upon my guard; at the same time pointing to my pistols, which then
happened to lie upon the table: upon this he went away, and about three hours
afterward he returned, and told me he had orders from the Governor to acquaint
me that I might do as I pleased. The hotel at which I resided is licensed by
the Governor and Council, and all strangers are obliged to take up their abode
there, except officers in his Majesty's service, who are allowed private
lodgings, which, however, I did not choose.

At this place I continued between three and four months, and during all that
time I had the honor to see the Governor but twice: the first time was at my
arrival, when I waited upon him at one of his houses, a little way in the
country; the next was in town, as he was walking before his house there, when I
addressed him upon a particular occasion. Soon after the news of the Prince of
Orange's marriage arrived here, he gave a public entertainment, to which I had
the honor of being invited; but having heard that Commodore Tinker, upon a
like occasion, finding that he was to be placed below the gentlemen of the
Dutch Council, had abruptly left the room, and was followed by all the Captains
of his squadron; and being willing to avoid the disagreeable dilemma of either
sitting below the Council, or following the Commodore's example, I applied to
the Governor to know the station that would be allotted me, before I accepted
his invitation, and finding that I could not be permitted to take place of the
Council, I declined it. On both these occasions I spoke to his Excellency by an
English merchant, who acted as an interpreter. The first time he had not the
civility to offer me the least refreshment, nor did he the last time so much as
ask me to go into the house.

The defects of the ship were at length repaired, much to my satisfaction, and
I thought she might then safely proceed to Europe, though the Dutch carpenters
were of a different opinion. The proper season for sailing was not yet arrived,
and my worthy friend, Admiral Houting, represented that if I went to sea before
the proper time, I should meet with such weather off the Cape of Good Hope as
would make me repent it; but being very ill myself, and the people being
sickly, I thought it better to run the risk of a few hard gales off the Cape,
than remain longer in this unhealthy place, especially as the west monsoon was
setting in, during which the mortality here is yet greater than at other times.

On Wednesday the 15th of September, returning,

On the 20th, and the casks filled without putting them on shore,

Having in a few days completed our wood and water, we weighed and stood out of
the Straight of Sunda, with a fine fresh gale at South East, which did not
leave us till the island of Java was seven hundred leagues behind us.

On Monday the 23d of November,

Table Bay is a good harbor in summer, but not in winter; so that the Dutch
will not permit any of their vessels to lie here longer than the 15th of May,
which answers to our November. After that time, all ships go to False Bay,
which is well sheltered from the north west winds, which blow here with great
violence.

At this place we breathed a pure air, had wholesome food, and went freely
about the country which is extremely pleasant, so that I began to think myself
already in Europe. We found the inhabitants open, hospitable and polite, there
being scarcely a Gentleman in the place, either in a public or private station,
from whom I did not receive some civility; and I should very ill deserve the
favors they bestowed, if I did not particularly mention the First and Second
Governor, and the Fiscal.

The recovery of my people made it necessary to continue here till the 6th of
January 1769;

On the 20th, and saw plenty of turtle,

On Friday the 19th, companion, Hope; yet I was not perfectly satisfied: for,
we lost an officer and some men in an engagement with the Indians;

After he was gone, and we had made sail, I went upon the deck, where my
Lieutenant asked me, if my visitor had entertained me with an account of his
voyage. This led me to tell him the general purport of our conversation,
thought an artful attempt to draw me into a breach of my obligation to secrecy,

On the 7th of March,

A TABLE OF THE VARIATION of the COMPASS, As observed on board of the SWALLOW,
in her Voyage round the Globe, in the Years 1766, 1767, 1768, and 1769.
N. B. The days of the month in this Table, are not by the Nautical Account, as
is the custom; but, for the convenience of those that are not used to that way
of reckoning, are reduced to the Civil Account: A. M. denotes, that the
observation was made in the forenoon, and P.M. in the afternoon, of that day on
the noon of which the latitude and longitude of the ship were taken.

TIME. Latitude in at Noon. Longitude in at Noon from London. Variation.
REMARKS. North. West. West. 1766. August English Channel 22 30 From the Downs
to the Island of Madeira. 30. P.M. 45 22 13 17 20 25 Septem. 3. P.M. 38 36 13
40 19 04 4. A.M. 37 27 14 12 20 17 Island Madeira 32 34 16 35 16 00 17. A.M. 24
33 19 22 13 00 21. A.M. 17 19 22 19 11 14 The island of Sall, in sight, S. by
W. ten leagues. 22. P.M. 16 34 22 29 8 20 Was then between the Island of Sall
and the Island of May. Porto Praya 15 00 23 00 8 00 Island of Saint Jago.
October 10. P.M. 6 34 21 41 5 36 On the passage from the island of Saint Jago
to the Streights of Magellan. 11. P.M. 6 40 21 35 6 00 South. 22. A.M. 0 06 25
03 6 23 25. P.M. 4 14 27 23 4 30 27. A.M. 7 03 28 49 3 52 28. P.M. 8 46 29 14 1
50 30. P.M. 10 57 30 09 0 30 31. A.M. 12 30 30 30 No var. 1766 South. West.
East. October 31. P.M. 12 56 30 46 1 24 Coast of Patagonia. Novem. 2. P.M. 17
22 32 09 1 40 7. A.M. 23 54 38 10 4 56 P.M. 5 56 8. P.M. 25 49 39 21 6 45 11.
A.M. 29 57 42 27 8 50 15. A.M. 34 12 46 41 12 00 16. A.M. 34 38 47 58 12 36 17.
A.M. 34 46 48 28 13 03 P.M. 14 20 18. A.M. 35 37 49 49 14 30 Soundings 54
fathoms of water, with a bottom of fine black sand, rather muddy. P.M. 15 45
Ditto depth and bottom. 20. P.M. 36 57 51 48 15 33 Ditto depth, fine sand, but
not so black, with small shells. 21. A.M. 37 40 51 05 15 52 Had no bottom with
80 fathoms of line. 38 53 53 12 Had soundings at 70 fathoms water. 40 34 53 47
No bottom with 90 fathoms of line. 41 34 55 39 45 fathoms, dark brown sandy
bottom. 41 57 56 06 42 fathoms, fine gray sand. 41 06 57 18 46 fathoms, fine
dark brown sand. 28. A.M. 41 14 56 48 19 00 39 fathoms ditto bottom, here we
caught very good fish with hooks and lines. 29. A.M. 42 08 58 41 19 02 32
fathoms of water, with ditto bottom. P.M. 19 45 33 fathoms depth. 43 18 58 56
Depth 45 fathoms, the same bottom; we had here a calm, and we caught good fish.
44 04 58 53 52 fathoms water, the same bottom. 45 00 59 34 53 fathoms, fine
light brown sand. December 4. P.M. 47 00 60 51 20 20 47 15 61 10 60 fathoms,
fine dark sand. 5. A.M. 48 01 61 28 20 40 56 fathoms, with ditto bottom, and
grains of sparkling sand mixed with it. 6. A.M. 47 35 62 50 20 34 47 30 63 08
45 fathoms of water, dark sand, with small stones, and in going west about 10
miles, we had 52 fathom, a bottom of soft mud. December 7. A.M. 47 14 63 37 19
40 54 fathoms, soft mud, with small stones; at this time the land was seen from
the mast-heads, somewhere about Cape Blanco. 8. P.M. 48 54 64 14 20 30 9. A.M.
49 12 65 31 20 35 51 15 66 02 53 fathoms, dark gray sand, with small stones.
17. Cape Virgin Mary, Eastermost entrance of the Straight. Magellan 52 23 68 02
22 50 In the Streights of Magellan. Elizabeth Island 22 36 Port Famine 22 22
Off Cape Froward 22 10 York Road Ditto Swallow's Harb. 22 00 Off Cape Notch
1767. Off Cape Upright Off Cape Pillar 52 45 75 10 21 50 Westermost entrance of
the Str. April 18. P.M. 49 18 79 06 17 36 Coast of Chili in the South Sea. 20.
A.M. 48 04 80 56 17 20 26. P.M. 45 57 81 22 16 17 28. P.M. 44 27 81 24 15 10
May 33 40 78 52 11 00 East end of the Isl. Juan Fernandes. 33 45 80 46 10 24
Island of Massafuero. 28. P.M. 29 45 79 50 9 40 In crossing the South Sea. 31.
P.M. 26 26 82 15 8 10 June 1. P.M. 25 51 84 23 8 8 7. P.M. 27 23 97 16 5 45 8.
A.M. 27 20 97 51 5 45 10. A.M. 26 30 98 25 5 40 12. P.M. 26 53 100 21 4 13 16.
P.M. 28 11 111 15 2 00 17. A.M. 28 04 112 37 1 51 18. P.M. 28 07 113 55 2 00
20. A.M. 28 04 116 29 2 09 30. P.M. 26 00 130 55 2 32 July 2. P.M. 25 02 133 38
2 46 Off Pitcairn's Island. 3. 25 00 136 16 2 30 Crossing the South Sea. 4.
A.M. 25 24 137 18 3 43 5. A.M. 24 56 137 23 5 24 6. A.M. 24 32 138 31 4 16 7.
A.M. 24 10 139 55 5 12 P.M. 4 02 8. A.M. 23 46 139 55 5 56 10. P.M. 21 38 141
36 4 20 12. A.M. 20 36 145 39 4 40 20 38 146 00 5 00 13. P.M. 21 07 147 44 5 46
15. A.M. 21 46 150 50 6 23 16. P.M. 22 02 151 09 6 34 19. P.M. 19 50 153 59 6
08 20. P.M. 19 08 156 15 7 09 21. P.M. 18 43 158 27 7 38 23. P.M. 16 22 162 32
6 05 24. P.M. 14 19 163 34 6 29 25. A.M. 12 13 164 50 9 30 P.M. 9 40 26. A.M.
10 01 166 52 9 00 28. A.M. 9 50 171 26 9 04 30. A.M. 9 50 175 38 9 32 P.M. 9 00
August 1. A.M. 9 53 179 33 10 04 East. 2. A.M. 10 09 178 58 10 30 4. A.M. 10 22
177 10 10 54 5. A.M. 10 35 175 50 11 14 P.M. 10 52 7. P.M. 10 52 172 23 11 17
August 8. P.M. 11 02 171 15 10 27 9. A.M. 10 56 171 00 10 02 11. P.M. 10 49 167
00 10 38 Cape Byron 10 40 164 49 11 00 N. E. end of Egmont, one of the
Charlotte Islands. 18. P.M. 9 58 162 57 8 30 19. P.M. 8 52 160 41 8 30 20. A.M.
7 53 158 56 8 31 7 56 158 56 8 20 Off of Carteret's and Gower's Isl. 22. P.M. 6
24 157 32 7 42 24. P.M. 5 07 155 08 6 25 26. P.M. 4 46 153 17 7 14 In sight and
on the west side of Nova Britannia 6 30 Cape St. George 5 00 152 19 5 20 Nova
Hibernia. In St. George's Channel 4 40 Nova Britannia. Here the land seemed to
have an effect on the needle. Septem. 16. A.M. 2 19 145 31 6 30 Off the
Admiralty Islands. 19. A.M. 1 57 143 28 5 26 From the Admiralty Islands to the
Island Mindanao. 1 45 143 02 4 40 20. P.M. 1 33 142 22 4 40 21. A.M. 1 20 141
29 4 54 22. P.M. 0 52 139 56 4 30 23. P.M. 0 05 138 56 4 17 North. 24. P.M. 0
05 138 41 3 08 27. A.M. 2 13 136 41 2 30 P.M. 2 09 2 50 136 17 2 00 30. A.M. 4
25 134 37 1 41 October 3. A.M. 4 41 132 51 3 09 P. M. 3 14 5. P.M. 4 31 132 39
3 10 6. A.M. 4 21 132 45 3 33 October 8. A.M. 3 53 134 13 3 38 From the
Admiralty Islands to the Island Mindanao. 9. A.M. 4 03 134 04 3 11 12. P.M. 4
49 133 42 2 19 13. P.M. 5 12 133 27 2 20 16. A.M. 5 54 133 10 2 34 27. P.M. 6
35 127 56 2 10 Cape St. Augustain 6 15 127 20 1 45 Island of Mindanao. South
End 5 34 126 25 1 20 Off the Island Mindanao. Novem. 6. A.M. 5 34 125 40 0 48
From the Island Mindanao to the Streights of Maccassar. P.M. 0 49 7. P.M. 5 37
125 23 0 39 8. P.M. 5 30 124 41 0 50 14. A.M. 1 57 122 04 0 06 West. 26. P.M. 0
04 118 15 0 19 South. 27. A.M. 0 14 117 45 0 12 December 7. 3 26 116 45 0 27
Bonthain 5 30 117 53 1 16 At the Island of Celebes. Island Tonikaky 5 31 117 17
1 00 Off the S.E. end of the Island Celebes. 1768. May 29. P.M. 5 29 110 23 0
56 Off Madura 0 30 On the N.E. part of the Island of Java. Batavia 0 25 Septem.
30. P.M. 7 41 101 36 0 51 From the Streights of Sunda to the Cape of Good Hope.
October 2. P.M. 10 37 97 19 2 06 4. P.M. 12 13 93 56 3 12 12. P.M. 19 50 76 40
3 30 14. P.M. 21 47 72 47 6 26 15. P.M. 22 53 70 47 8 09 17. A.M. 24 23 68 02 9
36 P.M. 11 20 18. P.M. 25 08 67 21 11 50 19. P.M. 25 08 67 08 12 49 October. 20.
A.M. 24 59 66 35 12 54 From the Streights of Sunda to the Cape of Good Hope.
P.M. 11 48 24. A.M. 23 21 64 31 12 54 25. P.M. 23 23 63 35 12 39 26. A.M. 23 32
62 43 13 42 28. P.M. 24 52 60 14 16 10 30. P.M. 25 40 56 50 18 18 31. P.M. 26
31 54 49 18 24 Novem. 1. A.M. 27 05 52 57 20 12 P.M. 20 20 3. A.M. 27 40 50 55
20 58 P.M. 21 23 4. P.M. 27 42 50 10 21 15 5. P.M. 27 44 49 01 21 09 6. P.M. 28
58 46 23 22 38 7. A.M. 29 59 43 55 24 40 P.M. 24 55 8. P.M. 30 12 42 51 25 39
9. A.M. 30 19 41 37 25 50 10. P.M. 30 37 40 48 25 32 11. A.M. 32 02 38 47 25 08
12. P.M. 32 39 37 17 25 02 13. P.M. 33 21 35 27 25 05 19. P.M. 35 17 28 38 22
32 20. P.M. 35 42 27 22 22 46 21. P.M. 35 46 27 00 22 18 22. P.M. 35 04 26 29
22 50 23. P.M. 34 57 25 46 21 39 24. P.M. 34 52 25 28 21 44 Cape of Good Hope
34 24 18 30 19 30 1769. Jan. 9. P.M. 30 37 13 08 19 20 From the Cape to the
Island of St. Helena. 14. P.M. 22 16 4 52 16 19 Jan. 15. P.M. 21 04 3 54 16 31
From the Cape to the Island of St. Helena. 18. P.M. 17 05 0 10 14 38 West. 19.
P.M. 16 06 1 38 13 46 25. P.M. 14 22 7 04 12 30 From the Island St. Helena to
the Island of Ascension. 26. P.M. 12 54 8 05 11 47 27. P.M. 11 36 9 25 11 40
28. P.M. 10 26 10 36 10 46 Feb. 2. P.M. 6 45 14 42 9 34 From the Island of
Ascension to England. 3. P.M. 5 04 15 45 9 04 4. A.M. 3 26 16 49 9 10 5. P.M. 2
01 17 34 8 58 6. P.M. 0 20 18 27 8 32 North. 7. P.M. 0 58 19 24 8 37 8. A.M. 1
56 20 16 8 25 10. P.M. 2 39 28 58 7 21 15. P.M. 6 38 32 40 4 35 16. P.M. 8 03
24 18 6 09 19. P.M. 12 06 24 34 6 48 21. P.M. 14 39 27 15 6 12 26. A.M. 23 54
28 15 6 00 March 3. P.M. 32 33 23 35 13 26 4. A.M. 34 02 22 32 13 43 5. P.M. 35
30 21 56 14 53 6. A.M. 36 46 21 23 15 15 P.M. 14 58 Between the Islands of
Tercera and St. Michael 13 36 28. P.M. 39 09 19 02 16 46 From this Day till my
Arrival in England the weather was so bad that we had no opportunity of making
any observation of the Variation.

N.B. The ill sailing of the Swallow prevented me from getting a sufficient
number of Soundings to make a separate Table.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

