PROPOSALS For PRINTING the Art of Political Lying, In Two Volumes.

PROPOSALS For PRINTING A very Curious Discourse, in Two Volumes in Quarto,
Entitled, PSEYDOLOGIA POLITIK; OR, A TREATISE of the ART OF Political Lying,
WITH An ABSTRACT of the First Volume of the said TREATISE.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall. 1712. Price 3d.

THere is now in the Press, a Curious Piece, entitled, PSeudologia Politic;
or, A Treatise of the Art of Political Lying: Consisting of Two Volumes in 4to.

The PROPOSALS are, I. That if the Author meets with suitable Encouragement, he
intends to deliver the First Volume to the Subscribers by Hilary-Term next. II.
The Price of both Volumes will be, to the Subscribers, Fourteen Shillings;
Seven whereof are to be paid down, and the other Seven at the Delivery of the
Second Volume. III. Those that Subscribe for Six shall have a Seventh gratis;
which reduces the Price to less than Six Shillings a Volume. IV. That the
Subscribers shall have their Names and Places of Abode Printed at length.


Subscriptions are taken in at St. James's Coffee-house, Young Man's at
Charing Cross, the Grecian, Brydges's by the Royal Exchange, and most other
Coffee-houses in Town.

For the Encouragement of so useful a Work, it is thought fit the Public
should be informed of the Contents of the First Volume, by one who has with
great Care perused the Manuscript.
THE Author, in his Preface, makes some very judicious Reflections upon the
Original of Arts and Sciences; That at first they consist of scattered Theorems
and Practices, which are handed about amongst the Masters, and only revealed to
the Filii Artis, till such time as some great Genius appears, who Collects
these disjointed Propositions, and reduces them into a regular System. That
this is the Case of that Noble and Useful Art of Political Lying, which in this
last Age having been enriched with several new Discoveries, ought not to lie
any longer in Rubbish and Confusion, but may justly claim a Place in the
Encyclopedia, especially such as serves for a Model of Education for an able
Politcian; that he proposes to himself no small Stock of Fame in future Ages,
in being the first who has undertaken this Design; and for the same Reason he
hopes the Imperfection of his Work will be excused. He invites all Persons who
have any Talent that way, or any new Discovery, to communicate their Thoughts,
assuring them that honorable mention shall be made of them in his Work.

The First Volume consists of Eleven Chapters.
In the first Chapter of his excellent Treatise, he reasons Philosophically
concerning the Nature of the Soul of Man, and those Qualities which render it
susceptible of Lies. He supposes the Soul to be of the Nature of a
Plano-Cylindrical Speculum, or Looking-glass; that the plain side was made by
God Almighty, but that the Devil afterward wrought the other side into a
Cylindrical Figure. The plain side represents Objects just as they are, and the
Cylindrical side, by the Rules of Catoptricks, must needs represent true
Objects false, and false Objects true; but the Cylindrical side being much the
larger Surface, takes in a greater Compass of visual Rays. That upon the
Cylindrical side of the Soul of Man depends the whole Art and Success of
Political Lying. The Author, in this Chapter, proceeds to reason upon the other
Qualities of the Mind; As, great Fondness of the Malicious and the Miraculous:
The Tendency of the Soul toward the Malicious, springs from Self-love, or a
Pleasure to find Mankind more wicked, base, or unfortunate, than our selves.
The Design of the Miraculous, proceeds from the Inactivity of the Soul, or its
Incapacity to be moved or delighted with any thing that is vulgar or common.
The Author having established the Qualities of the MIND, upon which his Art is
founded, he proceeds,

In his Second Chapter, to Treat of the Nature of Political Lying; which he
defines, to be, The Art of convincing the People of Salutary Falsehoods, for
some good End. He calls it an Art to distinguish it from that of telling Truth,
which does not seem to want Art; but then he would have this understood only as
to the Invention, because there is indeed more Art necessary to convince the
People of a Salutary Truth, than a Salutary Falsehood. Then he proceeds to
prove, that there are Salutary Falsehoods, of which he gives a great many
Instances both before and after the Revolution; and demonstrates plainly, that
we could not have carried, on the War so long, without several of those
Salutary Falsehoods. He gives Rules to calculate the Value of a Political Lie,
in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence. By Good, he does not mean that which is
absolutely so, but what appears so to the Artist, which is a sufficient Ground
for him to proceed upon; and. he distinguishes the Good, as it commonly, is,
into Bonum utile, dulce, and honestum. He shows you, that there are Political
Lies of a mixed Nature, which include all the Three in different respects* That
the Utile reigns generally about the Exchange, the Dulce and Honestum at the
Westminster End of the Town. One Man spreads a Lie to sell or Buy Stock to
greater Advantage; a second, because it is honorable to serve his Party; and a
third, because it is sweet to gratify his Revenge. Having explained the several
Terms of his Definition, he proceeds,

In his Third Chapter, to treat of the Lawfulness of Political Lying; which he
deduces from its true and genuine Principles, by enquiring into the several
Rights that Mankind have to Truth. He shows, that the People have a Right to
private Truth from their Neighbors, and oeconomical Truth from their own
Family; that they should not be abused by their Wives, Children, and Servants;
but, that they have no Right at all to Political Truth: That the People may as
well all pretend to be Lords of Manors and possess great Estates, as to have
Truth told them in Matters of Government. The Author, with great Judgment,
states the several Shares of Mankind in this Matter of Truth, according to
their several Capacities, Dignities, and Professions; and shows you, that
Children have hardly any share at all; in consequence of which, they have very
seldom any Truth told them. It must be owned, that the Author, in this Chapter,
has some seeming Difficulties to answer and explain Texts of Scripture, and a
Sermon lately Preached before Her Majesty at Windsor.

The Fourth Chapter is wholly employed in this Queston, Whether the Right of
Coinage of Political Lies be wholly in the Government? The Author, who is a
true Friend to English Liberty, determines in the Negative, and answers all the
Arguments of the opposite Party with great Acuteness; That as the Government of
England has a Mixture of Democratical in it, so the Right of Inventing and
Spreading Political Lies, is partly in the People; and their obstinate
Adherence to this just Privilege has been most conspicuous, and shined with
great Luster of late Years: That it happens very often, that there is no other
Means left to the good People of England to pull down a Ministry and Government
they are weary of, but by exercising this their undoubted Right: That abundance
of Political Lying is a sure sign of true English Liberty: That as Ministers do
sometimes use Tools to support their Power, it is but reasonable that the
People should employ the same Weapon to defend themselves, and pull them down.

In his Fifth Chapter, he divides Political Lies into their several Species and
Classes, and gives Precepts about the Inventing, Spreading, and Propagating the
several sorts of them: He begins with the Rumores, and Libelli famosi, such as
concern the Reputation of Men in Power; where he finds Fault with the common
Mistake, that takes Notice only of one sort, viz. the Detractory or Defamatory,
whereas in truth there are three sorts, the Detractory, the Additory, and the
Translatory. The Additory gives to a Great Man a greater share of Reputation
than belongs to him, to enable him to serve some good End or Purpose. The
Detractory or Defamatory, is a Lie which takes from a Great Man the Reputation
that justly belongs to him, for fear he should use it to the Detriment of the
Public. The Translatory, is a Lie that transfers the Merit of a Man's good
Action to another who is in himself more deserving; or, transfers the Demerit
of a bad Action from the true Author, to a Person who is in himself less
deserving. He gives several Instances of very great Strokes in all the Three
Kinds, especially in the last, when it was necessary for the Good of the
Public to bestow the Valor and Conduct of one Man upon another, and that of
many to one Man; nay, even upon a good Occasion, a Man may be robbed of his
Victory by a Person that did not Command in the Action. The Restoring and the
Destroying the Public may be ascribed to Persons who had no hand in either.
The Author exhorts all Gentlemen Practitioners to exercise themselves in the
Translatory, because the Existence of the Things themselves being visible, and
not demanding any Proof, there wants nothing to be put upon the Public but a
false Author or a false Cause, which is no great Presumption upon the Credulity
of Mankind, to whom the secret Springs of things are for the most part unknown.

The Author proceeds to give some Precepts as to the Additory. That when one
ascribes any thing to a Person which does not belong to him, the Lie ought to
be calculated not quite contradictory to his known Qualities: Ex. gr. One would
not make the French King present at a Protestant Conventicle; nor, like Queen
Elizabeth, restore the Overplus of Taxes to her Subjects. One would not bring
in the Emperor giving two Months Pay in Advance to his Troops; nor the Dutch
paying more, than their Quota. One would not make the same Person zealous for a
Standing Army and Public Liberty; nor an Atheist support the Church; nor a
lewd Fellow a Reformer of Manners; nor a hotheaded crack-brain'd Coxcomb
forward for a Scheme of Moderation. But if it is absolutely necessary that a
Person is to have some good adventitious Quality given him, the Author's
Precept is, that it should not be done at first in extremo gradu. For Example:
They should not make, a Covetous Man give away all at once, Five thousand
Pounds in a charitable generous way; Twenty or Thirty Pounds may suffice at
first, They should not introduce a Person of remarkable Ingratitude to his
Benefactors, rewarding a poor Man for some good Office that was done him thirty
Years ago; but they may allow him to acknowledge a Service to a Person who is
capable still to do him another. A Man whose personal Courage is suspected, is
not at first to drive whole Squadrons before him; but he may be allowed the
Merit of some Squabble, or throwing a Bottle at his Adversary's Head.

It will not be allowed, to make a Great Man, that is a known Despiser of
Religion, spend whole Days in his Closet at his Devotion; but, you may with
Safety make him sit out public Prayers with Decency. A Great Man, who has
never been known willingly to pay a just Debt, ought not all of a sudden to be
introduced making Restitution of Thousands he has cheated; let it suffice at
first, to pay Twenty Pounds to a Friend who has lost his Note.

He lays down the same Rules in the Detractory or Defamatory kind; that they
should not be quite opposite to the Qualities the Persons are supposed to have.
Thus it will not be found, according to the found Rules of Pseudology, to
report of a pious and religious Prince, that he neglects his Devotion, and
would introduce Heresy; but, you may report of a merciful Prince, that he has
Pardoned a Criminal who did not deserve it. You will be unsuccessful if you
give out of a Great Man, who is remarkable for his Frugality for the Public,
that he squanders away the Nation's Money; but, you may safely relate that he
hoards it: You must not affirm he took a Bribe; but, you may freely censure him
for being tardy in his Payments; Because though neither may be true, yet the
last is credible, the first not. Of an openhearted generous Minister you are
not to say, that he was in an Intrigue to Betray his Country; but, you may
affirm with some Probability, that he was in an Intrigue with a Lady. He warns
all Practitioners to take good heed to these Precepts, for want of which, many
of their Lies, of late, have proved abortive on short-lived.

In his Sixth Chapter he treats of the Miraculous; by which he understands any
thing that exceeds the common Degrees of Probability. In respect of the People,
it is divided into two sorts, the (...), or the (...), Terrifying Lies, and
Animating or Encouraging Lies, both being extremely useful on their proper
Occasions. Concerning the (...), he gives several Rules; one of which is, that
terrible Objects should not be too frequently shown to the People, lest they
grow familiar. He says, it is absolutely necessary that the People of England
should be frighted with the French King and the Pretender once a Year; but,
that the Bears should be chained up again till that time Twelvemonth. The want
of Observing this so necessary a Precept, in bringing out the Raw-head and
Bloody-bones upon every trifling Occasion, has produced great Indifference in
the Vulgar of late Years. As to the Animating or Encouraging Lies, he gives the
following Rules; That they should not far exceed the common degrees of
Probability, and that there should be variety of them, and the same Lie not
obstinately insisted upon; that the Promissory or Prognosticating Lies should
not be upon short Days, for fear the Authors should have the Shame and
Confusion to see themselves speedily contradicted. He examines by these Rules,
that well-meant, but unfortunate Lie of the Conquest of France, which continued
near twenty Years together; but at last, by being too obstinately insisted
upon, it was worn threadbare, and became unsuccessful.

As to the (...), or the Prodigious, he has little to advise, but that their
Comets, Whales and Dragons, should be sizable; their Storms, Tempests, and
Earthquakes, without the reach of a Days Journey of a Man and a Horse.

The Seventh Chapter is wholly taken up in an Enquiry, Which of the two Parties
are the greatest Artists in Political Lying. He owns the Tories have been
better believed of late; but, that the Whigs have much the greater Genius's
amongst them. He attributes the late ill Success of the Whig-Party to their
glutting the Market, and retailing too much of a bad Commodity at once: When
there is too great a Quantity of Worms, it is hard to catch Gudgeons. He
proposes a Scheme for the Recovery of the Credit of the Whig-Party, which
indeed seems to be somewhat Chimerical, and does not savor of that sound
Judgment the Author has shown in the rest of the Work It amounts to this, That
the Party should agree to vent nothing but Truth for three Months together,
which will give them Credit for six Months Lying afterward. He owns, that he
believes it almost impossible to find fit Persons to execute this Scheme.
Toward the end of the Chapter, he inveighs severely against the Folly of
Parties, in retaining such Scoundrels and Men of Low Genius's to retail their
Lies; such as most of the present News-Writers are, who besides a strong Bent
and Inclination toward the Profession, seem to be wholly ignorant in the Rules
of Pseudology, and not at all qualified for so weighty a Trust.

In his Eighth Chapter he treats of some extraordinary Genius's who have
appeared of late Years, especially in their Disposition toward the Miraculous.
He advises those hopeful Young Men to turn their Invention to the Service of
their Country, it being inglorious, at this time, to employ their Talent in
prodigious Fox-Chases, Horse-Courses, Feats of Activity in Driving of Coaches,
Jumping, Running, Swallowing of Peaches, Pulling out whole Sets of Teeth to
clean, etc. when their Country stands so much in need of their Assistance.

The Eighth Chapter is a Project for Uniting the several smaller Corporations
of Liars into one Society. It is too tedious to give a full Account of the
whole Scheme; what is most remarkable is, That this Society ought to consist of
the Heads of each Party; that no Lie is to pass current without their
Approbation, they being the best Judges of the present Exigencies, and what
sort of Lies are demanded: That in such a Corporation there ought to be Men of
all Professions, that the (...), and the (...), that is, Decency and
Probability, may be observed as much as possible: That besides the Persons
abovementioned, this Society ought to consist of the hopeful Genius's about
the Town (of which there are great plenty to be picked up in the several
Coffee-houses) Travelers, Virtuoso's, Fox-hunters, Jockeys, Attorneys, Old
Seamen and Soldiers out of the Hospitals of Greenwich and Chelsea. To this
Society, so Constituted, ought to be committed the sole Management of Lying.
That in their outer Room there ought always to attend some Persons endowed with
a great Stock of Credulity, a Generation that thrives mightily in this Soil and
Climate: He thinks a sufficient Number of them may be picked up any where about
the Exchange: These are to Circulate what the other Coin; for no Man spreads a
Lie with so good a Grace as he that believes it. That the Rule of the Society
be to invent a Lie, and sometimes two, for every Day; in the Choice of which,
great Regard ought to be had to the Weather, and the Season of the Year: Your
(...), or Terrifying Lies, do mighty well in November and December, but not so
well in May and June, unless the Easterly Winds reign. That it ought to be
Penal, for any body to talk of any thing but the Lie of the Day. That the
Society is to maintain a sufficient Number of Spies at Court, and other Places,
to furnish Hints and Topics for Invention; and a general Correspondence in all
the Market Towns, for Circulating their Lies. That if any one of die Society
were observed to blush, or look out of Countenance, or want a necessary
Circumstance in telling the Lie, he ought to be expelled, and declared
incapable. Besides the Roaring Lies, there ought to be a private Committee for
Whispers, constituted of the ablest Men of the Society. Here the Author makes a
Digression in Praise of the Whig-Party, for the right Understanding and Use of
Proof-Lyes. A Proof-Lye is like a Proof-Charge for a Piece of Ordnance, to try
a Standard-Credulity. Of such a nature he takes Transubstantiation to be in the
Church of Rome, a ProofArticle, which if any one swallows, they are sure he
will digest every thing else. Therefore the Whig-Party do wisely, to try the
Credulity of the People sometimes by Swingers, that they may be able to judge
to what height they may Charge them afterward. Toward the End of this
Chapter, he warns the Heads of Parties against Believing their own Lies; which
has proved of pernicious Consequence of late, both a Wise Party and a Wise
Nation having regulated their Affairs upon Lies of their own Invention. The
Causes of this he supposes to be too great a Zeal and Intenseness in the
Practice of this Art, and a vehement Heat in mutual Conversation, whereby they
persuade one another, that what they wish, and report to be true, is really so.
That all Parties have been subject to this Misfortune: The Jacobites have been
constantly infested with it; but, the Whigs of late seem even to exceed them in
this ill Habit and Weakness. To this Chapter, the Author subjoins a Calendar of
Lies proper for the several Months of the Year.

The Ninth Chapter treats of the Celerity and Duration of Lies. As to the
Celerity of their Motion, the Author says it is almost incredible: He gives
several Instances of Lies that have gone faster than a Man can ride Post: Your
Terrifying Lies travel at a prodigious rate, above ten Miles an hour; your
Whispers move in a narrow Vortex, but very swiftly. The Author says it is
impossible to explain several Phoenomena in relation to the Celerity of Lies,
without the Supposition of Synchronism and Combination. As to the Duration of
Lies, he says they are of all sorts, from Hours and Days to Ages; that there
are some which, like your Insects, die and revive again in a different Form;
that good Artists, like People who build upon a short Lease, will calculate the
Duration of a Lie surely to answer their purpose; to last just as long, and no
longer, than the Turn is served.

The Tenth Chapter treats of the Characteristicks of Lies; how to know, when,
where, and by whom invented: Your Dutch, English, and French Ware, are amply
distinguished from one another; an Exchange-Lye from one Coined at the other
End of the Town; Great Judgment is to be shown as to the Place where the
Species is intended to Circulate: Very low and base Coin will serve for
Wapping: There are several Coffeehouses that have their particular Stamps,
which a judicious Practitioner may easily know. All your Great Men have their
proper Phantateusticks. The Author says he has attained, by Study and
Application, to so great Skill in this Matter, that bring him any Lie, he can
tell whose Image it bears so truly, as the Great Man himself shall not have the
face to deny it. The Promissory Lies of Great Men are known by Shouldering,
Hugging, Squeezing, Smiling, Bowing; and Lies in Matter of Fact, by immoderate
Swearing.

He spends the whole Eleventh Chapter on one simple Question, Whether a Lie is
best contradicted by Truth, or another Lie. The Author says, that considering
the large Extent of the Cylindrical Surface of the Soul, and the great
Propensity to believe Lies in the generality of Mankind of late Years, he
thinks the properest Contradiction to a Lie, is another Lie: For Example; If it
should be reported that the Pretender was at London, one would not contradict
it by saying he never was in England; but you must prove by Eyewitnesses that
he came no farther than Greenwich, but then went back again. Thus if it be
spread about that a great Person were dying of some Disease, you must not say
the Truth, that they are in Health, and never had such a Disease; but, that
they are slowly recovering of it. So there was, not long ago, a Gentleman who
affirmed, That the Treaty with France for bringing in Popery and Slavery into
England, was Signed the 15th of September; to which another answered very
judiciously, not by opposing Truth to his Lie, That there was no such Treaty;
but that, to his certain Knowledge, there were many things in that Treaty not
yet adjusted.

The Account of the Second Volume of this Excellent Treatise, is reserved for
another time
FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by John Morphew, near Stationers' Hall.
THE Examiners for the Year 1711. To which is added, an Explanatory Index. The
Four Volumes of the Atalantis, called the Memoirs of Europe. All the Parts of
John Bull. An Appendix to John Bull still in his Senses, or Law is a Bottomless
Pit. Printed from a Manuscript, found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry
Polesworth; and published (as well as the Three former Parts) by the Author of
the New Atalantis. Price 3d. Some Remarks on the Letters between the L^d T^nd,
and Mr. Secretary B^le. In a Letter to the Author of the Remarks on the
Barrier-Treaty. Five extraordinary Letters supposed to be Writ to Dr. B^y, upon
his Edition of Horace, and some other Matters of great Importance. The Conduct
of the Allies, and of the late Ministry, in beginning and carrying on the
present War, the 7th Edition. Pr. 6d. Some Remarks on the Barrier Treaty,
between Her Majesty and the States General. By the Author of the Conduct of the
Allies. To which are added, the said Barrier-Treaty with the Two separate
Articles; part of the Counter-Project; the Sentiments of Pr. Eugene and Count
Sinzendorf, upon the said Treaty; and a Representation of the English
Merchants. 2d Edit. Pr. 6 d. The Picture of a Modern Whig; First and Second
Part. By Dr. Davenant. T^l^nd's Invitation to Dismal, to Dine with the
Calves-head Club. Imitated from Horace, Epist. 5. Lib. 1. Price 1 d. Some
Advice humbly offered to the Members of the October Club, in a Letter from a
Person of Honor. The Second Edition, price 2d. A Learned Comment upon Dr.
Hare's Excellent Sermon, preached before the Duke of Marlborough, on the
Surrender of Bouchain. By an Enemy to Peace. The second Edition Price 2 d. A
New Journey to Paris: Together with some secret Transactions between the F^h
K^g, and an Eng^ Gentleman. The Third Eddition Corrected. Price 2d. Some
Reasons to prove, that no Person is obliged by his Principles, as a Whig, to
oppose Her Majesty, or Her present Ministry. In a Letter to a Whig-Lord. Price
3d. The Character and Principles of the present Set of Whigs. The Third Edition
with Additions. Price 3 d. The new way of selling Places at Court: In a Letter
from a small Courtier, to a great Stock Jobber. Price 2 d.

