THE CASE OF IMPOTENCY As Debated in ENGLAND, In that Remarkable TRIAL An.
1613. between ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX, and the Lady FRANCES HOWARD, who, after
Eight Years Marriage, commenced a Suit against him for IMPOTENCY.

CONTAINING I. The whole PROCEEDINGS, and DEBATES on both Sides. II. The REPORT
of the Seven MATRONS appointed to search the Countess. III. The Intrigue
between Her and the Earl of SOMERSET, who after the Divorce married Her. IV. A
Detection of some Politics in the Court of King JAMES the First.


Written by GEORGE ABBOT, D.D. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

In Two VOLUMES.

London, Printed for E. Curll, at the Dial and Bible against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1715. Price Five Shillings.

The PREFACE.
THE Public having given a general Approbation of the late Trial, between the
Marquis DE GESVRES and his Lady, as indeed so nice and curious a Subject
deserved: I was inclined to search our own Law Books and Historians, to see
what adjudg'd Cases and Precedents we had of the same Nature.

That which is the most considerable in our English History was, the Case of
the Earl of ESSEX, and the Lady HOWARD; a Case that engaged the Politics of
the greatest Statesmen, and the Casuistry of a Monarch himself. There has as
yet been a great Defect of Information concerning this Case, which the Reader
will now find supplied from an Original Manuscript of Archbishop ABBOT's,
written in his own Hand. This Manuscript contains an exact Account of all the
Artifice and Stratagem used in that Affair, and is not only very full and
particular upon the Case, but lets us into a considerable Part of the Secrets
and Politics of King JAMES's Reign. I must assure the Public, that it is
faithfully printed from the Original, which is now in the Hands of a learned
Lawyer.

To make a Collection of this Nature, as perfect as I well could, there is
added the Lord AUDLEY's Trial, and the Proceedings upon the Duke of Norfolk's
Bill of Divorce, which, as they bear some Relation to this Subject, so they are
now very rare, and valuable. The Duke of Norfolk's Case, in particular,
employed some of our greatest Lawyers, who have made since very eminent Figures
in their Profession, and contains all that can be said upon the Article of
Divorce.

In short, these Volumes complete the Account of Cases of this kind, and I dare
promise will prove useful and entertaining to the Reader.

Inner Temple. Oct. 30. 1714.
SOME ACCOUNT OF Archbishop ABBOT.
GEORGE ABBOT, D.D. was born at Guilford in Surrey, and bred at Oxford, where
he became Master of University College, An. 1604. upon the Translation of Dr.
Bancroft from the Sea of London to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, he was
made Bishop of that See; and in the Year 1611. at the decease of Bancroft,
succeeded him in that honorable Post.

An. 1619. He founded a large Hospital at the Place of his Birth, himself
laying the first Stone, and endowed it with a liberal Maintenance.

An. 1621. As he was hunting in Burnhill Park, belonging to my Lord Zouch, near
Hertford Bridge, he killed the Keeper by chance with a forked Arrow out of a
Cross-bow, as he was shooting at a Deer. The Quaere was, Whether he should
incur the Penalty of Irregularity by this involuntary Manslaughter, or
Suspension? but he was acquitted from either; yet himself out of a religious
Tenderness of Mind, kept a solemn Anniversary Fast during his whole Life; and
made a sufficient Provision for the Keeper's Widow and Children.

He governed the Church with great Prudence, and was in much Esteem with the
People and the moderate Clergy, but in the Year 1627. many Discontents arising,
he was by the Clamor of some turbulent Persons, sequestered from his Office and
Jurisdiction, though in a very short Time he was graciously received again into
Favor.

He was an eminent Preacher, and it is universally agreed that Gravity,
Learning, and Piety, adorned his Life. He died at Lambeth, An. 1633.

THE CONTENTS of this Volume.
SOME Memorials touching the Nullity between the Earl of Essex and his Lady,
pronounced Sept. 25. 1613. at Lambeth, and the Difficulties endured in the
same, Page 3. Some observable Things since the Sentence was given in the Cause
of the Earl of Essex, continued unto the Day of the Marriage, December. 26. 1613,
p. 59. The Case of, John Bury, Esquire; who was Divorced for want of his Testicles,
p. 107. An Original Letter from King James I. to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
p. 130. The Bill of Complaint promoted by the Lady Frances Howard, against
Robert Earl of Essex, before the King's Delegates, authorized under the Broad
Seal, p. 136. The Earl of Essex's Answer, p. 140. Doubts conceived out of the
Fact, and Process in the Suit between the Earl of Essex, and his Lady, p. 142.
The Archbishop of Canterbury's Reasons against the Nullity, p. 143. Testimonies
produced by the Archbishop for his Opinion, p. 146. The King's Answer to the
Archbishop's Reasons, p. 152. The Copy of the Divorce drawn up in Form, p. 164.
An Account of the Intrigue between Robert Car, Earl of Somerset, Viscount
Rochester, etc. and the Lady Frances Howard. An. Reg. 10. An. Christi, 1612. By
Arthur Wilson, Esquire p. 166. The Countess's Attempts against the Earl by Sorcery,
p. 185. The Countess's Letter to Mrs. Turner, to procure an Enchantment, for
turning the Viscount's Affections toward her, p. 191. A Letter from the
Countess to Dr. Forman, p. 192.
THE CASE OF ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX; AND THE Lady FRANCES HOWARD.
Written by Archbishop ABBOT.

Printed from his GRACE'S Original Manuscript.

SOME MEMORIALS TOUCHING The Nullity between the Earl of Essex and his Lady,
pronounced Sept. 25, 1613, at Lambeth, and the Difficulties endured in the same.
BEing at the Court at White Hall, on the 12th of May, 1613, or thereabouts,
his Majesty moved me, that I would be a Commissioner in a Controversy to be
begun between the Earl of Essex and his Lady, for the separating of them; and
when his Majesty had ended those few Words with me, my Lord Chamberlain, who
was then in the Gallery, spoke also unto me to that Purpose. It was unto me a
Matter very strange, having heard before of some Discontentments between that
noble Couple; but never imagining that Matters were come to that Head. My
Answer was alike to both, That I did not know the Ground whereupon they
intended to move; but that if I were to be a judge in any such Question, I
would pray, that other Bishops, being near the Town and Court, might be joined
with me. The Persons that were named then, were, my Lord of London, my Lord of
Ely, and my Lord of Litchfield, (for at that Time was my Lord of Bath with the
Queen's Majesty at Bath.) Besides, I prayed both the King's Majesty, and my
Lord Chamberlain, That before any such Thing were entered into, I might speak
privately with my Lord of Essex, for the satisfying of mine own Mind; which by
both was permitted unto me. The Day after, I sent for the Earl, and having
private Speech with him, only about the Ability of his Body, and nothing else,
I found him generally much reserved in Talk, but only avowing the Ability of
himself for Generation; and that he was resolved never to lay any Blemish upon
himself that Way. I knew not well what to make of this; for I did not then
understand, that some Lords had met before at White Hall on both Parts, (the
Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Southampton, and the Lord
Knowles, as afterward I heard) to settle an Order by Consent, how this
Prosecution should be; that is to say, That a Separation should be made, and my
Lord's Honor every Way preserved.

Within a Day or two, coming to White Hall, I had speech with the Lord
Chamberlain, in the Gallery going toward St. James's Park. I might not reveal
all Particulars of that which passed in private; but yet I told his Lordship,
That I had spoken with the Earl of Essex, and I perceived it was like to be a
Matter of great Difficulty, and therefore wished his Lordship to be well
advised, before any thing was brought into Public. I told him, That he must
proceed either upon Confession or Proof: That it was probable, the Earl would
not confess his own Impotency, for then he blemished himself: That my Lady's
Oath in that Case, was not sufficient; and how other Proofs might be had, I
could not conceive: That the Earl in open Estimation was to be thought an able
Man: That his Father was not thought in that Kind unsufficient. The Lord
Chamberlain replied, That, perhaps, the Father's Sin was punished upon the Son:
That it was Truth, that the Earl had no Ink in his Pen: That himself had
confessed, that he could not know a Woman, and that, before diverse Noblemen,
and some of them his own Friends, naming, as I remember, the Earls of
Northampton and Worcester, and the Lord Knowles. All this while I never dreamed
of impotentia versus hanc, but conceived, that they would charge the Earl
simply with Disability. The Lord Chamberlain then seemed unto me fully resolved
to procceed, and told me whom he would have in the Commission, The Bishops of
London, Ely, and Litchfield, the two Chancellors of the Exchequer and Duchy,
my Judges; (for so he called them) Sir Daniel Dun, Sir John Bennet, Dr. James,
and Dr. Edwards. I told his Lordship, That I liked the Persons very well. The
next News I heard, was about a Day or two after, That the Commission was out
under the Great Seal; which I wondered at, by Reason that I thought, that my
Words to the Lord Chamberlain being well weighed, would have moved some longer
Consideration. Well: The Commission is brought; it is accepted, and Proceeding
decreed; the Earl of Essex is called; the Libel is put in. When we saw it, and
that it contained impotentia versus hanc, most of us, who were not acquainted
with the Project before, were much amazed at it. I told the Council for my
Lady, That they had laid a very narrow Bridge for themselves to go over: So
said my Lord of London, and diverse of the rest; only my Lord of Ely was still
silent. My Lord of Litchfield, two several Times, uttered Speeches, as much
grieving and repining at this Controversy: That he was Ordinary to the Earl of
Essex, and had been in his House at Chartely, which he saw to be well governed;
and the Earl did bear himself most religiously therein, to his great Comfort:
That his Wife had the Honor to be Cousin Germain to the Countess of Suffolk;
and therefore he had no Reason but to wish well to the Earl of Essex and his
Lady both. Yet if he had been worthy to be consulted withal, he should have
thought that seven Years had been little enough to have deliberated, whether it
were fit to bring such a Business into Question before the World. Another Time
he told us, That it was very good, that we should proceed with great Wariness
in this Cause; for, says he, the World looks on us what we do; and there
were not more Eyes upon the Earl's Father losing his Head, than there be upon
the Earl now losing his Wife. He told me afterward, That he had ill Will for
those Speeches, and complained that some among us did tell Tales of all that
was said and done. (And so it appeared afterward, that Sir J. Caesar, and Sir
Daniel Dun did.) Sir Thomas Parry, in all his Speeches, privately murmured
against this Nullity, till he came to Windsor; where, the Day that the King
heard us, the Lord Chamberlain, in my Presence, spoke privately with him and
Sir Julius Caesar about this Matter; and from that Time forward, Mr. Chancellor
of the Duchy was altered. My Lord of Ely, also, for a great while, was in
Dislike of the Separation, (as I have credibly heard he opened himself to Sir
Henry Savile) until such Time as the King spoke with him, and then his Judgment
was reformed. But Truth it is, that among us he said nothing.

Now the Earl's Answer is taken, which appears. In it there were diverse
Things very observable. He used no ill Speech of his Lady, for which we all
much commended him. I gave him so strict a Charge to speak the Truth, requiring
him, as he would answer me before God at the last Day, to deliver nothing for
Favor or Affection, but to inform us in the Verity, that it wrung from him
something which I supposed he intended not to speak so plainly. He gave the
Reason of his having no Motions to know his Lady carnally, and of his thinking
that he never should. When I came out of France I loved her; I do not so now,
neither ever shall I. When he was to answer to the Article, that she was Virgo
incorrupta; he smiled, and said, She says so, and she is so for me. Sir Daniel
Dun caught these Words, and bid the Register set down then, credit articulum
esse verum. These Things gave me no great Encouragement to the Business; but
yet being at very little Leisure, I let Matters go on, and in mine own Part
resolved nothing. Then the Witnesses were deposed, but not published. The
Inspectresses were chosen, who came most unwillingly unto it, and howsoever Sir
Julius Caesar, and Sir Daniel Dun, (whom we never suspected to be as Parties in
the Cause, as afterward they appeared to be) made all clear and fair Weather;
yet my Lord of London told us openly, That he being with them, found that the
Ladies knew not well what to make of it; that they had no Skill, nor knew not
what was the Truth; but what they said, was upon the Credit of the Midwives,
which were but two, and I knew not how tampered with. Then came the Lady
Francis, to take her Oath, with the seven Compurgators. I noted therein some
Things. A Paper was brought, containing Verbis praecisis, what her Ladyship
would swear. We saw it, and considered it, and found it too bare and slight to
enforce any thing. The Commissioners advised, that it should be more full. Dr.
Steward accordingly drew it; but he must go forth to the Lady, to know whether
she would swear it. At last it was agreed unto. When she came to subscribe it,
after the Oath taken, one or two of her Brothers standing at her Back, put her
in Mind, that she must not write her Name Francis Essex, which she most
willingly remembered, and subscribed Francis Howard. We saw my Lord of
Litchfield's Wife to be one of the seven. We were afterward informed very
credibly, That the Lady Knevet had declared her Sorrow, that she was used in
such an Action, and said, That she wept all the Day about it. These Things
pleased me little, that Nobody took Comfort in the Business.

Things go on in a Course 'till Midsummer-Day. Then did the King deal with me
privately, as if he had received diverse Complaints against me. The first was,
That we delayed the Proceeding, in as much as the Meeting was put off, from the
18 th of June, 'till the 2 d or 3 d of July. My Answer was, We had rather gone
too fast: We had sat Forenoon and Afternoon: The Term now grew to an End, and
we had many Businesses to dispatch of the King's: That the Commission-Day for
Causes Ecclesiastical was put off for a Week, by Reason of Midsummer-Day
falling on a Thursday; and consequently, that our Proceeding in this Cause,
which commonly attended the other Commission, was of Necessity to be deferred.
But my principal Answer was, That we could not shorten it; for the Council on
both Parts, bad agreed upon that Day in July, and so it was upon the Acts:
Howsoever, therefore, the Council for my Lady moved openly in Court to
abreviate the Time, yet the Council for my Lord would not renounce nor alter
their Term probatory, but kept them close unto it. Another Objection was, That
I acquainted not the King, from Time to Time, how Matters did go. I answered,
That I knew not my self; for as yet there was no Publication of Witnesses. When
any thing came to my Knowledge, his Majesty should understand it. It was added,
That diverse Persons repaired unto me, who wished not well to the Business.
Belike, said I, they mean the Earl of Southampton, who came in the other Day,
when we were all sitting together. But his Coming, was about John Cotton' s
Cause; and I never had a Word with him in all my Life, touching this Business.
No, said the King, and smiled, it is Sir Henry Nevile. Indeed, quoth I, he was
with me the other Day, and this very Morning: But your Majesty well knows what
was the Reason. It was touching that Cause, which your Majesty commanded me to
send for him about. I delivered him your Mind the one Day, and he gave me an
Answer the other. At this Time, his Majesty cast out some Words, as if he
wished well to the Nullity; but it was so obscurely, that I did not conceive
that earnestly he desired it. After this Day, the Complaints were many which
were made to the King against me, and many Threats were used, and diverse Tricks
were played, to urge me to yield to the Nullity. One was, That I should suffer
the Earl of Essex to go out of Town. I answered, He had made his Answer, and
had his Proctor, and it was our Custom then not to stay Men. His Majesty
commanded me to enquire, if his Presence were not necessary; and if it were,
then I should stay him. I sent to Sir Daniel Dun, to Sir John Bennet, and to
Dr. Steward; and they all agreed, that there was no need of his Lordship's
being in Town. And of this I sent Word to the Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord of
Essex was permitted to depart. One while it was given out, that I was moved by
the Queen to cross them; when, in Truth, I had not spoke with her thereabout:
Another while, that I had spoke with the Earl of Essex at first, and hence his
Lordship grew less pliable; when they knew what about it was, and were told of
it before. And it was not forgotten, that when I gave Charge to the Earl of
Essex, to answer truly to the Positions in the Libel, I named the Case of my
Lord of Devonshire and the Lady Rich, as if I had compared this Cause unto
theirs. When afterward the Earl's Council took Exception to the Libel, it was
given out, that they were animated by me to oppose; whereas I never spoke with
them, nor knew any thing of their Purpose. And ever that was one, that there
were Delays used. Yea, it was to my Face delivered as a Threat, that
Archbishop Grindall had been overthrown for not giving Consent to the Divorce
of Dr. Julio, as implying, that the same would be my Case.

About this Time, the Lords, and the rest of the Feofees, were to meet at Mr.
Sutton's Hospital, about the Settling of it. The Day that we were to come
thither, my Lord Chamberlain in the Privy-Gallery at White Hall, showed his
Anger toward me, that we had not sent for the Keys to his Lordship, and that
he might deliver over the Cause. But when I came to the Charter House, there
was delivered me a Letter, written all with my Lord's own Hand, and directed to
the Lord Archbishop, the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Privy Seal; wherein he
did twice take Exception to me by Name, and, in a Sort, braved me, that so he
might pick a Quarrel to me; whereunto I replied not, but bore it with Patience.

A little before Whitsontide, his Lordship was very kind to me, and of his own
Accord proffered me a Chamber at Greenwich, which my Lord, my Predecessor, had;
but after twice Proffering of it, and my Accepting of the same, his Lordship
fell off strangely, and I never spoke of it more. These Complaints and Threats
made me to suspect all was not well; for what needed these Things to me, in a
Matter of Justice?

The Time now grew on, that his Majesty was to go abroad in Progress on a
Sunday, which was the Day before the Council for my Lord, were to put in their
Answers and Exceptions to the Libel. The Lord Privy Seal showed me a Letter of
the King's to his Lordship, wherein he was to expostulate with me, for delaying
the Business. I gave his Lordship Answer what was done, and he professed that
his Lordship was satisfied, and that no Man could do more than I did. On the
Monday, the Council for my Lord, put in their Answer, which was round and
picquant. The Lord Chamberlain had Notice of it, and complained thereof to the
King. I sent his Majesty the Copy thereof, and received from the King a Letter,
written all with his Majesty's own Hand, showing Dislike thereof. At that Time,
Sir William Button threatened Sir Daniel's Servant hard for that Answer, as the
said Sir Daniel diverse Weeks after told me. The Commissioners considered of
the. Answer, and disallowed it, giving Order, that no Record should remain of
it, but that it should be utterly defaced. This was very well accepted, and now
my Lord of Canterbury was a very honest Man. But 'till this was done, their
Followers gave out, that the King had in two Letters so schooled the
Archbishop, as he was never schooled in all his Life.

Things now being quiet, I called Sir William Button one Commission-Day unto
me, and spoke thus to him: Sir William Button, you have followed this Business
from the first, and have been present at the acting of all Things. Have you
ever seen me, in Word or Deed, done any Matter that does not become me? (for
indeed hitherto I had no Way declared my self, because we were not come to
consider of the Proofs.) What is then the Cause that I am thus complained upon,
that I cannot one Day be quiet? His Answer unto me, was, That the Lord
Chamberlain was every way a kind Father to his Children, but in this of his
Daughter, he was so Passionate, 'till it had an End, that he lay as on a
Grid-iron, broiling 'till the Matter were accomplished. Quoth I, It shall not
be delayed by me. Now, the Council on both Sides grew on to inform us, wherein
I noted, that whereas the Libel was laid in Nature of Maleficium versus hanc,
my Lady's Council upon the shutting up of the Cause, would not apply themselves
thereunto, neither would they willingly hear of it; which seemed strange, since
all the Books which they brought, particularly to the Cause, did mention that;
and Doctor Steward had publicly and expressively said, That it was that which
they did mean. This troubled me somewhat, because I perceived that they
themselves could not tell what to make of it. But afterward fell out another
Matter, which very much alienated my Judgment from the Cause: It appeared, that
Sentence could not be given, 'till the Time that the King entering his Progress,
was gone as far as Windsor, and then his Majesty was soon to depart to Farnam.
Sir Daniel Dun told us, That he was to attend the King in Progress; that he
must be at Farnam; that he was Old and Lame; that it would be too great a
Trouble for him, to come back again at the Day of Sentence. He therefore
prayed, That we would hear him deliver his Judgment of the whole Matter. This
Proffer seem^d wondrous strange to most of us, and putting it by handsomely, we
resolved not to trouble him therewith: And in this Opinion we arose. But
afterward my Lord of Litchfield comes to my Study Door, where I and my Lord
of London were about another Business, and tells us, That my Lord of Ely, and
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, were very desirous to hear Sir Daniel speak;
and that he, for his Part, was of the Mind that it would do very well, and
therefore he importuned us both to give Consent unto it; we imagining no great
harm could come thereby, assented, and the next Day is appointed for that
Purpose. There Sir Daniel comes with a formal Declaration, divided into six
Parts, to every one of which, he spoke so largely, that with a little replying
of ours, it spent a whole Afternoon. Matters which I most observed therein,
were these: He told us, That by our Commission, we might hear this Cause
summarily. He brought a Book, That he who has Power to hear a Matter
summarily, is in Nature of an Arbiter chosen by both Parties, and therefore may
judge in Discretion, as he shall think fit; and more to that Purpose. I thought
with my self, that this was strange Doctrine in a Matter of Marriage; that as
Arbitrators, we might adjudge a Wife to her Husband, or not adjudge her,
according to our Discretion. In his discoursing of my Lord's Impotency, Versus
hanc, he beat upon the Matter of Maleficium, and yet by no Means he would have
it to be that apparently. He insisted much, That the Sentence was to be given
in General Terms, not naming any particular Impotency. I told him, In such a
Sentence, the World look that we should yield a Reason of that which we did. He
replied, That it was fit to give no Reason. And here, said Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer, a Judge is not to give a Reason of his Sentence, but only to
God. I would give no Reason to any Prince in the World. I was once called
before Queen Elizabeth, about a Sentence which I gave, and she demanded of me
the Reason thereof; I told her, A Judge was bound to give no Reason of that
which he pronounced, but only to God. I marvell'd much at these Things, and at
last replied, Well, let it be, we acquaint not the World with the Reason of
that which we do, yet is it not fit, that I who am the Judge, and must
pronounce the Sentence, know the Ground of that which I am to pronounce. Here,
after a little pausing, one of them said, Yes, for you may see that in the
Books and Depositions. Quoth I, But I cannot see that there which may satisfy
me. But Mr. Chancellor said, I, and Sir Daniel Dun, Commissioners, you perhaps
be not driven to it, yet I shall be forced of Necessity to tell Men the Reason
of the Sentence: For as soon as this Cause is sentenced, every Man who is
discontented with his Wise, and every Woman discontented with her Husband,
which can have any reasonable Pretense, will repair to me for such Nullities.
If I yield unto them, here will be strange Violations of Marriages; if I do
not, I must not tell them, that it was fit for my Lord of Essex, but it is not
so for you; for the Law knows no, Persons, but is indifferent to all. If I
then repel them, I must show a Reason: Your Case is not like that of my Lord of
Essex; for his Case was thus, yours is thus. And so must I deliver the Reason,
or Men will not be answered. In this Time of debating, I ask^d Sir Daniel Dun,
I pray you Master of the Requests, what Examples have we of any Nullity in
England, pronounced in this kind? Might a Man see any Precedent of it? For I
would be loath to do a thing, that never was done before. Yes, says he, there
be Precedents thereof. In Anne of Cleve's Case, we have an Example, and another
in one Berry, which I have here in my Book; and thereupon out of a Note-Book of
his own, he read now a Line or two, and then two or three other Lines in
another Place, and so forward. My Answer was, I did not think that King Henry'
s Separation from Anne of Cleve, was for any such Matter, but upon a
Precontract. I said, King Henry the VIIIth was a strange Prince in that kind:
He put himself into many Marriages; and when he began that with Anne of Cleve,
he feared least the Emperor, and King of France, should combine with the Pope
against him, and therefore he was desirous to strengthen himself with the
Protestant Princes in Germany; and for that he thought this Marriage was much
behoveful. But afterward growing into Peace, with one or both of those
Princes, he grew soon weary of the Marriage, because he liked not the Woman.
But then I promised to consider further of these two Cases. This was the End of
that Day's Labor, which, when at Night I had recounted with my self, I thought
it was an audacious Part, for such a one as Sir Daniel was, to teach us out of
such poor Grounds, both what to do, and how to do. I found by my Observation,
that it was a set Match, that thus he should be heard; that he was prepared for
the Purpose: For no Man upon the sudden, or one Day's warning, could deliver so
much, and so digested. And now I began to assure my self, that he did not show
himself a Judge, but was a Stickler for the Nullity. I much suspected the
Conscience of the Man, knowing him reasonably well before, both out of mine own
Estimation of him, and out of the Judgment of my two Predecessors, the Lords
Whitgift and Bancroft, who held him for a Man most corrupt. Yet the next Day I
sent unto him for his Note-Book, and I caused the Record of Anne of Cleve, to
be brought unto me. Reading over all the latter, I found not one Word tending
to the present Case. Good Lord! thought I, how does this Man deceive me!
Perusing his own Book for that of Berry, I found it to be nothing but the
Pleadings of Advocates on both Sides, when about the 40 of Eliz. there was some
Question in the Common Law Courts, about Berry's Land, Berry himself being dead
many Years before. But I saw more in this Book against the Cause now in hand,
than for it; and by some other Writings in my House, I discovered that Berry's
Divorce, Anno 1561, was for want of his Stones, which Dr. Steward also, being
now of Council for my Lady, and who formerly stood for Berry's Brother against
the supposed Son, publicly acknowledged. These Things made me in my Heart much
dislike the Cause, and procured in me a hard Opinion, touching Sir Daniel Dun,
who should not have wronged me, being my Officer, as Dean of the Arches.

Within few Days after, the Message comes to us, that we were all to attend
the King at Windsor. This accordingly was done. The Morning before the Hearing,
the Lord Chamberlain in my Presence, spoke first earnestly with the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and afterward with the Chancellor of the Duchy, who that Day
fell from us, as appeared by the few Words that he had before the King. Some
few Days before that, had Sir John Bennet, by Sir William Button, and Dr.
Edwards, been otherwise dealt withal, earnestly to give Consent to the Nullity;
but that Day we dealt in it more than three Hours. His Majesty propounding the
Matter, asked, How Things did stand? Sir Julius Caesar said, That Sir Daniel
Dun was best able to speak unto it. And then, ex composito, Sir Daniel begins,
and tells a great Tale, and especially insisteth upon Non potnit. When he had
done, I answered him, and showed the want of Ground for that Conclusion, out of
other the Earl's evident Answers, That the Non potuit was for lack of Love, and
not for want of Ability. I challenged Sir Daniel, for abusing the King with a
false Report, and especially for his two Precedents of Berry's Case, and that
of Anne of Cleve. Amongst us, was diverse ways showed the Insufficiency of the
Proofs; that the Libel was laid short of the Cause, and the Proofs were short
of the Libel: That we had very many Times called upon the Council for my Lady,
that they should look that they rightly laid their Matter, and made their Proof
strong; that in the End, they complained not of the Judges, when the Fault was
in themselves: (Where my Lord of Litchfield added, That himself fearing the
worst, had gone to the Doctors-Commons, and warned the Council for my Lady,
that they should look to it.) Among other Things there uttered, Sir Daniel Dun
said, What a Disgrace will this be to my Lord Chamberlain and his Daughter, if
it should not now go forward? My Answer was, They should have looked to that
before they did begin it: We were not the Men that set the Matter on Foot; if
it were a Disgrace, they put it on themselves. But, quoth I, must I, to save
any Man from Disgrace, send my Soul unto Hell, to give a Sentence whereof, I
saw no Ground? I will never do it. My Lord of London, Sir John Bennet, and Dr.
Edwards, did carry themselves well that Day, although Sir John Bennet had much
Opposition from the King himself. When we saw the King earnest, I fell down on
my Knee, and with Tears in mine Eyes, I said, I beseech your Majesty, if ever I
have done you any Service, whom I do serve with a faithful Heart, or may do you
any Service, rid me of this Business. I had said before, That I was the
unfittest Man that might be, to judge of such a Cause; I was no married Man, I
was no Lawyer, and I had not had the Time, by reason of my infinite Businesses,
to read so much of that Matter, as other Men had. I observed that Day, many
Things in his Majesty's Carriage, of the Matter: He was Earnest, but Gracious
and Moderate. He found Fault with the Libel, and said, That Complaints were
made, that we went too slow, but he perceived we went too fast. He marvell'd
that my Lord of Worcester, and the Lord Knowles, were not examined as
Witnesses. He constantly profess^d, That he believed that my Lord of Essex, was
Impotent for a Woman. He told us, That some of the Earl's Friends had put a
Woman to him, and he would not touch her. His Majesty said, That the Earl was
once purposed to have gone to Poland, to have tried whither he might be
unwitched. To which Things my Reply was, I would to God we might see these
Things legally proved. That his Majesty much disliked that Course, and
therefore he set the Course now in Prosecution; and therefore if there were any
Error in it, he had done the Lord Chamberlain wrong, and he must take it upon
him. In sum, I found his Majesty much troubled what to do, as I gathered,
especially by these Words, If my Lord of Canterbury, and my Lord of London,
have a Negative Voice, we must either begin all again, and have a new Libel, or
we must have a new Commission, and put other Adjuncts. The Conclusion from his
Majesty was, That we should all meet at Lambeth on the Morrow, and if we could
unanimously consent, then go to the Sentence; if not, we should put it off unto
another Day, and certify him of it, and so farther understand his Pleasure.
When the King was risen from his Chair, he fell to inveighing against these
Marryings of young Couples, before they be acquainted one with another. He told
us the Inconvenience of it, how he knew in Scotland, a Father who married his
only Child to a Man against her Will: That she withstood it; yet her Father
forced her to marry him: That being gone Home with her Husband after a very few
Days, she came run away from him: That her Father jerk'd her, and sent her home
again: That not long after, she poisoned her Husband, and was burnt for it,
while the King was in Scotland. After his Majesty's going out, I followed him,
and told him, I evidently perceived, that it was in the Earl of Essex Vitium
Animi non Corporis. His Majesty swore he thought so. There passed some other
Speech from the King to me, touching his own Lying with the Queen the first
Night that he married her. But, at the last, I kissed his Hand and departed.
After I was gone, the Lord Chamberlain speaking somewhat against me, the King
replied, The Archbishop has so adjur'd me to be rid of this Matter, that I
cannot tell what to say to him. This did Sir Julius Caesar tell me that Day at
Dinner, at Eaton College, letting me know, that the King found no Fault with
me. But afterward, the King coming to Dinner, after his Meat had stayed for him
on the Table more than a Quarter of an Hour, he sat him down in his Chair, and
casting his Leg over one Side of it, he eat no Meat for a great Space of Time,
neither said he any Word, but sat musing to himself; which every Man observed.
And it was given out by some in the Court, that I was gone away in the King's
Displeasure. Within some few Days after, it was also more Ways than one brought
credibly to my Ears, That the Archbishop and my Lord of London, should be
hereafter kept to their Spiritualities, and should meddle no more in temporal
Matters: And within a while it came so far, as that they should have their
Temporalities taken from them. Sir John Bennet was at Windsor moved by Sir
Thomas Lake in the Lord Fenton's Name, and afterward by the Lord Fenton
himself, That he should alter his Opinion, and make his Peace with the King,
for his Majesty was not well pleased with him.

As I came Homeward from Windsor in my Coach, and all that same Night, two
Things did run much in my Mind; the one of them was, What a strange and fearful
Thing it was, That his Majesty should be so far engaged in that Business: That
he should profess, that himself had set the Matter in that Course of Judgment:
That the Judges should be dealt withal before, and, in a Sort, directed what
they should determine: That the like Example had not been seen: That his
Majesty did win himself much Honor in the Case of Sutton's Hospital, that,
notwithstanding all Importunity, he had suffered the Judges to do their
Conscience. This strange moving to the contrary, did make me marvelously
suspect that it was no direct Matter; and, as a dutiful Servant to my most
gracious Master, I wished in my Heart, that his Majesty's Hand might be taken
off the Business. The other Point was, That we had all this while, in our
Debatings, never, or very little, meddled with Points of Divinity. And I
thought with my self, that much might be said therein, against maleficium, and
the Nullity to be pronounced thereupon versus hanc; for out of this we could
never get in all our Talking, though they would never cleave fast to it. I
therefore, having formerly revolved some such Things in my Mind, rose early on
the Day that we were to debate Things at large, and set down my Mind in writing
out of something in Divinity. The Copy of this appears. The Day after we came
from Windsor being Tuesday, we met, and all the Forenoon we insisted on that
which I had briefly written: But to deliver my Conscience freely before God, I
received no kind or show of Satisfaction. My Lord of Ely sat little less than
Dumb, as if he had never dreamed of any such Matter. Diverse of the
Commissioners wondered at him, that he, who had spent so much Time in reading
of the Canonists touching this Question, should not think upon Divinity.
Briefly up and down by others somewhat was said, but nothing to Contentment.
After Dinner, Sir John Bennet propounded Reasons out of the Law, but without
any Satisfaction. I observed two special Points that Afternoon: The one was,
That we all thought my Lord of Essex his Answer to the Libel, was neither plain
nor sufficient. And now it was remembered, that my Lord of Litchfield had put
to him certain Questions, that four Things were necessary to Generation;
Membrum virile, Erection, Penetration, and Ejaculatio Seminis; which, although
they were then smiled at, and since that Time much Sport had been made at the
Court and in London about them; yet now our married Men on all Hands wished
that punctually his Lordship might have been held to give his Answer unto them.
This instructed me, that the Proofs were not full. A second Thing was, that
when toward the Evening, I wished that a Reconciliation might be labored
between my Lord and my Lady, that it should best become us, my Lord of Ely, who
from the first Beginning of the Process, had been always very silent, spoke
home about that, much disliking that any such Thing should now be sought; that
it was too late; that it might be the Cause of poisoning and destroying one of
another, to bring them together again. Well, when we could not agree upon our
Conclusion, we were enforced to put all off unto a longer Day; and as the King
commanded, I was to certify his Majesty of it. I wrote a Letter to the King,
praying humbly that I might be freed from the Trouble of this Cause, or, at
least, give no Sentence in it, 'till I were a married Man, and so might better
understand the Business. I enclosed also six Reasons of Sir John Bennet's
taking Exceptions in Law against the Nullity. And withal I joined mine own
Reasons in Divinity, of which I said in my Letter, that I knew not where to
seek an Answer to them; meaning, that the Commissioners had given me none.
These Reasons afterward cost me a great deal of Trouble.

The next Progress in this Controversy, was, that I was advertised, that it was
his Majesty's Pleasure that the Cause should be put off until the 18th of
September; and withal there was brought a new Commission of Adjuncts, whereinto
my Lords of Winchester and Rochester were put. The Day that I perceived this,
acquainting the two Chancellors of the Exchequer and Duchy therewith, in the
Gallery at Lambeth, I told them, That I hoped now, that for my Part, I should
be freed from any Trouble therein farther, for I did desire to be rid of it.
They both answered me, That they desired in like sort to be quit of the Matter.
A good Business, thought I, that no Body takes Comfort of it, unless it be Sir
Daniel Dun, of whom I forgot before to note, that on the Day of meeting, next
after our coming from Windsor, he, with a great deal of Insolency, challenged
me for my Speech before his Majesty, the Day before. Do not abuse the King, Sir
Daniel Dun. I remembered it was in mine own House, and if I had rattl'd him
according to his Deserts, my Lord Chamberlain would have said it had been done
for his Sake; and in the Progress, Sir Daniel having the King's Ear, would have
made Things worse than they were; and I therefore forbore him with such
Patience, that some of the Commissioners told me afterward, that they wondered
how I could endure those Behaviors, at the Hands of a Man of his Quality: But
yet they commended me for it. Now grew I to consider what were the Reasons why
these two Commissioners were joined to us; and therein I had many
Advertisements from diverse Friends, diverse Ways. We resolved for my Lord of
Winton; that it was supposed, that there was no great Amity between him and me;
that when I was Dean there, there was some Disagreement between us, which they
supposed yet continued: That he had an old Grudge to me, for having the
Archbishopric, which his Lordship so much desired. Besides, it was some
Tickling unto him, that his Gravity and Learning should either win in the
Archbishop, or lay some Blemish upon him, if he stood out. Certain it is, that
Sir William Button was with him; and, doubtless, would tell him how acceptable
this Service would be to his Majesty. I heard of good Credit and secretly, That
he was put in hope to be made a Privy-Counsellor; and the Fame was general,
That for the Father's Labor, the Son should be made a Knight. It seems at
the first, that he had no great Fancy unto it; but being wrought upon, he
consented; so that he might be required by his Majesty to be present. This was
done by a Letter from Salisbury, which, at his being at Lambeth, he showed me;
that I should take Notice, that he had not come, unless he had been commanded.
I leave him for the Time, only signifying, that in the Vacation, he sent for
diverse Books from London, and had Dr. Steward much with him, to inform him in
all Particulars. Yet I may not forget, that while he held off his Consent, some
hard Opinions were raised of him at Court; as I found by a Letter from my Lord
of Litchfield to me. For there he was found Fault with, that he attended not
the King at Farnham, or at Andover. And there Blame was laid, that Mr. Love,
who was so great with my Lord of Winton was like to get the Warden's Place at
Winchester, Dr. Harmar being reported to be dead. Concerning the Bishop of
Rochester, it was well known that he had opened himself before the King's going
in Progress, that he liked well of the Nullity. Coming once or twice while we
were about it, he, with some in my House disputed earnestly for it. He was a
great Dependant of my Lord of Litchfield. This was a Way to make him well
esteemed, and to arise high in Preferment. But, in Truth, he should not have
verified the Report which Archbishop Bancroft on his Deathbed gave of him,
together with Butler and Carrier, to the King by a Message, unless he did some
such Thing. When he was put into the Commission, he in diverse Places seemed to
be much offended, that he was made one. His Grief was, that he was set in
Opposition against me: He would never give his Voice to it, unless I consented.
These, and the like Things, he spoke, as elsewhere, so to some of my Servants
in my House at Croydon: For, under another Color, he came three Times in the
Vacation to me; but I never spoke a Word with him about that Matter, as knowing
it would be an Argument against me, that I labored to draw away the King's
Commissioners; and the End showed, that I had no great Reason to trust him.
Besides these two Adjuncts, the new Commission it self seemed very strange unto
me. There were eight made of the Quorum; and it was so laid, that if three of
them, with two other, consented, the Sentence might be given; so that, by the
Words thereof, if seven had denied, five might have pronounced and prevailed. A
Matter so uncooth, that, as I credibly heard, my Lord of Winton himself found
much Fault therewith. Again, there was a Clause, Legibus, Statutis,
Ordinationibus, Constitutionibus quibuscunque non obstantibus; so resolved they
were to have it dispatched. Every thing now stood at a Pause; and my Lord of
Ely (who, at first, delivered his Judgment against it to Sir Henry Savile, as I
heard it avowed upon good Credit; but afterward said, he was better instructed
by the King) began to hearken what Men said of the Matter, as appeared by
Speech which he had with Sir John Paiton; to whom, notwithstanding, he told
some Things of the Insufficiency of my Lord of Essex. The Weather grew fair; he
hoped the overflowing of the Isle of Ely would cease; he would go down in his
Visitation; he came and took his leave of me, but not one Word of the Nullity.

Now was his Majesty abroad, and I had more Leisure to consider of this
Question. I read what I could; I conferred with many Men about diverse
Circumstances, so to inform my self the better. I prayed frequently to God to
direct me aright. I often perused the Depositions, but I found little
Satisfaction. I perceived most of the Lords had a great Dislike of this
Proceeding; that the better Sort of Men had generally a Detestation of it; that
the Judges and Lawyers much condemned it. I heard many strange Stories of the
Lady's Carriage. Something was freely spoken of a Woman arraigned at Bury; and
how to shut that up, and so to free the Earl, this Course was consented upon.

These Things, though out of Charity I entertained not as absolutely true, yet
the Concurrence of them from so many, made me that I could not contemn them.
Besides, now grew the Rumor strong, that a new Husband was readily provided
for her: Whereof I called to Mind the Opinion of Sir Henry Nevile, delivered to
me at Windsor; and I did not forget a Speech of Overbury's, once to me in that
Kind. I understood, that at Christmas last, there was a Reconciliation wrought
between the Earl and his Lady, howsoever it fell out. Yea, that when the Lords
met at White Hall about the Manner of Separation, there was three Times that
Day a Likelihood to make them Friends; which we thought implied no Disability
of my Lord of Essex, even in their own Opinion. I farther understood, that
whereas it was whispered among us, the Commissioners, That at Christmas last,
my Lord of Essex being in Bed with his Lady, should labor a quarter of an Hour
carnally to know her, and in the End should say, Frankey, it will not be, and
so kissed her, and bid her good Night: That this was not true; but that the
Earl, the Night before his going from London, at the End of Trinity Term, said
with Tears in his Eyes, That when he went to Bed to her at Christmas last, he
had forgiven all Things as clearly as he wished that God should forgive him his
Sins; but when they were alone, she reviled him, and miscalled him, terming him
Cow, and Coward, and Beast: And he added, that she was as bitter a Woman as any
was in the World: Which Things so cooled his Courage, that he was far from
knowing, or endeavoring to know her. These Matters, together with the small
Joy which the Commissioners had to deal in the Business, made me have no great
Fancy unto it. On the other Side, I heard that my Lord Chamberlain, or his
Followers, gave out, that what was done, was performed by the King's Direction,
otherwise it had not been begun; and therefore, they expected that his Majesty
should see it effected; that they rested themselves on him. I was much grieved
that they had this Advantage on my Master, who being so engaged, as I thought,
could not well go backward or forward: And, to increase my Sorrow, I was
privately advertised from Court, that his Majesty did mean himself to give an
Answer to my Reasons abovementioned. I heard another Way, that his Majesty in
the Progress wrote much with his own Hands. From another Friend I was told,
That the King with his Answer to the Reasons, had written to me a sharp Letter.
Yea, by another I learned the Contents of the Letter, which was full of
Sharpness.

These Things in the Summer kept me full of Expectation of some great
Coffeehouse. Yet my heart still assured me, that I was guilty of no
Wickedness. I found all Persons with whom I spoke of my Mind, for the Dislike
of the Nullity. In many Businesses to and from the King by Letters, I found
nothing but well. His Majesty sent me Warrants for three Bucks, as formerly he
had done, and with some Kindness joined.

Thus I was tossed in my Thoughts; and in all my Troubles, I had Recourse to
God in Prayer.

By this Time, the 18th of September, draws nigh, and I am informed, That my
Lord of Winchester, the Tuesday before, was come to Town; and that besides my
Lady's Council, Sir Julius Caesar, and Sir Daniel Dun, did, at St. Mary Overy's
House, daily attend his Lordship. I expected no great Good of this; only from
the King I heard nothing but well. For some few Days before, his Majesty had
been at White Hall, where I kissed his Hand, and he did not only look merrily
upon me, but he gave me Promise of the Bishopric of Lincoln, for my Brother,
as I understood it. Some other Matters also passed quietly in Speech, and I
found no Disturbance. But on the 17th of September. the Day before our new
meeting at Lambeth, my Lord of Litchfield being sent from the King, brings
diverse Papers unto me, sealed up. I opened them, and found there my Reasons
first, secondly, an Answer to them, and, thirdly, a Letter, all written with
the King's Hand unto me. I read them all presently, without any abatement,
whereunto I was helped by my Foreknowledge, that such Things would come. I
said little unto it, only I asked my Lord of Litchfield, Whether he knew what
those Papers contained? He told me, That the King had read unto him the Answers
to the Reasons, and had given him the Letter to Seal up in a Paper; but in
Reverence to his Majesty, he held it not his Duty to look into it. Growing
afterward in some Speech of our next Days Business, I told him plainly, That
having spent much Time in this Vacation, in perusing the Books, I could not
find any where, but especially in the Answer of my Lord of Essex, that which
would give me Contentment. I read the Places, and my Lord confessed with me,
That there was not enough. He told me also, That unless I gave my Consent to
the Separation, that he would never give his: So much Reverence in him did I
find both then, and diverse Times before, against this Divorcement. At last he
mentioned one Thing which pleased me wondrous well, and that was, That we
should call for my Lord of Essex again, and new examine him, upon some Points
to be farther declared, ad informandum animum Judicis. For hence, either we
should know so much as might persuade us to decree a Separation, or the World
might be satisfied that we had no Reason for it. These Things thus settled, his
Lordship separateth. Then I withdrew my self to my Study, and read over again
and again, the Papers from the King. I found them very sharp, and perceived by
the Time that they arrived unto me, that they were detained 'till that Day,
that I might be overwhelmed with them on the sudden, and have no Time to
deliberate, before we were to come the second Time to sit in Judgment. These
things did much trouble me, so that I did sleep but a little that Night. I
revolved many things, and much tumbling I had in my Miud. It grieved me
infinitely, that the King should make himself a Party therein; That some
Unthankfulness, and other Matters, were little less then Reproaches unto me:
Methought my faithful Heart to my Master, deserved no such Sharpness. I devised
how I might give the King Contentment, and it was some Comfort to me, that we
had thought upon a Course of new examining my Lord of Essex. But as things
stood, I could not force my Conscience, which cried upon me, That it was an
odious Thing to GOD and Men, to give such a Sentence, without better warrant. I
here cast what might befall to the Church in my Disgrace; how Papists would
scorn at it; how it might be my own Ruin, and that diverse ways; a Hazard to my
Friends, and to the Commissioners which were of my Mind; how my Lord of London,
had a Wife and Children, which might all be overthrown at one Blow. But after
Midnight sleeping, toward the Morning I considered on the other Side, That my
Conscience was more unto me than all the World; that it was a fearful thing, in
Place of Judgment, to give a Sentence against mine own Heart; That Olivarius,
the Chancellor of France, upon such an Occasion, grew Mad, and died in it: That
the Manner of our Sentence, must be Solum Deum prae Oculis babentes, a rei
veritate inspecta; all which, and the like Meditations, did much preponderate
with me. Then I slept again, and now rising, I found my Heart much settled, to
persist in that which I held to be Truth. I poured out earnestly my Prayers to
God, and was now strongly resolved, to leave all to God, remembering, That he
had preserved me from my Mother's Womb; that he had from Time to Time, rid me
out of all my Troubles; that his Power was the same still; that he would never
forsake me, if I turned not from him. I forgot not, That the Hearts of Kings
were in the Hand of the Lord; that I had Experience of the Graciousness, both
of GOD and the King, the Year before; when standing earnestly in a good Cause,
that Prince Henry should not marry a Papist, I received some sharp Words from
the King for my Labor; but the next Day his Majesty used me very kindly again.
To this I added, That Poverty, Imprisonment, Death it self, were things
contemptible to a resolved Mind: That some of my Predecessors, as Archbishop
Cranmer, and my Lord Grindal, had given good Examples of these Sufferings, and
they were recorded in the Catalogue of the Righteous. These Thoughts thus
revolved, I read again the Letter from the King, and drawing out into a Paper,
all the sharp Words, I considered them again and again, and methought they were
not altogether so bitter as I apprehended them; that they were wrung from his
Majesty by my Lord Chamberlain's Importunity; that my Master had deserved at my
Hands, that I should bear patiently twenty times more; and that all was
nothing, so the Clearness of my Conscience might be preserved. With these
Resolutions on the Saturday, I came to Lambeth, where I met with the News of
Overbury's Death, and the sound of some fearful Apprehensions thereupon, bruted
about the City. I made Trial of my Lord of London's Constancy, telling him, aut
cidendum, aut cadendum. I found him most resolved, avowing unto me, That if he
should pronounce for the Dissolution of the Marriage, he thought the Devil
would that Night fetch away his Soul. Yea, he was earnest on me, to persist
where I began, telling me, That the Eyes of the whole Church of England were
upon me, and expected of me, that I should show my self a worthy Man. At last
we came to sit, where my Lords of Winchester and Worcester, took their Places.
The Commission was read, the Fact, and Manner of the Process was opened, and
nothing notable done, saving that my Lord of London, proposing, that it was fit
that my Lord of Essex should be called to explain himself farther, for the
fishing out of the Truth, all the Commissioners most willing assented
thereunto, (yea, my Lords of Winchester and Worcester expressly,) saving Sir
Julius Caesar, who softly declared his Dislike thereof, in my hearing. When the
Court was risen, I spoke with my Lord of Litchfield, and not thinking fit to
return any thing to the King in Writing, I prayed him to acquaint his Majesty
how Things stood; and to tell him, that upon this Course of new calling my Lord
of Essex, I hoped in the End, we should give his Majesty Satisfaction. The
Sunday I spent at Croydon, and preached on that Text of Christ's raising the
Widow's Son of Naim, to the great Comfort of mine own Heart. That Day I
conferred with a Friend, and settled some Courses, if any Trouble should befall
unto me. I was also by a good Friend informed, that my Lord of Essex, on that
Sunday Morning, having five or six Captains, and Gentlemen of Worth in his
Chamber, and Speech being made of his Inability, rose out of his Bed, and
taking up his Shirt, did show to them all, so able, and extraordinarily
sufficient Matter, that they all cried out Shame of his Lady, and said, That if
the Ladies of the Court knew as much as they knew, they would tread her to
Death.

On the Monday we met at Lambeth again, and Information was given on the Part
of my Lady. These things passed quietly. When the Court was risen, my Lord of
Litchfield told me, That he had made his Majesty acquainted with our
Proposition on Saturday, but that his Majesty was strongly against it, my Lord
of Essex should any more be called, and that by no means he would endure it;
for that peradventure, the said Earl, either being provoked by the late
Challenge between him and Mr. Henry Howard, or otherwise instigated by the Earl
of Southampton, might speak somewhat which might mar the Business. This made
me still suspect, that all was not right, and I replied to my Lord, If that be
denied us, and we have no farther Proof, I shall never give Sentence for the
Nullity: As good declare my Mind at first, as at last, and I pray you so
acquaint his Majesty. When I went Homeward, I much revolved this in my Heart,
thinking, Good Lord! What a Case is this? Shall any Truth be kept from us? Are
they afraid to have all out? Do they only look to attain their own Ends, and
care not how our Consciences be entangled and ensnared? On the Wednesday we met
again, and now Dr. James is come to us, and by and by comes in my Lord of Ely,
who, as it seemed, had meant to have kept him away, but the King sent an
express Messenger for him, requiring him by a Letter, to be there on the
Tuesday Night. Now are we plena Curia. Before we sat down, Sir Thomas Lake
delivers a Message unto me from the King, That his Majesty desired a speedy
End of this Business; that it had hung long, and the World was in expectation
of it; that the Term grew on, which would be full of Businesses: That his
Majesty on Monday, was to go to Windsor, to meet the Queen, and my Lord
Chamberlain with him; that therefore he would have us to fall close to our
Work, not to trouble our selves on the Morrow, to come see the King, who would
come late to White Hall, because some Ceremonies were to be performed, as upon
the last Day of Hunting; that we should not attend his Majesty 'till Friday,
but that the Sentence must be given on Saturday. My Answer was publicly, That
there should be no Stay in me, and that therefore on the Morrow, we would sit
Forenoon and Afternoon, if the Commissioners so pleased; and if they thought
good, Is would not refuse to sit until Midnight. But in mine own Heart I
perceived, that all the Care was, that the Matter might be dispatched before
the Queen spoke with the King, whom they supposed not to wish well to the
Business. We go to our Court, and Sir Thomas Lake stayed to hear the
Information on my Lord's Part. It was strange, to see how my Lord of Winchester
carried himself that Day, partly to play his Prizes before Sir Thomas Lake, who
might make Report of it to his Fame, and partly to show his Ludi-magisterial
Disposition. He snapp'd up my Lord's Council, that they could not speak a Word,
but he caught it before it was out. I know what you will say, when indeed he
knew not, neither was it any such Matter as he imagined. God Almighty will tell
you a Tale for that; I tell you, Doctor Bennet, I have as much Law as you, I am
as good a Lawyer as you are. He fell diverse Times on my Lord of London
Personally, and would needs know of him openly, How many times in a Year, a Man
was bound Carnally to know his Wife. In a Word, with Scoffs, and imperious
Behavior, he played the Advocate all that Day, to the great Offense of the
Standers by, so that it was publicly spoke of in London, which, I think, came
to his Ears; so that ever afterward, he carried himself more tractable. I was
forced to bear it, because of avoiding new Complaints.

The Point most observable that Day, was, that both my Lord of Winchester, and
my Lord of Ely, did deny Maleficiation, so that by no Means they would have
this Question to proceed in that Nature, which I openly did thank them for, and
bound it upon, before all the Commissioners and Standers by, telling them, That
the same was my Opinion. But I asked my Lord of Winchester, who sat by me,
What be then held it to be. He told me privately, That he held it to be a
Natural Impotency, which was before the Marriage. I asked him, What that might
be, and whence he gathered it. He answered, I have heard diverse Particulars,
which are enough to persuade me if they be True. Yea, my Lord said I, if they
be True, I have heard as many to the contrary. I wish that we might examine,
whether they be True or no; that were fair Proceeding. It is my Grief, that it
is not permitted unto us, to try whether all these Matters be so or not. This
might satisfy a Man's Conscience. So we parted that Night.

On the Thursday, at Ten of the Clock, we met in Lambeth-Hall, where my Lady's
Council took on them, to answer some Scruples objected by Dr. Ferrand. But Dr.
Martin, when no Body spoke of it, fell to wipe away that Objection, that my
Lord had not sworn, Cum Septima mann. Upon his Speech, the Commissioners took
hold of it, and it then being urged strongly, my Lady's Council stood at first,
as if they had been blasted with Lightning. Afterward they grew extreme angry
with Dr. Martin, that he had proposed it, but the Issue was, there could no
Answer be given unto it; but in the Sight of all the Standers by, this was
broke off with Shame and Confusion of Faces. We dined not that Day, but about
one or two of the Clock, we withdrew our selves privately into the Parlour. I
had thought there to have had Dr. Edwards, and the rest who liked not of the
Nullity, to propound their Doubts, and so in Order; and last of all, I would
have spoken. But there I found a contrary Course resolved, which my Lord of
Winchester seemed much to dislike. But my Lord of Litchfield, Sir Julius
Caesar, and Sir Daniel Dun, had set the Clock, and they must have their Will.
The six Reasons are produced, which Sir John Bennet had delivered the Day after
we came from Windsor, and the Copy whereof, was by me sent to the King. All
these must in their Order be debated. One was about the unperfectness of the
Libel, in which we all received Satisfaction, that the Libel was well to so
much purpose as now they declared they would have it. The other five, my Lord
of London, Sir John Bennet, Dr. James, and Dr. Edwards, maintained: I allowed
of three of them absolutely* and the other two, that was Inspection of my
Lord's Body, and a Time to be assigned by the Judge, to try whether they might
Carnally know one another, I held to be fit, when those Reasons were proposed;
but now such Flames and Quarrels were arisen, I thought not amiss now to be
forborne My Lord of Litchfield, with a Pen, did note what every Man resolved,
but principally my Words, with a Purpose to show them to the King, as I
conceived, and afterward I found it to be so. I was desirous therefore, that
his Majesty might see I was not Obstinate, but settled to yield to Reason. And
again, I supposed, that this Candor of mine, would make some of them yield to
us, where they saw there was unevitable Truth. But I found it far otherwise,
for our Afternoon's Work was, that they gave shuffling and shifting Answers to
the Objections, such as themselves had studied all the Vacation; but no Care
was, whither they were True and Satisfactory, or not. And to what Sir Daniel
proposed, all Seven of them consented, without sticking or scruple, so that I
might imagine it was a set Play. Upon the first Scruple debating, Sir Julius
Caesar finding the Difference of Opinions, and that our Lawyers stuck strongly
unto it, Let us, says he, put it to the Question, and let the major Part of
Voices determine it. When I saw this to be the Proceeding, the Lord, thought I,
deliver me from such Judges. But yet observing their Manner, I possessed my
Soul in Patience. When it grew to be dark, that the King might understand, that
I was willing to allow time to all that might be said, I remembered Sir John
Bennet to read the Sentence of the Rota Romana, where, in the Popes own
Consistory, about the Year 1585, a Judgment was reversed, which an Archbishop
in Spain, had given for a Nullity, in a Case being ours altogether, because,
after the triennial Cohabitation, he had not assigned a Time for the married
Couple to make Trial again, and to use Fasting and Prayer. This Repeal was read
at large, and so was another of the Rota, in the same Kind. But both these were
slighted, as Matters of Nothing, and so I think had St. Paul been, if he had
been there. I urged that of Alexander III, That even in France it self, no
Nullity had been allowed; but that it was Consuetudo generalis Ecclesiae
Gallicanae; and that Ecclesia Romana, did know or practice no such thing. This
was slighted like the former, and I perceived it was but in vain to speak to
them, for they were resolved, and be it Good, or be it Bad, the Matter should
be done.

On the Friday Morning I went to White Hall, and looking somewhat heavily, the
King comes to me, and to my Lord Chancellor, and offers us both his Hand to
kiss. He might perceive by my Countenance that I was not a little troubled, and
that was perceived by diverse of the Lords, who privately let me know their
Minds, that we had a foul and strange Matter in Hand at Lambeth. At last, the
King takes me aside, and after propounding three or four Businesses, walking,
he took me to the Window, and asked me, How that great Cause did go forward? I
told his Majesty, That I had no Liking of it; that I had received a Letter and
Writing from him which very much troubled me, for I knew my self to be his
dutiful Servant, and had not deserved Ill of him; that it was nothing to me
whether she remained Wife to the Earl of Essex, or were married to another Man;
but that I might not give Sentence where I saw no Proof; that I had lived fifty
one Years, almost, and had my Conscience uncorrupted in Judgment; that I knew
not how soon I was to be called before God, and I was loath, against that Time,
to give a Wound to mine own Soul; that all my Grief was, that his Majesty's
Hand was in it; that for other Men I cared not; that I chose rather to die an
honest Man than a wise Man; that he must never afterward expect true Service of
me, for, how could I be true to him, who was false unto God; that if he marked
it well, this was no Time to disgrace his good Servants: I told him, That if
his Majesty pleased to let the Matter alone, as he did all other Causes, I
would make good my Part against all England, on the Peril of my Head. The King
answered, That I would have no Lawyers. I replied, Yes, enough, There is not an
honest Lawyer in England that would not be on my Side. His Majesty asked me,
Whether the rest of the Commissioners, Yesterday, did not persuade me. I told
him, No; but their Dealing, rather drove me the contrary Way. For, (said I) I
came thither ingeniously to yield to any Truth that should be showed me; but
they, on the contrary Part, in a factious Course went wholly together, and what
one said, another said, be it Well, or be it Ill, without any Scruple. To my
Speech, That it was an Example that never had been in England; the King said,
Yes, Berry' s Case. I beseech'd his Majesty, That he would not believe that
Cause to be any such Matter; for if he would pardon me, it should not be long
before that I would show, that his Separation was for Lack of his Stones. In
this debating, the King was very desirous to know, what should be the Reasons
whereupon I stood, that I might have Satisfaction. My Answer was, That when I
was in Place of Judgment, I would not conceal the Reasons of my Sentence, but
it was to no Purpose to speak them now; it would but put his Majesty to a new
Trouble to hear them, and then some Man must answer them, who looked to his own
End, and to make a plausible Answer, which would not content me, without ground
of Truth. A great Part of the Time, that I had this Speech with the King, my
Eyes were full of Tears, which I saw, much moved my gracious Master, and
especially, my earnest Desire, That I might do my Conscience. I perceived the
King was much overcome, by this my honest Dealing: And then, whilst his Majesty
went to speak with my Lord Privy Seal, and my Lord Chamberlain, who stood all
this while at the farther End of the Gallery; and to whom, I conceived, the
King told much of that which I had spoken; I went my ways to Lambeth, to
Dinner. Now grew I confident to do my Conscience right, whatsoever came of it.
That Day I dined privately, but yet, my Lord Bishop of Bath was with me, whom,
when I had acquainted with so much of the Cause, as I thought fit, I received
no Discouragment from him. My Heart was much eased, and now I thought I should
no more be troubled. Yet, between three and four a Clock, after Dinner, my Lord
of Litchfield comes to me from the King, and brings a written Treatise upon
the present Argument, which was the Work of a Scotchman, I know not who. I
received it, and promised that Night to read it; as indeed I did, riding in my
Coach to Croydon; for thither I thought fit to withdraw my self, though it were
late, for avoiding of more Perturbation. This Treatise no way pleased me, but I
thought it the Work of some hungry Fellow, who lacked twenty Shillings to buy
Food to his Belly. Here, finding it the Day of the End of my Quarter, I settled
much of my domestic Business. I forgot not to commend my self, and the whole
Cause, to God by Prayer. I meditated many Things in my Bed: In the Morning I
rose early, and before Day, in my Study, I set down some Heads, what I would
speak unto. Then went I early to Lambeth, and there supplied my brief Notes,
digesting my Matter of Sentence into Order; being resolved to speak large, and
home to the Cause, without Touch of any Person more than I must needs. By this
Time, most of the Commissioners were come. I sent for my Lord of London, Sir
John Bennet, Dr. James, and Dr. Edwards, singly and severally, into my Study: I
required them, before God, not to speak any thing for respect to me, but to do
that, which in their Learning and Conscience they thought to be just, and to
speak that intrepid, without Blemish to any Man, but soundly to the Matter. I
found them all avowing, that in their Souls, they found no Warrant for the
Nullity. I then wished severally, Dr. James, and Dr. Edwards, to deliver their
Sentence, with some Reasons adjoined, not many, but of the strongest. I told
Sir John Bennet, that this Day, I expected he should show himself a worthy Man;
that he should deliver his Judgment per extensum; that they had labored to
blemish his Skill, and to slight his Learning especially, therefore, both for
his Conscience, and his Credit, he should show what was in him, to maintain an
honest Cause. If Sir Daniel Dun, and Sir Julius Caesar, who came after him,
should bespatter him in their Choler, or lay any Imputation upon him, he should
find that some of us would take it off him. To my Lord of London, I said, We
have three that speak first, who, I trust, will lay such a Foundation in the
Heart of the Hearers, as shall not be removed. But the other Side have this
Advantage over us, they are seven of them Lawyers and Bishops, to answer what
our three have said; and perhaps with weak Men, such a Stream of such Persons
may much prevail: But let not that dismay you, my Lord, only take this Course;
Deliver, first, your own Meditations; and then, having taken with your Pen,
some of the Absurdities, which, in the Sentence, some of them will deliver,
blast those, and let the Auditors see, that by you the Stream is turned. Then
leave it to me, and I doubt not, in Almighty God, but to batter their Nullity
to Dust. That though they have it by the major part of Voices, yet, the World
shall see what the Cause is, and they shall have little Comfort by it. I am
very well provided; I am no way afraid; and you shall see, I will not be
Tongue-ty'd. So confident was I in the Honesty of the Cause, and in the Helps
of Almighty God, that I was not now afraid of ten thousands of People; but did
long to be at the Business, as the Lord truly knows.

When now I was alone, revolving my Meditations, Sir J. Caesar comes into my
Study, to me, tells me, That he wondered that my Lord of Winchester was not
come, that it was even ten a Clock, that therefore it was fit, that the Hour
should be continued from ten to twelve. I assented thereto; and by some of the
Commissioners the Time was prorogued. Then comes in Sir Thomas Lake, with a
Message from the King, which he must not deliver 'till all the Commissioners
were come together. So he was forced to stay. Between Ten and Eleven, comes in
my Lord of Winchester; who, as afterward found, had been all the Morning at
the Court. I told him, We had stayed for him two Hours and a half. His Lordship
slightly excused it. Then, in the Gallery, Sir Thomas Lake told us, That his
Majesty had sent him unto us, to deliver two Things. The one was, That in our
Sentence, we should take heed of gauling of any Person. My Answer was, That
from the Beginning of this Process, we had ever been wary not to offend in that
Kind; and that he should be much to Blame, who, in the Conclusion, would
transgress that way. And so said the rest. The other was, That we should not in
any long Manner, but compendiously, deliver what we had to say. I prayed Sir
Thomas Lake to explain that farther, whether we were only to say Yea or or No,
and no more: For I would obey the King's Commandment.

Tu Regina jube, mihi jussa capessere fas est. He answered, That he could not
say so, but that we were to speak briefly. Yea, but said Sir Julius Caesar, I
know the King's Mind; for I was Yesterday with him, and he told me, that he
expected that we should go no farther than Yea, or Nay, for of Reasons there
would be no End. Yea, says he, The King told me he was promised so much. By
whom, said I. I think, quoth he, by your Grace. Not so, said I: But I said,
indeed, Let every Man deliver his own Conscience, I will not perturb the
Sentence. No more indeed will I. Then he replyeth, I know the King expects we
should say no more, than I do like this Sentence, or, I do not like it. And
that you know, Sir Daniel Dun, is the Manner of the Delegates, and not to go
farther. It is so, says Sir Daniel. Upon this, the Bishops all said, We were
best to proceed in that Fashion. To which, I replied, I will not be willful,
but if it be agreed upon, and it be the King's Pleasure, I will obey. But look
you to it; for if any Man give a Reason, I am no more bound than he, but that I
will return the Reason of my Opinion and Judgment. They all said, they would be
observant of it. Thus Sir Thomas Lake was dismissed. Then we called for the
Sentences on both Sides, which the Counsel had ready. They disliked that which
was Absolutory of the Earl of Essex, and we approved it. We found Fault with
the other Sentence, Anullatory, both for the Whole, and because, some Parts in
it, in our Judgment, were apparently false. But they persisted in their
Intention. So we went into the Hall, where, my self, my Lord of London, Sir
John Bennet, Dr. James, and Dr. Edwards, freed my Lord of Essex. The Bishops of
Winton, Ely, Litchfield, and Rochester, together with the two Chancellors, and
Sir Daniel Dun, pronounced for the Nullity, and subscribed the Sentence, my
Lord of Winton pronouncing it. We perceived that they were afraid we should at
large speak our Reasons openly, being the last who were to speak.

The three Bishops, of Winton, Ely, and Litchfield, went immediately to the
Court, hoping to receive great Thanks for their Service, but they waited a full
Hour, ever they could speak with the King; however they sped afterward. And we
were glad that we were freed of the Trouble. And now, I, who would not have
given the Sentence for all the Gold in India, do expect God's Pleasure, what
will become of this Business hereafter, and submit my self to God's Providence,
who ever preserves those that trust in him.

THIS Narration is wholly written with mine own Hand, and was finished the
second of October, 1613, being the eighth Day after the giving of the Sentence.
And I protest before Almighty God, that I have not willingly written any
Untruth therein; but have delivered all things fairly, to the best of my
Understanding; helping my self with such Memorials and Notes, as I took from
Time to Time, that if there were occasion, I might thus at large set down the
Truth to Posterity, when this Case shall be rung from Rome Gates, or the Fact
hereafter be questioned. GEORGE Canterbury.

Some Observable Things, since Sept. 25, 1613, when the Sentence was given in
the Cause of the Earl of ESSEX, continued unto the Day of the Marriage, December.
26, 1613.
THE Sentence being given for the Nullity, the Minds of Men in their several
Places, were wonderfully distracted, and every one spoke according to their
Fancies. But for the most part there was a Detestation of the Thing, and a
great Dislike of those that gave the Sentence, which was expressed by all
Courses that Men durst adventure upon. On the other Side, there was a strange
applauding and commending, of those who withstood the Separation; and from all
Parts a Testimony came unto them, That they had done like Honest Men, albeit
the only Scope which they aimed at, was the Discharge of their Conscience, and
not vain Popular Applause. The Archbishop the Day after the Sentence, went to
the Court, to White Hall, and waited on the King to Chapel, standing also by
him in the Closet, where he was strangely looked on by the King, as he was also
by some of the Lords; but nothing being said unto him, he took no Notice of it,
but bore all patiently. This Strangeness of the King held on at Hampton Court,
and elsewhere; and it came to the Archbishop's Ear, that the King spoke diverse
Times hardly of him, but much magnified them of the Affirmative Part, and
especially my Lord of Winchester, as the worthiest Man in the Kingdom. Some
things were done also in Recompense to diverse of them; as Sir Julius Caesar's
Son was made a Knight, my Lord of Winton's Son also had the same Reward, which
some merry Fellow blighted with the Name of Sir Nullity Hilson; and the Bishop
of Litchfield must remove to Lincoln; and as for Litchfield, it must be
bestowed on Mr. Dean of St. Paul's, that so Doctor Carry might be preferred to
the Deanery of Paul's, for which it was generally supposed, he should pay well.
But now it run current, that the Archbishop must no more have to do with
Naming any to Church Livings, but some Lords in Court should dispose of all;
and principally it must be provided, that (...) Abbot must never be preferred,
no, not so much as to Litchfield, so far was he from Lincoln, which was
formerly promised unto him. These things grew detestable to the People, who
feared that even Religion would smart for it; but the Parties most malign'd,
were silent and patient, expecting God's Leisure, and Malice enough from some
other Men. The first thing of Bitterness that appeared, was a Letter from
Royston, under the King's Hand and Signet, directed to the Commissioners in the
former Sentence, but brought to the Archbishop about three Weeks after the
Sentence. This was a most sharp Letter, complaining that they of the Negative
Part, for so they were styled, had hindered the Act to be made upon the
Sentence; had solemnly Protested against that which was done; had given unto
themselves other Titles than were in the King's Commission; had glorified
themselves in that which was done; by which they laid an Imputation upon the
King's Conscience, who had declared himself for the Divorce, and other things
of the like Nature. This Letter being read to the Commissioners, the
Archbishop said, That he knew not what it meant; for he understood of no Man
that Protested, nor knew nothing of any Man's arrogating of Titles to him, or
glorifying himself: And as for the Act, he supposed it to be made up in common
Form, and never heard ought to the contrary, neither meddled with any thing
therein, but left it to the Register, and what he had done with it, he could
not tell. Furthermore, he asked all the Commissioners particularly, if they
knew what this meant, or if any of them were able to charge those of the
Negative, with the Points quarrelled at; who all, with one Consent, denied that
they could, and expressly averred, that there was no such thing done at the
Time of the Sentence, as had been complained upon. When standing thus in
Admiration, Sir Daniel Dun took upon him to understand the Matter, and said,
that if the Register were called, it would appear there was something in it.
Barker, the Register, is sent for, and being demanded whether he had made up
the Act, he said that he had drawn it up in a Form that he liked, but some
other of the Commissioners did dislike it. And thereupon he showed two Forms,
the one more large, the other more brief; but both of them having in it, that
the Archbishop, and the rest of the Negative Party, protested against the
Sentence. Here every Man wondered at him, out of what Ground he should do this;
and all the Commissioners with one Consent, very much rebuked him, professing,
that there was no such Protestation used. For the rest of the Charge in the
King's Letter, Barker freed all in all things, save only Dr. Edwards, who was
absent by reason of his sore Eyes. The Archbishop upon this, desired the
Commissioners to suspend their Judgment touching Dr. Edwards, 'till he might
answer for himself, saying, that Honor, Justice, and Charity, required so much
in his Behalf; and adding withal, that he doubted not but it would prove some
mistaking of the Register's Part, to whom it was apparent, that small Credit
was to be given, since he had so grossly set down of them, that they Protested,
when all the Commissioners could witness the contrary. Moreover he desired Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir Daniel Dun, to certify the Lord
Chamberlain, how free and innocent from those Aspersions, the rest were found,
and that from Top to Toe, it was nothing but Misprision. Before this Truth was
discovered, it was known that a Gentleman of the Earl of Northampton's, had
said to Sir John Levison, and that, as from his Lordship, That there was
something descried, which would break the Archbishop's Back; such Account was
made of his Business.

Thus Things passed silently until the next Week, when upon the Thursday, being
High Commission Day, Dr. Edwards being amended, repaired to Lambeth. His coming
was watched; and then was delivered to the Archbishop a second Letter from the
King, commending the Concurrence of all to the Act, to be made up in common
Form; but requiring the Commissioners to convene Dr. Edwards and the Register
before them, and to charge them with all the fore-remember'd Matters, and to
learn where the Fault did lie. It was also commanded, that they should require
the said Doctor and Register, to set down in Writing what had passed between
them; and if it were found that Dr. Edwards were to blame, he should be
suspended 'till the King's Pleasure were farther known.

These Things are fallen upon; and Dr. Edwards showed that the Register had
wronged him, and that no Part of the Accusation was true, in modo and forma,
appealing to the Commissioners, what Faith might be given to Barker contesting
against him; when it had been manifestly proved, that he had forged the Matter
of Protestation against my Lord of Canterbury, my Lord of London, and the rest.
Time is assigned to them to deliver in their Writings, and accordingly, about
two Days after, Dr. Edwards brings to the Archbishop his Answer, denying the
Points whereon he was accused. But Barker brought nothing till a Fortnight
after; and then, by Candlelight, when the High Commission was risen, and the
Commissioners were departed, he delivers a long Writing to the Archbishop,
who could not read it that Night; but reproved him for detaining it so long.

On the Morrow, my Lord of Canterbury perused this Declaration; as as he found
it to be uncertainly and diffidently set down for some other Circumstances, so
he discovered there one Thing much to be observed, and that was, that Barker
delivered, That some few Days after the Sentence, the Lord Chamberlain sent for
him, finding Fault that the Act was not made up. And there Speech was, That
some desired to have their Titles put in, as well as the Titles of others; and
for that, Barker named Sir John Bennet. Whereunto the Lord Chamberlain said, I
know no Title that he has: Yes, said Barker, he is Judge of the Prerogative
Court of Canterbury. But Barker concludes the Narration, That himself finding
that he had named Sir John Bennet unjustly, therefore was in mind to excuse
him, and was about to say, that he had done him Wrong; but the Lord Chamberlain
was so angry, that he could not bring it forth; but went his Way, leaving the
Lord in that Opinion.

By this it was descried, that in the first Letter Sir John Bennet was aimed
at, as well as Dr. Edwards, to put some Disgrace upon him, which made Men
wonderously marvel at the vindicative Mind of some Men, who sought for an
Occasion to do other Men Disgrace. The End of the Matter was, That no Man could
be touched; and therefore the Archbishop, taking Sir Julius Caesar with him,
acquainted the King (who was now returned from Royston) with the State of the
whole Matter; informing his Majesty, that Fault fell on no Man save the
Register; and therefore, if his Highness were pleased to have him punished, it
might be so: But for the Thing itself, since the Report was more than there was
Cause, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer said, It was better to let it die, and
stir in it no farther. To this the King assented, being not willing that any
Punishment should be laid on the Register; whereby it appeared, that the
Intendment was, in the stirring of these Coals, to have burnt some greater
Persons than Barker, the Register.

All this while it was confidently given out, That because the Sentence had
been opposed, there should a Book be written in the Defense of it; and one
while it should be by a Divine, and that sometimes was my Lord of Winton, and
sometimes my Lord of Ely; and it was said, they were earnestly about it:
Another while, it should be by a Civilian, and then Sir Daniel Dun must do it:
But at other Times it must be by a Scotchman, who had written somewhat of that
Argument before the Sentence; and other while two Scotchmen must join together
about it: And to make the Thing the more probable, the Lord Felton sent to the
Archbishop for the Copy of the Scotch-man's Writing, which was sent unto him;
and after copying of it out, it was returned to my Lord of Canterbury again.
This Speech of a Book continued about nine Weeks in all; but at last Dr.
Stuart, and Dr. Bird, were sent for to the Lord Chamberlain, and their Judgment
was asked concerning that Point. Their Advice was, That it should by no means
be meddled withal, but that Things should die of themselves: But no Questioning
by Writing; for so it might go on to the World's End: For one Book might breed
another; and so, they whom it concerned should never be in rest. This was
resolved on; and afterward there was no more Speech of Writing, saving only
faintingly and whisperingly, but nothing to the Purpose. It seemed that the
Commissioners who were for the Nullity had enough of it, and desired no more to
bring themselves on the Stage, being so by all Men exclaimed upon for that
which they had done.

The Bishop of Winton, after the Sentence, went down with great Jollity, full
of Hope and Glory; but within a while after, he grew much daunted, as some
about him, and namely his own Daughter, reported; for he heard many Ways of the
strange Detestation which the World had of the Deed; and the nick-naming of his
Son, much affected him: But his Advertisements from Sir Richard Norton, his
Son-in-Law did much trouble him: For Sir Richard wrote diverse Times from London
to his Wife, That he could come in no Place, but his Father-in-Law was railed
upon: That Men told him, that he thought he had a Wife, but it was no longer
than my Lord of Winton pleased; for whenever he offended him he could make a
Nullity between them. Besides, the said Sir Richard told Mr. John More of
Lincoln's End, diverse Times, That it was such a Disgrace unto him to hear how
the World talked of that Sentence, that although my Lord of Winton promised to
give him, his Wife, and Family, their Diet and Entertainment so long as he
lived, yet he would get him to his own House, and live there, where he had
Means sufficient, and not be subject to that perpetual Scorn which would follow
him so long as he remained in his Father-in-Law's Company.

By these, and the like Passages, it was guessed, that the rest of the
Commissioners, who were for the Sentence, had little Comfort in themselves of
that which they had done. On the other Part, the Archbishop, and those who
stood with him, had their Honesty and Justice sounded out every Day more and
more; and many Messages were brought them, and diverse Letters written unto
them, or showed them by some Friends, from sundry of the Bishops in the Land,
from the Universities, from many godly Preachers out of all Parts, which was an
exceeding Consolation unto them, among the many Frowns which they did bear,
That there was an universal Concurrence of all honest Men to approve that which
they had done. And the Archbishop had privately, from many great ones in
Court, and Nobles, and worthy Personages elsewhere, such Significations of
their good Acceptance which he did, that it cheered him much inwardly, and he
was nothing dismayed.

Now, about the Middle of November, the Wheel was turned about: For since
nothing could be gained by speaking hardly of the negative Part, they thought
they would make Use of them another Way, and that should be by making the World
believe, that they had now given Approbation of the Fact. And thereupon it was,
in Court and London, asseverantly given out; and the Fame of it went far and
near, That the Archbishop, and the rest, after more mature Deliberation, had
testified their Concurrence with the rest of the Commissioners, and all now
were of one Mind. Men did not hastily believe this; but yet diverse of good Rank
came and sent to the Archbishop and the rest, to know whether those things
were so or no. And when it was found to be but a Jargon, it gave a great deal
of Contentment, and removed away much Scandal which formerly was taken. Yet
again afterward it was bruted, the second Time, That my Lord of Canterbury had
given the King Satisfaction in the Matter; and my Lord of London, on such a
Sunday, had come and submitted himself to my Lord Chamberlain, and the rest had
relented. Nay, it went so far, that in Yelverton, the King's Solicitor, and a
great Dependent upon the House of Suffolk, told Mr. Pie the Counselor, and Mr.
Cholmeley the Earl of Essex's Solicitor, coming unto him about Books to be
drawn up, for passing back the Jointure of the Lady Frances's Part, and the
Portion of the Earl of Essex's Part, That the gainsaying Commissioners were now
consenting, and the great Man beyond the Water was come over; which he knew so
assuredly, that he had seen it ratified by the Subscription of the Archbishop
and the rest. Yea, farther, he added, that there was great Reason, at the
first, wherefore my Lord of Canterbury, and the others, should stand against
the Separation; for they had just Cause, at the first, to fear that this Fact
might be drawn into Example, and so Marriages ordinarily be violated; but now
it was resolved that no more such should be permitted, and thereupon they
assented. These Things were enforced to be endured with Silence, for the
avoiding of Clamor, and making of Trouble.

But now behold an admirable Device of the Bishop of Litchfield, which shows
what his own Opinion was of the Validity of the Sentence. I will set it down as
it came to be acted.

On the 26th of November, Searle the Proctor comes to my Lord of Canterbury at
Lambeth, and brings with him a Writ of Certiorari out of the Chancery,
directed to the Commissioners in the Cause between the Lady Frances and the
Earl of Essex. The Archbishop was prayed to open it, and so he did, and there
found that four of them, sub sigillis vestris were, required to certify
Recordum Sententiae, into the Chancery. The Arch bishop asked Searle, If this
were an usual Thing? Who answered, No, he had not known any such Thing before:
It is replied, What then should be the Reason thereof? Answer was made, That
since the Matter was controversed in the Sentence, least there should be
Question of the Marriage afterward, the Earl of Somerset would have the
Sentence lying by him under the Great Seal of England ratified. The Archbishop
thought that to be but a weak Hold, yet charged Searle to see such an
Instrument drawn, and a Certificate should accordingly be made. On the
Wednesday after, Barker the Register, comes to Lambeth, and shows a Form of
a Draught in Paper, how the Certificate should be returned in the Names of all
the Commissioners specially put down. The Archbishop, in the Reading of it,
found five or six Lines having a black Line drawn under them; and thereupon,
the more marking the Words contained in them, found that which he liked not.
Thereupon he asked Barker, who lined those Words? Barker said, He himself did.
The other asked, What was the Reason of it? And it was answered, Because Sir
John Bennet and some other of the Doctors with him had disliked that Sentence.
Quoth the Archbishop, And they had Reason for it: Who put them first in?
Barker said, None but himself. Quoth the Archbishop then, May not the
Certificate stand as well without those Words as with them? To which Barker
answered, Yes. Then said the Archbishop, Let them be stricken out. Here the
Register, with somewhat ado, faintly made Answer, That the Commissioners on the
other Side would by no Means have them out. The Archbishop said, Then I
perceive it is a Device to entangle us: I am ready to certify the Sentence as
the Writ requires, but I will none of this. Barker, I am first in the
Commission, and for my Place sake, I would have looked, that I should have been
conferred withal, what had been fit to return, and not to have had this Trick
put upon me, that either I must certify that which crosses my Judgment at the
Time of giving the Sentence, or I must be forced not to certify at all. So
Barker departed, and all was quiet until the Monday after; at which Time the
Archbishop was early at White Hall, the Council sitting that Morning. There,
in the waiting Chamber, at the End of the Privy-Gallery, the Bishop of
Litchfield comes to him, and says, My Lord, we have received a Writ of
Certiorari out of the Chancery, to certify the Sentence for the Nullity. Yea,
says the Archbishop, and I am ready to certify it. But, says the Bishop, He
who framed the Writ, has made it sub Sigillis vestris, and does not know that
there is a Seal of Office for the Delegates; it should have been sub Sigillo
Communi. Before the Archbishop could reply, in comes the Lord Chancellor, and
to him comes out of the next Chamber the Lord Chamberlain; and then those two
Lords, together with the Bishop of Litchfield, drew themselves to a Window, and
there had they secret Communication about the altering of the Form of the Writ,
as the Effect declared; for that Afternoon, a Cause being to be heard touching
Alimony, from Sir Pexal Brocas to his Lady; and the Committees in it being the
Bishop of Litchfield, and Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy, and my Lord of
Canterbury being Umpire; before Mr. Chancellor was come, Bembo, Deputy to the
Clerk of the Crown, came into the Parlour at Lambeth, and had private Speech
with the Bishop of Litchfield. The Archbishop going out into the Garden,
Litchfield followed him, and told him, That Mr. Bembo had brought another Form
of a Writ; and thereupon showed him the Words sub communi sigillo. The
Archbishop bid him do as he thought good, and withdrew himself into the low
Stone-Gallery, whither Litchfield followed him, and used these Words: My Lord,
here is a Form of a Certificate, which has been thought fit to use in the
Business of my Lord Chamberlain; and I hear your Grace takes Exception to some
Things in it. Then he pulled out the very Paper which Barker formerly had
showed. The Archbishop answered, My Lord, have I not Reason to take Exception
to these Words, that post omnimodam Veritatis disquisitionem, post probationes
idoneas and de jure requisitas, we gave such a Sentence? For, to subscribe
this, were to proclaim my self a dishonest Man upon Record: For if these Things
be true, why did I deny to join in the Sentence? Quoth Litchfield, This here is
true; for it cannot be denied, but some probationes idoneae, and de jure
requisitae were used; and we do not say that all were. The Archbishop
answered, You shall do well, therefore, to certify post probationes aliquas,
and I will join with you; but as it stands now indefinitely, it will be taken
as if all had been used; I pray you therefore to alter the Certificate, and
make Things plain. My Lord, quoth Litchfield, I will deal plainly with you;
because the Words were in, and doubt was made, whether they should pass or no:
The King's Majesty has been acquainted with the Business; and he, by a Letter
from Sir Thomas Lake, has sent Word expressly, that he will have them in. The
Archbishop said, Let them then certify who will avow those Words, for I cannot
condescend unto them. And has not that Person done a good Office, who has
informed the King hereof; that Distraction may still be among the
Commissioners, and there may never be an End of Difference. The Bishop said, My
Lord, I could wish that you would yield unto the King, and so give him
Satisfaction. The Archbishop answered, What would you have me do? I gave the
Sentence as I was persuaded in Conscience, and since that Time I have been
silent, and meddle no way in the Matter: I did what I did upon long
Deliberation; and I may not in Private, upon no Ground since appearing to me,
cross that which I have done in Public. It was farther added, That there was
Reason to suspect, that they did ill Offices, who held those Things still on
Foot: That there never was any Man, who sought to grace himself by disgracing
others, but it met him at the Lane's End, at one Time or another. These Things
passed then; and after the Cause heard between Sir Pexal Brocas and his Wife,
the Bishop of Litchfield said to the Archbishop at his Parting, My Lord, you
will give us leave to certify then as we purpose? To which the Archbishop
answered, Yea, with all my Heart.

The next Morning, the Archbishop remembered, that by the Carriage of Things
in such Fashion as was pretended, he might be tricked: For if the Names of all
the Commissioners were put into the Certificate, and four of them might certify
under a common Seal, it should not be known hereafter, but that he and his
Fellows concurred therein, and that, with the Words which were excepted
against: He therefore sent for Barker, and in the Presence of Sir John Bennet,
and two Servants, being Public Notaries, he expostulated with Barker, as
serving Men's Turns, rather than caring for Peace; and then punctually he
delivered these Things.

First, The Writ requires me to certify the Sentence, and I am ready to do it.

Secondly, If the whole Process be desired, I am willing to certify that also.

Thirdly, For the Words in Question, because they were put in without my
Privity, and they may as well be left out as put in, by your own Saying, I pray
to be forborne for returning of them.

Fourthly, I require you to conceal these Things as much as you may, that the
World take no new Alarm of any Difference between the Commissioners.

The Archbishop spoke of returning the whole Process, because he had heard,
that at the first, it was meant it should be so; but Dr. Stuart, and, perhaps,
some other of the Civilians, dissuaded that by all Means; least, if the whole
were on Record in the Chancery, every Man that list, hereafter, might censure
that Sentence, and sift the Grounds whereon the Commissioners proceeded; it was
good, therefore, to take away that Occasion.

When Matters were thus resolved, the Bishop of Litchfield, who meant to play
his Prizes in this Service, speaks to Bembo, to draw some Preface, or
Conclusion, to add to the Certificate; that it might not only be signed with
the great Seal, as after the Form of an Inspeximus; but that his Majesty might
add a Confirmation to it: And when Mr. Bembo, as unacquainted with this
Fashion, did not fit the Bishop's Humor, his Lordship took on him to do it
himself. He drew up, therefore, a strange Writing, as was informed by a
credible Person that saw it, containing barbarous Latin, and no good Congruity
of Sense. But the Matter of it was, that his Majesty having the Authority of
the Pope now in himself, and in scrinio pectoris, having Power to ratify, did,
ex plenitudine potestatis, confirm that Divorce to all Intents and Purposes. In
an Evening Dr. Martin was sent for to the Lord Chamberlain, and there was the
Bishop with his Papers. The Doctor, as it has been eredibly delivered, being
showed that Writing, and his Opinion thereupon being asked, did utterly dislike
it, and said, That the King claimed nothing of the Pope's Power; but took that
as his own, which the Pope had usmped: That the King had spoke before by his
Judges Delegate, and had nothing more to do: That if the Sentence were not good
already, no Confirmation could make it good. And when the Bishop was earnest in
Defense of his Device, there was a little Heat stricken between the Doctor and
him, so that these Words passed from the said Doctor: You do, as much as in you
lies, spit in the Face of the King our Master, by laying on him all the
Matter; whereas the Scandal that has already been, is this, that his Majesty
is said to deal so much in the Matter. My Lord, you are to blame to enter into
these Things without Advice of Men skilful in the Law: Has Dr. Stuart or Dr.
Bird been acquainted herewithal? The Bishop says, No; but for this Matter, I
know as much Law at the best of you all. Dr. Martin replied, No: Your Lordship
thinks, that because you have read two or three Chapters of the Canon Law
about this late Business, you know as much as we do, who have spent all our
Lives in that Profession: I tell your Lordship, I have studied the Law these
two and thirty Years; and therefore, you shall give me leave to believe that I
know more therein than you can. I am the King's Advocate, and therefore may
suffer nothing with my Consent to pass dishonorable to my Master.

Upon these Contestations, the Lord Chamberlain was much troubled, saying, What
a Matter is this, that Men should be of such contrary Opinions! What shall we
do? When the Bishop murmured much that his Conceit was not followed, Dr. Martin
said thus: My Lord, in a Business of this Importance, I will not wish your
Lordship to follow my single Advice, but let this be done; to Morrow let Sir
William Button, in your Lordship's Name, come to Doctors-Commons; and let him
get together Sir Daniel Dun, Dr. Stuart, and Dr. Bird, and I will attend them;
and then we will consult jointly what is fit to be done.

This Advice was much liked; and on the Morrow, being Friday, they all
assembled, and, for two Hours, all Points were debated; but the Conclusion was,
That there should be no farther Confirmation: For this was to proclaim, that
the Sentence was defective in itself, which would make a great Buzz in the
World: And therefore, the Counsel was in general, That too much had been done,
and for the Time to come, the Care must be, how to lay it asleep fairly.

This Resolution being taken, the next Knack was, that so many of the
Commissioners as were for the Sentence, should be called together; and they
should be made acquainted with this, that the Bishop might be fairly put off.
On the Saturday Night, therefore, in the Dark, at Sir Julius Caesar's House in
the Strand, met the Bishops of Ely, Litchfield, Rochester, the two Chancellors
of the Exchequer and Duchy, and Sir Daniel Dun, and well near for an Hour,
they privately debated what they thought fit, but, as it seems, resolved as
before, and so departed.

A Friend being the next Day with the Lady Caesar, and knowing of the Meetting,
asked her, What about it was? She answered, It is something about the late
Nullity; but what it is, I do not know. It seems, that they who were the
Doers in it, think somewhat is amiss. They suppose all is not well about it,
and I, for my part, think so also.

A Man would have supposed, that all these Things should have contented the
Bishop of Litchfield; but he was so far in Love with his own Invention, that
yet he would not be beat off; and therefore, to merit the more, he once again
moves the Lord Chamberlain to send to Sir Francis Bacon, and to Mr. Yelverton,
being of the King's learned Council, to know their Opinion: Which being done;
and they two, for the Reasons above named, concurring with the Civilians: The
Bishop, as it has been credibly related, said of them, together with the rest,
They are all Fools, And so ended this Stratagem; but the Worker thereof was not
yet for an End.

From the Beginning of this whole Question of the Nullity, the Bishop of
Litchfield had carried himself variously, sometimes being vehement in Words,
publicly against the Separation, and other Times in Deed, giving Furtherance
to it. Many Speeches he had privately with the Archbishop, making show of much
Honesty and Respect to him, which the Archbishop ever warily observed;
thinking, notwithstanding, that these had been Testimonies of the working of
his Conscience, conflicting in it self, but not resolved what to do. In the
mean Time, from the Court, from London, and out of the Country, the Archbishop
was still called upon by diverse worthy Friends, That he should take heed of
that Bishop; that he was ever, and in all Things naught: That he did all the
worst Offices that possibly he could, and was still stirring the Coals, to
procure to himself a Reputation; that he was zealous of the House of Suffolk.
The Archbishop forgot not those many Warnings, but carried himself very warily
toward him: Yet out of Charity, it still came in his Mind, He is a Bishop, I
know no Evil of him; I ought not to condemn a Man upon a Generality; I have no
particular Proof of his Misbehaviour in this behalf, although he dealt ill with
the late Lord Treasurer, and most falsely with the Archbishop Bancroft in his
Lifetime, and after his Death; and for that Cause was detested by both of
them; yet an honest Man may think, that Experience has reformed him, and now
he is amended. Yet it much affected the Archbishop, that all Men spoke so ill
of him; and one Speech of an old Courtier, a very honest Knight, entered far
with him. For about a Fortnight before the Marriage, the said Courtier,
speaking privately with the Archbishop, among other Words, he used this. I
know not what the Bishop of Litchfield does among you; but he has made a shift
to be taken for a Knave, generally with us in the Court. Now, whether the next
Prank will verify so much or no, let the Reader judge. Eight Days before the
Marriage, on a Saturday Morning, that Bishop comes to Lambeth, and in private
Conference with the Arch bishop, he tells him, That out of his Love and
Respect to his Grace, he was come voluntarily, as of himself, to know his Mind
about one Matter, and it was this. On St. Stephen's Day, says he, the Lord
Chamberlain means to have this great Marriage go forward: Now it may,
perhaps, be desired, that a License should be given by you, that the Banes may
not be asked, which if you like not to grant, I may be the Means to free you
from being moved to it. The Archbishop said, What have I to do with granting
of a License; it belongs not to me: But wherefore should there be any Need of
a License; the Marriage is intended to be Public; Masks and Shows are made for
the same; all England takes Notice of it, and therefore it were good, that the
Banes were openly asked, as the Manner is of such Marriages as are made in the
King's Chapel. Yea, the Lady Elizabeth herself, had her Banes asked. My Lord,
says Litchfield, there is some Cause why it should be done without publishing
the Banes: For peradventure some ^^dy may step up, and make a Disturbance. You
know what a mad, naked Fellow, came in to St. James's, after the Death of the
Prince; if such a one should come in now, what a Work would it make? The
Archbishop wondered within himself, to hear such a Reply, and thought surely,
that it was no mad Body that they should need to stand in fear of, but they
suspected somewhat else. But his Answer was, My Lord, there come no such into
the King's Chapel; there be Doors and Officers to keep such out. But if it
should be suspected, that any would oppose, it is best the Banes be asked, for
then there will be some warning of the Gainsaying; whereas, otherwise, if at
the Time of the Marriage, one should suddenly start up, it would make a greater
Trouble. Notwithstanding the Bishop went on, That a License would cut off all
the Doubt. The Archbishop answered, But what have I to do with granting a
License in the King's Chapel: It belongs to the Ordinary of the Place, and
that is my Lord of Bath, as Dean of the Chapel. Litchfield replied, He never
granted any, and he has no Seal for that Office. It was answered, He never
granted any, because no Body ever desired it; but the Manner was, that the
Banes were published. But as for the Seal of the Office, who does not know that
any Seal will serve; and none better than his Bishop's Seal, it being said,
Datum sub sigillo nostro Episcopali, quo in hoc casu; or hoc Tempore utimur.
King James at the first, did use the Seal of Queen Elizabeth, 'till a new one
was made. The Bishop proceeds, Yet it would be fit that you granted the
License, if it be requested. To this the Archbishop said, I shall do that
which never any of my Predecessors did. Yes, quoth Litchfield, If you would
seek your Records, you should find some so granted. The Arch bishop answered, I
have inquired of my Officers, and they tell me, That no such thing was heard
of, in Omni Hominum Memoria. But my Lord, I know that my Lord of Bath has it
under the Great Seal of England exclusively, to the Archbishop; so that in
direct Words there is a Restraint, that he may not meddle there. Yea, but,
quoth Litchfield, you have an Act of Parliament, enabling you to grant
Dispensations to the King and his Children; and therefore it belongs to you.
Said the Archbishop, Do not you think that I understand the Act of Parliament
as well as you? My Lord, Do you think that that Statute was made for these
ordinary Graces and Dispensations? Why, is not your Lordship able, within your
Diocese, to grant a License, that a Marriage may be solemnized, and not the
Banes asked? Yes, says he, I may: Nay, every Archdeacon may do it within his
Jurisdiction. Then my Lord, quoth the Archbishop, must an Act of Parliament be
made to grant the Archbishop Power to do that which every Archdeacon may do
within his Precinct? There is surely some other Matter in it. But I marvel, my
Lord, that you are now so earnest for the Archbishop's Licenses, when, as I
have heard, in the Days of my Predecessor, when you were Bishop of Rochester,
you would not suffer the Archbishop's Licenses to pass within your Diocese:
No, says he, it was for Westminster that I did strive, not for the Diocese of
Rochester. And it is true, that there be Records in that Church, that the Monks
did contend with the King about diverse Questions. I had Reason therefore, to
stand for the Privileges of my Church. It was answered, So has my Lord of Bath
to stand for the Rights of the King's Chapel. The Archbishop seeing how
earnest the Man was, in so unreasonable a Thing, said farther, My Lord, you
have mine Answer, but let me now tell you one thing. It is six Weeks agone,
that I heard from the Court, and many Times since I have had it reiterated,
that such a Trick should be put upon me: That although it needed not, yet I
should be moved for granting this License, because thereby I should be
constrained, either to grant it, and so cross my former Sentence, and
involvedly give my Consent to the Nullity, or I should deny it, and so grate
once again upon the King's Displeasure. You see now I have given you a fair
Answer, which may free me from both. But, my Lord, I pray God you do good
Offices in this Business. I fear you put your self into many Things, which may
be better forborne. But let me tell you, there was never any Man, who sought to
raise himself by wronging another, but at one Time or other he had enough of
it. It is now almost three Months since this Sentence is given, and since that
Time, I have not meddled with the Matter, for offending the King. I am silent,
and no way oppose, and Men have their End; yet cannot I be quiet. I would have
you know, that God beholds these things, and remembereth them. And for my
Part, I am not blind, I see well what is done; and I shall not always be
silent. The Time will come, that I must speak; and it shall appear I am not
Tongue-ty'd. This made the Bishop not so forward as before, but Occasion of a
farther Speech being offered; the Archbishop went on, and said, The Sentence
which I gave, was in the Fear of God, and according to my Conscience: And if
that had been done, which was convenient, and we called for, there needed not
to have been any Division in Judgment. For, my Lord, you may remember when you
came to me at Croydon, and brought these Papers from the King, after the
reading whereof, I slept little that Night, how desirous I was to give his
Majesty Satisfaction; and therefore prayed you, fetching out the Process unto
you, to tell me whereupon I should ground my Sentence. You showed me one
Article, that he had not known her, nor he thought that he never should. I told
you then, Yea, that was for want of Love, for he said, When I came out of
France, I loved her; I do not so, neither ever shall I. It is want of Love. To
this the Bishop said, Yea, and the Earl added, That he had done his Best
oftentimes, Carnally to know her, but he found an Imperfection in himself. The
Archbishop replied to this, Oh, my Lord! Never say so; for his Lordship's
Answers upon his Oath, are to the contrary: He found no Defect or Impediment in
himself. And if I shall speak my private Opinion, although I would not have you
believe it, I think the Earl as able a Man for a Woman, as any is in England.
And I think to the contrary, Quoth Litchfield. The Archbishop went on: But, my
Lord, when your Lordship and I had these Difficulties in our Mind at Croydon,
you told me of one thing which I embraced as an Oracle from Heaven. And that
was, that to rid our selves of these Distractions, we had no other Way, but to
call the Earl of Essex again upon his Oath, that so giving us a fuller Answer,
we might either have good Ground to pronounce for the Nullity, or Matter to
give Reason why we might not condescend unto it. I approved this, and you know
how the next Day, in public Court, it was moved, and my Lords of Winchester,
Ely, Rochester, and your self, gave very good liking to it; and no Man said any
thing against it, except Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, who softly spoke, I
know not whether that will be permitted. But you may remember, you were
entreated to deliver this to the King at Theobalds, from whom you brought Word,
That it should not be granted, because the Earl of Essex, being partly provoked
by his falling out with Mr. Henry Howard, and partly being counseled by the
Earl of Southampton, would speak all things to hinder the Nullity. My Answer
then was, That he was to speak upon his Oath, and we would most strictly
examine him. When that was denied, which should have led us to the Truth, I
must confess I had never any mind to pronounce for the Separation. The Bishop
seemed to take no great Pleasure to hear these things thus repeated, but fared,
as if he could have wished, that they all had been forgotten. The Conclusion of
all was, that the Bishop seemed to be well satisfied, that no License was
given, and promised the Archbishop, to take Care that he should no farther be
troubled with it, assuring him, That he did ever good Offices to him, whereof
the King could give Witness, and would; and he would ever make the best of
things. To which the Archbishop said, If he did, he would take it for a
Kindness at his Hands, and so he departed.

Accordingly, the next Day the Banes were asked in the Chapel, and there was
nothing but fair Weather, the Archbishop attending the King in the Closet. On
the Monday the King went to Hampton Court; and that Day the Bishop of Bath and
Wells came to Lambeth: He told the Archbishop, that he had a direct Message
unto him from the King, and that was, That his Majesty did much marvel, that he
spoke not with him about the Sentence: That the King expected Satisfaction and
Submission. His Lordship added, That he perceived that the King had some
Scruple in his Mind, which he wished should be removed before his going to the
Communion on Christmas Day. The Archbishop knew not that the Bishop of
Litchfield had dealt any Way treacherously with him, and therefore was
constrained to answer, in general, that he knew not what to say to his
Highness. He persuaded himself, that in giving of the Sentence he had done his
Duty, and therefore could not tell how to make a Submission where he conceived
no Fault. If in any Circumstance he had erred, he was ready to testify his
Sorrow for it; but he knew no such Thing; yet, if his Majesty was displeased at
him, to signify his Obedience to his King and Sovereign, to whom he was so much
bound, he would not refuse, if the King were pleased to restrain him of his
Liberty, and lay him in the Tower all the Days of his Life, to submit himself
unto it patiently, without Murmuring.

Furthermore, he prayed the Bishop of Bath, and (who, on the Morrow, was to go
to Hampton Court) to signify, humbly to his Majesty, That he had nothing in
this World more precious than his Life; and that he wished, that he had given
that Life as a Redemption, that the King's Hand had never been in that
Business. And withal, he said, that at the coming of the King, he would attend
his Majesty.

On Wednesday Night, the King came to White Hall; and on the Thursday, after
Dinner, my Lord of Canterbury went to the Court, where they were all busy about
Plate and Jewels against the Marriage. Notwithstanding, he had hastily Speech
of diverse Matters with the King; and in the End, he said privately unto his
Highness, May it please your Majesty, I understand, by my Lord of Bath and
Wells, That your Majesty expects that I should give you an Account about the
Matter of the Lord of Essex, and the Lady Frances: I can say nothing more than
this, That I was put into the Commission as a Judge, and at the Time of
Sentence, I did my Conscience; and since I have not meddled with the Matter.
Yes, says the King, I hear you denied a License to be granted, for not asking
of the Banes; which I wonder you would do, since the Sentence was passed. No,
said the Archbishop, I denied no License; but I advised, that the best Course
was, that the Banes should be asked according to the Custom used in the Chapel.

Secondly, I said, That if any License should be granted, it belonged not to me
to give it, but to the Ordinary of the Place, the Dean of the Chapel, who has
it under your Majesty's Great Seal, exclusive to the Archbishopric. Yea, said
the King, My Lord of Bath said so; but I am told it is otherwise. The
Archbishop replied, Nay, it is so indeed.

And thirdly, said he, My Answer was, That never any of my Predecessors granted
License for any Thing done in the King's Chapel: I have received Information
so, from my Officers. It had then been Presumption in me, to attempt that which
belonged not unto me. This is another there Matter, says the King, Were these
your Answers? I was told otherwise. But I will take some other Time to speak
with you. The Archbishop, after this, attended half an Hour, and nothing being
said, he departed.

The same Night, a Friend coming to Lambeth, told my Lord, That he had been
that Day with the Lord Knowles, where he found, that the Bishop of Litchfield
had exceedingly wronged my Lord of Canterbury: For he had reported all the
Speech about the License, in a spiteful Manner, said, it was absolutely denied:
That the Archbishop gave out, That the Earl of Essex was very Potent for a
Woman; and that he intended to question this new Marriage, at one Time or
other, that it should never take effect.

This said, the Gentleman made a great Stir among them; and the Archbishop was
much blamed, that he would never make an End: But they were much troubled at
it, as fearing themselves, that all was not sure. But, quoth he, when I had
told them, that this was some ill Office of the Bishop of Litchfield, who had
every Day new Inventions to puzzle them, that he might so much the more indear
himself unto them, by signifying his Zeal for them; and that I knew how fairly
my Lord of Canterbury had answered him, (for so indeed he did) and that he was
so far from disturbing the Marriage, that he intended to be present at it; they
were not only appeased, but seemed much content, that his Grace would be there:
And this I assure you to be true.

When the Archbishop heard this, he was now satisfied, that the Man who had
done him all the Wrong, was the Bishop of Litchfield; from whom he resolved
afterward to be very wary how he trusted him. Yet, professing that he forgave
him with all his Heart, on the Christmas Day he attended the King, and received
the Communion with his Majesty; and so, coming Home to Dinner, Sir Charles
Cornwallis came along with him. This Gentleman is one, to whom, for his Love,
the Archbishop was much beholden; and after Dinner they grew privately into
Speech of all these fore-remember'd Stirs; where the Knight found much Fault
that so many Tricks were put upon the Archbishop; blamed infinitely the Bishop
of Litchfield; promised to acquaint some of his great Friends with his
Qualities, and assured to make, Things be rightly understood; and took away
with him that Report, wherein he seemed much to joy, that the Archbishop would
be at the Marriage.

On the Morrow, being St. Steven's Day, the Archbishop went to the Court,
attended the King to Chapel, went down to the Marriage, (where, not the King,
but the Lord-Chamberlain, gave the Bride) had a Pair of Wedding-Gloves, and so
came Home to Dinner, where he sat with much Comfort, as being glad, that since
Things must be so, they were come to an End: And so prayed God to bless his
Church, the King, and Kingdom, and himself; that he might be free from so many
Vexations, as for a long Space undeservedly had followed him.

The SPEECH intended to be spoken at Lambeth, September 25, 1613. by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, when it came to his Turn, to declare his Mind
concerning the Nullity of Marriage between the Earl of Essex, and the Lady
Frances Howard.
[Seven of the Commissioners having before declared themselves that they would
Sentence for a Nullity, and great Reason being to think, that the Bishop of
London, Sir John Bennet, Dr. James, and Dr. Edwards would give Voices against
the Nullity.]
MY Lords, and you the rest of the Commissioners, I have had a great Contention
and Deliberation within my self, in what manner I should utter my Judgment in
this present Cause, since, after the Speech of those Three who first began, so
great a Stream and Concurrence together of the rest, (my Lord excepted, who
spoke last) have given their Opinions for the annulling of the Marriage. But
yet I hold not my self concluded thereby, but that I may declare my Judgment,
having learned that Suffragia among Wisemen are as well appendenda and
ponderanda, as numeranda: And it was no shame for Phocion in Athens, upon good
Ground, to contradict the whole City; neither was Paphnusius, in the Council of
Nice the less respected, when he stood against the whole Synod; nay, it was his
Honor, that by delivering of his Sentence, he altered the Resolution which
that whole Assembly had intended to take, which I freely acknowledge I have no
hope to affect at this Time. And yet, though I have not that hope, but might
very well spare this labor, yet my Conscience tells me, that it becomes me
to speak in a Matter of this importance, because, not only, Deum timeo, I fear
God, which I doubt not but all of this Company does; but I am afraid of God,
least he should be angry with me if in this Case I be silent. And I think it is
expected of me, since I am here present, that I should not sit as an Idol, and
only fill a room; for that were to lay an Imputation on my self, that I had
undertaken a Cause, which in public I durst not offer to maintain.

I must acknowledge, that in delivering of my Mind in this Business of so great
Weight, I do find two defects, that I cannot so pertinently speak unto the
Purpose as diverse of the Judges here: The one is, That I am no Lawyer; and the
other is, That I am no married Man; by both which I am disabled, that I cannot
speak with that Confidence concerning some Particulars, as most of you, the
Commissioners, are able to do; but in lieu thereof, I have endeavored to
furnish my self some other way concurrent to this Purpose. As by reading, by
conferring with some whom I do trust, with pondering thereupon, so that it has
lost me much sleep at several Times, with frequent Prayer unto God, that he
would direct me aright; which I have more begged of God in this Cause, than
ever in any that was before me in Judgment. And besides, I bring with me animum
candidum, a Mind devoid of Passion, or any Perturbation, which inclines to no
part for fear, or for favor, for spleen or for hatred: From which, I thank
God, in pronouncing of Sentence, I ever have been free, remembering that Judges
are in the Place of God; and as Jehosophat said, 2 Chronicles. 29. Non hominis
judicia exercetis sed Domini, and quicquid judicaveritis in vos redundabit. He
then who sits in the Place of God, and in pronouncing of Sentence will vary
from Justice, he leaves God, and shows himself worthy to lie in the flames
of Hell, for abusing of the Trust which is committed unto him, which I hope I
shall not do. And cui boni? to what end should I transgress in Judgment for
either side, when I have no reason to be partial for either, since it is
indifferent to me in any particular, whether this Question receive one or other
determination.

Where least I should be mistaken, I think it not amiss, as publicly I have
done diverse Times before, to let the World know what my Judgment is concerning
the Impotency of a Husband toward his Wife. That since Marriage in young
Couples is for carnal Copulation and Procreation thereupon, and that it is the
intendment of those which contract Matrimony to receive Satisfaction in that
Kind, that if this Nobleman be not able to perform those marital Rights unto
his Lady, he does unto her a very great Injustice to retain her as his Wife;
and we shall perform a great part of Injury and Cruelty toward her, if we do
not free her from this Burden and Yoke. We are bound in Conscience to do it,
since it is in truth no Marriage, but a pretended Matrimony, that Consummation
being wanting which was one of the first Things in Intention when they two came
together: For impossibilitas officii, by a received Maxim, solvit vinculum
Conjugij. But the Point is, that before this Separation be pronounced, it must
appear unto the Church, that there is good Cause for the same; which must not
be upon light Surmises, or questionable Suggestions, but upon evident
Declarations and Proofs, which may give full Contentment to the Conscience of
the Judge. The Marriage was overt and in the Face of the Church, whereby they
were joined into one; let the Reason of Separation be as clear as that was, if
it possibly may be; or let it be so apparent, that the Church may well know,
that there is ground to stand upon for pronouncing of a Nullity. Now this is it
which I doubt will not fall out in this Case of my Lord of Essex; there is not
proof sufficient to inform the Minds of the Judges that this knot should be
dissolved, and themselves set at liberty, the one from the other. And then you
understand what the general Rule is, Quod dubitas ne feceris. And in this
Controversy there seems in my Judgment many Reasons of doubting, that the
Separation desired ought not to be granted. You shall hear some few of them.

1. The first Scruple which arises in my Mind, is from the uncertainty of that
Proceeding, which we have had in this Busisiness. For in the handling of it
formerly, we had it propounded, that there must be a Nullity propter maleficium
versus hanc. That was it which we debated, and for the which we turned our
Books; that the Counsel for my Lady did still insist upon, not naming the Words
indeed, but by a Periphrasis, or Circumlocution, describing the same. And it
cannot be forgotten, how Dr. Stuard, being told by one, or more of the
Commissioners sitting then in Court, that his whole Speech did still point out
maleficium, he answered, it is true, that is it which we intend. The
Authorities always brought out of the Canonists were in direct Terms upon
maleficium, the Proofs intended nothing else. And we all understand, that to
have an Impotency unto a Man's own Wife, and an Ability unto other, and that
incurably, and that for some Latent Reason, which cannot be known, is the Case
of maleficium; and that is the matter alleged in the Libel, and whereupon my
Lord is examined. And yet, now since we sit upon the second Commission,
maleficium is disclaimed. One of my Lords My Lord of Winchester.
has avowed it, that he dislikes that maleficium; that he has read Del-Rio,
the Jesuit, writing upon that Argument, and does hold him an idle and fabulous
Fellow; that he rather supposes it to be God's own handy Work, than any Thing
from the Devil. Another of my Lords My Lord of Ely.
has assented thereunto, and maleficium must be gone. Now I for my part will
not absolutely deny, that Witches by God's Permission may have a Power over
Men, to hurt all, or part in them, as by God they shall be limited; but how
shall it appear that this is such a Thing in the Person of a Man? The Question
is, An factum sit, and how it shall be discovered. But to make it a Thing
ordinary, as the Romish Writers do beyond the Seas, I take it to be a Fable,
acknowledging that for Truth, which a Bishop well versed in that Argument did
lately write, that Maleficiation is the very garbage of Popery; a Thing so
base, that we who have learned Christ aright, should despise and contemn,
allowing it no place amongst us. Which Course it were a shame if we should not
observe, since the Papists themselves grow very weary of it; and that even in
France, where there has been more ado with this Maleficiation than in any
other Country; for there the common Sort at the Time of their Marriages, were
wont to be afraid to have the Words of Conjunction in Matrimony to be spoken
aloud, Quos Deus conjunxit nemo separet, or the Benediction to be publicly
given, lest some Witch or Sorcerer in the same Instant should tie a knot upon a
Point, or play some other sorcering Trick, whereby the new Bridegroom so long
as that knot lasted, should be disabled from actual Copulation with her whom he
had married. And for avoiding of that hazard, they had therefore their
Matrimonies celebrated in the Night Time, and in some private Place, where none
came but such Friends as they dared to trust. This Superstition grew so common,
and Men were so abused by the fright that came thereof, that the Prelates of
France, about Thirty Years since, in a Council at Rheimes, made this Decree
against it. Bochellus in Decret. Eccles. Gallic. lib. 3. tit. 5. cap. 176. Anno
1583.
Peccare graviter admonemus eos, qui noctu vel clanculum benedictionem
nuptialem sibi dari procurant propter metum maleficij: Maleficium enim se
vitare posse, credere debent, si eo pietatis affectu ad conjugium accedant, qui
praescribitur in sacris literis, videlicet ut cum timore Domini, and amore
filiorum, magis quam libidine impulsi copulentur, devote susceptis paenitentiae
and Eucharistiae Sacramentis. And the Year after that, another Council in that
Kingdom does speak yet more plainly. Idem, lib. 1. tit. 14. cap. 7. ex Concilio
Bituricensi, Anno 1584.
Et quia Christiano nomine indignus error nostro seculo inolevit, ut
signationibus, consignationibus, vinculis and nexibus Matrimonia impediantur:
Haec Synodus communione Ecclesiae interdicit omnes eos, qui hujusmodi
superstitionibus utuntur: monetque fideles, ne hujusmodi commentis fidem
habeant, sed in Deo fiduciam certam constituant, nec id circo matrimonia noctu
fiant, sed in luce and frequentia hominum. If it be rotten ripe in France; if
it be Error indignus Christiano nomine; if Men must not fidem habere hujusmodi
commentis; what do we with it here in England? let it be cast away as a rotten
Rag of Popery. And yet I do now find, that in the very Sentence which is this
Day to be given, it falls directly upon the Description of maleficium versus
hanc. So that what should I think of this Case of my Lords, which is built on
such a Foundation as no Man will stand to? We are on it, and off it, and avow
it we dare not, yet fly from it we will not. This moves Scruple in me, how I
should assent to that whereof I can learn no certainty from the Council of my
Lady, nor from you that be the Judges, who speak for this Nullity: I dare not
rest my Building on such a sandy Foundation.

2. Another Matter which troubles my Mind, is the Novelty of that which is now
set on Foot; a Thing unheard of in our Church, and unknown in our Kingdom. We
have many Stories, Old and New, of Things done in this Land; we have Registers
extant in every Diocese; we have Acts and Records which specify those Accidents
which have fallen out in the Days of our Forefathers. I have caused search in
many Places to be made, and so I know have some of you, the Commissioners; and
I have called upon you for the same, but I can have no Precedent of any such
Example that has passed in our Kingdom. No Memory of Man can express unto me
the Name of that Person, whose Marriage was annulled for Impotency toward his
Wife, when he found an Ability of carnal Copulation with any other Woman. It is
this Year, 1613. that has set Abroad this present Imagination, for the former
Ages knew it not. It is safe walking in the Ways which are treaded out unto us.
We have great Reason for our doings in these Human Actions, when we do those
Deeds which formerly were done by our Predecessors. I have had many worthy Men,
which have gone before me in the Place which I now hold, Men learned, Men
judicious, great discoverers of Impostures; Men that have done great Services
for the Nation where we live; but of them never any had such a Case before
them, they never gave Sentence for a Nullity of Marriage upon such an
inability. I know not whether it be a happiness or unhappiness, that I must be
the first to sit in a Commission for determining such a Controversy.

I know to meet with this Objection, it is whispered sometimes, that there is
an Example, and that is Bury's Case, which is urged as a Precedent unto this
now in Question. But indeed, that is no Pattern of this, the dissimilitude is
great between the one Case and the other, for Bury had his Stones stricken off
with an Horse, that nothing but a little part of one of them remained. I will
read you the very Case, which if any Man doubt of, shall be avowed unto him.
Thus then it does follow.

John Bury, Esquire, was lawfully seized in his Demeanes as of Fee, of, and in
diverse Manors, Lands and Tenements, within the County of Devon. The said John
Bury, did the 20th Day of November, in the first Year of Queen Mary, marry one
Willimot Gifford, and they lived together Three Years; and the said Bury could
not carnaliter cognoscere dictam Willimotam.

Afterward, viz. the 17th of May 1561, the said Willimot called the said Bury
before the Ecclesiastical Judge, and charged him to be impotentem ad coeundum
cum dicta Willimota, propter vitium perpetuum, and incurabile impedimentum ad
generationem, and ejus inhabilitatem, etc. and thereupon desired to be
divorced, In the Proceeding before the Judge, it was proved by diverse
Witnesses, of which two were Physicians, that the said Bury had but one little
Stone, and that no bigger than a Bean. It was also deposed by diverse Matrons,
that the said Willimot Gifford remained a Virgin, and incorrupt; and the said
Bury confessed no less: Upon which Proof, and Confession of John Bury, the
Ecclesiastical Judge pronounced Sentence of Divorce, and did thereby separate
them.

Afterward the said John Bury took to Wife one Philip Monjoy, his first Wife,
Willimot Gifford, being then alive; and the said Philip had a Son in the Time
of their continuing together, John Bury's first Wife being alive.

Afterward, the said Willimot being still living, the said Monjoy, of her own
accord, without any Sentence of Divorce, forsook the said John Bury, and
married one Langeden, with whom she continued. The said John Bury, and his
first Wife Willimot died, the said Monjoy and Langeden then living, married
together.

The Question is, Whether John Bury, being divorced from Willimot Gifford for
Impotency, the second Marriage, solemnized between the said John Bury, and
Monjoy, during which Time the Issue Male was born, be in Law a Marriage or not.

It appears by the Process made in the Cause, and the Words of the Sentence
grounded upon the same Process, that the first Marriage was pronounced to be
void, Propter defectum and vitium testiculorum, which made the said John Bury,
impotentem and ineptum ad actum generandi, and coitum conjugalem. And so in all
Respects, this second Marriage with Monjoy is void, and of no effect: For
either this Cause of the Dissolution of the first Matrimony is true, which is
always to be presumed, until the contrary do appear, and then the same Cause
does make the second Marriage void also; or else, if it any ways appear, this
Cause of the Dissolution of the first Marriage to be false; Et Ecclesia erat
decepta, quia satis potens ad generandum, and quod in ipsa generavit. And in
that Case the first Marriage is good, in Law, and debet redire ad priora
connubia: And so the second Marriage is utterly void.

We are of the Opinion above laid down.

John Loyde, Henry Jones, John Hone, Nicolas Stuard, Edward Crompton, Robert
Fourth, William Farrand.
Whether this be true or no, I appeal to Dr. Stuard, who is here in Presence,
and of Counsel for my Lady, who, I know, will affirm it, because, not long
since, being asked by me of it, he confessed the same. And here is Dr. Farrand
now of Counsel for my Lord, who was used -- for his Advice in this Case of
Bury; and Dr. Hone is yet living, who can testify the same. For I will suppose,
that a Man cannot forget such a famous Case as that was, wherein himself was
employed; but if all these were dead, I know where Records, be, which still
will continue. If this then were the Matter in Question touching Bury, defectus
testiculorum, what is this to the great Controversy now depending before us?
And if this be the only Precedent, that should be the Inducement, that the
Sentence to be given in this Cause is not new, but the like has been heard of
before; I am where I was: We are now to act a Novelty, a thing strange, and
unheard of in this Church of England, whereof let other Men be the Managers, I
may have no hand in it.

But perhaps it will be said, that in some other Countries, and especially in
France, these things are well known, and the Examples of one Kingdom,
especially being so near unto us, may be an Inducement for us to do the like,
since the Reason is the same. My Answer thereunto is, That I that live in
England, am to frame my self to those things, which I find in the Church of
England, whereof I see no reason, but there should be as great Esteem, as of
any Church in the World. In the Days of our Forefathers, as our Nation was
held a very noble Nation, so was the Church of England held a very famous
Church. Ecclesia Anglicana, as might easily be showed out of Matthew Paris, and
by diverse things in some later general Councils, did carry a greater Sway. And
why should we at this time, in any thing, yield unto any Church in the World,
since it is a thing well known, that the Knowledge of Divinity does abound
here, beyond all other Nations? and Men of this Land have beat down the Power
of the Pope, and made evident diverse Quesions in Matters of Theology, beyond
all the Parts of Christendom! But beyond this, I do know, that the Customs of
Churches, even by the Determination of the Pope himself, ought to be the Rule
of Judgment in this Nature. We have a famous Place interserted into the Body of
the Law, written by Pope Alexander the 3d. unto the Bishop of Amiens in France.
It is worth your hearing; De frigidis and maleficiatis, cap. 2. in Supplemento.
Quod sedem Apostolicam consuluisti super his, quae tibi dubia existunt, gratum
gerimus and acceptum, and tua exinde fraternitas non parum commendanda videtur.
Ex tua siquidem part nobis est intimatum, quod quaedam mulier, tui Episcopatus
cuidamviro nupserit, asserens quod os utriusque inguinis rupturam, genitalia
ejus abscissa fuissent, nec dum ab eo cognito fuisset, qui utique factus
leprosus, se pariter and sua domui reddidit infirmorum. Mulier vero ad domum
patris reversa sicut asseris invenis, alii viro nubere desiderat, and conjugali
affectu conjungi. Vnde licet Romana Ecclesia non consueverit propter talem
infirmitatem, vel propter alia maleficia legitime conjunctos dividere, si tamen
consuetudo generalis Gallicanae Ecclesiae habet, ut hujusmodi matrimonium
dissolvatur; nos patienter tolerabimus, si secundum eandem consuetudinem, eidem
mulieri cui voluerit nubendi in Domino concesseris facultatem. By this we do
find, that the Church of Rome it self does grant no Separations in Matters of
Matrimony, where the Church of France does; and if the Pope permit in France it
self, that a Divorce should be made, it is but a Toleration, and not this
neither, but where it is consuetudo generalis Ecclesiae Gallicanae; which if
you will apply unto this Cause in Question, you must show me, that in England
it has been a general Custom, that a Nullity in Marriage may be pronounced
propter impotentiam versus hanc; which if you cannot show, as indeed you
cannot, nor give any true Example, that ever has been of any such Separation
within this Church; I may both in Law and Conscience conclude, that I dare not
introduce any Novelty, and so consequently pronounce for the Nullity of this
Marriage. Many things are done in France, whereof if we in England had the
Examination, we should peradventure find the Fact different from that which
they conceived; or if we agree in the Fact, we should give another Sentence. It
is not unknown how, within the Space of one Year, there has been much a-do in
France, about two Women, Magdalen and Louyse, pretended to be possessed with a
great many Devils, and how Verrine, a principal Spirit in one of them, has
avowed and maintained the Mass, Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Images, and
a great many other Points of the Grossness of Popery; and a Book hereof has
been printed and reprinted in Paris, with Approbation of the State, and
Allowance of learned Men; in which the Church of England would certainly
dissent, and proclaim the whole Business to be but an Imposture; as the very
like was in the Days of Queen Elizabeth, when the Devils of Denham were said to
possess Sarah Williams and her Sister, and some other Persons; and much a-do
was made of it, and diverse fond People believing those Knacks, turned Papists
thereupon; yet the Issue of all was, that it proved no better than a shameful
Delusion, and a great abusing of credulous and light-believing Persons.

3. But now to proceed farther; if it shall be said, It is not the Novelty, nor
the Want of Custom here in England, which should prejudice the Truth; valeat
veritas, wheresoever or whenever it appears: The Proofs are evident whereupon
we do stand, and that will enforce the Sentence. My Answer thereunto is, let
that be made manifest, and clear and perspicuous, unto the Conscience of an
understanding Man, and I shall concur with you; but how shall I find this in a
Matter of this Quality? Because it is nothing else but Truth which we do aim
at, it were fit that all Probations, if not which are possibly, yet at the
least which reasonably may be had, should be got together to enforce a
Conclusion of this Consequence. My Books tell me, In valor matrimonii
investigando quaecunque probationes possibiles adhibendae sunt, and potius
debent esse superfluae quam diminutae. It is Solomon's Saying, Prove. 25.
It is the Honor of a King to find out a thing. And wherein can Judges bestow
their Time better in a Point of Difficulty, than to search and search again, by
all honest and good Means, to know what is the Bottom of that which lies
secret, that so they may satisfy their own Conscience, and the Conscience of
others, in the Sentence which they give, and leave no kind of Scruple, which
may trouble their own Thoughts? Whether these things have been done in this
present Case, I appeal to your own Consciences; whether the Writers do not
mention diverse things; whether the Council for my Lord have not spoke of sundry
Matters; whether we that be the Judges, have not thought of diverse Courses
convenient to be held; of all which, no Piece or Parcel has been permitted
unto us. The Proofs then which we have had, do arise only out of the
Depositions, and if there be not Proof sufficient, where shall we seek for it?
Let us then consider them. I will tell you my Opinion of them. I find nothing
in them all, which is not in Substance contained in the Answers of my Lord of
Essex; a noble Personage says, that in the hearing of diverse things, the Earl
has said, that he was not able to know his Lady carnally; the Earl thinking
this to be true. But this is but a Relation of Wonder spoken extrajudicially;
and therefore for the understanding of the Truth therein, we are to have
Recourse unto that, which by the said Earl is judicially deposed. Diverse
Witnesses do speak, that the Earl and the Lady have lived and lain together for
diverse Years, my Lord does acknowledge it in his Answer; the Matrons and
Mid-wives do declare, that in their Judgment, my Lady is a Virgin, and
therefore that she was never known carnally by the Earl; himself confesses
that he did never know her. So that now, all in Substance depending upon his
Lordship's Answer, it ought to be our Labor to scan that exactly, and to judge
of it circumspectly. Does not he then say, in responsione ad quartum; that though
diverse times, in the first Year of their Cohabitation, he did attempt to know
her (which diverse times may be twice or thrice, and no more) yet in the two
latter Years, he did never attempt it? But does he not say plainly, in
responsione ad tertium; that since the time of his Marriage, he had not, nor
has any Sickness or Impediment, to hinder him, but that he might have had, and
may have carnal Knowledge with a Woman. This is for the General, that he has
no Impediment; but in responsione ad quintuni, does he not descend more
particularly unto his own Lady; that it is true that he did never carnally know
the said Lady Frances? Mark now what follows; but that to the Act of carnal
Copulation, he did not find any Defect in himself. Indeed he was not able to
penetrate into her Body; but he lays the Faults of that upon her, as may be
seen in his Answer unto the 7th Article. And it may not be forgotten, that in
the End of the Answer to the 4th Article, he says, that sometimes she refused
him; these things are evident, and cannot be denied. The only Matter which
makes show against this, is, that he acknowledges that he has lain by her,
and has had no Motion to have carnal Knowledge of her; but especially, that in
the End of his Answer unto the 6th Article; and believes he never shall. These
Words are the Shield and Buckler of the contrary part; but how easily do they
vanish away, or fall to the Ground! For I appeal unto you all, who were present
at the Examinations (and those were ten of us in Number, who now sit here
present) whether the Earl did not openly subjoin that to his Answer; When I
came out of France, I did love her, but I do not so now, neither ever shall I.
I appeal unto the Conscience of you all, except my Lord of Winton, and my Lord
of Rochester, who were not then Commissioners, whether this be so or no; here
then is the Matter, it is the Want of Love, which restrains all Motions of
carnal Concupiscence, and not any Impotency; it is defectus voluntatis, and not
defectus potestatis. Let Coffeehouse be removed, and there will be an End of
all the Inability: Married Men best know these things; but out of common
Reason, there can be no great Longing, where there is no great Liking; many
things they say fall out between Man and Wife, that for some good Space of
time, there is no carnal Conjunction, and yet no Impotency concluded thereby
may be. The Case is famous of Pulcheria, Sister unto the Emperor Theodosius the
younger, who having vowed Virginity, was notwithstanding afterward, for great
Reason of State, thought fit to be married unto Martianus, who thereupon was
chosen Emperor; she would not condescend thereunto, till she had Promise from
him, that her Virginity should be preserved, and with such a Promise he did
marry her, so that they lived together in Show as Man and Wife; but indeed as a
Brother and a Sister. Our Stories do make mention, that he who was called Saint
Edward in England, I mean King Edward the Confessor, did marry a Lady, the
Knowledge of whose Body he never had, neither did this wedded Couple ever
endeavor to break their Virginity. The Writers do declare no other Reason
hereof, but that they had an Opinion, that to live in Virginity, was the more
meritorious, according to the Superstition of those times. Now were it not a
strange Argument, to conclude in this manner, that because Martianus had not
conjugal Copulation with Pulcheria, therefore he was a Man impotent; or,
because King Edward had not carnal Knowledge of his Wife, therefore he could
not know her. I know the Circumstances of this present Question do differ from
those, but the Ground of the Argument is the same. Want of Act upon private
Reason, will never enforce a Want of Power. And this is our Case, as I
understand it, which makes me unwilling to consent to this Nullity.

4. There follows now another Argument, which I shall deliver briefly. We
have always agreed, that the Chapter in the Law, which contains our Case, is
the Chapter Litera de frigidis and maleficiatis; for if it be not there, it is
no where to be found. When we have delivered many things appertaining to this
Cause out of the best Writers of the former Ages, or of our own time, as that
my Lord should be inspected, or that Physicians should use their Art to discern
and remove Impotency, if any were to be found, or that Fasting, Prayer, and
Alms should be exercised to overcome this Evil, and diverse other Points of
like Nature; it has still been answered to us, to say the Interpreters, but it
is not in the Law; or it is in the Decrees which bind not, but it is not in the
Decretals; or it is a Council and Exhortation; but it is no Mandate or
Injunction. I now therefore mention some things, which is in the Law, and in
the very Body of this Law, and it is the Pope's Mandate; and that is, that my
Lord should have given his juramentum cum septima manu, as well as my Lady; for
Want whereof, the whole Proceeding is annullated. This is the Pope's
Commandment, Quocirca mandamus, and it requires the Oath of both, ipsis cum
septima propinquorum manu firmantibus juramento, se commisceri carnaliter
nequivisse, then proferatis divortii sententiam inter eos. This is a thing so
clear, that when on Thursday last, by chance, there fell mention of it; the
Council for my Lady Dr. Stuard, Dr. Bird.
were so far from giving Answer to it, that to speak plainly, they stood as Men
blasted or blighted with a Lightning, and knew not which way to turn them; as
was manifest not only unto us, but to all the Standers by; which I do not utter
to do them any wrong, for they are worthy Men, both learned and faithful to the
Cause which they undertake; but the Note is, that this Objection can receive no
true Answer. I know, that since that time, there has been Labor made, to give
a Salve to this Sore, but no Man's Wit can do it. I said, and say still, that
no Man's Loquence, neither any Man's Eloquence, can persuade me, that ipsis
firmantibus juramento is of the singular Number. I know there has been
tumbling and turning of Books, to find some Show to meet with this Objection,
but nothing can be found, which will hold out this Water. The Proceeding
therefore does appear to be unperfect and defective in that, which is mainly
required by the Law, which makes me to conclude in this fashion against some
unperfect Speech touching my Lord of Essex; his affirming or denying of his own
Inability toward my Lady; that either he does confess it or deny it: If he do
acknowledge it, where is then his Oath cum septima Manu, which the Law
imposes? If he do deny it, where is then your Proof of his Inability, since
you ground the whole Substance of the Nullity upon his Lordship's Answer, That
he could not know her carnally.

I must yet crave Patience to go a little farther. One other Exception which I
take unto this Nullity, is the manner of the Sentence, which by us is to be
given, which has ever been resolved should be in general, not expressing any
Reason particular wherefore we do give it. To say that my Lord is impotens in
genere versus hanc, and not to tell wherein, is to propound a Riddle to the
World, which no Man understands. It were a strange Thing in Learning, to say,
that such a Creature is Animal, and not to tell whither it be a Man, or a
Horse, or a Fish, or a Bird. And although it has been said, and strongly
maintained, Sir Julius Caesar, Sir Daniel Dun.
That it is enough in a Sentence to pronounce a Thing in general, and that the
Judge is bound to give no Reason of it; yet I would be glad to know whether,
howsoever I will conceal the particular Reason from the Hearers or Standers by,
yet were it not fit, that I who am the Judge, and must give the Sentence, or at
least consent unto it, should know the Ground whereupon I do give it. Give me
leave to speak my Conscience, I think such a Sentence, that propter latens
aliquod impedimentum, which is perpetuum and incurabile versus hanc, is nothing
but a device to serve a present Turn, which we must deliver in such obscure
Words, to blind Posterity that comes after, and to amuse those which will
inquire into it, as if we had known something which we held not fit to utter,
when in Truth we know nothing. I find the Texts of the Law do still set down
the Reason, and give a Case particular, as Frigidity, or Section, or unfitness
of the generative Part, or some such other Matter; but for an Inability,
propter latens impedimentum, my dullness is such, that in the whole Book I
cannot discover it: And it is a Mystery that cannot enter into me, how a Man
should be potent unto other Women, and impotent to his Wife, if it be not in
Case of Phrensy, which is not latens impedimentum, and which also finds
lucida intervalla. Cap. Litterae.
It was the Assertion of him in the Law, That he did not know his Wife, but
that he had a Power to know other Women. But what wise Man does believe him? Or
what is there in the Text which does declare it to be true? I will end this
Point with that of our Savior in the 29th of St. Matthew, That there are three
Sorts of Eunuchs, or Men unfit to marry; the one is of God's making, the second
is of Men's making, and the third is of their own making. The first are they
that are past from their Mother's Belly, who either are frigidi, or such as
have not Members fit for Generation, or some apparent Debility. The second are
those who are castrated by Men, or by some violence have that hindered in them,
whereunto by Nature they are fit in respect of Procreation. I will not here
dispute that idle Maleficium, because your selves are flown from it. The third
has no coherence with this Nobleman. Let me know then, in which of the former
two you do place it. Is he past from his Mother's Womb? why then do you give
him leave to marry again? that he who has deluded and frustrated one, may also
delude another. If he be in the second Rank, why do you not tell us what the
Violence is which he has sustained from Men, or from any other Creature. Let
us have, I pray you, some kind of Satisfaction, and let not this Aenigma in
general blind us, least the World should say, that wilfully we shut our Eyes
against the Truth.

6. One Reason I have more, why I yield not to this Nullity, and then I have
done. It is drawn from the Inconveniences which will follow thereupon, if we
dissolve the Matrimony in such Case as is now desired. I look first on the
detriment and harm which will follow, if the Marriage do continue in force, and
in vigor, and I do find, that all the inconvenience does redound but to one
Person. Between a Lady and her Husband there is some coffeehouse, which Time
and God's Grace may easily remove: There is then an end of that Controversy.
Or if the disagreement shall never be appeased, it is no more but one Lady does
want that Solace which marital Conjunction would afford unto her; which many a
good Woman is enforced to endure, and yet commits no Sin, neither labors to
violate the Laws of the Church: For suppose the Husband be sick of some long
Disease, or languishing Weakness, must not the Wife sustain it with patience
and quietness? Suppose the Husband be Captive in some Foreign Nation, or
Prisoner in his own Country, whereby occasion of marital Complexion is taken
from the Wife, no Divine will pronounce, that a Separation is in this Case to
be sought. Let a Woman do that in Modesty which others are enforced to do out
of Necessity; and let her expect God's leisure, in Fasting and in Prayer, and
in other Humiliation. This is all the Inconvenience which arises to one
Person, if she have not the Performance of conjugal Duty.

But look on the other side, what are the Incongruities, or rather Absurdities
which will easily follow, if such Dissolutions of Marriages be permitted. I
will name only two. The first is the hazard of violating and annulling of
Marriage by an ordinary Practice; for if the Gap be open, who will not run in:
And the Judge must dispense the Law indifferently to all, if the Proofs be
accordingly; for we may not say, that it is for noble Personages, and great
Peers in the State, and not for others of inferior Rank. Whatsoever Couple
therefore have no Children, and live discontented, come presently to take part
of this general Jubilee: And, albeit they know in their Consciences, that it
which they attempt is unlawful; yet to satisfy their Fancy, they will collude
the one with the other, and enter a Prosecution secretly agreed upon, howsoever
in open show they seem to differ the one from the other: And who can doubt, but
for Money or Favor, they may procure Witnesses, and others who are to be used
by the formality of the Law, to testify and depose so much as serves the Turn.
By which means we are at a fair pass, when not only the Marriage Bed shall be
defiled, and Adulteries made frequent, which is against the second Table of the
Law, but Perjury shall be committed, and God's Name taken in vain, which is
repugnant unto the first Table.

A second Inconvenience is the Danger, least both Parties which are freed from
their Matrimony, should diverse Years after be returned to it again, when
perhaps the Husband by a second Wife has Children, and the Wife by a second
Husband has store of Issue also; for there is no doubt in the Law, but if a
Man supposed to be frigidus, and therefore divorced, shall afterward Marry,
and by begetting of Children show himself not to be impotent, but apt for
Generation, this Man is to be taken from his second Woman, and returned to his
first Wife, and the Woman for whose Marriage a Nullity was pronounced in
respect of the Insufficiency of her Mate, must be now taken from her second
Companion, and returned to the first. Of this the Reason is apparent, quia
decepta est Ecclesia, they adjudged him to be impotent upon wrong Information,
whom Experience and Truth has declared to be potent. And what Man can foretell,
how variety of Times may produce other Judgments. There may be Question of Land
or Inheritance, of Legitimation or Illegitimation; and a wise Man would be
unwilling to bring it on the Stage when he is dead and gone, and to make it the
Fable of the World, whether his Children be born lawfully, or to be reputed in
the Rank of Bastards. The World is subject to much mutability, and Judges of
future Times may peradventure be led with the Power of some great Persons, and
perhaps may think upon other Considerations; that it is but a Conceit, that a
Man should be potent unto another Woman, and impotent to his Wife; or that the
Common Law does not know any Maleficium, or that they do not believe, that
there may be latens impedimentum perpetuum, and incurabile versus hanc, when
they see that the Husband is in show of the World, a lusty, able Man, and has
well proved his Potency, by begetting Three or Five, or Seven, or Ten Children
upon another Woman. These are pretty Things, if a Man do well consider them,
and will serve to make distraction between Kinsman and Kinsman, and make work
for the Lawyers, and keep the Courts at Westminster that they shall not be
idle; which if we could not learn otherwise, yet Bury's Case before remembered
does teach us, who was divorced from his Wife in the 3d or 4th Year of Queen
Elizabeth, and when his Brother had enjoyed his Land until the 40th Year of the
said Queen, then was he thrust out of it, and the questioned Son, or his Heir,
was put into Possession of it by Trial of Law; a great deal of Money being
spent in that Contention, and both Civilians and common Lawyers in great
Numbers were entertained of both Sides; and yet the Controversy was not so
appeased, but that of my certain Knowledge, within these three Years it had
been raised again, and a strong device was laid how to bring this about again;
only my self withstood it, and would not give way unto it, when I was diverse
Times consulted thereabout; conceiving very well, that it would not be long
before some Prohibition would come out of some of the King's Courts, because
the common Law disliked, that Men's Inheritance, especially after Judgments,
should be disturbed, when the Parties whom most of all it concerned, are dead
long before, and cannot answer for themselves; whereas, peradventure, if
themselves had been living, they could have answered that for themselves which
other Men know not. And there ought to be a settled Course in all Things
appertaining to Inheritance.

By this Time, I hope you see, that it is not out of willfulness, or
prejudicate Conceit, that I have impugned this Nullity, but out of ground of
Reason, and out of scruple of Conscience, which is it that must accuse me, or
excuse me, before the everliving God. I know you have heard what other Men have
said, and they have answered for themselves. Upon all which Grounds I make this
Conclusion, That howsoever this Matter of Separation with great earnestness
has been persued, yet it is the surer and the safer way to leave it as we find
it, and in no Case to dissolve it. I often remember that Saying, which is
frequent among the Canonists; Tolerabilius est aliquos contra statuta hominum
dimittere copulatos, quam conjunctos legitime contra statuta Domini separare.
That concerns us who be the Judges, and for the Parties themselves, who
perhaps can be content to be severed, and to Marry elsewhere, let them know
this from me, that they may best expect a Blessing from God when they live in
that State where fewest scruples shall arise in their Mind: From which, whether
they shall be free in leaving their old Conjunction, and betaking themselves
unto a new, I refer to their wiser Thoughts, when in all probability, if any
cross or thwart shall arise in their new intended Matrimony, this perplexity
and anguish will still follow their Souls, that they have done that, whereof in
their truest Meditations they have no ground of Conscience, and therefore that
it is the Hand of God upon them, who gives not a Blessing unto that which was
unduly sought.

You have thus at large heard my Opinion against the annullation of this
Marriage. Now, if you ask me, what would you then have done concerning this
Couple of noble Personages: my Answer is, that I would have a Reconciliation by
all means to be labored; and although that be difficult to bring about, yet it
is the more Honor when it is effected. Charity will forgive, and forget the
highest Offenses. It is St. Augustine's Judgment, That in the greatest Breaches
between Man and Wife, Reconciliation is the best; and the worthiest Pains that
can be bestowed, is to bring that about. There wants only one or more good
Mediators, and then great Things will be compassed. The disagreement was
inconceivable between God and Man, yet Christ, that great Mediator, did take it
away. The Breach was very bitter between England and Spain, yet our most
blessed Sovereign, as a gracious Intercessor, did give an end unto it. Let
Divines be used now, as much as Lawyers have been used heretofore. Take the
godly Counsel of the one, which will be given freely, as you have taken the
Advice of the other with much expense of Money. This I wish for, this I pray
for, and if my Counsel had been used, before Things grew to this height, I
would have used my best means to have wrought an Atonement. But because there
is no hope thereof, and this does expect a legal Decision, proceed you that
please unto this Separation. Give your Sentence in scriptis, as you have
declared your Opinion in verbis. Five might have served the turn by the Words
of the Commission, if seven had dissented, but you have seven Suffrages, and
therefore proceed; only this I crave of the Register, that he do make his Act,
that this Sentence is given, Joanne Episcopo London, D. Joanne Bennet milite,
D. Francisco James, D. Thoma Edwards dissentientibus, potissimum vero Georgio
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi renitente.



This is the Substance of that Matter, which the Archbishop of Canterbury, out
of certain Notes which he had drawn up, was ready to have uttered, and no one
material Point is added thereunto, as appears unto me, the Writer hereof,
comparing it with the Notes at such Time as I ended the writing of this, which
was on the 28th of September 1613. three Days after the Time when it should
have been spoken.

The KING's Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
My Lord,
AFTER I had received, and read your Papers, which the Bishop of Litchfield
brought me, I found it very necessary that I should make answer thereunto at my
first leisure; for whereas, before, at my last meeting with you, ye seemed to
me to be only as yet unresolved what Sentence to give in this Business till you
had heard it thoroughly disputed, that by that means ye might be fully informed
of the State of the Cause: it appears now by these Papers, that you have, after
your last Days consultation, put on a negative Resolution, grounded upon
Fundaments of Divinity and Conscience, as you think, which has moved me to
send you herewith my Judgment upon your Arguments, in regard that I did ever
hold it necessary that in a Matter of this Weight all my Commissioners should
be as near of one Mind, as might be, and therefore I would be sorry that your
private Conceits should so blind your Judgment, as to make you and your
Followers draw the Perplex or torment.
Catharrows against your Yoke-fellows; for, that I may now open plainly my
Heart unto you, at my first reading of your Papers from the Bishop, I chance to
cast mine Eye first upon the Paper of your Arguments before I had looked upon
your Letter, and lighting upon your first Words, In as much as we do firmly
believe, etc. I protest I thought it had been some strange Confession of Faith,
that you had intercepted amongst some of the Sectaries; but when I had read out
the rest of that first Article, God is my Judge, I thought that Paper had been
some Pasquil made against this Divorce, which coming to your hands ye had sent
me, and therefore without reading any farther therein, I looked upon your
Letter, which resolved me of all these Doubts; but after that I had fully
perused, and rightly considered of all your Papers, I found your Principles so
strange, and your Doubts so far sought, that I thought it necessary, as I have
already said, to set down unto you my Observations upon them. But to conclude
my Letter with that plainness that becomes one of my Quality, I must freely
confess, that I find the Grounds of your Opposition so weak, as I have reason
to apprehend, that the Prejudice you have of the Persons, is the greatest
Motive of breeding these Doubts into you; which Prejudice is the most dangerous
Thing that can fall in a Judge for misleading of his Mind. And the Reason
moving me to this Apprehension, is partly grounded upon your last Words to me
at your parting from Windsor, and partly upon a Line scraped out in your Paper
of Doubts, for I am sure you think me not so blunt a Secretary, but that I can
read a Line so scraped out. In your last Speeches with me, you remember you
told me what Assurance you had of the Earl's Ability out of his own Mouth,
which you said you could not but trust, because he was so religious a Nobleman.
But when I told you of the other Party's contrary Affirmation, you remember how
you used the Word of Iniquity, and how far your interlined Line seems to have a
Harmony with this Word, your self can best judge. Now then, if I would ask you
what Proof you have of the one's Religion more than the other's, you must
answer me, by judging upon the Exterior; and how deceivable that Guess is,
daily experience teaches us. But with a holy Protestation that I never knew any
Thing but good in the young Earl. Was not this the Ground of Master Robert
Bruse's Incredulity, because he knew the Earl of Gowry to be truly Religious;
and did not beg a Register. Bothwel in his Preface of his Book De viris
Illustribus. And as for your Judgment of the other Party, Christ's Precept is
the best Answer unto you, nolite judicare. But if the Question were to judge of
the Earl's Inclination, whether is it likely that you or I could best judge of
it; I, he having been bred with my late Son, and served him so long, or you
that never spoke with him but once or twice in your Life, and never knew either
good or evil of him but out of his own Mouth. I will conclude therefore, with
inverting the Argument; that if a Judge should have a Prejudice in respect of
Persons, it should become you rather, to have a kind of Faith implicit, in my
Judgment, as well in respect of some Skill I have in Divinity; as also that I
hope no honest Man doubts of the uprightness of my Conscience; and the best
thankfulness that you that are so far my Creature, can use toward me, is, to
reverence, and follow my Judgment, and not to contradict it, except where you
may demonstrate unto me that I am mistaken, or wrong imformed, and so farewell.

JAMES R.

The LIBEL promoted by the Lady FRANCES HOWARD, against ROBERT, Earl of Essex,
before the King's Delegates, Authorized under the Broad Seal. Ann. 1613. Viz.
GEORGE, Archbishop of Canterbury; JOHN, Bishop of London; LANCELOT, Bishop of
Ely; RICHARD, Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry; Sir JULIUS CAESAR, L.L.D. Sir
THOMAS PARREY, L.L.D. Sir DANIEL DUNN, L.L.D. JOHN BENNET, L.L.D. FRANCIS
JAMES, L.L.D. THOMAS EDWARDS, L.L.D.

I. FIRST, that She, and Robert, Earl of Essex, were married by public Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church, on the 5th Day of January, 1606.

II. That she at that time was full Thirteen Years old, and is at this present,
about Twenty Two, or Twenty Three.

III. That the foresaid Robert, at the time of the pretended Marriage, was
about Fourteen Years old, and is at this present, about Twenty Three or Twenty
Four, and at that time, and ever since, and at this present, is a Man (as far
forth as a Man can judge) and has been in good Health and perfect Estate of
Body, not any way hindered by any Ague or Sickness, but that he might have
carnal Copulation with a Woman.

IV. That since the pretended Marriage, at least by the Space of whole and
continuate Three Years, after the said Robert had fully attained to the Age of
Eighteen Years, as Time and Place did serve, after the fashion of other married
Couples, the said Frances Howard, in hope of lawful Issue, and that she might
be made a Mother, lived together with the said Robert at Bed and Board, and lay
both naked and alone in the same Bed, as married Folks use; and desirous to be
made a Mother from time to time, again and again, yielded her self wholly to
his Power, and as much as lay in her, offered her self, and her Body to be
known, and earnestly sought and desired Conjunction and Copulation.

V. And also the said Earl in the aforesaid time, very often, again and again,
did try to have carnal Copulation, as with his lawful Wife, which she refused
not, but used the best Means she could; notwithstanding all this, the said Earl
could never carnally know her, nor have that Copulation in any sort which the
married Bed allows.

VI. Yet before the said pretended Marriage, and since the said Earl has had
and has Power* and Ability of Body, to deal with other Women, and to know them
carnally, and sometimes has felt the Motion, and Prick of the Flesh, tending
to carnal Copulation, as he says and believes, and peradventure truly; but by
a perpetual, and natural Impediment, has been hindered all the former time, and
is at this present, that he can have no Dealing or Copulation with the foresaid
Lady Frances.

VII. Furthermore, the said Lady Frances has been, and is a Woman fit and able
to have Copulation with a Man, and such an one, as may be carnally known,
neither has in this regard any Impediment.

VIII. Moreover the said Lady Frances remains, and is at this present a
Virgin.

IX. Besides, at the time of the pretended Marriage, the said Lady Frances was
utterly ignorant and unacquainted with the said Earl's Unability, and
Impediments formerly mentioned.

X. Also the foresaid Earl long before this Suit commenced, has very often,
and at sundry times confessed in good Earnest, before Witnesses of Credit, and
his Friends and Kinsfolk, that although he did greatly desire, and did his best
Endeavors, yet he never could, nor at this present, can have carnal Copulation
with the said Lady Frances, no not once.

XI. Lastly, in regard of Womanish Modesty, the said Lady Frances has
concealed all the former Matters, and had a Purpose for ever to conceal them,
if she had not been forced by false Rumors of her Disobedience to the foresaid
Earl to reveal them. She requires, that since this pretended Matrimony is but
in facto, and not in Right, it may be pronounced, declared, and adjudged as
void, and of no Force, and that she may be freed, and quit from all Bonds and
Knots of the same, by your Sentence and Authority.

The Earl of ESSEX replieth, July 5, 1614.
I. II. HE answers to the First and Second Articles Affirmatively.

III. He thinks that at the time of his Marriage, he was full Fourteen Years
old, and is now Twenty Two and upwards, neither since has had, or now has any
Sickness or Impediment to hinder him, but that he might have had carnal
Knowledge of a Woman, save in the time of his Sickness of the Small Pox, for
two or three Years after his Marriage, which continued a Month or six Weeks,
and that at another time, when he had some Fits of an Ague.

IV. He affirms, that for one Year, he diverse times attempted, and that the
two other Years he did lie in Bed most commonly with her, but felt no Motion or
Provocation, and therefore attempted nothing. The first Year, when he was
willing, sometimes she showed her self ready, some other times refused.

V. He says, he never carnally knew her, neither found he any Defect in
himself; but confesses that he was not able to penetrate into her Womb, nor
enjoy her.

VI. He believes, that before and after the Marriage he has had an Ability of
Body to know any other Woman, and has often times felt Motions and Pricking of
the Flesh, tending to carnal Copulation; but for perpetual and natural
Impediments toward the Lady Frances, he knows not what the Words mean; but
that he has lain by her Two or Three Years now last past, and had no Motion to
have carnal Copulation with her, and believes he never shall.

VII. He believes not that the said Lady Frances is a Woman apt and fit for
carnal Copulation, because he has not found it.

VIII. IX. He believes to be true.

X. He believes, that once, before some Witnesses of good Credit, he did speak
to this purpose; That he had often times endeavored carnally to know her, but
that he did not, nor could not.

DOUBTS conceived out of the Fact and Process, in the Suit between the Lady
FRANCES HOWARD, and the Earl of Essex.
I. WHether the Libel be defective, especially in the Fourth Article, where it
is said, that Dominus Comes Essex pluribus and iteratis vicibus (which may be
verified and satisfied in two or three times) dictam dominam Franciscam ejus
uxorem praetensam cognoscere tentavit, etc.

II. Whether the Answer of my Lord of Essex, to the said Fourth Article in that
Behalf, being but thus, ( that he did diverse times attempt, etc.) be full,
certain, and sufficient.

III. Whether in this Case my Lord of Essex his Oath ( cum Septem manu
propinquorum) be not by Law requisite as well as my Ladies.

IV. Whether my Lord of Essex should be inspected by Physicians, to certify (so
far as they can by Art) the true Cause and Nature of the Impediment.

V. Whether by triennial Co-habitation, there having been no carnal Copulation
between them, ( Impedimentum maleficii, being accidental) presumatur
praecessisse vel potius subsecutum fuisse matrimonium, contractum and
solemnizatum.

VI. Whether they ought post praeceptem Judicis (notwithstanding their
triennial Cohabitation before the Suit began) to cohabit together, saltem per
aliquod temporis spatium arbitrio Judicis moderandum, for farther Trial, etc.

The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Reasons against the Nullity.
IN as much as we do firmly believe, that the Scripture directly, or by
Consequence does contain in it sufficient Matter to decide all Controversies,
especially in things appertaining to the Church; and that Marriage amongst
Christians can be no less accounted than a sacred Thing, as being instituted by
God in Paradise, honored by the Presence of our Savior himself, declared by
St. Paul, to be a Figure of the Spiritual Conjunction between Christ and his
Church; I would be glad to know, by what Text of Scripture, either of the Old
or New Testament, a Man may have a Warrant to make a Nullity of Marriage,
solemnly celebrated in facie Ecclesiae propter maleficium versus hanc; which I
do the rather ask, because I find Warrant expressly in Scripture, to make a
Nullity of Marriage, propter frigiditatem, by the Words of our Savior, Mat.
19. 12. For there are some chaste, or Eunuchs, which were so born of their
Mother's Belly; and there be some chaste, which be made chaste by Men; and there
be some chaste, which have made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven.

I would also know gladly, what ancient Father, either amongst the Greeks or
Latins, by Occasion of Interpretation of Scripture, or any Disputation has
mentioned, Maleficium versus hanc, or declared it to be a Cause of Nullity in
Marriage.

The like I demand touching the ancient Councils, either general or provincial,
and concerning the Stories Ecclesiastical, whether any such Matter be to be
found in them.

If for ought that appears, never mention was made of this, till the time of
Hincmerus Episcopus Rhemensis, who lived Nine Hundred Years after Christ; it
may well be conceived, that this was a Concomitant of Darkness and Popish
Superstition, which about that time, grew to so great an Height, God permitting
then the Punishment to fall upon the Children of Unbelief.

But since the Light of the Gospel is now in so great Measure broken out again,
why should I not hope; but those who have embraced the Gospel, should be free
from this Maleficium? especially since amongst a Million of Men in our Age,
there is not one found in all our Country, who is clearly and evidently known
to be troubled with the same. And if there should be any that might seem to be
thus molested, we are taught to use two Remedies against it; the one spiritual
Physic, the other external.

For the first, our Savior said, Hoc genus daemoniorum non ejicetur nisi per
orationem and jejunium. And St. Peter speaking of the Devil, Cui resistite
firmi in fide: And the Canonists themselves prescribe Alms, Fasting, and
Prayer, to be used in that Case; but that they join superstitiously their
Exorcisms thereunto. And for corporal Physic to be applied as against a
Disease; it is the Judgment of our late Divines, whether they speak of
Maleficium or not.

Now admit the Earl of Essex might be imagined to be troubled with Maleficium
versus hanc, I demand what Alms have been given? What fasting has been used,
what Prayers have been poured out to appease the Indignation of God toward
him, or his Wife, or what Physic has been taken, or Medicine applied for
Eight Years together? Not one of these things; but the first Hearing must be,
to pronounce a Nullity in the Marriage. Of which Declaration we know the
Beginning, but no mortal Man's Wit can foresee the End either in his Person, or
the Example.

TESTIMONIES produced by the Archbishop, for his Opinion.
Judicium Philippi Melancthonis de Divortiis ex impotentia in loco de conjugio;
quod Chr. Pezelius suis in Melancthonis examen exemplificationibus inseruit,
Secunda Part.
PErsonae quae sunt idoneae ad commixtionem conjugalem nequaquam fiunt
conjuges, sed cum explorata est frigiditas, Judex pronunciet illas Personas
liberas esse. Nec fit tunc divortium, quia non erat conjugium juxta dictum,
Mat. 19. sed fit declaratio, ut alii sciant, illam societ atem non esse
conjugium, and personae quae habet naturae vires integras, concedi aliam
faeliciorem copulationem legitimam. Sed ad explorandam frigiditatem Jura tempus
constituunt, si res dubia est, ne ante triennium fiat sejunctio. Eodem modo
pronunciant de iis. in quibus natura ita laesa est facino aut veneficio, ut open
medica sanari non possit, si toto triennio frustra tentata est medicatio.

Tenta autem est virtus aliquarum mulierum, ut occultent imbecillitatem
virorum, sicuti viri doctissimi Simonis Grynei soror narravit, se, mortua prima
conjuge, duxisse viduam virginem, quae undecem annos nupta fuerit viro frigido,
nec unquam ulli ante mortem viri hanc rem patefecit. Haec Melancthon in locis:
Loco de conjugio, quae Christopherus Pezelius suis in Melancthonis examen
explieationibus inseruit, and eis adjecit hanc annotationem. Impotentia alia
naturalis, alia accidentaria est. Naturalis, cum quis naturae non est idoneus
ad commixtionem conjugalem. Accitentale, cum quis est castratus, aut veneficio
corruptus. Rursus quae ex veneficio accedit impotentia, aut curari potest
medicamentis, aut est perpetua. Ex his distinctionibus sumitur explicatio
questionis, An, and quomodo impotentia sit causa divortii. Nam inter
impotentes, non potest constare conjugium, quiae deest causa sufficiens and
finalis. Primum, ni persona illa quae sana est, decepta fuit, and ignorans
duxit impotentem, non igitur potuit esse consensus, qui est causa efficiens
Matrimonii. Secundo duplex est finis conjugii, unus est generatio sobolis,
sicut dicitur, Crescite and Multiplicamini: Alter finis est Vitatio confusionis
libidinum, juxta dictum: Vitandae fornicationis causa unusquisque habeat
uxorem. Haec Pezelius 2 part Explicat: in Examen Melancthon.

Hemingii Judicium lib. de Conjugio, Repudiis and Divortiis. Professoris Theol.
in Academ.
INhabilitas corporum ad usum matrimonii divortii causa est, and nonnunquam
fascino and veneficio adeo inhabiles reduntur viri, ut nunquam sanari possint.
Sed plura sunt judicii perpendenda, antequam divortii sententiam serat. Primum,
an impotentia praecesseret Nuptias. Secundum, an sit subsecuta Nuptias. Tertium
an sit curabilis. Quartum, an ejus rei mulier conscia fuerit ante Nuptias. Si
praecesserit Nuptias, potest liberari persona sana divortium petens, non enim
fuit verum conjugium, siquidem non legitime consentiunt, cum unus fallit, alter
errat, fallit impotens, errat potens. Cum ergo Deus nec fallacium nec errorem
probat, non est dicendus cos conjunxisse. Proinde Judex, si intellexerit ex
probationibus incurabile esse vitium, mox declarabit suo testimonio, non fuisse
Matrimonium; verum si spes sit curationis, triennium statuatur, in quo
patienter expectetur curatio, quae si frustra tentata fuerit, Judex
pronunciabit Conjugium nullum fuisse.

Si subsecutum est vitium post nuptias and complexium maritalem conjugum, nullo
pacto permittendum est divortium: fortuna enim afflicta, si absit culpa,
patienter in conjugio ferenda est. Si alter fuerit conscius infirmitatis
alterius ante nuptias, cogantur simul habitare, and alia officia sibi mutuo
praestare: Nam persona conscia vitii alterius absque dubio fraudem meditata
est, quae fraus non debet illi prodesse, si postea divortium petat. Haec
Hemingius libello de Conjugio, Repudio, and Divortio.

Polani professoris Theol. nuper in Academia Basiliensi Judicium.
COnjugium inire possunt, qui non sunt natura vel art Spadones, aut quibus
natura non est laesa fascino aut veneficio. Tales enim personae nequaquam fiunt
conjuges. Ideo etiam nuptiis celebratis cum trienni spatio explorata est
spadonis frigiditas, aut toto triennio tentate est naturae laesae medicatio,
Judex pronunciare potest illas personas liberas esse. Polanus lib. 10. Syntag.
c. 53.

Sive Treularii.
Arcularii nuper prefessoris Theol. in Academia Marpurgensi Judicium.
INter personas quae propter frigiditatem aliumve naturae vitium ad usum
conjugii sunt ineptae, cum non sit conjugium, test Christo, Mat. 19. divortium
hic locum habere poterit. Si quam igitur personam talem alteri jungi contingat,
Judex, explorata frigiditate aut naturae vitio, utramque personam liberam
pronunciabit. Porro ad explorandam frigiditatem Jura triennii tempus
praescribunt, praesertim si res dubia sit. Idem judicium est de eis quorum
natura vel fascino vel veneficio ita sit laesa, ut ad conjugii usum reddanter
inepti; and omnem medicorum operam intra triennium inanem fuerint experti. Haec
Arcularius in arcu foederis, cap. 28.

Bezae Judicium in lib. de Divortiis.
SPonsalia cum personis paralysi immedicabilii, quae corpus prorsus enervavit,
frigiditate insanabili, genitalium partium privatione, vel adeo insigni
laesione, ut perpetua coitus impotentia necessario consequatur, affectis,
contracta prorsus inutilia sunt, cum ad matrimonium a Deo vocati videri non
possint, qui fidem in sponsalibus datam praestare, naturali objecto vitio
nequeunt. Quod si sponsalibus factis, conjugio tamen nondum reipsa consummato,
ejusmodi malum supervenerit, sentio ejusmodi sponsalia, veluti Deo ipso
jubente, dirimenda, ut, quid objecto perpetuo impedimento, palam demonstret
sibi istiusmodi sponsalia non placere. Beza lib. de Divort. and Repud. page 91.
Genev. 1591 impress.

Atque hanc suam doctrinam Beza multis ex sacrae scripturae testimoniis probat:
sed tantum page 94. ei duas cautiones adjecit. Primam, si frigidus postea
convaluit, repetere priorem uxorem, errore, viz. Separatam oportet, etiamsi
alteri postea esset conjuncta: secundum cautionem, recto omnino in istiusmodi
controversiis constitutum est: ne quod videlicet fieret quod postea mutari sine
magno offendiculo non posset, ut triennium saltem ab ipso copulationis, i. e.
ductae uxoris die expectaretur, priusquam isti morbi insanabiles esse, and
sponsalia conjugiave dirimenda pronunciarentur. Hoc autem omnino de iis vitiis
accipiendum est quae per se non patent. Nam alioqui, ut in erectione, vel
siquis naturae vitio, testibus aut genitali membro careat, quorsum ullum
temporis intervallum?

Zanchii Judicium in lib. 4. de operibus Dei, cap. 3. non tamen impotentiam ex
veneficio attigit.
QVemadmodum Beza, sic nec Zanchius impotentiam ex veneficio attigit, sed
tantum docet, quosdam esse casus, quibus matrimoniain ipsa Ecclesia benedicta
nulla sint, and subinde haec exempla subjungit. Si cum eo contrahitur, qui vir
non erat, sed spado, aut propter perpertuum ei insanabilem morbum, officium
conjugis praestare nullo modo potest. Haec Zanchius, lib. 4. de op. Dei, cap.
3. sed illam nec scripturae testimoniis nec rationibus confirmat.

Non eadem sentire bonos de rebus eisdem,
Incolumi licuit semper amicitia.
His Majesty's Answer to the Archbishop's Reasons.
TO the first Article, that the Scripture directly, or by Consequence does
contain sufficient Matter to decide all Controversies, especially in things
appertaining to the Church; this in my Opinion is propositio erronea, and one
of the Puritan's Grounds, without a better Distinction or Explanation. For the
Orthodox Proposition is, That the Scripture does directly, or by Consequence,
contain in it self sufficient Matter to decide all Controversies in Points of
Faith and Salvation; of which sort a Nullity in Marriage cannot be accounted
for one; and therefore your Consequence upon the former Proposition must fail.

For farther Satisfaction to your former Question, I say, your own Second
Question does answer it: For if there be a Warrant in Scripture for pronouncing
a Nullity, propter frigiditatem, then all the Means, which may make him
frigidus versus hanc, must be comprehended therein. For why does our Church
justly condemn as incestuous, the Marriage of a Man with his Sister's Daughter,
or the Marriage of Two Sisters, but a Paritate Rationis? for none of them is in
terminis prohibited by the Scripture, only the Conclusion is gathered a
Paritate Rationis. For if it be not lawful to marry your Father's Wife, because
thereby you discover your Father's Shame; nor his Sister, because she is his
Kinswoman; nor your own Sister, because thereby you discover your Father, and
Mother's Shame: It can no more be lawful to marry your Sister's Daughter; for
thereby you also discover your own Shame. As also that the same Reason serves
for ascending or descending, in Points of Consanguinity, quia par est Ratio.
The like is in this Case, for although Christ spoke only of three sorts of
Eunuchs, yet ratio est quia non potest esse copula inter Eunuchum and mulierem,
and therefore St. Paul in the 6th of the Corinthians, tells us clearly, that
it is no Conjunction sine copula: I conclude therefore, a paritate rationis,
that Christ did comprehend under those three sorts of Eunuchs all Inability,
which did perpetually hinder Copulam versus hanc, whether it were natural or
accidental. For what Difference is there betwixt cutting off of the Hand, and
being made impotent thereof? Amputatio and mutulatio Membri, is all one in the
Civil Law, and it is alike defrauding of the Woman, when either he who is to be
her Husband is gelded, or when the Use of that Member toward her is by any
unlawful Means taken from him. Neither is it any way needful to crave the
particular Warrant of Nullity, propter Maleficium, out of the Scripture, no
more than there is Warrant in that Place for any Nullity at all. For Christ
does not directly say, that a Marriage so made shall be null; neither does he
teach us what Form of Process shall be used in it; neither makes he mention of
a triennial Probation, no more than he forbids Marriage within the Fourth
Degree, without Leave obtained of the Bishop of the Diocese. It is therefore
sufficient to all moderate Christians, to be taught out of the Word, that
Marriage is null sine Copula, and that the Word Quos Deus conjunxit, is never
found in the Scripture, where erunt (...) does not precede, ( viz. they shall
be one Flesh.) But whether the Impediment be universal, or versus hanc only,
and whether the Fault thereof have been born with him, or done to him by
Violence, or fallen by Disease, or by Disproportion, or Ineptitude betwixt the
Parties, or by unlawful or unnatural Practices, it is ever par ratio: He is
Eunuchus versus hanc; for he ought to be Eunuchus versus omnes alias, seeing to
her only he was married; and therefore a Paritate Rationis, such Nullities are
grounded upon the aforesaid Warrant of Scripture; neither had Christ then any
Occasion to speak to the Jews concerning Maleficium; for as it is apparent,
that God made King Abimelech and his Family unable to abuse Sarah, Abraham's
Wife; and so was he made by God himself Eunuchus versus hanc: is it not
improbable, that the Devil being God's Ape, should imitate God's Work by his
filthy Witchcraft, by making such as God will permit him, inhabile versus hanc,
though it may be, that it was long after that time, before the Devil put that
Trick in use upon the Earth.

As to your Third and Fourth Questions, What mention the Fathers, and Councils
make of Maleficium versus hanc? First, I answer, That it may be, if they be
well searched, that either something to this purpose shall be found in them; or
at least aliquid analogum, which a paritate rationis, or by Consequence, may
serve to decide this Question. But leaving this to the Search, my main Answer
is, That we must distinguish of Times. For in all the first Ages, as long as
Persecution lay heavy upon the Church, and before that the Emperors became
Christians, the Church did not meddle with Questions of Marriage; for the Civil
Judges determined them, who would not suffer the Church to meddle with any
thing which drew a Consequence after it of Possessions, and Inheritance, as
Marriage does. Nay, even diverse hundred Years, after the Conversion of the
Emperors, the Judgment and Decisions of all such Questions did still remain in
foro Civili, till the Popedom began to wax great, and assume, or rather usurp
to her self a Power of Supreme, or Independent Judicatory in all Ecclesiastical
Causes: And therefore the Fathers, and Councils had no Occasion to make mention
of that which was not eorum fori at that time. And besides that, it is an evil
Argument to say, that such a thing is unlawful, because the Fathers, and first
Councils make no mention of it. For you know much beter than I, that diverse
main Points in Controversy betwixt the Papists and us, are never mentioned by
the Fathers, because they could never have dreamt that such Questions would
arise; and therefore we only find the Fathers exact in such Questions, as were
most agitated, and upon the Stage in their time; as de Trinitate: de duabus in
Christo Naturis, and such like. It is therefore sufficient, that there can be
nothing found in them, which may be justly understood to contradict this
Opinion; and it is very probable (as I said before) that this Trick of
Maleficium had not then been put in Practice in the World, and therefore not
known, nor mentioned by them; for why may not the Devil find out as well new
Tricks of Witchcraft, when God will permit him, as he does daily new sorts of
Heresies? for his Malice can never end, till the End of Times.

To your Fifth Argument my former Answer does also serve. For till the Nine
Hundredth Year of God, it may be, that that devilish Trick came never to be
discovered, and you know the old Proverb, Ex malis moribus bonae leges, and it
is not unlikely that that Time of Darkness gave the Devil occasion of devising
of such new Tricks. Look my Demonology, and yet was that Law, for which you
cite Hincmarus Episcopus Rhemensis, made by Charles the Great, who in many
great Points, as you know, had so great Light, as I dare scarcely term his Time
a Time of Blindness. But how great and palpable soever that Darkness was in
Points of Superstition, I will still maintain it, as I have ever done, that for
Matter of Order and Policy, all the World shall never be able to find out any
other so good, and so old an Order of Government to be put in the place of it.
In sign whereof, there is no well governed Commonwealth in the Christian World,
where the Canon Law is not received to judge in Questions of that Nature; and
it is certain, that this Question in hand is only a Question of Order and
Policy; for the Grounds of this Question, That the essential Point of Matrimony
cannot be accomplished, sine Copula, is warranted by express Scripture, and
confessed by your self.

To your Sixth Argument, or rather Hope, I fear that Hope shall prove contrary
to Faith. For as sure as God is, there be Devils, and Devils must have some
Power, and their Power is in this World, (for Satan is the Prince of this
World:) Neither are the Elect exempted from his Power; Job was not; St. Paul
was not: Christ says to all his Disciples, Cribravit vos Satanas. And if the
Devil has any Power over the Elect, it is over their Flesh; and if over the
Flesh, rather over the fleshest, and most sinful part thereof; whereunto
original Sin is so tied, as God, both before and under the Law, to show the
difficulty of purging Man's original Sin, ordained the amputation of the
Foreskin of that Member. And to exempt those of our Profession from the Power
of Witchcraft, is a Paradox never yet maintained by any Learned, or Wise Man.
That the Devils Power is not so universally unbridled amongst us, that I freely
confess, but that it is totally restrained, quoad nos, how then was a Minister
of Geneva bewitched to Death? And how are the Witches daily punished by our
Laws? Surely if they can harm none but the Papists, we are too Charitable to
labor for avenging them only. Satan is permitted to punish Man as well for the
breach of the Second, as the First Table; and thereof are we no less Guilty
than the Papists are. And if the Power of Witchcraft may reach to our Life, how
much more to a Member? especially to a Member so governed by the Fantasy,
wherein the Devil has his principal Operation, and he may so estrange the
Husband's Affection from the Wife, as he cannot be able to perform that Duty
unto her. For it is a common Thing in many Men's Nature, that they cannot do
that Act but where they Love, nor Fight but when they are Angry. God keep us
therefore from putting the Trial of our Profession upon Miracles; let the
Miracle-mongers live by their own Trade.

To your Seventh Argument touching the Remedies, what do you know whether both
Parties, or either of them, have used both those Remedies or not? And that that
spiritual Remedy of Fasting and Prayer should be used publicly for them, I can
see no necessity. For non interest Reipublicae nec Ecclesiae. And private
Persons are commanded to use their Fasting and Alms secretly, and in private;
besides, that no such Remedy or Cure is likely to succeed well, except the
Parties own Heart and Desire be set upon it.

And as for your Conclusion upon the incommodum, either in these Persons, or in
the Example, I can see none in either; for as to this Couple, (betwixt whom
Marriage was never truly accomplished,) they will peradventure both of them by
the declaratory of this Nullity, be made capable to accomplish lawful Marriage
with others, (which they could not do betwixt themselves) wherein they may live
to the satisfaction of their Hearts, and enjoy the Blessing of Procreation of
Children. And as to the Example, the Law shall be fulfilled by due
Administration of Justice, which cannot serve for an Example or President of
counterfeited Nullites in Time to come; for, Notoritas facti, or rather non
facti, is luce clariorie in this Case. Besides the many legal Probations and
Confessions of the Parties, which have been taken in this Process; whereas by
the contrary, if they shall be forcibly kept together, their Names, or shadows
may well be kept together, but never their Persons or Affections; and they
shall be forced to live either in perpetual Misery and Scandal, or both: And
what such a forced Continency can avail, the Monks Continency can teach us. And
for a President in time to come, it can reach no further than to open a way of
lawful Relief for any Parties who shall chance to be distressed in that sort.
Hac est mea sententia.

2. And, as for the Extract of our late Divines Opinions upon this Question, I
confess, I cannot guess what your intent was in sending them unto me, for they
all agree in Terminis with my Opinion, that there is such a Thing as
Maleficiati versus hanc; and your very interlined Passages prove it clearliest.
As for their Advice concerning the Remedies, that is, Consilium, non jus, nec
Decretum; not imposing a necessity; but is to be used by discretion, as
occasion shall serve, or require it.

1. As for the legal Doubts of formality, they concern none of your Calling. If
your Conscience be resolved in the Points of Divinity, it is your part to give
your consent to the Nullity, and let the Lawyers take the burden of making it
formal.

And as for the triennial Probation, I hope no Man can be so blind as to make a
double triennial, both Ante and post litem contestatam. And in Conclusion, our
new Divines Solution of this Question proves clearly, that their Resolution
upon this Doubt, (howsoever it was first conceived in blindness, as you think,)
yet is it now approved in the time of the greatest Light, and Purity of the
Profession of the Gospel.

To conclude then, if this may satisfy your Doubts, I will end with our
Savior's Words to St. Peter, Et cum conversus eris, confirma fratres tuos. But
I must add, vel (si opus fuerit) converte fratres tuos. For on my Conscience,
all the Doubts I have yet seen made in this Business, are nothing but Nodos in
Scirpo quaerere.



The Midwives appointed to make Inspection upon the Lady's Body, gave in, that
the Lady Essex is a Woman apt to have Copulation, and to bring forth Children,
and that the said Lady is a Virgin and uncorrupted.

Three Ladies affirm, That they believe the same, for that they were present
when the Midwives made the Inspection, and did see them give good Reasons for
it.

After these Matters were summed up, there was a Sentence of Divorce given for
the Nullity of the Marriage, and both Parties licensed to be married again.

The Commissioners who gave Sentence in the Lady Essex's behalf were,
Bishops. Winchester, Ely, Litchfield and Coventry, Rochester,
Doctors of Law. Sir Julius Caesar, Sir Thomas Parry, Sir Daniel Dun,



The Commissioners Dissenting.
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London. Doctors of Law. Sir John Bennet,
Francis James, Thomas Edwards,



The Copy of the Divorce, drawn up in this Form, which follows.
IT is by these Presents declared, That whereas Robert, Earl of Essex, and the
Lady Frances Howard, Contracted by show of Marriage, did Co-habit in one House,
and lie together in one Bed, Nudus cum Nuda, and Solus cum Sola; and that the
said Lady Frances did show her self prompt, ready to be known of him; and that
the said Earl neither did, nor could have Knowledge of her, although he did
think himself able to have Knowledge of other Women. And that the said Lady
Frances, by inspection of her Body by Midwives, expert in matter of Marriage,
was proved to be apt for carnal Copulation with Man, and yet a Virgin.
Therefore we the said Judges deputed in the Cause, first invocating the Name of
Christ, and setting God before our Eyes, do Pronounce, Decree, and Declare,
That the Earl of Essex, for some secret, incurable, binding Impediment, did
never carnally know, or was, or is able carnally to know, the Lady Frances
Howard, and therefore we do Pronounce, have Decreed, and do Declare, the
pretended Marriage, so Contracted and Solemnized, de Facto, between them, to
have been, and to be utterly void, and to no effect; and that they did want,
and ought to want the Strength of the Law; and that the Lady Frances was, and
is, and so ought to be free, and at Liberty, from any Bond of such pretended
Marriage, de facto, Contracted, and Solemnized. And we do pronounce, That she
ought to be Divorced, and so we do Free, and Divorce her; leaving them, as
touching other Marriages, to their Conscience in the Lord. Which our Definitive
Sentence, and Decree, we here Ratify and Publish.

Bishops. Winchester, Ely, Litchfield and Coventry, Rochester,
Doctors of Law. Sir Julius Caesar, Sir Thomas Parry, Sir Daniel Dun,




The Earl of Northampton immediately hastened to Court with the News of this
Divorce; and it was soon spread all over the Kingdom. The Earl of Essex in a
great discontent left the Court, and repaired to his Seat in Warwickshire, near
Drayton, and there lived a private Life.

An Account of the Intrigue between ROBERT CAR, Earl of Somerset, Viscount
Rochester, etc. and the Lady FRANCES HOWARD, An. Reg. 10. An. Christi, 1612.
By ARTHUR WILSON, Esquire
AMONG all our Historians, Mr. Wilson, in his Life of King JAMES the First,
relates this Affair with the most exactness; and See the Notes upon King
James's Reign, in the Collection of the History of England, Vol. 2. page 687.
As he has given us a more full and particular Account of these Passages
between the Earl of ESSEX, his Lady, and the Favorite CAR; so he was best
qualified to do it, being an intimate Bosom Acquaintance of the Earl, from his
Youth to his Death. But if any unusual Warmth be observed in his manner of
relating them, it must be attributed to his Zeal for the Honor of his Patron.

Having thus given the Motives that might in some Measure sway Mr. WILSON in
the Earl's behalf, I shall now produce his own Words, leaving the whole to the
Reader's Judgment.

The Treasurer See Mr. Wilson's History of King James I. page 686. and seq.
CECIL, Earl of Salisbury, that great Engine of the State, by whom all Wheels
moved, held an intimate Correspondence with the House of Suffolk, which he had
strengthened with an Alliance; marrying his eldest Son, the Lord Cranborn, to
Katharine, the eldest Daughter of that Family. And being mindful of the
Asperity and Sharpness that was betwixt him and the late Earl of Essex, he
thought it a good Act of Policy and Piety not to suffer Malice to become
Hereditary, and therefore he was a great Means in marrying the young Earl of
Essex to the Lady Frances Howard, another of those Sisters, that the Father's
Enmity might be closed up by the Son's Nuptial Fraternity. The Earl of Essex
was Fourteen Years of Age, and she Thirteen, when they married; too young to
consider, but old enough to consent: Yet by the Advice of Friends separated
after Marriage, she under her Mother's Wing, and he visiting France and
Germany, till Time should mature and ripen a happy Co-union. The Court was her
Nest, her Father being Lord Chamberlain; and she was hatched up by her Mother,
whom the sour Breath of that Age (how justly I know not) had already tainted;
from whom the young Lady might take such a Tincture, that Ease, Greatness, and
Court Glories, would more distain and impress on her, than any way wear out and
diminish. And growing to be a Beauty of the greatest Magnitude in that Horizon,
was an Object fit for Admirers, and every Tongue grew an Orator at that Shrine.

The Prince of Wales, now in his Puberty, sent many loving Glances, as
Ambassadors of his good Respects; and amorous Expressions are fit Subjects for
jealous Reproaches to work on. Her Husband having been now Three or Four Years
beyond the Seas, (sick with Absence from her whom his Desires longed after)
came over again, and found that Beauty, which he had left Innocent, so faded
and sophisticated, with some Court Drug which had wrought upon her, that he
became the greatest Stranger at home. His Patience made way for him a while,
and he bore up with a gentle Gale against the Stream of this Woman's
Affections, which ran altogether (unknown to him) into another Channel. Nor was
her Reputation yet become so robust, (being of a tender Growth) to strike his
Ears with Reproaches; and therefore he imputed her sly Entertainments to a
Maiden bashfulness; till surfeited with that dull Potion (upon better Advice)
he went to the Earl of Suffolk (her Father) and demanded his Wife, thinking
himself capable to enjoy both her and her Love. The Father, that thought there
had been an Intimacy betwixt them suitable to their Conjugal Knot, made use of
his Paternal Power to reduce his Daughter to the Obedience of a Wife. But while
these Things were struggling for, a most violent Disease of a poisonous Nature,
imputed to, but far transcending, the Smallpox, seized on the Earl of Essex;
and had not the Strength of Youth, and that Almighty Power that orders all
things, wrought out the Venom of it, the Earth (as probable wished by her) had
been his Marriage Bed.

For this Lady being taken with the growing Fortunes of ROBERT CAR, Viscount
Rochester, and grounding more Hope upon him than the uncertain and hopeless
Love of the Prince, she cast her Anchor there, which the Prince soon
discovered, and slighted her accordingly. For dancing one time among the
Ladies, and her Glove falling down, it was taken up, and presented to him, by
one that thought he did him acceptable Service; but the Prince refused to
receive it, saying publicly, He would not have it, it is stretched by another,
meaning the Viscount: This was an Aggravation of Hatred betwixt the King's Son
and the King's Friend.

The Countess of Essex having her Heart alienated from her Husband, and set
upon the Viscount, had a double Task to undergo, for accomplishing her Ends:
One was, to hinder her Husband from enjoying her; the other was to make the
Viscount sure unto her: For dishonest Love is most full of Jealousy. Her
Husband she looked upon as a private Person, and to be carried by him into the
Country, out of her Element, (being Ambitious of Glory, and a Beauty covetous
of Applause) were to close (as she thought) with an insufferable Torment;
though he was a Man that did not only every way merit her Love, but he loved
her with an extraordinary Affection, having a gentle, mild, and courteous
Disposition, especially to Women, such as might win upon the roughest Natures.
But this fiery Heat of his Wife's mounted upon the Wings of Lust, or Love,
(call it what you will) carried her after so much Mischief, that those that saw
her Face, might challenge Nature of too much Hypocrisy, for harboring so
wicked a Heart under so sweet and bewitching a Countenance.

To strengthen her Designs, she finds out one of her own Stamp, Mrs. Turner, a
Doctor of Physick's Widow, a Woman whom Prodigality and Looseness had brought
low; yet her Pride would make her fly any Pitch, rather than fall into the Jaws
of Want. These two consult together, how they may stop the Current of the
Earl's Affection toward his Wife, and make a clear Passage for the Viscount in
the Place. To effect which, one Doctor Forman, a reputed Conjurer, (living at
Lambeth) is found out: The Women declare to him their Grievances; he promises
sudden Help; and to amuse them, frames many little Pictures of Brass and Wax,
some like the Viscount and Countess, whom he must unite and strengthen; others
like the Earl of Essex, whom he must debilitate and weaken; and then with
Philtrous Powders, and such Drugs he works upon their Persons. And to practice
what Effects his Art would produce, Mrs. Turner, that loved Sir Arthur
Manwaring (a Gentleman then attending the Prince) and willing to keep him to
her, gave him some of the Powder, which wrought so violently with him, that,
through a Storm of Rain and Thunder, he rode Fifteen Miles one dark Night to
her House, scarce knowing where he was till he was there. Such is the Devilish
and mad Rage of Lust, heightened with Art and Fancy.

These Things matur'd and ripened by the Cunning of this Jugler Forman, gave
them Assurance of happy Hopes. Her Courtly Invitements, that drew the Viscount
to observe her, she imputed to the Operation of those Drugs he had tasted; and
that Harshness, and stubborn Comportment she expressed to her Husband, making
him (weary of such Entertainments) to absent himself, she thought proceeded
from the Effects of those unknown Potions and Powders that were administered to
him: So apt is the Imagination to take Impression of those Things we are
willing to believe.

The good Earl finding his Wife noussed in the Court, and seeing no Possibility
to reduce her to Reason, till she were estranged from the Relish and Taste of
the Delights she sucked in there, made his Condition again known to her Father.
The old Man being troubled with his Daughter's Disobedience, embittered her,
being near him, with wearisome and continual Chidings, to wean her from the
Sweets she doted on, and with much ado, forced her into the Country. But how
harsh was the parting, being rent away from the Place where she grew and
flourished? Yet she left all her Engines and Imps behind her; the old Doctor,
and his Confederate, Mrs. Turner, must be her two Supporters: She blazons all
her Miseries to them at her departure, and moistens the Way with her Tears.
Chartley was an hundred Miles from her Happiness, and a little time thus lost
is her Eternity. When she came thither (though in the pleasantest time of Summer)
she shut her self up in her Chamber, not suffering a Beam of Light to peep upon
her dark Thoughts: If she stirred out of her Chamber, it was in the Dead of
Night, when Sleep had taken Possession of all others but those about her. In
this implacable, sad, discontented Humor, she continued some Months, always
murmuring against, but never giving the least civil Respect to her Husband;
which the good Man suffered patiently, being loath to be the Divulger of his
own Misery: Yet having a Manly Courage, he would sometimes break into a little
Passion, to see himself slighted and neglected by himself; but having never
found better from her, it was the easier to bear with her.

While she was at Chartley, she writ to her Confederates, That her Husband
found little Operation in their Drugs, complaining of his Lustiness and her
Misery: For (she said) the Viscount would never love her, if her Husband did
meddle with her, which with Difficulty she yet impeded, but how long she should
resist his Violence, she knew not; therefore she implored their Assistance, if
they would not see her the most despicable Creature in the World: And for
Satisfaction, they should make their own Price. With this kind of Stuff she
filled her Letters, which were after found in Forman's Closet. These
Instigations made him active; and the Man being skilful in Natural Magic, did
use all the Artifice his Subtilty could devise, really to imbecilitate the
Earl; for no Linen came near his Body, that was not rinsed with their Camphire
Compositions, and other faint and wasting Ingredients; and all inward
Applications were foisted on him by corrupted Servants, to lessen and
debilitate the Seminal Operations: which Veneficium is one great part of
Witchcraft, destructive to Nature, and horribly abominable to be practiced. And
this in time wrought such Effects upon his Person, that he found himself unable
with her, though she permitted him; yet when he had been from her some reasonable
time, to renovate his Spirits, by shaking off those Artificial Applications,
then his Abilities made her unwilling and refractory. Though some are of Opinion,
that he was not much debilitated, but that she got (by her virtuous Agents) an
Artifice too immodest to be expressed, to hinder Penetration. And thus she
tormented him, till he was contented to let her steer her own Course, which
after run her on Ground.

For coming to London next Winter with this full Sail, laden with Lust, she
found the Viscount much prepared for her; who being at first fastened on the
Object, Absence, and all those little Artifices that mischievous Women and
cunning Impostures could devise, had advanced him as much in his Desires, as
they had hindered the other. We could dispute the Nature of these Operations,
how far they are contingent, and how the Fancy works with them, though ignorant
of them, making their Impulsions more active, being the Sparks that kindle this
combustible Matter; for we will never allow there was any other Diabolical
Means used, Nature being strong eenough for such a Production; but being not
pertinent to the Story, will leave it, and follow them that found the Effects
of it, and had Affections suitable to it, which they made use of with an
unbridled Appetite, yet meeting closely in Corners, (Sin being at first
shame-fac'd) but afterward they grew more bold; and every Hour that the
Viscount could steal from his Royal Master, he dedicated it to his disloyal
Mistress: Being caught in this Net of Adulation, he becomes a willing Prisoner;
Lust only getting Liberty to all Looseness and Licentiousness: Places of
frequent Meetings are daily renewed; Persons fitted for such Practices are
employed; and when Nature was exhausted, Art, her subtle Imitator, brought in
her Store, to contribute new Spirits, purchased at any rate. All outward
Adornment, to present Beauty in her full Glory, were not wanting on both sides,
being Lust's Fuel, which tended to the Consumption of all Reason: And among the
rest, yellow Starch, the Invention and foil of Jaundice Complexions, with great
cut-work Bands, and Piccadillies, (a thing that has since lost the Name)
crowded in and flourished among us, Mrs. Turner being nominated to be the first
Contriver, happily in England, but the Original came out from France; which
Fashion and Color did set off their lean and sallow Countenances. Thus did the
Viscount get the Conquest of two, the King, and this Lady, but could not subdue
his own lustful Appetite.

However, the King's Affections were not so monopoliz'd, but that his crafty
Servant the Earl of Salisbury, had a good Hole, as well in his Councils as
Treasure: And being not well pleased to see himself bearded by a Youth, new
started into the Affairs of the World, and mounted by the Wing of Love, not of
Merit, he cast out many Mists before him, to hinder and damp his Passage so,
that the Viscount could not rise to that Pitch (during his Life) that he
afterward arrived at.

On the 6th Day of November, Death deprived us of the King's eldest Son, Prince
Henry, a Prince as eminent in Nobleness as in Blood, and having a Spirit too
full of Life and Splendour, to be long shrouded in a Cloud of Flesh.

Anno. 1613. The Viscount Rochester, all this while (though plunged in Lust) was
held up by the Chin in the Glories of the Court; and the Prince (that
interposed betwixt him and the Beams of Majesty) being removed, the Earl of
Salisbury (another Obstacle) dying Six Months after the Prince, in the Way from
the Bath; he now took full Possession of the King's Favors alone. He executes
the Place of Principal Secretary, receiving all Pacquets, and dispatching
Answers without the Knowledge of the King or Council; or if the King did know,
his Love had hoarded up such a Confidence in him, as he laid all out upon that
Stock. Rochester's greatest Assistant was a private Gentleman, one Sir Thomas
Overbury, by whose Compass he steered his Course, who (being a Man of Parts and
Abilities) had wrought upon the Viscount so, as not only to keep him in, and
close with the King, but to make him capable of managing the highest Affairs,
if he had kept himself within the Circle drawn to his Hand. This Intimacy
betwixt them, spoke Overbury, an Actor in all his Privacies. And when he
understood by the Viscount his Intention of Marriage with the Countess of
Essex, he opposed it with all the powerful Arguments he could use: For though he
might be so active, in his Initiation of Favor with the Viscount, to be
Assistant to his Pleasures, and for carrying forward some of his dark
Contrivances, (those Secretaries being always the greatest Favorites) yet
having now gotten good footing in his Affection, and building his Fortune
thereon, his Reason might tell him, there could be nothing more destructive to
both their growing Hopes, than to lay a Foundation upon so much public
Injustice, as to marry another Man's Wife, her Husband living; therefore he
passionately persuaded him to cast his Thoughts upon a more honorable Object,
and not one, whose Disloyalty (in her present Condition) was so much branded
with Infamy, that the Marks of it would be visible on his Face. But the
Viscount, bewitched with the Enticements of his Soul-ravishing Mistress,
(incapable of good Counsel) does not only call home his Affections from
Overbury, that had been long Leiger with him, (denouncing Enmity) but incites
his Beloved against him also; who mustering up all her Passions, with the
greatest Acrimony, that a Feminine Malice could devise, she never left, till
she had discharged all the Vollies of her Rage upon him. And the better to do
it, she consults with her Uncle, the Earl of Northampton, aggravating
Overbury's Offense, as tending to the Dishonor of their whole Family: That he
(a petty Fellow) should dare to raise such Scandals against her Innocence. The
Earl of Northampton, that knew of the Endearments betwixt the Viscount and his
Niece, (so base and mercenary was his Spirit) thought it good Policy to stop
all Passages, that it might not come into the public Mouth: For being in a
Sphere elated above others, it was a Sin of a high Presumption, for any of an
inferior Orb to move but in its own Place, or meddle with what is above them.
He therefore closes with the Viscount, (whom in his flattering Acclamations by
Letters, he makes a little Deity) and after some Dispute of the manner how to
be revenged of Overbury, they conclude to dispatch him by Poison, which could
not be done so well in a public way; and therefore they subtly contrive to
exasperate the King against him, that being a Prisoner, and shackled by them to
a Place, he might be a more settled Mark for their envenomed Arrows.

About the same time, the King thinking fit to send an Ambassador into
Flanders, to the Archduke (some say, into France) the Viscount recommended Sir
Thomas Overbury to the King for that Service, (extolling his Abilities, and
Fitness for the same, publicly, that more Notice might be taken of the
Affront) and the King made choice of him for that Employment, Which done, the
Viscount (under the Shadow of Friendship) imparts to Overbury, what Intentions
the King had toward him; but he thought it would not be so convenient for him
to accept of it, because he should not only lose his Converse and Company by
such an Alienation, (which he highly valued) but many a fair Opportunity of
improving his Respects to him, in some better way of Advancement. Overbury had
not been so little a Courtier, or a Man of so mean Reason, but that he was
sensible what Displeasure he should pull upon himself, by refusing the King's
Commands: And therefore he told the Viscount, that betwixt the King's Favors,
and his Friendship, he had a great Conflict in his Spirit, being willing to
retain both; but how he should refuse the King's Commands with Safety, he knew
not. But the Viscount, with fair Promises, prevailed with him to set up his
Rest at home, upon higher Expectation, (such a sweet Bait is Ambition!)
protesting to take off the Asperity of the King's Anger from him, and smooth
his Way so, as should be for his better Advantage. When he had wrought Overbury
in this Forge, he goes to the King, and blows the Fire, incensing him with all
the Aggravations he could; so that the poor Gentleman, for his Contempt was
forthwith committed to the Tower. And to prepare all things for his Reception
there, Sir William Wade, the late Lieutenant, was removed, and Sir Jervis
Ellowis, a Person more ambitious than indigent (having made his Way by Money,
the common Merit) was admitted to the Place.

Now the Countess, like another Alecto, drove furiously, her Chariot having two
Wheels, which ran over all Impediments: One was, to sue a Divorce betwixt her
and her Husband, that she might marry the Viscount: The other was, to take away
Overbury, the Blemish in her Eye, and that laid such a Stain upon her, that
nothing but his Blood could expiate. For these she has several Engines; the
one must be acted Overtly; the other Covertly, in dark Corners; and she and her
Agents find fit Ministers for both.

The Earl of Northampton resenting his Nieces Grievances, makes the King
acquainted with her Maiden Bashfulness, how loath she is to divulge her
Husband's Infirmities, and how long it is since her Marriage, and yet she has
not enjoyed the Happiness of a Wife; that her Husband's Inability must needs be
an unnatural Conjunction, such as neither Law nor Reason can admit of; and that
there was a great Affection betwixt the Viscount and her, so as there seemed to
be a more excellent Sympathy, and sweet Composition of Soul in them, more
suitable to Reason and Nature, than in the State she was in Which was seconded
by the Viscount's humble Submissions to the King's great Wisdom, who (he
acknowledged) had not only raised him to what he is, but may yet make him more
happy, by uniting him to a Lady of so much Honor and Virtue.

The King, that took Delight to complete the Happiness of them he loved,
commanded the Bishops to sue out a Divorce between the Earl of Essex and his
Lady, that the Viscount might marry her: For he had been practiced formerly in
Scotland, in his Minority, with the like Experiment. Elizabeth, Daughter to the
Earl of Athol, being married to the Earl of March, under pretense of Impotency,
but merely for Lust, (as the Vid. Johnston's Hist. of Scotland.
Author reports) was Divorced from her Husband, and married to the Earl of
Arran, (the King's Favorite) who had been before a Partner in her Adulterous
Sheets, (so current is the Parrallel, and so equally are Lust and Ambition
yoked together, that they both (with full Violence) draw one and the same Way.)

The Bishops and others, having a Commission under the Great Seal of England,
to convene the Earl of Essex, and his Countess before them, sent out their
Summons, and they made their Appearance accordingly. But before they proceeded,
they caused a Jury of Twelve discreet Matrons to be impanell'd, to search the
Countess, whether she were (as she pretended to be, and was reputed) a Maid
still; for if she were a Maid, they could fasten upon a Nullity, and so
separate them for the more Honor of her Virginity. The Countess being ashamed,
and bashful, to come to such a Trial, would not expose her Face to the Light;
but being to appear before the Matrons under a Veil, another Said to be one of
Sir Thomas Monson's Daughters, for the Countess was reported to have had a
Child in the Earl's Absence.
young Gentlewoman, that had less offended, was fobbed into the Place; and she
passed, in the Opinion, both of Jury and Judges, to be a Virgin.

These Bishops, and the rest of the Judges, could not be ignorant what
scandalous Reports of this Lady's Actions flew up and down, from Lip to Lip;
which, however sweetened by the Partakers, carried an ill Savor with them in
every honest Understanding, who were not blinded with Wilfulness, or deafned
with Prejudice, which made the Bishops of Canterbury, and London, decline the
Business, though nominated in the Patent. But Kings will never want fit
Ministers in corrupted Times, both in Church and Commonwealth, as long as there
are degrees, and Places of Ascent to clime to. And though these Things floated
a while upon the Streams of Greatness, yet there is one above that moves the
Waters; who did not only see what passed in the Bishop's Palace, but in the
closest Prison, which he discovered to the Shame and Ruin of the Actors.



The Countess's Attempts against the Earl, by Sorcery.
THE Earl of Essex being a Gentleman of the fairest Character, and universally
beloved, he, out of the natural sweetness of his Temper, took frequent
Occasions of admonishing his Lady against those Evils which common fame loaded
her with. But she being averse toward him, and persuing with all her might the
bent of her lascivious Inclinations, was deaf to his kind Entreaties, and
privately conspired his Destruction after the following manner.

She became acquainted with one Mrs. Turner, a Woman of a vicious Character
from her Youth, and who encouraged her in her wicked Purposes against the Earl,
by consenting to Poison him, which they attempted, but their execrable Design
not taking effect, the Countess writ thus to Mrs. Turner.

Sweet Turner,
AS thou have been hitherto, so art thou all my Hopes of Good in this World; My
Lord is as lusty as ever he was, and has complained to my Brother Howard, that
he has not lain with me, nor used me as his Wife; this makes me Mad, since of
all Men, I loath him as the only obstacle and hindrance, that I shall never
enjoy him whom I love.

Yours, etc. FRANCES ESSEX.


The Earl having escaped this Plot, the hatred of the Countess still increased
toward him, and drew her headlong into her own Destruction. He perceiving
himself less regarded, gives her fresh Advice, endeavoring, if possible, to
reclaim her, which she not in the least regarded, but grew more enraged, and in
a great Fury she takes her Coach, and repairs to Mrs. Turner, who was ready to
assist in any evil Act; accordingly they repaired to one Dr. Forman at Lambeth,
who was skilled in the Magic Art; him they fee'd to join with them, who tried
many Devices to bewitch the Earl; all which failing, at last they framed a
waxen Image, and got a Thorn from a Tree that bore Leaves, and stuck them upon
the Privities of the said Image, by which means they accomplished their desire.

This being done according to her expectation, she repairs to her House at
Chartley, and thither the Earl comes to her. But whether the Earl was more
lusty than she expected, or what other accident happened, it is unknown.
Nevertheless she grew jealous of her Acts, and falls into a great Fear that all
their Labor was lost; whereupon she wrote a Letter to Dr. Forman to this
effect, viz.

Sweet Father!
ALthough I found you ready at all Times to further me, yet must I still crave
your help, wherefore I beseech you that you keep the Doors close, and that you
still retain the Lord with me, and his Affection toward me; I have no cause
but to be confident in you; although the World be against me, yet Heaven fails
me not; many are the troubles I sustain; the doggedness of my Lord, the
crossness of mine Enemies, and the subversions of my Fortunes, unless you by
your Wisdom do deliver me out of the midst of this Wilderness, which I entreat
for God's sake.

From Chartley, Your Affectionote Daughter, FRANCES ESSEX.


This Letter coming to the Hands of the old Master, procures a new attempt, and
now he goes and inchants a Nutmeg, and a Letter, one to be given the Viscount
in his Drink, the other to be sent to him as a Present; these Things being
accomplished, he not long after died, leaving behind him some of those Letters,
whereby the Countess had intercourse with him, in his Pocket, which gave some
light into the Business, amongst which this aforesaid Letter was one.

Dr. Forman being dead, Mrs. Turner wanted one to assist her; whereupon at the
Countess's coming to London, one Gresham was nominated to be entertained in
this Business, and in process of time was wholly interested in it.

The Countess upon her return, sends Gratulations to the Viscount, and with
those the Letter sent her by Dr. Forman, he reads it, and the more he reads it,
the more he is entangled, for no Man knows the Mysteries that are contained in
Evil Arts, and who can withstand the Mischiefs that are in evil Tongues?
Whereupon he returns Answer, and new Places of meeting are assigned; amongst
the rest, one at Hammersmith; in the mean Time the Viscount makes dispatch of
his Business, leaves Things half done, half undone, to the intent he might meet
her, who had there stayed for his coming above Two Hours, and being met, they
solemnly saluted each other, fell into diverse Discourses, and insinuating
Phrases, from Words to Deeds, and from speaking to acting the Sin of Venery.

The Countess having obtained that she desired, and the Viscount caught in the
Net of Adulation; the more he striveth to be loose, is caught the faster; so
that Lust having by this means got liberty, being covered with Greatness, like
a Fire concealed in a pile of rotten Wood, burst forth in all looseness and
licentiousness, Places of more frequent, and private Meetings are concluded
upon between them; Persons fitting for their Purposes being acquainted with
their Proceedings; watch-words are given; all Things having relation to a
certain end, make them the bolder, and more safely to accomplish that which
both Time and Memory cannot demonstrate in former Histories; now these good
Parts, which seemed heretofore to be hopeful in the Viscount, consume to
Cinders, and the Corruption remains to brand him in the Forehead for his evil
living; his Modesty becomes eclipsed, his Behavior light, his Carriage
unseemly; in his Place nothing so costly; no Attire so uncouth, but at all
Costs and Charges he obtains it for the increase of Favor; new Fashions are
produced, that so he might show more beautiful and fair, and that his favor
and personage might be made manifest to the World; and to this purpose yellow
Bands, dusted Hair, curled, crisped, frisled, slicked Skins, opened Breasts,
beyond accustomed modesty, with many other inordinate Attires, were worn on
both sides, to the show of the World; so that for the increase of dishonest
Appetites, they were abundantly practiced; surfeiting thus upon their Pleasure,
having been before accustomed unto hardiness, causes him to fall into all
manner of forgetfulness, letting all Things go to wrack, careless in
Attendance, neglecting State Affairs, ignorant of his own Worth, subjecting
himself to the lustful Appetite of an evil Woman; accounting no Time well
spent, nor Hour deemed so happy, as when dalliance and pleasant Discourses pass
between them, either in Words or Writing.

Time could no longer conceal these secret Meetings, but at length the Marriage
of the Viscount and Countess were brought to light, which when made public,
every one declaimed against her, but extolled the Earl of Essex; however, an
Order was forthwith sent to him to repay her Portion of 5000 l, to do which he
was forced to sell part of his Estate, thereunto willingly consenting, that he
might get rid of her. The King nevertheless continues his Favor to the
Viscount, and installed him Earl of Somerset. But at last the joint Wickedness
of all these Accomplices broke out in the Murder of Overbury, upon which
occasion, the following Letters found in Dr. Forman's Closet after his Death,
were produced in Court at Mrs. Turner's Arraignment, by the Doctor's Widow.

The Countess's LETTER to Mrs. Turner, to procure an Enchantment for turning
the Viscount's Affections toward her.
Sweet Turner,
I Am out of all hope of any good in this World, for my Father, my Mother, and
my Brother said I should lie with him, and my Brother Howard was here, and
said, he would not come from this Place all Winter, so that all comfort is
gone, and which is worst of all, my Lord has complained, that he has not lain
with me, and I would not suffer him to use me; my Father and Mother are angry,
but I had rather die a thousand Times over; for besides the Sufferings, I shall
lose his Love, if I lie with him, I will never desire to see his Face; and if
my Lord do that unto me, my Lord is very well as ever he was, so as you may see
in what a miserable Case I am, you must send the Party word of all, he sent me
word all should be well, but I shall not be so happy, as the Lord to love me.
As you have taken pains all this while for me, so now do all you can, for never
so unnappy as now, for I am not able to endure the Miseries that are coming to
me, but I cannot be happy so long as this Man lives, therefore pray for me,
for I have need, but I should be better if I had your Company to ease my Mind,
let him know this all News; if I can get this done, you shall have as much
Money as you can demand; this is fair play.

Your Sister, FRANCES ESSEX.
Burn this Letter.




A Letter from the Countess to Dr. Forman.
Sweet Father,
I Must still crave your Love, although I hope I have it, and shall deserve it
better hereafter, remember the Galls, for I fear though I have yet no cause, but
to be confident in you, yet I desire to have it as it is yet remaining well, so
continue it still, if it be possible; and if you can you must send me some good
Fortune; alas! I have need of it; keep the Lord still to me, for that I desire:
and be careful you name me not to any body, for we have so many Spies, that you
must use all your Wits, and all little enough, for the World is against me, and
the Heavens favor me not. Only happy in your Love; I hope you will do me good,
and if I be ungrateful, let all mischief come unto me. My Lord is lusty and
merry, and drinks with his Men; and all the Content he gives me, is to abuse
me, and use me as doggedly as before. I think I shall never be happy in this
World, because he hinders my good, and will ever, I think so; remember (I beg
for God's sake) and get me from this vile Place.

Your affectionate, loving Daughter, FRANCES ESSEX.
Give Turner warning of all Things, but not the Lord; I would not have any
Thing come out, for fear of my Lord Treasurer, for so they may tell my Father
and Mother, and fill their ears full of Noise.




There were also showed in Court certain Pictures of a Man and Woman in
Copulation, made in Lead, as also the Mould of Brass, wherein they were cast, a
black Scarf also full of white Crosses, which Mrs. Turner had in her Custody;
at the showing of these, and enchanted Papers and other Pictures in Court,
there was heard a crack from the Scaffolds, which caused great fear, tumult,
and confusion among the Spectators, and throughout the Hall, every one fearing
hurt, as if the Devil had been present, and grown angry to have his Workmanship
showed, by such as were not his own Scholars; and this Terror coming, about a
quarter of an Hour after silence proclaimed, the rest of the cunning Tricks
were likewise showed.

Dr. Forman's Wife being Administratix of her Husband, found Letters in
Packets, by which much was discovered; she was in Court, and deposed that Mrs.
Turner came to her House immediately after her Husband's Death, and did demand
certain Pictures which were in her Husband's Study; namely, one Picture in Wax,
very sumptuously apparalled in Silks and Sattins, as also one other sitting in
form of a naked Woman, spreading, and laying forth her Hair in a Looking-glass,
which Mrs. Turner did confidently affirm to be in a Box, and that she knew in
what part or room of the Study they were.

Mrs. Forman further deposes, that Mrs. Turner and her Husband would be
sometimes three or four Hours locked up in his Study together. She did depose
further, that her Husband had a Ring would open like a Watch.

There was also a Note showed in Court, made by Dr. Forman, and written in
Parchment, signifying what Ladies loved what Lords in the Court, but the Lord
Chief Justice would not suffer it to be read openly in the Court.

Mrs. Turner sent Margaret, her Maid, to Mrs. Forman, and wished that all such
Letters and Papers as concerned the Earl of Somerset, or the Countess of Essex,
or any other great Personages, should be burned, telling her that the Council's
Warrant should come to search the Study, and that all his Goods might be
seized; whereupon she and her Maid Margaret, with the Consent of Mrs. Forman,
burnt diverse Letters and Papers, but yet she kept some without their privity.

There were also Enchantments showed in Court, written in Parchment, wherein
were contained all the Names of the Blessed Trinity, mentioned in the
Scriptures; and in another Parchment, + B. + C. +. D. + E. and in a third
likewise in Parchment were written all the Names of the Holy Trinity; as also a
Figure, in which was written this word, Corpus, and upon the Parchment was
fastened a little piece of the Skin of a Man.

In some of these Parchments, the Devils had particular Names, who were
conjured to torment the Lord Somerset, and Sir Arthur Manwaring, if their Loves
should not continue, the one to the Countess, the other to Mrs. Turner.

Finally, These faithful Servants of the Devil obtained the due Reward of their
Deeds. Mrs. Turner was served first, who being found guilty of the barbarous
Murder committed upon Sir Thomas Overbury, was Condemned for the same, and
Hanged at Tyburn on Wednesday, November 10. 1615. Sir Jarvis Ellowis was
likewise Hanged for the same on Monday, November the 20th following. The
Viscount and Countess were likewise found guilty of the said Murder, for which
they were committed to the Tower; and although the King pardoned them, they in
a short Time pined away their Lives, dying in the utmost Disgrace. At this Time
my Lord of Somerset little thought to have been laid in the Tower, and made
Heir of Overbury's Bedchamber; but by this Course we may see, That all Things
are in the Hands of God.

FINIS.

