A GENUINE NARRATIVE Of the MEMORABLE LIFE and ACTIONS OF JOHN DYER, (Who was
Executed at TYBURN, on Friday the 21 st Day of November, 1729.)

CONTAINING, A Particular RELATION of all the Notorious and Surprising FACTS by
him committed for the Space of Fifteen Years past, as Petty Larcenys,
Fellonies, Burglaries, Housebreakings, Shopliftings, Street and
Highway-Robberies, Rapes, Cheats, etc.

Wrote by Himself, when under Condemnation in Newgate, and Published at his
Earnest Request, for the Benefit of the Public, in Order to prevent the
Perpetration of the many Villainies which are daily committed In and About this
Metropolis.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by J. APPLEBEE, in Blackfriars; W. MEADOWS, at the
Angel in Cornhill; Mrs. NUT, at the Royal Exchange; and Mrs. DOD, at the
Peacock without Temple Bar. 1729. (Price Sixpence.)

READER,
THE following Narrative being Printed from the Genuine Copy of the within
mentioned Criminal; as the same was wrote by his own Hand, whilst under
Prosecution and Sentence, in the old condemned Hold, (where he was at his
Request confined,) in Newgate; the READER will the more readily excuse such
Errors as are found therein; it being the Design of the PRINTER, to communicate
the same to the Public, without any Variation from the Original, of which I
assure the Readers this is a True Copy.

John Applebee.

THE LIFE OF JOHN DYER, etc.
I Shall not trouble my kind Reader with a tedious Apology for the Publishing
of this Narrative, but as I hope I have, by the Blessing of God, a due sense of
my Sins and the folly of my Youth; I think it my Duty to Almighty God and my
Country, to Declare openly and truly, such Things as shall be for the Public
Good, and a warning to all Honest Men, that they may secure themselves, their
Houses, Goods and Money, from the vile Practices of Highwaymen, Street-Robbers,
and House-Breakers, and all sorts of Thieves; and I hope my unhappy Fate will
be a warning to all Persons against the committing such Crimes, as I sadly
Lament, and am to Suffer for, as the just Rewards of my Evil Deeds: I beg leave
to say, that I was born of honest Parents at Salisbury, who gave me a Sober and
solid Education; and when I left my School, they put me to an honest Trade, a
Cordwainer, to which I served my Apprenticeship: At my first falling into this
wicked Course of Life; being short of Money, I made bold to Rob a Chandlers
Shop of the Money-Box of about 30 s. at Collingbourn in the County of Wilts,
and got clear off without being any ways suspected: Some time after that, my
Master sent me one Sunday to another ChandlersShop to get him a Shillingsworth
of Halfpence, and there being no Body at Home, I cut the Bar of the Window off,
and got in and Rifled all the Shop: I took all the Money I could find, it being
about three half Crowns, and out of a merry Frolic I brought away all the
Raisins and Currants that were in the Shop, and they was like to betray me, but
I stood it out, with a great Assurance, and so I got off. I was however,
searched for the Money, but I had hid it in a parcel of Nettles, but in their
searching of me they found some of the Raisins in my Coat-Pocket; but as usual,
I insisted upon it, that I bought them at Andover Market the Saturday before,
and they could not disprove me, so I got clear off. Some short time after, my
Master sending me to Andover Market with five Pound to buy some Leather,
another Boy and I agreed together to feign a Story as if I had been Robbed of
the Money, so I went home and told my Master that I was Robbed, and brought the
other Boy, who was concerned with me, who vouched it to be True; so the Boy and
I shared the five Pound between us: This was done near Lurgershel in Wiltshire.

My Master sometime after that, sent me amongst his Customers to get in some
Money which was due to him, upon which I got up about three Pound, and as soon
as I received it I went off with it, and made the best of my way for Salisbury
in Wiltshire; as soon as I came there, I got acquainted with a young Woman, and
with her Assistance and my own, we soon spent the Money; when Madam found the
Money gone, she marched off too, and then I was put to my Shift. Going one
Market Day into the Market, I spied a young Woman, and saw her receive some
Money, then I watched her till she left the Town, when I followed her and
overtook her, and knocked her down, and Robbed her of what Money she had;
afterward I made her go into the Wood, where I made her comply to my Lustful
desire; after I had my Will of her, I tied her to a Tree, and there left her;
this Robbery was committed about two Miles from Salisbury. Afterward I made my
Addresses to a young Woman at a Place called Forthingbridge in Hampshire, I
went there to Work Journey work, and so became acquainted with her; but after
some small Acquaintance, I went to Lodge at her Mothers, and that was what I
wanted, after I had lodged some short Time there, I made bold to take up my
Lodging with the Daughter, which occasioned a Swelling in her Belly; finding
herself with Child, she and I consulted to Rob her Mother, which we did of
twenty Pounds; after that we made the best of our way for Bristol, there we
lived upon the Reversion of the Money till it was all gone: Then she returned
once more to pay another visit to her Mother, where the good old Woman received
her and the Child, with abundance of Joy; I thought it not proper for me to
appear, therefore I made the best of my way, and left the good old Woman to
take care of her Dutiful Daughter and GrandChild.

After this I made the best of my way to see my Mother at Salisbury, I had not
been long with her, but I took an opportunity to Rob her of fifty Pounds, and
went immediately for Bristol, and there Gamed best part of the Money away: Then
I took to Work at my Trade again, and from Bristol, I went to a place called
Thornbury in Gloucestershire; and there I came acquainted with one Mrs. Low a
Widow Woman, where we lived together about six Months, and we took the Town in
for about 30 l. then we Sold all off, and went to a Place called Weekware, and
there the Biter was Bit; for I agreed with a Collier to go Partners with him,
and was to give him 50 l. whereof I gave him 30 l. down, and was to pay him the
other Monthly, but before I came to pay the first Payment, my very good Friend
the Collier went off of the Ground, and so the Biter was Bit indeed, so I
packed up my Awls and came packing away from thence.

From thence I went to a Place called Bartley in Gloucestershire, and there I
worked very honestly for sometime, till I was known by a Man that came from
Thornbury, and was obliged to move farther, for fear of being betrayed, so I
packed up my Awls there likewise, and went to Hereford City, and Worked there
very Honestly; till one Night I was in Company with a Higler, and he said he
was a going to a Place called Ross, to buy some Fowls; I readily replied, I
don't care if I go along with you, he said he should be very glad of my
Company, but poor Man, he little thought I should deprive him of his Journey;
the next Day accordingly we set out, and had not gone above four Miles but I
attacked my FellowTraveller, and robbed him of two Shillings; I thought that
but a very small matter of Money for him to buy Poultry with, therefore I had a
thought came into my Head to search the Hampers, and accordingly I did, where I
found twelve Pounds; so I left him his Hampers to look on, but his Horse I
took, and rid him about 40 Miles, and then turned him loose: After that I went
to Marlborough in Wiltshire, and stayed there about a Fortnight, there I was
taken and put into Marlborough Goal for a Silver pint Mug where I remained
about a Fortnight, but one Night I took an Opportunity and made my Escape, and
never had the Manners to take my leave of my new Landlord, which gave me some
uneasiness, but that soon went off.

From thence I went to see an Aunt of mine, at a Place called Douton, within
seven or eight Miles of Salisbury, and there I remained till my Uncle and Aunt
began to have Words about me; but the first Opportunity I had, I took my Leave
of my Uncle and Aunt, and went afterward to my own Sister, and there lived
with her about six Months, and I met with an old Playmate, where we renewed our
former Acquaintance, and began to play some of our old former Pranks; for we
thought, what we took from our own Friends, was our own, and no Robbery, we
having in our Opinion, as much right to it as them; so we very dishonestly, and
he like an undutiful Son, began with his own Mother, and robbed her to the
Value of about fifty Shillings, or three Pounds; and then we returned to our
old Course of Life, Gaming, as we had done before; but we was disappointed of
our Aim, for we was soon apprehended and taken, and brought Home to his
Mother's, where we were mightily persuaded to own the Robbery, but we as usual
brazen'd it out; but after all, they carried us before a Justice of the Peace,
and he very honestly committed us to Bridewell; where not approving of our new
Lodging, we thought it not convenient for us to stay, therefore we made our Way
through the Necessary-House, without so much as taking Leave of our Landlord.

Afterward I turned Jockey, and went to Horse-Coursing, and took as many
Horses one Spring, out of the King's New-Forest, near Rumsay, in Hampshire, as
I sold for above threescore Pounds, at thirty and forty Shillings a-piece; they
were none of your large Horses, but only little Foresters; and indeed, I went
so often, that I was ashamed to go any more, for fear that the People should
think much of my Coming, so I thought it best to leave off in Time; but soon
after I stole a Horse, and set up a new Trade, but do not think it proper to
name the Man, that I stole the Horse from, because the Owner of it is a-live,
and he knows me. I went to work, and the first Man I met with in that Way, was
one Mr. Whitehead, a Painter, and I robbed him of eighteen Shillings and a
Plate-button-Coat, and coming bravely off of that, put more Courage into me;
and I bought me a Pair of Pistols with some of the Money, for I had but one
before, and then I was stocked very well. And so I proceeded on too,

The next Adventure, which was with an old Man, that was going to Market, to
buy a Pig, but I soon stopped his Journey, and robbed him, and took what Money
he had away from him, and sent him Home about his Business; the Man is since
dead, he lived at a Place called White-Parish, near Salisbury, his Name was
John Price, a Tailor. Afterward I went on with my old, or rather new Game, and
with Abundance of Courage, having pretty good Success, the next that I met with
was a Butter-Woman, coming from Rumsay-Market, and I robbed her of twelve
Shillings, and made her go about her Business; she had not been gone long, but
came by a Servant-Maid, just out of Place, so I made bold to rifle her of all
the Money she had. The Sum mounted to three and fifty Shillings, and a Ring
from her, and after having served her so, I thought it Pity to let her carry a
Box of Luggage, and eased her of that also; in the Box I found two Suits of
Clothes, and Linen, and other Necessaries, which served for traveling
Charges, so I came away about my Business.

From thence I went to Winchester, and there I disposed of the Box of Clothes,
and afterward I went to the Cock Alehouse, in High Street, and after sometime
Drinking, I fell into Discourse with a Laceman about Traveling, till the
Laceman told me he was going to Amsbury Fair, in Wiltshire, I told him I was
going that Way too, so at Night, when we got to Amsbury, and put up our Horses,
at the Sign of the Chopping-Knife, at one Mr. Hedges's, from whence the Laceman
went out to take a Standing for to sell his Goods in; and the while he was
gone, I went to the Landlord, and asked him for my Partner's Box of Lace, and
he gave it to me, and I went to the Hostler, and got my Horse, and away I went,
and left the Landlord and the Laceman to agree.

The next I met with, a bonny Scot, traveling over the Plain, going toward
the Devizes, and I said, well over-taken Mr. Johnson, and he said, How Mon, how
done you, but he did not know me, but I knew him, so asked him if he had any
good Handkerchiefs, and said Yea, he put down his Pack, and opened it, and
showed me several Sorts of Goods, among which I saw a large Quantity of Hair,
which is a good Commodity; so I said to my Friend Johnson, that I did not want
to buy any Thing of him, for I must have them for nothing; but he began to make
Words about that, and was going to be obstropolous, till I showed him the
Pistols; and then he begged very heartily not for to use him ill, and take all
that he had, upon which I took him about forty Yards from his Pack, and there
tied him to the Post of a Well, and then went and searched the Pack all over,
and found therein nine Pounds odd Money, and a great Parcel of Hair, as much as
I sold at Marlborough for eight Pounds. I also took six Dozen of Handkerchiefs,
and a Quantity of Muslin, all that was light Carriage; and when I had took as
much as I thought proper, I went and released the Scotchman from the Well, that
he might take Care of his Pack again, and then I took my Leave of Mr. Johnson,
and he paid his Respects in a very handsome Manner, but it was more out of
Fear, than Love.

After I had parted from the Scotchman, I met with a jolly Shepherd, that had
been at a Place called Burfet-Fair in Wiltshire, and had sold a Quantity of
Sheep for his Master, but that was a Mistake of mine, to say, that he sold them
for his Master, I should rather have said, he had sold them for me; for I met
him at a Place called Humington, about two Miles from the Fair, where he sold
the Sheep, and there I attacked him, but he was a good old Fellow, for before
he would part with his Money, he would have a Duel; I was loath to kill him,
because he was a brave Fellow, so I fought him with my Hanger, till the old
Fellow yielded, and then I rifled him all over, and took from him seventy odd
Pounds, which he had received for the Sheep, upon which he said, that if he had
had his Crook, he would not a Lost his Money without he had been killed; but as
I have not my Weapon, says he, I must submit, and so he went homewards about
his Business. After which I went away about mine also, to a Place called
Dortchester, in Dorsetshire, and there I stayed till best Part of my Money was
wasted, where I took up with a broken Butcher to be my Companion, but I was
dubious of him, for fear that his Heart should fail him, but it did not, for he
proved to be a good Fellow, and so we agreed very well together, for some Time,
till he began to sink some of the Moneys out of our Stock; but I found him out,
and told him of it, and he owned it, but said he never would do so no more, and
so we agreed and went on together.

Then the Butcher and I went to a Place called Woodbury-Hill-Fair, in
Dorsetshire, and there we tarried till the Fair was over, and then our Fair
began. We attacked a Man that had been selling of Cheeses, but he had but a
small Matter of Money about him, for he had paid it away, for we see him
receive above fourscore Pounds; but when we came to search him, he had not
above twelve Pounds about him; on which we fell a Cursing our hard Fortune, and
we gave him four or five good Licks with our Whips, and bid him never pay Money
away when Gentlemen waited to receive it; but the old Man went homewards very
heavy Hearted as it was, we did not take above twelve Pound from him, which was
but a small Trifle to what we expected; and so we left the honest Cheesman.

The next was an honest Hop-Merchant, who answered our Expectation very well,
but we may thank his Wife for our Booty, for when we begun to search him, we
did not find any Money about him, till we began to Curse and Swear, and said we
would kill him, and then the good Wife cried out, do not kill him, and I will
tell you where the Money is; so I asked her, and she said, it was in his Boots,
upon which I took my Knife out of my Pocket and cut his Boots off of his Legs,
and there found in his Boots fifty Guineas, which I liked the Looks of very
well; so I took and put them in my Pocket, and we went smiling away about our
Business; returning Thanks to the good Woman for our Booty.

From thence I and my Friend went away together from Woodbury-Hill, to a Place
called Sherbourn, and there we staid and took our Pleasure for some Time, and
we got each of us a fine Lass to divert us by the way, so we staid and enjoyed
our selves as well as we could for some Time, when we had Information of a
Grasier going further down into the Country to buy some lean Beast to fatten;
upon which we went after him and robbed him of all the Money he had, which was
fourscore and ten Pounds; with which we diverted our selves, and came back
again in hopes of more Business, and went to a place called Ringwood in
Hampshire, and there my Friend happened to fall sick, and lay for some Time,
till that Money was almost consumed; and then growing pretty well again, I took
him down to the Bath with me, where we staid about six Weeks, and then we fell
to work again, and robbed the Stage Coaches going from Bath to London; and took
them as they came back again from London to the Bath, and continued that
Practice till they were obliged to hire People to guard the Coach to and fro,
as it passed from Bath to London, and from London to the Bath: We robbed the
Stage for six Weeks together, as it passed to and fro every Time; but once we
were like to receive Damage by a Gentleman in the Coach, for as we went up to
demand the Money, the Gentleman fired a Blunderbuss at us, but missed us both;
however, we robbed them afterward, and well Horsewhipp'd the Gentleman for his
Reward, and then we came away about other Business of the like Nature.

The next Adventure was at a Place called Hungerford, and there we staid for
two Months, where I made up a Match for my Friend to be married to a Widow
Woman, one of his own Trade; so we lived very well there, till such time we
were blowed by somebody that knew us, and was very near being taken, but by
good Conduct we got away safe, and came to Newberry, which was not a great ways
from the Place where we was put to the Rout; that did not put any stop to our
Proceedings, we met with a Tallow-Chandler, not far from Newberry, and we
robbed him of what he had; then we concluded to go and see one of the Wonders
of the Country, a Place called Stoneage, where we staid about three or four
Days, and then we concluded to make our way further from our Enemies, and
agreed to come to London, which accordingly we did, and proceeded on our
Journey till we came to Reading, and there we was like to be taken again by the
Bath Stage Coachman; but I and my Friend were pretty well mounted, and by good
Luck got away, and rode that Night, and the next Day, from Reading to Exeter in
Devonshire, and there we were safe; so we remained there about three Weeks; but
being very uneasy in our Minds, for fear we should be taken, we agreed to part
by Consent, and accordingly we did; and he went back to Dorchester again, and I
set out for Salisbury to see my Friends, and staid there about a Week: After
which I set out again for London once more, by a round about way, and in coming
to London, I met with four young Sparks who were going for Oxford, but the
merry Joke was, that after I had attacked and had searched them, I could not
find any Money about two of them, but the other two I had rifled, and took from
them their Money and Watches, and was riding away therewith; they called to me,
and told me that their Companions had Money about them, so I went to Work
again, and at last I found Money upon one of them, planted under the Buttons of
his Coat, and eased him of ten Guineas I found there; his Watch he had conveyed
into his Cod-piece, but happening to find it there I made bold to keep it: The
other had his Money planted in the Cape of his Coat that goes round his Collar,
and his Watch he had conveyed to one of his Companions, but being willing that
they should be served all alike, he held the Watch in his Hand, with the Chain
hanging down, that I might see it, which I did, and took it from him, and then
they could not laugh one at another, for I am sure they had no Occasion,
because they were served all alike. I have laughed at the Fancy many Times, to
think of their telling of the others having Money about them; but I did not
like them never the worse when I heard them speak of it, because when I found
it, I did not grudge my Time of looking for it, otherwise I should have thought
much of my Time, so I took my Leave of them and came my ways for London.

When I came to London, I lived very honest, and went to Work Journey-work at
my Trade, and Lodged at one Mr. Rickets a Shoemaker in Harp-Alley, Shoe-Lane,
and there Worked for about Six Months, for Mr. Holliday, Shoemaker upon
Ludgate Hill; and from thence I moved into Leather-Lane in Holbourn, and there
I Worked almost Twelvemonths; till at last I took up with a Harlot of the Town;
I had not kept her Company more then six Days, but she was Arrested and carried
to the Marshalsea, and the next Day I got her Bailed out, and then they
Arrested her in the Borough-Court, and I Bailed her again, and brought her home
with me to one Mr. Wood's a Shoemaker, in Three-Leg-Alley near Fetter-Lane;
but all this while, this was to make a Mouth of me, and to take me in for some
ready Money, but I had none then, but I had a Legacy of Ten Pounds a Year in
the Exchequer, and they were persuading me to sell it; and at last I went to
the Exchange, and to the Jobbers for that purpose, but I could not agree with
them for it, so at last I sold it to one Mr. Littlefield, a Carpenter, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and he gave me Fourscore Pounds for it; and then my
Mistress was pleased, for there was a great Score to the Landlord for Rent, and
he Swore and Damned that he would send her to the Marshalsea again if he had
not his Money; that was to make me the more fonder of the Froe, but I Paid them
nothing at that time, but I took her out a long with me into Monmouth-street,
and there I bought her a suit of blue Flowered Satin Clothes, and every thing
else that was agreeable to ware with them; and then we came home again, and the
House was like a Mad House for Money, there was G^d D^m your Blood you B^h,
must you have such fine Clothes, and I must go without my Money, but you B^h I
will see you D^'d first, then the Old Bawd came to me and Sweetened me up with
abundance of fine Words; and said my Dyer, your Alice is a fine Woman now she
is dressed; come let us have a quartern of Brandy to Drink Mr. Dyer, and his
Spouse's good Health; Mary, go and fill another quartern of Brandy, and call
Mrs. Dyer to her Spouse; come Mr. Dyer sit down and bring your Wife with you;
is not Mr. Dyer and his Spouse a very likely Couple; Moll you B^h, when will
you have any Body fall in Love with you, Dingyb^h: Moll, pray call your Master,
and tell him that Mr. Dyer wants to drink a Glass of Brandy with him: So when
the Landlord comes, he sits himself down and drinks a Glass of Brandy, and
takes me by the Hand, Mr. Dyer, Pray do not be angry with me for having Words
with your Wife, for I cannot help it, it is my Passion, and for want of Money,
that makes me Mad; I tell you what Mr. Dyer, your Spouse owes me almost Nine
Pounds, if you will give me Five Guineas, I will give you a Receipt for the
whole; so I thought for to save three or four Pounds, and paid him the five
Guineas, and took a Receipt in full; well, that was mighty pleasing to my
Madam: Well my Dear, I am very glad that it is Paid, come my Dear said she, let
us take a walk and see Mrs. Shelton, and there we shall see my Sister; so away
we goes, and when we came to Mrs. Shelton's, the first Compliment was, Pray Mr.
Dyer, and Mrs. Dyer, how do you both do, you was the last People that my Tom
and I was talking about, we was talking about that small matter that your
Spouse owes us, Pray said I, how much is it? but two and forty Shillings, well
I put my Hand in my Pocket and Paid him, and took a Receipt.

Some short Time after this Transaction, another Woman and she fell out, one of
her fellow Trade, and one that knew her Secrets, and then she told me that
there was no Money due to Mr. Wood, when I paid him the five Guineas, nor there
was none due to Mrs. Shelton, but that she wanted the Money in her own Pocket,
for she thought she would make Hay while the Sun shone. Well this passed on for
some Time, and I took no farther notice about it at all, but soon after that
her Husband came from Sea, and came and knocked at the Door one Morning about
four o'Clock, and asked if one Mrs. Davis did not live there, and I told him
yes. I did not know that she had a Husband before, for I took it for one of her
Culls, till she looked out of the Window, and then she said, my Dear Johnny it
is my Husband, what shall I do; so I put my Clothes on, and came down one pair
of Stairs and went to Bed to another Harlot, and there lay till Madam and her
Husband came down Stairs; so I went away about my Business, and came home at
twelve a Clock, and my Brother was gone Aboard a Ship, but he came home at
Night and deprived me of my Bedfellow; but the Cream of the Jest was, that my
Madam shamed Jealous of the Woman that I went to Bed to, but she was not
Jealous of me, but of my Money. But however, somebody had let her Husband know
that I kept her Company, but he took no notice of me, but he Cursed and Swore
every time he saw me; but in short, he Arrested me, and put me into the
Compter, and I got Bailed out again, and then I Arrested him for Meat, Drink,
and Lodging for his Wife, and I put him into the Compter, and there he remained
a great while, till at last he sent for me to come to him, which I did; so we
came to an agreement, he gave me a Note of Ten Pounds, and I let him out, and
have not seen him never since, so farewell, Brother Tar. Soon after that, I was
Married to an honest Woman, and then I took a CoblersStall in Leather-lane, and
lived very well if I could have been contented, but I was like a great many
more young Men, did not love Work; but presently after that I had taken this
Stall, a young Man in the Neighborhood that was a little low in the World, and
wanted Money, but did not know how to get any, opened his mind to me one Night
as we was a walking in the Fields; and said he must go upon the Highway, or
else he must go to Prison; so I asked him if ever he did any such thing? he
said no; and I asked him if he had any Pistols, he said no, but he would Pledge
his Watch and buy a Pair, and accordingly he did; and he and I went out one
Night together, and at the old Spaw we stopped a Man and Robbed him of his Watch
and two Rings and what Money he had, which was not much, it was about 7 or 8 s.
in Silver; and from thence we went farther into the Fields, and by
Sadlers-Wells we robbed another Gentleman of his Watch and one Cipher Ring with
a Heart in it, and a pair of Silver Buckles, his Hat and Wig, and then we tied
his Hands and Legs and came away and left him. My Companion thought that was a
good and quick way to get Money, therefore he liked it so well, that he kept to
it; so the next time that we went out, we had better Success than we had
before, for we stopped a Gentleman's Chariot up by Pancras-wash, and robbed the
Gentleman and his Lady, to the Value of 30 l. in Goods and Money, and so we
came home.

Soon after which my Friend and I met one Mr. Lewen, the late City Marshal, and
robbed him to the Sum of near eight Pounds, in Hornsey-Lane, going toward
Muzzle-Hill, and got safe away. The same Night we robbed two more Men near
Pancras Church, of about four or five Pounds, and being Weary we came home that
Night. The next Engagement was in the Strand, where we stopped a Hackney Coach,
and rifled the Men all over, but to a very little Purpose. And from thence we
went to Covent Garden, and there we picked up a Molley, and carried him to one
Corner of the Rails, and we took from him a silver Watch, and about fifteen
Shillings in Money, but the Molleying-Bitch had a Goose with him, which we made
bold to take with us, and we had it roasted the next Day for Dinner, and made
our selves very Merry over it. The next was a merry Frolic which happened in
Lincoln's- Inn-Fields: I and my Consort one Night set upon a Man in Lincoln's-
Inn-Fields, and robbed him, and he went about his Business as we thought; but
we staid there for some Time after we robbed him, we were surrounded with
fifteen or sixteen Watchmen; they came in all four Ways upon us, that we did
not know very well what to do, but being both of a Mind, to be killed before we
would be taken, so the Watchmen at last gathered themselves near together, and
were coming to look for us we did suppose, but we did not give them the
Trouble, for we went and met them, and came as nigh them as we thought might
without danger of hurting them, and then we fired three Pistols at them, and in
a quarter of an Hour afterward if you would have given a Hundred Pound for a
Watchman you could not see one in the Fields, for happy was he that could run
fastest.

I hope I shall not be thought tedious in giving this true and plain Account
how I fell from the Paths of Virtue, and a sober Religious Life in which my
Dear Parents took great care to have rendered me an honest Man; I do not boast
of my Sins, nor believe there is any real satisfaction in the doing what is
ill, contrary to the Laws of God and Man: I humbly take shame to my self, and
do affirm that the foregoing Narrative is in every part true; I only rehearse
it to warn young Men especially to take notice by what degrees I fell into
these Crimes, so that they may by the Prudent use of God's Grace, be preserved
from Iniquities: I have shown how Masters may be wronged by their Servants, who
follow such Vices as I own I have done, as well as to caution against the sad
consequences of conversing with lewd Women, and as what I have already said was
Principally done in the Country. I shall now proceed plainly and briefly as I
can, to show what Company and more pernicious Adventures I have more lately
been engaged in, which has brought me to many dangerous Misfortunes, and
rendered me liable to be Prosecuted, even by my vile Companions, whom often
draw'd me into this Snare, but as a Landmark, serves to warn the careful
Mariner of Danger, so I propose in the remaining Part of this Narrative,
impartially to Discover such bold daring Dangers, and vile Attempts, as may
secure honest Men from Danger for the future; which may in some means convince
the World of my sincere Repentance: I shall only beg leave to trouble my
Reader, with two or three petty Accounts of my Actions, that I may thereby
render the most weighty Matters contained in the following Pages clear, and of
Use to those who are so kind to read them.

Some little Time after our Escape in Lincoln's- Inn Fields before mentioned; I
and my Fellowmen robbed a Gentleman and a Woman at Hyde-Park corner in a
Hackney Coach, of a silver Watch, Snuff Box, and about four or five Pounds in
Money, and a small Cipher Ring, the Value of it was not very much, but they was
very desiring not to part with it, which made us the more eager to keep it; but
we told the People that if it was not a Diamond one, they should have it again,
if they would let us know their Names, and where to direct for them, they
should have it again; (upon Honor) and accordingly we sent it to them to the
Devil-Tavern at Charing Cross, in a Penny-Post Letter, for it was no Service to
us.

Some small time after, we met a Clergyman near the same Place, where we Robbed
him of all his Money, Watch, Hat and Wig, and so came Home for that Night.

The next Prank we played was at Hollowway, going to Highgate, and there we
Robbed the Barnet Stage Coach; there was but two Passengers in the Coach, and
we Rifled them both, but they had but a small quantity of Money about them, not
above thirty Shillings between them; we stayed there about all Night till
Morning, and met with the HogButchers going to Finchley to buy Hogs, but I
believe it prevented their Journey, for they were obliged to go back again to
fetch more Money before they could proceed on their Journey; for we took from
them between forty and fifty Pounds, and came away about our Business; but I
fear they were obliged to sell Bacon very dear to fetch up their Money we took
from them.

The next was an honest Baker (if a Baker can be so) that we met coming from
Hampstead, but he was very much in Liquor, and which obliged us to tie his
Hands and Feet before we could do any thing with him, and then we rifled him of
twenty-five Pounds, a Silver Watch and two plain Rings, and left him in the
Fields.

We next met with a Hackney-Coach coming from Hampstead, with two Tailors and a
Woman in it, we pulled the Tailors out of the Coach to Search them, and then we
handed their Lady out and rifled her also, but she was worth both the Tailors,
for she had a very handsome Gold Chain about her Neck, and two good Rings on
her Fingers, and a Spanker in her Pocket, and Seven or Eight Shillings in
Silver, but the two poor Tailors not above four Shillings between them; so we
bid the Coachman drive on, and I gave him half a Crown and bid him say nothing;
but when they came to Tottenham-Court Turn-Pyke, the Coachman begun to cry out,
Thieves and Rogues on the Road; but he little thought that we was so nigh them,
for we heard every Word they said, and so they went on about their Business,
but the Coachman had better to have held his Tongue, and then he might have got
home Safe, but he fared well, and cried Roast-meat; upon which as soon as he
had passed the Turn-Pyke we stopped him and took the half Crown from him, that
we had before given him, and twelve Shillings to boot, and made him go about
his Business, which we said would teach the Fool more Wit another Time.

In an other Adventure, I and my Companion undertook to rob the Salisbury
Wagon, at Knightsbridge; there proved to be but one Passenger in it, who was a
Country Fellow, and going into the Country; he had but a small Store of Money
about him, and was very loath to part with it, but we frighted him into a
Compliance, and left him Pennyless, all he had was twelve Shillings and
Sixpence. We had not Time, nor proper Opportunity, to take out any Boxes, it
being so near the Town, and People passing hard-by, who probably saw what we
were Doing; but they, and the Waggoners, finding our being armed with several
Pistols, made free Way for our Escapes.

The same Day we took a Tour to Blackheath, in Kent, where we met with a
Gentleman on Horseback, well mounted; my Partner suddenly took hold of his
Horse, whilst I surprised the Gentleman, laying hold of him, presented my
Pistol to his Breast, cocked and prim'd, swearing, [ The Lord in Mercy pardon
me,] that I would shoot him immediately, if he did not instantly, without any
Delay, or making any Noise, deliver what he had; and we took from him fourteen
Shillings in Money, and a handsome silver Watch, cutting his Stirrups, and
Horse's Bridle, we left him unmounted, not imagining he could, or would attempt
to follow after us; but unexpectedly, the enraged Gentleman mended the broken
Bridle, that he mounted again, and pursued us with more Rashness than with
Prudence, for his own Safety; for he pursued us with so great Have, that he
forced us to attack him, in our own Defense, whilst we ran over the Common;
whereas, had he sliely followed us, as he might have done, we having not the
least Apprehension of his being mounted, he might have easily apprehended us,
when he had found us in a conveniently Place, where he might have had
Assistance; but he, as I said before, attacked us by himself, that we were
forced to unhorse him again, to give him Blows for his Blows, and then, to bind
him to strick Obedience of our Pleasure. viz. To lie quiet until we were out of
Sight; and to speak the Truth, we left him secure, until some might come to
relieve him; and for his Horse, we quite demolished his Furniture, and turned
him loose, and by this Means got free from one of the most refractory Chaps I
ever met with; in a Word, he acted as a Person drunk or mad.

We took our Way by Peckham to Lambeth, and so over the Ferry, and so Home, to
spend the sad Fruits of our abominable Labor; and shortly after, as our Wants
required, we took a Journey to Epping-Forest, where looking for our Prey, we
met with a Gentleman and his Lady in a Chaise; we civilly accost them, in our
Way, desiring them, To supply our Want of Money, which we hoped they could
conveniently spare; which they being unwilling to do, we took the Boldness to
oblige them to alight, and showing our Pistols, the Fear of Death compelled
them to submit to be searched, and we found five Guineas and some Silver, and a
silver Watch from the Gentleman, and a Ring and silver Snuff Box from the Lady,
who we used with great Tenderness, observing that she was in a great Fright,
insomuch, that they freely forgave us, and would never prosecute us, if it
should be in their Power, and so we parted with great Curtesy. This Booty
served us a little while, but we quickly turned out again, choosing to change
our Horses, Apparel, Wigs, and every Thing that was remarkable about us.

The next Attempt we made, was on Hatfield Common, were we met a
Tallow-Chandler coming from Ware, who was well mounted, and somewhat obstinate;
however, we took from him eleven Guineas, and about seven or eight Shillings in
Silver; we left him unhors'd, and made the best and surest Way we could back to
Town. Immediately after we met a Gentleman very drunk, on Tower Hill, of whom
we took five Pounds in Silver, his Hat and Wig, after he had been very rustical
and fought with us. We were forced to prevent his Clamor and Noise, for he
began to cry out aloud for Help; but we left him on the Ground, and took
prudently to our Heels. The same Morning we made our Way Home by
Doctors-Commons, where we desired a Gentleman to speak with us, and telling him
our Business, was wanting Money, we begged that he would spare what he had
about him; the Gentleman was greatly surpised seeing our Commission, a Pistol,
begged of us not to kill him, I said, no Sir, We will not hurt your Body, it is
your Money we want, and that we must, and will have; we were forced to rifle
him, and took about thirty five Shillings; he did ( stage much) that is our
Cant Word for crying out; so we left him, and found no Manner of Annoyance from
the Watchmen, or otherwise.

Coming to Fleet-Ditch, in Harp Alley, we met with a Person, who for some
Reasons I believe was a Grocer, he was surprised and stopped by us, we took from
him fourteen Shillings, a Watch, and a Cane, which he was pretty easy to part
withal, after we had put him into a trembling Fit. A few Days after we and our
Doxies having consumed the Product of our ill-gotten Pelf, we turned into
Gray's- Inn-Lane, in our common Road, like Birds of Prey, and there we met with
one of the Disturbers of Human Society, I mean a Petty Fogging Lawyer (as he
called himself) who upon our attacking him, told us his Employ, and would argue
with us, with the Consideration of the great Danger we should bring upon
ourselves, by provoking a Person of his Knowledge; how to find us out he knew
many Thieves and Highwaymen; some had been his Clients, and as for the
Thief-Takers he knew all, in or about London and Westminster. We had dragged
him, partly by Force, and gentle Persuasions, to a convenient dark silent Place
under the Walls, and found him so Diverting, that I desired my Partners to let
him go; but one of them had felt his Pocket, and said there was Swag in it, and
obliged me to consent that he might rifle his Pocket, where they found Thirty
odd Shillings, and one of them took his Sword, gilt Handle, of little Value;
the poor Gentleman was obliged to submit, and has since made a most sad
Complaint, to some of my Acquaintance, who assures me, that he pretended in
Gray's- Inn, to have lost a great Sum of his Clients Money. We left him in a
quiet Temper, and much I fear some Thieves as well as honest Men, have dearly
paid for this Robbery, which was done very lately in the last long Vacation.

Another very late Crime I committed with my Companion, was on a Victualler,
who having been Merry with his Friends abroad, was reeling over
Bloomsbury-Market, betwixt One and Two in the Morning; we attacked him, and he
pleasantly asked, What we meant, what we wanted; our Reply was still the Same*
We were Men of Fortune, and Money was our Game. We had no Time, the Place would
not admit of a long Dispute, we flung him down, stopped his Mouth, (not to hurt
him) then took from a silver Watch, Seventeen Shillings in Money, two plain
Rings, and his Buckles out of his Shoes, and so wished him better Fortune for
the Future.

Afterward in Tottenham Court Road, we met with a Man coming to Town, we
seized him by Surprise and took from him Fortyfour Shillings, and the Man was
as Joyful to be rid of our Company, as we were to be free from him: I prevented
his being stripped of his Clothes, for I ever abhorred to leave any Person
naked, or to offer any Violence to modest Women, but have often restrained the
rude and cruel Behavior of my unhappy Acquaintance, when such Attempts have
been designed.

Another late Exploit was returning to Chelsea Road, where we met with two
Gardiners, coming Drunk from Market, they proved very Troublesome awhile, but
we were too Strong for them, and our usual Arms afrighted them to a Compliance,
so we took 12 s. from them, and they having warm great Coats, and my Companions
wanting them, took the Freedom to take them, and tied them Back to Back,
disabling them from pursuing us. In the long Field we robbed Mr. Homes,
commonly called Lord Homes, a Clerk at Chelsea, he had a Guinea and a Steel
Seal, which was all he had about him, but the Patrole coming that way, which we
were aware off, we made our Escape with great Precipitation. Other Crimes we
committed, and laid wait to do, to the Prejudice of great Men, and particular
private Families, which may not in the Reading be unacceptable to the Reader.

I not long ago meet with a Person of some distinction well known in this Town
of the sordid vile Company of Sodamites [I was clean dressed and looked fresh] in
Lincoln's End Fields, he pretended after several times turning and looking hard
at me to know me, and desired me as I went along to go and drink a Glass of
Wine with him at a Tavern, which I consented to do, and he going to the Drawer
desired a good Room up Stairs, who carried us into a Room next the Street,
which happened luckily to my purpose; for this Gentleman (who is in Years) was
very amorous upon me, and would by all means treat me with a Fowl or any thing
I could Eat, which was ordered accordingly, and whilst it was getting ready, he
took a Diamond Ring from his Finger, saying it was a rich Stone; I begged the
Favor to see if my Finger was not bigger then his, which he granted, and
presently after I had it on, I being near the Window and seeing a Coach going
by, I called out stop Coach, pretending I had a Friend in the Coach that I
wanted to Speak with; I ran down Stairs, and so went off with the Ring. I
shortly after met the same Gentleman under the great Arch in Lincoln's-
Inn-Fields, who in a Surpize told me he wondered that I carried away his Ring,
I gave him a surley Answer, and so he went quietly away.

A Whipmaker's House in Holbourn, we broke open, and took a quantity of Whips
from him one Saturday Night, and we came away safe.

The next was a Shoemaker's Shop in WildCourt near Drury Lane, and there I and
my Companions, took away all the Shoes the Man had in his Shop, and likewise
came off safe that Night.

I am my Companion had a mind for a hollow Bit, so we opened a Poulterer's Shop
in Clare-Market, (with a false Key) and took a dozen of Chickens, and two
Turkeys for our Selves and Doxies, just for our own Spending; for soon after
one of our Doxies lay-in, and with the help of those Chickens and two Turkeys,
we made a grand Christening, were we had some of our own Fraternity and Doxies;
but my Companion and I never had the good Manners to Invite the Poulterer and
his Wife.

Not long since we met a Man in Kirbystreet near Hatton-Garden, and we knocked
him down, and Robbed him of his Hat and Whig, and that was all, for we were
disturbed from doing any more, for the Watch came and Surrounded us, that we
was obliged to Fire before we could get away, but by good Luck we got off Safe.

Then we broke open a Linen Draper's Shop at the Sign of the Maidenhead in
Piccadilly, there we took a great Quantity of Linen, as much as two of us
could well bring away, and came off with it, without being Discovered.

N. B. The two last Robberies I was Capitally Convicted for at the last
Sessions, at the Old-Bailey, and am to Suffer Tomorrow, at Tyburn for them.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Good People,
I Desire of all young Men to take Warning by my Ignominious Death, and to
forsake Evil Company; especially Lewd Women, who has been the Chief Cause of my
unhappy Fate. I hope, and make it my earnest Request, no Body will be so Ill
Christians, as to reflect on my Aged Parents, who took an early Care to
Instruct me, and Brought me up, a Member, though a very unworthy One, of the
Church of England: I hope my Misfortunes will be a Warning to all Youth,
especially some whom I wish well, I will not Name them; but hope, if they see
this, they will take it to themselves. I die in Charity with all Men,
forgiving, hoping to be forgiven my self, through the Merits of (...) Blessed
Savior Jesus Christ.

JOHN DYER.


