THE TRIUMVIRATE: OR, THE Authentic Memoirs OF A. B. and C.

In quibus fuit propositi, semper a nugis
Ad bona transire seria.
Unde Nescio. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOLUME I.

LONDON: Printed for W. JOHNSTON, in Ludgate Street. MDCCLXIV.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Bedford.
MY LORD,
I TAKE the liberty of laying these Volumes at your feet, as it was owing to
your GRACE'S generous and voluntary Patronage, that I have enjoyed either
spirits or leisure sufficient for undertaking, or executing a work of this
nature.

YOUR GRACE will, I hope, find amusement, at least, in these Writings, and I
entreat the Honor of your kind Acceptance of this small Tribute of his Duty,
the Services of whose Life, were he capable of performing any which might ever
deserve that name, ought in justice, and gratitude, to be dedicated to your
GRACE.

I am, MY LORD, With the highest Respect, Your GRACE 'S much obliged And most
obedient Servant, The AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
NOTHING has surprised me more than to find that novels and romances still
maintain their ground, in the libraries of the Fair. Mistakes and prejudices
are wearing daily away in other things, to the great improvement and
enlightening of mankind; but with regard to female education, some customs have
been abrogated, which had better have remained, as they were on the safe side,
even supposing them to have been errors, while this, among others, stands still
unrepealed, though the slightest sense or reflection might have exploded it
long ago; nay, should have stifled the chimaera in its very birth.

What has been urged in favor of these kind of writings, is, that the
extraordinariness of the adventures, and the variety of the incidents, are
fitted to induce young ladies into an habit of reading, at first, which may
afterward be directed to more profitable studies: that the personages in
romances, are of the most exalted ranks, and their characters of the most
perfect kinds; and that therefore the conduct and sentiments of such examples,
might be proper to imbue young minds with refined precedents, and elevated
notions. That novels serve to afford them a general knowledge of life, without
the hazard of their own experience; which may teach them a prudent diffidence
in their own strength, and a safe caution against the arts and intrigue of the
world.

Against this plausibility, I argue, That history supplies us with as
extraordinary events, and as entertaining incidents, as any which can possibly
be met with in fiction; that the characters in the latter, being but ideal,
lose the full influence of example, and that the sentiments consequently,
become deficient in the authority of precept. That in the former, there are
many real characters, as brave, as noble, and as perfect, as any to be met with
in romance; and the sentiments, maxims, and reflections, of persons who did
really exist, upon occasions which did actually occur, have infinitely more
spirit, beauty and moral, in them, than all the imaginary ones that ever have
been framed by the sterile labor, and puerile genius of novelists or
romancers. And with regard to the knowledge said to be gained from the study of
novels, I cannot imagine what benefit young women may be likely to draw from
repeated memoirs of eloping daughters, frail mistresses, or faithless wives.

Nay, if polite readers would have something still more interesting than novels
or romances, than even any history or biography already extant, modern writers
may well supply themselves with cotemporary materials for such a work, from
public annals, and private anecdotes. As far as Orondates is exceeded by
Scanderbeg, does not Frederic excel him again, in every quality which marks the
king, the soldier, the scholar, and the philosopher? The present age has
presented us with an hero who gives the appearance of veracity to ancient
fable, and will convey the air of fiction to future history. Are not the tales
of Boccace put out of countenance by the Lives of the Empresses? and these
exceeded again by the modern memoirs -- not yet published -- of lady -- and
lady --? I forget their titles.

It was upon such reflections as these, that I have undertaken, on the credit
of an historiographer, to publish the following memoirs; every particular of
which, except the names of persons and places, can be authenticated by living
testimonies; insomuch that as each separate fact may be in course recorded, one
man shall say openly, I bear evidence to this; another, I can answer for that;
while some ladies shall tacitly cry, I could vouch this, that, or the other -- if
I durst. And so of the rest. And yet, to the great good fortune of those who
delight in fiction, the whole will nevertheless, bear the air of a novel; not
from any manner of address in the publisher, but from the incidental
circumstances, and extraordinary contingencies of the real story.

But should it be still objected, by any of your over-scrupulous lovers of
truth, that many of the characters herein represented, carry somewhat the
appearance of composition, let them but only reflect a little, upon real life,
and they must certainly recollect to have frequently met with genuine
peculiarities, contradictions, foibles, and absurdities, among mankind, more
outrees, or extravagant, than any of the caracatura's of the Dramatis Personae,
even though the stage, like a gallery, is allowed to exhibit figures larger
than the life.

How I happened to become possessed of these memoirs, is not at all material to
the Public; however, I have really so much complacency for so respectable a
body, that I would satisfy their curiosity, even in this trifling article, if I
could limit the discovery to that particular only; but it is surrounded and
connected with so many, and such various well-known circumstances, that it
would be impossible for me to reveal it, without making, at the same time, too
full a discovery of myself; which might lay me extremely open to the just
censure of the republic of letters, that a person of my deep erudition,
extensive thought, and comprehensive judgment, should throw away his genius and
learning, so idly and unprofitably, in digesting a parcel of insignificant
events, and obsolete morals, into a consistent series or digest, while any
hearsay of the Cabala remains unexpounded; or that the points of Hebrew vowels,
continue still to be a point in question.

As to the inaccuracies which perhaps some minute critics may observe upon in
the following pages, I do not think them worth amending, in a work of this
kind. I write always without book, and just as if I was speaking to you.
Suppose now, for instance, that you and I were occasionally conversing
together, upon some literary topic, or other; would it not be extremely
pedantic in me to interrupt the discourse till I went into my study to settle
the olympiad of an historic fact? Or would any body now, give a farthing
difference, whether it was Augustus Caesar, or Asinius Pollio, that reprehended
the Patavinite of Titus Livius See the first note in chapter xxxv.
?

Writing and correcting, like saying and doing, are very different things; and
the latter I take to be by much the more tedious and laborious. Now I think
that either of them is even full trouble enough for one person; therefore I
really never do more myself, than write, and leave the world to correct: they
have more dull time on their hands, it relieves their idleness, and gratifies
their malice; for some readers would loose half their pleasure, if they did not
meet something to find fault with. It sets them, in some sort, above the
writer, and I yield them their advantage freely.

Most of these volumes have been wrote at inns, or in the midst of business, or
company; and indeed the best way, in my opinion, as well as the easiest too, is
never to form any plan for writing, at all; for it gives a constraint and
stiffness to the work, which betrays the lamp too much. The great beauty of the
ancient authors, may be owing, perhaps, to their having wrote entirely without
rules; while the modelling moderns endeavor to cramp even what little genius
they have left. In the first, you perceive the free stroke of the pencil; in
the latter, is discovered the restraint of the compass. Or compare, if you
please, the confined mincings of a go-cart, with the unspancelled strides of
manhood.

However this formal age may possibly find fault with me for the mixed matters,
the tragi-comic manner of writing, in these volumes. They urge that all works
should be consistent, or of a piece; either serious, or comical; learned, or
unlearned; pious, or profane. But Sir Richard Steel says, It is the
misfortune of our time, that people think it as easy to be critics, as
politicians. Here he spoke ironically, for they are both equally difficult.
There are Arcana Literae, as well as Imperii, which, if a person is not let
into the mystery of, he may frequently find fault in the wrong place, in both
instances.

In a work like this, designed for the Public at large, there must be
something, in allusion to dramatic writings, to entertain the three different
classes of auditors; pit, box, and gallery. The stage of Athens, from whence
your learned, but ignorant critics, frame their drama, was chaster than ours,
because their audience was all of a piece. Insomuch, that Plato being asked by
Dionysius, (now I am not certain whether it was Plato or Dionysius) whom he
would recommend as a preceptor for his son, replied, Send to Athens, and take
the first man you meet with in the streets. But modern readers and audiences
are in an unhealthful state, and must sometimes be indulged in unwholesome
seasonings, to help them to digest proper food.

This then, may seem to have been the design of that anomalous, heteroclite
genius, the author of Tristram Shandy, whose principal end, I hope and believe,
was to inculcate that great Magna Charta of mankind, humanity and benevolence.

"A tale may catch him who a sermon flies."

It Is true indeed, that he has given us, according to the vulgar phrase, rather
more sauce than pig, and this not sufficiently seasoned with Attic salt,
neither. But he seems to have wrote more for the present age than the future
ones; judging like Aurelius, though in a far different sense, that surviving
fame is but oblivion. What is posthumous fame? Meat blown up in a shamble -- A
dead body puffed up with the breath of the living. Modern writers seem
perfectly indifferent how soon their works die, provided they themselves can
live; and may be compared to butchers, who thrive the better, the more they
slaughter.

His third part is better, that is, not so bad as his second. There is a good
deal of laughable impertinence in it. He has repeated the same empty humor
there, of an unlettered The marbled paper.
page, and has given us a carteblanche, in this last Page 147, vol. 6.
. Whatever is neither quite sense, nor absolute nonsense, is true Shandeic.
However, through the whole, there is some entertainment for a splenetic person,
though none at all for a rational one.

Qui Tristram non odit, amet rhapsodias Rablais. But there are some things in
that work, which ought to be more severely reprehended; though it is folly,
rather than vice, that tempts people to speak in a gross manner; while others
relish it, in general, more for want of taste, than virtue. It requires genius
to be witty, without being wicked at the same time; but the most vulgar parts
may serve for obscenity. It Is easier to make one laugh, than smile; and when
dullness would be witty, it lets fly bawdry, as it does something else,
satisfied to raise a laugh, though it does a stink also. Loose expressions, in
a woman, are a double vice, as they offend against decency, as well as virtue;
but in a clergyman, they are treble; because they hurt religion also.

But to his graver works -- His sermons Yoric's sermons.
are written professedly, upon the divine principle of philanthropy; and there
are two apostrophe's in them, which are both striking and affecting. In the
midst of a most moving description of a complicated family distress, he
suddenly interrupts himself with this humane exclamation: Look down, O God,
upon their afflictions! and then proceeds with his narrative Sermon 2d, page 41.
. Again, he is telling the story of the good Samaritan, and after these words,
by chance there came by a certain priest, he cries out, Merciful God! that a
teacher of thy religion should ever want humanity Sermon 3d, page 53.
! For my part, were I a bishop, I would not indeed prefer him to a Cure,
(though I am glad that he does not want one) because of his Tristram, but I
would certainly make him my Vicar General, on account of his Yoric.

As to those few free passages, which the reader may find interspersed
throughout these writings of mine, if rightly apprehended, in context with the
whole, they may be compared to the anamorphosis in painting; which is an
innocent art of drawing a picture so equivocally, that, according to the light
it is viewed in, may present you either with a satyr, or a saint; or like
Minerva's ring, which could render Ulysses handsome or ugly, just as he found
it expedient to carry on his purpose.

Vita verecunda est, musa jocosa mihi. Ov. Or, Dixero si quid forte jocosius,
hoc mihi Juris,
Cum venia dabis -- Hor.


Or, Sit lasciva licet pagina, vita proba est. Mart. All which apologies I do
here most cordially invite Mr. Stern to take share of with me; for by all
accounts, his private character deserves it.

And really, if I did not interlope, now and then, to the great relief of my
readers, what would these two volumes be good for? would they defray the
printing? No -- Would they lie on the toilet as untoiled as the Bible? Yes --
What a preciseness of moral! a decorum of manners! a purity of sentiment!
Stuff! mere old-fashioned stuff! truly. One might imagine to himself a parcel
of antique portraits suddenly inspired with a faculty of speech, and conversing
together through their oval frames; or a set of hewn-stone stoics declaiming
from their niches.

Some few, perhaps, who prefer old books to new, might buy this -- But after
all, prithee tell me who are even those few? Why possibly the king might read
it -- I mean king George the Third -- for as he has neither idle, nor ignoble
avocations, he can afford leisure from his great public duties, to indulge his
taste and virtue in literary and moral amusements. I think too, that the king
of Prussia would relish it, (if Voltaire, doctus utriusque linguae, would
translate it into French) after his brave and rebounding spirit, having
restrained the vain ambition of universal monarchy, within the prescribed
bounds of balanced empire, shall have left him at liberty to exalt the hero,
permutatio foelix! to the philosopher. Perhaps Mr. Pit also, might dip into
it, after he has resolutely fought out a peace, and given himself leisure to
refine politics into morals This Preface was wrote in the year sixty-one.
.

Here indeed are a Triumvirate! whose glory dims the luster of that ancient
title. Under such a patronage would that my A. B. C. were placed! But then, in
the mean time, prithee what would pay the printer, if it was not for honest
Triglyph, who steps in among ye, now and then, with a slap dash, that sets
fools a staring, tickles the small wits, quickens the sale, and quits all
scores, at once?

I am, GENTLEMEN, Your obedient Servant, And LADIES, Your most devoted Slave,
Biographer Triglyph.

PROLOGOMENA TO THE SUBSCRIBERS.
AS I had never published any book before, I had not attained the least
knowledge in the arts of puffing off a work; and as I had seldom conversed,
except among the learned and good, I had consequently but few acquaintances: I
was therefore alarmed at the certain expense of an impression, at my own suit,
on the precarious hazard of a sale. Upon which I determined with myself, to
have a subscription solicited, in order to defray the charges of printing.

The trouble of this business I left entirely on the hands of my booksellor;
upon whose counter also, I laid the manuscript, to be dipped into, here and
there, by the subscribers, in order to afford them some specimen of the work.
And while this scheme was going on, it has amused me often, to sit unnoticed in
some obscure corner of the shop, attending to the questions and observations
which the customers used to throw out, when the proposals happened to be put
into their hands.

The Triumvirate -- Very well -- Pray Mr. Folio, is this the Triumvirate of
Caesar Augustus Caesar.
, Anthony, and Lepidus? or -- Neither, Sir. No, no, I see now it could not be
that, for though A. and C. may very well stand for Anthony and Caesar, we
cannot possibly squeeze Lepidus out of B. Nay, nor can it mean the former
Triumvirate neither, for stronger reasons still, of the same kind. Caesar,
Pompey, and Crassus.
Why really, Sir, replied Mr. Folio, I do not think that there is the least
mention of any one of those antiquated gentlemen, from one end to the other of
these writings. The persons here intended, may be walking about the streets
every day, for aught I know; and it is odds but you might know one or other of
them yourself, if Mr. Triglyph would but suffer me to publish their names; for
those of A. B. and C. you must understand, Sir, are but their incog-nomens -- I
think that this was the expression Mr. Triglyph made use of.

When people have taken up the manuscript, it has often entertained me to hear
the several remarks which have been made, upon looking into it. Some have cried
out, Zounds, what a world of moral stuff is here! By the Lord, a man may as
well sit down and read the Bible -- Every whit, indeed Sir, replied sober
Folio. What the devil have we got here? says another, opening in a different
place. O, by Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, and virorum too, this scene licks Shandy
all to nothing -- Nay, now d -- n my eyes, Tristram, but this thrusts your nose
out of joint, worse than the forceps.

Another critic, upon looking into the several parts of the book, pronounced
with a precise and dogmatic tone, that it wanted the true simplex duntaxat, et
unum, and that there was such a variety of characters, subjects, styles,
sentiments, and manners, mixed together in this multifarious work, it could
never be one man's money, that is pos -- and therefore the impression would
certainly never bring a sale.

Upon this hint I carried home the manuscript, and drew out specimens of the
different species of writing, subjects, characters, etc. and gave them to Mr.
Folio, to select one or other of them, according to his particular knowledge of
the respective genius of each subscriber; who taking it for granted, that the
entire work would be carried on in the same strain, might the more readily
enter into a subscription.

This device produced a most sudden and lucky effect, and my friend Folio very
soon received cash sufficient to put these sheets into the press; to which I
think proper to prefix a list of the subscribers, in the very manner I copied
it out from his books, when I was settling accounts with him, upon this
article. In which catalogue you are to observe, that where he has put down the
names, as in the first column, it was of such persons only, who without knowing
any thing in particular of the work, subscribed merely at the request of a
friend, or to encourage the freedom of the press; to fill up a gap on their
shelves, or for the pleasure of seeing their names, or titles, in print: that
where the subscribers were too modest to have their names mentioned, or too
numerous to be inserted, they are classed under character, as in the second
column. The specimens, which engaged their respective patronage, are entered
down in the third; and the fourth contains the numbers of the subscribers.

As for Example.
Names. Characters. Parts subscribed to. Numbers This column must remain a
blank, till the fifteenth edition, for reasons that will perfectly satisfy the
then Public. All who have faith in the veracity of Burnet's History of his Own
Times. To The Preface 15 The dependents on the little Great. The Appendix
20,000 All the primitive bishops, priests, deacons, and presbyters, in England,
Ireland, and Scotland. Mr. Carewe's confession of faith. 10 Every man of true
love and honor in these kingdoms. The story of Mr. Andrews 20 All the witty
rakes in ditto. The character of the condisciple. 15 Every moral rake in ditto.
The story of Mr. Carewe. 5 The admirers of Mrs. Slipslop. The description of
Mrs. Benson, the Cornish squire, etc. 5,000 All the women in the world, who
would banish an amiable lover from their presence, and remain with a
disagreeable husband in a bleak castle, on the Cornish coast. The story of
Anadyomene. 00000 All the old maids in England, etc. The chapter on the Forlorn
Hope. 20,000 All the old virgins in ditto Ditto. 0 Some of the noble families
of Europe. The chapter on private relations. 400 The admirers of Tristram
Shandy. Some of the chapters where Triglyph speaks in his own character. 20,000
Total Subscribers 65,465

ERRATA.
Vol. I.
Preface.
PAGE xii. line 4. read lose. P. xiii. l. 12. r. literarum. P. xviii. l. last
but 2. r. unsoiled. r. Prolegomenon.

Memoirs.
P. 7. l. 3. r. virtutum, and next line, last word, r. il- P. 46. l. last, 1st
word, prefix an s. P. 58. last line but 8, r. successfully. P. 125. l. 3. 3d
word, r. his. P. 138, l. last but 1. after in. r. an. P. 177. l. last but 1. r.
employ. P. 178. l. 1. r. port. P. 192. l. 11. r. women, and l. 18. change the
period to a semicolon; P. 198. l. 15. r. vein. P. 211. l. 14, r. Genies.

Appendix.
Dele 1st page, and commence the paging on the back of that leaf, and so go on,
1, 2, 3, 4.

Vol. II.
P. 7. l. last but one, dele the 2d and. P. 12. l. last but 2. for buthe, r.
but the. P. 13. l. 14. after letters, change the comma to a colon. P. 20. l. 9.
for to. r. the. P. 21. l. 10. for her, r. hur. P. 30. l. 1. dele Kate. P. 58.
l. 20. before was, r. she. P. 102. l. 21. dele the 2d comma. P. 105. l. last
but 2, put a comma after galants. P. 119. l. 19. dele of. P. 122. line 3. r.
the, before resolve. P. 198. l. 9. r. person. P. 214. l. 8. for and, r. for. P.
245. l. 6. dele me. P. 263. l. 37* for complete, r. compose.

THE TRIUMVIRATE: OR, THE AUTHENTIC MEMOIRS OF Andrews, Beville, and Carewe The
initials of A. B. and C. were objected to in the manuscript, as being too
abstracted, and fitter for geometry than novel; that they did not distinguish
the persons sufficiently, in the memory, nor impress the ideas of them strong
enough on the mind. In compliance therefore with this indolence of attention in
my gentle readers, I have embodied thought, and thickened shadow into substance
for them, by supplying the above names throughout the remainder of this work.

-- Giving to airy nothing
A local habitation, and a name.

.
-- Et in medias res,
Non secus ac notus. -- HOR.

CHAPTER I.
HIS horse grew tired before he had earned half his hire; so that it was late
at night before Mr. Carewe had reached the inn at Scarborough. The reader must
have been a lucky traveller, if he does not know that the beast, whether
through sympathy, electricity, contactity, or any other word, quod exit in y,
communicates its own fatigue to the rider, as if, marriage or Centaur-like,
they were but one flesh. And, indeed, in many other instances in life, the
tedious urging of a Person to an unwilling act, is often more tiresome than the
doing twice as much oneself. Mr. Carewe eat a poached egg, drank a pint of
negus, and retired to bed.

The next morning he went down early into the kitchen, to order his breakfast,
where he met with several persons, on the same errand, and the landlord among
them. He enquired of this latter, where or how near the town one Mr. Andrews
lived, who he was informed had lately come to reside in that country. The host
replied, that he was settled, as well as he can be settled, on the northern
road, about a mile from the town; that he was but little known in the Country,
for that all his neighbors looked upon him to be mad, as he lived entirely at
home, and spent all his time in reading of books.

A gentleman who stood by, and had endeavored to interrupt this declamation,
addressing himself at last to Mr. Carewe, said, You are not to take the
character of that gentleman, Sir, from the description of our host here, for he
may be one of the many who are incapable of distinguishing between a common and
a peculiar character; and fools, said he, are apt to impute every thing to
frenzy, which rises above the ordinary level of dullness.

Mr. Beville then proposed to Mr. Carewe, that they should breakfast together,
as he should be extremely pleased to cultivate an acquaintance with any person
who might have the least social connection with his amiable friend Mr. Andrews.
Mr. Carewe bowed with that ease and complacency that was natural to him, and
stretching forth his hand toward the door, said, in effect, Sir, I am ready to
attend you.

During breakfast they conversed familiarly together, upon general topics of
politics and letters, and did not, like attorneys, proceed immediately to the
purpose of their meeting. There is in ingenuous minds, under the advantages of
a liberal education, a certain native freedom, and a well-bred ease, which, at
first sight, render perfect strangers as familiar, as if they had been old and
intimate acquaintance.

At length Mr. Beville said, that he had come that morning from Mr. Andrews's
house, as he usually did every day, to drink the waters, and bathe in the the
sea, for a disorder which he had been for some time subject to, namely, the
scurvy; which insulars are generally afflicted with, and is the root whence all
the rotten branches of distempers, peculiar to nations surrounded by the ocean,
usually spring. He then asked Mr. Carewe where, and how long he had been
acquainted with Mr. Andrews.

He told his name, and was proceeding to give him a particular account of his
acquaintance and attachment to Mr. Andrews, when he was interrupted by an
exclamation, O, Sir, I have you all by heart, already; I have frequently heard
our friend mention you with the highest fondness and esteem; lament, of late,
his not knowing where to direct a line to you, and often wish, after his warm
manner, that some fortuitous concourse might happily throw us three together,
in some retired scene, where we might mutually know, approve, and rejoice in
each other. This fortunate crisis, added he, has at length arrived, and I am
impatient to make the welcome present to my friend.

Mr. Carewe bowed, they embraced, discharged their bill, and walked away
together to the farm, as it was styled, where they found Mr. Andrews reading in
an Arbor in his garden, having just retired from the heat of the day, after
pointing out some works to his laborers.

CHAP. II.
I Would here describe the meeting of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe, but for the
following reasons. You have seen two friends meet, therefore to you it would be
superfluous. Or, more probably, you might never have seen two friends together,
any way, in your oldest life; so that to you it might appear improbable. For it
was not like two merchants meeting upon Change; it was not like two justices
saluting at a sessions; nor even like two neighbors shaking each other's arms
out of the sockets, at a fair. In short, it was not like any thing you may have
ever seen, except you have had the extraordinary chance of being present on the
meeting of two friends There was speech in their dumbness, language in their
very gesture: They looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one
destroyed: A notable passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest
beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say if the importance were
joy or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one it must needs be. WINTER'S TALE.
.

But then you are to observe, that, by this expression, I do not mean such
connections as the moderns, by way of composition with morals, are reduced to
ascribe that high title to; but such friends as may be quoted from among the
ancients, "In this dull age scarce understood." Buckingham upon this subject,
in his ode on Brutus.
between whom, and the present race, there is as much difference, as between
the man that Diogenes was searching for, at Athens, and those who, ignorant of
the reproof, laughed at his extravagance Diogenes, observing that the whole
State of Athens had sunk into debauchery and corruption, and meaning to
reproach them for having dwindled from the original dignity of human nature,
walked through the city at noon, with a lighted torch in his hand, and being
asked what he was in search of? answered, I am looking for a Man.
. David Simple too A character in a modern novel.
, who sought through the two great cities of London and Westminster, in quest
of a friend, proceeded exactly upon the same errand with the philosopher. For a
true man is a real friend. But the qualities which are requisite to constitute
this character, have been so long lost in the world, that Cicero cries out,
even in his time, Haec genera virtutem non solum in moribus nostris, sed vix
jam in libris reperiuntur: Chartae quoque, quae ilam pristinam severitatem
continebant, obsoleverunt.

Epicurus, in his morals, prefers friendship before any other virtue. St.
Evremond says, that justice is only a moral, established for the convenience of
human society; it is the work of man; whereas friendship is the work of nature.
One might imagine that the Saint had Love rather, in contemplation, in this
definition. I carry the subject higher, and deem friendship to be an angelic
virtue. Nay, higher still. For friendship proceeds farther than the having care
over us. It will induce us to sacrifice even ourselves for its sake, and
therefore approaches nearer to the excellence of a God -- A God who died for us!

And here I confess, that I feel so strong an impulse upon me, to acquaint my
readers with my own situation in life, with regard to this particular, that I
cannot refrain from letting them know, one and all of them, which I hope, in
other words, will be every one who can read English, that I have sufficient
reason, from a long experience of my own, joined to the accounts I have
occasionally received from others, to affirm, that I have been all my life
placed under the patronage of all the real and disinterested friends in these
kingdoms.

And as a just sense of my obligations, upon this account, calls on me here,
for proper acknowledgements, the thread of my story pressing me, at the same
time, not to discontinue its weft, I shall beg leave to refer the curious
reader to my appendix to this volume, pages first and second, for a full and
true account of this matter; and in the third and fourth pages, ditto appendix,
he will find a catalogue of the many and great benefits which I have myself
received, and which others may also derive, from such advantageous clientcies.

CHAP. III.
AFTER the usual questions and unusual transports were over, Mr. Carewe desired
Mr. Andrews to show him his demesne, his husbandry and improvements, which he
replied he would do, without stirring out of the spot; and taking out a
pocketbook, he opened a map, of forty perch to the inch, in which he showed
him the whole farm, neatly laid down, divided and denominated, as the
wheatfield, the meadow, the pigeon-park, etc.

After Mr. Andrews had fully instructed him in the topography of the draught,
you may be surprised perhaps, said he, at this concise and figurative manner of
answering your request; but, in general, people propose this question, more out
of complaisance than curiosity, while others accord it out of ostentation,
rather than good will. And, as vanity is ever more active than civility, I have
sometimes known an old gouty fellow fatigue his grandson, in leading him round
an improvement of his own making. And yet, after all his sweat and toil, think
you, added he, that he would know so much of the matter, or be able to describe
the place so well to others, as he might from such a diagram as this, without
moving any thing more than a finger or an eye.

But with regard to the plan now before you, continued he, I must observe one
thing to you, which otherwise might require your going to the several closes,
to inform yourself of. You would naturally imagine, from the different
denominations, that the pigeon-park had a dovehouse in it; that the meadow
supplied my stables with hay; the wheatfield supported my family with bread;
and so of the rest.

But not one syllable of all this, I assure you, Sir. These divisions indeed, I
suppose had been originally named from respective merits of the kind; and, like
other titles, these are still retained, though the qualifications which
formerly gave rise to them have long since surceased. And in truth, added he, I
have generally considered all the parade of heraldry, in the same light; for,
respecting qualities, not quality, I am apt to style some peers of the realm,
in allusion to my own demesne, by the cognomens of pigeon-park, meadow,
wheatfield, etc. who, as Sir Richard Steel says of a Grubstreet paper, can
produce no merit beyond the title. Titles which distinguish not merit, are but
nick names; as a deformed man or woman are in derision styled my lord or my
lady.

CHAP. IV.
THE house was situated exactly as the learned Dr. Cheyne recommends, in his
Essay on Health and Long Life. Fronting the east, to receive the full benefit
of the first sun: on the side of a gravelly hill, that the foundation may be
dry: over a running water, to give a motion to the air; and unincumbered with
trees, which are apt to confine the damps, and keep them hovering about the
mansion.

The house was what was styled a Batchelor's Lodge, but so well contrived,
that, if Mr. Andrews should ever double his condition, he might, at the same
time, double his house too, without having occasion to alter any part of the
building; for his was not a small house, but rather half a large one. I here
freely make a present of this distinction, to the ingenious modern architects
of Chinese orders; and as terms of art are necessary toward the conciseness of
sciences, I shall dub it with the technic of dimagdome, which I have most
learnedly compounded from the words dimidium magnae domus, vel domi.


A neglect of this sort of economy, is too generally seen in most of the
villa's of young men of fortune; who are apt seldom to frame any purpose beyond
the present expediency; which subjects them frequently, as future contingencies
may happen, to the aukwardness of disproportioned additions, the inconvenience
of returns, or traps for whirling eddies, the expense of altering what has been
already built, or of rasing the whole, to begin again anew. In economy, as
well as morals, the frolic of the season, should never be inconsistent with the
scheme for life.

The furniture was perfectly simplex munditiis, and, according to the precept
of Marcus Varro, in his Essay on Entertainment, rather neat than fine, elegant
than rich. The bedsteads, chairs, and tables were all of oak or walnut, because
of our own growth; and the curtains, seats, and hangings, of stamped linen;
because, said Mr. Andrews, it is our own manufacture, looks handsome at first,
and, that the being obliged to have it washed sometimes, renews its freshness,
and gives employment to the poor.

Such was Mr. Andrews's expression, and quite in his manner, who constantly
took advantage of every opportunity of inculcating the god-like virtue, and
soul-saving moral, of charity and benevolence. Here now, had I been inclined to
have swelled my volume by notes, I might have introduced the word philanthropy,
in this place, instead of benevolence, which would have afforded me the
opportunity of informing the generality of my polite readers, that philanthropy
is a plaguey hard Greek word, which in downright plain English means nothing
more than a love of mankind.

But in the first place, the writer of these memoirs, is far above such
bibliopolist arts; and, in the next, the word philanthropy would not have
sufficiently comprehended the full scope of Mr. Andrews's benevolence; for his
was not confined to human nature alone, but extended itself throughout the
whole animal creation, from the Leviathan of the deep, to the emmet of the
field. And, in order to awaken such sentiments among his domestics, along with
other devices for the same purpose, he had placed this text over his stable
door, A righteous man regards the life of a beast.

CHAP. V.
WHEN they came into the parlour, they found dinner served; which was a true
monastic meal; only one joint of mutton, and a sallad. But they were all in
health, eat heartily, and conversed cheerfully together. Mr. Andrews observed
upon the frugality of his board, but assured his friends, that this economy
proceeded more from Epicurism, than parsimony; for that he had always perceived
an higher relish to one dish, than to many; and that various meats were apt to
perplex the choice, and weaken the appetite, by dividing its taste.

Mr. Beville took occasion, from this hint, to philosophize upon this subject,
by remarking that single objects are better observed by the eye, than plural
ones; that variety in prospect, like many angles in architecture, distracts the
vision, instead of filling the sight; and that the sea engages the attention of
the mind, as much from its uniformity, as its vastness. In fine, that variety
in general rather diverts, than satisfies the eye.

Mr. Carewe wrought the subject still higher, by running the analogy into a
moral, saying, that in love, as well as food, a craving for variety was the
certain sign of a sickly appetite; that temperance and constancy were the best
preservatives of health and vigor; and that, as providence pursues its several
purposes by uniform means, it might not be unreasonable to conclude, that a
fondness for change was more consonant to a state of depravation, than of
nature.

After this manner did they coverse together, in the spirit of ancient
symposiac's, during their meal, a bottle of wine, and a pot of coffee. After
which Mr. Andrews asked Mr. Carewe, whether he chose to play cards; to which he
replied, that he had no particular inclination to any amusements of that kind,
but was always ready to comply with the disposition of his company; and desired
Mr. Andrews, as master of the revels, to appoint the entertainment for his
guests. No, Sir, interrupted Mr. Andrews, I do not understand the punctilio in
that sense; for I consider a man in his own house, to be a master to his
domestics only, but to his friends a vassal. However, as you say, Sir, added
Mr. Beville, that you are ready to comply with the humor of the company, I
shall make so free as to acquaint you, that neither Mr. Andrews, nor I, choose
play of any kind.

Agreed, replied Mr. Carewe, for my part, it is compliance, and not choice, that
ever induces me to sit down at a card-table. There are three things requisite
to a gamester; a love of play, a knowledge in its mysteries, and a fortune to
support it -- or better, no fortune to lose. In every one of which, I am myself
deficient. Nay, I must always play at a disadvantage, even upon equal terms,
for the winning of fifty guineas could not make me happy, and the losing of
them might render me uneasy. I have portioned out my income in a certain even
proportion, and think that it would be extremely indiscreet in me to stake any
part of it upon a hazard, which might injure my economy, without improving my
fortune: for fifty guineas are more than I want, and are, at the same time,
more than I can spare.

CHAP. VI.
UPON which they retired to the library, where, after some general
conversation, which the scene both hinted and inspired, Mr. Carewe repeated to
Mr. Andrews the discourse which had passed in the morning, at Scarborough,
between the host and him. Mr. Andrews smiled, and replied, that most of his
present neighbors, as well as some former acquaintances in life, had conceived
the same notion of him, because he had generally sequestered himself from the
world, and mixed not in their sports or entertainments, their races,
cock-fightings, hunting-matches, or play.

In all things of an indifferent nature, said he, one should certainly conform
to the manners of the world, in order to avoid the unsociable and affected
character of singularity; but in reality, added he, these things are by no
means indifferent to me, and I am so far from having any manner of taste or
passion for such amusements, that I rather feel a disrelish to some of them,
and an absolute aversion, even to horror, to others.

I have, continued he, made experiments upon every article in life, which bears
the name of pleasure; and the first thing that disgusted me was a crowd. I ran
headlong into all manner of public places, with that giddy eagerness of youth,
which is natural, before one has given themselves leisure to enquire either
into the ends or motives of their actions. But, after having sustained much
squeezing, sweating, and jostling, at balls, feasts, shows, and masquerades,
for many years, I began to find out the true definition of a crowd, to be, a
certain combination of an indifinite number of persons, to render each other
mutually uneasy. Henry, in the series of letters, says, I will forgive none but
a pick-pocket for loving a crowd.


And besides, with regard to the boisterous and unmeaning mirth one is
generally stunned with, in large companies, which may be styled, not the
conversations, but the convulsions of society, I have always looked upon
laughing, without sentiment, to be merely histerical, and needed the aid of
assa foetida. I have sometimes imagined, that, in the days of ancient
philosophy, when men used to give rational rebukes, but after an absurd manner,
as in the instance of Diogenes and his torch, mentioned just now, and many
others, one of the Sages would have brought a wet mop into such a merry-making
assembly, and have twirled it in their faces, as supposing them to be falling
into fits. Risibility has been made a character of rationality; the conclusion
then must be fairly this, that none should laugh without a reason; otherwise,
looking asquint might be as distinguishing a mark, as some philosophers have
made it.

With regard to horse-racing, besides the crowd and noise which attend it,
there is something much more abominable in it. For, not to insist merely upon
the cruelty of straining a beautiful and useful creature beyond the extent of
its powers, and running the poor animal with whip and spur for many miles, in
blood, which is the jockey's expression, is it not an encouragement to the
idleness of the lower classes of people, who are the riches of a nation? are
not the bettors generally either dupes or sharpers? and is not the immorality
of such proceedings freed, by custom, even from the restraint of shame? For,
are not the most flagrant impositions qualified by the title of a jocky stroke,
and justified by the laws of the turf? etc.

Cock-fighting too, makes a barbarous sport of courage, wounds, and death! Does
the generous animal win an hard fought battle, at the expense of blood, or
limb; what is his reward? To have his head wrung off, after his bravery has
rendered him unfit for fighting any more But the trial, or cutting down of
cocks, is too shocking for humanity to describe!

As for hunting, I have always thought that the only rational creature that
pursues this sport, is the hound; for he follows his instinct: I excuse the
huntsman, because he is acting in his profession: I pity the horse, as he is
pressed into the service; but I despise the 'Squire, having neither compulsion,
vocation, or natural impulse to plead. The only plausible apology I ever heard
given, in defense of this diversion, is, that it conduces to health, by
inducing to exercise. But is not this rather worse than giving up the argument
entirely? Is it not, in effect, to say, that a man cannot do a rational thing,
without having an irrational motive for it?

Gaming I need not expatiate upon; many writers, of sense and morals, have
already done so, and without effect. Even in its most simple state, it cannot
be said to be innocent, but merely idle. It is a misapplication of accountable
time, pereunt, and imputantur; and apt to awaken passions, which had much
better remain asleep. Herodotus tells us, that play was invented first in
Lydia, at the time of a great famine, by way of diverting the pressing calls of
hunger: And has it not, long since, returned back again to its primitive
institution, by supporting an infinite number of persons, who have no other
trade, merit, profession, or visible fortune to keep themselves from starving,
without the relief of such handicraft, or moyens de vivre?

The conversation here took another turn, and was carried on for the remainder
of the evening upon various topics, till they were called in to supper, where
the same frugality appeared as at dinner. A roasted fowl, and a bottle of
whitewine, which they diluted with Spa-water, completed the repast. They
parted at eleven, and retired to bed.

CHAP. VII.
THE next morning Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe met at breakfast; but Mr. Beville
had gone off, as usual, to drink the waters at Scarborough. After they had
taken a few turns in the Garden, and returned into the study, Mr. Carewe put
Mr. Andrews in mind of a promise he had formerly made him, on their parting at
Islington, of relating to him the history of his life, if ever they might
happen to meet again.

Mr. Andrews acknowledged the debt, and said that he would take the lucky
opportunity of Mr. Beville's absence, to discharge it, as it would supply him
with an occasion of introducing his friend's most excellent character, and also
of mentioning some circumstances which would revive his grief, as they will
necessarily do my own, added he, with a sigh! his tears flowing fast at the
same time. He remained for some minutes unable to compose himself, and then,
after having made Mr. Carewe acknowledge that the obligation was mutual between
them, in this particular, he proceeded thus:

The story of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Beville.
WHEN I was at school, said he, I had conceived a particular attachment toward
one of my condisciples, for an odd reason indeed, but it is such a one as makes
mothers often fond of sickly or ungracious children, merely for the trouble
they give them. He happened, however, to be my chum, which first accidentally
led me to distinguish him from the rest. He was arch, lively, and idle; but, as
his humor had a peculiar charm for my gravity, I used frequently to make his
exercises for him, furnish his themes, and assist him in the construction of
his lessons.

As he was quick of resentment, and well-spirited, he had frequent boxing bouts
upon his hands, and seldom waited to consider the odds against him; but,
whenever I saw him overpowered, I used to enter the lists in his defense; and,
as I was by much the biggest and strongest boy in the school, none of the rest
would venture to cope with me, but used to cry out, Class, class, upon such
occasions, and then a whole form would rush down pell-mell against me.

You Will pardon me, Sir, said Mr. Andrews, for this puerile detail; but one has
naturally a fondness for dwelling upon those early scenes of life, and renewing
their youth, as it were, by the recollection of past aera's. Haec olim
meminisse. But I shall now pass on to our riper years, after having made this
philosophic reflection; that it must certainly be nature, and not habit, which
has given men a greater bravery than women, for boys universally decide their
quarrels by boxing, even before education can have pointed out their
distinguishing characteristic; and girls show their resentments by frumps, or
scoldings, only.

CHAP. VIII.
THE intimacy, between this friend and me, continued after we had quitted
school. I still retained the same fondness and attachment toward him, though
without any manner of esteem. He was a character, he had wit and humor, but
was dissolute and capricious. He had cheerfulness and goodnature, but was
passionate and ill-tempered. He would sacrifice his fortune for you to day, and
tomorrow refuse you a guinea. In fine, he was a good companion, but a bad
friend; and one of those whom one is generally pleased at meeting with, but
never regret the parting from.

Our different manners of life, not less than our separate vocations, would
frequently divide us from each other, sometimes for many months together; but
whenever his frolic or extravagance, as was often the case, happened to involve
him in any difficulty, his first resort was to my counsel and assistance. I
have bailed him out of goals, released him from the watch, and redeemed him out
of bagnio's. I have been his second in some encounters, and his marshal of
honor in others.

In fine, his giddiness and debaucheries drew upon me so much trouble, hazard,
and scandal, that I have frequently resolved to withdraw myself entirely from
any manner of connection with him, and should certainly have done so, but that
I knew he had no other friend, either willing, or sober enough, to guard him
from scrapes, or to relieve him out of them; his other associates being at
least as idle and thoughtless as himself, and some of them even more so: And
yet, he generally kept what the world is too apt to style the best company.

He was placed by his guardians at a college in Cambridge, where he loitered
away his time for about three years, and used to make frequent elopements to
London, where I resided at that time, with my father. While he remained at the
university, he used to write often to me, and, as there was some wit, spirit,
and whim in his letters, I have kept most of them by me, which I shall
entertain you with, some other time, added he, looking out at the window, for I
now perceive our friend Mr. Beville returning from Scarborough, and we'll go
out and meet him, if you please, and inquire what news he may have picked up in
that gay, idle scene of dissipated life.

These three friends passed the remainder of that day in the same kind of
liberal converse as before, and the next morning, after Mr. Beville had walked
away to town, in course, and, as soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Andrews
reassumed as follows:

CHAP. IX.
WE were interrupted yesterday, said he, just as I was going to show you some
of my condisciple's letters, which I here present you with, in an heap
together, without regard to dates, as of no manner of consequence in writings
of this kind. So saying, he put a parcel of papers into Mr. Carewe's hands, and
the first he took out to read was the following.

LETTER I.
Dear Andrews, Cambridge.
THE grace they repeat here, is about five minutes long. How much must the
gross ideas of beef and pudding impure the hungry student's devotion, during
that interval? I have often thought the marriage ritual too tedious, for the
same pious reason. But, to make a ceremony of a thing, which in itself is the
farthest from ceremony of any thing in the world, is most catholic nonsense,
surely!

Long prayers, vigils, fasts, and penances, are certainly most dangerous
institutions. If the devotee be a cool person, they abate his zeal to lukewarm;
and, if one of strong passions, he is inflamed to enthusiasm; which are either
above or below the proper temper of true devotion. Religion is love; and all
its acts should be short and exstatic..

I was hurried into this expression, my dear Andrews, and would have corrected
it for your prudery, but that I happened to recollect doctor Tailor, in his
severe treatise on holy living and dying, speaking on the imperfection of all
human pleasures, introduces, among his instances, the married virgin led by her
paranymphs to uneasy joy. Bridemen or bridemaids, indifferently used.


A certain reverend dean also, in his christian philosophy, keeping up to the
same strain of arch piety, in order to fix our affection, I suppose, upon
things above, and not upon things below, says, that the highest of mortal
pleasures is attended with a sort of fainting.

But, indeed, were you to read St. Austin, St. Ambrose, St. Bernard, and others
of the saintly fathers, you would find them somewhat more than arch; for, in
truth, they often speak not only like fathers, but like mothers too. You must
not however think me so stupidly learned as this last paragraph seems to hint
me; for all I know of these rums, is from the several curious passages selected
out of their works, by lord Bolingbroke, in his philosophic writings. That Is a
charming book! I think I am now a match for a parson at least.

Adieu.

I perceive from this letter, said Mr. Carewe, the briskness of your
correspondent's character. He enters upon the subject without preface, and
quits it again as abruptly. Is he not in the right of it? The limits of a
letter afford no room for exordium, or peroration. One may compare most modern
epistles to a frozen flask of wine -- cold at both ends, and all the spirit in
the middle. I love the con spirito in wit, as well as music. I thank you for
these letters, I like his writing, and am sure the remainder will entertain me.
Let us see the next to hand.

CHAP. X.
LETTER II.
Cambridge.
I AM impatient to acquaint my dear Mentor, how well I have extricated myself
out of a difficulty, for the first time, without his assistance. You may
remember the Cambridge lass I used to toast to you when I was last in London,
and prefer to all your belles on the Mall. Since my return, my love, my
constancy, have been amply rewarded. I called her Amaryllis, she styled me
Celadon. I vowed, and she believed.

Our amor remained not long a secret. Between unguarded innocence on one side,
and giddy youth on the other, we suffered some indiscretions to escape us,
leading to the door of truth, which alarmed her father, an huge hulking fellow,
who dwelt on Gogmagog Hills, with a sour beetle in his brows, a stoop in his
shoulders, a stride in his gait, and a damnable swing in his arms.

Methought, when he rushed into my chambers, he appeared as tremendous as my
own Quinbus Quinbus Flestrin, or the man-mountain, in Gulliver.
, when he used to pour down in my defense at school. However, this was too
difficult a point of honor to suffer me to cry out class upon; so I listened
with most Christian resignation and patienee, to his charge, but wishing
ardently, all the while, that you were standing by my side. Though, to what
purpose? You would not lie for me. -- No, damn it, and I scorn to lie for
myself, either -- But for a simple equivocation, in defense of passive
innocence, where is it forbidden?

Thus fortified in my moral, I immediately made the father this reply. If the
account yon are come to call me to, Sir, be of satisfaction, my sword shall
answer your waked wrath; but if of justification, my oath is at your service.
Dear Sir, answered old Six foot high, taking advantage of my own distinction,
if you justify her honor, you perfectly satisfy mine. Right, Sir, cried I out,
and taking him by the hand, you seem to have the true moral sense of this
matter, and I here tender you my oath, that your daughter is a very vestal for
me.

My equivoque lay here -- There was a temple at Athens, dedicated to the
goddess Vesta, where the fire was preserved by widows alone; virgins being
excluded from administering the fuel, as they did in the one at Rome, erected
to the same divinity. Is not this same learning a fine thing? He accepted my
terms -- they satisfied him -- but, I don't know how, the whole of this
business, not indeed any part of it, does not quite satisfy myself. It vexes me
sometimes, to find that I can neither be perfectly good, nor perfectly bad.
From which imperfection, I can be neither completely happy in this world, nor
the next; but feel, in my present Hell-militant warfare, as if I was serving
the devil upon half-pay. A plague on your musty morals, which has raised this
struggle in my nature.

Farewell, however, my worthy philosopher.
CHAP. XI.
LETTER III.
Cambridge.
YOU know how ill I left London, with a nephretic cholic. I reached my first
stage with difficulty, in writhing pain. I detest drams, they are dangerous
anodynes; they are apt to captivate, and their effect is so sudden, that one
has not leisure to make a compromise with their senses. Wine gives sufficient
warning -- This proceds by sap, the other by storm. Drinking is only simple
fornication, but dramming is -- the devil --

However, having soon got a surfeit of martyrdom, I was prevailed on by mine
hostess, to swallow a large glass of geneva, as she told me she did herself
every now and then, whenever she found herself choleric. Well! it is an ill
wind, etc. as the proverb says, for this cordial very soon afforded me ease
enough to mount my horse, carrying on its carminative and diuretie operations
all the way, till I reached college.

I think it might be an excellent expedient to carry a provision of this liquor
to sea, in case of our being at any time becalmed; and the fable of Ulysses
having got the winds tied up in a bladder, may be literally understood of a
borachio filled up with your right, good, Aeolic, Holland gin.

Una Eurusque notusque ruunt. -- Now, between you and me, Monsieur Rollin, this
interpretation of that story is not one bit more strained than yours, where you
say, in your life of Hannibal, that the article of his having cut a passage
through the Alps, with the help of vinegar, is to be figuratively understood to
mean only, that he recruited the strength and spirits of his army, during that
cold and difficult march, by frequently priming his soldiers with drams of
vinegar. Among the lives of Plutarch, which are said to be lost, was
Hannibal's, and Mr. Rollin has supplied it. But in the king's library, vide
Casley's catalogue, there is a translation of Plutarch's life of Hannibal, by
Henry Parker, lord Morley, written in the reign of Henry the eighth. Surely the
original cannot have been lost since that era, when literature was beginning
to revive in England.


Farewell.

Mr. Carewe was extremely entertained with the spirit and humor of these
letters, and spent the rest of this morning in perusing the remainder of the
collection, while Mr. Andrews walked about his grounds; but I shall not insert
any more of them here, because I would not interrupt Mr. Andrews's story any
longer, and that I design soon to publish the rest of them, in a distinct
volume from this work, if I shall find that my readers give me sufficient
encouragement, by their relish of the foregoing specimens.

Just as Mr. Carewe had finished the reading of these letters, Mr. Beville
walked into the room. The remainder of the day was passed in family incidents
not of sufficient consequence to relate, or in conversations which the
generality of readers, preferring narrative to sentiment, would excuse the
recital of, that I may be the more at liberty to file the thread of my story,
without any further interruption. Therefore, I shall just dine them, sup them,
and put them to bed, and tomorrow morning, after I have sent off Mr. Beville
to Scarborough, messieurs Andrews and Carewe shall retire to the library, of
which I have myself a master key, and will suffer the reader to slip in after
them, incog. and overhear their whole conversation; For be it unto all Men
known,
I keep no secrets -- but my own.


CHAP. XII.
ABOUT a year before my friend became of age, continued Mr. Andrews, he quitted
college, and came up to London, to consult the physicians about his health,
which appeared, at that time, to be in a dangerous state, inclining to a decay.
While he remained in town, he lived entirely with me, at my Father's; and
restrained himself within a very regular and abstemious course, which I
complimented him upon, as his then invalid condition had been brought upon him
by free living and riot. To which he replied, after his lively manner, that
there was a moral in excess, as it induced sobriety, more than a folio upon
temperance.

When he began to recruit a little in London, the physicians ordered him down
to Windsor, for the air. Here his health was established in about six months,
most of which time I spent with him there, administering his medicines with my
own hands, and restraining him within the bounds of his regimen; which was no
easy matter, after his strength began to be restored again.

I took the advantage of this interval, to inculcate some sober reflections,
with a due sense of religion, into his heart and mind; and my lectures seemed
to produce their proper effect, so far as they could support themselves upon
philosophic principles. But whenever I happened to touch upon faith, or system,
he would cut me short, by crying out, more of your argument, good Mr. orthodox,
and less of your doctrine.

In vain I used to urge, that faith was necessary to religion, as well as
works, and that system was framed upon articles of belief. Not at all, would he
reply, after his quick manner, faith is merely constitutional, and a man can no
more believe, than lift a weight beyond his natural strength. And what are your
systems after all, added he, but the visionary fabrics of metaphysical dreams?
Divines take a text, as Dido did a hide, and, by quibbling, slicing, and
straining, force it to enclose an area large enough to build a city upon. But
delenda est carthago is my motto, as well as Cato's.

The occult qualities in physics, are laughed at, he would run on; in
metaphysics the entities and quiddities are exploded also; the heart is placed
right in anatomy, and all science has been purged by the reasonings of the
latter philosophy. It Is in religion alone, that prejudice still keeps its
ground, which makes it in danger of losing its own; and, that error is
sanctified, even to blasphemy. Addison says, very justly, that an ignorant
devotee affronts the Divinity more than an atheist; for it is better to
disbelieve a deity entirely, than to form any notions of him unworthy of the
infinite perfection of his nature.

In fine, concluded he, there can be no merit in ignorance, nor any virtue in
error; and whatever contradicts the common principles of sense or science, can
never be any part of a divine revelation. For philosophy, like Jacob's ladder,
mounts us up, step by step, into the very presence of the Deity; but
metaphysics resemble the Laputan method of building a house, from the top to
the bottom.

Here Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe entered into a disquisition upon these
subjects, Carewe taking part with the condisciple, and Andrews arguing in
support of system; but, as their conversation on such topics would not much
edify or entertain the reader, I shall here leave Mr. Andrews at leisure to
continue his memoirs, without any further interruption.

CHAP. XIII.
SOON after we had gone to reside at Windsor, pursued he, we happened to become
acquainted with a young lady who lived in the town; of a good family and
character, but of no fortune. Her father had an employment at the palace, of
about three hundred pounds a year; had a wife, this daughter, and a son, who is
our worthy friend here, Mr. Beville. I passed most of the evenings at their
house, that I could spare from my invalid, and, when he was able to go abroad,
he used to come along with me, and frequently accompanied us upon little
parties about the country.

Miss Beville's stature was rather below the middle size, but she was finely
made, and well fashioned; she had a clear brown complexion, fine hair and
teeth, a lively eye, with a great air of sensibility through her whole
countenance. She had read most of the polite English and French writers, and
was perfectly accomplished in music and dancing: Her sense was of the right
feminine kind, for it consisted rather in a quickness of apprehension, and a
delicate taste, than a strong judgment.

She had a great ease and freedom in her manners; but at the same time such a
nicety and decorum in all her behavior, that our invalid, upon receiving a
rebuke from her one day, for some liberties he had attempted, upon his
returning health, styled her a rake-trap, and, with his usual briskness, asked
her, How the devil shall a man know how to conduct himself toward such a woman
as you are, who, like a cunning gamester, leads one in by suffering a trick or
two of no consequence, to pass, and, when he thinks the stake his own, pops the
ten-ace upon him? Good breeding, Sir, replied Miss Beville, should conduct you
-- whoever has arrived at that polite character, will need no formal rules;
and, without it, the whole academy of compliments will not be sufficient to
instruct you.

They had frequent squabbles of the same kind together, while I continued
always to behave toward her, both in speech and action, with that propriety and
respect, which modest women of all ranks have a right to challenge, from the
prince to the peasant. Which conduct apparently gained me the preference in her
regards and esteem, before my friend, though he was younger, handsomer, more
lively, and had a very considerable fortune.

As soon as he perceived himself restored to health, he retired down to his
estate in Cornwall; and from that time several years elapsed, before I heard
any thing more of him; he residing all the while at his seat in the country,
without making the least overture toward a renewal of our former
correspondence; having, it seems, less leisure to spare from his sports, than
he had from his studies. But, though he had a lively warmth and earnestness in
his manners, he had a certain coldness and indifference in his nature, which
rendered him insensible to fond or friendly attachments; chance, caprice, or
convenience, forming and dissolving all his connections.

CHAP. XIV.
WHEN we were parting, continued Mr. Andrews, he to go take possession of his
estate, and I to return to London, our fair friend gave me some slight
commissions to execute for her, among which I received a letter to deliver to
her brother, who was then in town, and in whom I had before met with all that I
had ever wished in man: A sobriety of manners, a refinement of moral, a liberal
mind, a spirited heart, and an universal benevolence of affections. Besides
which, a perfect agreement in all our general notions, of philosophy, politics,
or religion, united and stamped us friends for life. The approbation and esteem
which I had marked toward his sister, rendered our union still more tender. I
loved him yet more, because he was her brother, and he became fonder of me for
the polite regards I had always paid to her.

When I had executed Miss Beville's commissions, I took the liberty of giving
her an account of them, by letter. I wrote to her with gaiety and galantry, but
kept quite clear of the least hint or expression tending toward passion. In the
first place, my affections had not arrived to such an height as might have
excused a freedom of that kind; and next, my fortunes depended too much upon
the caprice of another person, to suffer me hastily to form attachments on my
own sentiments.

In this letter, however, I endeavored to court her into a correspondence,
merely to exchange the news of town and country, with each other. But this she
declined. She answered my civilities in a letter to her brother, and paid some
compliments to my character, and manner of writing; adding, that she would be
both pleased and flattered with a continuance of my epistles; but that, as
there ought never to be any kind of mystery between us to which Mr. Beville
need be a stranger, she hoped that I would always accept of her
acknowledgments, in paragraphs of her letters to him.

I was pleased at her delicacy upon this point, and continued the
correspondence, on her own terms, while Mr. Beville remained in London; and,
when he returned to Windsor, she was prevailed upon so far, at his instance, as
sometimes to write paragraphs to me herself, in his letters.

CHAP. XV.
WE both of us found this amusement extremely pleasant, for a time, and
exerted, upon those occasions, the highest spirit and address we were capable
of, on each side, but without any other view than what we might have had on
playing in concert together, to preserve time and harmony, and mutually
exchange compliments upon each other's performance.

But I would never advise any person to enter into such an intercourse with the
other sex, before some farther consequences shall have been fully weighed and
considered of. The having one object constantly in contemplation, is even more
dangerous, than the having it always in view. We are not apt to keep such a
strict guard over our reflections, as we do upon our actions; and, when the
mind once surrenders itself up to the fond persuasion of a separate pleasure,
the heart soon begins to grow jealous; and if it should happen to be a fit
object for its occupation, steals slily in for its share.

I made frequent excursions to Windsor, and perceived that each time I returned
from it with more and more regret. My passion commenced unknown to me, and
increased by such insensible degrees, that its empire was established in my
breast, before I even suspected its invasion. Nay, such is our blindness, or
our vanity, that I actually began to perceive her regards arise, before I
discovered my own. And when her marked preferences, her petits soins, her
manners free to others constrained toward me, had first alarmed my honor, I
forthwith determined to withdraw myself from an intercourse which might perhaps
end fatally to one or other of us, possibly to both.

I formed this resolution on the instant, one morning at Windsor, and returned
to London with that precipitation with which one is apt to execute an irksome
purpose; hurrying away, to have it over; and it was on this retreat, and not
before, that I first perceived my affections to have been a long time
prae-engaged. However, frequent reflections upon the expediency of the measure
I had resolved upon, helped to support me through the difficulty of it.

I considered that I had no fortune independent, nor any profession to render
myself so; and that all my prospects in life were founded on the will of a
severe father, who having made his own establishment by a lucky marriage, might
be the more apt to resent an indiscretion, with regard to this particular, than
in any thing else. Especially, as he was wont frequently, in some of his
elevated moods, to vaunt himself highly, upon his own success; and hint often
before me, that a man of spirit and address might meet with many opportunities
of pushing his fortune more easily and expeditiously by marriage, than by the
slow means, and dull labor of any trade, art or profession whatsoever. I
therefore opposed prudence to passion, and balanced duty against romance.

CHAP. XVI.
WHEN I arrived in London, I told my father that I was weary of spending an
idle dissipated kind of life, and begged he would purchase some commission for
me in the army. He replied, that since he found I was inclined to that
profession, he was in hopes, as fresh troops were then levying every day, of
being able to obtain me one by the interest of his friends, without the expense
of buying.

I appeared satisfied with this answer, at the time, not so much from any
sanguine expectations I had conceived, either from the good will, or exertion
of any of his friends, but it afforded me an occasion, which I thought it
became me to lay hold of, for taking leave in form, of the too dear miss
Beville, whom I thought it extremely ungalant to withdraw myself from so
abruptly and entirely, without any apparent reason, or necessity. Accordingly,
I wrote her a letter, conceived in cool, but civil terms, acquainting her with
my present destination; representing it in a more forward situation than it was
likely soon to be, by saying, that I expected, every day, to be commanded over
to Germany; and so concluded my letter with taking leave, perhaps for life,
which was my expression.

About this time, a friend of mine, who had been my schoolfellow, came into the
possession of a large fortune, by the death of his father, and had also a
considerable interest in a certain county, which gave him a weight with some
persons in the ministry. I soon after paid my compliments to him, upon his
accessions, and was received with great politeness and friendship by him. He
asked me some questions with regard to myself, and I let him into my present
scheme of life, without or hope or design.

In a few days after, I received a letter from this gentleman, acquainting me
that he had obtained a cornetry for me, from his friend the minister, wishing
me success, and assuring me of every future service in his power. I was much
elated, at first, and still continued to be so, but from a more generous
motive. I considered that I had two younger brothers, who, having never
received any manner of education, were but in an hazardous situation in life.
Their helpless and unprovided state lay heavy on my mind, as well as my own,
and apprehending that I might have better advantages than they, to push my
fortune, I determined to cede the commission to the eldest of them, I waited on
my patron accordingly, the next day, expressed my gratitude, and urged my
sentiments upon this subject. He appeared much surprised, at first, but
afterward he applauded my motives, and had my brother immediately nominated in
my stead.

About half a year after this event, my good friend called upon me one morning,
and told me that he had been just appointed to a considerable patent-employ, in
which he had the power of naming a deputy, with a salary of one hundred pounds
a year, and had been so struck with the generosity, as he was pleased to term
it, of my former motion, that he was resolved to ease my mind of the second
encumbrance also; which was accordingly done.

CHAP. XVII.
MY friend, Mr. Beville, continued Mr. Andrews, had taken a farm in
Hertfordshire, soon after I had quitted Windsor; and was so wholly occupied
about it, that all intercourse of letters, as well as visits, had dropped between
him and me, for about eight months. During which time I had not the least
opportunity of hearing any manner of account about his dear, still dearer
sister, which afforded me full exercise for my usual resorts in every
difficulty, or uneasiness of the mind -- books and philosophy.

After this interval, I happened, one morning, accidentally to meet a neighbor
of Mr. Beville's, in London, whom I had often seen at his house in Windsor, and
asking him, in a seeming careless way, about that Family, I was told that miss
Beville's manners and behavior had been remarkably altered of late, that from
gay and cheerful, she had grown grave and retired; that she never stirred
abroad, except to church, where she attended indeed, rather more stictly than
usual, and spent her time mostly in reading, shut up in her chamber; which
account he concluded, in a laughing way, by telling me a reflection about her,
that was made by the curate, that either love, or learning, he was afraid, had
turned poor miss's head.

These particulars rendered me extremely uneasy, I began to apprehend that what
I had imagined in her to have been only the slight tokens of a commencing
passion, might have been rather the certain proofs of a confirmed one. May not
my charming Fanny, said I to myself, have been unwarily led into the same error
in this particular, that I had fallen into myself? might she not have perceived
my passion, before she had suspected her own; and thus have ennobled her
affections, by the generous principles of gratitude and compassion?

I then began to blame the indiscretion of my own dalliance, lamenting the
effects of it in her breast, as well as in mine. My philosophy had bravely
withstood my own passion, but was overborne by hers. All considerations of
father, fortune, or expediency, dwindled into mere words, upon this just
sentiment, that though prudence should restrain our affections, it ought never
to control our honor. After these reflections, I repaired immediately to
Windsor, in order to satisfy my scruples, upon this truly interesting occasion.

It was at this interval, continued he, while I was struggling both with my
heart and fortune, that I had the happiness of becoming acquainted with you, my
dear Carewe. I tried, approved, and admired you. There was something besides,
in your whole air and manner, which resembled the person of my favorite
condisciple, but with a nobler moral, and a more liberal soul. Mr. Carewe
bowed, and blushed at this encomium, and was just going to return the
compliment, when Mr. Beville happened to come into the room, and gave a new
turn to the conversation.

CHAP. XVIII.
AS Mr. Andrews most certainly will not divert his narrative, in this place, by
repeating to Mr. Carewe, particulars which he had been acquainted with before,
and that the reader may possibly, by this time, begin to feel himself somewhat
interested in any material circumstance relating to these gentlemen, and that
this little anecdote will also furnish out a very pretty episode in the context
of their lives; I shall undertake to relate this extraordinary story myself;
but this in so succinct a manner, that I will engage to have it quite finished,
by the time that Mr. Andrews, who is just taking horse in London, shall have
alighted at Windsor; which I hope will be a sufficient apology to you, Ladies,
who always keep such a fidgetting, upon being interrupted in any part of a love
adventure.

The Episode of Andrews and Carewe.
ONE evening, as Mr. Andrews was returning home to his father's house, in
London, he observed, at some distance, as he was passing through Ludgate Hill,
a gentleman defending himself with his sword, against four mean, ill-looking
fellows, who drove furiously at him with staves and cudgels. Mr. Andrews's
spirit and humanity made him instantly take part on the weaker side, and
running up quick to his assistance, drew his sword, and entered immediately
into the lists. He sustained several strokes, and returned some passes at the
assailants, till they fled, upon seeing an indignant crowd come rushing down
the hill, to the support of the gentlemen. They put up their swords, and Mr.
Andrews led off the stranger as fast as they could walk together, directly to
his father's house.

As soon as they had got into the parlour, Mr. Carewe embraced his gallant
second, and thanked him for the generous aid he had afforded him; adding, that
he had even more than life to thank him for, as his liberty, which he prized
dearer, had been then at stake, in the hands of those ruffian bailiffs, who
were attempting to arrest him upon a debt of five hundred pounds; which alone,
indeed, continued he, would not have long confined me; but the consequences of
it, in bringing some other demands, more pressingly upon me at the same time,
might perhaps have rendered me tenant for life to the Marshalsia. But, added
he, as soon as it is dark, I shall quit this asylum and London together, this
night, and retire into the country, till some better economy, or other lucky
incident of fortune, may hereafter place my present involved affairs in a
proper state of defense.

Mr. Andrews called for a bottle of wine, which they drank cheerfully together,
without any interruption. Mr. Carewe then desired a chair to be sent for, which
was directed round to a back door, leading into an unfrequented lane, and he
retired, after acquainting Mr. Andrews with his name, and assuring him that the
first instant he should be at liberty of returning to London, with safety, his
brave volunteer, as he styled him, should be the first person he would pay his
bounden duty to.

CHAP. XIX.
MR. Andrews was a good deal pleased with this adventure, at first, both on
account of the service he had rendered, even to a stranger in distress; and
that there was something in this gentleman's person, manners, and appearance,
which had attracted his simpathy, at first fight, and prepossessed him with a
desire of being further acquainted with him.

He was a young man, of about twenty-three years of age, tall, genteel, and
well proportioned; his features were remarkably handsome, and he had a sensible
countenance, quickened with spirit and vivacity. He was richly dressed, and
had, altogether, the air, address, and mien of a person of quality, and fashion.

In his conversation he showed a lively wit, a readiness of conception, and a
quickness of reply; in his expression, there appeared the ease, style, and
correctness of a liberal education; and on the few topics which the short
interval of their tete a tete had afforded them the occasion of introducing,
his judgment and sentiments denoted a competent knowledge of men, manners, and
things.

But, after he had leisure for his own reflections, his nice moral began soon
to render him uneasy, at having wrested a person out of the hands of the law,
and defrauding, perhaps, a fair creditor, of a just demand. He deliberated upon
this scruple for some time, and then determined it within himself, that this
debt had, in justice, now become his own, as truly as if he had originally
contracted it; and upon this punctilio resolved, without the least regard to
consequences, to tender himself as collateral security, to the creditor, as
soon as he should be able to inform himself of the person.

Accordingly next morning he repaired to one of the sheriffs of the city, with
whom he happened to be intimately acquainted, and inquired from him who the
plaintiff was, in the writ lately issued against Mr. Carewe. The sheriff
carried him to the office, and, upon examining the books, found him to be an
eminent banker in the city.

Upon this information Mr. Andrews immediately waited upon the banker, at his
house, told him who he was, acquainted him with the adventure of the evening
before, declared his scruples upon it, and, at the same time, offered to pass a
counter-security to him, to make that debt his own, if Mr. Carewe should not
discharge it within a year. Old Cent. per cent. stared at him, for some time,
with astonishment; the thing perhaps might have been a new case, and might
possibly not have fallen within the ordinary course of his dealings. But
throwing off the surprise, as quick as he could, he replied, Why, really, Sir,
you act but the fair and honest part, it is just what I should have done
myself, or indeed what any body else would do, in like circumstances. No, no,
Sir, there is no trifling with money matters; a very serious thing are your
money matters, Mr. Andrews. Therefore, Sir, pray, good Sir, walk into my office
till I write a note to my attorney, who must certainly be well acquainted with
precedents of this sort, and he will forthwith attend and draw up the proper
article between us, Sir.

CHAP. XX.
THE attorney appeared soon after, and, taking his place at a table opposite to
Mr. Andrews, addressed him thus: Your Christian-name, pray good Sir? Henry --
but pray don't you require my Surname also? O! that I suppose is Carewe -- Are
you not a brother of Mr. Carewe's, Sir? No, Sir, I am not, nor any manner of
relation to him at all, that I know of. The money though, I presume, must have
been for your use? Not one penny of it, I assure you, Sir, nor did I ever see
Mr. Carewe before, or know any thing, in the least, about this matter, till
after the incident which happened yesterday evening on Ludgate Hill.

Here the attorney laid down his pen, and was beginning to elevate his
eyebrows, when the banker, growing alarmed at this conversation, winked at him,
and begged he would proceed with the instrument, without any further loss of
time, which, after asking Mr. Andrews his Surname, he drew up immediately, and
it was perfected accordingly.

After the tremendous sound of sign, seal, and deliver, was pronounced, Mr.
Andrews rose up, made his bow, and retired, the banker and attorney attending
him to the door; where, on a hem from the latter, he was laid hold of by four
ruffians in arms, arresting him for the riot, as they termed it, on the night
before, in which they said that one of the bailiffs, as worthy a citizen as
ever broke the world's bread, had been wounded by his complish, one Carewe, a
mere stape-grace of a fellow, and that his life was despaired of.

Mr. Andrews, according to that philosophic complexion which added a luster and
a dignity to all his actions, submitted himself without the least resistance,
or even a murmur, to the arrest, only just turning his eyes, for a moment, on
the attorney, to see whether he still retained an human form, and directing a
chair to be called, in order to be conducted unseen to prison. In the interim,
the man of money expostulated thus, with the man of law, that such a proceeding
might possibly be very injurious to him; for, if the gentleman should happen to
be hanged, said he, which very probably may be the case, must I not certainly
lose part of my security, for the five hundred pounds? and this, if you will but
weigh it well, Sir, you must allow to be a very unlucky circumstance for me.

I cannot help that matter, replied the attorney, for these honest gentlemen
the bailiffs, are my clients, as well as you are, Sir; nay, the king himself,
who is higher than ye all put together, is my client also, in this suit, as
plaintiff against the prisoner, and currat lex is the rule of my life, Sir, as
you may see it is the motto of my coach too, said he, pointing to an equipage
which stood at the door; and stepping into it at the same time, drove away,
after having concluded his moral with this expression, That, according to his
way of thinking, a man who was fool enough to go bound for another's debt,
deserved to be hanged for another's crime. The chair arrived, Mr. Andrews went
into it, attended by the bailiffs, and the banker returned into his house again.

CHAP. XXI.
AS soon as Mr. Andrews had been lodged in confinement, he sent a message to
his friend the Sheriff, to come unto him, which he immediately obeyed. He
acquainted him with the unhappy consequences of his romantic honor, and
inquired in what condition of danger the wounded bailiff was, at that time. He
replied, that the Surgeon had just then made a report at his office, on that
morning's dressing, that the wound, though dangerous, was not mortal; and
therefore, added he, you may yet be admitted to bail, which I would advise you
to procure immediately, before this hazardous affair may take a more unlucky
turn, or afford the surgeon cause to pronounce less favorably, about his
patient.

Mr. Andrews then dispatched a messenger to the banker, to inquire who Mr.
Carewe was, where he had lodged in London, and what town or county of England,
an express might have the best chance of finding him in? To which he was
answered, that all he knew of that gentleman, was his having become bound for
the five hundred pounds then in suit, along with a certain merchant, who had
since become bankrupt; and absconded; and that he was a lodger at the widow
Benson's, a milliner, in Dukestreet, Grosvenor's Square, at the time of his
arrest.

Mr. Andrews, upon this information, sent off an intelligent person to this
lodging, to make a particular inquiry about him, but received as little
satisfaction from that quarter, also. The landlady said, that Squire Carewe had
lodged under her roof, for about the last six months, past, and had discharged
her the very night before, on the sudden, without the least manner of previous
warning, before hand, except only the sending a person to her with the rent,
who whispered Mr. Carewe's servant where to follow his master, with his trunks;
which makes me timorous, said she, that all is not right with the poor
gentleman. Adding, that she knew not where his fortune lay, of what family he
was, or what connections he had, either in city or country, having never seen
any person come anear him, from whom she could have picked up any sort of
intelligence, of this kind.

She concluded her account of him, with saying, that to be sure and certain he
was a dear gay soul of a lad, but a little rake-hellish, or so, she believed,
like the best of them; for that he sometimes kept late hours, and would at
other times stay abroad whole nights together, successively, one after another.
But that, without all manner of gainsay, or peradventure, she never beheld with
her eyes, a more good-humourder affability gentleman; for that he would
frequently joke and romp with her daughter Cicely, just for all the world like
one of ourselves; and sometimes in good truth, that a body would scarce hear
their own ears, for their noise.

But indeed, added she, the good naturesome cretur left off his gamiorum a
little, for the last three or four weeks before he went away, being timbersome
of hurting the poor girl, who has been for some time apprehended to be falling
into a dropsy, and the poticary tells me lately, continued she, in a whining
tone, that he is much afraid my dear child has got an impostor, in her belly.
But to be sure it was the Lord's will that it should come there, and who can
help sickness, I say?

After this scrap of religion and philosophy, she recovered her voice again,
and putting a bundle of papers into the person's hands, said, Here Sir, I give
you some malescripts that I found scattered about Mr. Carewe's closet this
morning, which I suppose are no signifies, by their being left behind. But
perhaps you, Sir, continued she, may be able to find out some hints or
antidotes among them, which may serve to direct your search after Mr. Carewe;
and, dear Sir, added she, if ever you should happen to get the least tidings of
my worthy guest, I prithee acquaint me with it; for poor Cicely there within,
is breaking her heart after him, just like a child that had lost its
play-thing, because of his good-humouredness and comicality. And in truth, Sir,
concluded she, even myself thinks the house itself begins to appear but pure
and lonesome after him, all this morning.

CHAP. XXII.
WHEN Mr. Andrews had got these papers into his hands, he looked eagerly
through them, to see if he could receive any manner of information about his
dear bought friend, but was disappointed. They were only a collection of
reflections and observations, upon life, pleasure, and virtue, as they were
entitled on the back, thrown together after the manner of Paschal's thoughts,
without order or digestion.

However, the admirable turn of moral which appeared throughout these notes,
afforded poor Mr. Andrews some hope in Mr. Carewe's honor, that he would
redeem him, as far as the laws might admit, from the twofold difficulties he
had been involved in upon his account. But then, how to come at him, or
acquaint him of them?

But it at last occurred, that though he did not know where to convey a private
notice to him, a public hint might reach him, in any part of the kingdom. Upon
which thought he immediately directed a paragraph to be inserted in all the
newspapers, setting forth, that a person, who had accidentally rescued a
gentleman from an assault on Ludgate Hill, on such an evening, had been, the
next day, involved in a severe misfortune, upon that account; and that if his
unknown friend should be inclined to afford any assistance, toward relieving
him out of his present difficulties, he might send a line to Mr. H. A. at the
Woodstreet Compter.

He then sat himself down to recollect all those persons in London, who had
ever received obligations from himself, or his family, or who had ever declared
particular friendships for him, through life; and, after he had formed a list
of about three or four and twenty names within such connections, he dispatched
a letter to the first upon his paper, setting forth his situation; not in the
least doubting his ready assistance, as he was a young gentleman of
considerable fortune, to whom Mr. Andrews's father had been guardian, and
acquitted himself of the trust, to the perfect satisfaction of all his friends,
with regard both to his health, education, and estate; and with whom he had
himself lived in a fond and free manner, even from their earliest years to that
time.

The answer he received to this letter, was, that as a person of his fortune in
life, must necessarily have a large number of friends, he thought it would be
an imprudent step in him to afford a precedent for so many others to call upon
his goodnature, in like circumstances; he therefore begged to be excused. He
acknowledged indeed some few obligations to his father, but concluded, at the
same time, with saying, Prithee what, after all, has he done for me, more than
the law would have exacted from him?

If the sins of the father's be visited upon the children, why not their merits
also? But it seems that, do all we can, we shall be deemed still but
unprofitable servants, here, as well as hereafter. This, too truly, is no
uncommon reasoning, among men; and nothing for nothing, is this world's motto.

CHAP. XXIII.
THIS disappointment shocked poor Mr. Andrews, but did not discourage him. He
sat down again, and wrote a letter directly, to the second upon his list; who
was a gentleman every way qualified to serve him, at this crisis, both from
affluence, credit, and interest in the city. He had these reasons to expect it
too, that they had been schoolfellows together, that an intimate friendship had
ever since subsisted between them, and that he had lately, at the hazard of his
life, rendered him a most signal piece of service. The story was this:

They had supped together, at a tavern, one night, with several other persons,
when an absurd, ill-tempered fellow in company, took it into his head to fasten
(I think that is the phrase) upon this gentleman, without any manner of
provocation, but solely to indulge his own spleen; and, finding him to be too
slow of resentment, proceeded to bear him down, in the most bullying manner.

Mr. Andrews felt compassion for his friend, and taking advantage of his
looking toward him, though with a most timorous countenance, rose up, saying,
Yes, Sir, I understand you, but I can by no means suffer this matter to become
personal. That gentleman's behavior is an equal insult to the whole company,
and, as all tavern reckonings are paid by club, I expect that every man here
will join me in obliging this disturber of the peace to ask pardon of the whole
room, or in treating him as a person whose manners have placed him below the
character of a gentleman.

Reader, don't you think that this would be the proper method of dealing with
your bucks, or bears; to make a general rising against them, at once? For,
surely, it is an hard case that one man must venture his life, merely because
another does not value his.

The whole company, one and all, some through spirit, and others through shame,
rose up in arms, at the word, poor sneaker now as forward as the best; and
insisted on his making a general submission, or leaping out of the window. The
easier conditions were accepted of, and all was peace and harmony for the rest
of the night.

It is now full time to acquaint you with the answer which Mr. Andrews received
to his second embassy, which in few words was this: That he would be extremely
glad to oblige his dear friend, in any other way he could require, but that he
had made it an invariable rule to himself, upon his first entrance into life,
never to become a bondsman for any person whatsoever. -- Concluding his letter
with this passage out of Proverbs, He that hates surety, shall be sure.

Cowardice betrays a narrowness of soul; and a man can no more be generous,
than brave, under such mean circumstances of heart and mind.

CHAP. XXIV.
I Have now, said Mr. Andrews to himself, had repeated ill luck, by proceeding
in a regular course, and taking my friends one after another, as I had noted
them down in the roll. Perhaps I may meet with some success, by selecting them
here and there, according to the rank they hold in my opinion of their virtue,
or the degree which I think myself entitled to, in their regards.

Upon this reflection he moved his eye slowly and considerately, over the list,
and at last fixed upon a person whose character, life and fortune, had at once
been attacked, by popular slander, suits at law, and criminal prosecution. Mr.
Andrews, unknowing him, and without any other connection, except the ties of
humanity and benevolence, but persuaded of the malice and injustice, at that
time raging against him, had generously became a volunteer in his cause;
retrieved his character by public writings, and defended his life and fortunes,
from the virulence and oppression of his enemies.

He dispatched a billet to this obligee, and waited, in perfect acquiescence of
his justice, honor, and gratitude, till the messenger -- say rather the friend
himself, returns. It would be impossible to convey an adequate idea of this
correspondent's response, to the reader, without giving him a literal
transcript of the letter, which was verbatim, as follows: My dear Andrews,
HOW cruel is it in you to put my assured friendship for you, to so severe a
shock! How irksome to the generous mind, to be asked what it must deny. A burnt
child, they say, dreads the fire; and my own danger is still too recent in my
mind, to suffer me to run the hazard of incurring so soon again, the public
censure, and the resentment of the courts, by thus openly abetting a person who
has had the misfortune (for my friendship will not suffer me to call it by an
harsher title) of violating the laws of his country, in two such flagrant
instances, as a rescue and a murder.

This would be to involve myself in your imputed guilt; and, by looking too
like a mutual compact to support each other in iniquity, be apt to endanger
anew, that injured character, which you have already so generously, and
successfully defended.

I wish you, however, both safety and happiness, and am, as in duty bound, my
dearest Andrews, your truly sincere friend, and most obliged humble servant.




Gracious heaven! that a person should attempt to forge arguments for his
ingratitude, out of those very incidents of his life, from whence arose a claim
to the highest demonstrations of friendship! Should it not rather have excited
a transport, almost bordering upon vice, of rejoicing at so lucky an occasion
of acquitting oneself of such pressing obligations! Ingratitude is a detestable
thing; for, besides the vice, there is a meanness in it also, which disgusts.

There is certainly a most hellish turn of wit, in the above letter, and I
could wish, with all my heart, that the story was not quite so abominable, lest
the indignant reader may suspect its veracity. But, upon the faith of history,
I affirm it to be fact, in every the minutest circumstance; and, whenever I
shall be at liberty to publish a key to this work, and declare the real
personages throughout the whole, I do hereby promise that the original letter
shall be lodged in Mr. Folio's hands, with the names subscribed at length, in
order to be perused by the curious, along with several other choice
manuscripts, which I hope soon to have the permission of communicating to the
public.

CHAP. XXV.
WELL! what is to be done now? Mr. Andrews was a good deal cast down, upon this
third, and least expected disappointment; and now, despairing of success,
resolved to make no farther essays, of this hopeless kind. I have already, said
he, made experiments upon three of the strongest anchors I had, and they have
failed me. To pursue the trial longer, would be to betray less reason than a
dog, which, foiled in one or two attempts to get at food, will never again
assail the latticed grate Philosophers urge this article, among the instances
of that animal's rationality; whereas, say they, were he guided by appetite or
instinct, merely, he would still continue the attempt, till his strength failed
him.
.

However, as he had always a way, in any matter of consequence, of trying every
method, probable or improbable, possible or impossible, to compass an end,
(not, indeed, acting from his own judgment, but in order to satisfy the
officious queries of unassisting friends, Why did you not do so and so? or
this, or that, or the other?) he sent a person round to the remainder of his
list, inviting them all together, to come and spend the evening with him; but
without giving the least hint of the request he had a design of making to them;
imagining that, though one or two might think the obligation too great, a score
of friends might possibly join to divide the load among them.

His messenger had the good fortune of meeting every one of the guests, at
home, and having acquainted them that their friend Mr. Andrews had desired
their company respectively, to consult together upon a certain difficult
matter, which he would communicate to them at meeting, they each of them most
readily accepted of the invitation. What, honest Andrews, cried one, no
business on earth shall detain me from him. I would run an hundred miles, on
foot, to serve him, says another. He deserves every act of friendship in the
world, from me, cried a third. And so went on the rest.

But when the suspicious scene of appointment came to be named, their brisk
countenances were overcast, on the sudden. They made some kind of inquiries,
how it was, and how it happened; and then dismissed the messenger with their
condolements and best wishes to their worthy friend Mr. Andrews, who might rest
assured that nothing, except some business or other, of consequence, might
chance to intervene, should prevent them the pleasure of waiting upon him, in
the evening.

This answer began to revive his drooping spirits, and he said, in soliloquy,
that one should always make use of every kind of means, in difficult cases; as
it sometimes happens, that the most unlikely ones succeed, where the best
concerted may sail. He walked about his chamber for an hour or two, in longing
expectation of seeing a groupe of friends rushing together into the room; and
his honest heart sprang with joy, at hearing the sound of a number of hasty
steps come ecchoing up the stairs. He threw open wide the door, and his arms,
at the same time, but received into them only a parcel of sweaty porters, with
each a billet in his hand.

You have read the story of the invited guests, in scripture -- if not, I beg
you will immediately turn over to it. My wife says it is in Luke, the fourteenth
chapter, and eighteenth verse, first paragraph. For this will save me the
trouble of repeating a score of apologies to the unfortunate Mr. Andrews, from
so many modern friends.

CHAP. XXVI.
A Person thus forlorn of all foreign aids, generally betakes himself to
philosophic resources; that is, with deference to the porch, to melancholic
reflections. For, what are all the arguments of Seneca or Epictetus, (though in
truth this last advises sometimes, to hang oneself, The door is open, says he)
that fate is inevitable; that what will be, will be; that we must submit, where
we cannot defend; that the best have suffered; and that life itself, is but an
appointed state of trial -- and so forth -- What is all this, I say, but
holding our misfortunes the more steadfastly under contemplation, and
superadding a further weight from despair? Would a physician mean to raise your
drooping spirits, by pronouncing you past hopes?

I heard once of a French surgeon, who most happily expressed the whole spirit
of stoicism, in one word; for, upon probing a wound, and being asked by the
patient, his opinion of his case, replied, Courage, courage, Monsieur -- for
begar you die in one half hour. This I take truly, to be but an epitome of
inevitable fate, what will be, will be; where we cannot defend, we must submit,
etc. Courage, cries old Forceps, for begar you die in one half hour.

But Mr. Andrews had a much better manner of conducting himself, upon all such
occasions: for whenever he felt, or even apprehended any kind of difficulty, he
immediately sat himself down to ruminate on every means, which prudence or
activity could supply, to obviate or remedy the evil: But from the moment that
he had digested and applied his expedients, he directly applied himself also to
reading, with such an attention of mind and study, that he could, for the time,
exclude all thought or reflection, either upon the misfortune or the means,
till the crisis or the cure, had awakened his recollection again.

And this method of avocation, I take to be a much better way, than to sit
brooding over misfortunes, or the hardiness of attacking them, to take arms
against a siege of troubles, with the weapons of philosophy. For what is
generally imagined to be a strength of mind, is often little more than a
command of features, which enables us to put a good face upon bad matters, and
only suffers misfortune, like the most dangerous wound, inwardly to bleed.
Zeno, founder of the stoic sect, hanged himself at ninety, for a whitloe. It
certainly was not so trifling an ailment that overcame his temper; but his mind
might be compared to a balance, with philosophy in one scale, plumb, and
misfortunes dropping into the other, one by one, till they came both to poise
in equilibrio; and then a feather turned the beam.

I have always thought stoicism both an absurd and a mistaken pride.
Expressions and demonstrations of grief, are as natural, as those of joy; and
arise often from nobler sentiments, and more generous motives. And yet, we
manifest the one, without reserve, and conceal the other till our proud hearts
break Shakespeare has given us a beautiful image of this unequal struggle
between philosophy and misfortune, in his Twelfth Night.

-- She never told her grief,
But let concealment, like a worm in the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek; she pined in thought,
And, with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. --

. To weep is womanish weakness, they cry, but there are tears which become the
bravest man. Sighs are the effect of sorrow, as well as laughter is of mirth;
and both equally designed by nature to discharge certain humors in the mind,
springing from their respective sources, which, if not suffered to evacuate
themselves, might ultimately affect the body. If you backen a tumor, you
corrupt the blood.

There is another vulgar error too, which has often surprised me; that gravity
should still impose upon the world, as a sign of wisdom. Is it because an owl
was the arms of Athens, and the bird of Minerva? We seem to have accepted the
emblem literally, which the mythologists tell us was designed rather as a
caution against being imposed upon by outward appearances. Gravity generally
proceeds from a defect of natural spirit in youth, or a decay of it in age.
When real, it is the effect merely of constitution, or stupidity, and, if
assumed, it is either to conceal weakness, or to cover pride.

That gravity is an imperfection may fairly be deduced from the natural causes
of it, grief, misfortunes, sickness, or old age. But sense is the parent of
cheerfulness -- Addison joins virtue; for to the wicked may justly be applied
that sarcasm of Solomon's, They are mad when they are merry; In fine,
good humor is to morals, what the sun is to nature, whose light not only gilds
the objects, but whose warmth improve their virtue also. And in imitation of
Carneades, who styled beauty Royalty without force, I shall define cheerfulness
to be philosophy without reflection.

CHAP. XXVII.
MR. Andrews remained in this irksome situation, during almost four days, when,
on the last of them, about seven o'clock in the evening, a person came limping
into the room, and delivered him the following letter, dated London, two
o'clock; the hand unknown.

MY gallant, generous, but unhappy friend, how shall I accost you! I met with a
paragraph in one of the public prints, last night, about twelve o'clock, and
above fourscore miles from hence. It shocked and alarmed me so extremely, that
I instantly took horse, and have rode post hither, where I lie concealed at my
attorney's house. He has informed me of both the particulars relating to your
distress -- I cannot go on -- I leave him to say the rest -- For none but a
person hackneyed in the ways of men, can speak without emotion, upon such a
subject as this. Adieu, Adieu.

Charles Carewe.


This letter, said Mr. Andrews to the person who had delivered it to him,
refers me to you, Sir, for those particulars which relate to the business of
it; and, as time presses hard upon us at present, I beg that you will execute
your commission without any manner of preface, or delay. I shall obey you, Sir,
replied the attorney, and will deliver myself in as few words, as the nature of
the subject may admit. Pray proceed.

You must know then, Sir, that my first acquaintance with Mr. Carewe, was --
Dear Sir, cried Mr. Andrews, since I must know that very interesting
particular, I promise you to attend to it any time you please, when we shall be
more at leisure. It cannot possibly be necessary to relate, at present;
therefore, pray good Sir, proceed. And so I would, Sir, if you had not stopped my
mouth. Then, as I was saying, my first acquaintance with Mr. Carewe -- Indeed,
Sir, I require not the least account of your first acquaintance with that
gentleman, all I want to know, at this time, is, what your last conference with
him was? Why, really Sir, replied the attorney, I was coming to that point
directly, if you had not twice interrupted me; and if a man of law is once
shuffled out of the regular course of business, do you take me, Sir, he will not
readily again be able to bring on matters properly to an hearing; do you mind? I
ask your pardon, Sir, replied Mr. Andrews, I pray you go on, Sir, in your own
way -- For, I was born to suffer! [aside.

Well then, as I said before, Sir, continued old Tautology, my first
acquaintance with Mr. Carewe, (who, by the by, is a very worthy client of mine,
and indeed in other things, too, the man bears a good sort of character) was
his lodging five thousand hard pounds in my hands, with directions to purchase
for him into the four per cent. funds. To make short work of the matter, for I
perceive that you don't love long speeches, Sir, I actually did lay out this
same five thousand pounds sterling for him, in the said four per cent. funds,
as I told you before, he had given me commission to do.

Well, Sir -- Upon my presenting him with the debentures, what consideration he
gave me for my honesty, diligence, trouble, and dispatch -- for I did not keep
him long in suspense, Sir -- is not, by any manner of means, do you mark me,
material at present, but I believe, Sir, that I may venture to let you so far
into the secret, as to inform you that it was no trifle. No trifle, I assure
you, Sir. For indeed Mr. Carewe, as I think I told you already, is a very
worthy gentleman -- A gentleman every inch of him, believe me, Sir -- And he
was certainly, much in the right of it too; for there is no surer thing in the
world, than that if you would have your business well done, you must pay for it
well. Live and let live, is the true maxim in trade, Sir. But that is neither
here nor there, do you mind, to the present matter in hand; therefore, you will
give me leave to have done with that part of the story, I presume, Sir -- Most
willingly, indeed, good Sir.

But to make a long story short, in order to have done with it, quite and
clear, and not to detain you any longer from the business in agitation, Sir,
there was one thing, and only that one thing, I ever knew him guilty of, which
gave me but a slight opinion of him. I speak above board, Sir, for they call me
old Tell-truth, among my friends, and those that are free with me -- And that
same thing, Sir, in a few words, was this:

Oh! [aside.

CHAP. XXVIII.
MR. Carewe employed me once, continued he, to prosecute his servant man, or
man servant, as it is termed in the law books, for robbing him of a good new
spic and span suit of clothes, some shirts, and other movables, to a
considerable value. For Mr. Carewe, Sir, was always a most tearing beau. I had
the villain set and taken, as nimble as he was, and lodged him in this very
house, as safe as you are yourself, Sir, at present.

But what would you have of it, Sir, when the rogue was brought upon his trial,
no Mr. Carewe appeared to swear to the goods found upon him. Not in the very
least, Sir. No Mr. Carewe appeared, though called upon his recognizance, three
several times, by the crier, with a laudible voice, Sir. And when my younker
did not come and appear, to save his fine, the judge immediately ordered his
forfeited recognizance to be forthwith estreated into his majesty's exchequer,
and the rogue was discharged, for want of prosecution.

I went off, Sir, hot foot, from the court, to Mr. Carewe's lodgings, to see
whether he was alive or dead, and who should I find there, but my young dilly
dally gentleman, in his nightcap and slippers, sitting by the fire, and
reading some conjuring book or other, that I could make neither head or tail
of. Upon which I up, and told him a piece of my mind, very roundly, asking him
why the devil he had not come to court, and done justice against his hang-dog
Tim? But all the satisfaction the dainty gentleman gave me, was, that a woman,
with a parcel of children at her heels, had kept bawling and roaring in the
hall, all the morning, and that as he had ever a mortal dislike to the crying
of brats, he could not possibly think of stirring out of his room while they
remained below. Pray did you ever hear now, so foolish a reason, in all your
life, Mr. Andrews, for not going to do what the law directs? I believe you
might not have understood him, Sir -- Not I truly, Sir, nor could any body
else, I think, who had either sense or reason. But so this foolish affair
ended, after having cost us a good round fine of fifty pounds, sterling, in
shining cash, Sir, besides my own bill of costs, which I warrant me totted to
ten or twelve pieces more. A pretty business this truly, you will say, Sir!

I say nothing, Sir, and could wish, for charity sake, that you had done
saying, also! I must have done now, Sir, for I have nothing further to add upon
this subject, that I can now recollect, said he, pausing. -- Oh, Sir! for mercy
sake, proceed immediately to the business you have been sent about, or I shall
be obliged to dispatch a messenger directly, to Mr. Carewe, to get that part of
his letter, which relates to your errand, explained by himself, Sir. There need
be no manner of occasion for all that hurry, Sir, replied the attorney, for I
will deliver it every word to you myself, from first to last, without the least
delay, or adding to, or diminishing from, Sir -- But first, I must beg you will
be so kind as to order me up a bottle of wine, Sir; for I don't know how it is,
but I am a little dry and hoarse, at present. But I was hurry scurry, there,
Sir, and hurry scurry, here, Sir, and then talking away so fast, to get plump
to the matter in hand, that this may be the occasion of it, perhaps, Sir --
Very likely, Sir.

CHAP. XXIX.
THE wine and glasses were laid upon the table, and after the attorney had
swallowed down half a dozen bumpers running, Well Sir, continued, or rather
commenced he, the upshot of the matter is this. Mr. Carewe came to my house
about two o'clock, or rather before, this day, muffled up in a chair; and
without staying even to ask me how I did, inquired of me whether I had heard
any thing, so and so, as how he had been arrested on Ludgate Hill, had been
rescued by a gentleman, what was the consequence? and so forth.

I told him that the whole story was then current in the courts, for that the
plaintiff's attorney, a very acute creditable man, had told every body he met
with, as how one Mr. Andrews, who I presume was you, Sir, after having
delivered him from the bailiffs, was fool enough, I ask pardon, Sir, to go to
the creditor, and join himself in security for the money in suit; and how he
nabbed him there, in the very fact, on account of one of the honest fellows
that had been desperately wounded in the fray, and that he was then held to two
thousand pounds bail; which was the restriction the court had laid him under,
in resentment for their affronted laws.

Poor Mr. Carewe, said he, dropped tears, at the first part of this story, though
I really saw no such crying matter in it; but he turned pale, and fell into a
chair, by the time I had come to the latter part of it; overcome, I suppose, by
the fatiguing journey he had told me he had rode all the last night and this
morning. Mr. Andrews was much affected at this recital -- Mr. Carewe's distress
augmented his own; for his compassion extended itself even to the person
through whom his own misfortune had fallen, upon him. However, he quick
recollected himself, and entreated the attorney to proceed, who thus went on:

As soon as Mr. Carewe had a little recovered himself, he pulled the very
identical five thousand pounds worth of four per cent. debentures out of his
pocket, and putting half of them, to the amount of just two thousand five
hundred pounds, into my hands, Run, fly, said he, in a perfect agony, to my
generous and unhappy friend Mr. Andrews, summon the sheriff on the instant,
deposit with him, instead of bail, two thousand pounds of these securities, to
set that worthy gallant man at liberty -- and oh! send him quick as lightning
to my grateful arms -- I have have entrusted you before, cried he, all in a
breath, with my whole fortune -- And there indeed, perhaps he was right -- How
much higher a confidence do I repose in you now! -- But this last expression I
could not, for the very blood of me, comprehend the meaning of, when I had
actually but half of the debentures in my hands, at the same time.

But he really seemed to be a little non com himself, the man did, while he was
speaking to me; for you verily never did see any creature in such a hurry
combustion, in all your life. Just for all the world in such a twitter, as a
girl going to be married, exactly. Run -- fly -- was the word at every hand's
turn -- Nay, he would not even suffer me to stay to eat a poor morsel of
dinner, neither, which was just then coming upon the table; an, excellent fowl,
bacon and greens, with a piping hot shoulder of mutton, Sir, all of the very
best meat that the markets could afford; for my crest has always been, Sir, Win
gold and wear it, in faith. Nothing less, Sir, as I was saying, would serve my
gentleman, but out I must go directly, or there would be no living in the house
for him.

So after I had settled a few papers in my desk, Sir, and had put on my hat,
gloves, and cloak, looking for my cane for some time, which my son Tommy had
carried up to the nursery, for a hobby horse -- Young things will play, Mr.
Andrews -- Mr. Carewe fidgetting and fidgetting about the parlour, all the
while, I sallied out of the door, without any manner of delay, exactly as it
struck three o'clock, Sir.

CHAP. XXX.
THREE o'clock! cried out Mr. Andrews, and looking at his watch -- It Is now
just eight, and allowing an hour for your coming to this point, without any
manner of delay, since you came in, what, in the name of prolixity and the law,
could you have been doing, Sir, during the other four hours?

Why there now, again Sir, you may easily perceive from hence, the hurry and
confusion that both Mr. Carewe and you had thrown me into; for it had made me
near forgot one very material article of my errand, which this question of
yours, now started, has made me recollect again. I told you before, Sir, that
Mr. Carewe had given me debentures to the amount of two thousand five hundred
pounds sterling -- The first two thousand you know already, how that is to be
applied; but now for the odd five hundred -- Why this, Sir, Mr. Carewe desired
me, as soon as I should have dispatched you off to him, to post away to the
banker with, to release his bond, with your counter-obligation, and bring them
to him directly; that he might have the honest pleasure, as he expressed
himself, of delivering them up cancelled to you, himself, Sir.

Well Sir -- when I had now gotten into the middle of the street, safe and
sound out of his clutches, and found myself at liberty of thinking and acting
according to my own judgment or experience of matters and things, I began to
consider with myself, that my best way, undoubtedly, would be first to hye me
to the banker's, before I came to you, Sir; arguing the point pro and con, in
my own mind, thus: Should I defer this business till the evening, I may
possibly miss of my chap, for he may be gone abroad; but as for Mr. Andrews, I
shall be sure of finding the gentleman at home, at any hour; for he must
necessarily stay till I call upon him. Ay, ay, bonum securum is the word there.
At dinner is the surest time of meeting with a man of business at his own
house, and I can also by this means, kill two birds with one stone, and pick up
a meal for myself, at the same time, in spite of all Mr. Carewe's hurry and
fluster.

I judged the thing for the best, I thought, taking every circumstance
together; and so, without any more ifs or ands, away I hied me to the bank, as
fast as my legs, which are none of the best, could carry me. I found the
gentleman at home, as I surmised, I told him my errand, he was overjoyed,
invited me to sit down at table with him, and indeed, to do him justice, made
as much of me, as man could do.

While we were at dinner, continued he, the banker sent one of his clerks to
the attorney, acquainting him with the business, and desiring him to attend
immediately, and see very thing performed according to law. He came on the
summons, and after I had paid the money, and that we had taken our jolly
bottles apiece, and a peremptory, I acquainted them with the other commission I
was going to transact; and so came off hither, without stop or stay, only just
calling upon a client of mine, for about half an hour, as it happened to lie
directly in my way. Business must be done, you know, Sir. But for all my hurry,
I did not neglect the main chance, you see, added he, throwing two papers on
the table, for there are the girth and circingle, my boy -- Five hundred pounds
sterling, with interest and costs, (which latter, by the bye, Mr. Carewe owes
me yet) was a plaguey dear purchase truly, for such dirty scraps of paper -- But
law is law, Sir.

Mr. Andrews lost all manner of patience, by this time, and ringing the bell,
sent off directly for his friend the sheriff, entreating him to come
immediately, and take the securities from the attorney, as he dare not venture
to let this tedious impertinent go to the office to make the deposit himself,
or suffer him one moment out of his sight, till he might be at liberty also, to
issue forth along with him.

CHAP. XXXI.
THE sheriff returned with the messenger, on the instant, but brought this
unwelcome piece of news, at the same time, that about half an hour before, a
certificate had been lodged in the office, by the surgeon who attended the
bailiff, that upon that evening's dressing, he had found the wound to have
proved mortal; after which notice, added he, I am sorry to acquaint you that it
is not in the power of our office, to accept of bail, without a special order
of court.

Mr. Andrews then turning toward the attorney, said with a grave, but dejected
air, I thank you, Sir, for this; and I hope that Mr. Carewe will reprove you
too, with the same temper. I understand you, Sir, replied he, but having done
every thing for the best, as I told you before, I am not to be chargeable with
the consequences, do you mark. Business, let me tell you, Sir, (because you
really seem to be a perfect stranger to it) business, I say, is not to be
scuttled away, as fast as this man, or that man, or the other man, take it into
their wise noddles; as if they thought of nothing all the while, but their own
convenience, forsooth. But I find that I have no more business here, at
present, Sir, and as I hate loitering where I have nothing to do, I shall even
pack up my awls, and return home to Mr. Carewe, again, with his two thousand
pounds, safe and sound, out of all manner of jeopardy -- I am sure my delay was
lucky for him, at least. So saying, he took up his hat, gloves, cloak, cane,
girth, and circingle, filled up a brimmer, drank the clerk of the crown's
prayer to Mr. Andrews, and hobbled down stairs.

The sheriff, who was really a very good kind of man, staid for an hour behind
him, to console his friend; and told him he had hopes, even if the bailiff
should die, from former instances of the same kind, that upon its appearing to
be a sudden thing, merely accidental, and without any manner of malice
praepense, on your part, said he, together with the remarkable sobriety and
excellence of your character, the crown may be induced to make a favorable
distinction, upon the representation of the court, between the accessory and
the principal.

I thank you, Sir, replied Mr. Andrews, for your kind wishes; but, free from
guilt, I am devoid of fear. I would not yet die, because nature seems yet
unwilling to release me -- but, if providence shall think fit to supersede her
laws, heaven's will be done, and I shall submit, without repining.

The spirit and virtue of these expressions, drew tears from the sheriff's eyes
-- and so they would have done from the hangman. Farewell, most excellent young
man, said he, embracing him, and retired.

CHAP. XXXII.
JUST after he went away, the following letter was delivered to Mr. Andrews: My
dearest friend,
THIS vile attorney has rendered me a most shocking account of his principal
commission. But who can one trust, who depend upon! A common porter would have
been a better, though not so proper an agent. I could have stabbed him, but
your danger has made a coward of me. Fear not, however, notwithstanding the
unpromising appearances of this night, I have a scheme in resolve, which may
set you free tomorrow. My life, and fortunes, are dedicated to you. Farewell,
Amen!

C. C.




This letter appeared quite enigmatical; but Mr. Andrews read, prayed, and went
to bed, in expectation of the next day's event. No measure rested upon himself,
and his anxiety was therefore less, than it would have been had any issue
depended upon his own conduct.

The next morning he was informed, that, as soon as the King's Bench had met, a
counsel, on the part of Mr. Carewe, had moved the court, setting forth the
whole story of Mr. Andrews's accidental and unmerited misfortune, confessing
that Mr. Carewe himself had wounded the bailiff, before Mr. Andrews had come
up, and offering, on condition that Mr. Andrews should be admitted to bail, to
surrender Mr. Carewe into custody, to take his trial, should the bailiff die.
The court was extremely struck at the generosity of the proposition, but saying
that the laws admitted of no commutation in in such cases, dismissed the motion.

Mr. Andrews himself, notwithstanding the greatness of his own soul, was
astonished at the magnanimity of Mr. Carewe's; and wept then, for the first
time since his confinement; crying out, this is a man, indeed, worth living
for! yet I may die, perhaps, without the happiness of any farther commerce with
him! Say, say, ye learned in the philosophy of nature, is there on earth a
transport higher than the embrace of such a friend! But I cannot fly to his
arms, nor dare he venture into mine.

Just as he had finished this expression, Mr. Carewe, with a flow pace, and
dejected air, entered the room, moving up toward Mr. Andrews, who upon seeing
him, sprang back from his chair, crying out, Gracious heaven, Sir, what has
brought you into this horrid place? My own extravagance and vice, and your
virtue and misfortune, replied he, throwing himself at his feet, embracing his
knees, and entreating his pity and forgiveness. Mr. Andrews, endeavoring to
raise him, sunk into his arms.

CHAP. XXXIII.
I WAS obliged to close the last chapter somewhat abruptly, because I began to
perceive my generous reader too much affected, myself not less so, to suffer me
to continue the rest of the story, in description. Therefore, for the mutual
ease of both our nerves, I shall conclude the remainder of it, in simple
narrative only.

Upon Mr. Carewe's having heard that his motion had been rejected by the court,
he walked about his room, for some time, like a distracted person -- Then
sitting down, for a while, composed in thought, started suddenly up again, and,
on the instant, rushed out of the house, surrendered himself to the sheriff,
and was immediately conducted to the Compter.

The principle, upon which he took this extraordinary step, was this: He feared
that if Mr. Andrews should be tried alone, he might, in all probability,
suffer, as being the only delinquent taken for the fact. But that should the
principal take his trial along with him, he hoped that the punishment of the
chief aggressor, might be deemed sufficient satisfaction for justice, and
incline the court to extend its favor toward the innocent and accidental
accomplice. Oh! should this gallant friend suffer for my crime, cried he out,
what a legacy of life would he leave me! I can die with courage, but I cannot
live with ignominy -- Death is but an instant -- Infamy is immortal! I ask
pardon of my readers. But I am not describing, I am only repeating.

These pair of extraordinary friends passed some minutes together, in mutual
admiration of each other's worth, not knowing how to express their heartfelt
sentiments of such unmodern virtue, when they were relieved from their
difficulty, by the hasty entrance of the sheriff, who running up and embracing
Mr. Andrews, cried out, in a transport of congratulation, Joy, joy, my dear
friend, and to you, Sir, also, turning to Mr. Carewe, for two of the most
eminent surgeons in London, whom I called in myself, to attend the bailiff's
dressing, this morning, have pronounced him absolutely out of danger, and even
in a condition to walk abroad.

While the two friends attended earnestly to this discourse, he thus went on: I
confess, said he, that I was much surprised, last night, upon finding such a
notice served upon my office, so shortly after my having been informed in the
courts, just as I was going home to dinner, that the bailiff had been
pronounced to be in a fair way of recovery. I began to suspect, from this
circumstance, that there had been some foul play intended, from some quarter or
other, in this affair, and therefore resolved within myself, for the sake of
justice, humanity and friendship, to call in two of the ablest surgeons in the
city, at my own expense, to attend the dressing of my patient, this morning.
However, I did not mention any thing of this purpose to you last night, added
he, turning to Mr. Andrews, thinking it not proper to amuse you, lest the
success might not have answered my hopes and expectations.

CHAP. XXXIV.
THE former surgeon, continued he, who was by at this report, appeared to be
extremely confounded, and sneaked immediately after out of the room. This
strengthened my suspicion, and running hastily after him, down stairs, just as
he had gained the threshold of the door, I seized him by the collar, pretending
to have a warrant for him, in my pocket, upon an information of a collusion
with some certain person, to impose his patient's danger on the court, for some
sinister purpose or other.

His fright betrayed his guilt, and upon a promise of indemnity he immediately
confessed to me, that the banker's attorney had called upon him in a great
hurry, the evening before, and prevailed on him, with a fee of twenty guineas,
to make a false return upon his patient's case; with a design, as I apprehend,
said he, to skrew money out of the prisoner, in order to be admitted to bail.

I was transported with joy, said the sheriff, at this fortunate discovery; but
resolving not to suffer it to rest here, I sent immediately for a coach, and
carried him, with the two other surgeons, along with me, to court, ordering the
wounded bailiff, by their permission, to follow us in a chair.

I got a counsel then to move the bench, on your behalf, and after a thorough
examination into this iniquitous affair, and our producing the patient on the
table, the court directed a prosecution against the attorney, at the suit of
the crown, and granted me permission to come immediately and set you both at
liberty, the bench having been just at that instant informed, that you, Sir,
said he, and turning to Mr. Carewe, had surrendered yourself up into the
sheriff's office, this morning, upon the dismissal of your extraordinary, and
unprecedented motion.

They all mutually embraced each other, and Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe made the
most grateful acknowledgments to the sheriff, for his generous and active
services; entreating the enjoyment of his company, for the remainder of the
day, in some safe and retired scene, beyond the city wards, upon Mr. Carewe's
account; where, by the help of friendly converse, they might endeavor to
forget the irksomeness of their late adventure.

The sheriff excused himself, on account of the business of his office, and Mr.
Carewe, at parting, put a bill of fifty pounds into his hands, desiring him to
discharge the compter fees, to reimburse himself his own expenses of surgeons,
counsel, etc. and to give the remainder to the bailiff. He answered that he
would certainly execute the first and last of these commissions, but begged to
be excused from performing the second, saying, that he was no attorney, and
that providence had blessed him with a fortune which could afford to treat him
to such acts as these. Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe then took a coach, and drove
out to Islington together.

CHAP. XXXV.
NOthing can possibly demonstrate the veracity of these memoirs, more than my
two last chapters; for the sudden transition, from the danger of the two
friends, to their safety, is certainly against all rules of novel, whatsoever.
But so it happened, and so I was bound to relate it. It is a common thesis of
school declamation, whether or no it would have been a prudent measure in the
Carthaginians, immediately after the battle of Cannae, to have marched up
directly, to the gates of Rome? But then surely, that class which should assert
the affirmative, must point their court martial censure against Hannibal alone,
who was at liberty to have done as he pleased, and not at Livy, who was
restrained by an historic fact.

Livy and I, it is hoped the courteous reader will please to observe, are
perfectly alike, in three very remarkable particulars -- In being equally
slaves to truth, in the beauties of our writings, and where the same courteous
reader, I am sure, would least of all have suspected any manner of resemblance,
even in the very defects of them. Asinius Pollio Some historians say it was
Augustus Caesar.
arraigns him of a Patavinite, as he phrased it, in his style, a sort of
impureness of language, contracted at Patavium, the place of his nativity; and
as I confess myself to have been born in Ireland -- For what Irishman is
ashamed? I hope that the Critical Reviewers, or self-named Athenians A set of
self-sufficient persons once erected themselves into a tribunal, which they
styled the Athenian Oracles proposing to answer every question, or solve any
difficulty, in wit, morals, or physics -- several ridiculous queries were
proposed to them, and one of them begins thus:

Self-named Athenians pray let it be shown,
For sure it is obvious to such mighty wits,
Why, etc.

, will heartily impute the Hibernicities in this here work, to my having been
indigenated in that there place.

Had I been at liberty to have suffered events to wait upon the leisure of
invention, how pleasant would it be to have locked up the reader in the goal
with them, for a week or ten days longer? The turnkey bringing them accounts,
from time to time, of the still increasing danger of the bailiff? At length, he
is given over, and then he dies, and then they are both instantly loaded with
irons.

After which, I might have related, how, as they were transmitting from the
compter, to Newgate, they were interrupted by a funeral procession, which, upon
enquiry, they found to be the aforesaid bailiff, going to be buried -- And how,
upon its taking wind, no matter how, among the populace, that these pair of
unfortunate friends were the culprits for the fact, they were first insulted,
and then pelted so furiously with stones, or brick-bats, no matter which, that
if it was not for the guard, most luckily coming up in the nick, firing among
the mob, and killing seven or eight poor innocent men, women, and children, who
had taken no manner of part in the fray, but only stood gaping on -- I say,
that was it not for this same unexpected and timely relief, which favored
their escape, they would never have lived to be hanged, you may depend upon it.

Well, but after their rescue, I might have lodged them, safe and sound, in the
dungeon, for a week, on ten days longer, till their trials are brought on;
during which interval, I could have highly entertained the reader, (who has
voluntarily confined himself to the same condemned hold, along with them) with
the histories of the several criminals, neck-yoked in the same place; which
they might have amused themselves with, to while away the time, till their
executions.

As how one man finding another in bed with his wife, did, contrary to his
majesty's peace, his crown and dignity, and contrary to the statute, in that
case made and provided, blow out the cuckolder's brains, with a charged pistol,
which he happened luckily to have in his hand, at the very time. That the
adulteress had prosecuted, and convicted him for the fact; notwithstanding it
had been specially argued, by his counsel, that jointure-wives should never be
admitted as evidence against their husbands, because they are to be gainers by
the success of the suit.

How another hang-dog, having cogged a die upon a young heir, just come of age,
and stripped him of a large sum of money, upon being charged by the loser, with
the fraud, and being a person of nice honor, but not having the fear of God
before his eyes, whipped him through the guts, upon the very spot. With several
other such extraordinary occurrences in life, as swell and embellish the most
of our modern novels.

And after I had held the reader in pain, for his two friends, quantum
sufficit, had brought them into the dock, and arraigned them at the bar, I
might have introduced the officious sheriff, aforesaid, leading in the supposed
dead bailiff, by the hand, and making a discovery of the whole sham, contrived
by, etc. There is a twist for you now, which would be the more delightful,
because it was quite unnatural to expect it.

I say, that if I had not tied myself, too scrupulously, down to the very facts
themselves, as they really did occur, (which forces me on a digression, now and
then, to give a scope to fancy) I could have made this work infinitely more
engaging, both to my fair readers, and to my foul ones too; for I could have
exchanged sentiment for incident, and have forced moral to give place to --

But, have a little patience, good people, for I hope soon to rid my hands of
the confined work I am now upon; and then I promise you to give myself a loose
to all the extravaganza of invention; and to present the public with a novel,
though nothing new, which shall at once distress and delight all hearts -- I
have here already, in this very chapter, afforded them a sketch, both of the
style, and manner I mean to conduct it in; which I have picked up out of
several successful modern performances.

For it shall be a most dismal series of adventures, without language,
reflection, or sentiment, but rendered perfectly easy and familiar, by the il
modo basso An Italian phrase, for low-life expressions.
; for one must humor the public, like a child, by telling them a story, of
what kind no matter, so you keep going; for the motto of them all may be, that
one is good, till another is told. But methinks, our novelists treat the old
babes worse than one does the young ones, for they give them the fable only,
but neglect the moral.

And really, after all, what use would the embellishments of thought or
expression be of, to a work of this kind, except to take up too much of one's
attention, from the narrative, or action? which would be just as absurd, as if
you were conducting a gentleman or a lady, for example sake, to see an
execution, and should suffer them to loiter at a bookseller's, or a
picture-shop, by the way.

The principle, upon which our fabulous biographers proceed, is certainly a
very just one. That this world is so brimful of happiness, that it quite
surfeits us; and it is therefore become absolutely necessary, to invent tales
of difficulty, and distress, to relieve our satiated minds, with a little
variety A fellow in London, who hawked the daily papers about the streets, upon
finding them to lie on his hands, toward the latter end of the day, while he
cried only Great News, suddenly bethought himself to change his tune, and
roaring out Bad News, sold more in an hour, than he had been able to do the
whole day before.
. And therefore, since readers have taken up such an unnatural passion for
crying, I think proper to acquaint them that I have framed the plan of a novel,
which, if it does not blind their eyes with tears, first, shall break their
hearts with grief, at last. The story, in short, shall be this:

I will join Clarissa Harlowe, and Sidney Bidulph, both in the same piece; and,
after I have ravished Clary, and married Biddy, I will pack them off on a
voyage together, no matter why, or where, but in order to have them taken by
pirates, and sold into slavery; where, after they have been re-ravished, and
re-married, to the end of the chapter, they shall attempt making their escape
from Algiers, and be taken in the fact; tried, condemned, but not executed all
at once -- not so fast, good Sirs -- This would be putting the reader out of
pain, too suddenly, either for his pleasure, or my profit, by cutting me short
of just forty entertaining chapters, exactly.

For, in the first, I will only lop off a finger, and in the next, a toe; and
so proceed, alternately, as often as they have fingers and toes. Oh! oh! oh!
till finis shall bring us an account of their tedious deaths and burials. These
Algerines, you know, are a merciless sort of people, and it is no matter, in
the least, how many lies a good Christian may tell, of Turks, Jews, or Infidels.

But after all, what signifies lying? might it not do as well to print off any
old story, of a cock and a bull, in onion juice; which, I warrant you, will
oblige the strongest Cabletonians Cabletonians -- Persons whose nerves are as
tough as cable ropes; and who have no feelings, but what are simply natural to
animal nature; who are sensible of pain, but not grief, of pleasure, but not
joy.
, in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, to "Drop tears as fast, as the Arabian
tree
"Its medicinal gum" --
for certainly, that kind of sorrow, which arises neither from the truth of the
fact, nor the art of the representation, must be imputed rather to a weakness,
than a tenderness of heart; and may properly enough be distinguished from
compassion, by the denomination of eye grief.

N. B. This work shall consist of nine volumes, in octavo. Subscriptions to be
taken in by the printer hereof, at five guineas, in hand, and a guinea, on
delivery of the first eight books. The ninth to be delivered gratis. The first
volume to be put into the press, as soon as one thousand setts shall be
subscribed for.

CHAP. XXXVI.
MR. Andrews and Mr. Carewe dined, supped, and lay, at Islington, that night,
Mr. Carewe not thinking it prudent to return to London, for the reasons he had
already given to Mr. Andrews, for quitting it immediately after his rescue.
They were sensible of a mutual satisfaction in each other's converse, and
several polite expressions were exchanged between them, during the course of
that evening.

But when Mr. Carewe began to compliment his friend, upon the generosity of his
late behavior, Mr. Andrews interrupted him, by saying, that it would rather
humble him, in his own opinion, to be praised for what, in honor of human
nature, he hoped were but common merits. My first act, said he, was but the
usual impulse of manhood; and the second, but the result of common honesty,
only -- Your conduct, indeed, upon this occasion, has been truly noble. --

Hold, interrupted Mr. Carewe, since you will not indulge me, Sir, in the real
pleasure of dwelling on your praise, spare me, at least, the awkward uneasiness
of listening to my own. Let us, rather, added he, since we are, I hope, from
this day, cemented friends for life, contrive, after some sort, to commence our
acquaintance earlier, by mutually relating to each other, the private history
of those aera's, which have preceded our first meeting; so as, in a manner, to
retrieve past time, and thus take hands, as it were, together, from first to
last, through life.

With all my heart, replied Mr. Andrews; but as the evening is now too far
spent, that you have declared your purpose of retiring farther into the
country, tomorrow, and that I must necessarily return to prosecute my
fortunes, at London, let us defer entering upon this proposition, till we may
hereafter, be more at leisure together; and, for the present, we'll pass the
short remnant of our contracted span, in a more general converse.

The next morning, they parted; and their different avocations keeping them
still at a considerable distance from each other, the first place they ever
happened to meet in, after their separation at Islington, was the farm, as
before recited, in the first chapter. And now, ladies, I have fairly kept my
word with you, for Mr. Andrews has but just alighted at Windsor, and I shall
leave him to continue his narrative to you, which I took the liberty of
interrupting, at the end of the seventeenth chapter.

CHAP. XXXVII. The continuation of the story of Mr. Andrews and Mr. Carewe.
I Dined, said Mr. Andrews, at the inn, and, after I had changed my dress, I
went immediately to pay my compliments to miss Beville. I met Mrs. Beville in
the hall, ordering some wine into the parlour, where I heard a great noise of
rustic mirth, going forward. I saluted her, and enquired, with earnestness, how
her daughter was? She sighed, and replied, that she had been, for a
considerable time, ill of something like a slow fever on her spirits, had
loathed food, and declined company; that a physician had been called in,
several times, but that it had been with great difficulty she could be at all
persuaded to use any of his prescriptions; and that the few which she had been
prevailed on to take, had yet produced no visible effect upon her health.

She added, that, for a week past, she had confined herself entirely to her
chamber; and that, though this was her birthday, upon which occasion her
father had invited some friends to dinner, in order to tempt her down stairs,
to do the honors of the table, she had declined it, by saying, after her
present low-spirited manner, that it would be insincere in her to affect
rejoicing at her birth. Mrs. Beville then pressed me to go into the parlour,
but I refused it, telling her that I always avoided every occasion of drinking;
and that since miss Beville had refused rejoicing, upon the present one, it
would certainly be extremely ungalant in me, to make merry on it.

After this, she kindly asked me where I had been this age, as she was so
obliging to term it; which inquiry I happily took advantage of, by replying
that I had been studying physic, ever since; adding, with an affected spirit,
that as quacks sometimes succeed, where the faculty have failed, perhaps I
might be in possession of some nostrum, or other, which might possibly restore
the fair invalid to her health and spirits again. She replied, that she really
believed poor Fanny would be glad to see me, for that she had always seemed
pleased with my company, and had also distinguished me with particular regards,
as her dear brother's friend. I bowed, and she led the way up stairs, to her
daughter's apartment.

When I entered the room, I saw her sitting at a table, with a pen and ink, and
a paper just written, lying before her. She appeared pale and languid, and had
a certain air of melancholy diffused over all her features. She did not
perceive me at first, as her mother walked in before me, I advanced to salute
her, and she seemed struck with surprise; she rose to receive me, trembled when
I took her hand, faltered in attempting to speak, and instantly fainted in my
arms.

I carried her to the couch, loosed her stays, and bared her lovely bosom,
while Mrs. Beville sprinkled water on her face and neck; she at length opened
her eyes, with a great sigh, but quickly perceiving the situation and disorder
she was in before me, she fell into the utmost confusion; which her mother
endeavored to qualify, by saying never mind it, my dear child, for this
gentleman has become a physician, since you saw him last, and a deshabille, you
know, is nothing between doctor and patient.

I turned immediately aside, toward the table, to leave her at liberty to
compose her handkerchief, which while her mother and she were adjusting, I was
tempted to run my eye hastily over the manuscript, that lay open before me, in
which I read the following lines:

CHAP. XXXVIII. On my BIRTHDAY.
THOUGH sorrow fills my swelling heart,
And care sits heavy on my brow,
Yet shall I with my utmost art,
Hail and applaud the instant now.
This day, in time's extended line,
Was marked the era of my birth,
It was God's gracious will, not mine,
That I should then first visit earth.
What though my cup be dashed with gall,
Nauseous and irksome to the taste,
Do I not know that soon I shall
Be from the bitter draught released?
Then let me welcome this glad day,
With choral song and festive mirth,
Which steals from life a year away,
And brings me near my second birth.
The soldier placed in time of war,
Where mines lie hid beneath his feet,
Welcomes the coming guard afar,
But 'till relieved, dares not retreat.
The sensations which affected me on reading this paper, are not to be
described. I was very near wanting the same assistance myself, which had been
just supplied to her. Where I expected to meet a birthday ode, as the title
had promised me, I was shocked with a funeral elegy, rather. Sadness, at other
times, may arise from some sudden loss, or transient misfortune -- The grief
may be but temporary -- But when a season, otherwise of joy, shall supply
occasion of melancholic reflection, it betrays the ingrained complexion of the
mind. Throughout the whole poem she prefers death to life, and seems to have
restrained her impatience, by the consideration in the last line, only.

I did not appear to have taken any manner of notice of the paper, which, the
moment she recollected, she sprang forward, turned upon the table, and blushed
at the same time; which quick restored her suspended beauties, and made her
seem, at that instant, more lovely to my eyes, than methought I had ever seen
her before.

I asked her about the state of her health; how long she had been ill, after
what manner affected; and at the same time made a physical pretense, of feeling
her pulse, for the natural one, of touching her hand. She answered me every
question, with as much gravity as she would have done to a regular physician,
only that she seemed to seize, with a certain quickness, an opportunity from
thence, of accounting for her late emotion, by adding, that she had dreamed,
the night before, that I was dead, and the tediousness of her disorder had
reduced her mind, as well as her body, to such a state of weakness, that the
suddenness of my appearance before her, so little expected, had struck her,
some how, as if it had been a vision.

CHAP. XXXIX.
MRS. Beville, on hospitable cares intent, frequently quitted the room, to
order in wine to the company below stairs, and give the necessary directions
about her household affairs; which left her charming daughter and me, at greater
liberty to entertain each other. Miss Beville, in one of these intervals, asked
me what was the whim of her mother in stiling me a physician, just now? I
repeated our conversation below stairs, and told her that this was a pretense I
had luckily framed, extempore, in order to entitle me to the privilege of being
admitted to visit her in her present retired and invalid state. However, added
I, the science of physic is not so deep a mystery, neither, as that common
sense need be at a loss upon every occasion, how to prescribe; and in your
case, Madam, said I, it is not impossible, at least, that I may be able,
without a diploma, to retrieve your health, ever long.

She answered that she was very willing to submit to my prescriptions; adding,
that if faith in the doctor, was an help to medicine, no physician could
possibly meet with better success, in a patient. This she pronounced with a
smile, but a blush at the same time -- The highest charms of female beauty,
joined at once in one!

She then inquired of me, with a modest, down-cast look, and hesitating voice,
to what fortunate crisis she was indebted for the pleasure of my present visit?
Then raising up her head and voice, a little, hoped that I had returned from
Germany, loaded with laurels, and brought home trophies to add to the ancient
and present glory of England; with other railleries of the same kind.

I smiled at her humor, and told her, as was in truth, the case, that I had
been trifled with by my father, who, after several vague schemes for my
establishment in life, had at length, left me at liberty to seek out my own
fortunes; but that my disappointments were, at present, greatly qualified, by
the extreme pleasure I received in being allowed to behold and converse with
her once more. That I began now to look upon myself to be my own master, but
would willingly exchange that vain prerogative, for the higher privilege of
becoming her slave, if she had not already engaged one more worthy to be
commanded.

She turned her eyes quick upon me, with a regard of emotion and surprise; but
collecting herself again, in an instant, replied in a low and softened tone of
voice, that politeness afforded men great advantages, because it indulged them
the privilege of speaking in a kind of equivocal style, which none but women
who had been bred at courts, could possibly have address enough to answer. I
replied, that though galantry might possibly admit of such hollow language, it
had never yet obtained a currency, in friendship; and that, if she would but
grant me permission, I would explain myself more explicitly, upon this subject,
to her brother. She blushed, and bowed -- I kissed her hand, and retired.

CHAP. XL.
I HAD come down to Windsor, you may remember, continued Mr. Andrews, in order
to satisfy myself more fully, about my scruples of love and honor; but perhaps
you may think that I had here drawn too hasty a conclusion, from the premises.
Possibly too, there may appear at least as much of vanity as of generosity, in
this precipitation.

But you will indulge me, I hope, in the most favorable construction on this
passage, by supposing rather, that the strength of my own passion, might have
super-added a degree of evidence to here is; and that having thus wrought the
matter up to a moral certainty, at least, it would have been most indelicate,
besides seeming to rate my purchase too high, to have required a more explicit
declaration.

A delicate lover will never force his mistress, to a confession -- She loses a
good deal of her price, by such a frankness; and too categorical a certainty,
if the expression may be allowed, lessens also considerably, the refinement of
his own pleasures. There is a subordination in love, of that nice and peculiar
nature, that, if once destroyed, can never be restored; and the state,
thenceforward, either becomes anarchical, without any order at all, or
inverted, by inferiors bearing sway. Until the avowal, a woman reserves to
herself, the privileges of her sex, but at that instant resigns her whole
prerogative. Nature seems to have from the first, endowed them with this
empire, and a salique law here, would be dissolute rebellion. The confession
humbles a woman too much, and a polite, or prudent lover should never suffer
his mistress to abate the opinion of her own value. The conferring of favors,
preserves the whole spirit of this passion, which sickens and dies away,
whenever they come to be challenged as a right.

Besides, is not the confession either needless, or uncertain? are there not
surer tokens of a passion, even than words or actions? Is the love which
declares, or the one that betrays itself, the strongest? And is a premeditated
speech or motion, or an involuntary sigh or emotion, the most certain sign?
Love is the great purpose, and pleasure of our lives, and yet how few of either
sex, are capable of that economy, delicacy, or address, which are requisite to
heighten or confirm its joys, by zest or permanency?

CHAP. XLI.
THE next morning, I sent a card, with my compliments to the family, desiring
to know how they all were, particularly miss Beville; adding, that I should
wait on them immediately after breakfast, to learn the route to my friend's
lodge, in Hertfordshire. This message was answered by Mr. Beville's coming down
to the inn, and inviting me to dinner; calling me doctor Andrews, in a laughing
way, and saying that his daughter had been so much recovered, by my friendly
visit, that she would venture down stairs that day, to receive me.

I readily accepted the invitation, but upon this condition, that my patient
should not be suffered to quit her apartment so suddenly; for that it had often
proved fatal, the having mistaken spirits for strength -- That as I had
accidentally assumed the character of a physician, I would humor the title a
little farther, by directing the proper meats to be sent up to her from table,
and should do myself the pleasure of waiting on her in the evening, to drink
tea, feel her pulse, and receive her commands to the lodge. These preliminaries
were agreed to, and I went to dine with the father and mother, at the appointed
hour.

I directed some broth, and a little white meat, to be carried up to my
patient, and then ordered her a large glass of wine, with very little water in
it; which latter part of the prescription Mrs. Beville objected to, saying that
it might perhaps inflame her blood, as she had not tasted any thing stronger
than tea, for a considerable time. It Is for that reason I direct it, said I,
for in all depressions of the spirits, we of the faculty, madam, usually
prescribe high cordials, in order to raise a fever, and then any dispensatory
can point out the cure; which admirable expedient saves us, madam, a world of
trouble, in certain difficult cases.

We thus amused the time during dinner, which I thought a most tedious meal, as
I was become then more impatient of returning to my charming Fanny, than ever I
had been before. I began to consider her now, in a more interesting light; no
longer as one who might merely fill up the vacancies, or amuse the intervals of
life, but as the sole person who was both to inspirit the business, and relieve
the cares of it -- at once to heighten and refine its pleasures.

I soon rose from table, saying that, like a Turk, I preferred coffee to wine,
and that a physician should always preserve his blood in an equal temperature,
for fear of sometimes mistaking his own pulse for his patient's. Then taking
Mrs. Beville by the hand, I led her up stairs, to her daughter's apartment.

CHAP. XLII.
MISS Beville was dressed with the nicest elegance and gaiety, and seemed
extremely recovered since the evening before, both in her looks and spirits,
though still weak and pale. I therefore, in order to save her the fatigue of
exerting herself to entertain me, engrossed the discourse mostly to myself, by
repeating to her every incident which had happened to me since we parted last,
to which I added all the articles of news, both foreign and domestic, which
were then current in London. Among the rest, I related to her the story of our
adventure, my dear Carewe, said he, and she wept, and wondered, both at the
virtue, and the vice of my recital.

I wrought out an occasion, from some part of my discourse, of comparing with
disadvantage, all the pleasures I had experienced in London, united together,
to the single one I had left behind me at Windsor; adding, that even this, though
the same, was far transcended by the present enjoyment, as the total exclusion
of every wandering thought, of every alien scheme of pleasure, had now left
this favorite one at liberty to occupy my heart and mind entire.

Oh! my dear Carewe, cried he out in a rapture, there is somewhat in the rich
endowment of a chaste woman's love, which exceeds all human bliss -- How low is
ambition, how poor are riches, how insipid is pleasure, when void of this
enlivening spirit! Love cannot be deemed a distinct passion, but rather the
informing soul of every other sentiment or affection in the human breast. It
refreshes labor, relieves care, and gives enjoyment to pleasure. It not only
inspirits our moral, but even religion is but cold philosophy, without it. I
ask pardon, said he, for this enthusiastic digression, for without experience,
all this rapture must appear but Platonic vision.

My dear friend, replied Mr. Carewe, you rave not to me, and perhaps I may have
conceived still an higher relish for such hallowed pleasures, even than you, as
I have had an opportunity, which your purity may have denied you, of comparing
transient and libertine joys, with chaste and solid transports. Some minutes
now passed in sighs and silence, on both sides, after which Mr. Andrews thus
proceeded:

After tea was over, continued he, I offered to read to her, which she
accepted, and I chose to take up a play, as it afforded me opportunities, in
the love scenes, of addressing myself more personally to her, giving me
pretenses for sometimes seizing her hand, or catching her in my arms. She would
oppose my transports, and defend herself by saying, that she must certainly
acquit herself but aukwardly of a part, which she had never even rehearsed
before. To which I replied, that love was a play, contrary to all others, where
the best performers were those who had practiced least.

After this cheerful and galant manner we conversed and passed away the evening
together, till I thought it time for my dear patient to retire to rest. I then
bowed and withdrew, calling upon Mr. Beville in the parlour, to inform myself
how to direct my course to the lodge. I then retired back to the inn, got up
early the next morning, and rode post to my friend's house, about four miles
beyond Hertford, where I arrived before dinner, the same day.

CHAP. XLIII.
HE was rejoiced to see me, my pleasure was double. I was affected with a
twofold emotion, both of love and friendship. I asked him a number of
questions, about the nature of his farm, his interest in it, his economy in
the management of it, etc. I questioned him after that vague and hurrying
manner, in which people are apt to inquire about things they have no personal
concern in, and received his answers with that inattention which is natural,
when one's mind is occupied by reflections that relate solely to themselves.

After dinner we fell into a more settled and deliberate conversation. I gave
him an account of my scheme and conduct, since our last interview. I declared
my passion for his sister, but with that polite reserve, that I did not afford
the least hint of my fond suspicion about her reciprocal affection. I told him
of my late visit to her at Windsor, that I had urged my love and wishes, and
had happily, though only in a tacit way, obtained her permission, to speak more
fully to him, upon that subject.

He seemed transported at the overture, and acknowledged that he had perceived
a growing passion in his sister's breast, toward me, for some time past, and
that this observation had rendered him a good deal uneasy, with regard to the
situation of her mind; as it was certain that love always produces a more
powerful effect in chaste, than in dissolute minds; for delicacy of sentiment,
like the pureness of gold, increases its weight, while vice, like alloy,
renders it at once both light and fragile.

He concluded this reply, however, with this reflection, that though his mind
had been now made easy with regard to that particular, he apprehended some
difficulties in others, relating to our mutual security and happiness,
together. For my sister, said he, has no fortune, and I am afraid that your
father has as ridiculous a notion of knight errantry, as ever Cervantes had.

I replied, that this danger might be guarded against, for a time, by his being
the only confidant in this affair, until I might be able to induce my father
into a settlement, at least post mortem, upon the merits of having provided for
two of his family already, and at my own expense too. But that if a discovery
should happen to occur, before I might be fortunate enough to bring matters to
a safe crisis, I did not apprehend that his resentment would extend itself
beyond the present emotion; for that though his character was not, in some
things, such as I could wish it, yet I hoped and believed that he had proper
notions of justice; for that his few failings had always appeared to me to be
rather faults of error, than of vice. Upon the whole, I concluded that if he
would risque the hazard for his dear sister, I would adventure it myself, for
my still dearer wife. We embraced, and set out the next morning for Windsor.

CHAP. XLIV.
MR. Beville rode up directly to his father's house, while I alighted at the
inn, in order to shift my dress to one more seemly for a courtier, and as soon
as I was equipt I followed him. I found miss Beville in the parlour, with her
mother and brother; I welcomed her down stairs, and wished the world joy of her
returning into it again. She bowed, and Mrs. Beville replied, with a smile,
that she wished her dear Fanny had been a person of higher consequence in it,
for my sake; that the fame of the patient's cure, might make the doctor's
fortune. In a short time after, my friend led his mother out of the room, upon
some pretense or other, whispering these words to me in French, as he passed
by, L'amour, et l'occasion.

When we were thus left alone, I told her that I had waited on my friend,
according to her permission, and had entirely explained away all ambiguity of
expression, in my late address toward her; and that, in return, he had given me
leave to tender her, in more explicit terms, the future services of my life;
which I here, madam, in the fondest and most earnest manner, entreat you to
accept of, added I, taking hold of her hand, and throwing myself at her feet.

She raised me up with precipitation, expressing these charming words, at the
same time, that thenceforth, submission should be not only her duty, but her
practice also, which, while she pronounced, a crimson glow added a warmth and
richness to her beauties, which inspired me with the following reflection: How
ill advised are women who banish blushes from their cheeks! They are equally
ornamental, to the sinner and to the saint, and supply those advantages which
either vanity or virtue would desire, at once both charm and awe, allure the
lover, and rebuke the libertine.

Just at this instant, a crisis, when a polite lover and a delicate mistress
wish equally to be relieved from each other, Mrs. Beville returned into the
room, to search for some keys. I took advantage of this interruption, to
retire, on pretense of seeking out my friend and confidant, whom I found in his
study, employed as usual, in catching the flying moment to improve himself in
literature or morals. I acquainted him of my success, expressed my gratitude
for his mediation, and consulted with him upon proper measures to perfect my
happiness, and to conceal it at the same time.

I dined at Mr. Beville's that day, and we spent the remainder of it in
conversation and reading. In the evening Beville took his sister aside, to
settle preliminaries, and appoint the day for our nuptials, which he told her
it was necessary for herself to do, as the expediency of keeping the affair a
secret, for some time, left us not at liberty to communicate it even to her
father or mother.

She replied that it would, by no means, be decent for a young woman to go upon
such an errand as this, without the guardianship of some matron or other; and
that since it was necessary, which she did insist upon, that some person in
that character, should be confided in, her duty and respect both, required that
her dear mother should become the party. Beville mentioned this to me, I was
highly pleased with her delicacy, and consented to the proposition. We then
desired miss Beville to communicate the matter to her mother, who received the
proposal with joy, and in a few days I was rendered completely happy.

CHAP. XLV.
SOON after our marriage, my friend returned to the lodge, and invited his
sister home with him, on pretense of adjusting the economy of his little
household, making an apology to his father and mother at the same time, on
account of the smallness of his accommodation. I took a formal leave of the
family, the same day, and returned to London, to examine into the situation of
my affairs there, which finding just in the same hopeless state I had left
them, I repaired immediately to the lodge, summoned at once by love and
friendship.

In this charming retreat we spent some months together, in the highest
enjoyments of mortal bliss; love, friendship, conversation, music, and letters.
My dear Fanny was an excellent performer on the harpsichord, and had a voice
and taste so very expressive, that she could almost turn sound into sense; her
brother played finely, on the fiddle, and I had been well practiced on the
violincello. What an harmony here, of sound and soul!

We secluded ourselves from all other society at this place, except the
minister of our parish, whose merit you shall hear of; and were attended by
dumb-waiters at our meals; so that we might converse of books, without the
imputation of pedantry, and philosophize, freely, without giving offense to
weak minds; for 'squires were excluded from our table, and servants from our
side-board.

The pleasures I enjoyed in my new state of life, are not to be imagined but by
one who has had the happiness both to love, esteem, and possess a woman of
sense, beauty, and virtue. I was then sensible, for the first time of my life;
of a certain solid and permanent joy; for the happiness of marriage, like the
interest of money, arises from a regular and established fund; libertines
squander the principal, and so become bankrupts.

I happened to rally my wife, one day, about her birthday elegy, as I styled
it; upon which she smiled, and said, that she had quite dismissed Melpomene
from her toilette, and called down Thalia into her place; adding, that as there
were to be none but her first and second self by, (bowing to her brother and
me) her third one being to quit the room, she would communicate one of her
hand-maid's handy works to us immediately. So saying, she took a paper out of
her pocket, threw it on the table, and quick retired. For her modesty was not
confined to chastity alone, but formed the bloom and complexion of all the
words and actions of her life.

Ode on CUPID.
PHOEBUS is styled the god of wit,
But I his influence deny,
None ever the mark of fame has hit,
Who could love's pleasing power defy.
The poet's and the lover's rays
Are sparks from one congenial flame,
True passion must allume the blaze,
Which warms the heart, then mounts to fame.
'Twas Lydia's charms raised Horace' verse,
Lesbia that made Catullus write,
'Twas love that decked fair Laura's hearse,
And brought the nut-brown maid to light.
From Eloisa's plaintive tongue,
Such tender accents never had flowed,
Nor had we wept, nor had she sung,
But for the little pur-blind god.
Ask Hagley's muse I was going to supply a note upon this passage, but having
neglected to mention Petrarch or Prior, when Laura and Emma were introduced
above, I thought I might, for the same reason, omit the name of Lyttleton here.
, whose love-lorn tears
Fell melting soft as feathered snow,
If Titan's shafts have pierced our ears,
Or Cupid launched the heartfelt bow?
To Venus' son I tune the lyre,
Who first inspired my soul to write,
He kindled my poetic fire,
And not the feebler god of light.
CHAP. XLVI.
IN order to enjoy the pleasures of this dear society without interruption, or
alarming my father, I, soon after our marriage, took a large farm in the
neighborhood, which I set again in divisions, to a considerable advantage,
reserving one of the enclosures in my own hands, to lay out my profit-rents
upon. About the same time my friend took some other farms also, and obtained
several agencies which enabled him to enlarge his house, and encouraged his
father to rent his employment at Windsor, to a deputy, and remove with his wife
and family, to settle at the lodge.

Soon after this, my father summoned me up to London, to assist him in raising
my sister's portion, who had lately received a proposal from a gentleman of
good fortune, in Surry. Our sole capital stock had been derived from my mother.
It was a sum of ten thousand pounds, in the funds; but her father dying when
she was a child, her guardian and trustee had involved it in the intricacies of
the law, by borrowing some money for his own use, upon it, before my mother had
come of age.

From the time of my father's marriage, to this era, the difficulty about
proving the trust, had continued in chancery; which prevented his getting an
absolute dominion over the principal, though the court had permitted him, all
along, to receive the interest. And though his claim became finally ascertained
in the preceding term, yet the time requisite to make up the decree, with some
other common forms, or usual delays of law, obliged him to borrow the money,
wanted upon the present occasion.

This he had engaged from a banker in the city, who happened to be our former
acquaintance, my dear Carewe, said he, and who, having conceived a good opinion
of me, from my former transaction with him, and which he related to my father,
insisted upon my joining in the bond, as counter security. I readily concurred;
but when the deeds were brought to be signed, I confess that I was both shocked
and surprised to find that his old attorney was the person who was employed to
transact this affair. I hinted it to the banker, and the answer he made me was,
that the man was perfectly acquainted with the business of his profession, and
that this article was all the concern he had with him. But as for morals, and
all that stuff, said he, it is a mere jest, in things of this sort, for
attorneys will be true to their clients, for their own sake, and what matter is
it to us, how they play the rogue with all the world besides? Were we to enter
into enquiries of this kind, added he, what would become of half the trade of
London? A person may be a good man, on the Change, who is a very bad one, in
his own house. Whores and rogues must live, concluded he, or the world would be
too thinly peopled -- I signed the deeds, and returned to the country.

Mr. Beville and I gave our whole application toward the improvement of our
farms, which was an exercise, both to body and mind, equally pleasant and
healthful. The constant succession of business, relieves the fatigues of
labor, and the rich and various fruits of the earth, ripening one after
another, present us still with something new, to hope, or to enjoy, preventing
all satiety; so that the farmer may say, with Milton, "All seasons and their
change, each please alike."

CHAP. XLVII.
WHILE Mr. Beville and I lived together at the lodge, we became acquainted with
the clergyman of our parish, of whom I hinted to you before. He was a man of
sense, learning, and humanity, a person of strict morals, and exemplary piety;
but at the same time so easy in his manners, and polite of address, that all
who conversed familiarly with him, would have taken him for a mere man of the
world; the divine or philosopher never appearing, but in his actions, or
devotions. My Fanny said wittily of him one day, that he certainly did himself
a sort of injustice, by being so agreeable, for that the love and esteem which
his worth alone had entitled him to the whole of, was by this means divided,
and each merit thus defrauded of half its due.

His first appointment in the church, was to acuracy of forty pounds a year,
during which time, his sister was left a dowerless widow, with a great number
of unportioned children. He immediately fled to their relief, took a house to
accommodate this helpless family, and opened a Latin school in the parish, in
order to maintain them.

While he was laboring under these difficulties, and life wasting away in
celibacy, some of his friends proposed the scheme of matrimony to him. But he
declined it, saying, that, till he had made provision for his present children,
he could neither think it just, or prudent, to incumber himself with any future
ones. "Why, man alive, these children are none of your own, surely" -- Not in a
natural sense, indeed, answered he, but in a moral one, I consider them in the
same light. Children are the gift of Heaven, added he, and since Providence has
thought proper to ccmmit these orphans to my charge, I will, like Jacob,
endeavor to wrest a blessing from the struggle, by striving to perform the
duty of a parent, toward them.

Well, but doctor, are there not warm widows, or snug old maids enough, in your
parish, to feather your nest withal, and no danger of incumbering yourself with
a second brood, as you term it? But, gentlemen, sometimes ladies, he would
reply, I will not mock the church's rites, and to marry, without a lover's
wishes, or a father's hopes, is the basest prostitution, surely; nor would I
grasp another's wealth to enrich an alien. It Is enough that I forego my
pleasure for my charge, but too much to expect that I should sacrifice my moral
also.

His virtue was applauded by all the bishops, and afterward rewarded, by a lay
patron, who promoted him to the benefice of that parish, which is computed to
be worth about five hundred pounds a year -- Exactly the income of the man of
Ross.

CHAP. XLVIII.
HIS church was always crowded; for there was, in his manner of preaching,
something which caught the attention and fixed it, without either action, or
grimace; so that many passages in his sermons used to be remembered again, and
quoted in conversation; and often urged as authorities, upon more serious
occasions. I shall endeavor to recollect, said he, some of them which my Fanny
used to repeat, for your entertainment, and to make you, in some sort, better
acquainted with our worthy pastor:

The poor man's scrip, is the rich man's treasury.

The perception of virtue is a sixth sense.

If, among the questions of scholastic philosophy, it should be asked, what is
the strongest thing, in nature? I should answer, Piety. It subdues this world,
and wins the next.

Religion is not a stoical habit of penance and self-denial, but a physical
regimen for pleasure and self-enjoyment.

God is the spring and ocean of our thoughts and actions. Every wish, every
purpose, every deed, as they arise originally from him, should refer finally to
him. Whatever design, though ever so virtuous, falls short of that great
ultimate, unphilosophically makes the means the end -- This reaches not up to
true religion, but terminates in moral heathenism, only --

The exercise of virtue upon the mere score of intellectual pleasure, has no
more merit than the practice of temperance to give a zest to Epicurism. As
neither of them make any part of the Christian religion, they cannot be
entitled to the promises of the gospel.

To rejoice at rain, without an acre of land; to redeem a debtor, remaining
still unknown; to quench the firebrand in others haggart, without a boast; to
wrest the dagger from an assassin's hand, and never inform the victim; the
secret transport of such acts as these, can never be described equal to the
feeling. In this sense alone, stolen pleasures are sweet, in any other, bitter.

There is a moral precept obligatory upon all mankind, to do good, as well as
to abstain from evil. Suppose that all the world should refrain from absolute
ill, and yet perform no positive good? in what state should we remain then?
But, in reality, there can never be such a supposed circumstance in society,
for the declining of actual virtue, is the incurring of negative guilt; Qui
succurrere perituro potest, cum non succurrit, occidit; says Seneca, de
beneficiis; but we have an higher authority, in scripture, for, were not the
priest and levite both censured, for passing over on the other side, though
they took no part with the assassins?

It was the opinion of the stoics, long before Christianity, that all crimes
were equal, and that an offense against any one moral, was the same with a
breach of the whole ethic. Can philosophy then complain against the severity of
this text? He who is guilty of the breach of one part of the law, is guilty of
the whole.

Epictetus, in the 24th chapter, of the third book, has these remarkable words:
My children's children will bear the punishment of my disobedience, and
fighting against God. Compare with this, part of the second commandment, and
visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation, of them that hate me.

CHAP. XLIX.
THIS most excellent person both ornamented and enriched our little society;
and my dear Fanny, added he, with an heavy sigh, seemed to receive a more
particular satisfaction, in his company and conversation. She said to me, one
evening, just after he had left us, How amiable is virtue, in the sacred
character! Is it not remarkable that it should strike us with an higher beauty
here, where it must be most expected, than in any of the other conditions of
life, where it might appear more extraordinary? Is it perhaps, that in
proportion as the deficiency of a character might offend, the perfection of it
may please? Is it not for this reason, said she, that modesty is most charming
in woman, because it is their peculiar characteristic? Is it that virtue seems
more immediately derived from heaven, in them -- That in the clergy, it appears
inspiration; in the laiety, but instruction, only?

What an advantage, continued she, must such a pastor bring to morals and
religion, in whom the purest virtue, and most exemplary piety, are shown not to
be inconsistent with the easiest manners of a gentleman? For it is the
formality of parsons, and the stiffness of mere good men, which disgust the
world, and not their strictness, or sanctity. All which she concluded, with
this ingenious allusion, that as matter, endued only with its necessary
properties, would be a lifeless mass of uniformity; so virtue without manners,
would be as morally unamiable..

The intervals of all these transactions which I have recited to you, are not
at all material; and indeed, continued he, sighing, Though I have dwelt long,
with pleasure, upon the former part of my relation, I shall now make amends, by
shortening the sad remainder of it, the principal event of which, I shall
comprehend in the exclamation of Brutus -- Portia is dead!

He attempted to pronounce this sentence in the spirit of ancient philosophy;
but he was no actor; and, few as the words were, his heart, if I may use the
expression, failed him in the middle of them. A torrent of fond and grateful
tears, gushed suddenly to her memory, a generous sympathy affected Mr. Carewe,
and Mr. Beville coming just then, into the room, quick joined a brother's
sorrow to an husband's grief.

CHAP. L.
MR. Carewe, in order to change the subject, and give a new turn to their
thoughts, asked Mr. Beville what general news he had brought home from
Scarborough, and what adventure had detained him so much longer in town that
day, than usual? He replied, that every thing of a public concern, was
comprehended in the London prints, which he took out of his pocket, and that he
was delayed by taking leave of some friends of his, who were setting out from
Scarborough, for the York races, which had carried off most of the company out
of town, and left the rooms extremely thin.

Suppose, said Mr. Carewe to Mr. Andrews, that you and I should accompany our
friend, in his walk, tomorrow? It will serve to shift the scene a little, and
diversify our ideas. The emptiness of the place, continued he, will be lucky
enough for you, but, for my own part, I would be content to bear a little more
crowding, for a little more company, tomorrow.

Why truly, I could be satisfied with it, myself too, replied Mr. Andrews, upon
your account; for I would sacrifice my own ease to a friend's pleasure, at any
time. Nay, I will do more for you, added he, I will sacrifice even my pleasure
to yours also, by setting you at liberty to go off to the races, tomorrow; and
Mr. Beville, I hope, will be so kind as to accompany you thither, for a few
days, as I really think that both his health and mind require a little more
exercise and amusement, than he takes, or can possibly meet with, at the farm.
Beville bowed assent toward Carewe.

No, gentlemen, replied Mr. Carewe -- But first, let me thank ye both, for your
politeness, upon this occasion. However, as well as I love company, I would not
ride thirty miles to seek it in a crowd. Besides, your sentiments upon
horse-racing, said he to Mr. Andrews, have much abated my relish for that
sport, which I confess I was formerly very fond of; as, in truth, I was once,
of every thing that had gaiety, spirit, and hurry in it.

Formerly, and once, upon a time, you should have added, my dear Carewe,
replied Mr. Andrews, these are expressions too antiquated to be uttered by a
young, handsome fellow, of five and twenty. Oh! my dear friend, answered Mr.
Carewe, with a sigh, and grasping his hand, at the same time, you have loved --
and must therefore know that true passion renders us philosophers to all other
pleasures, and an eunuch to every other desire.

The starting of this subject, sent each of the three friends home to their own
thoughts, for the rest of the day; which not supplying us with any thing to
entertain the reader, who is, I assure you, my principal concern throughout
this work, I shall conclude this chapter with just acquainting him, that they
read the newspapers, conversed upon general topics, till supper, made a slight
repast, and then retired to bed.

CHAP. LI.
THE next morning, Mr. Beville called upon his two friends, to take a walk with
him to Scarborough, according to the purpose of the night before; but their
spirit for the frolic had subsided in sleep, and they suffered Mr. Beville to
pursue his course alone. After breakfast, Mr. Andrews led his friend to take a
walk with him, along the sea beach, and thus reassumed his memoir.

I had brought my story to a short period, yesterday morning, continued Mr.
Andrews, for two reasons. The first, because it gave me pain to dwell, for any
time, upon a circumstance, that whatever has already, or may hereafter befall
me, of loss, or sorrow, I may venture to style, by way of eminence, the only
misfortune of my life. And next, that as I had turned toward the window, to
hide my eyes from from yours, I perceived Mr. Beville coming up the avenue, and
I would spare his grief, as well as my own.

But as there remain some particulars yet to be mentioned, to complete my own
history, I shall relate the last article again, more at large, during our
present leisure, and the sorrows which it must necessarily renew, will, in some
sort, be relieved by the pride and pleasure I shall at once receive, in letting
you a little farther into the beauty and delicacy of that amiable woman, my
lost Fanny's character.

Our marriage had been kept still a secret from her father, till my wife had
become with child; and, as he then lived in the house with us, it was not
possible, at least my nicety about her same rendered it improper, to make a
mystery of it to him, any longer; and he was therefore, admitted to be a member
of our privy council. He received the news but coolly; he was naturally warm
and proud; he, at first, resented his not having been made a confidant, from
the beginning; and then seemed mortified at the necessity his daughter was
reduced to, of carrying on a clandestine commerce, to the hazard of her
reputation, and the humiliation of his own pride.

He had a precipitate manner of resolving, and acting. He took his resolution
on the instant, and, without communicating his design, wrote a letter, that
very evening, to my father, informing him of our marriage, saying, that he had
been a perfect stranger to it himself, until a few hours before; adding, that
he had already pardoned the breach of duty, on his daughter's part, hoping that
he might do the same on his son's; and concluded his letter with saying, that
he would readily join his interest with my father's, to compass some
preferment, or civil employ for me, to make amends for his daughter's want of
fortune; which he, with justice indeed, affirmed to be the only merit in which
she could be deemed deficient.

To this indiscreet epistle he received no answer, but I did. My father
enclosed it back again to me, with a few lines in the cover, declaring that he
had that day made and perfected his will; and had cut me entirely out from all
chance of inheritance, for ever, of any part of his present, or future fortunes.

CHAP. LII.
I happened to be at my farm, when the post came in, and as I had always
indulged my dearest Fanny in the amusement of opening my letters, in my
absence, she had the unhappiness of receiving this shock, which I would have
saved her from as long as it might have been in my power, if the letter had
fallen first into my hands.

When I returned to the lodge, that day, I perceived a remarkable alteration in
her countenance, though she received me with the same tenderness as usual. I
appeared alarmed, and taking her fondly by the hand, asked her, with some
emotion, whether she had been taken ill, during my absence. The softness of my
manners affected her, she fell into tears, and took the letters out of her
pocket. I read them hastily over, and after making this short reflection, that
the indiscretion of a friend, may sometimes do one as much mischief as the
malice of an enemy, I caught her eagerly in my arms, crying out with hope and
fondness, that Heaven had, for virtue, more fathers than one.

We then agreed not to mention any thing of this affair, to her father or
mother, in order to preserve peace and harmony at home. Her brother had been
accidentally made acquainted with it before, as he happened to be by when she
opened the letters, and snatched them up as they fell from her trembling hand.
I endeavored to re-assure her spirits, for the present, by this philosophical
reflection, that as I had long despaired of any manner of assistance from my
father, during his life, it was too soon to grieve, till we should first feel
the effects of his resentment.

Such turns of thought as this, have frequently assisted me to parry, or
postpone several uneasinesses in life; but my dear Fanny had not the least
particle of stoicism in all her composition. She was all delicacy, feeling, and
sentiment. This event therefore, preyed constantly on her spirits, and,
finally, affected her health; and mine also, in a great measure, along with it.
For though I am an excellent philosopher, for myself, I am the worst in the
world, for another. My mind; indeed, is masculine, but my heart of the true
feminine gender. My sympathy is stronger than my nerves, and I feel
misfortunes, as one does heat, weak in the direct line, but forcibly from
reflection.

CHAP. LIII.
SHE labored under a depression of spirits, till she delivered a son to my
arms, and then fell into a fever; from which, however, she recovered, but with
so slow a progress, that I was alarmed about her declining into a decay; and,
to increase the danger of which, her fond mother, her first connection in life,
both of duty and affection, expired in her arms, of a disorder she had
contracted by her constant watchings, and assiduous attendance upon her beloved
child, during the course of her late and present illness.

About this time Mr. Beville, the father, received an account from Windsor,
that his deputy had failed, and imbezzled his revenues; which obliged him to
return, and try what measures he could pursue, in order to vindicate his right,
and recover his employ again. My wife remained with her brother, who spared no
manner of expense, in physicians or medicine, for the re-establishment of her
health; while I did every thing, on my part, that tenderness, love and duty
could suggest, to assist her remedies, and expedite her cure. For, oh! I loved
her, to the last moment of her existence, with tenfold the ardour with which I
first received her virgin sacrifice to my longing arms. For where true virtuous
passion is, the torch of Hymen but singes the wings of Cupid, and anneals his
arrows.

Our difficulties were, soon after, considerably increased, by the falling away
of Beville's agencies, one after another, by minors coming of age, and others,
for whom he was employed, returning from abroad, to reside upon their own
estates; while, in the midst of these streights, and gloomy prospects, my
family was increased by the birth of a daughter; which threw the dear mother
back again into her former weakness, from which she had, for some little time,
appeared to be tolerably well recovered.

Just at this interval, her aunt, by the mother's side, became a widow, with a
good jointure. She had been made acquainted with our marriage, as soon as the
veil of secrecy had been withdrawn; and as she lived within twenty miles of our
residence, we had had frequent intercourse of visits, while my dear wife was
able to ride abroad.

Soon after her husband's death, I waited upon her to pay my compliments of
condolance; and, on my informing her of our apprehensions about her niece's
relapse and danger, she very kindly offered to carry her with her to Spa,
whither she was advised to repair immediately, on account of her daughter, and
only child, a very handsome young woman, about twenty years of age, who had
been, for some time, in a very precarious state of health.

I expressed my thanks, in the most grateful and affectionate manner, and
returned directly to the lodge, to acquaint my dear wife of this kind and
opportune invitation. She, at first, declined accepting of it, but, after some
reluctance, and her being informed by her physicians, that those waters were
absolutely necessary, toward the recovery of her health, with a religious
exhortation too, upon this subject, from her favorite divine, she was at
length prevailed upon, to prepare for her journey.

In a few days after, her aunt and cousin called upon her -- I put her into the
coach -- I saw her then, for the last time!

CHAP. LIVE.
I Returned to her apartment, threw myself on the bed, and felt infinitely more
wretched than at any interval of my confinement in the compter; for now, I had
her life to fear for. As my eyes wandered about the room, I perceived a
manuscript paper lying on her table, which, apprehending to be some necessary
memorandums she had forgot to take with her, I hastily arose, read, kissed, and
wept over the following lines:

A Soliloquy.
I HAVE been the child of sorrow, or of care, ever since my first reflection's
dawn. My heart was early taught to melt at other's woe, by feelings of its own.
In my first spring of youth, I sought for wisdom, and dulled the roseate bloom
upon my cheek, by searching for her sacred lore. The midnight taper often has
been extinguished by the radiant sun, which found my sleepless eyes unwearied.

Yet then did vanity intrude, and youthful spirits mounting to my heart,
whispered that all this philosophic pride was fruitless, the means were
pleasant, but the end was endless; and that in love alone, was happiness
supreme. The trial soon was made -- I loved, and was beloved again. But, oh!
what anguish did that passion cost my timorous heart! Fear entered with it, and
held the alternate empire of my breast, for many a tedious day. Without the
latter, how unsafe the first; and with it, what a slavery to sustain!

At length, what can be found of happiness in love, was mine. The object of my
choice, with generous tenderness and reciprocal flame, approved me his, and
left me no ambition. Sorrow and fear now vanished for a while, but to return
with allied strength. Attended by pale poverty they came, and, to extend their
cruel power, have with a double barbed arrow pierced me. For on their iron
darts are graved the tender names of husband, and of children!

How then can I defend my unshielded heart, or vindicate the empire of my soul,
when these dear ties, the nearest and the best, give added force to every
wound, and rise auxiliaries against me! Yet sure there is a strength, superior
still to theirs, and, oh! endow me with it, Heaven! A resignation to thy
all-wise decrees, a calm dependence on thy paternal providence, and grace to
say, Thy will, my God, not mine, be done. Amen.

F. A.

CHAP. LV.
Enter Mr. Beville in a hurry. Beville. The chidren are come.


Andrews. (springing from his seat) My children!


Carewe. Let us fly to embrace them.


Exeunt A. B. and C. Manent Triglyph and the Reader. Read. PRAY now, Sir,
shall not we follow them too, and have the pleasure of seeing the dear little
prate-a-paces also, which I must confess I long to do extremely, from the
affection and esteem you have taught me to conceive for their father and mother.


Tri. I do not choose it, at present, Sir, and I Will tell you why. I have been
all my life afflicted with a certain praecordial weakness, which the
Cabletonians, before mentioned, style nervous See the last note, chapter xxxv.
. I saw Mr. Andrews and his children meet once -- that was enough for my
disorder. Believe me, Mr. Reader, that, for all the money I expect to make of
you and your whole fraternity, I would not review such another scene -- To see
the storge, to perceive the workings of the father, when he placed little Harry
on his knee! But the looks, the emotions, the tears, when he snatched up la
petite Fanchon in his arms! So like her mother! Eternity, I have bought you,
with her loss!

And then we should be plagued, at the same time also, with the nonsense of the
nurse. This is daddy's eye, and that is mammy's lip. This is daddy's this
thing, and that is mammy's the other thing. Now, master Harry, walk up strait to
your uncle, there -- Ah! Mr. Beville, is'nt he the very gunter-part of his
father? And miss Fanny, too, pray hold up your head, miss, and drop a daisy
there, for the gentleman -- The mother's air, as I am a sinner, to a tilly --


Read. You are a whimsical man, Mr. Triglyph, and shift so suddenly sometimes,
from serious to comical, that I declare one does not know how to accommodate
themselves to your humor; for you possess a certain art, of setting the upper
part of the face a crying, and the lower a laughing, so histerically, at the
same time, that I am sure I must, at this instant, make as drole an appearance
as a whipped school boy eating a tart, while tears with syrup mixed, run down
his chaps, together.


Tri. Indeed, Sir, you happen to mistake both my talent, and my character. My
cast is entirely grave, nor do I mean to jest, even in those parts of my
writings, where I sometimes speak in humourous images; but I happened to have
learned my philosophy in the porch of Democritus; and it is a certain, though a
ridiculous truth, that, after one has been taught to laugh at the follies of
mankind, it becomes morally impossible for him, ever after, to preserve a
serious countenance. But then, Mr. Reader, this is not mirth, nor is my moral
the less severe, upon this account; for human frailties do not divert, but
tickle me; and extort a smile, through pain.


CHAP. LVI.
THE next morning Mr. Beville staid from Scarborough, to play with the
children; and Mr. Andrews was as great a romp as the rest. But, lest this
particular might be apt to sink the characters of these philosophic gentlemen,
with a certain class of readers, I think proper to acquaint them, that
Agesilaus used frequently to amuse himself, with riding hobby-horses with his
children, in the nursery. Some have hobby-horses, and others have hobby-asses.

Mr. Carewe assisted in the tumult, for a while; but, not being actuated by the
same parental feelings, his spirit soon began to flag, and he retired alone to
the seashore, where he spent the rest of the morning in walking with folded
arms, and musing in deep melancholy, till he was called in to dinner.

There was something in this charming young man's distress, that had a
nobleness, a generosity, a virtue in it, which, in my opinion, must interest
the mind, even more than the misfortunes of either Mr. Andrews, or Mr. Beville.
For I shall just hint here, that the latter had some to lament, distinct from
those of the former; but the reader must suspend his curiosity about these
matters, till the regular course of this history shall, in their proper places,
introduce the several stories, both of Mr. Beville, and Mr. Carewe.

Their conversations for the rest of that day, and indeed all their evening
entertainments, were extremely ingenious, and polite. I must confess that I
have been several times tempted to interrupt the narrative, in many places,
where I thought that I could make the reader sufficient amends, by introducing
him to amusements of a more refined nature. But those who may have a true
relish, for such reading as this might afford them, will be perfectly capable
of imagining to themselves, in a more lively manner than I could possibly
represent it, what an elegant, and elevated society, three such persons of
talents, virtue, literature, and taste, whose minds had been softened by
adversity and disappointments, and who were mutual friends to each other, must
be capable of forming together. O noctes, caenaeque Deum!

And as for the rest of my readers, who may not have been blessed with a genius
for such delicate enjoyments, they will very readily excuse the interludes, in
order to pass more immediately on to the catastrophe of the action. I shall
therefore, suffer the representation to proceed, without intermission, except
where I shall think that any of the passages in the story may need to be
illustrated, or explained.

The next morning every thing went on, as usual, Mr. Beville walked away to
Scarborough, the two other friends retired themselves after breakfast, into the
library, and Mr. Andrews thus pursued his adventures, in context with those of
Mr. Beville.

CHAP. LVII.
ABOUT a year before this event, my worthy friend, Mr. Beville, who, though a
reading and contemplative man, had a great spirit for adventure, had engaged
himself in a certain manufacture; in order to carry on which, with effect, it
was necessary to borrow a considerable sum of money; and for which purpose I
recommended him to our old banker, before mentioned, my dear Carewe; who, in
order to judge of his security, sent his same attorney down into the country,
who staid a week with us, to inquire into the circumstances of Mr. Beville's
fortune, the interest of his farms, the nature and progress of the manufacture,
with the responsibility of his character. About all which particulars having
received sufficient satisfaction, he drew up the deeds, paid the money for his
client, and returned back to London.

While he remained with us in the country, he appeared extremely pleased with
all the improvements made both upon Mr. Beville's farms, and mine; but said
that it was a pity they were not held jointly, by the same tenant; for as one
was moist, and the other dry, they would yield a double profit and convenience
together, to the value of both, separately occupied.

He seemed to be charmed with the situation of the lodge, the gardens,
orchards, fish ponds, and the accommodation of his offices; and said, that it
would be an happy scene of retirement, for any wearied citizen, from the hurry
and bustle of a town, there to pass, in peace, and religion, the remainder of
his days; rejoicing in the fruits of honest industry, and enjoying the fullness
of a well-earned fortune.

Some time after my dear wife had gone off to Spa, leaving her brother and me
in the highest of human afflictions, despairing, from the many symptoms of her
disorder, with some dark expressions dropped by her physicians, of ever seeing a
person return to us, again, whom we so tenderly loved, and so deservedly
esteemed; we received a private intimation, one day, from the sheriff of our
county, that executions against our bodies, goods, and lands, had been lodged
in his office, that morning, by the banker's attorney, aforesaid.

We then, both of us, too late, perceived the unguarded weakness of putting
ourselves, or fortunes, into the power of a person who lay under the dangerous,
and wicked influence of one, whose malice and revenge, we had reason to
apprehend, might have instigated his avarice and extortion, to injure and
oppress us. But we soon exchanged reflection for action, having but just time
enough to secure our persons from arrest, by flying up to London, together,
with what bills and cash we could muster up between us, at that time, and of
which we made one common purse, amounting to about an hundred pounds.

CHAP. LVIII.
OUR farms, stock, and furniture, were soon after put up to sale, and in these
difficulties we -- Nonnulla desunt. --

The above hiatus shall be supplied in the second, or third edition; for there
is a peculiar nicety in this article, which requires some time to be able to
accommodate for public view.

Biographer Triglyph.



I wrote also, to my father, continued Mr. Andrews, entreating that he would
take some speedy measures to stop the execution, and relieve my slight and
unpatrimonial fortune, from the heavy weight of a family debt, which rested
solely upon him to provide for. This letter I sent to him by his own attorney,
who informed him likewise, of the banker's malice, in this affair.

His answer was perfectly calm and temperate, for he was a great philosopher,
in his own way. He replied, that I had very romantic notions, in some things,
but vulgar ordinary ones, in others. That my first dealings with the banker,
and my marriage, were instances of the former; and the seeming now to consider
my sister's portion, for whom I was, by the laws of reason and virtue, equally
obliged to provide, as his sole debt, was an instance of the latter. But that,
as the laws of the land had made the same distinction that I did, I was welcome
to recover the debt against him, as soon as I should have discharged it myself,
and had the judgments assigned over to me; by which time he hoped, by the
finishing of his own suit, to be in a condition to answer mine: -- Multa
desiderantur. --

Here the three following chapters, in which are contained some curious
anecdotes, must sleep some time in manuscript, for the reason already given
above; so I shall pass on to

CHAP. LXII.
AFTER these disappointments, I wrote to the principal tenant on my own farm,
to come up to town, and give us an account of the transactions which had passed
in the country, with regard to our unhappy affairs. He was an intelligent
person, and had attended the sheriff's sale, both of poor Beville's effects,
and mine. He told us that every thing had gone off, at a third or fourth of
their value, as they always do upon such unhappy occasions; except my wife's
picture, and mine, which, having been bid for, by our honest friend the
clergyman, dropping some indiscreet expressions of regard, at the same time,
were raised upon him to a considerable price, by the attorney, who was present
at the sale, and took the hint from his earnestness.

He then added a large encomium upon our friend, and concluded with an
expression, the simplicity of which forced a smile from both Beville, and me,
even in the midst of our distress, that the doctor was certainly a primitive
Christian, if ever there was one. He told us also, that the attorney had
purchased the interests of both our farms, at a very trifing value; as the
sub-sheriff immediately declared the sale, as soon as he began to bid for them.

I settled accounts with this man, for his rent, and the balance in my favor,
which was forty pounds, I directed him to pay into the hands of his worthy
pastor, to whom I also wrote a letter of thanks, begging him to keep that
deposit in his hands, to defray the current expenses of my dear children's
nursing, who were rearing in his parish. I offered him the money he had paid
for the pictures, and told him where he might find us incog. if his occasions
should summon him up to London, before we might have determined upon any scheme
of life, or rather of living.

About a week after, a carrier called at our lodgings, left a letter for me,
with a large deal box, and went away directly, without waiting either for
payment, or an answer. The letter was from our friend, the clergyman; and I
give it to you here to read, added he, just as I received it, excepting a bill
for forty pounds, which was enclosed in it. Mr. Carewe took the letter, and
read Dear Sir,
ACcording to your order, I have received the money from your tenant, which I
take the liberty of returning into your hands again, because I think that you
are a much fitter trustee for your children, than I can be. Besides, as their
nurse is my tenant, it will be time enough, in all reason, to discharge her
wages, when I call upon you for them.

I have also, sent up the portraits you desire; but must beg the favor of
being excused from accepting payment for them. Did I part wholly with these
dear relicts, I might, perhaps, be induced to settle a more sterling account
with you, on this article; but while you entrust the living miniatures of these
prized originals, to my care, I shall, by looking steadfastly to that precious
charge, be overpaid for parting with these faint resemblances.

Pray make my most affectionate compliments to my amiable friend Mr. Beville;
and here let me most cordially entreat you both, that, as soon as the situation
of your affairs may admit of your returning into this country, you will both of
you accept of my roof, till you shall be able to establish yourselves in some
happier scheme of life; for, by assisting me in my endeavors for the good of
mankind, you will be justly entitled to a right of sharing that income, which
Providence and the church have vested in my hands, for no other purposes.

Adieu.



CHAP. LXIII.
AFTER Mr. Carewe had made proper reflections upon the polite address, and
truly Christian spirit of this letter, Mr. Andrews re-assuming his story, with
an heavy sigh, a flowing tear, and hesitating voice, I am arrived now, said he,
to the last period of my life -- To my first death, at least -- To the last
event that can ever be of moment to me hereafter, except so far as I have
revived again in my dear children, and renewed my fondness on those living
relicts!

I wrote every packet to my dear Fanny, but without giving her the least
account of our misfortune, for fear of disturbing her mind, in the present
state of her body, and had received some letters from her, in which she
informed me that she had got a severe cold in her voyage, which had greatly
increased her disorder; but that the physicians at Spa, had put her into a
regimen, and that she would do every thing in her power to keep up her spirits,
and assist her medicines.

In the midst of these difficulties, while poor Beville and I remained in
privacy together, mutually assisting each other's philosophy by moral
reasonings, and religious arguments, scheming from day to day, some new
project, or untried adventure, toward rescuing us from our present forlorn
condition, I received a letter from our aunt, at Spa, that my dear Fanny's cold
had fallen so heavy on her already exhausted strength and spirits, that the
physicians had almost despaired of her recovery.

The next packet brought me a black seal!

CHAP. LXIV.
AS Mr. Andrews will not be inclined, for some minutes, at least, to continue
the remainder, and less interesting part of his story, I shall make use of this
interval to verify the authenticity of these memoirs, by observing to the
reader, that no writer in the world, who had either sense, taste, humanity, or
virtue, could possibly think of dispatching the amiable Mrs. Andrews off the
stage, so abruptly, without bringing about any other catastrophe, but her own.
To be at such expense of beauty, wit, sentiment, love, and delicacy, merely to
render a man of worth miserable, during his surviving life! Sed parcae vocant,
the relentless fates have snatched her from us; and the severity of history
admits of no redemption.

You have now before you two unhappy men of virtue and merit, laboring under a
complication of misfortunes, which, so far from having been incurred by any
vice, or folly of their own, were brought upon them rather by their very sense,
and virtue; and therefore may more properly be styled afflictions, by way of
contradistinguishing them from inflictions; being such as neither forecast
could foresee, nor prudence might prevent.

The changes of this life, have been frequently observed to be so
extraordinary, so contrary to the allowed designs of Providence, so much beyond
even the mere fortuitousness of events, that the ancients were induced to
worship a deity, under the title of Fortune, quite distinct from Providence; an
intelligence of caprice, only -- I think it was a goddess Timoleon built a
temple, and dedicated it to her.
.

Thus one man shall be attended with a constant series of success, during his
whole life, Quibus dormientibus Dii omnia conficiunt, while another, employing
the same means, diligence, and virtue, shall be unlucky through the whole
course of his. Some are fortunate, or unfortunate, during certain periods of
time and the changes are seen frequently to shift, without any manner of
alteration in the person's own conduct. Even at play, where every thing seems
to be left to blind hazard alone, how often have we seen ill luck stick to one
particular seat, for a whole evening together; while, at other times, it has
pursued one person quite round the table, in spite of all the shifting,
cutting, and shuffling of the night?

This subject has just now brought to my memory, a speech that I once heard
pronounced by a certain fellow, of a certain college, as he was common-placing
on the changes, and chances of this mortal life, at the university: Single
misfortunes, said he, seldom come alone, and the greatest of evils are attended
by greater. This person was afterward made a bishop, and died an archbishop.
Must it not be to chance alone, for it was not in Gotham, that he owed his
preferment?

CHAP. LXV.
POOR Beville, continued Mr. Andrews, restrained his sorrow, and did every
thing in the power of good sense, religion, and friendship, to strengthen my
mind, and support my spirits under our mutual calamity; while I, in tenderness
to him, used to turn aside to mourn, and endeavor to conceal a woman's heart,
under a stoic's mask. And this generous attention toward each other's grief,
was of more real service to us both, than all the bravery of philosophy.

But, one day, after I had brought myself tolerably well, to the preserving of
appearances, at least, an unlucky incident happened to occur, which occasioned
me to relapse again, into all my former indecencies. After dinner Mr. Beville
drank off a glass of wine to my health, and taking me by the hand, at the same
time, Dear brother, said he, this is your birthday.

The first expression conjured up, almost to view, my blushing Fanny, in her
bridal robes, and the last brought instantly to my mind, that triumphant, that
transporting scene, which I had exulted in at Windsor, upon such another era.
Memory, like lightning, shot quick through every interval of bliss, till the
last fatal close. My spirits were hurried on too fast, I grew sick, my manhood
failed me, I fainted suddenly into my friend's arms.

When he had recovered me to sense again, I just hinted to him, without daring
to dwell upon it, the groupe of thoughts which had overpowered me. He lamented
his expression, though innocent, and we passed the remainder of the evening
together, in mutual silence, sighs, and tears.

We immediately removed the wine, after my emotion, being both of us of
opinion, as well from our own experience, as from a general observation upon
others, that there never was a more fallacious maxim, than that which has been
too often imposed upon the already too unhappy, that wine is serviceable to
banish care. When the body is oppressed by fatigue, sickness, or pain, high
cordials may relieve, or assuage; but where the mind has caught the infection,
water is our safest potion. Wine but augments the disposition it encounters;
sinks dullness into stupidity, raises mirth into madness, and aggravates
melancholy to despair.

CHAP. LXVI.
TOward the hour of rest, having composed my spirits a little, a kind of
parallel still running in my mind, between the two birth-days, I took the pen,
and wrote these lines, said he, opening his pocketbook, and presenting a paper
to Mr. Carewe, which you will find to be expressed in the very same gloomy
strain of thought and sentiment, with those I repeated to you before, of my
dear Fanny's.

On my BIRTHDAY.
ON each revolving year, I Am pleased to see,
That hour approaching which by fate's decree,
Is doomed the last of my mortality.
Life is a race, still verging to a post,
Which he who soonest reaches gains the most,
But, if precipitate, the prize is lost Compare this line with the last of
those upon the same subject, in chapter xxxviii. "But, till relieved, must not
"retreat."
.
Men should with years, as hosts do at a feast,
Welcome the coming, speed the going guest,
Till night comes on, and then rejoice in rest.
Then farewell nonage, welcome ripened years,
Which but emancipate, and make us heirs,
Instead of earthly, of celestial spheres!
I could not close my eyes, all night, and the next morning I found myself in
an high fever. I continued ill for about three weeks, ten days of which my life
was despaired of. During the whole time Mr. Beville lay on a pallet, by my
bedside; and our worthy friend the clergyman, upon receiving an account of my
danger, by a letter from Mr. Beville, came up immediately to London, and staid
in town till I was quite recovered; visiting, praying, and reading by me, every
day.

How often, and how ardently, my dear Carewe, continued he, have both Mr.
Beville and I wished for the high relief of your friendly converse, during our
confinement here! But I knew not where to enquire for you, nor dared I venture
abroad, to search for you in coffee-houses, or on the public walks.

And this restraint was perhaps not the least part of my difficulties in this
situation; for so great is my love of liberty, that though I seldom stir from
home, and usually, through choice, pass most part of my time in my study, I
believe that there are few persons alive, who can brook imposed confinement,
less than I could.

CHAP. LXVII.
THE clergyman remained in town for a few days after my recovery; he had taken
a lodging near ours, and spent most part of his time with us. Among other
subjects of conversation, happening to speak about our late misfortune in the
country, he told Mr. Beville that, as is generally the way, a few pitied his
distress, but many blamed his conduct; for with mankind, said he, it is crime
enough to be unfortunate; and, in your present unhappy circumstances, censure
has pursued you, even for merits, because unsuccessful.

This is by no means uncommon, replied Beville, for the world, like women,
never pardon an attempt -- if you fail -- But prithee, dear Sir, said he, what
are the charges produced against me, and in what particulars is my conduct
reproached in the country?

Why, in the first place, answered the clergyman, that you turned your mind to
extravagant projects, animum habuit semper ingentia, semper infinita
expetentem. Secondly, that you had once an opportunity of establishing your
fortunes, by the management, as they term it, of seven or eight thousand pounds
a year His agencies.
, and yet have nothing to show for it, as is the expression. And lastly, that
you have lived above your fortune, till you finally ruined it.

In answer to the first of these indictments, replied Mr. Beville, I hope it
will be accepted as a sufficient plea, that as I never had patrimony,
profession, trade, or employ, my life, of necessity, must have been a life of
adventure. Project, or starve, was certainly, in this case, my motto. In such a
situation as mine, to live, itself, required a scheme -- Necessitas ante
rationem. For life has long since ceased to be a sine-cure -- Spontaneous
fruits rise not, at present, from the earth, as in The Garden; nor does manna
now drop from the heavens, as in The Wilderness.

With regard to the second charge, I do confess that I have known many persons
thrive, forgive the expression here, upon far less advantages; who have raised
fortunes, by purchasing some their neighbor's, some their employer's estates,
and sprung from dung-carts into a coach and six. All this indeed, I know to be
true -- I had like to have said too true -- Too true, alas! for themselves, I
fear.

To take advantage of one man's misfortunes, to overreach another's weakness,
To wring
From the hard hand of peasants, their vile trash,
By any indirection,
were arts my pride disdained, my moral started at. I have a sympathy in my
nature, which, like the cameleon's hue, catches the complexion of occurring
objects -- I rejoice, and mourn for feelings not my own -- What should I gain
then by another's distress, when by augmenting his I must increase my own! With
what a ravening hunger must that wretch be seized, who eats one morsel in
another's wrong! I should deem myself unhappy to have inherited a fortune, so
dearly earned -- How much more wretched then, to be the guilty purchaser! Yet
much I fear, there are, who could revel in a sacked city, and reckon plunder
among the goods of fortune!

The last objection, said he, I need give but a short answer to -- It has been
urged, that I have lived above my fortune -- But in reality, I never did, I
never could do so. I never had any -- I have, therefore, only lived above no
fortune, which the most thrifty person alive must do, in like circumstances.

I entered the world -- I must repeat it -- without patrimony, profession,
trade, or emyloy; I have unportioned, and unpensioned, maintained the post and
character of a gentleman, ever since I have entered into life; and, had I not
experienced the miser's gripe, had I not felt oppression's weight, I could now
walk uncaptioned on the Exchange, with a thousand pounds in my pocket. Let any
man first show a better economy, and he shall then be free to censure mine.

I cannot choose my life, continued he, all that rests upon me is to make the
best of it, as it occurs. My desires are reasonable -- above dependence, but
below ambition, and I despair not of Providence. Should even this whole world
fail me, my hopes remain unabated still, nay rise in measure to my
disappointments here. The business of life is so to live, as not to fear to
die. This once secured, anxiety is over -- The rest be Heaven's care. Amen!

CHAP. LXVIII.
MR. Carewe appeared charmed with the spirit and virtue of Mr. Beville's
justification, and acknowledged to Mr. Andrews, that the generous warmth, with
which that gentleman had expressed himself, upon this occasion, had stamped an
higher character for him, in his mind, than any thing he had yet seen, or heard
of him, till then, had been able to raise.

In fine, said he, I think that both he and you have revived the credit of the
ancient philosophy, and restored to poverty its former dignity, in your single
and singular characters. Regum aequabat opes animis. I wish you could also,
added he, bring back the golden patronage as happily, that some Pollio, or
Macaenas, might seek you out amidst sequestered groves, and "Beckon modest
merit from the shade." In the mean time, as Pliny says, Est quidam vera
felicitas, felicitate dignum videri.

Mr. Andrews bowed, and returned him equal thanks for his encomiums both upon
his friend, and himself; and then replied, that he had never considered poverty
in the abject light that the world is too apt to do. There are two sorts of
pride, said he, with regard to this point. One, the ancient and philosophy
spirit, which chose, and gloried in it; the other, the modern, and beggarly
one, that avoids, and is ashamed of it.

But poverty, in itself, is so far from being mean, that it requires certain
accidents, to render it so. Ignoble birth, servile office, low condescensions,
vulgar manners, dishonest actions, or poorness of spirit. Any of these
particulars, indeed, may debase poverty to meanness; but will they not, at the
same time, diminish the grandeur of riches?

Poverty, continued he, hurts our credit, only on the Change, yet even there,
character alone, has raised a fortune; but considered singly, excludes us not
from a court. The opulence of Plato enriched not his philosophy, but the
indigence of Socrates has reflected a luster upon his. Is there then a soul so
poor, as not to prefer a pedigree from the latter, to the whole lineage of
Attalus?

Just as Mr. Andrews had finished this expression, Mr. Beville and the children
came rioting into the room, to acquaint them that dinner was on the table. They
passed the remainder of this day more cheerfully together, than any of the
former, except a sigh or furtive tear, which would often escape involuntarily
from Andrews, and sometimes from Beville, also.

CHAP. LXIX.
HERE give me leave, Mr. Reader, to offer you a further proof of the
authenticity of these memoirs, from an observation I shall make upon some parts
of the two preceding chapters. And first, there is a very obvious personality,
perceivable in the warmth, feeling, and lively resentment, which Mr. Beville
has expressed in his defense, so different from the natural coldness of
composition, that must certainly, to a critic, manifest some real and peculiar
adaption in it, and sufficiently evince these writings to be genuine.

But the particular which most eminently points out the ingenuousness of this
whole performance, is the high encomiums which Mr. Carewe bestows upon the
characters of both Mr. Andrews, and Mr. Beville. Supposing this triumvirate to
be three real, and distinct persons, such politeness might very fairly have
passed between ingenious persons, and friends; but, upon the hypothesis of its
being merely a novel, where every thing that is said, in whatsoever character,
is to be directly imputed to the author, such self-applause, admissible in no
case whatever, except the testimony of a clear conscience, would certainly be
most abominable.

For though the commendatory verses, which one often sees prefixed to the works
of several modern writers, seem to savor a good deal of this vanity, yet still
they are but the compliments of others, though published by themselves. And
notwithstanding the express eulogies, which some of the ancients have left us
of their own works, as the Non usitata nec tenui ferar
Penna biformis per liquidum aethera
Vates, -- of Horace;
The Exegi monumentum aere perennius,
Regalique situ pyramidum altius, of ditto;
The Jamque opus exegi, quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignes,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas,
of Ovid; What Hesiod tells us, that the muses had given him a white wand, and
a branch of laurel; had breathed into him a divine song, and taught him to
celebrate things past, and prophesy things to come. What Homer, in his hymn to
Apollo, boasts of, that when it shall be inquired who is the sweetest singer
among men, you may make answer, (dictating to the god) it is the blind bard who
dwells in Chios, and whose songs excel all human harmony. Nay, even the modest
Virgil has his Ille Ego too, with other similar passages of flattering
authority, might seem to warrant a presumption of this kind, yet these are to
be considered as prophetical vaunts, or poetical licenses, only, which have
never yet been indulged to vulgar prose, and therefore can by no means be
justified in an humble writer of simple memoirs, who pretends not the least
claim to inspiration, of any kind. For I speak as I think, and I think as I
please.

CHAP. LXX.
JUST about this crisis, and after an interval of five years silence, I
received the following letter by post, directed to my father's, from my old
acquaintance and condisciple, whom I mentioned to you before. Dear Andrews,
cried Mr. Carewe, you cannot imagine what pleasure it gives me to have that
careless lively fellow brought upon the stage, once more. He comes in
critically here too, said he, to relieve your mind, and give a new turn to your
thoughts; and will, at the same time, treat me too, with a little variety, and
satisfy my longing to be somewhat farther acquainted with this irregular
genius. But the letter, the letter -- The Letter.
Old Friend,
I MAY well call you so, for it really seems an age, since we parted. I never
forgot you, however, but thought of you as often as I could of any thing, in
the dissipated kind of life I have ever since led. It was what you would have
styled perfect squirely.

But I have lately taken one thought into my head, that will probably last for
life; and am very busy, at present, in collecting my scattered affections
together, to place them all upon a single object.

In fine, I am to be married, without reprieve, on the tenth day of next month;
and, as it is usual for the dearest connections to attend the departure of a
friend, I entreat the favor of your flying to me directly, on the receipt of
this summons, to accompany me at my approaching execution.

Here now, I expect that you will throw one of your systems at my head. What!
to open the solemn nuptial scene, at once, without an amorous prologue? But
methinks, in this instance, I act the philosopher's part better than you would
do -- You guided by your passion -- I governed by my reason. I wanted her
fortune to improve my estate; and her alliance to strengthen my interest.

The deeds are engrossing, and I expect you.

Adieu. P. S. My affectionate compliments attend our Windsor friend, Will
Beville, and I beg the favor of him to accept this postscript as an invitation
to afford me the pleasure of his company, along with you.






The same man still, I find, said Mr. Carewe; Not the least alteration, replied
Mr. Andrews. On the receipt of this letter, my former fondness for him began to
revive, I needed exercise and amusement, myself, in my then weak and solitary
state, and was also pleased at an opportunity of releasing poor Mr. Beville
from his heavy confinement. So we both of us agreed, in his own phrase, to
attend him, took leave of our amiable friend, the clergyman, and accordingly
set out together, in about a week after the receipt of this letter.

CHAP. LXXI.
HE received us with his usual briskness, and seemed particularly pleased to
see me. His character ran through his whole economy. His living was extempore.
A market, at six miles distance, supplied him with every thing in his house,
and his demesne was overrun with deer and horses. Within, all hurry, and no
order; and without, a number of improvements begun, but nothing finished.

For his way was, whenever he resolved upon any thing, he immediately commenced
it; and, if any other whim came into his head, before he had completed the
first, he took off his hands, directly, to enter upon that also, for fear he
should forget it. So that his whole demesne was but a confused heap of
memorandums, and might not improperly be styled Notes for improvements.

Before his house was laid out a mile avenue, of fifty yards long; behind it, a
Caspian Sea, with an hogshead of water in it; on one side, was an obelisk,
three feet high; and on the other, a rialto, of half an arch. His garden was
but half enclosed, in one corner of which stood the four seasons, huddled
together in a groupe, as in the chaos; and in the midst of them were seen time,
and a sun-dial, lying in wait for their pedestals.

I found my friend much impaired since I last saw him, both in his looks,
health, and manners. His face was emaciated, his hand shook, and instead of
that free, disengaged air, which used to give the grace of youth and fashion to
all his words, and actions, he had contracted a stiffness in his gesture, a
constraint in his address, and a certain mediocrite throughout his whole
appearance.

I essayed him a little, upon literary topics, but he soon cut me short, by
acknowledging that he had not read one crabbed line, as he termed it, ever
since we had parted. And why, after all, said he, should we idle away our time,
after the concerns of the past world, when the present supplies us with
sufficient occupation, for our whole lives? I perfectly agree with you, my dear
friend, replied I, that the current world may very wisely employ the full
measure of our time, provided that we consider it, not as a distinct interval,
but as a commencement of the next.

I know, doctor, said he, smiling on me, that theological philosophy is always
for blending of systems; but I hope that I do not separate these two, myself,
when I declare that I take the whole duty of man, both absolutely and
relatively considered, to consist in these three things: Fear God, honor the
king, and pay twenty shillings in the pound. Which, in my opinion, added he,
fully comprehend the scope of all our religious, civil, and moral obligations.

Beville and I strolled into his study, the morning after our arrival, and took
a survey of his books. They were but few. About a dozen volumes of plays,
novels, and miscellanies, Bolton's Justice, with Hobbe's, Woolston's, Tindal's,
and Chubb's works, Shaftsbury's Characteristics, and Bolingbroke's
philosophical writings, composed his whole library.

At length the nuptial morn arrived. Our friend dressed himself in the gayest
manner, for the occasion, and we all took coach together, to wait upon the
bride -- To commence that fatal course of the supremest bliss, or deepest
misery.

CHAP. LXXII.
WE got thither about two o'clock, at noon, and were accosted with a great deal
of rustic hospitality, by the parent squire, and two familiar cousins of the
family. Sack and cakes were immediately called for, and the father, filling up
an half-pint rummer, presented it to the bridegroom, crying, Pop down this
primer, my young soldier, for a man must make but a feeble assault on it, that
has not a dram of courage in him. Ha, ha, ha! good, good! damned good, that!
cried the cousins.

My friend excused himself from the draught, saying that he needed no such
auxiliary, that he should not be found bashful on the field of battle, that he
had seen Pharsalia, etc. Pharsalia, Pharsalia, cried the old gentleman, why
that is not my wench's name, do you mind me; she was christened Ethelinda, I
remember very well -- Her godmother was an old romantic maiden lady, and had
picked up that unchristian name, out of some heathenish book, or other.

That may be, Sir, said I, winking at my friend, but lovers claim an ancient
privilege, styled Poetica Licentia, of giving their mistresses a sort of
poetical baptism, and of borrowing names from history, or romance.

Very good, very good, replied the squire; but, prithee, says he, who was this
same -- what is the word? Pharsalia, replied I. Ay, this same Pharsalia, that I
find is now become my daughter's nickname?

That is a name, replied I, well known in ancient story, at whose relentless
feet many thousands have died, in strife to win her. A cruel jade, a cruel
jade, quoth the squire -- The beauties of your outlandish times, continued he,
were terrible people, terrible people, indeed, Sir. But, thank our stars, they
are all of them distinct, now. Dead and gone, and rotten too, for all their
conceit, I dare say, long before this. And there is no dying for love
nowadays, not in the least, not in the least, Sirs; no more dying for love, I
assure you, gentlemen. So my gallants, you may set your hearts at rest, for the
future, believe me. Ha, ha, ha!

Don't you think, continued he, addressing himself more particularly, to me,
that we are much wiser now, than your old people were formerly? I cannot tell,
Sir, said I, for I never was in company with any of them, and I never pretend
to judge of persons characters, by hearsay.

Very right, very right, good Sir, replied the squire, as they are not
heretofore, to answer for themselves, it would not be quite fair to be too hard
upon them. You really seem to have good notions, right notions, indeed, Sir,
added he, taking me by the hand, and bruising my knuckles, when luckily a
servant came in to my relief, by annoncing us that dinner was upon the table.

CHAP. LXXIII.
THE squire led the way, and we followed him into the parlour, where we saluted
the ladies, and took our places. I was struck with the whole air, and person of
the bride, altogether, but did not fix my eyes upon her attentively enough to
distinguish her beauties, out of regard to good breeding; as the looks of a
stranger might have thrown her into confusion, at such a delicate crisis as
this.

And indeed, this politeness I soon found to be but common humanity toward her;
for she had a world of sorry mirth to sustain, from the vulgar facetiousness of
her father, and cousins, who exhausted all the commonplace jests, and
railleries, that are usually thrown out by merry dullness, upon such occasions.

The bridegroom too, joined in the same stupid humor, though I said every
thing I could to restrain him from it. I hinted to him, in French, that though,
in the rest, it might be ill breeding only, in him it was indecent, also. He
replied that he had a design in it, for coyness was troublesome, and that he
always observed when womon once became familiar with ideas, they were seldom
apt to start at things. I answered that he must not only be an indelicate, but
an indiscreet husband too, who would desire to lessen a wife's modesty; but to
call in foreign aid, for that purpose, added I, is gross indeed!

The father still went on, blundering in sense, and mistaking in expression.
While the familiar cousins made more than amends, by speaking rather too plain,
arresting every innocent word that was uttered, by any of the ladies, and
torturing it to confess a double entendre.

Among all the improper behavior of men toward women, I think that the
wresting a single to a double sense, is the most inexcuseable. A rape upon
their persons, may have some temptation, but one on their words can possibly
have none; and the violating an innocent expression into an immodest sense, may
justly be censured under this harsh appellation.

There is certainly, in some men, such a malady, as grossness of ears, which,
like a dull medium, gives a bluntness to the acutest sounds. I would have the
aures asini affixed to such an head, which, like Midas, prefers a satyr's
voice, to the melody of Apollo; and that may be compared to blisters, which
extract only the foulest humors. Immodest wits may be resembled to beggars,
who betray their poverty, by exposing their nakedness.

CHAP. LXXIV.
DUring the entertainment, the parlour door was left open, to stun us with the
noise of shrill fiddles, and hoarse hautboys; which supplied still fresh
occasion of insipid mirth, by affording opportunities of calling for certain
tunes, with arch names; but, at the same time, they served to drown a good deal
of the ribaldry that was bandied about, while the dinner lasted, which
therefore, in some sort, reconciled me to the interruption, for that time.

But I have generally thought the introduction of music, at meals, to be a most
absurd entertainment. Friends are more particularly selected, and assembled at
these times, to be cheerful and sociable together; it is therefore, most highly
improper to suffer any kind of avocation to intrude upon such jovial occasions,
which may either divert the attention, or lay the free circulation of familiar
converse, under any manner of difficulty, or restraint. Is there a scold, an
evil spirit, or a tarantula, in company!

When a person treats his guests with music, at meals, he should always provide
each of them with a speaking trumpet, to fill the concert, lest the vocal
should be found too weak for the instrumental. At least, I think that the
company ought to converse together in recitative, only.

I met with a sign once, in Ireland, that was perfectly emblematical of such an
absurdity. It was a cat eating a mouse, and playing on the bagpipes, at the
same time. Is this an Irish blunder? No -- It is there only, that it is not
one. For music may not improperly be blended with conversation, where most
people speak with a tune.

Pere Le Compte, describing the manners of the Chinese, says that they eat and
drink to a certain measure, which is marked by a person who stands at the
side-board, and bea^ (...) during the dinner. He farther adds, that they never
speak a word during meals, but that their whole address of compliment, is
performed by gesture, and grimace, only. Music would not be impertinent at such
festivals as these; and might likewise, have not been improperly introduced at
Belshazzar's impious feast, where all the guests were struck dumb at once.

Socrates, in the Protagoras, reprehending the sophist, for quoting poetry in a
philosophical argument, compares it to certain ignorant people, who, for want
of sense to entertain their company, have their feasts accompanied by music.

CHAP. LXXV.
ABOUT six o'clock in the evening, we were summoned into the drawing room to
tea, where we found the parson ready to perform his office. After the ceremony
was over, every one saluted the bride, in course; and when the squire gave her
his blessing, perceiving that she trembled a good deal, he cried out, Hey girl,
are you falling into a panatic? Look ye there, look ye there, said he, pointing
to her mother, she had the same frantics, in her time, wench, and yet you see
that she is still alive, to tell the story -- The cousins, the parson, and the
footmen laughed.

After tea the music struck up again, and the ball began; the father and mother
led up, I excused myself from mirth, Beville danced with the bride, the
bridegroom with one of the paranymphs, first cousin with the other, the parson
with my lady's woman, and second cousin with a chair.

These six couple jigged it away, as one of the cousins termed it, for the rest
of the evening, with a great deal of rustic mirth and jocularity; the only part
of which that I remember, was what the parson said, on their first setting out.
Exulting at the preference he had obtained over poor second coz, who stood next
under him, What, Mr. Tom, said he, are you tired already? Tired, Sir, tired!
prithee how came such a crotchet into your nobb, Mr. Parson? Why really, Mr.
Tom, replied he, is it not natural to suppose that a man is so, when he takes a
chair? Here a loud laugh -- Ay, but doctor, doctor, parson upon Dorothy, I have
this advantage over you, again, that when I am tired, I may rest myself in my
partner's lap, which is a liberty you dare not take for your cassock, doctor --
Here a louder laugh --

Mr. Beville entertained his fair partner with his usual good breeding. He
talked to her of indifferent matters, in the gay and polite world; of plays,
music, and dress -- Not upon any particular modes of the latter, but treating
it only as a general topic, and exposing the improprieties, and extravagancies
of certain fashions, where caprice reigned alone. From whence he took occasion
of comparing taste and wit together, which, however they may strike upon the
fancy, at first, are equally false, said he, if one be not founded in sense,
and the other in nature.

He found her extremely attentive, intelligent, diffident, and modest. He
treated her like a rational creature, notwithstanding her youth, and beauty;
and was so perfectly polite all the evening, as to keep quite clear of every
subject, hint, or expression, which might even glance, or seem to allude to the
circumstances of her present situation.

During supper, he and I both concurred in the same sentiment, and endeavored,
as much as possible, to parry all the rude merriment that was thrown out, upon
this occasion. The chaplain though, pressed us hard, for he showed himself
indeed, most truly orthodox -- in all the mysteries of weddings and
christenings -- which, by the warmth of his imagination, he joined so close
together, in his expressions, that in a bottle or two more, I believe he would,
like the projector in Tristram Shandy, have proceeded to baptize the infant,
slap dash, in potentia rerum.

Our difficulty, with regard to this gentleman, lay here; that we could not
tell how to reprimand a person, under his character, without saying some
things, at the same time, too severe for good breeding, or the laws of
hospitality. We contented ourselves, therefore, with taking him in the groupe,
and giving a turn to their prolific ein of conversation, by entering into
country politics, in which none of us were in the least concerned, or abusing
the ministry -- because they had never provided for any of us, with such other
squirely topics; in which the rest of the company engaged with modern patriot
warmth In some manuscripts the expression is party rage, and in others
pet-valiant fury.
; to moderate the ardour of which, we frequently interluded with quibbling upon
words, or retailing Joe Miller's Jests. Choosing rather, to be silly, or stupid,
than loose, or profane -- And in this turn too, they equally joined us, with
native humor, and most mortifying applause.

The stocking thrown, we retired.

CHAP. LXXVI.
WHEN Mr. Beville and I were lest alone, we commented upon the incidents of the
day; and agreed together, that none of the men wanted understanding, within
their own sphere, but yet, from an ignorance of the rules of good breeding and
decorum, had rendered themselves either ridiculous, or absurd, during the
course of the whole entertainment.

We then pursued this subject up to a general reflection, and Mr. Beville very
justly observed, that some of the characters which had distinguished the
ancients, seemed to be quite lost among us, at present. We have neither a
Socrates, nor an Alcibiades now, said he. The good are formal, the wise severe,
and the learned pedantic: while the young show little spirit, but against
religion, the gay are profligate, and the unlettered unmannered also.

Abroad, continued he, we hear that appearances at least, are still preserved;
and as charity is said to cover a multitude of sins, so politeness has the
address to conceal a number of faults; and it is some merit, certainly, to be
able to palliate a defect in morals, with the decent substitute of manners.

From this reflection we carried our observations up to the British
constitution, both of church and state; by taking notice that the freedom which
we are too apt to indulge ourselves in, of framing the councils both of our
God, and king, gives a certain bravery perhaps, to our speech and actions,
which may possibly render us greater heroes in a state of war, but are quite
incompatible with a state of peace. Our ebullient spirits become impatient of
inactivity, and where a foreign enemy does not unite our prowess, we are too
prone to create a sort of civil discord among ourselves, and set one half of
the nation at strife against the other; either by the sword, or by the pen.

By this means, the ingenuous arts of life become neglected, the generous
emulation of genius subsides, all civil commerce is interrupted among us, that
traffic chiefly encouraged, which tends merely toward luxury and profuseness,
and merit is allowed no other test, but that of party, only. Thus do we grow
invalids from too much health, and even our wealth but furnishes us with means
of impoverishing ourselves again.

We then parted, and retired to rest. The next morning, we escorted the bride
home to her new empire; the father, mother, paranymphs, first, and second coz,
with the parson, forming our cavalcade; who all returned back again, the next
day.

CHAP. LXXVII.
WHEN we had passed a week together, Mr. Beville and I attempted to take our
leave, but were pressed by our friend, to pass, at least, the honey-moon, with
him, as he styled it; in which invitation, the fair Ethelinda joined him, with
such an air of hospitality, and politeness, that we readily consented to their
request.

She was tall, finely proportioned, fair, and of most captivating beauty; she
had a grace and decency in her air, motion, and gesture, with so remarkable a
mildness and modesty in her countenance, that one might imagine nature had
infused no more blood into her body, than what was just sufficient to blush in
her cheeks. In fine, there was something in her look and manner, altogether,
which won one's friendship, at first sight; and I may pronounce that whoever
saw her even once, with a heart not preingaged, could scarcely have it to
offer, but at second hand, to another.

I attended to her sentiments and conduct, during the time I remained in the
house, and observed that she was possessed of a disposition singularly
compassionate, and humane. Her charity was extensive; but I have known it
sometimes restrained, by the fear of having it taken notice of. Her moral was
curbed by her modesty alone.

My friend and condisciple was a most unfit character to be yoked with hers. He
was very inconsistent, had a princely grandeur in some things, and a pedling
meanness in others. His mind might be compared to an old mansion house, with a
few large rooms, but crowded with closets.

His temper too, was uncertain; for caprice, good humor, and passion, used to
shift so quick upon you, that there was no prescribing to oneself any certain
measure of conduct toward him. His cheerfulness resembled the air pent up
between two hills, which in the calmest day is subject to be disturbed by
squalls.

He had no steady principle of action, neither. He would strike his dependents
this hour, and make them presents, the next. He often gave charity, but
repented of it as often, so that he impoverished his purse, without enriching
his soul.

He was indefatigable at all country diversions, without understanding any of
them; and might literally be said to be a slave to his sports, for he was
master of none. So that I have sometimes known him to lounge away whole
evenings on the couch, like a tired post-boy, lamenting the fatigue, without
resenting the pleasure. He used to drink hard, though it always made him sick;
and seemed generally to prefer inferior company, which appeared too visibly in
his manners. He who ever affects to be the highest of his company, will
probably become, in time, to be the lowest of it.

He had been but little conversant in polite life; for want of which he had
contracted an uncouthness in his manner, and a freedom in his speech and
behavior, that must be extremely disgusting to a woman of delicacy, or
breeding. Joined to all which, he had fallen under the common prejudices of
weak, or vulgar minds; namely, a gross suspicion of female chastity, and an
ignorant contempt of all women's understandings. The fair and polite Ethelinda,
soon saw, felt, and mourned her disappointment.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
SHE had no visitors while we staid in the house, for it was in the months of
November and December, the nights dark, and the roads impassable; so that all
the compliments she received upon her coming into the country, were only cards
of congratulation on her marriage, and postponing visits till the spring.

Her husband used to spend his mornings in hunting or shooting, and his
evenings in carousals, or sleeping on the couch. So that her whole time was
left entirely at her own disposal; which she used to divide between working,
reading, painting, and music; during which occupations, Mr. Beville and I would
relieve, or assist her, by turns.

We used to read to her while she was employed at her pencil, or her needle,
and accompany her at the harpsichord, which concert she much improved by the
addition of a fine voice. We used at first, to call upon our friend, to take
his part, as I remembered he had formerly been a good performer on the violin;
but he had only one in the house, which he resigned to Mr. Beville, and showed
so little relish to an entertainment of that elegant nature, that he would not
even send into the neighborhood to borrow one.

In these amusements though, he would sometimes interrupt us. He would stride
across the carpets, with dirty boots, give his wife a rustic smack, then a
stroke of his whip over her petticoats, and cry, these jessamin philosophers,
girl, will turn your head. Knitting and pastry are fitter occupations for a
housewife. Knowledge was the first thing that destroyed your sex, my dear, and
the devil has never so sure an hold of a woman, as when he makes her learned.
With other such commonplace sarcasms as these.

The greatest difficulty that Mr. Beville and I had at first, to struggle with
here, was to get ourselves excused from drinking; but as our host had
remembered that we had both of us always declined the least excess of this
kind, he would after this glass, or that bottle, or clear the deck, or just
take what is in the room, with such other dalliances of debauchery, suffer us
to make our escape; which I take to be the justest expression, in all the
peculiar phraseology of drinking.

CHAP. LXXIX.
AFTER this manner did we pass the honey-moon together; till toward the latter
end of it, Mr. Beville began to grow silent, thoughtful, and disturbed;
neglected his favorite studies, and used to take long and solitary walks in
the wood. I quickly perceived the change, and spoke to him upon it. He replied,
that he had lost his spirits, rest, and appetite, of late, and apprehended that
some disease was undermining his constitution, by slow degrees.

His danger, together with a languid and dejected look which he cast upon me,
at the same time, resembling the last view I had had of his dear sister,
produced such a sudden effect in me, that I could not recover myself again, for
the remainder of the evening. I retired soon to my apartment, and passed the
night in fruitless tears, and vainer wishes.

The next day my dear friend found himself unable to leave his room. I sent
immediately for a physician, but he was with difficulty prevailed on to see
him. He prescribed some medicines, which he refused to take with an obstinacy
which I had never before observed the least symptom of in him. In two days he
was confined to his bed, in a raging fever.

I got a pallet into his room, and attended him solely, myself, not suffering
even a servant to enter his chamber, on pretense of the danger of communicating
his distemper to the family; but more on account of some symptoms in his
disorder, which greatly alarmed me with regard to the cause of it.

He raved much, and in his deliriums would frequently repeat the name of
Ethelinda. Sometimes he would cry out in an ecstasy, O she is all angel! nothing
but air, voice, and color! we can but see, hear, and breathe her! An
Anadyomene Have a little patience, reader, and I Will answer you to that
question, by and by. But in the mean time, I must caution both my belle and
beau readers, not to mistake this word for Anno Domini, for I do assure them
that it was in being, long before that era.
! an Anadyomene! O! had Ulysses seen but such a sea-nymph, or Scipio taken such
another captive! At other times, Well! I am a a king now, but where is my
queen? What is a world without her! with many other extravagancies of the same
kind.

The physician attended regularly, but I always took care to keep him waiting
in the ante-chamber till I found my dear unhappy friend was composed to rest,
that he might have an opportunity of feeling his pulse, and prescribing for
him, according to the changes in his disorder, without the hazard of suffering
a secret to escape which had already given me such complicated uneasiness, and
might farther be attended too with such unhappy consequences.

In a few days he began to recover his reason, and in ten more was pronounced
out of danger, though his spirits still continued extremely low. I constantly
kept up the appearance of cheerfulness in his company, and whenever I found my
art begin to fail me, I used to select books of the highest wit and humor I
could meet with in the fair Ethelinda's study, to entertain him. Serious or
religious writings would have been improper for him, at that time.

I took not the least notice of his raving hints to him, nor did he remember
any thing of the matter, himself, or let me any farther into the secret, except
by such involuntary intimations as sighing at the sound of her name in a
message to inquire his health; or by a visible emotion upon hearing her voice
as she walked under his window; with such other unequivocal signs of love, more
certain than the most explicit declarations of passion.

CHAP. LXXX.
AS his fever was not inflammatory, I did not confine myself so closely to his
room after his delirium had ceased, but used to go down to meals, and during
the intervals of his rest. I found the tender and humane Ethelinda extremely
concerned at Mr. Beville's indisposition, and very assiduous about his cure.
She measured the proportions, and compounded the medicines herself, and
appointed her servants to relieve each other, by turns, in sitting up every
night in the ante-chamber.

She also entreated the favor of her husband not to bring home any of his
jolly blades, during Mr. Beville's illness, as his chamber happened to lie
directly over the dining parlour. He complied indeed with her request, by
staying generally abroad with one or other of them.

The first two or three days after I had used to come down out of the sick
room, the weather happening to be unfit for sports, the condisciple and I
passed most of our time in her dressing room, which he employed chiefly, in
discountenancing her from reading, holding lectures upon huswifry, and passive
obedience, or in speaking or romping with her after too free and course a
manner, before her maids, or me.

I quickly perceived how much she was disgusted at such sentiments and
behavior, and using the privileges of long and early friendship, I reprehended
him for it, sometimes in private, and sometimes before her, as the occasion
happened to urge, or that I found her to be affected.

This piece of good breeding rendered her at length, so much at her ease before
me, that she used to speak to me with the same freedom as she might to a
brother; which, joined to the open and ingenuous frankness of her nature,
without the least reserve in her manners, but what modesty, or politeness had
inspired, led her to address me thus, one evening, just after my friend, having
thrown her into confusion by speaking to her somewhat too indecently before me,
had quitted the room and was rating at a footman in the hall.

Pray, Sir, said she, what is the reason that there should be so remarkable a
difference in the manners of men? While I am in Mr. Beville's company, or
yours, I am sensible of both the pleasure, and the pride of considering myself
as a rational and independent creature, a person of some rank, or character, in
life; but in the presence of my father, or my husband, I feel the humiliation
of finding myself dwindling by turns, into an housekeeper, or a puppet-doll.

I have, continued she, had but little opportunity of becoming conversant with
polite life. I have, indeed, sometimes read the characters of it in books; but
in comparing them with those of my father, cousins, the chaplain, and our
neighboring squires, though all of them very good sort of men, in the main, I
have hitherto been apt to impute the descriptions I had met with, entirely to
the wanton imagination of romance, and used to rank such chimeras in the class
of genii's and centaur's. But some observations which I have lately had an
occasion of making, added she, and bowing toward me, have convinced me that
good breeding is not purely ideal, and that men may be possessed of sense,
manners, and virtue, without being above the stature of others, or having the
power of rendering themselves invisible.

I bowed, in return, thanked her for her too polite compliment, and replied,
that the disadvantages of not being born to rank or fortune, were sometimes
compensated by advantages in other things; for that the observations and
decorums which were necessary to conduct such persons upon equal terms through
life, were things which their superiors in these articles, too frequently
looked upon themselves dispensed with from paying a sufficient attention to.

I instanced this matter in courts, where it has been observed, that the most
polished manners were generally met with among the second or third classes,
rather than in the first. I quoted also from history, that the most shining
characters had often risen from privacy to the purple; and then concluded this
climax of heroes with his present majesty of Prussia, who though born a prince,
was bred a private man, till his accession to the throne.

However, added I, this observation is not universal, as in the instances of
the chaplain, and your cousins, for it is not every one who is born with
elasticity enough to spring under a weight; but they, on whom this gifted
energy may have been bestowed, should only with humble gratitude enjoy the
blessing, and not with arrogance assume a merit from a grace. Your argument is
just, and fine, replied she, but though your modesty may reduce the merit, it
can never abate the excellence, of such a character.

CHAP. LXXXI.
ONE evening after Ethelinda and I had dined alone, and that Mr. Beville had
sat up for two or three days, she proposed to me that we should drink tea
together in his apartment. This alarmed me. I did not think that his state,
either of health or mind, was sufficiently valid at that time, to stand such an
interview.

Besides, the kindness and condescension of it too, might possibly, I feared
every thing, have too much flattered his hopes. I knew his honor, and his
moral perfect, and had conceived as high an opinion of her innocence and
virtue. But then again, he had passion, and she sensibility.

Upon these considerations I declined the proposal, saying that Mr. Beville
would be extremely distressed at receiving a visit from a lady whom he had so
much respect for, in his present deshabille. Never mind a punctilio of that
kind, she replied, I have visited the sick often before; my father's gout has
made nurse-tending familiar to me, and if I am willing to dispense with forms,
said she, surely neither of you can possibly have any reason to be difficult
about them.

I then thought it proper to assume an higher key, and told her that my
apprehension was by no means, that Mr. Beville would not be pleased with the
honor of her visit, but that I feared he might perhaps be too well pleased
with it. Which last words I pronounced with a look and emphasis, that
sufficiently marked their import.

The lovely Ethelinda blushed, and cast down her modest eyes, at this
expression. I found myself too far advanced to retreat, I therefore hurried on
as fast as I could, to rid myself of a subject which I so little cared to dwell
upon. I gave her then an account of every particular, since my having first
observed the change in Mr. Beville, just in the same manner I have now recited
them to you.

She was silent for some minutes, and then replied with a sigh, I confess, Sir,
that I am both concerned and surprised at this misfortune of your friend; but
as Mr. Beville has shown so much good breeding and respect toward me, as never
to have given me the most distant hint of his improper passion, it would be
injustice in me to express any manner of resentment upon an accidental
discovery of so unhappy an event.

But your own good sense and prudence, Sir, continued she, lifting up her head,
must certainly think it extremely proper to remove your friend, as far as may
be, from this unlucky scene, whenever the safety of his health may permit. I
wish him every success and happiness that his merit deserves, or his virtue can
desire; I approve his manners, and esteem his character -- My circumstances in
life forbid me to say, or even to think more; but even thus far, Sir, said she,
with a severer air, you must not be at liberty to pronounce; for what has
escaped me, in justice to your friend, might not perhaps, in honor to myself,
be proper to repeat.

I bowed respectfully, and having passed my word that I would never suffer the
least hint of this conversation to transpire to Mr. Beville, I went up to his
chamber and found him moving about the room by the assistance of the tables and
chairs, trying his strength, as he told me, with a design of beginning his
journey on the next day, if possible.

I was pleased at this motion arising from himself, but told him that I was
afraid his health would not permit him to set out so soon. To which he replied,
that he was pretty certain he should be able to perform the first day's
journey, in our friend's coach, and that if he should not have strength enough
to continue his route on horseback, he would much rather linger at an inn, than
where he was, for that he began to feel himself extremely uneasy at the trouble
and difficulties his disorder had subjected the family to. Adding, that he had
stronger reasons still, for removing himself, even at the hazard of his life,
from that too fatal scene of his present misery.

These words he pronounced with an heavy sigh, and faltering accent, which
however, I did not seem to take the least notice of, but replied, that I would
speak for the coach as soon as our friend should return home that evening. Then
shifting the discourse to general topics, I remained with him till he retired
to rest, and then went immediately down stairs.

CHAP. LXXXII.
WHEN I came into the parlour I found our friend just returned home. He was
much fuddled, told us that he had spent a jovial day among a parcel of (...),
of the first head, but was somewhat afraid that the wine had not been quite
sound, for it began to make him sick already, and that he would, with my leave,
retire immediately to bed.

I advised him to take an emetic first, which he promised to do, and went away,
desiring his wife to stay and entertain me at supper, which just then came upon
the table. But she excused herself, saying that duty should ever take the lead
of civility. Then desiring me to drink the healths of all my sick friends,
walked up stairs to her chamber, along with him.

I had no manner of inclination to sit down alone, and would have declined it,
but from a nicety about giving offense to the hospitality of my hosts. I
therefore went through the supper with an appearance of appetite, and then
filling up a bumper, drank, with a truly sincere heart, the double toast which
our fair landlady had recommended to me, joining her health and happiness along
with it.

Thus left alone, I began to reflect, as usual, upon the unhappy circumstances
of poor Beville's fortunes, and my own. I revolved many schemes in my mind, but
what signifies reasoning, without premises? At length I resolved upon this
measure, that we should both join our little fund and application together,
toward assisting Mr. Beville, the father, in vindicating his rights against his
deputy, and then live with him till my father should have extricated his
fortune out of the courts; and afterward, enter jointly into some project of
life, together, upon the fund of two thousand pounds, which I had paid for my
sister's portion, and which was confessedly my due.

While I was revolving these thoughts in my mind, the post arrived, and the
packet of letters was laid upon the table, among which I saw one directed to
myself. I opened it, and found it to be from our worthy friend, the clergyman,
beforementioned; the contents of which were these, continued Mr. Andrews,
taking a letter out of his desk, and presenting it to Mr. Carewe to peruse.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
The Letter.
London. Dear Sir,
I Staid a few days here, after my good friends, Mr. Beville and you, had left
it. The minister of St. Martin's, in whose parish I found out that your father
lived, was my old acquaintance, and cotemporary, at Oxford. I paid him a visit,
renewed my intimacy with him, entered into the subject of your situation and
circumstances, and got him, very readily indeed, to concur with me in jointly
employing our good offices and address, toward bringing your father into a
proper sense, both of your merit, and his own duty.

My friend invited me to dinner, the next day, and introduced me to your
father, without dropping the least hint of my profession, having before
directed me to lay aside my clerical habit, upon that occasion; telling me,
that Mr. Andrews, though a most rigid churchman, had, from some personal
disgust, conceived a strong prejudice against the private character of a
clergyman; and that one moral sent^^^^, spoken by a layman, would have more
weight with him, than fifty, pronounced by an hireling, as he is apt to style a
parson.

We spent the day very cheerfully together, and I played off his own character,
so successfully against himself, by helping him to roast the parson, who
pretended sometimes to be serious upon it, in order to heighten the sport, that
I won his affections so far as to be invited to dine with him the following
day, which I most readily accepted of.

The next day, after dinner, I asked your father what had possessed him with
such a resentment against the clergy, considered personally, while he appeared,
at the same time, to have a very orthodox belief of their appointment, and a
just sense of the high importance of their office?

He replied, that his father and brother had been both clergymen; the first
disinherited him, in favor of a second wife's children, and the latter had
left him involved for five hundred pounds, which had given him a mortal
aversion to the cassock. This story I had been apprised of before, by my
friend, and only led him into it, in order to supply an occasion of exclaiming
loudly, against the injustice of his father, toward him, which I did.

Yes, Sir, said he, and if you will consider at the same time, that I was not, on
my part, guilty of any one act of disobedience, to provoke him to such a
diabolical partiality. No, Sir, I replied, that is a circumstance, which I can
by no means admit into consideration, in such a case as this; for no conduct of
a child, which does not contradict the laws of God, or man, can possibly be
pretended, as a palliation, for so unparental a severity.

I pressed this subject no farther, at that time, because I did not choose to
let him perceive my design, too abruptly; so I shifted the subject to
indifferent matters, and soon after took my leave; having first engaged him to
spend a few days with me, in the country, telling him that the parson there,
would escort him. I fixed the time afterward, with my friend, and left London
the next morning.

They both of them came down to me, according to agreement, and we passed our
time pleasantly enough, as I exerted myself to the utmost stretch of
hospitality, toward my new guest. I still concealed my parsonship, during the
remainder of the week, for though we had prayers, as usual, morn and eve, I
appointed my friend of St. Martin's, to the office of chaplain, during that
time.

I had your lovely children, my dear Andrews, in the house with me, all the
while, and frequently called them into the parlour to fondle with before him,
letting them pass for relations of my own. He was struck with their beauty, and
used to take them often on his knee, by turns. I have sometimes felt myself a
little awkward, on account of my disingenuousness toward him; but then I
quickly solved it again, by thinking that if ever a pious fraud was allowable,
it must be in so virtuous a cause as this.

At length, Sunday morning arrived. I sent off my guests to church before me,
and when I had put on my proper garb, I followed them, walking through the
isle, directly into the desk, where my friend the clergyman had taken his place
before me, after having seated Mr. Andrews in a pew opposite to the pulpit. St.
Martin's read prayers, and I preached that day, upon a text selected for the
occasion, namely, the fifth commandment.

In this discourse, I carried the duty of children up to the highest degree, by
showing first, the general sense of mankind, upon this article, from the
earliest account of nations, and among even the most savage race of men; and
then wound up my doctrine, by confirming this great natural, and moral
obligation, with the express command of God.

I then proceeded to consider, on the other hand, the great and alarming duty
of parents toward their children; which point I carried even higher than the
former. For after having first inculcated it from nature, morals, and universal
concurrence, I pleaded even the silence of the decalogue, in this article, as
an argument to confirm it.

We have, said I, a command, not to kill; but none against suicide. We have
also a precept to love our neighbor; but none to love our child. And this,
because it was thought superfluous to frame injunctions, for, or against
things, whereof the passion, or aversion, had been so strongly rooted already,
both in our reason, and our nature.

Upon the whole, I concluded, that an unkind parent must be considered as a
reprobate both to reason, to nature, and to grace; and I preached the sermon,
with that natural, and most persuasive kind of eloquence, exceeding all the
arts of oratory, with which a person is endued upon a subject where his mind is
convinced, and his heart affected.

During the duties of this morning, I did not attend to any particular, which
did not relate immediately to the offices of the day; therefore, I could not
perceive what manner of effect, either my unexpected appearance, under a new
and solemn character, or the arguments of my doctrine, might have produced,
upon my most immediate object, next to God; but, on my descending into the
isle, and saluting Mr. Andrews in the midst of the congregation, he seemed to
be in a sort of confusion, and received my address with a certain distant
respect, and awed obeisance, which gratified me extremely -- not from cleric
pride, but christian charity.

As we walked home together from church, he asked me why I had concealed my
profession from him, all this while? To which I answered, that in general, I
neither took pains to reveal, or conceal it, but would however, rather choose to
suffer that particular, always to remain a secret, among strangers. Because,
said I, should they happen to be good, and formal, epithets too frequently
joined, the awe of it might, possibly, throw some restraint upon the freedom of
conversation; and if profligate, and ill-bred, which are terms as often
coupled, it might tempt such characters to become rather too free. We should be
Christians, every where, said I, turning toward our friend of St. Martin's, but
parsons, only in our pulpits.

During the remainder of the day, I behaved toward your father, with the same
ease and freedom as usual, but perceived that he, on his part, seemed to hold a
greater reserve over his speech and manners, than before. I took notice of this
particular to him, and he ingenuously confessed to me, that he could not
readily got the better of the surprise which had seized him, upon seeing me
walk through the isle in the sacred habit, and take my place at the desk,
before he had been in the least apprised of my profession; and that the
suddenness of the transition, from my supposed, to my real character, had
struck him somewhat like a divine vision, and impressed his mind with a certain
religious awe, which he could not, for that day at least, nor desired, during
his life, ever to get the better of.

In the evening, I brought your dear infants into the parlour, in my arms, and
placing them on their little knees before him, said, Since this has been a day
for discovering of secrets, Sir, I shall now acquaint you with one, which is of
infinitely greater moment to you, than that which you were let into this
morning -- Here, Sir, are your grandchildren -- whose mother your cruelty has
already sent weeping to the grave, has reduced their father to a wandering
exile, and driven these lovely innocents, these peculiar favorites of our
redeemer, crying to a stranger's gates for bread.

The strength of my expression, with the sternness of my look, and the voice of
authority, which I thought proper to assume upon so justifiable an occasion,
threw Mr. Andrews into the utmost confusion; and I could perceive a certain
mixture of shame, horror, and self-condemnation, in his countenance, at the
same time.

I turned carelessly aside, to leave him at liberty to collect himself, and
indeed in order to hide my own disturbance, also. Upon which, he hastily laid
his hands on the children's heads, crying, in an hurry, God bless you, God
bless you both. Then saying he was not very well, he suddenly quitted the room,
and retired to his chamber. I then snatched up the children in my arms, kissed
them, and wept; while the sportive innocents sat smiling at each other, and
clubbing their little mischief together, to throw off my wig upon the floor.

Mr. Andrews came in to supper, and after the cloth had been removed, he
addressed himself to me thus: You accosted me this evening, Sir, said he, with
such a suddenness, and severity, that I must confess myself to have been
totally deprived of all power of vindicating my character, from so heavy a
charge.

I am truly sorry for the fatal consequences you have mentioned to me; but
then, Sir, I hope you will admit, that these have arisen solely from my son's
own undutifulness, and cannot, therefore, be in the least imputed to my
cruelty, as you were pleased, just now, to style it. He married, without my
consent, and without a portion; and as my fortune is in my own power, I have
but exercised my right, in making a will, which, in proper time, may show the
gentleman my just resentment, against so high an act of disobedience.

Sir, said I, whatever the tenor of our lives may be, we ought to be more
particularly careful of the last, than about any other act of it. A will, Sir,
though perfected at any time of our lives, as it is not to take effect, till
after our death, ought certainly to be considered in this most interesting
light; and we should therefore, never attempt to sit down to so tremendous a
work, but in such a temper of charity and forgiveness, as we would perform any
other action in our latest moments This point was enough for the clergyman to
insist on, upon this occasion; but Marcus Aurelius carries the moral farther,
by advising to consider every action of our lives, as if it were to be our last.
.

Sir, said he, all this may be very ingenious reasoning, for any thing I know,
but as the laws of the land have invested me with an absolute dominion over my
fortune, I think that no person whatsoever, can possibly urge a claim of right,
against me; a petition of favor, is the utmost they can pretend to, and my
eldest son, by disobedience, has forfeited even this pretense.

Dear Sir, I replied, we are not here litigating this point, according to law,
but merely debating it agreeably to justice. Your absolute dominion I dispute
not, but Heaven is not a court of law, but of equity; before which dread
tribunal, a suppliant is required to do justice first, himself, before he can
be entitled to receive it. And, believe me, Sir, continued I, with a steadfast
look, that whoever has not virtue sufficient to distinguish between a right,
and a power, is a casuist for the devil.

These last expressions seemed to startle him; he immediately appeared to
retire into his own thoughts, and a dead silence ensued on all sides, for some
minutes; till the bell rang for family prayers, which I administered myself;
and had the sincere pleasure to observe that Mr. Andrews joined in them with a
more emphatical devotion, than usual.

Our supper passed away in general subjects, but a good deal constrained; and
the next morning, Mr. Andrews took his leave, and returned back to London. I
desired my friend to found him, on the road, and try what effect my lectures
and experiments, might have produced upon him.

He did so, and wrote to me, the next post, acquainting me that Mr. Andrews
seemed to have been a good deal awed, was more thoughtful than usual, had
several times repeated to himself, the words right, and power; and had treated
him, all along, though a parson, with somewhat more of decorum, than he was
wont to do. But that with regard to the point in question, his only answer,
when pressed to it, was, that resentments which had been gradually growing
warm, must be allowed time to become cool, by the same degrees, again.

Thus far, my dear Andrews, had I written to you, a month ago, but delayed
sending the letter, upon my friend's last hint, in order to wait the final
result, either to be able to afford you a successful account of my
interposition, altogether, or not to interrupt your resignation and philosophy,
with fruitless hopes.

Last Monday I came up to London, in order to feel my patient's pulse again,
and accordingly waited upon your father, the next day. I found him in an high
fever, but perfectly in his senses, and much pleased to see me. He told me my
reasonings had wrought a most salutary effect, upon his too hasty notions of
right, and wrong; and that if I would but take the trouble of drawing up a few
lines, according to my own sentiments of justice, he would most cheerfully
subscribe to them. This was immediately performed -- I prayed by him, and took
my leave -- The next day, and the following, his fever increased; and last
night, --

I have left every thing in charge with my good friend of St. Martin's, and am
just returning to the country again, to embrace my dear little adoptions. I was
young, and now am old, yet never did I see the righteous forsaken, nor their
seed begging bread.

Adieu.
CHAP. LXXXIV.
THIS Letter, continued Mr. Andrews, affected me extremely, in various ways; I
was charmed with the active virtue of my friend, I rejoiced at the proper,
though late moral of my father, and do declare that the first and principal
pleasure I received from this fortunate event, was in the reflection of his
having been brought, at length, to a just and equitable sense, of his parental
obligations. I resented the grant, more than the gift, and was sensible of a
certain pious transport, in thinking that this last act of my father's, had
retrieved his character, and sealed his merits.

But, oh! my friend, what a torrent of tears rushed from my eyes, at the
thought of my dear wife's death, just then occurring to my mind at the instant
of these reflections! How did I lament her missing of that virtuous transport,
which would have affected her fond heart and generous soul, at seeing her
husband and her children thus securely placed beyond the scorn of fools, and
spurn of fortune! In fine, I was struck with such a complicated emotion, of
filial gratitude, conjugal grief, and parental joy, that it was late before I
could compose myself to prayer, or rest.

The next morning I lay so long, that Mr. Beville, impatient to fly that fatal
scene, had come into my room, and asked me whether I had prepared every thing
ready for our journey. I told him that our host had returned home, the night
before, so much out of order, that I did not think proper to mention our going,
just at that time; but as I had received a letter from our friend the
clergyman, last night's post, with an account of my father's illness, I thought
it might afford a fair pretext for quitting the house, so abruptly, and that I
would immediately rise, and send in a message to borrow the post-chaise.

Poor Mr. Beville was still so weak, that even his short walk across the
gallery to my chamber, had fatigued him so much, that he was forced to lay
himself on the bed, by me. I did not think it prudent, in such a state of
health, to acquaint him with the full contents of the letter; as the pleasure
it would have afforded him, might possibly have had too sudden an effect upon
his present low condition of strength and spirits.

I arose immediately, and as soon as I heard my condisciple's bell ring, I sent
Mr. Beville's compliments and mine to inquire how he was, acquainting him with
the summons we had received, and desiring the favor of his equipage to convey
my friend the first day's journey, at least, as his health was not sufficiently
established to venture on horseback, so immediately upon quitting his chamber.

He returned his compliments, said he had discharged his stomach by an emetic,
the last night, found himself pretty easy that morning, but was just going to
take a medicine which would prevent him the pleasure of seeing us. He ordered
the post-chaise, wished us a good journey, and added, that he would be glad to
see us both again, as soon as our affairs might permit.

The fair Ethelinda too, sent us her compliments, and desired that we should
take the chaise on to London with us, if we found it either necessary, or
convenient; but, from a very becoming nicety, which confirmed my opinion and
esteem for her, neither joined in her husband's invitation, nor came down to
breakfast, on pretense that her attendance on him, required her staying above.

Mr. Beville and I breakfasted together, and immediately after, set out upon
our journey.

CHAP. LXXXV.
DUring the first day's stage, I avoided all particular conversation with my
friend, speaking chiefly upon general topics; pointing out to him the several
beauties of the country through which we passed, which were so strong as to
manifest themselves, even through December snows.

It was now near Christmas -- I made reflections upon that hallowed season, and
took notice of the remarkable goodness, wisdom, and economy of Providence, in
appointing that great festival to fall upon a time of the year, when the
husbandman's labors are suspended, and that nature had already ordained a
vacation, to rejoice in! At the most gloomy period of the year, to send us the
most glad tidings, that ever yet have reached the sons of man!

I do not recollect, Mr. Carewe, said Andrews, that these remarks have been
ever made before, by any of our divines. They occurred to my mind, upon this
occasion, for the first time; they warmed my heart, amidst December frosts, and
I endeavored to communicate the same fervor from them, to my friend; in order
to dispel his melancholy, and elevate his thoughts to a sublimer passion, to a
love equally void of satiety, or despair; and which, contrary to all other
objects of desire, we are nearer the fruition of, in age, than youth.

He joined in my reflections, with that religious and philosophic turn of mind,
which was natural, and habitual to him, and which gave me strong reason to
believe that if I could detain him in some distant scene, where he might never
see, or even hear the name of the too lovely Ethelinda more, his heart would
soon recover its former spring again. For without hope, passion subsists not
long; and I knew that his virtue forbad him even to frame a wish, which might
serve to keep it alive.

When we had been settled for the evening, at our inn, he asked me what scheme
of life I had planned out for us both; for you were more at leisure than I,
said he, with a sigh, for such contemplations, during our late visit in the
country.

I told him of the purpose which I had framed just before I received the
letter, and added, that I had some encouragement from my friend, to hope that
all matters would be accommodated between my father and me, as soon as we
should arrive in London. How should I rejoice at such an event, replied he, but
much I fear that misfortune has marked us for her victims! Such extraordinary
incidents! such uncommon adventures!

We made a slight repast, went early to bed, and pursued our journey the next
morning, in the chair. He seemed to be much recruited in health, but still too
weak to venture to ride, or even drive post; so we traveled together at his
leisure, through the whole journey.

This second day I found him continue thoughtful, and melancholic, and imagined
from the hint he had given me, when he pressed to quit the country, with some
others which he had let drop, the night before, that he would be pleased to be
questioned upon this subject, though his delicacy seemed backward to propose
it, in a more direct way, himself.

I considered also, that it is a great relief to a mind oppressed, to be at
liberty to communicate its uneasiness to a friend; and being myself also,
sollicitous to know how high his passion might have arisen, or what kind of
sentiments he had himself about it, I resolved to enter upon the subject with
him, at our next stage; and accordingly, after dinner, accosted him thus:

CHAP. LXXXVI.
MY dear friend and brother, the disorder which you have been lately affected
with, has given me most extreme apprehension, and concern; which is, however,
rather increased, than abated, by your recovery; if we may style it one, while
it leaves you still subject to the depressed and melancholic state, which your
mind and spirits seem, ever since, to have labored under.

And yet, even this, is by no means, my principal concern about you; for the
most obstinate distempers are still within the dominion of physic: But, I am
much afraid, from some expressions which have escaped you in your ravings, with
others that you have thrown out, since the recovery of your reason, that your
principal malady may be of that nature which Ovid says, Non est medicabilis
herbis.

He blushed, and appeared in confusion; but quickly asked me, with great
emotion, after what manner he had exposed the secret, or betrayed his passion,
during his delirium? I soon made him easy, with regard to this particular, by
assuring him that no ears, but his own and mine, happened to have been within
the reach of his voice, on his first extravagance, and then acquainting him of
the precaution I had used, during the remainder of his distraction.

O! then, cried he out, in a transport, my alarmed mind is again restored to
peace, and this secret shall be now entombed with me; for I may truly say, that
it has not yet escaped me, since you alone, my second self, are the only
master of it. Yes, my dear Andrews, I confess the passion, but deny the guilt.
It was not my choice, it is not my acquiescence -- It was my fatality, and is
my misfortune.

My dear Beville, I replied, the slightest suspicion, either of your honor, or
your virtue, has never yet rested on my mind. But, in this unhappy affair, you
must give me leave to be somewhat diffident, of your prudence, or discretion,
at least. For love, whatever the poets may have written of that passion, is a
fair, and open enemy, and always affords us sufficient warning, for a retreat.
It is by dalliance alone, that we are conquered; and after we have delivered
ourselves over, willing victims, to the soft persuasion, we would defend our
own weakness, by pleading of its strength. The bravest, who stand their ground,
may be o'erpowered, but the fugitive was never yet o'ertaken.

I entreat my dear friend, replied he, that you will be so charitable as to
suspend your judgment, till you have heard my defense; and though I trust that
I shall be found an object of compassion, rather than of censure, yet I must
confess, that the fond nicety, which I have ever had, about preserving your
favorable opinion toward me, oppresses me, notwithstanding, at present, with a
kind of generous diffidence, on my defeat, though conquered by surprise -- even
as a general, before his mistress, for having lost a day, though the odds a
million.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
WHEN first I beheld the fair Ethelinda, continued Mr. Beville, I was struck
with admiration at her transcendent charms; her form, her grace, her air, her
features. The contemplation of beauty, in whatever subject, is natural to the
mind of man; and not defended by the most severe philosophy. I indulged myself,
therefore, in this sublime delight, while I found the chaste pleasure not yet
descending from, the refinements of taste.

When I became acquainted with her mind, was conversant with her understanding;
had considered her virtues, and observed upon her manners; I found myself
affected toward her, with a warmer sentiment indeed, but still of the same
platonic kind. For the beauty of morals and of nature, are reciprocally
analogous; and we may become susceptible of a sensation for either, quite
distinct from passion.

Again, when I began to observe upon the uncouth manners, and indelicate
behavior of her husband toward her, seeming totally devoid of the least taste
or sentiment, for her mind or beauty, was it not virtue to lament her fate!
This was humanity -- not desire. I grudged him an happiness, which he seemed
unworthy to enjoy. But this was envy, and not jealousy.

Thus were my admiration of her beauty, my esteem of her merits, and compassion
for her misfortune, restrained within the precincts of innocence, and virtue --
As disinterested, and pure, as is a brother's love. Under such chaste, and
delicate sentiments as these, had I passed the first three weeks of our
acquaintance, without receiving the least hint from my passions, which might
have alarmed my virtue, or have warned my prudence.

I endeavored often, though obliquely, to reform his manners, but without
preferring my own; and have, upon some occasions, even restrained my own
politeness toward her, where I imagined that the contrast might have been too
strongly marked. My sole desire was to have reclaimed his conduct, and my
warmest wish breathed for their mutual happiness.

A father might have felt such sentiments -- an angel might have loved her so
-- But,

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
ONE morning, I happened to take a long and solitary walk through the woods,
ruminating upon our past misfortunes, my dear Andrews, said he, and forming
visionary schemes for future life; when returning dispirited and fatigued, I
strolled into the green parlour, and there threw myself upon the couch; where,
perceiving my wearied senses disposed to rest, I loosened the cords of the
suspended curtain, and letting it fall carelessly about me, folded my arms, and
resigned myself to slumber.

After some time, I was awakened by persons coming hastily into the room, and
from under part of the veil, where the cord had happened not to have run to its
full length, I perceived the lovely Ethelinda issuing from the warm bath, which
lay within this apartment, attended by her maid, who laying down a parcel of
clothes upon the carpet before the fire, retired immediately out of the room,
locking the door, and carrying off the key.

I felt myself in the utmost confusion, upon this adventure; but had no
retreat; and before I could possibly have resolved upon what measure of decency
to observe, the charming fair let fall her loosened wrapper to the ground, and
at once revealed her naked beauties to my ravished view. O, my dear friend! she
was ipsa forma Induiter formosa est, exuiter ipsa forma. Ovid.
, indeed! Were the Anadyomene A famous picture of Venus, rising naked from the
sea.
of Apelles but half so bewitching, how happy for the world it was so early
lost.

She dressed herself in haste, and every attitude exposed some new, some hidden
charm to my racked sense -- In me tota ruens Venus. I gazed -- I doated -- A
sudden fever rushed through all my frame -- My senses were intranced -- Reason
in vain opposed the fond delirium -- I could as well command a dream --
Religion was suspended -- Chastity swooned away -- I quick lost all reflection;
and Pigmalion's statue, new informed with life, was equal mistress of its
passions.

When she was dressed, she rung the bell for her maid, and retired out of the
room, without having perceived me. I immediately arose, and stole out to the
woods again. How did I feel! My mind was disturbed, my frame disordered. I
walked through the groves like a frantic person; now with a quick, now with a
slow pace. The bell tolled -- I returned to the house -- The dinner was served
-- I entered the room with confusion -- I avoided even your eyes -- I dared not
look on him. But when she appeared -- what a twofold emotion, equally of
shame, and passion! I felt a convict -- Imputed a crime to accident; and, like
a rifled maid, found myself shocked at the unhallowed pleasure, even of a
guiltless deed.

Oh! I could never think of her from that moment, without the most turbulent
affections! My admiration of her beauty, my esteem of her (...), my compassion
for her misfortune, were deprived, at once, of all platonics, and became new
fuel to my flame. Whenever I saw her, I felt as if I had injured her -- and
when her husband happened to occur to my mind, methought I had wronged him too.

Such passion, with such conflict, such desire, with such scruple, soon, my
friend, o'ercame me. I pined, I raved, I drooped -- I betook myself to my bed.
A double fever seized both mind and body -- The rest you know -- O! spare my
weakness, and assist my virtue! Tears forced their passage through his eyes --
He threw himself into my arms. We embraced.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
I SHALL really be under a good deal of uneasiness for ye, ladies, while ye are
reading the foregoing chapter. You had certainly a natural right to have
expected somewhat more of adventure, in so critical, and opportune a scene. A
young fellow, in health and vigor. A lovely woman, in flower of youth, and
beauty's pride, naked, and alone -- A couch -- The door safe locked, and the
key in the very bottom of Abigail's pocket! Had mother Behn, or grannam Heywood
the handling of this passage, they would have satisfied your curiosity, at
once, without even waiting to have raised it.

Now let us frame an hypothesis in this very crisis, by way of argument only.
Suppose, I say, that the very moment she had slipped her bagniane, he had slipped
also, into her arms -- She could not, in decency, have done less than faint. He
lays her on the sopha, and applies his best endeavors to awaken her senses.
She revives, and resents his services -- by looks and struggles, only -- For
she certainly, could not have the assurance to have cried out, and expose
herself in so suspicious a situation, and such unseemly circumstances.

In all difficult cases, one is apt to govern themselves by precedent, and as
she was a lady of great reading, she must surely have known, that throughout
all history, sacred, or profane, there are but two examples of female
chastity, upon record. And between you and I, ladies, queer ones enough, they
are.

Susanna's coyness could possibly supply no rule of conduct here, for in the
naked Ethelinda's case, there happened to be no Elder. Lucretia's story indeed,
was the very case in point. And how did she acquit herself, I pray ye? Why she
first most heroinely yielded, to save her fame, and then wickedly destroyed
herself, to revenge her adultery. Now, though the chaste Ethelinda's discretion
might possibly have induced her to the first, her religion, Lucretia was an
heathen, it is to be hoped, would have saved her from the latter Since I had
wrote the above, I have been informed by a lady of severe example, that there
is a third instance of female chastity, in history, which ought to be taken
notice of here, in honor of the sex. This was Margaret, countess of Richmond,
and mother to Henry the Seventh; of whom bishop Fisher gives the following
curious anecdote, in the funeral eulogy he preached over her remains; and which
I shall here present you with, in his own extraordinary words: She obtained a
license, to live chaste, from her third husband; whereupon, she took upon her
the vow of Celibacy. So that, according to the bishop's opinion, the dues of
marriage, are a breach of chastity -- But perhaps, he might have meant second,
or third marriages, and in this sentiment, many scrupulous persons agree with
him.
.

But poor Mr. Beville was verily, in a most awkward situation, as he describes
himself. I mean for such a sort of man as he was. He might truly be compared to
Tantulus, viewing the staking font, and the forbidden fruit, with unquenched
thirst, and appetite unallayed, And as listeners are said seldom to hear good
of themselves, so is there a proverb also, that folks generally pay for their
peeping. The story of Acteon is known by every schoolboy -- Coventry Tom, too,
of prying memory, is the second instance in history; and the unfortunate
William Beville is now put upon record, as the third example of this fatal
curiosity.

CHAP. XC.
MR. Andrews, continuing his narrative, said, I really felt a most extreme
compassion for my unhappy friend. Sense and virtue add strength to love. The
same vigor of mind, which exerts itself in reason, takes equal hold of
passion; and refined affections, like purged waters, preserve their properties
longer than foul.

I therefore endeavored to reconcile him to himself, by acquiescing in his
justification. I condoled with him upon the unluckiness of his adventure, and
concurred in the virtuous and manly resolution, which he seemed to have taken,
of exiling himself from the object of his fatal passion, and of excluding from
his mind all manner of fuel, which might serve to nourish his unhappy flame.

I then thought it might relieve his spirits a good deal, to let him into the
entire secret of my late letter from London, and accordingly laid it before
him, for his perusal; saying, My dear Beville, though fortune has used us
sometimes for her sport, you see she has not quite marked us for her victims,
yet.

The reading of this letter had the desired effect; it diffused a cheerfulness
over his countenance, and he confessed to me, but with an ingenuous shame, that
he was sensible of perhaps a quicker kind of pleasure, in having my fortunes
established by this sort of revolution, than possibly it might have done to
have had them even augmented, through any other medium. For besides my concern
for your misfortunes, my dear brother, added he, I have also labored under a
certain delicate distress, from the reflection that your alliance with my
family, had been the occasion of them.

I then took an opportunity, from this expression, to mention a sentiment to
him, that my heart had, for some days, with difficulty restrained; which was,
that the alliance he hinted at, was not dissolved, but devolved only, and that
I hoped he would henceforth consider himself as heir, in his dear sister's
place, to share an equal benefit in my fortunes.

He bowed, but quick replied, that he could not possibly think of accepting a
thing he had no claim to, in a case where even the gift could not confer a
title; as his sister, he rejoiced to say it, had left more rightful, and more
worthy heirs behind her.

To which I answered, that as I had, in the first instance, already dedicated
my fortunes to love, I could not think in the second, of excluding friendship,
its younger brother, from its share of the portion; and that as virtue forms
stronger connections than nature, the fond tie which had once allied us, would
induce me ever to look upon him as a real brother, if that title were not
already comprehended, under the higher and nobler one, of friend.

At length, after several days traveling, we arrived in London; he recruited
by the journey, and I fatigued with the delay. We passed the evening at the inn
together. The next morning he went down to Windsor, to wait upon his father,
and I called on the minister of St. Martin's, to settle with him about the
effects committed to his charge.

He came with me to the house, and delivered me the will, and keys. The scene
affected me. I dropped tears of filial duty, and felt my heart fill at the same
time, with pious gratitude toward the great dispenser of all earthly, as well
as heavenly blessings.

CHAP. XCI.
UPON looking into the situation of my affairs, I found that the family suit,
which had subsisted for so many years, had been ended the preceding term, and
the debentures, for ten thousand pounds, were lying on the desk, with about
three hundred pounds more, in bills and cash.

The will had bequeathed the entire fortune to me, except two legacies of one
hundred pounds, apiece, to each of my brothers; the eldest of whom had been
lately promoted to a troop of horse; and the younger, besides his employment,
had a little time before, been married to a merchant's daughter in the city,
with a fortune of four thousand pounds. My sister had died in childbed, about
six months before.

Both my brothers happened to be in London, at this time, and came to condole
with me upon our late loss. I had always loved them affectionately, and was
much rejoiced to see them. I laid the will before them, and they very
generously acquiesced in the disposition of it, without the least jealousy, or
murmur. They were both of them already well established in life, and
acknowledged the entire merit of it, to be owing to my disinterested, and
fraternal kindness.

I then paid each of them their legacy, and made a present, at the same time,
to my married brother, of all the family plate; which might be in value, about
an hundred pounds; promising the captain also, to pay him a like compliment,
whenever he should do me the pleasure to invite me to his wedding.

In a day or two after, my friend Beville returned from Windsor, and told me
that he had found his father in the greatest distress; for his attorney had
informed him, that the laws could not possibly afford him any manner of relief,
for as he had disposed of the income of his employ, during his life, he could
not possibly recover his office again; and that, as his deputy had sold his
interest, and retired to Holland, there was no remedy to be had, against him,
neither.

My friend left his father all the money he had about him, and seemed to be
extremely depressed, upon this additional misfortune; though I said every thing
that friendship could suggest, to support his spirits, by entreating that he
would suffer me to consider us all, as of one family; adding, that in this
instance too, I might challenge it as a right; as I had the honor of claiming
his father, as mine, also.

CHAP. XCII.
I WAS impatient to see my dear children, and to return my most grateful thanks
to my valuable friend, the clergyman; but I could not think of revisiting any
of those once happy scenes again, which had prevented me from paying my duty,
at Windsor, also. I therefore wrote a letter of acknowledgment to my friend,
entreating the favor of a visit from him, at London, and at the same time,
sent down a coach and four, to bring him up, with the children.

They all arrived in town, the next day, and in this fond society, the
pleasures I enjoyed, were so blended with those I had lost, that I might be
said to have truly felt that "Sad luxury, to vulgar minds unknown." So that I
had but little advantage, in this particular, by shifting the scene, while such
strong remembrances stood still before me.

Poor Beville's health and spirits recruited not so fast as I had hoped for. He
was frequently absent, in company, and would sometimes suffer a whole morning
to pass unmarked away, without books, or music; and when he did play, it was
always in the andante, pastorale, or amoroso strain; and when he read, Ovid,
Catullus, or Petrarch, were his studies.

I took notice of this turn of mind, to him, and he seemed so alarmed at it,
himself, that he laid aside music entirely, as he acknowledged that harmony, of
any kind, might be a dangerous solace, in the present disturbed situation of
his mind; for that the soft airs but soothed his passion, and the bolder ones
served only to elevate its transports.

He then began to apply himself to his former, and severer studies, but was
soon interrupted in them, by an illness which had the appearance of a milliary
fever. The physicians were called in, and determined it to be a scorbutic
humor, which had been thrown into his blood, by checking his late disorder,
too suddenly, and suffering him to come abroad, at so inclement a season,
before the dregs of his disease had been sufficiently purged away. They
prescribed him medicines, and recommended the Scarborough waters, and
sea-bathing, to him, as soon as the weather might permit.

I took a hint from this advice, to propose to my friend, to take a journey
with me, immediately, to Scarborough, and fix ourselves in some convenient
situation, near that town, before the concourse of sick and gay, who are
generally so oddly coupled, at all Spa's, might render our accommodation
difficult, or inconvenient. He readily accepted my proposal, and after I had
set off my house, and disposed of the furniture, by auction, we set out
together for this country.

Before I left London, I sent my dear children back again to Hertfordshire,
with my good friend the clergyman; to whom, at parting, I made a present of a
select collection of books, value about two hundred pounds; which had devolved
to my father, from his father and brother, who were both of them persons of
learning, and had formed their libraries with judgment and care.

I also wrote an invitation to Mr. Beville, at Windsor, to come and reside with
us at Scarborough, during the season; and then to accept of an apartment in
whatever mansion I might afterward fix myself, during our joint lives. He
wrote me an answer, full of acknowledgments, and promised to follow us, as soon
as he could sell the interest of his house and parks, at Windsor, and dispose
of his other effects.

CHAP. XCIII.
MY friend and I took lodgings at Scarborough, and about a month after, old Mr.
Beville came to us, with a debenture of five hundred pounds, which he had
realised out of the remnants of his reduced fortune. He was very ill on his
arrival, languished for some time, and at last expired of a broken heart, as he
confessed, occasioned by the loss of his wife, and his daughter, together with
that of his fortune.

As soon as we had got to Scarborough, I began to inquire whether there was any
place to be let, near the town; for I liked this country extremely well, as we
rode through it; and the purpose, which had occurred to my mind, at London, was
now framed into a kind of resolution, of settling myself somewhere hereabout.

The only counties I had ever any acquaintance with, were Berkshire, and
Hertfordshire; and being now self-banished from these, all other places had
become quite equal to me. But this one had obtained a preference, in my
election, upon my dear friend's account, because of its extreme distance from
the still too charming Ethelinda's residence.

I was informed of several houses and farms to be let, and rode out to see
them; but as none of them happened to be situated near the sea, I declined them
all. I considered, in the first instance, that they could not accommodate my
friend, with regard to one part of his prescription; and I confess also, that
in the second, I had all my life the highest relish for sea-prospects, and a
desire to fix myself in some situation near the coast.

There is something extremely awful and commanding in a view of the ocean,
which enlarges our ideas far beyond the richest landscape; and in the
contemplation of its uses, properties, movements, and contents, our minds and
hearts become naturally elevated toward the greatness and goodness of
Providence, at the same time.

But I own that there is another sentiment, much stronger than this, which had
always induced me to such a choice of situation; and it is this, that I might
possibly have the good fortune, after some horrid storm, of supplying relief to
some poor ship-wrecked voyagers, and of defending them also, from the savage
cruelties, and inhumanities, too frequently exercised by the greedy and lawless
peasants, upon all coasts, against such unhappy objects of real distress, and
commiseration.

At length, I fixed upon this charming spot; the rent of which farm was
considerably abated, on account of its not having the accommodation of a house
or offices upon it. Which consideration being computed, and added to the
savings of alterations and repairs, brings the expenses of this building,
almost within a saving upon the preference.

I commenced this house on the first day of March last, and, as it was
constructed with brick and wainscot, it was rendered habitable by the first day
of this month, July, when I entered into possession of it, and shall very
probably here fix my station, for the remainder of my life.

CHAP. XCIV.
WHEN Mr. Andrews had brought his story to a conclusion, Mr. Carewe made him a
great many acknowledgments for the high entertainment it had afforded him. He
said that there were a great many interesting events, in these memoirs, even to
an hearer; but as a friend, added he, I could most sincerely have wished that
they had been less rich of incidents, by two very affecting particulars.

My story, continued he, which by agreement you are entitled to exact, will by
no means return you the same amusement, either in kind, or degree. You are not
to expect from me, a continued series; my life has been too dissipated and
extempore, to afford much chain, and may rather be styled a collection of
incidents, than a connection of events.

I have been generally too much an individual of society, and, till a late
crisis -- whether happy, or unfortunate, added he, with a sigh, remains yet
within the womb of time -- there was not any person in the world, who could
either direct, or govern, give a consistent tenor, or steady purpose, to my
life and actions; which for the matter of them, and following after yours and
Mr. Beville's, may be considered as a lively epilogue, or a merry farce, after
a moving tragedy.

My dear Carewe, replied Mr. Andrews, the most trifling particulars, relating
to one friend, are interesting to another. Their passions, their affections the
same, namely, a mutual resentment of each other's pains and pleasures.

But this is a treat which I must not churlishly enjoy alone. We have secluded
my dear Beville long enough from our retired converse, already; and if you will
be so kind as to suffer him to form a triumvirate with us, in our mutual
confidence and friendship, it will double my pleasure and satisfaction, by
affording to that unhappy man, some kind of amusement and relief from his too
fatal passion; which, in spite of time, absence, philosophy, and virtue, seems
still to ingross too much his whole heart, mind, and affections.

I most cordially agree to your proposal, my dear Andrews, answered Mr. Carewe,
for I should think myself but half your friend, were I not wholly his. Nor do
I, in the least, apprehend that the admitting this very worthy person a third
in our union of souls, can in a^^ sort diminish our own mutual fondness toward
each other; but that we may then be considered, rather as a triangle, whose
angles, though they exceed not the quantity of two right ones, serve however,
by this division, to strengthen and support each other.

When Mr. Beville had returned from the Spa, he was made acquainted with this
plan of amusement, and received the motion with the utmost satisfaction; for he
had conceived an high esteem and affection for Mr. Carewe, from the story of
his adventure with Mr. Andrews, which had possessed him with a fond and
generous concern in the smallest matters which related to him.

He therefore returned thanks to Mr. Carewe, for his kind concurrence with Mr.
Andrews's proposal; and, in order to leave Mr. Beville still at liberty to
continue his course of bathing, their future evenings were fixed upon for this
entertainment. Accordingly, after dinner, that day, Mr. Carewe commenced his
memoir; as you will find it written in the second volume.

CHAP. XCV.
I THINK it full time, here, Mr. Reader, to put a Finis to the first volume of
these memoirs, in order to give you leisure to digest the matters herein
contained; and afford you opportunity also, for a relection. For, believe me,
dear Sir, that no book is worth reading once, which does not both require, and
deserve it twice.

Of writing of books there is no end, said Solomon -- but whether he spoke
literally, of his own times, as we have no cotemporary account of them, except
what he has been so communicative to hand down to us himself, I cannot say; but
he has certainly spoken prophetically, at least, of ours; if, instead of
writing, you will give me leave, after the manner of scholiasts, to substitute
copying in its place.

For, in reality, what are the volumes that load our presses, nowadays, but
transcripts, transpositions, or translations? Most of our modern writers have
the impudence to steal, even in the face of the living, and the most modest of
them are but robbers of the dead.

This imposition on the public, however, is nothing new among us, for our
fathers and grandfathers have labored under the same grievance, before us. Let
us but look back into the amass of literature, for half a century past, and we
shall hardly meet with any thing new, except the type, ink, and paper. Nothing
but former writings dressed up again, and republished. No work of genius, no
useful discovery; except the hardy, but ingenious attack upon Longinus, and one
or two attempts toward discovering the Longitude, at sea, if demonstrated.

What are Gassendi's, or any of the modern treatises on morals, but extracts,
or paraphrases on the Enchiridion, on Seneca, or Tully? Or Derham's physics,
but compilations, or compendiums of Galileo, Boil, Descartes, or Newton? Works
of learning, and labor, indeed, but not of talents, or genius.

A person well grounded in a college course, has, at present, nothing new to
read, except a very few writings of wit, or humor; and yet, books are printed,
or rather reprinted, every day, which but vary or transpose the pages written
in former centuries; and only serve to puzzle and obstruct all science, by
opening different avenues to the same point, and by inducing students to
imagine the Encyclopoedia to be more tedious, and difficult, than in reality it
is.

In fine, we may venture to pronounce that the wisest man, even at present, as
was once said by a learned ancient, is he who has read the fewest books --
provided he has but chosen them well. For learning, beyond certain limits, but
dulls the genius, confounds the intellect, and multiplies study, without
increasing knowledge.

If an ingenious society of men would take the trouble of making a critical
review of the Mega Biblion, or tautology of learning, and reduce it all into a
digest, I dare affirm that the whole compass of science, physical,
philosophical, theological, political, metaphysical, and moral; taking in the
classics and poetics, in all languages; with all history that is worth reading,
for knowledge, style, or observation, would not compose a library exceeding the
purchase of fifty pounds; and the whole study might be comprehended, within a
seven years college course.

But then indeed, I shall confess that there must be an entire reform also,
among the professors in each several branch, with regard to their present
prolix method of instruction. For the proverb of ars longa should be more
properly changed to artifices lenti And the rapid progress which some
extraordinary, and uneducated persons have been reported to have made in the
arts and sciences, might have been owing to their having instructed themselves
more by reason, than by rule.

Nor would this scheme be of the least disadvantage to the world in general;
for though some laborious dunces might by this means, perhaps, want bread,
unless much better employed in sowing and reaping it, yet the useful and
necessary trades of printers, booksellers, and stationers, would still continue
to thrive, even better than before. For there would then be a thousand
libraries, for one we have, at present; as men are often discouraged from
making collections, for want of proper catalogues to direct them where to
begin, and where to end.

I know many persons of fortune who have not five pounds worth of books in
their studies, at present, and those picked up by chance, or inheritance, and
who would not give five shillings for five pounds worth more, and yet would
readily lay out fifty, to purchase a complete library; which, if once pointed
out, and ascertained, would be then deemed one of the appendages of fortune and
grandeur, even to those who cannot read, as many furnish stables of horses,
which they cannot ride.

FINIS.
APPENDIX TO THE First Volume OF THE TRIUMVIRATE.

If they will have a may pole, why let them have a may pole.
Vide Tristram Shandy.
Volume first, pages 73 and 74. Volume third, pages 169 and 170. Volume sixth,
page 147.
I must here ingenuously resign the palm to Mr. Shandy, in the novelty of this
thought; nor shall I in the least, pretend to dispute any merit with him,
before modern readers, by hinting that my conceit, though poor, has some little
meaning in it.

A CATALOGUE of the several advantages and benefits, which the publisher of
these memoirs has received, from the patronage hinted at in the two precedent
pages.
1. It made me a religious observer of the precept in scripture, never to put
my trust in man. 2. It gave me the benefit of the ninth beatitude See Pope.
, Happy is he who expects nothing, for he shall not be disappointed. 3. It made
me to depend upon my own industry, and not upon another's favor. 4. It has
taught me the safest economy in the world, to trust to my own fortune, though
ever so small, rather than to another's, though ever so large. 5. It warned me,
too late, never to run in debt, for there are no sureties for the pauper. 6. It
has made me resolve never to breed a son to the church, for, without patronage,
merit will not avail in that profession, as it may in physic or the law. 7. It
has instructed me in this useful lesson, that -- 8. It has informed me also,
that -- with regard to the two last articles, I must be silent for the present;
as the reflections upon them point too strongly at certain persons, who though
their friendships freeze under the pole, their resentments burn under the line.
Si quid benefacias, levior pluma gratia est; at si quid peccatum est, plumbeas
iras gerunt. There are such characters! But have a little patience, my good
readers -- I may outlive them, and shall then speak out -- For the maxim of de
mortuis nil nisi bonum, is not of authority sufficient to control the
privileges of an historian. But enough for the present.

