THE TRIUMVIRATE: OR, THE Authentic Memoirs OF A. B. and C.

Et sermon opus est, modo tristi, saepe jocoso.

HOR. VOLUME II.

LONDON: Printed for W. JOHNSTON, in Ludgate Street. MDCCLXIV.

THE TRIUMVIRATE: OR, THE AUTHENTIC MEMOIRS OF Andrews, Beville, and Carewe.
Nec furtum feci, nec fugi --
Libera, per vacuum, posui vestigia --
HOR.
CHAPTER XCVI.
THE next day, after dinner, the Triumvirate, being tempted by the fineness of
the evening, took a walk to the sea beach, between two double lines of elms,
planted so artfully, that every tree of the outward rows, covered the interval
between two of the inward ones; which served to shade you, both from sun and
wind, as effectually as if they had been all placed in the same lines; and yet
left, at the same time, the trees themselves their due proportion of air and
soil, to thrive in. This avenue extended about a quarter of a mile, and was
terminated by a cIump of trees, which though only nineteen in number, were so
ingeniously and paradoxically placed, that they formed just nine rows, with
five trees in each Frame a regular hexagon -- inscribe two equilateral
triangles, draw diagonals from angle to angle, and the points, with the
intersections, mark out the station of the trees.
.

In the midst of this regular confusion, there was a seat formed round the
center elm, under whose umbrella they sat down together, fixing upon that
aspect, which regarded the sea. Here they all remained mute, for a considerable
time, as that element had occasioned reflections to arise in each of their
minds, which occupied their whole thoughts, in silent and self-contemplations.
At length Mr. Andrews, who by being the most certainly unhappy of the three,
was therefore become more collected and composed, than those who remained still
in suspense, first broke silence, and turning to Mr. Carewe, claimed his
promise, who thus readily began his story.

CHAP. XCVII. The story of Mr. Charles Carewe.
MY father is, for he is still alive, a gentleman of a considerable estate, in
this kingdom. And my mother, who died lately, brought him a portion of five
thousand pounds, and was a woman of remarkable beauty. I was their first, and
only son -- But my mother happened, unluckily, to be delivered of me, about a
fortnight before the usual time.

As such accidents are known frequently to have happened, and that her
character was irreproachable, the world, contrary to its usual bent, refrained
from all manner of censure, upon this event. Nor did my father, who loved her
as well as he was capable, seem to receive the least alarm, upon that occasion;
but rather in a coarse jocular manner, as was his way, applauded his own
prowess, as he termed it, which could bring that matter to bear, such was his
quibble, in about eight months, which required nine, with another.

However, about ten years after, he began to grow jealous and uneasy, about
this very article, upon the following incident. A gentleman, who was no way
related, either to him or my mother, who had lived above an hundred miles
distant from us, and had never even visited at our house, happened to die
unmarried, and left his estate, which was about a thousand pounds a year, to
me, appointing trustees for it, till I should become of age.

This person, it seems, had been a lover of my mother's, before her marriage,
and was well received upon those terms, by her father; but more advantageous
conditions happening to intervene, before matters had been concluded upon, she
was compelled by her parents, to break off her engagements there, and was
immediately married to my father.

These three concurring circumstances, her being wrested out of a lover's arms,
the praematurity of my birth, with this adoption, joined all together to raise
a suspicion in my father's mind, which had never once occurred to him, till the
last of these unlucky circumstances had happened.

Upon the first alarm, he with a precipitancy which was natural to him, and
without giving my poor mother an opportunity of vindicating herself, from so
foul a reproach, took a solemn oath that he would never see my face again, and
immediately hurried me off to the trustees of my fortune, to be educated and
maintained, out of my own patrimony, as he styled it.

The most interesting part of this story, the cause of my excile, I knew
nothing of, till some years after this event, when my mother had obtained leave
to visit me, at the school where I had been placed by my guardians, about forty
miles from my father's seat. She then related to me the particulars I have just
mentioned, which she said she would never have informed me of, but lest they
might, by any chance, happen to come to my knowledge hereafter, from any other
hand, and then possibly occasion some doubts to arise in my mind, which were
unworthy of her. To obviate which, she immediately entered into a vindication
of herself, with such an air of sincerity and virtue, that must have removed
all manner of suspicion, from any but uncharitable and disingenuous minds.

At the same time, she afforded me the extreme pleasure of being informed, that
she had perfectly quieted my father's uneasiness, by giving him every
satisfaction that a christian could offer; which, with his own reflections upon
the prudence and nicety, and of her whole conduct, ever since they had been
married, had rendered him so conscious of the hastiness and injustice of his
suspicions, that he declared to her, according to his rough manners, and
illiberal notions, that he would actually have asked her pardon, if he was not
her husband. And as for that poor fellow, Charles, said he, I am sorry I took
that rash oath, do you see me, but that is past and gone, and he must stay where
he is now; for, since I have sworn it, let who will go to the devil for a liar,
by the Lord I am resolved that it shall not be me, do you mind.

CHAP. XCVIII.
HERE Mr. Carewe seems to be very delicate, upon what weak people imagine to be
a material point; and takes great pains to clear up his legitimacy -- But why?
If the word bastard offends his ear, let him assume the title of private
relation; which is a more polite expression, in this case, that I here make a
present of to the civilians.

Letters of safe conduct were issued by Edward the fourth, to the count de la
Roche, natural son to a duke of Burgundy, who was coming over to engage in a
tournament, at London, with lord Rivers This lord Rivers was a person of
remarkable chivalry, and galantry of course. He was also a man of letters, and
translated the lives and sayings of the philosophers, from the Latin; but left
out every passage of them, which contained any manner of reflection, or
sarcasm, against women. A polite, and peculiar instance of galantry!
, who had challenged him. These letters were titled Pro Bastardo Burgundiae,
super punctis armorum perficiendis. The being admitted into the lists, was an
article of honor, and therefore the style of the Pass, could certainly never
be intended as an affront.

Or, to take it higher still, were not Romulus, Alexander, by Olympia's
confession, Hercules, Themistocles, Jugurtha, king Arthur, Homer, Demosthenes,
and Adrian the fourth, cum multis, every one of them notorious bastards? And
was not Ego Gulielmus Bastardus the preamble to one of William the Conqueror's
charters? But away with such upstart examples as these, and if you are tickled
with pedigree, derive your origin from Cain, the first bastard of the world.

Let Bourbon or Nassau go higher. Civilians distinguish bastards, by the title
of Natural Children, in opposition to those born in wedlock; which latter may
philosophically be divided into unnatural, and artificial ones. The first be
those, who are begotten in the ordinary course of matrimony. For surely, no man
can have the face to tell me, on this side of threescore, that it is natural,
for a couple already agreed upon the epenthesis, the medius terminus, or mean
point, to sit playing at push-pin, pitch and toss, or hide in the hand, while a
lame sexton is limping round a whole parish, to summon a fat, full-dined,
lethargic parson, waddling a snail's pace, to come and sanctify a deed, which
by an express text, has already been declared a divine command.

These slow-begotten brats, babes of grace before meat, these postponings of
love and joy, are what, in obstetrics Midwifry.
, as Shandy chooses to say, may be styled unnatural, or untimely births, as
coming into the world, contrary to the due course of nature, and as it may be
called, after their time, also.

By artificial children, I mean those succedaneums to generation, where
barrenness or impotency are repaired by help of medicine, or other arts of
physic -- They may likewise be styled Exotics too, as reared by cookery, in
cold ungenial zones. Such adventitious children, such interlopers in families,
should certainly never be allowed by the English constitution, to intercept an
estate from the heir at law. And for this opinion, I shall give you a
constructive case, in point, taken out of Whyte's Reports, folio 23, and page
678. This thing is said to have happened some years ago, at Whyte's
chocolate-house.


A man fell down in a fit, at a certain coffee-house -- A by-stander
immediately proposed a bett, that he would not recover -- Another unconcerned
spectator took him up -- Not the poor patient, but the challenger. A surgeon,
who happened to be in the room, drew out his lancet, and stripped up the dying
man's arm; but the bettor called out to him to have a care of what he was
doing, for that he should pay the bett, if the man recovered -- An appeal was
made to the jocky club, then present, who confirmed the sentence, for that the
gentleman had staked his money, upon nature only, not on art.

Besides, these surreptitious heirs seldom ever arrive to the size or vigor of
manhood, neither, but remain a kind of Puny insects, quivering at a breeze;
like some of our modern nobility and gentry. For my part, (had I any thing to
leave) [ aside.] I would much sooner adopt an heir, out of a warming-pan, than
an apothecary's shop. And, if a woman may be allowed to take medicines, to get
herself with child, why may she not be indulged in getting herself with child,
sometimes, by way of medicine, also? For physicians have prescribed this cure,
in some cases.

Bastards -- I ask pardon -- Private relations are also said to be generally
more endowed with spirit, wit, and genius, than the legitimate. Which must
certainly be owing to their parents being both of one mind, at the same
instant, and then in steps the good old proverb, that two heads are better than
one. Is there always such a concordance, in matrimony? And where this is
wanting, can the offspring of mere ceremony, be ever fit for any thing, but to
make heralds, dancing-masters, or gentleman-ushers. Quod persolvant debitum
languide, and oscitanter; unde foetus, a paretum generositate, descisit. Says
Lemnius, the great physician.
?

These merry begotten too, have another advantage over the legitimate, as they
may be at liberty to adopt a father; and show themselves wise children, in
their choice. The legal son may have a scoundrel, or a scavenger, for his
parent, buthe bastard must have had bad luck, indeed, if among the number of
galants, who may be imputed to his mother, he cannot be able, like some of the
ancient heroes, to pick out one, that he need not be ashamed of.

CHAP. XCIX.
I Remained at this school, continued Mr. Carewe, till I had completed the
course I had begun at a former one, before my banishment; and was thence
removed to the university of Oxford; where I passed through my studies and
exercises, with as much credit and success, as most of my cotemporaries.

I do not pretend to say, that I applied myself to books, with the same
sedulity that either of you, gentlemen, said he, bowing, would probably have
done, in so advantageous a situation for letters; I was too volatile, and fond
of pleasure, to engage deeply in study; but I had ever a certain pride of
character, which notwithstanding my dissipations, and the disadvantages of an
independent fortune, propelled me always, just to fill up the striked measure
of my duties, though to say truth, I seldom heaped it.

And in truth, the college courses there, are so very easy, to any person well
instructed, and attended to at school, that I have been frequently surprised to
see so many young men, of sense and parts sufficient, pass through them, or
rather, pass them by, with so little credit, or advantage. For a person may be
perfectly idle, in a moral sense, without being so, in a literary one. Let him
but diligently apply only that time, to his studies, which he cannot find room
for, in his pleasures, and I Will answer for it, that he shall pass through all
his degrees, with ease, and honor too.

But the misfortune is, that young fellows do not, time enough, take up a sense
of this economy, at the beginning, and then, like other bad managers, the
arrear of business they find on their hands, often affrights them from
adjusting their accounts, till it may be, perhaps, too late to retrieve either
their time, or their fortunes.

CHAP. C.
WHILE I was at the university, I happened to attach myself particularly, to a
young man, who was of the same hall with me. He was a perfect Adonis, in face
and person. This, you may be certain, was a matter of no manner of consequence
to me; but some friendly pieces of service, which happened to fall in my way to
do him, with his sense and gratitude for them, mutually endeared us to each
other.

He was not possessed of any great logical facultles, but had a refined taste
for poetry, painting, music, and the classics; with a remarkable facility in
learning languages; and he applied himself with such diligence to this
superficial part of literature, that he could not only read French, Italian,
Latin, and Greek, but speak them too, with perfect ease, fluency, and
correctness.

But in the deeper or more abstruse parts of study, such as physics,
metaphysics, and mathematics, in fine, through most of the arts and sciences,
he was remarkably backward and flow. He used to attend diligently indeed, all
the lectures upon natural philosophy, on account of the experiments, which he
seemed passionately fond and curious about, but would very gladly have excused
himself from the reasonings upon.

He was sensible of this weakness, and so mortified at it, that he was resolved
to use every assistance toward coquering this imbecility; and as these were
branches of learning in which I had happened best to distinguish myself, and
who was two classes above him, he used frequently to come to my chambers in a
morning, or invite me to his, and entreat me to help him forward with these
tough businesses, as he termed them.

I was flattered, and he obliged, by these conferences; and it was this which
first founded our mutual friendship; which was afterward farther cemented by a
piece of humanity and politeness, I had frequent opportunities of exerting
toward him, after our union, and which I am just going to mention to you.

He was very lively, had a good deal of wit and frolic, and was a perfect rake
too, as far as sitting up all night, which he would frequently do; but then he
indulged himself in no other kind of excess, at these, or at any other times.
He would neither drink, nor scour the watch, nor ransack brothels. His
amusements, on these occasions, were conversation, reading, drinking coffee,
playing cards, walking by moonlight, or hiring a coach, with two or three
friends, and setting out at midnight, to be early enough to see some fine seat
or improvement, fifteen or twenty miles off.

But some of the idle fellows who happened to be of our parties, used to press
him sometimes, quite rudely, to join with them in their debaucheries; which
perceiving in him such a virtuous aversion to, I used constantly to defend him
from, though I was frequently too ductile myself, toward such idleness and
excesses.

CHAP. CI.
THIS harmony had subsisted between us for about two years, when my poor friend
happened to have a very awkward piece of business fall upon his hands. He had
been at billiards, which he played remarkably well; he had much the advantage
of the party; but men are not, at all times, masters of their art, and he lost
the game by one manifest bad stroke.

Upon this, an hasty Welchman who stood by, and had lost a few shillings on a
bett, swore by St. Taffit, hur had played buty. My friend resented the
assertion, and quick replied, that no person could have suspected him of such a
baseness, who was not capable of it himself. Hur plood poiled over, at this
sarcasm, and snatching up one of the tacks, he broke it over my friend's head;
who retired out of the room, with an "I shall find a time, Sir."

It was late in the evening, and the poor discomfited squire retired home to
his own apartments -- He had been reared under his mother's eye, who employed
the curate of the parish as his private tutor, in her own house. This was by no
means a process of education likely to inspire much prowess; and accordingly my
pretty effeminate friend had not the least spark of chivalry about him. He
passed the night without sleep, and with very uneasy struggles, and
reflections, between the opinion of the world, and his mortal aversion to
killing people.

The next morning early, he called upon me, looked pale and disturbed, told me
with a trembling voice, the adventure of the night before, and asked my advice
after what manner he should conduct himself, upon this unlucky occasion. I
replied, that the testy Wallian had left him but one rule of action, which was
re-action, and that I was ready to carry him a challenge instantly, as there
was no time to lose. That a thing of this sort, should always be resolved on
quick, and acted briskly; for that the sooner we vindicate our character, and
the shorter time we bear resentment, the better.

He replied that it was not for such advice he had called upon me, on this
occasion; that he knew full well what the false notions of the world had too
strongly established in such cases; but that his principles of morals and
religion, stood more strongly still, on the other side of the question. He
added, that supported by these, he could muster up philosophy sufficient to
withstand a mere popular hiss; but that this was not his sole difficulty, for
his whole fortune depended on the favor of his grandfather, who had already
declared him heir to two thousand pounds a year; but having been bred all his
life in the army, and totally ignorant of any character but a military one, had
comprised all worth, all virtue, in bravery alone; and had been often heard to
swear, by the Lord, no coward should ever inherit an acre of his estate, which
had been all purchased by the sword. No, d -- n me, he may starve for me --
It Is fit the dog should rot, that begins to stink already; with such stuff: The
young man told me therefore, that he came to throw himself upon my address, to
extricate him out of this difficulty, by any possible means I could devise --
except fighting.

I confessed that it was really a stroke beyond my genius, to think of any
other expedient but challenging the fellow, at least. Perhaps he may be brought
to ask your pardon, said I, and I shall strongly remonstrate to him, that this
is the least he ought to do. If he is a man of true honor, he certainly will
do so. If not, he is a rascal, believe me, and will take to his heels, at the
sight of a pistol. The die is cast, and there is no retreating.

I grant you, continued I, that duelling is contrary both to reason and
religion, but as every one who lives in a community, is obliged to obey the
laws of it, so may we hope that heaven may make some allowances for a practice
which, though founded originally in barbarism, custom and opinion have long
since sanctified almost equal to a law, among more civilized nations. I clapped
him on the shoulder, bid him keep up his spirits till my return, and so quitted
the room suddenly, without waiting for an answer.

CHAP. CII.
I Crossed the square directly, to the apartment of our antagonist, whom I
found at breakfast, with a gentleman commoner from Llangefny. I told them my
errand; but said at the same time, that I should not have taken this
disagreeable commission upon me, only with a view of accommodating the strife,
without bloodshed, or dishonor. That it was plain to every body, Mr. Jones was
the aggressor, that the rebuke was too severe for the reply, and that
therefore, I hoped --

Hop me no hops, cried out ap Shones, hur was saucy Jack, and hur will teach
hur manners to a shentleman. If hur has mind to fight, let hur fight as fight
can, for by St. Taffit, ap Shones will do noting but fight, or break more of
hur pones, Jackadandy -- Llangefny seconded this gallant resolve, by saying
that it was unpecoming of a shentleman to ask pardon, for this was
acknowledging hurself to pe in the wrong. I appointed the park, and the present
minute.

At my return, I found my poor-spirited friend in the greatest agitation, both
of body and mind. He asked no question, but looked inquiry. I really pitied his
distress, and was so much affected with it, that I declare I would readily have
fought the sulky South Britain, myself, to have rid him of his fears and
danger; but that I thought this would be only acting the bravo, and have
injured my own character, without redeeming his.

I told him that ap Shones was a bear, that we must take the field on the
instant, that matters were unluckily come to that pass at present, there was no
living among men upon any other terms; that as he had been involved in this
affair, without any vice of his own, and was prosecuting it without the least
malice, but solely in defense of his character and fortune, he might well stand
acquitted both to God and man; that therefore, any farther difficulty about the
matter, must be cowardice, not scruple, Et propter vitam, vivendi perdere
causas. For shame, said I, shake off this womanish weakness -- Arouse -- Be a
man, etc.

During this military oration, he made no manner of reply, but fixing his eyes
upon the floor, with a kind of stupid insensibility, as if he was falling into
a lethargy, muttered to himself, in allusion to my last expression, Would to
heaven that I were either perfect man, or woman!

This extraordinary soliloquy struck my ear with surprise, but I had only time
for this reflection, which I spoke aloud, that an hermophrodite had neither
body, nor soul, worth saving. While I said this, I took down a case of pistols,
which I had charged the day before, on an idle affair of my own, which happened
to pass luckily over, and taking my feeble Epicaene briskly under the arm,
hurried it away to the ground, without permitting time, or power to dissent.

We found the enemy had taken the field before us, had got possession of the
heights, were properly stationed, and appointed, with their bright arms
glittering in the sun -- A terrible show! As I was leading, or rather dragging
my poor-spirited friend up to what I judged to be the due point of distance,
and before we could attain it, or that I could put a pistol into his hand, and
retire, the hasty Welchman let fly a shot between us, which however, luckily
missed us both.

I then thought this act of baseness a justifiable occasion for saving the
credit of my friend, and making the quarrel now become my own; so quitting his
arm, and desiring him to move off to the left, I rushed up to the station,
crying out, Since I find you aim at both, have at you for one. But before I
could form my posture, or present my pistol, I saw the enemy fairly wheel to
the right about, and betake himself most nimbly, to his heels.

Llangefny sputtered, cursed, swore, and hollooed after him to stand hur ground
like a shentleman, but the winds and ap Shones were equally deaf and swift. So
turning to the second, I just said, a flying enemy is not worth pursuit, and a
coward below resentment. Then discharging my pistol in the air, and running up
to my now undismayed ally, whom I found chanting out Victoria! Io Triumph! Io
Paean! with martial air and strides we marched off from the field together,
returning back directly to my chambers.

CHAP. CIII.
AS soon as we arrived, my friend threw himself-into a chair, with an heavy
sigh. I sat up all night, said he faintly -- doubts and anxieties distracted
me. I eat nothing all this morning, and my perturbations, with the hurrying to
and from the park, have so overpowered me, that I perceive my strength and
senses beginning to fail. Bring me a glass of water quickly. I saw convulsions
seize him, I ran for the bottle, but before I could reach it to him, he
fainted, sunk, and died away.

I caught him up in my arms, laid him on my bed, and plenteously bedewed his
pale face with water -- but in vain. -- I searched his pockets for some eau de
luce I had seen him snuff up several times, in the morning. The application had
no effect, there was no breath to inhale the spirit -- his pulse was silent,
and his eyes still open, had now lost all speculation in them.

I was distracted -- The Welchman's shot must have taken place -- I opened all
his clothes before, and lifted up his shirt to search the wound, but viewed a
spotless form. No, no, the wound was reserved for my heart alone. Such a
polished skin! such limbs! such breasts! such a gender! I gazed enraptured on
the perfect fair. An age of friendship rushed at once to love! I besprinkled
her lovely body all over, and the water applied to parts unused before to cold,
began soon to awaken sense. My hopes revived, and thinking the transition again
from cool to warm, might more quickly complete the cure, I stripped off my
clothes in an instant, sprang into bed, and enfolded her lovely body in my
arms. The roses returned into her cheeks and lips, her eyes began to dawn, her
breath expressed itself in murmuring sighs, and her pulse beat tremblingly
alive all over.

Soon as her bright orbs had twinkled into life, she quick perceived her
situation, and endeavored to disingage herself from my embrace. I leaped from
the bed, threw myself on my knees by the side of it, entreated her forgiveness,
urged my excess of passion, vowed ten thousand years of love and constancy,
then caught her again in my arms, while through a charming mixture of surprise,
confusion, gratitude, fear, irresolution, and desire, the yielding fair one --
Chorusque
Turpiter obticuit. --


After the usual compliments were passed, as

He. Thou most angelic fair! all heaven is in thy eyes, and bliss immortal in
thy arms, etc.

She. Oh, my dear undoer! I would have sustained a thousand martyrdoms, sooner
than have yielded to any other man alive, etc.

--

I then begged the favor of her to let me into the mystery of her
extraordinary metamorphosis -- But first, said she, prithee let us have some
breakfast. Agreed -- I slipped on my nightgown, and brought the tea-table to
the bedside. She would have arose, but I would not suffer it. She had not
slept the night before. After breakfast I returned again into bed.

--

I happened, after some time, to awake from that sweet slumber which the
Epicurean philosophers style the golden nap, while my fair Androgenes lay still
composed in sleep. I raised myself up gently on my arm, and with looks of
cordial love, hung over her enamoured. When I had viewed her beauties for some
minutes, I felt myself offended in delicacy, at her wearing a shirt, in my arms
-- The idea it conveyed disgusted me. Hic mulier, haec vir, as Seneca says of
equivocal dress. So resolving to have no more of love in masquerade, I gently
stole it off from her arms, then spurned the embracing clothes aside, "From
limbs of such a shape and hue,
"As Titian's pencil never drew."
The motion awaked her.

--

CHAP. CIV.
I THEN repeated to my fair chum, the request I had made her before breakfast,
and she thus readily began: My father was a clergyman of the diocese of --
you will excuse me; and had about three hundred pounds a year in the church, but
no other patrimony. My mother was daughter to captain -- you will excuse me there
again, in a regiment of foot, I forget the number. She was extremely handsome,
but had no fortune, and my father married her for love. She had a sister, a
year younger than herself, a perfect beauty, also, who was, some time after,
married upon the same terms, to a gentleman of a considerable estate, in the
adjoining county.

Soon after my mother's marriage, her father was commanded abroad, and
happening to be stationed in the East Indies, where in a few years he rose to
the rank of lieutenant colonel, returned home with a fortune of near threescore
thousand pounds, which he had amassed by spoil and plunder, among the nabobs of
that country.

When my grandfather came home, he was presented with two grandchildren, one by
my mother, and another by my aunt. They were both daughters, which disappointed
the old soldier extremely. He settled a thousand pounds apiece, upon each of
the children, and laying out the remainder of his acquisitions on the purchase
of a considerable estate, declared to his daughters, that he would make the
first grandson his heir. A pack of piss-kitchens, said he, by the Lord, I would
rather leave my fortune to the marine society, than among a pracel of
retromingents that are incapable of serving either their king, or their
country. Soon after this proposition, my mother declared a pregnancy, and about
a month later, my aunt annonced the same,

Here I took occasion to observe to my blooming bedfellow, upon the grovelling
ideas of an husband and wife manufacturing, as it were, an heir for an estate,
when compared to the sublime and disinterested joys of two free lovers,
regarding only their own mutual passion. From hence we launched out into the
unbounded field of philosophy and sentiment, in which scamper she acquitted
herself with that spirit and refinement, which was natural to her.

--

CHAP. CV. Triglyph loquitur.
Kate. WHAT o'clock is it? It Is very late, my dear, the watch have just gone
eleven. Well Kate, then I think it full time for us to --

The grammarians, rhetoricians, and annotators have contrived different points,
marks, and notes, for distinguishing the several parts of sentences,
expressions, interrogations? exclamations! (parenthesis) references, etc.
"quotations," etc. as the comma, colon: semicolon; period, [bracket] asterisk
*, etc. But there was much wanted a further figure of writing, for the quod
factu faedum est, which Mr. Carewe, being a great scholar, has happily
introduced to us, from Oxford; and which nearly resembles the aposiopesis, in
rhetoric.

This we may style a figure -- not of speech, indeed -- but rather, of silence;
which may therefore, not improperly be called the silent minute. This is not
the hiatus, or mark of vacancy, which we sometimes meet with in certain broken
tracts or imperfect manuscripts; but rather the sign of pleonasm, the full
stop; the punctum stans, or conjugate point, of geometry; the punctum criticum,
of morals; the punctum generatum, in conics; the punctum saliens, or punctum
lachrymale, in anatomy; or the point sensible, in physics, as Mr. Lock terms
it. It Is finally, the dropping of the curtain, and closing of the scene.

This method seems to imitate the ancient chorus of the Greek drama, which used
to hint what was not thought proper to be brought upon the scene of action. For
it was a rule, in those chaste representations, never to suffer any thing to
appear before the audience, which might give offense to decency, or humanity.
-- Non tamen intus
Digna geri, promise in scenam.


Therefore all rapes and murders were entirely excluded from their
performances. So that, then a days, if a reprobate, like some of our modern
genius's, should have had a delight in such spectacles, he was obliged to step
behind the scenes, and make sport for himself, of which ever kind he was in the
humor for, either by stabbing an actor, or rummaging an actress.

But then, this expression of before the audience, is to be understood
literally, that is, before their eyes; for where rapes or murders happened to
be any way necessary to the carrying on of the plot, they were always related
to the public, by some by-stander, in all the particulars of the action. I mean
the latter, only; for as to the first, whatever diversion there may be, it has
really so little diversity in it, that it by no means, affords us variety
sufficient for an ingenious description. What an infinite number of different
deaths has Homer introduced in his battles! No two men are wounded in the same
place, nor by the same weapon. But truly, it is a dull thing enough to think of,
that poor women, whether they will or no, can possibly be done, or undone, but
one way.

The English stage indeed, does not confine itself to such restrictions; for
there rapes, cuckoldoms, and fornication, are frequently exhibited to the great
delight and edification of the spectators; and men are stabbed, or run through
the body, and dying in convulsions for a quarter of an hour together, before
the philosophic audience. But the English, I suppose, are a freer, and a braver
people, than ever the Greeks or Romans were, and all representations partake of
the genius of a nation.

CHAP. CVI.
PRithee where did I leave off, when you interrupted me, thou restless chum,
said she? The point we were last upon, replied I, was the subject of pregnancy.
I recollect it now, answered she, and thus proceeded in her story:

A little before my mother was delivered, my poor father was seized with a
pleuretic fever, which carried him off, in a few days. About a month after, my
mother produced a son, who was christened Henry, after his grandfather, by whom
he was immediately declared heir apparent, and the following month my aunt was
also safely delivered of a boy.

Just as these words were pronounced, the college bell tolled three -- We
arose, dressed, and issued forth to the outward apartment, where I had ordered,
when I arose to breakfast, the most elegant repast that expense or the season
could provide. During the entertainment we were attended by dumb waiters, only,
to permit the full freedom of conversation; and my lively mess-mate, having now
thrown off the embarrasment and restraint of a personated character, showed her
sprightly female soul to be truly Epicurean.

I remember one reflection she made, just as I had finished the flask of
champaigne, for she drank but two glasses of it: Were I, said she, an heathen,
I should be apt to expostulate thus: If, as the stoics urge, all crimes be
equal, why should not every vice shock our nature, as much as murder does? and
for my part, added she, I cannot help imputing it as a sin to the gods, to
annex the sensations of pleasure, to any kind of wickedness, whatsoever. It Is
misleading, continued she, those weak persons who are apt to be governed too
much by reason and nature, which they unlearnedly take for the most
irrefragable revelations.

We walked the park in the evening, the Welsh Fuzileers did not appear, and we
strutted through the throng, amidst the applause of all the colleges. She
engaged me to supper, at her apartments. I promised to follow her, and stepped
aside to a milliners, to buy some night-shifts for her, in order to preserve
the decency of appearances, for the future.

The next morning we awakened about eleven o'clock, dressed ourselves, and came
out to breakfast, after which she thus continued her narrative:

CHAP. CVII.
THIS same Henry, said she, was myself. My mother, in the extremity of her
grief upon my father's death, resolving, like a chaste matron as she was, to
live and die a widow, concluded that she had then but one game to play for the
fortune; and determined within herself, that let matters turn out as they
might, she would either bring forth a son, or else impose an heir upon her
father. One should shuffle well who deals for an estate. The nurse and midwife
were bribed, and the cheat passed. For my grandfather was so rejoiced, and my
uncle so mortified, at this event, that the least thought of matriculation,
never once entered into either of their heads.

My mother reared me with the greatest circumspection imaginable, hardly ever
suffering me to be out of her sight, and keeping my nurse constantly to attend
me, till I was fifteen years of age; which so scandalized the old colonel, that
I heard him once say to my mother, By Mars, that fellow will soon beget softer
brothers for himself, upon that wench there.

This homebred and feminine kind of education, with the detaining me from a
public school, placing me under the private tuition of an old curate of our
parish, and never suffering me to mix, or play with boys, used sometimes, to
put the old gentleman out of patience. You Will spoil that child, he would say,
you will rear him a nest-cock, a coward; then fare him well, for me, for by the
Lord, Madam, if ever he should betray the least symptom of that vice and
disgrace to my blood, I will transfer my estate from him to his cousin Tommy,
that boxed a great hulk of a barber's boy so stoutly, before my face, the other
day.

My mother, upon these occasions, would play him off with pleading the
slightness and tenderness of my frame, which rendered it hazardous to rear me
after that careless and robust manner that other boys were treated in. It was
my grief for his dear father's death," she would cry, "that has weakened my
poor child's constitution, in the last month -- Should I not then endeavor to
repair the damage I have myself done him? He was tenderhearted, for he was
brave, and such reflections would soften him.

As for this same precious quality of courage," she would at other times say,
"let it be ever so valuable, it must be too dearly purchased at the price of
modesty or religion, neither of which are sufficiently taken care of, in the
common, or what is styled the liberal education of young men, in these days.
But you, Sir, need have no manner of apprehension about the boy's wanting
spirit, whenever proper occasions shall call upon him to exert it. A man may be
brave without being forward, and a grandson of yours, Sir, though reared in a
nunnery, would, like Achilles, soon betray that he was born a soldier. He was
vain, and this would effectually stop his mouth.

CHAP. CVIII.
I WAS arrived at the age of fifteen, continued she, before I had been let into
the secret of my real sex; and was hitherto kept so totally ignorant of
anatomy, that I even knew not the difference of gender; and was at the same
time so chastely bred, that the least curiosity or reflection about this
matter, had never yet arisen in my mind.

I used sometimes, indeed, after twelve years of age, to be sensible of a
remarkable difference between the kiss of cousin Tom, and his sister's, or my
own; which puzzled me to account for, till I had resolved it into our being
both lads, of the same age, and such near relations; and upon the whole, fairly
concluded, that till the heart has become susceptible of passion, the natural
sympathy of human nature, subsisted stronger between those of the same sex.

But this philosophical blunder of mine, was soon after exploded, when I was
about thirteen: A young fellow, who taught the guitar, happened to arrive in
our neighborhood. I had a tolerable voice, and entreated of my mother that I
might be suffered to learn this instrument, to accompany it, which she
consented to. I found a sort of pleasure in looking at the young man, though he
was not any way remarkably handsome; but whenever he took hold of my hands, in
order to place them properly on the guitar, I used to find myself affected with
the very same kind of emotion I had before felt, when cousin Tom used to kiss
me. Certain private intimations, or inward sensations, I knew not what, or why,
and which I could not possibly resolve into any manner of sentiment, or
philosophy, whatsoever.

This alarmed me extremely, I apprehended that I was contracting some dangerous
disorder, and mentioned these unaccountable effects to my mother. She blushed,
cast down her eyes, and seemed to be in the greatest confusion imaginable. I
felt frightened and ashamed, from sympathy and filial tenderness, without being
able to guess, or daring to ask the reason. But the very next day, my
music-master was dismissed; and I declare that I felt myself pleased at it,
without knowing why.

CHAP. CIX.
SOON after this event, my dear mother began to decline in her health -- She
had been ill for some time, of a slow fever on her spirits, which terminated in
a gradual decay, under which she pined for about two years. At length, finding
herself drawing near her end, she called me to her bedside, wept, blessed, and
embraced me.

Here my fair friend poured forth a torrent of pious tears, to the memory of
her mother, which interrupted her story, for that time; nor did I press her to
renew it, the rest of the day. And really, gentlemen, said he, the recollection
of her filial concern upon that occasion, is so strongly renewed, at present,
in my own mind, that you will excuse me now, I hope, as I then did her, from
pursuing this subject, till tomorrow evening.

Mr. Andrews and Mr. Beville bowed, Mr. Carewe wiped his eyes, and after taking
a silent turn or two, along the shore, they returned home together, supped,
conversed, and parted.

CHAP. CX.
THE next evening, the Triumvirate returning to their former station, amidst
the clump of elms, Mr. Carewe thus proceeded: That day, said he, I dined and
supped with my lovely orphan, but she insisted on my returning home to my own
chambers, at night. Our living so entirely together, both at bed and board,
said she, may possibly be taken too much notice of. I confess too that I begin
to feel myself a little frightened at our adventure, since this pause has given
me some leisure for reflection. Besides, I really want sleep and rest. Farewell,
farewell, said she, till the morning, and I will then call upon you to breakfast.

I replied, that I was neither ravisher, nor bravo, that I scorned to take
advantage of an accident, or a surprise, and would never claim any other tie
over her, than her own inclinations. But then, my charming Harriot, cried I
out, and clasping her in my arms, will you not pass the day natural then with
me, tomorrow? If, replied she, with a sigh, and a smile, at the same time, and
pressing me close to her bosom, grace shall not return in sleep, unsought for,
I will. I bowed, she bowed, then curtsied -- we laughed, and I retired.

I had now, in my turn, some leisure for my own reflections. I passed part of
the night in them. I pitied her misfortune, and would repair it. But how? On my
own part, I examined well my breast, and found I loved her not. Adventure,
frolic, and desire, only, had attached me to her. That mystic Gordian knot, of
two entwined hearts, which time itself can never resolve, but the sheers of
Atropos alone must sever, was wanting here. And on her part, she had seemed to
have acquiesced too readily in the intrigue; her conversation, since that
event, appeared rather too free; and though she still preserved her modesty,
she had, methought, resigned her chastity with too small reluctance. The veni,
vidi, vici, may enrich the spoils of war, but always impoverishes those of love.

However, upon the whole, I firmly resolved, at the hazard, nay the full
expense both of life and fortune, to steer her safely through the aukwardness
of her present circumstances; to confirm her mind, if not in female, at least
in manly virtues; and to be her friend, guide, and champion too, through every
incident of life, be her future conduct what it might. For from me she could
never possibly deserve ill, who had myself, too much undeserved from her,
already. This resolve then, serving me instead of a prayer, I folded my arms,
and slept quietly till morning.

CHAP. CXI.
SHE came to breakfast, according to her promise, and immediately after,
reassumed her story. My dear daughter, said my mother -- This expression both
surprised, and alarmed me. I thought that she had fallen into a delirium, and
was just going to expire. I threw myself on my knees by the bedside, and
taking hold of her hand, cried out, it is your son, it is Henry, dear madam, you
are now speaking to. I know full well, replied she, who you are, but alas! you
little know what you are; and I am now going to unsold a secret to you, that
will astonish you much more, but will, at the same time, explain the propriety
of that expression, which has just now surprised you.

She then revealed to me the whole mystery of my metamorphose, in the manner I
have before related it to you, and then concluded her speech in these words: My
dear daughter, said she, for now you will give me leave to call you by that
name, behold with fear and caution, the difficult and hazardous course you have
for the future, to steer alone! I would have guided your little bark, and
guarded this secret from you, for some years longer, had fate permitted. But I
must now entrust you to yourself, at the most dangerous time of life, without
the protection of any other matron, but your own sense and virtue. It Is
however, some consolation to my mind, to think that your present mask will
screen you from all outward perils, and I trust that those principles, both of
honor and religion, in which I have so carefully educated you, even from your
lisping years, have by this time, sufficiently shielded you within.

I have taught you that religion should be our principal business in this life,
as it will certainly become our only concern in the next. I have instructed you
that chastity was a virtue, required even in a man; how much more then, must
you think it requisite, in your present sex, when the opinion of the world, and
the laws of civil society both, join to demand it! And for this purpose,
believe me, that modesty is the surest bulwark you can raise; it is the advanced
guard, which upon being assaulted, gives timely notice to the citadel, for its
defense.

With this great view then, you may have observed that I have all along, bred
you up, rather as a woman, than a man; giving you the very same education, both
in morals and manners, with your sister; that you might have nothing to
unlearn, should you hereafter, at any time, be induced to confess your real
sex. For masculine manners are very incompatible with female morals, as liberty
in one way, is apt to extend itself in an other; and the departing from our
character, in any part of our conduct, is so apt to lead us astray, that we may
not always be able to find our way home again.

I confess that I have sometimes repented me of this stratagem," continued she,
"more particularly since I have fallen ill; beginning to think that this world
itself, were too dearly purchased, even with the least deceit. But then I
considered again, that my nephew will derive a very good fortune from his
father, and that I have done nothing more, by this finesse, than establish my
own father's estate in the eldest branch of his family, where by the rights of
primogeniture, it should naturally remain, were it not for that too partial
distinction between the male and female line, which I make little account of,
as founded more in law, than nature; that you will, by this means, have it in
your power to do more good; and lastly, that to discover the secret now would
be to brand my own character with an indelible stain. The world would then cry,
it was wickedness in the first instance, and weakness in the last.

I therefore recommend it to you, my dear child, said she, to continue the
masquerade, till you come into possession of the estate; when you may go out of
these kingdoms, live abroad, and change your condition, as well as your garb,
as you may find yourself inclined hereafter.

She then embraced me, and I parted from her in the utmost astonishment, and
difficulty. I could not believe my senses. I suspected all this novel to be
merely visionary, either in my mother's mind, or my own comprehension of it. I
ran to my nurse, and examined her about this story, but she confirmed every
particular of it; and, to put the matter beyond all dispute, gave me, alas! too
certain demonstrations of my sex.

The effect of this extraordinary discovery in me, is not to be described. My
spirits sunk suddenly, like those in a thermometer, upon a chilling blast. I
felt a sensation creeping through my veins, like an ague fit, with a sort of
timorousness stealing over my shoulders, like children left in the dark. I felt
awkward and helpless, like one who had lost a limb; I wept my fall, mourned my
imperfect state, and like another Adam, blushed at the discovery of my
nakedness. In short, I was affected all over, rather like a person that had
really suffered the metamorphosis, from man to woman, than one who had been but
barely informed of it. And becoming now a woman indeed, I fell from one
hysteric fit, into another, and laughed and cried myself by turns, out of them
again.

CHAP. CXII.
ABOUT two days after, my dear mother expired in my arms. I grew inconsolable:
A double distress oppressed my mind, to lose her, and to find myself! My
grandfather came to the house the day she died, just time enough to give her
his blessing, and to bid her farewell. He lamented her, after his manner, Poor
girl, she was indeed a good creature! but good or bad, do you see me, we must all
go, one time or another.

Then turning to me, cried, Hearkee me, youth, no more of your piping and
sniveling now, for though you have lost a mother, do you mind, you have got a
much better thing, which is a father, child. You have been too long tied to an
apron-string already, but it is I that shall have the management of you, now. I
design you for the army, do you mark me, but you shall go to the colleges first;
for though I am not much book-learned myself, look you, I don't think it
absolutely necessary to be a blockhead, to be a good soldier. No -- far from it
-- I have known several officers fight stoutly enough, though they had both
sense and learning to boot. The king of Prussia, do you mind, is not only the
bravest general in the world, but the compleatest too, in other matters. Not
that they signify, in the least, believe me, as to the main point; but what I
mean, is, that they don't hinder. As the renowned Don Quixotte says, The pen
blunts not the lance --

Now there is an example for you, my boy, fellow me that, I say -- And indeed I
don't doubt, but with a little of my instructions, after you have done with
your books, for good and all, you may. I don't love much bragging about the
matter, do you mind, but let me tell you, younker, for all that, I know the
thing, that is certain. Nay, that is given up to me by all.

You may reasonably conclude, said she, that I was by no means in a temper of
mind, to relish all this harangue, especially the fighting part of it; however,
I looked submission, called him my father, my only parent now; and promised him
that his commands should always be the rule of my obedience.

He let off the house, brought my sister and me home with him, and in about a
year after, disposed of her in marriage, with an additional portion of two
thousand pounds, to a gentleman of fortune in the neighborhood; and placed me
at this university, about two years ago. The rest you know too well, said she,
and concluded her narration, with a sigh.

CHAP. CXIII.
I Don't know how it might have struck my readers, as probably few of them may
be philosophers, but I affirm, that from the first, I began to suspect this
extraordinary personage to be a woman. He was not possessed of any great
logical faculties, but had a refined taste, a facility in languages, but in the
deeper studies and sciences, dull and slow. He was fond and curious about
experimental philosophy, but never troubled his head about the reasons of them,
etc. See chapter C. second and third paragraphs.
Prithee are not these the characteristics of a woman? And need she wear
petticoats, to declare her gender.

Epictetus says, that attempting to catch weak minds, with study, is like
fishing for custard, with an hook. Now I confess that this image is a very
absurd one, for it conveys no sort of natural idea. Huswives never throw
custards into a river, though the yellowness of the Tiber, upon the banks of
which Epictetus lived, or rather starved, might have led him to imagine they
did. But if they had, surely no alderman of those days, unless they were more
stupid than those in the present times, which I think morally impossible, would
have ever thought, as well as they love them, of such an instrument to catch
custard with.

But your ancient philosophers had but slobbering notions of things, in
comparison of our modern adepts; and as they are generally interpreted, more by
guess, than construction, I suppose the sense of Epictetus, to be, that women
have rarely a sufficient depth, for heavy lading; for that the weight which
might ballast a ship, would sink a boat. There may perhaps, have been amazons
in literature, as well as in war; but all I contend for here, is, that let the
Thracians, or Samothracians, boast what they will, there never was an army of
them.

And this natural economy, in the distribution of parts, was certainly, most
admirably designed, by Providence. The eastern allegory conveys the hint to us,
in a very ingenious manner. Woman, it is said, was formed of the slightest rib
of man, on the left side, which embraced the heart. Now, by a metonymy, let us
substitute the heart for the rib; and this we know to be sensible of
impression, but incapable of reason. Women therefore, were given to us, for the
sole purposes of feeling, and she who would pretend to assume an higher
character in life, in my opinion well deserves a rib-roasting.

Tacitus says of the English, when the Romans had established an empire among
them, Jam domiti ut pareant, nondum ut serviant. They were so far conquered, as
to become subjects, but not slaves. And this should be the motto of wives. A
man and his wife may be compared to the nominative and genitive cases, in
grammar; the first always governs, the second never. Women have confessedly
certain privileges, but they become rebels when they would extend them to
prerogatives. The Salique law -- the Salique law.

They were designed, not to harden our morals, but to soften our manners, not
to stiffen our philosophy, but to relax our studies. All subjects of taste
then, as Shaftsbury says they may be referred to sensation, fall properly
enough within their province. Music, poetry, painting, dress, entertainments,
etc. Topics of these kinds, though we should differ about them, can never raise
the heat of argument between us, sufficiently high to interrupt that harmony
and concord, which should ever subsist among the sexes; for you know the adage,
de gustibus non, etc. But should subjects of science once arise, then the
argument, then the vindiction, then the scholastic warfare begins! For of
science, man is proud, and woman vain.

CHAP. CXIV.
BUT with regard to the -- you know what I mean, methinks our friend Mr. Carewe
is a little too severe, upon our heroine, in his late night thoughts Chapter
CX. last paragraph but one.
. But as Noll Bluff says, he was then become as calm as a discharged culverin.
This is the only season for philosophy. Prithee, what woman in the world, could
have behaved otherwise, in her situation? Her mother indeed gave her a chaste
education, but then she takes and tucks up the poor girl's catastrophe, in a
pair of breeches; and pray did you ever know any woman come to good, that wore
them? Nay, even drawers are too much -- They are symbolical.

Then again, what between her gender, and her garb, she might be deemed to be
neither man or woman, but both between; and between two stools -- You know the
rest of the proverb.

But she resigned her chastity too easily, you say -- Perhaps she could not
help it. A lock never refuses the key, when it is in order. This was an adage of
Vulcan's, though some mythologists, with more probability, attribute it to the
blacksmith's wife. Persons may be burned in their beds, but would it be fair to
style them suicremators, upon that account? The flame might be none of theirs,
though the combustibles were. The smell of fire, it is said, renders the senses
lethargic, and it is too late to fly, when the flames surround us.

Now there are flames, even stronger than those of fire; and whatever inclines,
is more powerful still, than that which compels us. A resisting combatant may
wear out his antagonist, but to take away the power of resistance, is a
complete conquest indeed. Now pray consider the entire circulation of her blood
suspended for a quarter of an hour, then set a flowing again by the warmth of a
young fellow's embrace; and the tepid tide rushing from the heart into all
parts of the body, at once. Consider that she had been in a swoon, and that the
senses are the first things which awaken. Chastity might have continued still
asleep; for in the most virtuous woman, it may sometimes be taken napping.

The stoics divide man, into three parts, the body, the animal soul, and the
intellectual one. To the first, belong the senses or notices; to the second,
the appetites and passions; and to the third, reason and virtue. Now as this is
the order in which they ripen in our nature, it must certainly be the
succession of their awakening from our sleep. I would have women therefore, be
very careful to bolt their chamber-doors at night, so as to receive timely
notice; for a world of mischief may be done with two thirds of her, before she
may possibly be able to stretch and yawn herself into reason or virtue.

And as for her acquiescing so readily in the affair afterward, I am sure we
have all been told, that whenever a misfortune happens to us, we should always
endeavor to make the best of it.

But what will clear up my fair client's character beyond every blot of
censure, is this, that the poor child was but three years old, at the time of
her undoing. For it certainly is not fair to compute her age, but from the date
of her metamorphose, which was at fifteen; and she was only eighteen, at the
time of her fall.

She compares herself to Adam, in the first crisis Chapter CXI. last paragraph.
, and we may resemble her to Eve, in the latter one: For though I am the first
divine that ever had charity or duty enough, toward our great grandmother, to
make the least manner of apology for her conduct, in a matter which was
certainly more her misfortune, than her fault, I, as champion for the sex, must
ask you now, what sense or virtue could be expected in a brat of a year old?
And Eve was really no more, when she first played hell and the devil, with old
nick; for from the very best accounts we have, it was the first year after her
creation.

And this method of interpreting original sin, accounts for a difficulty which
has ever puzzled both philosophers and orthodoxians, with regard to the origin
of blacka moors; which in the natural way, say they, must have required another
Adam, or second first man; but in the supernatural way, I will be bold to
affirm, that they are undoubtedly the progeny of the devil and Eve, in
conjunctione copulativo. And this became farther manifest afterward, when this
globe came to be distinguished into zones, from their naturally taking
possession of the torrid one, as being most congenial to the fiery constitution
of this hellish breed.

CHAP. CXV.
WE lived together, for some time, in the pleasantest way in the world, by
mingling love and books together, till my poor pope Joan began to perceive
herself to be with child. At first she knew not what ailed her, and did not in
the least, suspect the truth of the matter. And indeed how should she? She was
always considered as a boy, and therefore women never spoke freely before her,
as it is possible they may sometimes do, among themselves; and her mother died,
and her nurse was discharged, too soon after the discovery, to instruct her in
the nature of those things.

And indeed, she has since declared to me, that she had not the least notion,
of any couple's being capacitated to beget children, except a married one. That
having heard of the mystery of marriage, the wedding ring, the indissoluble
knot, that man and wife were thereby rendered one flesh, etc. she had
carelessly concluded, that there must have been some sort of a free mason's
secret in the matter, which the priest had the sole power of initiating the
couple into, when he performed the ceremony. And that she had imagined what had
passed between us, might have been indeed, the unchaste joys of lovers, but
could really never have conceived them to have been the chaste duties of the
marriage rites.

But when she was made sensible of her mistake, she grew extremely unhappy, she
upbraided me severely, called me seducer, betrayer, etc. in one breath, and in
another, pressed me to marry her. I replied with a line in a Scotch song,
"Jockey would loo, but he wo'na marry," adding, that ceremony among friends,
was absurd, but to take up forms, where one should leave them off, ridiculous
to the last degree. That we had really as much matrimony already between us, as
might satisfy any two reasonable people, and that a clause of surrender, always
raised the value of any tenure. That marriage would be quite inconsistent with
the plot that was carrying on for the estate, that it must expose us to the
necessity of making a new confidant, which would certainly be too idle an
hazard to run, for a bare punctilio. That I would take care to extricate her
from this difficulty, with sufficient address, and it would be time enough
then, to settle plans for future conduct.

This sort of jest and earnest apology, silenced, though not satisfied her; but
served however, to render her seemingly easy, for the present. She kept
entirely within her own apartments, wore a loose bagniane, wrapped about her, and
received no visits, except from me, on pretense of studying for a fellowship.

About a month before she was to lie in, the long vacation happened to come on,
and I took a private lodging for her, about forty miles from Oxford. We set out
at night in a post-chaise together, and the next morning she assumed an entire
female garb, that I had supplied her with long before, at college, for the
pleasure and variety of seeing her a woman sometimes, when we used to shut
ourselves up entirely in my chambers.

CHAP. CXVI.
LADIES, I am much afraid that there is one particular, in this story, which
will shock your faith extremely. A girl of eighteen, not to know how a womon is
got with child! a probable, tale, truly! And yet I do really think such a thing
may be very possible; first, because she affirms it; next, because her mother
and her nurse guarded her equally from the converse of man and woman. And they
were much in the right of it to defend particularly against the latter, for
fear of a discovery. It Is mother's maids that debauch all boys. I Will tell you
the story of my first surprise, some time or other, when I am in the humor,
and I assure you it will entertain you vastly. Besides, might she not have read
the story of Jupiter and Ganymede, the Formosum pastor Corydon ardebit Alexim,
the account of Sappho and the Lesbian maids, the comedy of Love's Labor lost,
or Concubitus sine Lutina, etc? And is not a mixture of learning, apt to breed
indigested ideas, and lead one into very unphilosophical inferences?

And in the last place, who could ever imagine, from the mere light of nature
alone, or from any manner of a priori reasoning, without the assistance of
experimental philosophy, or a posteriori evidence, that a woman could possibly
be got with child, so ridiculously?

I have really known a few instances, myself, of this ignorance, in girls, who
have lived very far in the country; and I remember a young lady once, of about
seventeen, who upon hearing a gross expression one day, by accident, came up to
me, and repeating it, asked me, as a scholar, what was the meaning of that hard
word?

I met lately, among some French tracts, with an authentic story of two young
peasants, which I will relate to you after my own manner, not having the book
by me. Take it as follows:

The story of Lubin and Annete.
THEIR parents were both poor, and lived in a little village on the river
Seine, in France, which consisted only of their two cabbins, and huts for their
cattle. The fathers and mothers, on both sides, happened to die, before Lubin
was eighteen, and when Annete was about sixteen. They were cousin Germans, and
both extremely handsome.

As there was no fortune, in either of their families, worth the while of
guardians, executors or trustees to pillage them of, each of the heirs took
peaceful possession of their respective claims, which consisted of a few cows,
some sheep, goats and poultry, with a small vineyard, which their fathers had
held in partnership before,

These young persons had been bred up together, from their infancy, and had
contracted a mutual passion for each other, without knowing it; taking it to be
only the usual warmth of friendship. When the last of their parents died, they
joined their stocks, lived in common, and in the true state of innocence,
together.

There was a small market town, within two miles of their hamlet, to which one
or the other of them used to carry a lamb, a kid, or any thing else to sell,
just as they might have them fit to dispose of. One day, Annete went alone to
market, with a basket of chickens on her arm. The bailiff of the town, took
notice of the roundness of her waist, and asked her if any thing ailed her? No
indeed, Sir, said she, dropping a curtsy, I thank you -- I am as well as ever I
was in my life, thank God. What makes your hips swell so of late then, my
pretty Annete? Indeed Sir, I cannot guess the reason, but I find myself growing
fat every day, without knowing why, for I labor as hard as ever, and don't
eat, drink, or sleep, a bit more than usual.

You are married then, I suppose, replied the bailiff? No indeed, Sir. You have
got a lover, my pretty Annete? No indeed, Sir. I never saw one in all my life.
Pray tell me who sleeps with you a-nights now, my pretty lass? Why my cousin
Lubin, to be sure, answered the innocent. Then cousin Lubin is a rogue, said
the bailiff, and has got you with child, my pretty Annete. Upon this expression
she stared, asked how? and then clapping her hands for joy, cried out, Je ferai
peute etre un petit Lubin!

The fair Raravis returned home to her cottage, extremely rejoiced at this
news, and chid her Lubin for not letting her into the secret before. He was as
much surprised as she, and declared his equal ignorance of the matter; saying,
it is an odd way truly, of getting children, by romping, and tickling one
another!

The priest of the parish, hearing of this extraordinary story, came to the
village, and rated them soundly, about living in so criminal a state together.
This surprised them both, still more, than the other. They replied, like
simpletons and illiterates, as they were, that they could not possibly imagine
themselves to have been guilty of any manner of crime, in what had passed. We
had neither of us any envy, hatred, or malice, in what we did -- we injured no
body, and we pleased ourselves. To which Lubin added, can a sin, and its
contrary, be both criminal, at the same time? Are we guilty in killing one
person, and in bringing another into life, also?

Tush, tush, cried the priest, you add presumption to your crime, by daring to
reason with me. But is it possible, added he, that you can be so very ignorant,
as to doubt that the bringing a bastard into the world, is a crime? The holy
father then will kill it, cried out the simple Annete, and leaning on Lubin's
shoulder, wept bitterly.

The honest Lubin then turning to the priest, fell upon his knees, saying, O
father! I ask God's pardon, and yours, for happening, though by mere accident,
to get a child without your consents; but I am most willing to marry my cousin,
this instant, in order to prevent such wickedness, for the future.

Son, replied the father, I am as willing as you can be, to stop up the gap of
fornication, and lay open the gates of chastity; but it is proper first, that
you acquaint me, what kind of relation you bear to this young woman? I think
you styled her cousin, a while ago? pray what degree of kindred does she stand
in toward you?

Good father, replied the distressed Lubin, Annete is my first cousin. What!
cousin German? Yes, father, the same. This is more unlucky still, replied the
priest, for it is not now in my power, any way to accommodate your misfortunes;
as the church absolutely forbids all such consanguineous unions.

Upon this last sentence, the unhappy innocents retired home, weeping together,
to their cottage, where from scruples of conscience, they resolved to keep
separate beds, for life. They continued in this state of divorce for some time,
pining away, and languishing at each other, till the lord of the manor, having
been told their story, sent for them both, and after examining them, and being
fully convinced of their real simplicity and innocence, took compassion on
them, and obtained a dispensation for them, from pope Benedict the fourteenth,
to beget good catholics for the future, according to form.

CHAP. CXVII.
THE ingenious Monsieur Marmontel was so struck with this story, that he has
worked it up into a pretty novel, and inserted it among his writings, under the
title of Histoire Veritable, in order to distinguish it from some others, which
were only founded in fiction. In the preface to it, he speaks thus: If it be
dangerous, says he, to render young people too knowing, it is, on the other
hand, rather more so, to let them remain too ignorant; for there are offenses
against laws, which do not appear to be so against nature; and I am here going
to afford you one instance how far innocence may err, when the bandage is kept
too close upon the eyes.

You may see, ladies, from these examples, joined to that of mother Eve, that a
state of innocence, is a state of fall. Therefore, as I have ever known you to
swallow advice, as the sand does rain, and to keep both ears open to it, that
it may go in at one, and out at the other, I would recommend it to you to be
always, as to be sure you are already, innocent as doves, but wily as serpents,
at the same time.

But in truth, girls, I cannot contrive what in the world to do with ye. Your
mothers are quite at a loss, between freedom and restraint, to know how to
educate ye. It really requires a great depth in natural philosophy, for ethics
will not do alone, to be able to conduct ye safe through life, considering ye
still as free agents. Therefore women are unequal to the task, and men are
improper for it.

What Is to be done then? for my part, I prefer the eastern manner of
cloystering ye, to any other. For as women must be slaves, either to opinion,
or restraint, I think it much less severity to put their chastity out of
danger, than to annex infamy to the lapse of it. Women are in a pitiaable
condition indeed! our sex seduce them, and their own preven their reformation!

CHAP. CXVIII.
IN our new sojournment we kept ourselves quite retired, nor ventured to stir
abroad, except to take a short walk in the evenings, in a walled garden which
belonged to the house where we lodged. We neither of us brought any servants
with us, from the university, for fear of a discovery, but I hired a man, and
she a maid, in the village where we were situated.

I suffered my share of anxiety, as well as she, during this interval, till one
night about ten o'clock, after we had supped, the pains of labor came upon
her. I called up the midwife, nurse, and landlady to her, and then ran up to my
own room, which lay just over here is. Her groans pierced my ears and heart. I
could not stand them. I ran down the first flight of the stairs, in order to
get out of the house, but as her pains increased, her cries became so shocking,
that I had not resolution enough to pass by her door -- I ran back again, and
locked myself in, like one pursued for a murder.

I felt like Jaffeir, when he had betrayed his friend to the rack. I opened the
window, with a design of leaping out of it, into the garden, when I heard her
screeches subsiding to a moan, and the landlady, soon after, running up stairs,
cried out, Your wife is safe, and I wish you joy of a son. I hastily opened the
door, caught her in my arms, and thanked her for the joyful news, but adding,
in a generous transport, It Is well! but by Heaven I never will get her with
child again, unless she vexes me. The good woman cried Tush, you fool, is that
the way you will reward her labor? and ran laughing down stairs.

This happy event much relieved both our minds, and our joy was doubled in our
present awkward circumstances, that it was not a daughter. We congratulated
each other upon this occasion, and as we were both of us university lads, we
resolved to have all the ancient ceremonies performed, in honor of our terrae
filius. Accordingly, on the fifth day, we passed him through the rites of the
amphidromia, and appointed the festus nominalis, five days after, for his
christening; both of which were executed according to the most exact
formalities, of the Greek and Roman antiquities.

When the curate asked me the name of the child, I answered Hermaphrodite. The
parson, mistaking the name, for the nature of the infant, refused to go on with
the ceremony. It is not orthodox, said he, to give such a creature baptism. It
can never be a good Christian, that is plain. How can it make a fair show in the
flesh? how serve the Lord with all its members? how be fruitful and multiply?
All which things I do affirm to be required of a perfect Christian.

I laughed at the doctor's mistake, and told him that this was a
patro-matro-nimic, given to the son of Mercury and Venus; and that I looked
upon ours also, to be the child of wit and love, alluding to the mother's
beauty, and my being reared in the lap of the muses.

May be so, may be so, replied the doctor. I have forgot all your heathen
stories, entirely -- An heap of idle inventions, all of them. I stick to the
Bible -- I am sure there are as extraordinary ones there -- One need not turn
to the Pantheon, to look for them. And if they read the Bible at Oxford,
instead of your Ovid's Metamorphoses, I am positively sure and certain, that it
would do every bit as well -- nay better too, for one may learn a great deal of
good out of the Bible, moreover. But Christianity is disregarded nowadays,
and all our youth are bred up perfect heathens.

In the interim of this discussion, the nurse had slily unpinned the child's
rocket, stripped up its flannels, and presented it, heels foremost, to the
doctor. He then put on his spectacles, which he had been twirling about his
thumbs, during the harangue, and after examining the infant, matriculatively,
cried, Ay, ay, this will do; this child is within a very few words of becoming
an excellent Christian; and then proceeded to the consummation of it.

After the ceremony was over, she smiled at my whim in the nomination of the
child, but desired, lest perhaps other people might be led into the same
mistake with the doctor, that we should stick to the male part of the
derivation, and style our son Hermes only, for the future. This I readily
agreed to, and the doctor concurred with us, saying, it certainly was a much
more Christian name, than the other.

During her confinement here, I never stirred from her bedside, except when I
retired to meals, or that she fell into a slumber; reading to and coversing
with her constantly, to keep up her spirits; and as we passed under the
character of man and wife, and that I had changed my name, we had this same
curate of the parish to read prayers for us, morning and evening; and when she
was able to sit up at meals, I asked him frequently to dinner, which was a
great relief to us both, as she was become very reserved and thoughtful, and
that I began to grow intolerably uneasy at the confinement.

CHAP. CXIX.
ABOUT a fortnight after she was brought to bed, gentlemen, continued Mr.
Carewe, an adventure happened to me, which I shall relate to you here, in its
proper place.

My landlord took me aside, one evening, and told me that there was a lady just
come to his house, who desired to speak with me. I never staid to inquire who
she was, what she was, or what her business? My only question was, Where is
she? He led me down stairs to the parlour, and opening the door, cried, Madam,
here is the gentleman you want, and retired.

I walked into the room, and a lady richly dressed, remarkably tall, finely
made, and about five and twenty, rose gracefully from her seat, curtsied, and
moved forward. I bowed, and we advanced briskly toward each other, I to salute
her, and she to shut the door, which she did, and bolted it too, at the same
time, taking a kiss en passant. Then returning to her seat, and placing me
close by her, she turned a very handsome face toward me, and thus began:

The freedom I have taken with you, Sir, must certainly surprise a stranger,
but the business I have to propose to you, will probably do so much more. I
have been married these seven years, to a gentleman in this neighborhood; and
my husband has really behaved toward me, during all that time, not indeed as
well as it was possible, but as well, I suppose, as men generally do to their
wives; so that upon that score, I have no manner of complaint against him.

How irksome, dear Sir, must it then be, to a woman who has no charge to bring
against an husband, on her own part, to be reduced to the sad necessity of
urging one, and of the blackest dye too, against him, on a foreign account;
without malice, resentment, or the least manner of provocation, to impel her to
it.

Yet such, however, is my unfortunate situation, continued she, applying her
handkerchief to her large blue eyes; for my husband has been lately guilty of a
most barbarous, cruel, and premeditated murder, which not only cries aloud to
Heaven for vengeance, but to me in a most particular manner, for justice, as I
am perhaps the sole person alive, who can detect this villainy, as being the
only one who knows any thing of the malice praepense, which could have induced
a man, in other things tolerably good, to perpetrate so atrocious a crime.

Nothing, you may be assured, dear Sir, continued she, could have induced me to
enter into such a prosecution, but the clamorous cries of justice, and of
blood, which supersede all other obligations, and make me dread the divine
vengeance on myself, as an accomplice, should I suffer my ears to be shut
against their urgent calls.

You may think it extraordinary, perhaps, that I should address myself to you,
who are a stranger, and a man of no power or authority, in this shire. But
should I have applied to any of the neighboring justices, I was afraid, as
they are all my husband's friends, lest they might privately convey an hint to
him to make his escape, to lock me up, or probably, by some more effectual
method, to put it out of my power ever to appear against him.

I bethought myself, therefore, of placing myself and my cause, under your
protection; for having seen you several times at church here, and taken notice
of your respectable appearance, as a young man of fortune and fashion, and
being informed, upon inquiry, that you were come to reside, for some time, at
this house, I believed that your interfering in this matter, would not only
assist me to obtain justice, but also screen me from the violence and
resentment of my husband, upon this melancholic occasion. Here she closed her
charge, continuing still to weep, as she had done almost through the whole of
her harangue.

I was shocked, astonished, and concerned. For God's sake, madam, said I, what
are the particulars of this horrid murder? what inward consciousness have you
to accuse him upon? or what outward circumstance, to prove him guilty of the
fact? Sir, replied she, the body was found murdered, in a pit, and the person's
horse lay killed just by him, to prevent his running home to raise the alarm
too soon. My husband was the last person known to be in his company, and has
for some time, suspected him of an intrigue with me, since which surmise he has
never suffered him to come within his doors, bearing him constant grudge, and
deadly malice.

CHAP. CXX.
I Told her that I did not see sufficient grounds, upon the whole of the story,
to take away a man's life, who had any rank or character in the world; but your
internal evidence, madam, said I, which seems the most material, with you, will
never sway, nor ought it, with a jury. I therefore advised her to return home,
to say nothing of her intended prosecution, which should for ever be buried in
silence with me, to leave the detection of this crime to Providence, and the
punishment of it to the laws; for that, if there was any foundation, from facts
or circumstances, to charge the murder upon her husband, there would probably,
soon arise more natural and unquestionable prosecutors against him, than a
suspected, and provoked wife could ever possibly be deemed.

What effect can your evidence probably have, added I, except to fix the
indelible stain upon your own character, of two the most abominable and
unjustifiable crimes in nature; an offense against an husband's bed, and an
attempt upon his life? The first may ever remain problematical, if the latter
does not add demonstration to it. The adultress will hunt for the precious
life. And with regard to him, continued I, it must rather serve to acquit, than
condemn him; for the very cause of your suspicion, may in some sort, be deemed
the reason of his excuse.

The highest injury and mortification a man can possibly receive, went I on, is
from an offense of this nature -- The resentment and provocation must
therefore, rise, in proportion to the wrong. This is so well understood, and
admitted of, by legislators, continued I, that there is always an indulgence
shown, in the administration of the laws, upon the fatal effects of any sudden
transport of passion, on such an occasion.

But persons may not always be able, or sufciently prepared, to execute their
resentment, upon the first discovery; and as the Christian code By the Jewish
laws the adulterer and adultress, were both stoned to death.
has not thought proper to adequate a penalty to the offense -- for what are
fines or imprisonment, to a man's own sense of the wrong? -- I really think
that a resentment, shown upon the first opportunity, as well as upon the first
provocation, may be perfectly agreeable to reason, though not, it seems, to
law. He will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou
give many gifts. Nor may this be deemed of the nature of malice praepense,
neither, while the injury continues still instant to the soul, and that the
sense of it may rather gain strength, from reflection. For jealousy is the rage
of a man, therefore he will not spare, in the day of vengeance.

Now, to sum up all, madam, said I, and rising from my seat, give me leave to
add, that the justice which you say, and which I shall still preserve charity
enough to presume you are actuated by, is much mistaken in this point; for
there are, believe me, let the stoics urge what they will, certain duties,
within duties, which may render that action, which would be just in one,
unjustifiable in another.

CHAP. CXXI.
SHE seemed extremely confounded, rose and walked toward the window, wiped her
eyes, and then turning about to me, with a constrained composure in her air; So
young a preacher, said she, I have never heard before, and you may be an
orthodox one too, for aught I know; but this I am sure of, that after the steps
I have already taken, this day, in first charging my husband with the murder,
and then eloping from him, it is now too late for me to think of returning home
again. Even should he receive me, how could it be possible for us ever to live
on any terms, together, after his having suspected me of adultery, and my
accusing him of murder!

I have therefore no resource left me now, said she, with a sigh, and
countenance full of distress, but to pursue this point, at least so far, as to
frighten him into some terms of separate maintenance; which, after what you
have said to me, upon this extraordinary occasion, shall, I assure you, be the
utmost of my malice against him. And surely, Sir, said she, catching hold of my
hand, and falling on her knees before me, you will not refuse me your humane
and generous assistance, so far at least, as may be requisite to extricate an
unfortunate woman, out of so shocking a dilemma.

I raised her up in my arms, and -- I am quite ashamed of it, gentlemen, said
he, looking at Andrews and Beville -- I could not refrain from embracing her. I
had really conceived the most virtuous abhorrence, of her crimes, but -- I
don't know how it was, I found the kissing her, most wickedly pleasant.

I then promised to take her person under my protection, though I would not
patronize her vice; and telling her that it would not be proper for me to be
seen any more in her company, for the remainder of that evening, I left her in
the care of my landlady, and retired to see how my fair invalid had rested
since I had parted from her.

I found her just awakened from a refreshing slumber, and with that steady calm
temper which she had constantly preserved, through the whole course of her
confinement in this place. She was thoughtful, but not grave; easy, though not
gay; and had that kind of even cheerfulness always about her, which flows
rather from a composure of mind, than a mirthfulness of heart.

I did not mention a word of my adventure below stairs, and had given the same
caution to the whole house, as I was afraid that the shocking circumstances of
the story, might have too much affected the weakness of her spirits, in her
present invalid state; and that possibly, it might have alarmed her with a
little jealousy, also, as there was sufficient reason to suspect, that the
lady's chief concern about the matter, might have been for the loss of one
galant, and her principal end in applying herself to me, be for the compassing
another.

I sat and conversed with her, till her nurse-tender dismissed me, and then
retired up stairs to my own apartment, read for an hour or two, and went
supperless to bed.

CHAP. CXXII.
THE next morning, about eight o'clock, I was awakened by some body coming into
my chamber; and as I never shut the windows, at night, in order to rise early,
I perceived a gentleman whom I had never seen before, walk into the room, in
boots, with a pale, frightened look, and a pistol in each hand. I called out to
him to stand, and declare his business, instantly, or I would fire at him;
leaping into the floor, on the opposite side of the bed, and snatching up one
of my pistols, which lay on a chair, just by it.

He answered me as quick as I could speak, in these words: Dear Sir, I ask
pardon for this abrupt appearance, and be assured that I wear not these arms,
to offend you, but to defend myself; and so far from meaning to assault you,
Sir, I am rather come hither to require your protection. I then desired him to
lay down his arms, on the table, and take his seat, till I should have put on
my clothes. He did so, but while I was dressing myself, proceeded thus:

I am come, Sir, said he, to complete the adventure you had with a certain
lady, yesterday evening. I am, alas! the unfortunate husband of that wicked
woman, who in revenge for my not having repudiated her, some time since, which
I am now convinced she was disappointed in, is at present, endeavoring to set
herself free from the marriage chain, by the most diabolical stratagem,
imaginable. She eloped from me, yesterday evening, continued he, after some
very warm expressions, on both sides, she quitted the room in a rage, and left
me in such astonishment and confusion, that I did not know she had gone away
from my house, till the bell rang for supper.

I then sent servants all round the neighborhood, to inquire after her, and
about five o'clock this morning, one of them returned back and informed me,
that she had been seen alighting at this house, from behind a tenant of mine,
who lives in a little village near me. I was still sitting up, so mounted my
horse, and rode off directly hither.

As soon as I arrived, I inquired from the landlord, what he knew about her,
and he told me that when she came to his house she desired to speak with the
gentleman stranger who lodged here, that he immediately introduced you, Sir, to
her, and then left you together, in the parlour; that you remained there but
about half an hour, and then retired up stairs to your own apartments, for the
remainder of the night.

I then desired him to show me the chamber where she lay, and having left my
pistols in his charge, for fear of alarming her, I went softly into the room,
opened the window-shutters, and then going to the bedside, gently put aside
the curtain, to see if she was awake. She opened her eyes, just at the time,
looked at me for half a minute, before she could recollect herself, then
shrieked out, and hid her head under the clothes.

I sat down by the bedside, and desired her to be under no manner of
apprehension of any violence from me, that I only came to expostulate with her,
calmly, upon her hasty expressions, and precipitate flight; and also desired to
know, how far she intended to carry her wickedness and disobedience.

She then uncovered her head, and with a steady countenance, replied, that she
really deemed me a murderer, and had therefore fled from my house, in fear of
her own life; that, on the way, her conscience had urged her to a prosecution
against me, and that despairing of justice, from any of my own quorum, she had
applied to a stranger, for assistance, who had generously promised it to her.

By this time I was dressed, and sitting down by him, repeated to him all the
circumstances of the charge his wife had brought against him. I told him that
there was certainly foundation enough, to put him upon his trial, at least,
that guilty, or not, this affair must be attended with considerable scandal,
trouble, expense, and hazard. But that be he criminal, or be he not, taking all
circumstances together, I compassionated his unhappy situation, and if he would
heartily relate to me the whole truth of the story, I would be his friend, so
far, as to put a stop to the iniquitous and unnatural prosecution, on his
wife's part.

Sir, replied he, with an expression of joy and surprise in his countenance,
your generosity and humanity have won a secret from me, which I never should,
nor indeed ought to have revealed, to any other person breathing; but now, said
he, rising, and lifting up his hands and eyes to the ceiling, with the same
sincerity with which I entreat of Heaven forgiveness for my offense, I will
confess my crime, in this article, fully to you. So saying, he returned to his
seat, and thus began:

CHAP. CXXIII.
MY father died soon after I became of age, and left me, who was his only
child, a clear estate, of about a thousand pounds a year. I lived an idle,
debauched life, like other young men, till I was two and thirty. At that
unlucky era, I first saw this woman, fell in love, and married her, without a
fortune.

She was then, about eighteen, and from what she appears to be this day, one
may easily judge what a charming person she must have been, at that age. We
lived in perfect harmony together, for near six years, during which interval,
she bore me one son, and a daughter.

About a year ago, and near the unhappy end of this too happy period, a
gentleman arrived from the university, at his seat about four or five miles
distant from me. As this is a neighborhood in the country, and that I had been
formerly well acquainted with his father, I paid in due course, the first visit
to him.

He was a young man, of about two and twenty, not handsome, but of a genteel
person, and had that peculiar easy air about him, which denotes both birth and
breeding. He was hardly endowed with even a moderate share of understanding,
but had that kind of liveliness, and nonchalance in his manners, which is too
apt to captivate women, because it does not alarm them sufficiently to put
themselves upon their guard.

In about a month after, he returned my visit, and staid a week with us. He was
all frolic, and dissipation. He gave a shift, to be run for by the girls of the
village, a hat, to be cudgeled for, a saddle, for a horse-race, and tobacco, to
be grinned for by old women. He made me send for a fiddler, and summon all the
young people in the neighborhood, to a ball; and used to din our ears, in the
morning, with the noise of his hounds, and French horns.

He gave us an invitation at parting, and in a few days, we returned his visit.
The same kind of active idleness and extravagance, continued while we staid
there. Strange, giddy creature! my wife would sometimes say, he is as innocent
and undesigning, as an infant -- but he will run through his fortune and
constitution, as other young heirs do, before he has given himself time for the
enjoyment of either. A friend, such as you are, she would add, who has so much
the advantage of him, in years and sobriety, must be of vast service, to
prevent his falling into the hands of harlots, and sharpers. I thought as she
spoke, and therefore encouraged a frequent intercourse between us.

CHAP. CXXIV.
I Have seldom known a good end come of inmates, of this kind, in a man's
house. The husband is sometimes en deshabille, both in temper, and habit. The
friend always decked out, in dress and cheerfulness. The husband careless, the
friend attentive -- the husband old, and the friend new. Novelty and comparison
give the advantage. Freedoms increase, and it is never fafe for a woman to be
familiar, but with her husband. There are certain periods in female virtue,
which philosophers style critical minutes, when chastity, by long watching, I
suppose, begins to nod, and the close besieger must, sooner or later, catch her
off her guard.

An old and faithful servant, who had been butler to my father, and continued
in the same station, with me, came to me, one day, about a month ago, and after
a good deal of hesitation and difficulty, gave me some hints of a criminal
intercourse, between my wife and my friend. I caught fire, and in a peremptory
tone, commanded him to reveal all his knowledge in that affair, without the
least reservation or disguise.

He then told me, that the morning before, as he was going to wind up the
clock, on the staircase, he saw him going into his mistress's bedchamber. I
was surprised, at first, said the poor old man; but considering his free
careless manner, that he might not have known your honor was up, and called in
to rouse you, or might have imagined she herself was up, and have gone in to
hurry her to breakfast, I did not harbor much suspicion, at that time;
especially as I saw you all, soon after, at the tea-table, together, and that I
did not perceive the least manner of guilt, in either of their countenances,
which I supposed that no wicked persons could ever disguise.

But, this morning, continued he, as I was coming down from my own room, later
than usual, with my shoes in my hand, to avoid making a noise as I passed by
your door, I perceived him again coming out of my mistress's chamber, upon
which I turned back, for a while, to let him pass by, as if unnoticed. I then
began to grow uneasy in my mind, said he, and thought it my duty to inform your
worship, of such practices.

I was struck dumb for some minutes, and then directed him to lie on the lurch,
the next morning, and the moment he should see him go into the room, to come
and acquaint me of it. I went immediately into the closet, and charged my
pistols, afresh. I endeavored to appear easy and composed, all that day; I did
not stir out, indeed, but walked about the parlour, humming a tune, or sat in
the window, reading a pamphlet, till dinner. In the evening, we played parties
of picket together, and I took notice of many freedoms between them, both in
words and action. Catching hold of her hand, when she cut the cards, or
presented them to him to be dealt. Free speech* and arch looks; with other
ribaldry, of the same sort. Such impertinences might have passed unnoticed, at
another time, but trifles light as air, etc. We supped, and parted, about
eleven o'clock, all in seeming harmony.

The anxiety of that night, is not to be imagined. I doubted, I believed -- I
hesitated, I resolved -- I hoped, and I despaired. I recollected a thousand
circumstances, to think her innocent -- a thousand others, to deem her guilty.
Her touch digusted me. I lay on the stock of the bed, slept little, and waked
in a perfect fever. She slept sound, and did not in the least, perceive my
disturbance.

The next morning, I rose early, in order to give iniquity fair play, and
retired to my study; where I waited with impatience, till my confident came to
tell me, that my wife was come down to breakfast, and he had not observed any
thing, of what he had lain in wait for, though he had kept his station, ever
since he heard me go down stairs, till that every moment.

O Sir! cried he out, at this period of his discourse, is it not a shocking
thing to say, that I felt myself disappointed, at this report! but such,
however, was my wretched situation. Delayed revenge is like a late feast, the
appetite palls upon it. This day passed over, in the same manner as the
foregoing.

CHAP. CXXV.
THE next morning, the butler came running to me out of breath, and told me he
had just then, seen him go into the chamber. I desired him to remain upon the
spot I left him, till I should call him up. I walked up stairs, directly, went
into the room, with a pistol in my hand, and shut the door after me. It Is too
late to hide your baseness now, villain, said I, in a low voice, but I will,
notwithstanding, spare your life. Rise instantly, open the window, and leap out
into the garden; then return into the house, call for breakfast, and leave the
rest to me.

He flew to obey my commands, and as soon as I had shut down the window after
him, I opened the door, and going to the stair-head, called up John. Friend,
said I, I cannot find him here, but do you go in and seek for him. He declined
it, till I presented the pistol to his breast. He then searched the room
diligently, and upon his disappointment, looked aghast, and trembled.

Old man, said I, fear nothing; your information has shown an honest
disposition in you, but your eyes begin to fail you. You must have mistaken me,
who might have gone in and out, the two former mornings, and this day you must
have taken one of the maids for a galant. The poor fellow then threw himself
upon his knees, acknowledged his error, crying, that threescore and ten had
rarely eyes to be depended upon, and entreated forgiveness, both of God, and us.

I granted his pardon, said I would intercede with his mistress, bid him never
mention a word of the affair, and desired him to go down stairs, and lay the
tea-table. But how was his surprise augmented, and his mistake confirmed, when
he met the gentleman in the parlour, and entreating for breakfast, saying that
he was obliged to set out for London, that very morning.

I then returned into the chamber, where my wife had lain silent, and
motionless, during the whole transaction. She rose up, on her knees, conjuring
me to believe her innocent, the truth of which she offered to certify to me, by
the most sacred oath. She said that the young man had always a giddy free
romping way with him, which she had frequently reprimanded him for, and had
finally threatened to inform me of it, if he should continue his impertinence.
But that in thought, word or deed, a vestal was not purer than she, and then
burst into a flood of tears.

I replied, that I hoped, for my own sake, and had charity enough to believe,
for hers too, that no criminal intercourse had ever passed between them; that
her indiscretions had been indeed, almost unpardonable, but that I had given
sufficient proof of my having deemed them only such, by my command of temper,
upon this trying occasion, with the stratagem I had made use of, in order to
screen her character even from a footman's censure; and that I hoped her
conduct would thenceforth, become thoroughly reformed, from a grateful sense,
of my behavior, and a proper condemnation, of her own.

She did not come down to breakfast, but after the table was removed, and the
coast clear, the gentleman made me many asseverations, and swore all the usual
oaths, of men of honor, upon such occasions. To which I answered, that my
wife's innocence rested not upon his justification, that I dared not even to
think her guilty, though I believed him to be a villain, which I would then
resent, more emphatically by deeds, than words, if the regard I had already
shown by my late contrivance, toward her character, had not reprieved him from
my vengeance. He acknowledged his inhospitality, asked my pardon, and retired
with precipitation, and confusion.

CHAP. CXXVI.
MY behavior, upon this occasion, continued he, must appear very
extraordinary, to you, and so indeed it was; but my reasons for it, were these:
Had I found them together, the first day, as I expected, I should certainly
have shot him through the head, and might probably, have dispatched her too,
immediately after him. But the disappointment, and the interval, had given me
time for reflection. My resentment was by no means abated; but my prudence and
my pride, had tied down its hands.

I did not think her actually guilty, at that time, though her behavior since,
and at present, has now fully convinced me that she was. There are a sort of
women, who from a shameful neglect in their education, will too freely give,
and take, improper liberties; thinking it sufficient virtue to abstain from
mere matter of fact. I have seen women sometimes, handle and present a pistol,
out of a bravo, who would be terrified to death, at the thoughts of letting it
off. I hoped the best, and imagined she might be one of these. Though, after
all, where is the difference, between a wife who is really, or only seemingly
guilty? If, as the verse says, "She still is virtuous, if she so is deemed,"
the reverse of this maxim has, I am sure, much greater truth in it.

In the next place, the thoughts of my dear children, came across my mind. I
believed them both my own, and loved them, with a true father's fondness. Could
I then think of exposing their mother, the mother of my daughter more
particularly, to infamy? for a mother in dishonor, is a reproach to the
children. My own pride also, came in bar, on the apprehension that such
misfortunes, from the unreasonable and unaccountable opinions of the world,
generally occasion a man to fall into contempt.

All these considerations, joined together, operated upon my mind, and wrought
my temper to that calm conduct, which I manifested upon this mortifying
occasion. They governed my behavior toward her also, for there is certainly no
medium, between seeming to think a wife guilty, and turning her out of doors;
and it hurt my pride less, to appear credulous, than tame.

CHAP. CXXVII.
MY wife did not, by any means, behave properly, upon this crisis, though
possibly she meant to do so; she was very ill-tempered, and insolent, perhaps
from imagining that mildness and humility, might argue a sense of guilt; and
rendered the poor old butler so uneasy in his service, that he gave me warning,
in a week after this adventure; which obliged me to discharge him, and settle
an annuity on him, for life.

Thus matters went on, a little aukwardly, between us, for about three weeks,
till the day before yesterday; when I happened to go to dine at a neighbor's,
in a free way, without invitation, or knowing who were to be of his company.
There I chanced, most unluckily, to meet the person who is the subject of our
present tragedy. We took no manner of notice of each other, which however,
being in a mixed company, was not observed. The bottle went briskly about, and
I drank hard, and in an ill temper, which is always a dangerous thing.

When we broke up, and came to mount our horses, this gentleman's servants were
out of the way. He was pressed to stay, and answered, that he was under an
engagement to some company at his own house, that night, but lamented the want
of one of his men, whom he called his guide, as he knew the road, across the
country, and that it was now late, and dark. No matter for that, replied our
host, follow your friend, there, said he, pointing to me, to his avenue-gate,
it is not half a mile about, and it is strange if you are not able to find the
way from thence, which you have been galloping to and fro, both night and day,
for these twelve months past.

This unlucky reflection increased my rancour. I made no manner of reply to the
proposition, but mounting my horse, bowed to the gentleman of the house, and
rode off. This absurd person followed me. I was piqued at it. It appeared a
fresh insult. It was making too slight of my resentment. I mended my pace to
get rid of him, but he pursued me still. I had not the least thought of it, the
instant before. I am convinced that this may have been often the case. People
should be particularly careful therefore, never to indulge, as we are too apt
to do, that malice, or habit of mind, which may temper them for a crime that
opportunity, or the devil, may suddenly tempt them to.

Just when we came to a certain pass, I turned into a field, and pulling up my
bridle, cried out to him, I have taken the lead from you, long enough -- I now
resign it to you. Push away, across this fair field, and we shall recover the
road again, at the end of it. He clapped spurs to his horse, and in an instant
I heard them both, in full speed, fall tumbling down the precipice. I listened
for a minute, but heard neither motion or groan, from man or beast. I was
struck with horror -- I grew sober in a moment -- I repented too late. And
through the awful silence, and horrid darkness of the night, rode home a wretch
indeed!

This, Sir, concluded he, is the entire truth, and total circumstance, of my
unhappy story; and to show you that I am not quite guilty, I have been obliged
to let you into the secret, how far I am so. Not guilty, perhaps, according to
the laws of man, but too surely criminal, to the full, against those of God!

CHAP. CXXVIII.
HE then told me, that the coroner's inquest had brought in a verdict, of
accidental death, the evening before, as no marks of violence, appeared upon
either of the bodies, but what had been occasioned by the fall. Thus you see,
Sir, said he, upon what ground I stand, with regard to any prosecution about
this affair; so that nothing but the confidence which your generous deportment,
with the kind hint you have dropped of extricating me out of this difficult
business, have tempted me to place in you, need have induced me to let you into
the secret of my being, in any manner accessory, to this murder, which in all
my future prayers and penitence, I shall ever consider, and endeavor to atone
for, as one, in all its most horrid and culpable forms. Amen!

He then claimed my promise, about quashing the indictment: I told him how I
had reasoned, and how far prevailed with the lady, the evening before. That,
upon what I had heard, from both parties, I could judge that there was now no
possibility of their ever living together, again, and that I thought he would
make a prudent bargain, in giving her a bill of divorce, with two hundred
pounds a year, to get quietly rid of this troublesome and unhappy affair. He
embraced me and the proposal, together.

I went down stairs to acquaint my fair client with this negotiation, and she
willingly accepted of the terms, on condition that I should be her trustee. I
mentioned this article to the husband, who very readily consented to it. I see
plainly, said he, her further scheme in this: You are an handsome young fellow,
and she has no design, I dare say, of retiring into a nunnery. She would keep
up an intercourse with you. Be it so. She has now the world before her, where
to choose, and though it is some consolation to my humanity, at the same time, I
think she has better fortune than she deserves, to fall into the hands and
protection of a gentleman of worth and honor, he was pleased to add, as you,
Sir, appear to be.

Immediately upon this, I sent off an express to the next town, for an
attorney, who came, and while the gentleman and I were at breakfast, drew up
the article for a separate maintenance; we then went into the room, to the
lady, for their mutual signing and sealing; which when over, he rose from his
seat, made a low bow to her, without saying a word, but threw a bill of fifty
pounds into her lap, and let fall some tears. Then turning toward me, thanked,
embraced me, and retired.

This moving scene affected me, extremely. It was near half an hour before I
could get the better of it. Had I been twenty years older, I I might possibly
not have got rid of it, so soon. She appeared a good deal discomposed, also.
She wiped away a few tears, cried, Dear Sir, am I not extremely to be pitied?
But it is past, it is over now; and it is a jest to think of resisting destiny.
This is a fine salvo that some folks have got -- They sin away, without
remorse, and impute their crimes, to fate.

"The stars are more in fault than they." CHAP. CXXIX.
I Then went up stairs to see how my fair prisoner had rested, and found her
just done breakfast. She asked me where I had been truanting, for the hour
past, and I replied, that there had happened a small lawsuit in the
neighborhood, that I had been appointed umpire, on both sides, and had settled
the dispute to the entire satisfaction of the parties. Ay, said she, with a
sigh, you can be good, if you please. I staid with her, reading and talking to
her, by turns, till her chicken came upon the table, and then retired to my own
meal, as usual, for the flavor of beef or mutton were yet too strong for her.

I went down stairs, paid a visit to my new ward, and joined my dinner to hers.
Our behavior toward each other, was a good deal constrained. She thought,
perhaps, that a free carriage might have given me too slight an opinion of her
character; and I imagined, that a cavalier air, on my part, would seem too much
like taking advantage of her present situation. We drank a bottle of wine
together, after dinner, talked of indifferent matters, and I then took my
leave, pretending some extraordinary business called me away; for I had given a
caution to the family not to acquaint her with my particular engagements in the
house, and she seemed a stranger to them herself. At parting, she invited me to
return to supper, which I promised.

I drank tea and played picquet with my first charge, till nine o'clock, and
then retired. I felt myself uneasy, all the evening. I was dissatisfied with
the disingenuousness of my own conduct, and was alarmed at my entering too far
into vice. I had virtue enough to condemn such courses, but not resolution
sufficient to quit them.

After supper, the fair refugee and I appeared a good deal more at our ease
together. We entered into a very galant converse, made a jest of prudes, and
ridiculed parsons; deemed matrimony but mere form, and that the unlucky
expression, of man and wife becoming one flesh, was apt, from the very idea of
homogeneity, to make them consider each other, too much as the legs or arms, of
the same body, affording little more enjoyment in the conjugal embrace, than if
they were only hugging themselves. Observed, that David was a man after God's
own heart, without troubling ourselves to fix the era when he became so.
Preferred the Canticles, in the literal sense, to all the rest of the Bible;
and agreed, that Epicurus was the best, of all moral philosophers.

We drank two bottles together during this entertainment; toward the close of
which, she began to grow full of sorrow, and lamented her misfortunes -- I
became full of compassion, and comforted her. She seemed perfectly pleased with
my company, and wished frequently, as she was so kind to express herself, to be
possessed of my sex, sense, and spirit. They are all at your service, Madam,
said I -- There is a nation in the world, who think that by killing an enemy,
they shall be endowed with all his faculties, and I would die to serve you. No,
no, replied she, you are not my enemy, and I think I could sooner kill myself,
than injure you. The good-natured creature!

Well then, said I, there is another way of compassing your flattering wish.
You have read the Eastern Tales, I presume. There is a story among them, of a
certain dervise, who possessed the faculty of shooting his soul into any dead
body he pleased, and re-animating it again, while his own lay a breathless
coarse beside it. This fable, believe me, Madam, is verified among us adepts,
at Oxford, nowadays; and I myself have been thoroughly initiated into the
mystery of transmigration. Take an example now, said I, go stretch yourself, at
full length, upon that couch there, in the very posture of a dead person, and
counterfeit a trance. I will then instantly let fly my soul into you, upon the
wings of love, and revive you again, to the wonderful delight of all
spectators; while my inanimate body shall then lie panting by your side.

It was now the season which midwives distinguish by the title of gander-month.
A bill of divorce reduces it to simple fornication, and the consent of an
husband, absolves even that crime. However, I did not venture to urge this last
argument to her, for fear of making her refractory. Three reasons must be very
insufficient indeed, if they cannot furnish out an excuse, among them. --

An artichoke and a pineapple have the same shape, but what a difference in
the flavor!

The next morning, she hired a post-chaise, and drove off to London.

CHAP. CXXX.
HERE IS a rake for you, ladies, with a witness! Yea verily, with two. Two
strings to his bow, in faith. But to speak seriously now, prithee whose fault is
it, his, or yours? The affair with the man-lady, do you mind, was none of his
seeking, I am sure. He happened to meet with it, where no man living would have
gone to look for it. He was searching for a wound, only, when this same hiatus
valde ridendus, presented itself to his view. Obstupuit, steteruntque, etc.
And, as Falstaff says, Rebellion lay in his way, and he stumbled upon it.

If women will come into young fellows bed-chambers, and then fall into
fainting fits there, what in nature, can a man do, but like a quack, apply the
panacea, to them? His laboratory has no other drops, no other hartshorn, no
other cordial, but this.

And as for this here gentlewoman, neither did he seek her either. Did he stir
across the threshold of the door, to meet her? Did she not come to the very
house, dragooning him? Might he not use the se defendendo plea? I think it is
all fair, after a man has first tried what effect an exhortation may produce.
Could the parson of the parish, himself, have done more? And you must
acknowledge, that Mr. Carewe did preach a most excellent sermon, to her.
Though, how he came by so many texts of scripture, without having been bred at
Glasgow, I cannot conceive. And in the course of his homily too, he gives a
prudent hint to all galants with regard to cuckolds. Foenum habet in cornu, he
says --

A word more. With regard to what the husband says, about the nod of chastity,
which may be styled the nod of assent, or critical minute, I am to inform you,
that the French phrase for this same expression, is L'heure de berger, or the
shepherd's hour. Now if the character of a nation, as is reasonably enough
affirmed, may be known from its proverbs, I must congratulate my fair
country-woman in having the advantage, in point of chastity, over their
neighbors, even in the great proportion, of sixty to one. This frail crisis
holds only a minute, with English women, but lasts a full hour, with French
females.

CHAP. CXXXI.
WHEN I found that my fair academie was perfectly recovered, I began to renew
my galantries toward her again. One night, after we had supped and parted, as
usual, I returned back from my apartment, with my nightcap in my pocket, and
went into her bedchamber. I found her on her knees, and earnest at prayer, I
was confounded, and retired into the ante-chamber; where I stood musing, till I
heard her begin to move; but before I could gain the door, she had shot the
bolt on the inside, and walked away to the farther end of the room. I became
sensible of a certain inward rebuke, upon this occasion, and immediately
returned up stairs, to my own chamber.

The next morning, we met at breakfast; during which we appeared under a mutual
constraint and aukwardness, toward each other. After the tea-table was removed,
I attempted to open the conversation, upon the last night's incident, but
faltered in the first sentence; upon which she interrupted me thus -- Never,
never, Mr. Carewe, must we meet again, on any other terms but those of
friendship. A woman may be betrayed into error, by another's crime, but it must
be her own vice that suffers her to continue in it. I have had, by this time,
sufficient leisure for reflection, and have passed severe ones, on my former
conduct. But I rejoice in the smart, which heals whilst it corrodes. Good God!
cried she out, in a passion of tears, was it not enough, that I should sink, at
once, from man to woman, but that I must again fall, even below the only
character estimable in her, too!

She was going on, but I interrupted her by catching her in my arms, in a
sudden transport of generosity, and fondness, and offering to marry her, that
very instant. "No," she replied, and wresting herself from my embrace, you have
once denied me that happiness, already -- It Is enough -- I will not accept it
now: For I shall never receive from your honor, what I cannot owe to your
love. Had you ever loved, before, I might perhaps, be led to accept of the
present cool terms you offer. That dangerous crisis once over, I might
possibly, be induced to compound for your friendship and esteem; but while I
have that hazardous era to dread, I must always keep a reserve over my own
affections toward you, which would be inconsistent with that union, which your
generosity alone has challenged you now to proffer This reflection will be
explained in chapter cxxxix.
.

Ever since that fatal day -- or rather happy one, as I may now deem it,"
continued she, when you revealed to me the unfortunate situation I was in, my
thoughts have constantly turned inward on myself. The spring of that religious
and virtuous education, with which my dear mother had imbued my mind,
reverberated then so strongly on my heart, that it quickly awakened every pious
sense, which avocation, idleness, and pleasure, had till then, lulled to sleep.

I meditated on the dependency of our earthly state, on the relation, duty, and
obedience, we owe to our Creator; I weighed well the worth of all worldly
enjoyments, and upon comparing time with eternity, have fixed my soul so
firmly, upon higher concerns, that my mind has at length, happily arrived to
this just reflection, that nothing here below, but innocence, peace and ease,
are worth my care.

I will tomorrow," continued she, "reassume my former disguise, and still
carry on the masquerade, both on account of my dear mother's commands, and for
one of the reasons she gave too; namely, that it will save me from the
irksomeness and danger of any farther solicitation, or attempt; which by that
means, I should have escaped from you, also, if so unforeseen and unprovided an
accident, had not unfortunately, thrown me too much into your power.

She spoke all this, with a collected spirit, and stoicism, which astonished,
and charmed me. It raised my esteem for her, to the highest pitch, but at the
same time, affected me with such a tenderness and contrition, that I could not
possibly refrain from tears; which she perceiving, called out to me in a manly
tone, and with a smile at the same time, What, Mr. Carewe, said she, are you
going to change your sex, also? For shame, added she, shake off this womanish
weakness -- Arouse, and be a man. These were the very words he made use of to
her, when he was spiriting her up to the duel. Chapter cii. paragrath 4th,
latter part of it.
I recovered myself, but made no reply.

This whole day we spent together, in a general converse, through which I
behaved myself with the highest politeness and decorum; both in my deportment
toward her, and in avoiding the most oblique hint, which might revive in her
mind the remembrance of our former connection. This charming woman seemed much
flattered with the respect and delicacy of my manners; she declared that she
sincerely esteemed this day to be the happiest, and most pleasant, we had ever
spent together, and I endeavored to think so.

The next morning, she hired a post-chaise to carry her to her grandfather's,
where she told me she designed to stay during the remainder of the vacation,
and then return to the university, to finish her studies. She dressed herself,
en cavalier, and wrapped herself up in a roclaure, pretending to be afraid of
catching cold on her journey, so soon after her lying in. She made a present of
all her femalities, to the daughter of the house, saying to me in a low voice,
Farewell, now, for life, to my poor helpless sex. Then committing the care of
our son and nurse, to our host and hostess, we tenderly embraced, and she
hurried into the chaise, with a precipitation which betrayed her not to be yet
quite mistress of her philosophy.

I remained for some time, at the gate, looking after the carriage while it
continued in view, and contemplating upon this virtuous and extraordinary
woman; I then returned into the house, discharged my bills, embraced my Hermes,
took posthorses, and rode back to college, not so pleasantly indeed, but much
more composed in mind, however, than when I left it.

CHAP. CXXXII.
I Passed a very uneasy time of it, there, for a week. I felt an awkward want
of half myself, and if not the most necessary, at least the pleasantest part of
me. I was dull in company, and melancholic, when alone. I began to suspect I
loved her; but this I was sure of, that had she given me time enough for it, I
should certainly have done so.

At one while, I was for carrying her off, and ravishing her into matrimony.
Nor was this generous thought at all checked, by reflecting on her large
fortune, for that article I was firmly resolved to have made easy to myself: I
scorned to accept the portion of fraud, and would have restored it to the
rightful heir.

At another time, I had one curiosity already gratified, and another still to
satisfy; namely, to try how long a spliced chastity could hold out, and whether
this experiment might not be like new wine put into old bottles, or a new piece
into an old garment. At length, time and use, which generally blend all our
wants and losses with the common complexion of life, restored my carelessness
and spirits to me again.

On the commencement of our term, my dear Levis Agyeu One of the names of
Apollo, from his having no beard.
returned to college. As soon as I heard of her arrival, I went to wait on her
at her apartments -- She received me with great civility and affection, but
immediately putting on her hat, said it was a fine morning, and desired the
pleasure of my company to take a walk with her in the park, as she wanted a
little private conversation with me, which might be interrupted by other
visitants. I approved of, but was dissatisfied at, this caution of hers.

When we were alone in the park, she told me that the old colonel seemed
extremely rejoiced at her visit, but much concerned at seeing her look so pale
and thin. You have studied your eyes out, my child, said he, and it is high time
to be done with that same work, now. You have been chewing upon three years of
crabbed learning already, at that same university, as it is called, besides all
you swallowed before, at school, and if you are not as wise as Solomon, by this
time, the devil's in it for me. But there is an end of all farther puzzling now,
as I have lately procured a cornetcy for you, from my old friend the secretary
of war; and I long sadly, to see you strut the parade, in your military
uniform, shortly.

You know, said she to me, that I am no Amazon, and yet this declaration of his
did not distress me so much as you might naturally expect -- I was prepared for
it, from his frequent resolutions, in that way, and had therefore, furnished
myself with an answer. I returned him thanks for this, and all his other kind
intentions in my favor, but added, that with regard to the professions of
life, it was always both prudent, and reasonable, to grant the party engaging,
some liberty of choice, in a matter of so much moment, both to themselves and
others.

Zounds, said he, thou is not afraid, is thee? No, Sir, I replied, with an
assured countenance, I thank God, that I fear nothing now, but himself and you.
But it is my duty to the first of these most sacred obligations, continued I,
which makes me hesitate about too implicit an obedience, to your commands. Very
fine, very fine! replied the colonel, all this begins very finely indeed, but
tell me quickly, now, without any more of your logic, or sophistry, what the
devil is all this about?

CHAP. CXXXIII.
I Thus went on. When I entered upon the study of natural philosophy, Sir, at
the university, I was charmed and surprised at the internal art and contrivance
of the almighty artificer, in many subjects, which I had looked upon
superficially, before. Still as I proceeded, still as my knowledge improved, in
mathematics, gravitation, attraction, and astronomy, my mind enlarged, and my
soul was impressed with a sense of awe and wonder, at the amazing greatness,
goodness, and economy of Providence. Nor needs all this to refute the fool of
David The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
-- Show him but a straw, and when he has accounted for that, let him then
dispute a Deity.

Afterward, Sir, when I had entered into my course of moral philosophy, I
quick perceived the duties, the relations, the dependencies, both of civil and
religious obligations. I almost thought the system perfect; but there seemed
still to be something yet wanting. I loved virtue, but feared not vice. I
adored the Deity, but feared impiety, in prayer. I asked for blessings, and yet
dreaded them as curses. There needed two things, yet, absolutely necessary to
complete the scheme. Certain sanctions for our virtue, and a revelation, to
instruct our worship.

These great desiderata then, directed my inquiries toward religion. I here
found all was perfect harmony. The scene extended, my views enlarged, the
concordance, between divine and human things, apparent; virtue encouraged, and
vice deterred. And to sum up all, a form of worship appointed, which abolished
idolatry, instructed prayer, and restrained enthusiasm.

What the devil, is all this for, interrupted the old soldier? Was this
harangue necessary, said he, to let us know you were a Christian? I always
honored religion, as much as you, or any scholar of Oxford, or Cambridge,
either; ay, by G --, as much as the chaplain of our regiment, himself, who, by
the Lord, was as honest, and jolly a fellow, as any of the corpse. But a man may
serve God, and his king, and country, too, at the same time, I hope. Grant me
but that, and there is an end of the argument.

You are certainly in the right of it, Sir, replied I, and your observation is
indeed, very just. But then, Sir, in return, I hope that you will allow me
there may be more ways than one, of doing all three. How in the name of God,
now, is that possible, answered he? can we preserve the protestant religion,
Hanover, or Old England, any other way, but by fighting?

Dear Sir, said I, I am far from disputing the necessity of fighting, for as
the world is at present constituted, there must be soldiers, as well as other
handicraftmen. But pray, Sir, is not a divine, instructing his congregation, or
reforming his parish, more serviceable to God, the king, and his country, than
a colonel of horse, or foot, exercising his regiment on the parade?

Is not the making of good subjects, more necessary, than the training of
soldiers? One may be hired, the other not -- What so fitted to make men brave,
as religion? And what to regulate the discipline of an army, as morals? The
divine, then, is necessary, in the first instance -- The soldier, only in the
second. The soldier's profession, is but temporal and temporary. The divine's,
celestial and eternal!

Preach me no preachments, interrupted old Mars; a parson, indeed, were he such
as I am afraid few parsons are, might perhaps, do some service to religion, and
his country, in the way you suppose; but never tell me, man, that all the
preaching in the world, can ever be able to defend Hanover. No, no, Bilbo is
the word, there, and right or wrong, nolus, volus, we must all fight for
Hanover, that is a sure thing.

I replied, there was no fear but there would be always people enough found to
fight for Hanover, or a castle in the air, if they were paid for it; but as all
men were not to be soldiers, we might be left at liberty to choose our
professions; and that, for my own part, I had for some time, been sensible of
so strong a propensity toward putting on the gown, that I took it to be an
inward call from the spirit, to enter into holy orders.

Call me no calls, replied old Testy, you are a coward, sirrah, I see you are.
You are no man, but an hodmandod A shell-snail.
, and would rather fight the devil, than a Frenchman. Call of the spirit! No,
sneaker, it is want of spirit that is your call, and like a criminal, flying for
his life, you would take sanctuary in a church, would you? Yours is no call, I
say, it is proffered service, and you know the proverb, you sh -- n a -- e
fellow you.

Call of the spirit, forsooth! but it is necessary that some people should
pretend it, or how few of the pulpits, in England, would be filled, nowadays!
How many do I know, myself, who were never called by the spirit, nor ever call
upon it, either. But business must be done; and they marry and christen, as
well as the best; for a parson's a parson, and there is an end on it. What the
devil need we desire more?

But here is another difficulty, continued he, you have brought upon me too, by
your strange notions of spirit and pulpit, and such tringum-trangums -- What
will your quaking spirit help me to do now, with the commission, that I have
laid out all my interest to procure for you, and which I must now return so
thanklessly, upon my friend's hands again? By no means, Sir, said I, you may
dispose of it more properly, than even by giving it to me -- My cousin Tom,
Sir, will readily accept of it. It will be looked upon as a kind of present to
him, and I would willingly obviate every occasion of jealousy, which might
possibly, arise between us.

And so, by G -- d, I will, replied he, sharply, and if I should leave him my
estate too, what would you say to that, youth! I should say nothing, Sir, but
should think, that as you have made the fortune by your own valor, you have
certainly a right to bestow it according to your own favor; and if, Sir, added
I, your opinion or inclinations, should point him out, as the more worthy
object, I shall be perfectly resigned, both to the dispensations of Providence,
and yours.

Pugh, pugh, said he, you will not let me have my own way, in any thing, I see --
I am not used to these old-fangled notions, and I don't know, for the blood of
me, how to deal with them. I wish, with all my soul, that either you, or I,
were different sort of people, that we might understand one another, rightly.
But let us have done with it now, child, said he, and go bid them lay the cloth
for supper.

CHAP. CXXXIV.
YOU may be surprised, perhaps, said she, at the easiness with which I seem to
have resigned a fortune in which might be comprehended all the flattering
prospects and enjoyments of life. But, Mr. Carewe, pursued she, with a sigh, I
had already shaken hands with this life. And though I think I have now happily
attained to such a pitch of firmness and fortitude of mind, that were it
possible to be either my duty, or obligation, to fight, I could this instant
draw the sword, and like another Joan d' Arc, rush into the midmost battle. But
to enter a volunteer in arms, would have been a presumption unbecoming my real
character, and therefore I declined it.

And as to the worldly considerations, which might naturally have perplexed me,
upon this occasion, continued she, I had already wrought my mind to this
determination about them. I do not think that female virtue consists in
chastity alone, though certainly, both prudence and decency require this to be
our distinguishing character. This duty we owe, first to religion, and next to
ourselves; but justice is an higher point of virtue, because we owe this, both
to God, to ourselves, to our neighbor, and to the rights of civil society.

I had hitherto carried on the deceit, in obedience to my mother's commands --
But ever since I began to consider things in an higher light, and to compare my
first and second duty, together, I had resolved to act, in this matter, that
equitable, and ingenuous part, which I am certain she would herself direct,
were she now to return upon earth, to instruct me.

What then had I to apprehend from my grandfather's resentment, but that event
which I had before resolved upon in my own mind? The virtue of the act, was
already perfect in resolve, and the merit of the gift I was willing to resign
to another. I could not imagine that my grandfather would have cast me off to
absolute beggary; and any reasonable provision he might have made for me, would
have served to support me in that scheme of life which I had already resolved
upon: For I am determined, said she, to put on the gown, for one additional
reason more than my dear mother gave me for wearing a male habit; which is,
that a respect to my profession, may restrain both that profane, and immodest
manner of speaking, before me, which I have already sustained too much of among
men.

I was charmed, said Mr. Carewe, at the nobleness of soul, in this virtuous
woman, but was somewhat mortified, however, to find that I was not capable
myself, of the same refinement of sentiment, in one particular; for I confess
that I felt disappointed at her having prevented me from recommending to her
the very action, she had already resolved upon; and from offering her three
hundred pounds a year, out of my own fortune, in consideration of her resigning
the estate to her cousin; which I assure ye, gentlemen, said he, had for some
time past, been fully my purpose.

I was going once to mention this to her, but thought it might have had a
disingenuous air; and in short, said he, I was really, as much puzzled, as old
Square Toes, himself, to know how to deal with her old-fangled notions, as he
styled them, and almost wished as he did, that either of us were different sort
of people.

However, this not sincerely, for I thought it too soon for myself, to quit the
pursuit of pleasure, and indeed, for her too; as the small snack she had got of
it, was hardly, in my opinion, worth so much repentance; but as grace comes
earlier to some people, than to others, I would not wish to disturb her peace,
or attempt to interrupt her course of virtue, but for a moment, to gratify even
my warmest desires; for I was resolved, upon all occasions of this kind, to
qualify, as much as possible, the sinner, with the saint; and never to mix up a
greater potion of vice with my pleasure, than was just necessary as a vehicle
to it. By which means, I ever retained an hank in hand, as the jockeys phrase
it, to pull up, before I was got to the brink of the precipice.

CHAP. CXXXV.
WHILE I was revolving these things in my mind, the fair prolocutor thus went
on. The next morning, said she, after breakfast, the old gentleman called me
into his apartment, and after some minutes silence, during which time he sat
musing and looking at the fire, he lifted up his head, and turning his face
toward me, in a good-humoured tone of voice, Mr. Parson, said he, I could not
well sleep, last night, for the sermon you preached to me, yesterday evening.

It put me in mind of your poor mother, she was a great reasoner, and would
sometimes argufy the case with me, till she used to put me into a passion, for
I always hated women's prate. But it does well enough in a man, especially a
scholar, as you are; for what does people learn for, do you see me, if they don't
show it? Therefore, I consent, do you mind, that you make yourself a parson, as
soon as you will, and though I must say that you have disappointed me hugely,
in my first design for you, I don't doubt, in the least, but you may be a good
man yet, for all that; and we will now be as good friends as ever, said he, and
shaking me by the hand at the same time.

I thanked him on my bended knee, but he ordered me to rise quickly, saying,
Never kneel, child, but to the king, God bless him, or your prayers -- That is
my notion, son, and I don't doubt but I shall see you chaplain to our regiment
yet, and you shall be so, believe me, added he, if strong drink can kill a
parson, and that I have any interest with some people, and I never say a thing
that I don't mean to do; that is my way, do you mark me?

You Will live a roving, jolly life, of it, then, you dog you, and know more of
the world, in one year, there, than you would do in seven, in this parish, or
the next. But I have sent for your cousin Tommy, and will give him the
commission you know. No -- you shall give it to him, yourself, it shall be your
gift, it will make him love you, and I would have families live well together,
child, after I am dead and rotten.

He then gave me the secretary of war's letter, which mentioned that he had
procured a cornetcy for him, at his request, in the -- regiment of cavalry, and
desired him to write the person's name, at the bottom of that letter, and
return it to him immediately, in order to have the commission filled up. I
thanked him for the pleasing office he had assigned me -- For giving, is
certainly one of the pleasantest things, in the world.

In the evening, my cousin arrived, equipt perfectly a la militaire; for my
aunt, in compliment to the martial enthusiasm of her father, had ever since he
was put into breeches, affected to have him dressed like an officer, with
cockade, sword, and gambadoes. He is perfect master of his exercises, which,
with a little smattering of French, is the only part of education his parents
had ever attended to. He has an handsome, genteel person, and has that kind of
forwardness and air of confidence, which persons who know one thing, a little,
and are quite ignorant of every thing else, are apt to assume. He had lately
challenged a young apothecary, in the town where his father lived, for saying,
that it was ridiculous to see a chit pretend to strut about, with a sword on,
who was only of fit size, to wear a glyster-bag armed And the pistol and the
pestle were going to it, ding dong, when some friends happened to interpose,
and put an end to this martial strife.

After the mutual salutes were over, I took him aside into another parlour, and
showed him the letter from the secretary of war. He congratulated me upon my
good fortune, but said, with a sigh, that he would rather be in possession of
that commission, than of the old Don's estate, for that the army was the only
profession for a gentleman, all the rest of the world being divided into
paysans, and bourgeois; and that he longed most bloodily, to be at slashing
work with the French.

Then cousin, said I, you seem to be a much fitter person for this business,
than I am, for upon my word, I bear no manner of malice to any people
breathing, not even to my foes. So saying, I carelessly took up a pen, which
lay on the table, and writing down Thomas Irwin at the foot of the letter,
presented it to him.

He kissed it, hugged me, and drawing his sword, made several passes at an old
Windsor chair, swearing that there should not be a Frenchman in the world, by
the end of the campaign; and that he would then gather all the women together
into a seraglio, and people the kingdom over again, himself, with good
Protestants.

Come along, my gallant soldier, said I, and pay your acknowledgments, where
they are more properly due; for the gift is our grandfather's, though he was so
kind as to appoint me the giver. We then went up stairs to the old gentleman's
room, where the brisk cornet returned him hasty thanks for his preferment, and
instantly begged leave to set out, that evening, for London, to deliver the
letter, and expedite the commission. The good old man cried, There Is a lad for
you that is in haste to fight, then gave him his blessing, with a bill of an
hundred pounds, and dismissed him.

CHAP. CXXXVI.
HERE we were interrupted, by the coming up of three or four of our college
acquaintance, with whom we walked a few turns, till the bell struck three
o'clock. I then pressed her to come home, and dine with me, which she refused;
upon which I offered to go home with her, that she might be at liberty to
finish the rest of her story, if any yet remained, but she replied, that she
had nothing prepared at her chambers, and proposed to the rest of the company,
that we should all go to the tavern together, which was agreed upon.

After dinner, we entered into a lively conversation, in which she bore her
part with great wit and spirit, and seemed to be more cheerful and disingaged
in her manner, than I had known her for many months past. This struck me as a
confirmation of her virtue. The conflict seemed to be over. My heart exulted
with joy.

We drank our friends, in the usual course, and then one of the company, who
had been appointed magister bibendi, proposed a round of sentiments, and began
himself decently enough, with the joys of friendship, love, and wine. The next
turn fell to me, and I gave the season of May, and the age of fifteen. But this
sort of chaste archness, did not long continue, for the next person called
upon, launched out beyond all innuendo, which began to give my delicate friend
some uneasiness. She cast a look of distress, toward me, and I immediately put
a stop to the round, by acquainting the company that our friend there, had
lately taken the resolution of going into orders, and that such ribaldry must
certainly be offensive to him. She bowed, and the rest were silent,

I then proposed, as we were all scholars, that we should toast some classical
rounds, of memories, beginning with the philosophers, while we were sober, and
reserving the poets for our more jovial cups. The fancy took, because the
thought was new, and each person declared his sect, by his toast. Plato led the
way, because he wore good clothes, and kept a good table. Democritus came next,
because he was a merry fellow, and taught, long before Copernicus, that the
world turned round. Then followed Zeno, not on account of the severity of his
philosophy, but because he had done justice on himself for it, by an halter.

When it came to my turn, I named Aristippus, on account of the character that
Horace gives of him, Omnis Aristippum decuit, color, and status, and res. Then
my fair philosopher concluded the round with Socrates, as being, in the opinion
of Erasmus, a Christian, before Christianity; and then immediately, rose up,
and quitted the company. I offered to attend her home, but she forbad it;
saying, that she had her lectures to look over before examinations; and
appointed me to meet her, the next morning, in the park, as before, to conclude
her story. I returned to my company, and finished the evening, a la mode.

CHAP. CXXXVII.
THE next day, I met my charming friend, said he, at the time and place
appointed, and after a quarter of an hour's conversation upon general topics,
she proceeded with the thread of her narration. Thus far, said she, had I
tolerably well extricated myself, from a very difficult piece of business; but
my principal point had not been yet obtained. There was a matter of much higher
consequence, still to be disposed of, which I confess I was so impatient to
have adjusted, that I was, one or twice, very near declaring the whole secret
of my disguise, to my grandfather, had not a tenderness for my mother's
character, prevented me.

I then determined with myself to keep the matter still a secret, thinking that
no accident could disappoint the honest purpose I had already framed; for
should I happen to die before my grandfather, the estate would devolve of
course, into the right line; and should I outlive him, I might then resign it,
with equal advantage to my cousin, as at present.

However, some scruples arose, that justice delayed, was in some sort, justice
denied, and that it was always prudent to be honest, while one may, lest the
general frailty of human nature, might perhaps, obstruct the fair intent, when
the time may call upon us to perfect it by action. Besides, said she, the
matter lay a dead weight upon my mind, and I was impatient to get rid of it, in
order to dedicate my whole soul, to the contemplation and enjoyment of
philosophy, and religion.

Upon this resolve, I went up directly, into my grandfather's chamber, who was
much confined by the gout; I took occasion to commend the spirit and
accomplishments of my cousin, in which he seemed heartily to join me with a
certain martial joy in his countenance, at the same time. I added, that I
imagined he must have been just such a brisk young fellow, himself, at his
years, all fire and activity. The very counterpart, exactly, replied he, with a
smile of satisfaction. I am extremely sorry then, Sir, said I, that you have
not such an heir, to represent you; who might serve to perpetuate your fame,
and keep your character alive, after you are gone, better than I can possibly
do, in my confined scheme of life, who am likely to hide both, under a gown,
and bury their memory, in some country cure.

What do mean, boy, replied he, with a good deal of surprise? Have NOT I told
you already, that we are as good friends now, as ever? Prithee, what sort of a
crotchet have got in thy noddle, at present, lad? Pray explain it quickly, now,
without more ifs or ands. To which I replied, that I was then come to justify
my character to him, by giving a convincing proof of the sincerity with which I
had made my option of the gown, in preference to the sword, by begging leave to
renounce all future pretensions to his favor, with regard to the estate. That
as I did really mean to sequester myself entirely, from the world, firmly
resolving never to marry, so great a fortune might be either a temptation, or
an encumbrance to me. For that fortune, titles, rank, and grandeur, are
dangerous sophisters, and too often persuade us that the false goods of life,
are the true ones. That his other grandson was more likely to wear it with
honor, and being capable of bustling in camps, and shining in courts, and
senates, was a fitter person to put foremost in the world, at the head of a
family which his own virtue and bravery had so lately brought into respect and
notice. That for my part, I should perfectly acquiesce, in whatever portion his
kindness might think proper to allot me, which though ever so small, said I, if
I have virtue, will be as much as I shall want, and if not, will be more than I
shall deserve.

The good old man, continued she, at these words, burst into tears, saying, at
the same time, in an hurrying manner, Boy, boy, you were born to be my plague,
and are still crossing me, in every scheme I have. But perceiving that my tears
fell faster than his own, he cried, Prithee be quiet, child, and don't distress
me any farther -- Don't be angry, I don't mean what I say, to vex you, all I
meant, was -- But indeed, I don't know what to mean, or say, you have made such
a fool of me. We continued both silent, for several minutes, before we could
either of us compose ourselves sufficiently, to speak any farther, upon the
subject.

We then entered into several expostulations, on both sides, but upon finding
me determined in my purpose, he at length, acquiesced in my proposal, and asked
me upon what provision I had formed my economy. Speak, said he, and be it what
it will, you shall have it, by G --. I declined this offer, saying, that it
would not be becoming in me, to parcel out his bounty, nor to stipulate
conditions, as if I was selling the estate, only thus far I might pretend to
prescribe, that I should prefer a sum of money to an annuity, in order to have
something in my power, to leave, to friendship, or to charity.

Well then, my dear child, said he, I gave your sister three thousand pounds,
do you mind, and I will give you four, if that will content you. But, hearky me,
cried the worthy soldier, at the same time, don't be mealy-mouthed about the
matter, in the least, for you shall have what you please, as I told you before.
I said 'twas ample, bowed, and thanked him.

The next morning, continued she, he sent for me into his chamber, and showed
me the draught of the present will he designed to perfect, by which he had made
the provision of four thousand pounds, in my favor, and settled his estate on
my cousin, but with a remainder over, to me, in case he should not leave any
heirs male behind him -- For you deserve it, said he, if I had ten estates, by
the Lord, you deserve them all.

I expressed a proper sense of gratitude, upon this occasion, staid with him
till he could hobble about the house, received his blessing, and came off
hither, to finish my studies, said she, and to take upon me the profession of
holy orders, which I have already declared to you.

CHAP. CXXXVIII.
DUring the course of her story, I was affected, and amazed. I dropped tears,
at some parts of it, and would have praised her, in others, but that there
appeared a nobleness, and a spirit, in her virtue, which seemed above it, and
awed me into silence. I found myself in a situation, too difficult to be
described. Your own sentiment and delicacy, Gentlemen, said he, must represent
it to you. I could not admire, without lamenting, nor commend her, without
condemning myself.

However, there was one part of her discourse, which had dwelt upon my mind
ever since the first proposition of it, and which I then laid hold of, to
extricate my speech. I was displeased at her purpose of going into orders. She
was perfect enough, intrinsically, and needed not the cloak of sanctity: and
cleric pride, joined to female vanity, methought would be enough to demolish
the purest saint, that ever was canonized. I therefore, took occasion, from
this subject, to open my mouth, and gave her the following opinion upon it.

I told her, that there was something very unorthodox, in her scheme. Women are
ordered to keep silence, in the churches, so that the business of catechizing,
preaching, or exhorting, can never become any part of their province. That were
there even no offense, in the thing itself, yet the disingenuousness of the
act, was unworthy of her. That the carrying on a deceit, at the foot of the
altar, even with the best intent, was dangerous hypocrisy. Nor was such a pious
fraud at all necessary to her purpose, as we may dedicate our services to
Heaven, under any character, or in any profession. And that the world is, at
present, so constituted, that the precept, or example, of one virtuous layman,
would have more effect, than the preaching of ten parsons.

I added, that should she even be able to preserve the secret, during her life,
her death at last, most certainly would reveal it. That the story of pope Joan,
was a disgrace even to that religion, that was before a disgrace to itself; and
that this discovery might supply small wits and libertines, with matter of
scoff, would bring a reflection upon her memory, and occasion her body to be
the object of public view. I will set thee as a gazing-stock. I will show the
nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame. Nahum.

She assured me that she had never considered the matter in any of these
lights, before. That knowing of no salique law, in scripture, to exclude women
from the ministry Nor in France, to exclude them from the throne, neither,
though it was construed and strained to that sense by Philip de Valois, in
order to exclude Edward the IIId, of England, from the crown.
, she had presumed that nothing but negative custom merely, which establishes
no law, stood against it. But that what I had just hinted to her, had struck
her in such a way, as to make her suspect, that she had used somewhat of that
kind of ingenious sophistry with herself, which she had already condemned, in
her dear mother. But that at present, she found both her scruples and delicacy
sufficiently alarmed, to resolve on laying aside her purpose. She then thanked
me for my advice, and concluded her speech by saying, that she was pleased to
owe me any thing.

I snatched her hand, with eagerness, crying out, My charming saint, it is
impossible that you should ever be indebted to him whose life and fortunes you
have already, so fully purchased. The pittance you have compounded for, with
your grandfather, is too scanty a provision for you, for life -- Take half my
estate, in addition -- I here most -- Hold, Mr. Carewe, interrupted she -- Keep
your fortune, but amend your life. This would be true generosity to me, indeed;
and this the only present, be assured, I shall ever accept of, from your hands.

However, said she, seeing me affected, and confounded, let us still continue
friends, for life. I find a perfect disposition, in myself, toward this chaste
connection, and I should hope that your heart, however libertine it may be, is
not totally devoid of all Platonics, neither. Some company appeared in sight,
and came strolling up to us just as she had finished this expression, and she
retired home, immediately afterward.

Yes, my cherub, said I to myself, and gazing after her, my friendship, my
admiration, my esteem, can never possibly be raised higher, toward any mortal
object. Then why, O nature! have thou suffered love to be a passion distinct
from these! I would this moment, sacrifice my life for thy service, and yield
my fortune in exchange for love. But 'twill not be -- My fated hour is not yet
arrived, and chance, not choice, must fix my destiny!

CHAP. CXXXIX.
THIS reflection of Mr. Carewe, is both natural and mortifying, at the same
time. How must it hurt one's moral, not to be able to raise, or direct our
passion, toward an object, whom reason, honor, virtue, and obligation, even
with the addition of youth and beauty, may point out to us, as in this, and
frequent other instances, has been the case?

And, on the other hand, how must it pique our pride, to be reduced to wear the
chains of some idiot, of an harlot, or, what is infinitely worse, a shrew, even
with beauty and youth, but often, without either? of which I could quote you
many examples.

A friend of mine, who, though a man of both sense and spirit, had labored for
some years under this predicament, after many fruitless struggles to set
himself free, compared himself, aptly enough, to a lion in heraldry, held fast
by the lower parts, and pawing to get loose.

Distinct from that charming, and rational union of hearts and minds, which is
the general sympathy of the most perfect natures, there arises sometimes, a
certain extraordinary and unaccountable fever in the blood, more a phrenzy,
than a passion, and rather an instinct, than a sentiment, which it is said
people are, at one time or another of their lives, afflicted with.

Most people are born with the seeds of this passion, as well as of the
smallpox, in their constitution, which sooner or later, break out, as the
blood, or humors of the body, happen to be apt, or fit, to nourish the
distemper. These two unavoidable incidents are so much alike, in several
particulars, that I shall carry on the allusion, the better to illustrate my
subject.

One is a disorder in the blood, and the other an impression on the mind, from
the first of which, no temperance, or art in physic, and from the latter, not
the best sense, or most exercised philosophy, are able to defend us.

I style this sort of love, an impression on the mind, to distinguish it from
all sentimental passion, or any principle in human nature -- excluding all
manner of desire, admiration, or esteem, inspired by youth, beauty, or merit --
As these may be fairly accounted for, from physical, or moral reasons; and may
consequently, become effects, as often as these causes shall operate.

But the love I mean, is a mad enthusiasm of the soul, a singular caprice of
the affections, that sometimes, makes us dote on what, at another time, we
should fear to look on. It Is a fancy, that passes beauty, Alba ligustra cadunt,
vaccinia nigra leguntur; It Is a sense which is enamoured of folly, a sight that
blinds us, a thraldom we rejoice in, a plague which we solicit -- In fine, a
fascination, a crisis, or anomalous effect, which like the operations of
witchcraft, proceeds unaccountably, without any apparent cause, deducible
either from reason or nature.

"So by a calenture misled,
"The mariner with rapture sees
"On the smooth ocean's azure bed,
"Enamelled fields, and verdant trees.
"With eager haste he longs to rove
"In that fantastic scene, and thinks
"It must be some enchanted grove,
"And in he leaps, and down he sinks."
We often escape both infections, where one might naturally, have apprehended
the greatest danger, and catch them, perhaps, at a time, when we may have the
least reason to imagine any probability of our being affected. We are often
struck, at first sight, and sometimes, by the most unamiable objects -- So that
I have known persons to catch one, as well as the other, from a shock.

When people fancy that they have been more than once, affected by this
disorder, it must be by mistaking something else for it, as the meazles often
may impose itself upon the patient, for the smallpox.

There is one lucky circumstance then, in which they both agree -- That we are
never attacked by either, more than once in our lives -- But, alas! how slight
our triumph, when effects sometimes remain for life, almost as miserable, as
the malady! Such another victory, as a certain general said, would undo me.

In love, the struggling for an heart, is like wrestling for an egg; where
though you gain the prize, you get it broken.

CHAP. CXL.
THIS term completed my college course, and my guardian acquainted me, that he
had entered my name in the Temple books. The night before I was to leave the
university, I gave a parting supper, to my select friends, among whom I had
principally invited my fair Stoic. But she excused herself, by a billet, in
which were only these words: Tender adieus are apt to leave impressions -- It Is
easier to fly, than struggle. Farewell.

Soon after I had gone to the Temple, I became of age, and settled accounts
with my trustees. The balance in my favor, was but about five thousand
pounds, the rest of my income having been expended upon my maintenance and
education, and the discharging of some encumbrances which had affected my
estate.

As soon as I received this money, I was resolved that he first act of my
manhood, should be a deed of justice, and honor. I therefore immediately laid
cut four thousand pounds, in the funds, and enclosed the debentures to my
generous friend, at Oxford, with only these words in the cover: For Hermes
Carewe.

CHAP. CXLI.
I WAS now entered upon a more enlarged scene of life and action, had an
unrestrained dominion over my own fortune, and was not accountable, either for
my diligence, or idleness, to any one, but myself -- the worst of all masters,
let people boast of liberty as much as they please. My studies were quite of a
different nature from any thing I had been used to read before. It was
beginning school again. I would recommend Coke upon Lyttleton to be always
taught, immediately after grammar, while the memory is strong, and before the
mind may have imbibed the least tincture of taste, or polite erudition. For as
the study of it is a work of labor, not of genius, it comes to great
disadvantage after Virgil, Homer, Cicero, or Demosthenes.

However, I tugged away at this oar, for some time, till the world began to get
hold of me. I had more presumption than knowledge, and greater spirit than
judgment; which naturally, led me into two fatal errors, at once. I imagined,
that my understanding required no farther improvement; and that a thousand
pounds a year, needed no economy. I was naturally full of fire -- But, for
want of fuel to maintain the flame, I spent myself in a blaze.

Ut quondam in stipula magnus sine viribus ignis. I set up an equipage, and
kept a pack of hounds, about ten miles from London. I hired a genteel valet de
chamber, out of livery. I employed the most fashionable tailor, and left the
rates of every thing, to himself. I struck myself out of commons, lived in
taverns; and -- rented private lodgings, near the Temple.

I learned more of life, at this school of the world, in six months, than I had
known at Oxford, in the five years that I was stationed there. For though we
had treble the number of students, at the university, yet they were not enough
their own masters, to exhibit that infinite variety of characters, with which
mankind abound. If you see one Frenchman, one Spaniard, one Italian, you are
furnished with specimens of their several nations; but you may be acquainted
with an hundred Englishmen, without knowing the English.

It would be an endless task to enumerate, or describe all the various
characters I met with in this microcosm; some of which, indeed, exceeded to
such extravagance, that they might more properly be styled caracatura's, of
mankind; while others were so very anomalous to human nature, that you would
imagine I was describing the tenants of some other planet, instead of our own
species.

This diversity was more apparent among the Templars, than in any other set of
men in England; because they live more upon an equality together, and are less
restrained by the decorums of mixed societies, where different professions,
different ranks, and different sexes, join. So that Every man in his humor,
may be justly styled The Temple Comedy. To which may be added one very unhappy
cause also, which is, that they are, in general, tied down by no certain mode,
or system of religion, theirs being mere philosophic deism, alone.

"A consequential ill, which freedom draws,
"A bad effect, though from a noble cause."
And here, gentlemen, said Mr. Carewe, as I have spent some years in this
society, I think proper to justify myself from certain suspicions, which may
possibly, have arisen in your minds, upon this occasion. And I will now give
you a sincere, and ingenuous confession of my faith, with regard to this most
dread, and interesting article; and which I shall attempt to explain, upon the
simple dictates of reason alone, without the discussing of mysterious systems,
or venturing into the inextricable labyrinths of polemic divinity.

CHAP. CXLII. Mr. Carewe's Confession of Faith.
IN the first place, I take it for granted, that whatever there may have been,
in profession and practice, there never was a real atheist, in belief. Some
omnipotent, omniscient monad, some cause of causes, light of light, there must
have been, before all worlds, necessarily, independently, and self-existing,
coeval with eternity.

In the next place, I believe, that this intelligence did, by some supernatural
conviction, independent on reason, or philosophy, manifest, or reveal itself,
to the first race of mankind. I draw my argument, from the number of erroneous,
absurd, and unnatural systems of religions, and beliefs, which have appeared in
the world, from the most early ages of record.

For had religion its rise from the pretense of legislators, or been the result
of mere philosophy, the scheme of it would have been contrived more consonant
to human reason, like that of the Turks, which is consistent enough in its
doctrines, though erroneous in its faith. But the purest revelation from
heaven, handed down by tradition, and interpreted by priests, must necessarily
have involved both our belief and worship, in all the impiety and blasphemy, of
the heathen rites, and pagan superstitions.

The greatest philosophers, with Socrates at their head, finding the world in
so forlorn a state, cried out to Heaven, for a new revelation, to dispel the
mists of ignorance, and reduce our wanderings into the right line. It was
reasonable to hope for such a guide, from the goodness and justice of our
Creator; and from our knowledge and experience of the ways of Providence, I
firmly believe, that whatever is best to do, it always does perform.

I think that the Christian religion has at length supplied this great
desideratum, by conveying to us the most perfect moral, and the purest worship,
that ever yet was proposed to man. If we remain still in error, it is surely the
safest one we can possibly fall into. For the proofs, both internal, and
external, are so consistently framed, that the whole wit and philosophy of
mankind, cannot defend from the illusion. We err with saints, we err with
wisdom, we err with virtue, we err with piety; we err with infidelity
converted, and testifying its conviction through the martyrdom of death and
tortures! Heaven must then, either reward our faith with glory, accept the will
in atonement for the deed; or pardon with impunity that error, which itself
has suffered to be with so much plausibility imposed upon us.

I consider then, a deist, who writes, or argues, upon the religion of nature,
alone, as he cannot possibly be an infidel to Christianity, upon conviction, to
be an immoral man, and a dangerous citizen of the world. We have, alas! too
frequent, and sad experience of the strongest sanctions of rewards and
punishments, being too weak for the lusts and passions of men; and whoever
would attempt to set us still more at liberty from the restraints of virtue,
must probably, have conceived some mistaken interest in the indulgences of
their own vice, or in the tempting of others to the same fatal latitude.

In fine, without ever entering into a religious argument, upon the subject, we
may venture to pronounce a professed atheist, or deist, to be either fool, or
knave; because they but discourage the good, and set the bad more at liberty.

Fear first made gods, the impious atheist cries,
And fear unmade them, the divine replies.
An atheist is certainly, the most credulous fool breathing. He believes,
contrary to all philosophy, that matter produced motion first, and that then,
they both laid their heads together, and created intelligence.

We cannot conceive thought to be immaterial, say some philosophers; but can
they conceive matter to be intelligent? We are conscious of our own ideas,
therefore we have undoubtedly a conception, of somewhat, distinct from matter.

It is much more philosophic to imagine, with Berkley, an universe of spirit,
than with Hobbes, an universe of matter; for it is certainly, more rational to
think, that spirit might create, or, according to Berkley's metaphysical
refinement, impress the idea of matter, than to suppose, that mere matter could
ever rouse itself, to thought, or action.

CHAP. CXLIII.
I DID not think it proper or decent, to interrupt Mr. Carewe, while he was at
confession; for though I sometimes, pretend to be jocular, give me leave to
assure the reader, that the greatest heathen of Greece, or Rome, never had an
higher respect for virtue, nor the dullest parson in a country cure, a more
steadfast faith in the Christian religion, than the person who here assumes the
title of Biographer Triglyph.

This being premised, and finding that Mr. Carewe does not choose to treat you
with a description of any of the characters he hints at, as it would lead him
into some satirical strictures, which are, by no means, his turn of wit, I
shall here entertain you with one story, out of his budget, which is a most
extraordinary, and certain matter of fact, already known to many of my London
readers:

The story of the Weeping Cull.
ONE of Mr. Carewe's friends was a man of remarkable good sense, and agreeable
manners; but of a very grave deportment, and a serious air; which however, did
not appear to be natural to him, as he had a lively eye, an healthful state of
body, a florid complexion, and seemed to be fond of company.

He had been a resident there, for three years beyond the terms requisite to be
called to the bar; and could not be deemed a student, in any sense, at this
time, for he neither read law, divinity, humanity, or prophanity. He used to
spend most of his mornings, in riding or walking; and his evenings, in the
society of a few friends. He was a sober man, of good morals, and a constant
churchman, twice a day.

Once a week, on every Thursday, he kept a fast, till night, and toward the
dusk of the evening, after prayers, used constantly, on that day, to take his
station, on the Strand, to see the girls of the town pass in review before him,
till he had fixed upon his object, whom he would invite home to his own
chambers, to supper. He did not generally pitch upon the handsomest wench, for
he chose always one of a particular description. She must be tall and fair, but
pale and red-haired.

He would treat her with an elegant collation, and a bottle of wine. Would sup
with her, and make her sing, if she happened to have any manner of voice; he
would drink two or three glasses of wine, and then walk musing about the room
till she had finished the remainder of the bottle; which if she happened to
delay too long, he would grow impatient, and press her to, with all the seeming
ardour of a lover.

When she had drank the buzza, he would very politely take her by the hand, and
lead her into an inner apartment, which was lighted up with half a dozen large
wax tapers. There was no bed in this room, but a large oak table in the middle
of it; upon which was placed a very handsome cedar coffin, lined with white
satin, neatly crimped and quilted, with the foot of it placed directly
opposite to the door.

Then taking up a fine pinked shroud, he would put it into the girl's hand, and
a guinea into the other, desiring her to strip herself to her shift, and lie
down in the coffin, just like a corpse, with her arms placed cross-wise over
her bosom, and her eyes shut; and when she had composed herself in this manner,
to express one heavy moan, and then remain motionless and silent, as the grave.
While this sad office was performing, he would, through decency, retire out of
the room, and wait at the door, till he heard the sigh, or signal of admission.

He would then, open the door, softly, as if he apprehended he was going to pay
a visit to the sick, and march up slowly, to the foot of the coffin; then
start, as if surprised, stand aghast, wring his hands, take out his
handkerchief, and move step by step, up to the head of the coffin; sobbing,
weeping, and sighing, all the way, as if lamenting over some dear and real
loss. Then, after gazing for some minutes on her face, he would lay his hand
gently on the breast of the living corpse, stoop down his head, and give her a
parting and a passionate kiss. This obsequy performed, he would immediately
retire out of the room, leaving the girl at leisure to re-dress herself, and
walk about her business, in quest of more lively sport.

At first, when he took up this very odd fancy, it was with great difficulty he
could get a girl to undergo this dismal ceremony; especially, as the very idea
of death, must occasion shocking reflections, to reprobates. Besides, they were
not aware how far the farce might have been intended to be carried on; so that
it used to cost him three, four, sometimes five, or six guineas, to purchase a
corpse, to his mind. But in a short time, he became so well known on the
Strand, that he was styled The Weeping Cull, and whenever he appeared, all the
long, ghost-like gingers, used to crowd about him, and offer themselves
voluntarily, to perform a scene in his tragedy; which reduced the price, at
length, to a supper and a guinea.

His story was this: He had been, for some years, in love with a young lady, of
the description in the latter end of the third paragraph, of this chapter. She
returned his passion with a reciprocal flame; but her father, who was a rich
citizen of London, opposed their union, because she was his only child, and
that he was in hopes of matching her into some decayed noble family, whose arms
might want supporters.

The lovers were immediately separated, upon the first overture of the match,
and became inconsolable. But the lady, having a more tender sense of such
disappointments, pined for some time, fell afterward into a decay, and the
physicians at length began to despair of her recovery. Her father was moved at
this report, consented to the marriage, and gave her leave to acquaint her
lover with the news.

He was, at this time, near an hundred miles from London, taking possession of
his estate, about five hundred pounds a year, upon his father's death. The
moment he received the joyful summons, he mounted his horse, and rode off,
post, to London. When he arrived, he found the house open, and stole up stairs
directly to her apartment, without meeting any body in his way; but when he
opened the chamber door, and was going to rush into the arms of his beloved
mistress, he saw her just laid in her coffin.

He grew immediately distracted, fell into a fever, and was confined to his bed
and room, for near six months, before he recovered his health and reason. Some
part of the phrenzy still remained with him. There is a pleasure in indulging
gloomy reflections. He was resolved to enjoy them; and immediately instituted
the above funeral rite to her memory, to be performed weekly, on her death-day.
Which extraordinary and funest extravagance, he had continued for above a year,
when Mr. Carewe quitted the Temple, and resolved to persevere in, during the
remainder of his life.

CHAP. CXLIV.
SOON after I had been settled at the Temple, continued Mr. Carewe, I received
a letter from the fair Divorcee, which had been returned to me from Oxford. It
was in these words:

Dear Trustee,
THE first half year of my alimony, will be due tomorrow. I am distressed for
money. I beg the favor of you to discharge it immediately -- without advice,
which I hate. I lodge at Mr. Seawell's, merchant, in Leadenhall-street, London,
and am, dear guardian, your dutiful ward, and affectionate humble servant.


This hint rendered me uneasy. She had betrayed dangerous principles, and I was
afraid of entering into any manner of connection with her. I did not care to
have her name joined to mine, on my first setting out in the world. Men's
characters are generally marked, though very unfairly, by their first steps in
life. It Is hard to judge of persons, at an age when their passions are
strongest, their discretion weakest, and their experience least. My first
adventure with that lady, was naturally unavoidable. This would have been
morally premeditative.

Upon this reflection, I immediately sat down and drew a bill upon her husband,
for the half year's stipend; which received due honor by the return of the
post. The next day, I went to the Royal Exchage, inquired for Mr. Seawell, and
paid him the money, for his fair lodger; taking his receipt, in her name. I
desired him to deliver my compliments to the lady, and make an apology for my
not waiting on her, at that time; as I was then going out of town, etc.

CHAP. CXLV.
THE first masquerade that was exhibited in London, after my entrance at the
Temple, I prepared myself for, in the gayest, and most superb manner I could
devise. I dressed myself perfectly en Turc, and carried the folly to such
extravagance, that the expenses of my habit, and appurtenances, amounted to
above an hundred pounds.

The vanity of human nature is unaccountable, in some things. What possible
advantage or enjoyment, could I have purposed to myself, from so magnificent an
appearance; unknowing others, and myself unknown? To spend money upon passions,
or pursuits, is defensible, but it is really, a sort of suicide in economy, to
stab one's fortune, without having either pleasure or profit in view.

The oddness and variety of the appearances, surprised and diverted me, for
some time; but I soon grew tired of the farce; and felt myself offended at
seeing human nature so deformed, and so disguised. I had no rational amusement
here, for I could neither enjoy society, nor soliloquy. At one time, I compared
myself to Adam, when he had collected together all the animals of the creation,
to call them names. At another time, a more serious image occurred to me, of
the last day, when all the various nations of the earth, shall be gathered into
one groupe, for judgment.

Such reflections, with the intolerable warmth of the room, soon began to lower
my spirits, and I retired frequently, to the side-boards, to recruit them. I
happened to drink too freely there; and afterward, engaged too indiscreetly at
play, with a set of persons whose characters I was as little acquainted with,
as with their masks.

I had the misfortune to have won considerably at first, which excited my
passion, and joined to the wine, threw me entirely off my guard. I pushed away
at every thing, accepted all manner of betts, without waiting to compute the
odds, and lost and won, by turns, without ever considering how the balance of
accounts stood for, or against me; till upon the summing up of the reckoning,
at the close of the night, I found myself indebted to sundry unknowns, to the
amount of three thousand, five hundred pounds.

I felt myself in a very awkward and distressed situation, at this period, as I
had not above three hundred pounds about me, at that time. I took off my mask,
to let my creditors see that I was not afraid to show my face, though at the
same time, I acknowledged to them, that I was ashamed to do it; that I was
unused to play, and had engaged myself, unawares, beyond my present means. I
told them that I was a person of fortune, sufficient to answer their demands,
and offered to go with them to a tavern, and pass securities for their
respective claims.

They refused me this indulgence, said that play-debts were not recoverable at
law, that it was probable a man who could, among perfect strangers, accept of
betts, beyond his purse, might be likely to plead the statute, when called upon
for payment; that they were gentlemen, persons of honor, would be treated as
such; and so forth.

While they were, one and all, bullying after this manner, they surrounded me,
and seemed to make one common cause of it, as in truth, I believe they were an
associated gang; so that I had great reason to apprehend some harsh treatment,
or unhappy event, from this foolish adventure; from which I was preparing to
defend myself, after the best manner I could, and had just laid my hand to my
scymetar, when a little man, in a domino, who had stood close by my side, from
the time I had entered into play, and had frequently warned me, unheeded,
interposed on my behalf, and addressing himself to the banditti, said that he
did not look upon the debt in such a desperate light as they seemed to do; that
from my dress, my indiscretion, and my ingenuousness, it was reasonable to
suppose me to be a young man of modern fashion. That, according to the
gamester's phrase, he was ready to back his opinion with his money, and that,
if they would but wait his return, for a few minutes, he would bring cash
sufficient to satisfy their demands.

He retired immediately, took a chair, came soon back, with East India bonds to
the amount of my debts, and divided them among the adventurers, in proportion
to their claims. I was affected with a proper sense of gratitude, upon this
occasion, and invited the little Domino to a tavern, in order to pass a
security to him for his generous loan; but he excused himself, saying, that he
was in reality, an usurer, that a simple obligation would not answer his
purpose, and he would wait upon me, the next morning, to breakfast, and there
propose his terms. I thanked him, however, and gave him my address -- We then
shook hands, and parted.

I was extremely happy, at having got so well rid of this unluky adventure, and
quitted that grotesque assembly, with a full resolution of never wearing a
fool's coat there, again, during my life. Just as I was going out, I was
accosted by a female mask, in a Grecian habit, and of an engaging figure, who
addressed herself to me, in these words -- I am in a difficult situation,
Seignior, I have missed my company, in the crowd, I am afraid of venturing home
alone, and beg leave to place myself under your Highness's protection, to
convey me safe to my lodgings.

Yours, extempore, said I, then taking her by the hand, put her into a chair,
desiring her to lead the way, and followed her in another. When we stopped at
her door, I bad her farewell, and directed my chair to the Temple; but she
insisted on my going in to drink a glass of wine, and receive the thanks of her
friends, for my politeness and galantry toward her.

I bowed obeisance, handed her into the house, she led me into her own
apartments, then shutting the door, let fall her mask, and sprang my fair
Divorcee into my arms. --

CHAP. CXLVI.
THE reader, perhaps, may here inquire, how the Divorcee should know Mr.
Carewe's name, and address, or he himself happen to be informed of either of
these particulars, relative to her husband; as none of them appear to have been
provided for, already. But it is more than probable, that the trust-deed,
between these parties, was drawn up by the attorney, with all the usual forms
and requisites; among which, the real names of the contractors, with their
additions, and abodes, are always fully expressed.

I must confess, however, that my friend, Mr. Carewe, has rather too succinct a
manner of telling a story -- too little of the narrative, by a great deal.
Witness the close of the last chapter, with many other disappointing instances,
of the same kind, in various and sundry places of his memoirs. He might,
perhaps, have been pardonable for omitting those minutiae, at first, because he
might not have immediately foreseen that they would be necessary in the
prosecution of his story; but here he was certainly inexcusable to neglect it,
and should have interrupted himself, with a But, Gentlemen, first it is
necessary to inform you, that" -- Or, "I had forgot to mention to ye, in the
former part of my adventure with this same lady, how etc.

I would give fifty guineas, with all my heart, that this same laconic
Triumvirate had been better read, than they appear to be, in the modern novels
and memoirs which are published here every day; and I would engage to make
cent. per cent. of my money, by it, too. For there is certainly, matter
sufficient, in their stories, to have furnished out a third volume to this
work, had they been properly skilled in the manner, style, and conduct, of such
performances. But so far from supplying me with any helps of this kind, I
really think that I should hardly have squeezed out more than a single volume,
from among this costive Trio, if I had not eked out a second, by the address of
introducing myself so often, no matter how impertinently, into the scene, and
chorussing it away, chapter after chapter, in the manner I am holding forth at
present.

I agree with Mr. Carewe, entirely, that masquerades can never answer any fair
purpose, in England. It might have been a good contrivance enough, in Italy,
where they were first contrived, because the only freedom that nation enjoys,
is under a vizard. But, to adopt such a screen in these kingdoms, was really
superfluous, And the present age seems to be sensible of this absurdity, at
last; for masquerades have been abolished of late, since liberty has become so
very barefaced, as it appears to be in these days.

You see here, another mere casual adventure, of poor Mr. Carewe's. He had
taken all prudent means, and virtuous resolutions, imaginable, against renewing
any manner of commerce with this very dangerous woman -- But, he happened to
take off his mask, at play, and she immediately lays violent hands upon him.
Now what security, in this wicked world, for male chastity! For if men should
ever become coy, women will most certainly, ply stratagem against them.

CHAP. CXLVII.
THE next morning, said Mr. Carewe, I rose early, my double obligations to my
little Domino, both of equity and honor, rendered me uneasy. The fair Divorcee
pressed me to be frequent in my visits, I promised, her maid lent me a
riding-hood to conceal my Grand Seigniorship, and led me out through a back
door, into a private alley. I soon met a chair, and returned pleased, and
dissatisfied; resolving, and irresolute; home to my chambers in the Temple.

After breakfast, my friend Domino called upon me, and brought a bond, ready
filled up, for the money exactly, which he had advanced for me the night
before. I thought it prudent in him not to add the fee of usury, in the
obligation, but after I had signed the deed, I threw my purse upon the table,
and desired him to pay himself whatever gratuity he pleased, out of it.

But he declined my offer, saying, that the expression he had thrown out, the
night before, was merely made use of to conceal himself the better -- That he
never had dealt in usury or extortion; but being cashier to a company of
merchants in the city, he usually attended, incog. at public places of play, in
order to pick up securities for money which he could venture to make free with;
and which it might be imprudent in him to hazard in trade, or lend out in the
offices of notaries, lest it should take wind among the company.

Then putting the bond into his pocket, and rising up from his seat, I hope,
Sir, said he, that this transaction, instead of a debt, may become a purchase
to you. A proper reflection upon this marked occasion, may turn your loss to
gain. The entering into play, in your circumstances of fortune, sufficient, but
not abounding, is, give me leave to say, unpardonble indiscretion. It Is
risquing what you want, for what you do not need. It Is Aesop's fable exactly,
hazarding the substance, to grasp the shadow.

You seem, Sir, continued he, to be a young man, just entering into life, of a
liberal, and ingenuous nature, and a few more admonitions, from experience,
may, and I hope will, be both useful and necessary to you. Always leave your
purse at home, never carrying more money about you, than the probable expenses
of the day; for you will find more borrowers than lenders, in this world, believe
me. As you should conceal your vices, out of decency, so should you even your
very virtues, out of prudence; otherwise, the least worthy objects, being the
most forward, will be apt to throw themselves in your way, preventing modest
merit. Seek occasion, rather than suffer it to seek you; and let your
liberality be the result of virtue, not of weakness. This said, he bowed, and
retired.

He was a mean-looking, middle-aged man, and mechanically dressed, which made
his refusing the praemium, with the officious friendship which he testified
toward me upon this occasion, seem the more unaccountable, and extraordinary.
In fine, his words and actions were so much above his appearances, that I could
only reconcile them in my mind, by setting the whole of this matter down to the
account of character, with which, as I observed before, our nation so
peculiarly abounds.

His exhortation had this good effect upon me, that I immediately put down my
equipage, and disposed of my hounds and hunters in the country.

CHAP. CXLVIII.
I HAD promised the Divorcee to see her again, and accordingly paid her a visit
in a few days after, with a purpose though, of withdrawing myself from any
manner of future engagement with her, but without that abruptness which would
have been inconsistent with the decorums of galantry. It was in the evening, I
found her at home, and Mrs. Seawell, at whose house she lodged, at tea with her.

Mrs. Seawell was about twenty years old, and had been two years married. Her
husband had been a widower, and appeared to me, when I saw him on the Exchange,
to be above sixty. She was of a middle stature, fair and plump; she had bright
dark chesnut-coloured hair, and very white teeth Anne of Austria used to say,
that good teeth were the most natural beauty, because the only one that was of
real use.
; but what was extremely remarkable, they were naturally brilliant cut, so that
when she spoke, or smiled, the glittering spangles would catch the eye, and
rivet your attention, like the basilisk.

Her other features were nothing extraordinary, except her eyes, which were a
dark blue, with more of languishment than spirit in them; but she had a certain
riantcy about the lower part of her face, which was extremely captivating. In
fine, the contrasted air of her features, might well be compared to a
tragi-comedy, there was such a mixture of mirth and melancholy in them.

She did not appear to have much understanding, but whenever I spoke, she
seemed to show an attention that was flattering; and when I happened
occasionally, to throw out any little compliment of galantry toward her, it
would instantly diffuse such an air of awkward fondness, over all her
countenance, as was at once expressive, both of passion, and compliance.

We three played parties of picquette, and supped together. It was post-night,
and Mr. Seawell did not quit his office, while I staid. Nor indeed, did either
of the ladies send any very pressing messages to invite him up stairs. I
divided my addresses as equally as I could, between them, felt my situation
difficult and distressing, promised that my visits should be frequent, and
retired home to the Temple -- No -- It was to my private lodgings near it --
Chanting out Macheath's song to myself, all the way.

CHAP. CXLIX.
THE next day, some young Templars dined with me, we went in the evening, to
the play, picked up more company there, and went all together, to supper at a
tavern. Here, gentlemen, said Mr. Carewe, I blush to own, that I was a second
time, led into deep play; though without designing, or desiring it. But
resolution was never among my heroics; and I have ever been the slave of my
company. One is too apt to be ashamed of dissenting from their fellows, and
false modesty is a pimp to vice. I lost at first, and pushing away to retrieve
myself, was finally involved for four thousand pounds -- Purchasing anxiety at
the rate of a thousand pounds an hour.

I could not sleep all night; I felt shocked at my own madness; I recollected
my good friend Domino's advice, too late, and eked it out with more severe
reflections of my own. Gaming is a vice, not a passion. Passions have bounds,
vices none -- It should not be called a love, but a lust of play -- It Is not
natural, but accidental, to mankind. What Addison says of swearing, may be here
applied; that no one can plead the being born of a gaming constitution.
Ambition is connate; it is emulation; it both excites, and exercises noble and
generous faculties; it has, or may have, some great and liberal end in view.
Play is merely selfish; and confines the soul to mean and sordid objects. No
man ever yet ventured his fortune on the die, with a purpose of relieving the
poor, assisting the distressed, or rescuing an oppressed people, with his
success. A gamester comprehends the character, both of fool and knave; for he
sets out a dupe, and returns a sharper. But what signify all such reflections!
the world will never be the better for them -- For it is not sober counsel, but
sad experience, that will ever make men wise!

CHAP. CL.
THE next morning, I began to meditate upon methods of discharging this most
irksome encumbrance, and recollecting that I had some valuable woods on my
estate, I wrote directly to my agent, to get them valued, and then come up to
London. He did as I had directed, and told me the purchase was computed at
about five thousand pounds; upon which I desired him to publish the sale in the
papers; comforting myself after my too careless manner, that those trees, which
had been before, but nests for ravens, were likely now, to become habitations
for men.

Soon after the advertisement had appeared in print, I received a visit from my
extraordinary friend, the little Domino, who, after some short intercourse of
civility, asked me what sudden emergency had pressed upon me, since our
parting, to sacrifice the honors, as he expressed himself, of my estate? Has
any public calamity fallen upon the times? Is some dear friend, or fond
connection, languishing at present, in a gaol? Or -- I was piqued at his
sarcasm, and interrupted him peevishly, with saying, that often the heaviest
circumstance of being in debt, was the rendering oneself liable to the
overbearing insolence of purse-proud creditors; that I was not accountable to
any person whatsoever, for the exercise of a dominion over my own estate, etc.

The Domino collected himself, upon this rebuke, and made an apology for the
freedom he had used, by assuring me that he came to wait upon me, merely as a
friend, and was prepared to advance whatever sum I might need, upon the present
occasion, in order to spare my woods, which he told me he was informed would
not be in a condition to fell with advantage, for several years to come.

I felt myself ashamed at the folly and extravagance which had humbled me to
such mortifying circumstances; my resentment immediately subsided, I thanked
him for his friendly offer, accepted it, passed my bond to him for four
thousand pounds, and ran to discharge my notes of honor, on the instant.

CHAP. CLI.
WHEN I had composed myself a little after this disagreeable adventure, I went
to amuse myself, one morning to Leadenhall-street. I found the two ladies
sitting together, and Mrs. Seawell attempting to read a French book into
English, for the entertainment of her friend, who did not understand a word of
the language.

She stopped, on my coming in, but I begged she would proceed for a page or
two, that I might be able to judge how far she was a mistress of French. She
read on a little farther, but finding her to be a mere dictionary scholar, like
most of our modern translators, I took the book out of her hand, and construed
a few pages with an ease and fluency which pleased them both.

It was Le Sopha; and coming to that passage, where the writer, speaking of the
proneness to intrigue, in women, imputes it principally, a le de saeuvremnt
perpetuel dans lequel else languissent, I shut the book, crying out in a
transport, Deus nobis haec otia fecit! and putting it into my pocket, asked the
ladies to take the air with me a little way out of town, promising that I would
finish the remainder of the novel for them, in the coach. They accepted the
invitation, and we drove off to Ranelagh together.

The day was fine, and after we had walked a turn or two, in the gardens, we
sat ourselves down in an arbor, and the ladies claimed my promise of reading
the Sopha to them. To which I replied, that I would first give Mrs. Seawell
some instructions in French, as she seemed to need only a few lessons in the
auxiliaries, to become a complete scholar. The dear pupil appeared pleased at
my proposal, the other lady opposed it, but being out-voted, was obliged to sit
dully, and impatiently by.

I then began pedantically enough, with the verb avoir, and went very
seriously, through the indicative and imperative moods; but when I came to the
optative, potential, and subjunctive parts of the conjugation, the very titles
hinted an applicable subject to me; so digressing from old grammar, I laid hold
of this opportunity, of telling her in French, that the difficulty of
separating her from her companion, had reduced me to this ruse d'amour, to
frame an occasion of declaring the purest, and warmest passion for her, that I
had been struck at first sight, and this so strongly too, that ages could
neither increase nor diminish my flame -- That -- But here perceiving her
countenance falling into some confusion, I quick shifted my discourse to some
of the tenses of the verb, and then speaking to her in English, desired her to
repeat any speech, psalm, or prayer, she had by heart, in French, in order to
try her pronunciation.

She then spoke a stanza or two of Une Chanson a boire; and having by that
time, recovered herself a little, concluded it by thanking me for the
compliment I had paid her, and assuring me, in a sort of hesitating voice, and
embarrassed manner, that while I should preserve the decorums of Platonics,
which was all her present circumstances could admit of, she would return my
passion with the warmest friendship and esteem.

All this she spoke in a broken and interrupted manner, as if she was only
trying to recollect the remainder of her song; then speaking in English, said,
with an arch smile, that this was enough for the first lesson, and turning to
her friend, cried, Indeed, my dear, you miss a vast pleasure, in not
understanding French. During all this while, the discontented lady sat by,
throwing out, every now and then, such interjections as these: Vastly
entertaining! perfectly polite! Some folks are rude to show their breeding! Is
this the beau monde! This what they call the bon ton! What! the gay, the
ingenious Mr. Carewe turned schoolmaster, to teach parrots to speak! etc.

CHAP. CLII.
AFTER this manner, and in walking, we amused the time, till Mrs. Seawell,
looking at her watch, told us it was just three o'clock, and full time to set
out toward London. I was sent off, to order the coach to the door, and
returning soon back led the ladies into a little parlour, where a small, but
elegant collation had been prepared, by my private directions on our first
coming into the house.

I immediately seated myself at the table, entreating the favor of my fair
guests to take their places on each side of me, which the Divorcee readily
consented to, and placed herself directly on my right hand; but Mrs. Seawell
hesitated a little, lest her husband might be displeased at her staying abroad,
without notice. The other laughed at her scruples, saying, My dear friend, it is
good policy sometimes, to act a little irregularly, in innocent and indifferent
matters, so shall you be at liberty in things of higher moment. Practice
swimming, my girl, within your depth, and it may save you at a plunge. She
smiled, and blushed. She seemed in the most delicate temper imaginable -- at
once both willing, and afraid. I arose, took her by the warm, trembling hand,
pressed it tenderly, and seated her at the table.

We were each of us extremely lively, drank briskly, exhausted all the modern
wit of sentimental toasting, and our whole conversation was supported with
spirit and galantry. The Divorcee spoke her opinions pretty freely, upon this
latter subject; and while she meant only to justify her own amor, she was,
without perceiving, or intending it, assisting mine.

When we had got into the coach, to return to London, I proposed to my pretty
pupil, that we should converse in French together, for a while, upon any common
topic, just to try how far she had profited of my lessons, in the morning. The
other lady, who in truth preferred plain English, objected, but was, as before,
overruled in the question, which left us again at our liberty.

I took advantage of this second favorable crisis, to urge my now increasing
passion, with the united warmth of youth and wine; to which she answered, in a
tender accent, that if she had never done so before, she did, at that instant,
most cordially wish, that she had never been yet married. To this objection I
quick replied, that hearts were made before vows, and that nature was prior to
obligation; adding, that if she would make herself perfect mistress of the
language we were then conversing in, she must entirely accommodate herself to
the manners of that nation, who are our instructors in it.

To give you an example, now, continued I, all the difference that the polite
French make, between matrimony, and intrigue, is, that they term the first
menage, and the latter manege -- The transposition of a single letter only --
So that the strictest moralist can make but a literal error of it, at most. To
youth, and passion, mellowed by champaigne, any sophistry is good logic
Shakespeare has an happy expression, to this purpose, in his Coriolanus, -- I Will
watch him,
Till he be dieted to my request.

. I kissed her at parting, and in return, she pressed my hand. I lay at my
private lodgings that night, and the next morning discharged them.

CHAP. CLIII.
WHAT Mr. Carewe says, of the Divorcee's helping forward his intrigue, with
Mrs. Seawell, puts me in mind of a note of the Greek scholiast, upon Menander's
Fall of Woman. It is quoted, in Latin, by one of the commentators upon Ovid, De
art amandi; and my translation must be from this latter, having never seen the
original.

To employ one woman, to inveigle another, is like setting a knave to catch a
knave. A female confidante, or companion, will contribute more to the success
of an amor, in one month, than the galant's own assiduity, for twelve.
Consider the times and seasons, they are together; with the power of example,
added to precept. Another's courage inspires one's own Suetonius mentions one
woman, who was remarkable for resisting the prevalence of example. Antonia,
daughter to M. Anthony, and wife to Drusus, in the midst of a dissolute and
debauched court, was an example of virtue, prudence, and conjugal love. But
'twas also remarkable of her, that she never spit, in her life.
.

Here follows an anatomical dissertation on the body female; with a physical
account of the effects of passion upon the noble parts, the head, the heart,
the etc. and the whole is concluded with this quaint expression -- In short,
says he, women undo one another, like cockles.

This image is really ridiculous enough, but it is in the strong manner of the
ancient simile; and I have never been able to see the hinges of two cockles,
turned against each other, since, and niggling themselves open, without
thinking of the old scholiast on Menander, or The Fall of Woman.

CHAP. CLIV.
WE three had frequent parties together in London, at the play, the tavern, and
the china-shops, where I laid out a good deal of money, in presents, to both of
the ladies; for I thought it necessary to show some more certain tokens of
fondness and galantry to my lovely Seawell, than mere professions, and caresses
Win her with gifts, if she respect not words.
Dumb jewels often, in their silent kind,
More than quick words, do move a woman's mind.
Shakespeare.
. And to have neglected the same compliment to the other lady, might have
raised both a jealousy and a suspicion, and would not have been either prudent
or polite.

However, all my caution did not avail me long; for my attentions, my
languishments, on one side, with some unpardonable neglects and omissions, on
the other, soon visibly marked the preference. The forsaken fair had betrayed a
good deal of uneasiness and pique, at this, once or twice before; but one
night, after supper, at a tavern, when my pupil and I were exchanging a few
bons mots, in French, she started up from the table, expressing her resentment,
in these words:

Though I do not understand your tongues, said she, I do your eyes. I have long
suspected it; but being slow to censure -- or perhaps, to think so meanly of my
own age, or person, as to imagine they could, for many years yet to come, be
used to cloak another's amor, I have -- But I am trespassing on your patience,
or rather impatience, I dare swear -- Waiter, call me a chair -- I shall leave
you together, incontinently, here to consummate your unfinished loves. A chair
-- a chair -- below there --

She was an alarming figure all together. Her eyes flashed fire, her cheeks
flushed blood, her whole frame was convulsed; and her charms became, at the
same instant, both heightened and deformed. Enraged beauty strikes us with a
peculiar kind of shock. It raises a contrasted sensation in our breasts, both
of love, and aversion. We are affected, at once, with horror and compassion.

I attempted all in my power, to soothe her rage -- Denied the charge, and in
my hurry and confusion, vowed that she, and she alone, was the true object of
my real passion -- That -- But before I could frame, or add another syllable,
my ear was assaulted by a dying moan, and turning my eye quick about, I
perceived the fainting Seawell falling from her chair. I fled to her
assistance, caught her in my arms, called her my life, my love -- In plain
English -- having quite forgot my French, in this moment of distraction. I
leaned her back, sprinkled water in her face, and kissed it dry again, till she
recovered.

All this while the enraged Roxana went on exclaiming against my
disingenuousness and perfidy, and ringing the bell, for a chair. I ordered a
second to be called; she flung herself into one, I placed my poor trembling
pupil in the other, and ran along by the side of it, vowing, professing, and
stammering, all the way, till we got near her house; then slunk off, for fear
of being espied by the jealous termagant, and returned home to the Temple, in
the utmost perplexity and confusion.

CHAP. CLV.
I Could not compose my spirits sufficiently, that night, to lie down in my
bed, and sat up till daybreak, musing over the taper. My reflections ran thus:
I was apprehensive lest the violence of the disappointed Divorcee, might
transport her to expose the fair victim to her husband. I was resolved to
vindicate her actual innocence, and to support her through the consequences of
our mutual indiscretion, so far as it had already proceeded; and was so
affected with the dangerous situation to which my libertinism had reduced her,
that I resolutely determined never more to re-visit Leadenhall-street again;
and compounded for the loss of a fond mistress, by the getting rid of a jealous
virago.

Having thus far qualified the difficulty and uneasiness of my mind, I began to
turn my thoughts inward on myself -- What a life is mine! without purpose, or
end! -- "As if there was no more behind,
"But such a day tomorrow as to day,
"And to be boy eternal." -- Winter's Tale.

Youth flies, and fortune wastes! In what a venture am I engaged, and what a
shipwreck must he endanger, whose gale is passion, whose pilot inexperience,
and whose port is no where!

Then, upon comparing my Temple, with my college life -- That, letters, love,
and economy -- This, dissipation, debauchery, and extravagance -- I started
from my chair, crying out, Where is she, my lovely academic, now? my virtuous
mistress, my disinterested friend, my society alone! O! why not sum up all
these dear appellations, in one still more dear, and comprehensive term, my
wife! And she shall be mine, if love, approbation, and selection, can entitle
me to her; or that the confessing myself the base Indian, now repentant, may
win her from her delicacy and scruples. But is she not already so? Our souls
are one, and our bodies have been each other's.

"For marriage is a matter of more worth,
"Than to be dealt in by attorneyship."
With these reflections, and with this resolve, I laid me down to rest, and
awakened with the same. For sleep, by composing my spirits, and calming my
reason, had but the more firmly determined my purpose. I perceived the vanity
of life, the clearer, where nothing stable is, but love and virtue; which when
conjoined, stake this world as an earnest of the next.

"Consideration, like an angel came,
"And whipped the offending Adam out of him;
"Leaving his body as a paradise,
"To envelope, and contain celestial spirits."
CHAP. CLVI.
MY sentiments, with regard to the charming Eloisa, were not, at first, solely
the deductions of reason, but rather the inspirations of passion. This will
surprise you, perhaps. I had parted from her, with tolerable ease to myself,
because I had the satisfaction to have no manner of apprehensions subsisting
upon her own account. I had left her safe, both in fortune and in virtue. So
far had I acquitted myself, to the calls of honor, and the claims of justice;
and on my own part, I had youth, frolic, and adventure, before me, to keep up
my spirits, on the parting.

But, I had never passed a day, since our last adieu, without wishing for her
society; nor a night, without longing for her fellowship. Women and wine had
lost their flavor; company became insipid, books dry, and amor wanted zest.
In fine, she was my health, which I had insensibly enjoyed, in the possession,
and only lamented, in the loss.

My last night's shock had, like a burning-glass, collected all these scattered
rays of love and virtue together, in an instant, and their vis unita force was
irresistible. My resolves are sudden, and my action quick. I took posthorses
immediately, and drove down to Oxford.

My inquiry about her, there, was fruitless. I was informed, that he had lived
entirely sequestered, from the time I quitted college, appearing only at the
public lectures, and the public service; and that as soon as he had taken his
degree, he had struck his name out of the books, and retired, whither unknown,
without having taken leave of any body.

I lay that night in the town, and was preparing to pursue my dear fugitive
further, the next morning, when some select friends of mine, who had become
fellows of the university, and had been informed of my arrival, came to the
inn, and arrested my course. We loved one another, we walked together over the
classic ground; particularly the park, where my dear chum had related to me all
her transactions with her grandfather; and O! where the action with Ap Shones
had happened, which was the prologue to my happiness.

We spent the day together, often speaking of our pretty collegiate, as they
called her, and at several times I was in danger of exposing the secret, by the
transports that I found it difficult to restrain, upon the mention of her name.
I loitered at old Alma's for a week, purposing every morning to depart. My
stronger affections urged me to go, but my more immediate ones induced me to
stay. Such is the nature of man! Cadmus, being dispatched by his father Agenor,
in pursuit of his eloped sister Europa, happened to be struck with the beauties
of a particular situation, and built the city of Thebes, in his way.


CHAP. CLVII.
FROM Oxford I proceeded to our former sojourn, for the double pleasure of
embracing my little Hermes, and hearing, probably, some account of his dear
mother. But in both was I disappointed. My old landlady informed me that about
a month before, a very pretty young gentleman, who called himself my wife's
brother, and was as like her as a twin, had come to his house, brought a
maidservant in the chair with him, and carried away the child, who had been
long weaned, and was a fine healthy, lovely boy.

This additional circumstance sunk my spirits to the lowest ebb. I felt a
double loss at once, a wife, and son -- And in the latter, was deprived also,
of the only clue I had to trace the mother by. I was now arrived at the ne plus
ultra of my pursuit; for I neither knew her grandfather's name, or abode. She
had never mentioned him to me, by any other title than the Old Colonel, or
Grandsire.

Nor indeed, had I ever asked her any thing about the matter myself, because,
from the awkward circumstance of my own family affair, I did not choose to be
communicative in the like particular, myself. Nay, the same reserve I have
still continued to preserve, even toward you, gentlemen, said he to Mr. Andrews
and Beville, for Carewe is not my real name, but only one that I have assumed
to myself because I did not care to use my own, while my father and I remain
upon such unhappy terms.

Thus was I blown out to sea, again -- But though I lost my haven, I was
resolved to take what care I could of the cargo; and for one instance of it, I
immediately wrote a letter to the gentleman with whom I happened to have the
adventure at this house, desiring him to make his remittances of alimony
through the hands of Mr. Seawell, for the future; telling him that I found it
very inconvenient to act any longer as agent in that business.

I did not, however, resign the office of trustee at the same time -- The most
worthless person, the greatest criminal, has a right to justice from us, though
not to favor; and a breach of confidence is something more than an offense
against morals.

CHAP. CLVIII.
I FELT myself in the world alone. I had now no point of view to guide my
perspective, no referable object to direct my actions toward. The mind is
active, and like a conjured demon, will raze, or build a church, according to
the spell that raised it: Tam ficti pravique tenax, quam nuntia very. I
returned back, forlorn, to London, to folly, intemperance, and to single joys.
However, I shut myself up in my chambers, at first, and studied law with great
application, in order to keep my attention from wandering upon outward objects,
and to attach it to some rational pursuit in life.

About a fortnight after I had thus sequestered myself from the world, I
received the followed billet, one morning: Dear Sir,
A Certain friend of yours, is at present in a very unhappy situation -- If you
are a gentleman of honor, you will repair instantly to Leadenhall-street, and
there you shall hear the particulars from, dear Sir, your truly afflicted, and
most humble servant,

Jane Seawell.




This note alarmed me. I concluded that some awkward piece of business must
have fallen out, from the jealous resentment of the Divorcee. But whatever it
might be, I was resolved to bear myself through it, like a man; so putting on
my sword, I took coach, and drove off directly to the rendezvous appointed.

When I arrived at the house, I was led into the parlour, where I found Mr. and
Mrs. Seawell together, and alone. He was walking in a disturbed manner, about
the room, while she sat weeping in the window. Just as I guessed, said I to
myself, Mr. Seawell received me with a formal and embarrassed air, and his
wife, wiping her eyes, rose quickly from her seat, and running toward me, cried
out, Oh! Sir -- our poor unhappy friend is lost, ruined, and undone.

I was shocked greatly, at this state of the case, but began soon to grow
easier in my mind, than I had felt myself on my entrance, and desiring to be
informed of the nature and circumstances of that unfortunate lady's
difficulties, Mr. Seawell gave me the following account:

CHAP. CLIX.
A Young merchant Jew, just entered on the 'Change, having had frequent
business to transact at my counter, was often invited to my table, where this
lady was always one of the company. She threw out her lure, and encouraged his
addresses, extempore. This was obvious enough on the first interview; but as
there may be flirts, who would not be strumpets, I suffered the amor to be
carried on before my face, for about a fortnight; till her behavior at last,
her affecting always to sit by him, her laying hold of his hand to fix him in
discourse, her fond inclinings, her gloting eyes, etc. began to give me such
offense, and alarm too, on account of the example before my wife, that I marked
it to both the lovers, the last night they supped together here; and forbore
asking him farther than my counting-office, for the future, whenever his
business gave him pretense to call upon me.

This difficulty embarrassed the inamorato's a good deal, and reduced them to
the necessity of making appointments elsewhere. They met in the park, at the
play, and other places, which are not material to the story, therefore I shall
now pass on to the present crisis of this business.

This morning she was arrested at my house, upon an information for having
stolen a diamond ring, value five hundred pounds, from the Jew. She immediately
threw herself at my feet, continued Mr. Seawell, supplicating me not to suffer
her to be hurried away to a gaol, before she had an opportunity of speaking a
word or two with the merchant, whom she entreated me to go for, in person, and
bring to her, on the instant. My wife joined in the request, I prevailed on the
bailiffs to wait my return, and immediately repaired to the Jew's lodgings.

He told me the whole course of the intrigue, ever since the last evening they
had passed together at my house, till two nights past, when she was prevailed
upon to sup with him at his own lodgings. Here, said he, I happened to amuse
her by showing a parcel of valuable jewels, which had been consigned to me by a
correspondent at Venice, and were that evening just come to hand.

Yesterday morning, said he, I missed the ring in question, and wrote her a
civil line, to know whether she had taken it way, either in mistake, or jest,
to alarm me? To which she replied, that she knew nothing at all of the matter,
had not even distinguished the ring from the rest of the jewels, and lastly,
that I was welcome to her affidavit, if I should be mean and ungenerous enough,
to charge her still with so base a fraud.

Her answer confounded me, continued he. I could no longer suspect her, after
this last paragraph -- though she is a Christian -- Such was the Jew's
expression. I then looked all through my bureau again, searched my rooms and my
pockets, above twenty times; but in vain. By this time, said he, the day was
far spent, so that it was late before I could go about the city, to give notice
at all the jewellers shops; but had the mortification to find that my warning
came too late, for that the ring had been disposed of at one of them, early in
the morning, by an ordinary woman, who appeared to be a servant-maid.

Upon this I began to challenge the purchaser, for having ventured to buy such
a commodity, in so clandestine a manner; but he stopped me short, by
acquainting me that, in this particular, he had conducted himself with
sufficient mercantile caution; for, upon suspecting the persons who had offered
the ring to sale, he had threatened to detain her till she should be able to
give him a satisfactory account, both of herself and the jewel.

Upon this, said he, she led me to one Mr. Seawell's house, in
Leadenhall-street, where a lady, of a very responsible appearance, who, it
seems, lodges there, vouched the property to be her own. Upon which I returned
with the wench, back again to my shop, and paid her, before witnesses, what I
hope may be deemed pretty near the value of the ring.

After this, continued the Jew, I thought I had no other measure to keep, but
that of justice. I immediately gave in examinations before a magistrate, and
have now delivered the wretched woman over into the hands of the law, where she
shall abide her doom, for me. I pressed him to come along with me to see her,
at least, as she had so earnestly requested, but he peremptorily refused. For
to what purpose, said he? I would not forgive the debt, even to a Jew; much
less the theft, to a Christian.

I then returned home, concluded Mr. Seawell, and delivered the prisoner up to
the bailiffs, who carried her immediately away, and lodged her in the
Poultry-compter. That foolish chicken-hearted woman there, added he, fell into
distraction, at the merited distress of her hopeful friend, and wrote you the
note which has brought you, Sir, hither, and given you a trouble that I
apprehend can possibly answer no manner of purpose, in the world.

The lovely Seawell then falling on her knees before me, implored my assistance
toward rescuing our poor unhappy friend, from her miserable situation. I would
snatch her from the ground, but she was immovable in her suit. I promised
every thing in my power, said that it was not easy to frame any manner of
device, on the instant, but I would fly to comfort her, and consult together
all possible means of saving her life, at least. Justice forbids it, added I,
but humanity intercedes, even for vice. I then raised the suppliant fair; but
in the midst of my moral, found myself, ever I was aware, pressing her hand,
somewhat too tenderly.

CHAP. CLX.
WHEN I entered the gaol, I felt myself affected with a crowd of sensations and
reflections; the noisome scents, the sallow complexions, the squalid garments,
shocked my sight and smell. But I found myself much more disturbed at the
boisterous merriment I heard among the prisoners; which made their wretchedness
appear still more wretched; and added Bedlam to the Mint.

I spied the unhappy woman sitting in a corner of the common hall, her face all
pale with guilt and dread, her arms crossed over her breast, and eyes turned up
to Heaven; while a parcel of raggamuffins, male and female, were rifling her
pockets for garnish. The oppressed oppressing!

How I felt, is not to be described. Her beauty, her vice -- her situation, her
sex -- That form which I had once folded in my arms, with fondness and desire!
her jealousy, my vanity -- her distress, and my compassion! I scattered money
among the contending mob, seized her arm, and hurried her into an inner room,
before she could perceive who I was. Then taking her gently by the hand, and
beginning to speak I know not what, my tongue stood still, and my eyes
o'erflowed.

The moment she observed me, she gave a loud shriek, her strength failed her,
and she sunk down upon the floor, murmuring to herself, This is too much, O
justice! to be confronted with the person who knows so many vices in me! loaded
as I am with guilt, this added shame reaches beyond my powers! It gave me
extreme satisfaction to find her susceptible of any spark of virtue, of
humility, or contrition. I raised her up, embraced her, bid her repent, hope,
and depend upon my utmost exertion in her defense.

She then confessed the felony to me, pretending that had I been constant to
her, this misfortune could never have happened; that love alone, with me, would
have satisfied all her desires; but finding herself disappointed in that fond
wish, she had resolved to make all her future amors subservient to her
interest.

She told me that with this view, she had engaged in an intrigue with the Jew,
because he was reckoned rich. That she had endeavored to get money from him,
once or twice, on pretense of being considerably in debt, but sound him to be a
mean-spirited fellow; and that she was tempted to slip the ring into her bosom,
in order to pay herself; imagining that perhaps he might not have readily
missed it from among so large a parcel of jewels; or that if he should, she
might possibly not have been suspected; might wheedle him out of it; or
finally, compound the matter with him, by restoring it again. But -- having
once obtained the quiet possession of the prize, said she, my avarice began to
lay violent hands upon it; and the temptation proved, alas! too strong for my
weakness.

Thus, continued she, did I sap the foundations of my honesty, as I had done
before of my chastity, by salvo's. My first failure -- I may deem it my only
one -- For one breach in virtue, renders a woman bankrupt for life. Honor is
our true virginity -- Dishonor never strikes us twice -- My affair with the
unfortunate young man that is dead, said she, with a sigh and a tear, was never
intended, or the consequences even apprehended, by me. He was forward, and took
freedoms, which I permitted, rather for want of breeding, than of modesty; and
I finding still my purpose honest, indulged too great a latitude to my actions;
determining however, most resolutely, to oppose the last attack.

But alas! he had gained ground on me, so gradually and insensibly, that the
last favor, being but little more than what he had obtained the day before, I
was ruined, ever I perceived my danger. She then concluded her account of that
adventure, with this very just and prudent reflection; Women, said she, who do
not take up arms, against the first attempt, will scarce become heroines, upon
the last.

CHAP. CLXI.
I Staid to dinner with her, in this wretched scene, endeavoring to support
her spirits by frequent assurances of my friendship and compassion, which I
promised to exert for her service, to the utmost shilling of my fortune; but at
the same time, strongly recommending to her an unfeigned penitence, and a
thorough reformation of life. Prepare yourself for death, added I, not through
despair, but by the only preparation that is fit for life. Hope, and virtue.
She wept, vowed, and prayed.

At parting, I desired her to give me the money she had received on the sale of
the ring, that I might carry it to the Jew, and endeavor to bribe him into a
composition of the felony, with it. Here she fell into tears again, exclaiming
out, Oh, Sir! too surely is folly the natural concomitant of vice! I thought I
should have screened myself, by employing another person, and one unknown, to
dispose of the jewel; and I imagined I might have safely entrusted my own maid,
who had lived with me since we were both of us children -- but she has never
returned to me, since she received the money.

No matter, I replied, the expedient I intended, shall be supplied out of my
own purse -- So promising to return the next morning, I retired, without taking
any other leave of her, than by a bow, and adieu. A gaol is no scene of
galantry, and after my first transport of humanity toward her, was over, I kept
quite clear of all manner of dalliance, for the remainder of the day -- both
upon her account, and my own. Vice is contagious, as well as distemper; and I
was resolved to hold no farther connection with it, than what was barely
necessary for its cure.

However, I felt myself extremely uneasy at leaving the unhappy woman in such a
place, and circumstance, alone, and would have given bail for her myself, but I
was told by the jailer, that a positive felony would not admit it. I then gave
him five guineas, to treat the lady with the utmost humanity and respect, had
her placed in the best apartment of the house, and calling in at the first
bookseller's, in my way home, sent her a present of a Bible, a Prayer Book, and
Sherlock's two discourses upon Death and Resurrection.

CHAP. CLXII.
I WAS impatient, Mr. Reader, till Mr. Carewe had finished the last chapter,
that I might indulge myself in the opportunity of saying a few words, upon a
subject which he touches a little at, in the beginning of it. Namely, a gaol.

Every person's humanity, though ever so universal, still selects to itself one
favorite object of compassion. Some, the lunatic -- others the beggar -- some,
the slave; and others, the criminal. Mine is the Marshalsea prisoner.

The lunatic is a sad object, indeed! Swift said that this was a sight which he
could never look on, without an inward shock. I am, myself -- God preserve my
senses! as much affected at this appearance, as he could be, though I have not
so much wit to lose -- Sed miserum est perdere naulum -- But then, this is
considering the madman as an object, merely -- for, as a subject, he is
frequently an happy creature -- and fools bid fairest for that character!

The mendicant enjoys freedom, air, and charity -- Turkish captives, or
galley-slaves, have exercise, and its sweet lacquey, rest. And even these, or
mine, or row, in hopes of redemption -- For such is the mistaken charity of
Christians, that they often pass by the moans of Southwark, and the Fleet, to
set slaves free in Barbary! The Culprit! why he is not a prisoner for life --
but for death, only. His confinement is but short -- Aut cita mors, aut
victoria laeta!

The confined debtor is a wretch, who vexed with all their griefs, has not a
single solace of their reliefs. He has the Bedlamite's restraint, without the
ignorance of his misery! he is a beggar, without freedom, air, or charity! a
slave, without the wholesome vicissitudes of labor and rest! a prisoner,
without the permutatio foelix, of death or liberty! The criminal may have some
hope, from the favor of a jury, or the mercy of a judge -- but the harsh
creditor is, at once, both judge, jury, and executioner too, to the extremest
letter of the law. The Jew of Venice was tenderhearted -- he would have a
pound of flesh only, and let the rest go free -- the Christian jailer skeletons
the whole body with pining want, manacles the limbs to noisome dungeons, and
wastes the mind in repinings and despair!

I speak not here, of common cases, for I trust in my Redeemer, that there are
but few like this; for many debtors have substance, and some creditors want not
humanity -- but I speak only of those wretches, who cannot pay, and those
greater ones, who cannot forgive See Matthew, chap. xviii. beginning at verse
21.
. Under these mutual circumstances, I know some who feel, and others who fear,
a gaol, from those who calling themselves Christians, know no other text in
scripture but this, there shall thou remain, till thou have paid the uttermost
farthing.

The legislature would certainly interpose, in such hard cases as these, but
upon the presumption that no human creature can be totally devoid of humanity.
The bankruptcy act does not reach it. This respects only failures in trade.
Acts of grace come nearest to the remedy; but these are rare, and partial;
passed only upon extraordinary occasions, and extending but to prisoners, and
exiles, under certain restrained descriptions.

A standing act, of this kind, comprehending every person, and at all times,
who was willing to take the relief of it, would be necessary to abrogate this
summum jus, this tyranny within the law, would be -- a turn upon the word is
unavoidable here -- the most gracious act of power, that could be well devised,
and most becoming of that government, the principles and spirit of which are
founded in liberty.

CHAP. CLXIII.
AS soon as I returned home, said Mr. Carewe, I sent a note to my good old
friend Domino, addressed for him at the compting-house, where he had directed
me to pay the interest of my bonds, as it should become due; begging the favor
of him to let me have five hundred pounds, if possible, the next morning, upon
a very pressing occasion.

He came to me the next day, before ten o'clock, and brought the money along
with him, telling me, while he was filling up the bond, that this was the last
shilling he had, at present, or might perhaps, for ever have it in his power to
lend. No matter for that, replied I, so far as relates to myself, for I have
had a sufficient surfeit of extravagance already, and I promise you, that as
soon as I shall have got rid of a certain difficult business, which I am just
now engaged in, I will retire from the world, to books, and economy, till love
and matrimony, which I am now in quest of, added I, with a sigh, shall engross
me sole. Little Domino much commended both of these prudent and virtuous
resolutions, and took his leave.

I flew immediately to Leadenhall-street, to request the favor of Mr. Seawell
to carry this five hundred pounds to his friend the Jew, and tempt him to
withdraw the prosecution; as I thought that a collusion of this kind, might be
more successfully managed in privacy between themselves, than by the
negotiation of any third person. It was with great difficulty I could prevail
on him to transact this affair, but by the assistance of his wife's tears and
entreaties, we at length got him out of the house.

Mrs. Seawell remained in the parlour with me, till her husband's return,
expressing great apprehensions and concern for her friend, one minute, and
begging of me, the next, to tell her the whole story of our amor, for that she
loved to hear little novels, vastly. I defended myself, by replying that the
present occasion was too serious a time, to amuse with such light tales as
this, while the life of the unhappy subject of it, remained still under
suspense; and that memoirs, of the kind she seemed to imagine ours to have
been, were very improper and dangerous recitals for wives to listen to.

Lord bless me, how you talk, now! replied she, how differently from what you
used to do! but the extremity of your grief for the fair prisoner -- though she
is much fallen off, in my opinion, in that particular, of late -- has, I
believe, made a swaddler of you. Prithee now, could your telling an arch story
of our friend, among ourselves here, have any manner of effect upon her trial?
And for my own part, I really cannot see why any wife in the world might not
read an intrigue this hour, and say her prayers the next. Nay, the warmer
perhaps, for that reason, as it might afford her a hint to pray more earnestly
against the temptation -- I hope this last reflection, Mr. Methodist, said she,
with a smile, will please you.

I laughed at her giddy liveliness, but must confess that I was once or twice,
very near forgetting myself, on this tete a tete party. Her morning deshabille
had something extremely elegant and familiar in it; her robe was loose, and
made of a French lutestring, azure ground, clouded with pale pink: she had no
stays on, but a fine ticken vest, which suffered all the pliancies of an easy,
well-turned shape, to appear through it. Her bright glossy hair, which had a
natural curl in it, flowed carelessly over her shoulders, and was interwoven
before, with ribbon, like a victim dressed for the sacrifice. The few drops of
pity she had just shed, added another water to the brilliancy of her eyes. Her
neck was uncovered, excepting a slight black gauze handkerchief, which was
crossed before, and folded in between her breasts, to mark the parted snow. She
appeared to be finely limbed, her slippers were of light blue Persian, with a
silver fringe, her stockings white silk, and her petticoats so short, that the
tassels of her garters were to be seen, as she sat leaning on the couch with
one leg hanging over the cushion, and the other reaching to the floor.

Her toute ensemble was so very alluring, that a more perfect saint than I was,
might perhaps have fallen into the temptation; but virtue had for me, the
counter-charms of a new mistress. I reflected on the late danger to which she
had herself been exposed, from the rivalship of the Divorcee; I ruminated upon
the depth of vice which the other had fallen into, from perfect innocence,
through one unguarded step -- and could I think of exposing her to the same
sin! The place too, warned my virtue -- Scipio, a Pagan, forewent the rights of
conquest, from a principle of honor, alone -- and should I, a Christian, dare
profane the sacred laws of hospitality! But more, in aid, to my exalted sense
appeared the lovely academic, like an angel heavenly bright! she firmed my
footsteps, like a fixed point of view, which guides the equilibrist safely over
the precipice, upon a single plank.

I preserved the spirit of these reflections, through my whole conversation
with her; softening however, the austerity of them, with a guarded mixture of
gaiety and politeness; and endeavored to recommend virtue, as libertines do
vice, by setting forth the pleasures of it, till Mr. Seawell returned to us,
with an account of his having happily concluded a treaty with the Jew; who had
been prevailed upon to accept the money, and engaged not to appear upon the
trial.

CHAP. CLXIV.
I WAS transported at this event, and so appeared the lovely Seawell too, at
the first -- But -- female friendship! her joy began to flatten; which upon
perceiving, I took notice of to her. She replied, that it really did afford her
great pleasure, to find that the poor woman's life was safe, but feared, at the
same time, for her wretched soul's sake, that she would never die so well
prepared, as she had a chance of doing upon this lucky warning. To which she
added, that she apprehended still farther, upon my account, lest her beauty --
what remained of it -- her wickedness and arts, might hereafter lead me into
some more expensive or dangerous mishap, than I had hitherto sustained from her.

I returned her thanks for her friendly concern about me, but assured her that
all such fears for me, were groundless; for that vice, or even beauty, must
assail my heart in vain, whose affections were already fixed upon an adamantine
rock, of love, and virtue. And that besides, with regard to the lady in
question, I was resolved, as soon as the trial should be over, to make use of
all my influence to persuade her to quit the kingdom immediately, and leave her
shame behind her. She seemed to rejoice both in my security, and in my scheme,
and immediately offered to accompany me to the gaol, to carry the happy news to
her dear friend.

I declined going myself, at that time, saying that I should not choose to see
the unhappy woman, till after her first emotions were over; and that the
acknowledgements her gratitude might prompt her to make, would render me
awkward and uneasy; but said, that I should be much pleased, if she would carry
the good news herself, and prepare her to receive me, agreeably to my own
sentiments of this matter. That if she would stay to dinner there, I would
remain with Mr Seawell till evening, and by the time that I might imagine the
lady's spirits to be a little composed, he and I should wait upon them to
supper. Her husband consented to this proposal, and she went off directly in a
chair.

My purpose, in thus putting myself upon Mr. Seawell, was with a design of
cultivating an intimacy and friendship with him, in order to strengthen my
virtue, by an alliance with my honor. I had a farther view also, of becoming a
watchful guardian over his wife's behavior; as the galantries I had practiced
toward her, having seemed to have had some little effect upon her mind,
rendered me answerable for her future conduct.

CHAP. CLXV.
I Spent the remainder of the day pleasantly enough, with Mr. Seawell, and a
very sensible, good sort of elderly country gentleman, who was his near
relation, and happened to dine with us. Our host was a plain, rational man,
without either wit or learning; but one who appeared to know the world
sufficiently, and to understand mercantile business extremely well. I was with
him for some time in his compting-house, before dinner; and after he had
finished his letters for the post, and that his friend had taken his leave, we
took coach, and went to wait upon our ladies together.

We found them both very properly employed; the prisoner was reading one of the
volumes of Sherlock, while Mrs. Seawell was attending, and sprigging a flower
in the border of an handkerchief. The fair Confined, upon seeing me enter the
room, fell on her knees; I ran to take her up, and vowed I would quit the place
instantly, if she should attempt to distress me after this manner, any more.

She rose immediately, and asked my pardon, for having forgot the generous
injunction, as she termed it, which I had sent her by Mrs. Seawell; adding,
that it was increasing the obligation to do so, as it must have been impossible
for her to have found words strong enough to express the grateful sentiments
she bore toward her kind deliverer.

Her compliment threw me into some confusion -- from what principle in human
nature does this coyness arise? To call it modesty, does not satisfy my
philosophy Neither Mr. Andrews nor his brother returned him any solution to
this proposition, being unwilling to interrupt his story; nor shall I enter
into a disquisition upon the subject, in this place, for the same reason; but
shall content myself at present, with quoting a very pretty sentiment from the
Peruvian Letters, which combats this delicacy strongly: To be thoroughly
generous, one should listen to acknowledgements. It certainly must be a kind
relief, to a grateful mind, to be indulged in the fond pleasure of expressing
its obligations. It, in some sort, eases us of the debt.
-- I replied, that the amending of her life, would over-pay the gift, and that
her prayers and thanksgivings were fitter to be addressed to him who can redeem
from sin, than to one who has saved from death only.

We all supped together; and at parting, promised to pass most of our time with
her, by turns, till the day of trial should be over, which was to come on in
about ten days. While she was returning us thanks for our humanity and
compassion toward her wretched situation, Mrs. Seawell was hinting to me with a
low voice, and in French, that this would be a favorable opportunity for
proposing the scheme I had mentioned in the morning, of her quitting the
kingdom; because, said she, it will be an easier matter to make terms with her,
while she may consider herself as still in your power, than after her safety
shall become past dispute. I made no reply, and felt myself much offended at
her meanness. The ladies exchanged tears, embraces, and adieu's, with each
other, and we retired.

CHAP. CLXVI.
I Passed great part of every day, during her confinement, with the fair
reformed; and in reality, she appeared to be a truly penitent one. I acted as
her ordinary, and was highly sensible of the transcendent joy of ministering to
a mind diseased. I used to carry a variety of books in my pocket, and read
select passages out of them, to her, fitted to alleviate her distress.

Sometimes she would throw herself on her knees, and pray; at others, in a
female expression of gratitude, catch me in her arms, and weep. Then, with
joined hands, and uplifted eyes, walk across the room, crying out, How happy
was it for me to have felt this severe, yet healing affliction! Had not Divine
Providence, in its great mercy, thus awakened my soul to attention, I might
have still gone on, from bad to worse, to worst. Is there in sensuality an age
of joy, equal in poignancy, or degree, to one hour of that horror and anxiety I
have endured, since my committal hither! and yet, these terrors are what even
the most fortunate sinners must soon, or late, sustain; for though they should
escape a scaffold, a deathbed has no reprieve!

At other moments, she would start up from her seat, with wildness and despair
in her looks, crying, Where is my husband! where my children! where is that
generous hand, which raised me from indigence to affluence! and where those
lovely babes, that doubly blessed my fortunes! you have -- you have, she would
add, suborned the evidence against my life -- but oh! who shall bribe off these
bitter testimonies against my soul!

Such sad reflections, and self-expostulations as these, used to throw her into
swoonings almost to convulsions, which I endeavored to relieve, in vain, till
after a shower of contrite tears, had assuaged the tempest in her breast, and
recovered her, but rather to a torpid, than a calm state of mind.

I became quite charmed with my fair penitent. She seemed sometimes inspired.
She talked above her reason, and often exerted an energy, beyond her native
force. I contributed every argument in my power, to strengthen and confirm
these good sentiments in her. She only wrought herself into these ecstasies,
when we were alone together, but she diffused the spirit of them, through all
her converse with Mrs. Seawell, who always spent every evening with her; and
thus helped to second the fair intentions, which I had before conceived, toward
that very pretty, but very weak young woman.

On the post-evenings, Mr. Seawell never paid us a visit, and I used to walk
home with my fair pupil, to Leadenhall-street, and deliver up my charge, at the
door. She told me, one night, as I was conducting her, with a no-thanks to me,
that the Divorcee had related her whole story to her, at some interval she
happened to be with her alone, not by way of narrative, but confession; and
gave me such warning, and counsel, upon several passages of it, said she, that
I hope, and believe I shall be the better for, all my life.

At another time, she said that she really imagined our friend to be perfectly
sincere in her reformation; which had rendered her a truly edifying example --
And yours also, said she, turning to me, greatly confirms the strength of it;
for it proves that virtue may subsist, even in the midst of passion. To tell
you the truth, went she on, what had put me almost out of conceit with
goodness, before -- I mean, said she, catching herself up, the appearances of
it, was that one seldom sees it preached, or practiced, but by certain old
folk, who seem to grow good, merely when they are become good for nothing; and
poorly think to heal example, by precept.

I agreed with my fair moralist, that this was too generally the case,
especially with women; who once entered into vice, rarely quit the sin, till
the sinner forsakes them. And as their affections, being naturally strong, must
be occupied, and their fond hearts engaged, they then become devotees, and
enter into a course of Platonics with Heaven. The object only changed, the
passion still the same.

Upon the whole, then, replied she, we had better remain as we are, for women,
it seems, are scandalous, in sin, and become ridiculous, when they would put on
the appearances of growing good again. Your scheme, said I, is certainly the
best; for it is the easiest, the safest, and upon experience, will be found to
be the pleasantest, also.

CHAP. CLXVII.
AT length, the irksome day of trial arrived; a crisis, which even to the
innocent, or the secure, must occasion great matter of perturbation. My
penitent did not appear to be the least disturbed at its approach. She assured
me that virtue and religion had, even within so short an interval, so perfectly
calmed every passion in her mind, that she was very certain, had not the
prosecution been purchased off, I should have seen her upon this occasion,
rather more composed than she confessed she was at the present; for she owned
that there lay one concern heavy on her mind, now, which she would not much
have attended to, then. This was her being exposed a public spectacle in a
court, upon an indictment for so mean a crime.

This thought pleased me extremely. It gave me assurance of her virtue. Modesty
is the great bulwark of that sex; and the surest sign of a returning grace in
them, is its being accompanied with a sense of shame. I was resolved therefore,
to extricate her from this difficulty; and immediately calling in the jailer, I
told him how the case stood, with regard to his prisoner; that there was to be
no manner of prosecution; and therefore, as there was nothing more than mere
matter of form to pass through, I would give him ten guineas to procure any
ordinary woman to stand in the dock, and hold up her hand at the bar, in this
lady's name.

The money tempted him, he stepped out of the room, and returning back again in
about five minutes, told us he had bribed his own maidservant, to put on her
riding-hood, and act the culprit part for the prisoner. But at the same time,
he insisted upon locking the lady up safe, lest the prosecution might
unexpectedly go on, and he be obliged then, to plead a mistake, and produce the
real person, whose name was upon his calendar.

We submitted to this caution; and I consented, at her request, to be confined
along with her; having retained some eminent lawyers to attend the trial, and
placed Mr. Seawell as a guard upon the Jew. When we were left alone, tears
burst from her eyes, and turning them to me, You cannot bear acknowledgements,
said she, therefore I shall only still continue to oblige, by asking further
favors from you. Will you then, in this sad scene, and at this dread hour,
join your voice with mine, in fervent prayer? I kneeled down by her, at the
word, and we both continued in that posture, till we heard the door unlocked;
when Mr. Seawell came running into the room, to wish her joy.

She behaved with her new temper, upon this occasion; and with a composed
countenance, and steady voice, replied, I heartily thank my friends, both for
their kindness and generous assistance, during my distress, but O! far above
all do I acknowledge my eternal obligations to the Most Highest, for his
infinite goodness and mercy, in having thus tried and proved me, by this happy
affliction.

We immediately took coach, and went off together to Leadenhall-street, where
we found Mrs. Seawell in the fondest anxiety and impatience, as she expressed
herself, to receive her dear friend safe into her arms; and both she and I had
already set forth the reformation of the Divorcee, in such a light, that Mr.
Seawell was prevailed upon, at my request, to accept of her as a lodger in his
house again.

I staid to dine with them; in the evening the two ladies went to prayers, and
at their return, I read Amana to them, a new dramatic poem, which had been just
published that day. They appeared to be both charmed with the spirit, style,
and sentiments of the writing, and said they were flattered by it also, as it
was written by a woman.

We supped together; and when I was taking my leave, I paid the reclaimed
Divorcee all due compliments, upon her proper sense and merit on the late
occasion; and concluded with this injunction to the rest, that on account of
this consideration, no part of her past conduct, or private history, should
ever be repeated out of our little society, nor even remembered in it. The
Seawells made a solemn vow of confidence, to the purport of my proposition, and
I retired, leaving the retrieved fair dissolved in tears of tenderest gratitude.

CHAP. CLXVIII.
I Returned home with the most exulting heart imaginable. I had rescued one
woman, and prevented another, from ruin. So far well -- for them. But, for
myself, I had another woman, more precious than the whole sex besides, still to
recover. This acquisition was necessary to confirm my virtue, and complete my
happiness at the same time.

But, where to find her -- by what clue to trace her out! London was neither a
probable place to expect, nor a possible one to search for her in; and to what
part of England she might have retired, with her little Hermes, then about
three years old, it must have been impossible for me, even to have guessed.

The next morning, I sent a card to Leadenhall-street, to inquire how the
ladies did, but did not pay them a visit for several days, which I passed
retired in my chambers, in a very low-spirited way, arising from the despondent
reflection just mentioned; praying and hoping that either her friendship for
me, or natural curiosity at least, to know what scheme, or course of life, I
was pursuing, or some lucky accident or other, might restore me to the
happiness of seeing her once more; and resolving, upon a trust in this fond
hope, to hold both my heart and hand at liberty to dedicate to her.

The last evening of my retirement, Mr. Seawell called to see me. He told me
that his ladies had gone to morning and evening prayers, at six and six, every
day since we parted; and that his wife had objected to the early service, at
first, but had been persuaded to it by her friend, as answering a double
purpose at once, both of health and devotion. He added that he owed great
obligations to this extraordinary woman, who kept his wife almost constantly in
her company, read to her, and endeavored all in her power, to improve her
mind, and regulate her conduct.

He concluded his visit, with telling me that the ladies were much surprised at
my long absence, and had sent him to inquire whether any accident, or disgust,
had happened to deprive them the pleasure of my company. I returned my
compliments to the fair querists, and assured him that I had purposed to wait
upon upon them the next morning, before he had called upon me.

CHAP. CLXIX.
THE day following, I went to Leadenhall-street, about twelve o'clock; and
after a few minutes conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Seawell, below stairs, I
walked up to pay a visit to my now esteemed friend; who received me with great
cheerfulness in her manner, and pleasure in her looks.

She asked me, in a friendly way, why I had absented myself so long, from
friends who had so well-grounded an esteem for me? But I recollect your
delicacy, said she, you were afraid of acknowledgements, and knowing the world
tolerably well, might very justly have concluded that a few days interval would
have supplied a bumper of Lethe to obligation. No, Mr. Carewe, added she,
though my speech may be condemned to silence, my actions shall ever bear an
higher testimony of my gratitude toward you.

I hope, continued she, with a smile, that my behavior for some time past, may
not be understood as any contradiction to my present professions; but the
innocent, yet frail Mrs. Seawell, has heartily confessed her weakness, with
regard to you; she has translated to me all your French conversations together,
and has owned the dangerous preference, which it was too natural for a young
galant to have obtained over an old husband.

But my exhortations, my remonstrances, said she, with the prevalence of my own
sad example, who with -- I may without presumption add -- better sense, and
less temptation to err, had merely through indiscretion, been led from one step
to another, into the very gulf of destruction, have been so strongly urged by
me, as a warning to her conduct, that I think I may, as far as female sincerity
can be depended upon, give assurance of her conduct for the future.

To this I replied, in the same style with which she had accosted me, that she
had infringed one article of her covenant, for so far from restraining her
speech, she had testified her obligations to me in the highest manner, in thus
employing it to cooperate by her advice and counsel, with my own honest
intentions toward the person she mentioned. And if the lady has done me
justice, added I, you must be already convinced of this assertion, from my
conversation and manners with regard to her, for some time past.

I must confess, she replied, that my friend has not made me a confidant, in
this particular, you are not to expect such ingenuousness in our sex -- and to
tell you the truth, said she, I think it would not be prudent in either of us,
to take any notice of it to her. Women are naturally weak, and vain; and it is
the best philosophy always to oppose these foibles against each other. Now
should her virtue appear to have arisen from any other principle but her own
native force, believe me it would much weaken the incitement to it.

Just at this instant the door opened, and a lovely boy of about eight years of
age, walked into the room -- she looked, she doubted -- she blushed, she
started -- then giving a loud shriek, sprang forward, caught him up in her
arms, and would have stifled him with her embrace, if a most beautiful girl,
about a year younger, had not appeared immediately after -- she let her son
drop, and had not power to advance toward her daughter -- but when her husband
entered the room, she swooned away on the floor, before he could run up to
sustain her.

The scene was beyond my powers -- I ran instantly down stairs, to rejoice with
my friends below, upon this happy event, which I had already prepared them for.

CHAP. CLXX.
YOU were kinder to them, than you have been to us, interrupted Mr. Andrews and
Beville, with one voice, for this was indeed a crisis, which no part of your
recital could in any manner have warned us of. I was so impatient to obtain
this favorite point, replied Mr. Carewe, that I neglected the usual course of
narrative, to arrive at it. The story, in short, is this:

When I perceived the fair Penitent rising into virtue, by such degrees as gave
assurance of stability; her repentance; her resignation; her grateful
sentiments of her obligations to her husband; her reflection about her
children; her sense of shame; and finally, the receiving, and rejoicing in her
affliction, as a mercy and a blessing from the hands of Providence; I thought
her now become a fit object for the most interesting connections of life,
either as a friend, a mother, or a wife.

Upon this not unphilosophic sentiment, I wrote a letter to her husband, the
very night of her acquittal, saying that I had something to communicate to him,
of consequence to his children and himself, and requesting the favor of him to
bring them up to London immediately, for that I should not explain myself any
farther, by letter. Curiosity hurried him up express, and the morning before I
carried him to Leadenhall-street, he came to my apartments in the Temple.

I then told him that the business I had summoned him about, was to acquaint
him with an event, which must naturally afford the extremest satisfaction, to
an humane mind; namely, the most complete reformation in his wife, both in mind
and manners, that ever Grace had yet vouchsafed to a sinner.

I then gave him an account of her behavior and expressions, since her arrest,
as far as I could do so without revealing any part of her story, which would
have been to her disadvantage; but affected to speak of her amendment, as
commencing immediately, upon the separation.

I said that her actions and conduct had now ceased to be a scandal to her
husband, or a reproach to her children; and that her sense and virtue were
sufficient to recommend her, at present, both as a companion to the one, and a
guide to the other. For my part, said I, were she free, and my own heart
disingaged, from the thorough conviction I have conceived of her firmness in
morals and religion, I should not have the least manner of scruple about
accepting her myself, into the nicest and most honorable connections of life;
regarding her former vice and errors, be they what they may, but as the spots
of pestilence, or deliriums of a fever, unimputable now to her restored health
and reason.

Then, said I, taking hold of him by the hand, whom Heaven has forgiven, let
not man forsake! receive her, dear Sir, again into your favor and protection,
at once to reward and to confirm her virtue; and be assured that you will find
the exercise of this kindness, this charity, this humanity, most extremely
pleasing on the experiment, for perhaps, there may be few things, more grateful
to a generous mind, than to have something to forgive.

I perceived the workings of his mind rising by degrees, and aiding my purpose,
still as I went on, but when I came to this last expression, he burst silence
with these words: "Forgive!" said he, and leaning his hand upon my shoulder, "I
have, alas! nothing to forgive! my crime has been greater than here is, even
supposing her to have been guilty; and we have nothing now to do, but to
commute forgiveness. And as I hope that my contrition has already earned full
pardon for my sin, we meet now upon equal terms of penitence -- why not then,
of love? O! lead me to her, thou excellent young man, that I may show the
strength of that passion, with which I first embraced her, by its subsisting
still in force, after a separation of three years, and one so strongly marked
as ours."

I listened with pleasure, and embraced him with transport -- I then appointed
the next morning for the completion of their reunion; and told him that I
would not suffer her to receive the least notice of her approaching happiness,
in order to have their meeting as strongly marked, as was their parting.

CHAP. CLXXI.
I SAT below with Mrs. Seawell, who was praising and blessing me for my
goodness, till dinner was served; when I went up stairs to summon this little
happy united family. I embraced them all, not without tears; and taking her by
the hand, led her down into the parlour.

The remainder of that day passed off in the pleasantest manner imaginable, to
us all -- but the exultations of my mind, upon this occasion, are not to be
expressed. Your own virtue, gentlemen, must conceive them. The behavior of the
reconciled pair to each other, so polite, so attentive, and so fond! each
striving to prevent the other, in shows of love, and mutual amity --

The next morning early, they left London, and returned to their own seat, in
the country; where they have lived in perfect harmony together, ever since, as
frequent letters, and pressing invitations from them both, have happily
informed me. I have never yet paid them a visit -- their desiring one, pleased
me, because it showed the true humility of virtue; but my nicety prevented me;
because persons, be their reformation ever so sincere, can never enjoy perfect
ease or freedom, in company with those, who have once had certain knowledge of
their vices.

CHAP. CLXXII.
HAVING now rid my mind of all difficulties with regard to others, my own
uneasiness pressed more heavily upon me. I owed a treble obligation, to honor,
to virtue, and to love; but was deprived of the charming means of acquitting
myself to them all, at once. Reflection upon this scheme the more confirmed my
purpose; and disappointment augmented still my ardour.

I helped to relieve my spirits, by reading, and seeing the fair Seawell often,
at her own house, or by invitation with her husband, at my chambers; and our
behavior toward each other, was ever perfectly polite, and platonic. We used
all the freedom of a brother and sister together, preserving, at the same time,
the purest innocence of such correlatives.

In this situation had I continued for some time, when one evening I received
this letter by the penny-post, gentlemen, said Mr. Carewe, taking out his
pocketbook, and presenting them with a paper to read, the contents of which
were in the following words: SIR,
AS you may be deemed, in some sort, accountable for my conduct in life,
perhaps it may pass for a kind of duty in me, to acquaint you with every
particular of it, since we last parted; a faithful relation of which, shall be
the subject of this letter.

As soon as I had taken my degree at Oxford, I struck my name out of the books,
and returned home to my grandfather's. He was rejoiced to see me, said a great
many fond and flattering things to me, and pressed me several times in his
arms. I felt myself extremely unhappy, on this interview, as his kindnesses
appeared so much unmerited, on my part; first, from the equivocation of my sex;
and next, from that ultimate misfortune, which had rendered me so very unworthy
of my real one.

He told me that he hoped I had come home, with a resolution of remaining with
him during the short remnant of his life; and I had indeed really purposed to
do so. But I soon found it very disagreeable, and sometimes inconvenient to
myself, to live entirely in his house.

He was too fond of my company, and never afforded me the least opportunity for
reading, or reflection, except the few hours which I used to steal to myself in
the mornings, by rising so much earlier than he; and during the short siesto's,
or evening naps he took every day, after dinner.

I loved him for his goodnature, I respected him for his virtues, and I
honored him as a parent -- but notwithstanding these regards, his conversation
soon became tedious to me. He would tell old stories, and his memory, or fresh
topics failing him, would repeat them over again. He would also tire me with
asking a number of frivolous questions, which one moment's reflection might
have either answered to himself, or shown him the insignificancy of. But this
is after the manner of old people, who find it easier to talk, than think.

There were some other particulars, which rendered my abode with him difficult
and uneasy to me. He lived hospitably, and saw more company than was agreeable,
either to my inclinations, or circumstances. He would be sometimes peevish, if
I did not drink a bottle with my friends -- who cared not whether I was drunk,
or sick with it, or no -- and that I would not dishonor myself, to do the
honors of his house.

When young ladies happened to be of the company, he would distress me greatly,
by pressing me to exert my galantries toward them. I used sometimes to attempt
it, in complaisance to him, but my address was always too much embarrassed. I
could neither assume the assurance of my apparent character, nor divest myself
of the bashfulness of my real one; and this aukwardness appeared so very
ridiculous, that it has frequently set the girls a laughing at me.

But there was one difficulty, which distressed me more than any of the rest.
When his house was crowded with guests at nights, he would desire me to offer
share of my bed, to some of the jolly fox-hunters of the company. The first
time that this happened, I feigned a sudden illness, as soon as the old colonel
had retired; and sat up, taking an emetic, till the early horn sounded, which
summoned my chum to the chase, and left me the bed to myself. A second time,
upon foreseeing the like circumstance, I pretended a vast impatience of paying
my duty to my aunt, and accordingly ordered the post-chaise, and drove off to
her house, immediately after dinner.

Upon a consideration of all these circumstances, I resolved to retreat
some-where or other, where I might pass my life in a manner more retired and
agreeable, to myself, and to my real character. I told the good old man that I
required the conversation and assistance of some eminent divines, to settle my
orthodoxy; that I had a mind to see a little more of the world, before I
sequestered myself from it; and that therefore I should be infinitely obliged
to him, if he would let me have the portion he had been so good as to allot me,
and suffer me to seek my fortunes in the world, at large.

This most excellent parent received my proposal with regret; but after some
pause, Thou have so much sense and virtue, he was so kind to say, that I do not
think I shall fail in the duty of a guardian, in trusting you with your own
conduct in life. And as to the portion you have chosen to stint yourself to --
remember it was all your own doing -- I think, do you mind, that you have been
too fair a purchaser, to have that little modicum withheld from you, upon
demand -- so God bless you, boy -- you will come, do you hear, and see your old
father, often. God Almighty guide and protect my child!

The next morning he gave me an order on his banker for four thousand pounds,
and opening his bureau, made me a present of two hundred guineas, also. We both
of us wept sincerely, and the next day I borrowed his equipage, to set me down
in London. I placed the four thousand pounds, along with the same sum, which
you had been so generous as to remit to me at Oxford, in the funds. I hired a
small house there, and sent for my nurse and foster-father to come up, and
attend me in it.

My reason for selecting these two persons, was, that as she was the only
confidant of my metamorphose, from whom I apprehended any discovery, I thought
it prudent to retain her, both in my friendship, and my service; and, as her
husband was a very rational discreet man, who had been my father's
parish-clerk, had kept a Latin school in the village, was a good Christian, and
tolerably well read in morality and history, I thought he might be useful
toward assisting me in the first parts of my dear child's education; whom, at
the proper age for beginning instruction, I have since brought home to me.

I shall here ask pardon of you, for this theft; but fearing lest you might not
have had the generosity to bestow him to me, had I made the request; and being
likewise offended, at the apprehension of his ever coming to discover what kind
of relationship he bears to you, I ventured to steal him from you. Besides,
what is, at present, my sole happiness, might have been, perhaps, rather an
encumbrance to you. He is lovely, lively, healthy, and intelligent. I will be
responsible for his education and morals.

My reason for choosing London, as an asylum from the world, was, that I thought
I might live there more disingaged and unknown, than I could possibly have done
in any village or country-seat in England. One is best hid in a crowd. Another
inducement to this choice, was that I might sometimes enjoy the pleasure,
though an uneasy one, of seeing you, at a distance, of attending to your
conduct, of watching over you, like a guardian-angel, unseen, and of doing you,
perhaps, some little friendly offices, which your too giddy and dissipated life
might possibly, sooner or later, afford me an opportunity of exerting toward
you.

I have seen you often at church, and at the play; and having directed some
private inquiries about your conduct, character, and manner of life, I was
informed that you had prepared a most expensive habit, to appear in at the
first masquerade of last season, which dress I received a particular
description of.

I was struck with the whim of seeing you and this fantastic scene, together. I
went there, dressed in a domino. The rest of that night's adventure, perhaps,
may occur to your own recollection, now. I employed my foster-father to carry
on the masquerade with you the next morning, and twice since, by personating a
merchant's clerk.

I had determined to have remained in London, quite disingaged from any manner
of connection, suffering our dear son to pass for my ward, till he should be
fit to enter into college, when I purposed to carry him to Cambridge, and
reside with him there. But some expressions which you happened to let drop, the
last morning my agent was with you, have quite altered my scheme of life. You
hinted, with a fond sigh, that you were then in pursuit of love and matrimony.
May all the success and happiness, that your merit shall entitle you to, attend
you in every engagement and connection of life! To wish more were impious --

But, notwithstanding the sincerity of this prayer, notwithstanding the
religion, the philosophy, and the resignation, with which I flattered myself
that I had sufficiently armed my mind, I find I cannot -- I confess my weakness
-- think of remaining in the same city, or even in the same kingdom, with you,
after such an event. Some unlucky chance might possibly, hereafter, occasion
you and I to meet -- and I would spare us both the difficulty and disturbance
of such an interview.

I deferred sending you this letter, which has been written for some time, till
I was on shipboard, where I am at present -- whither bound, no matter -- May
prosperous gales breathe on us both! Amen, and adieu!

Domino.




CHAP. CLXXIII.
WHAT must have been my situation, when I had come to the conclusion of this
letter! what a fate had befallen me, that those very expressions of love and
honor, which the overflowings of my fond heart had occasionally poured out
toward herself, should have been the sole cause of her being banished from my
hopes for ever! I began to grow superstitious, and dread lest some evil
contingency might possibly have been interwoven with my destiny, and fell into
a kind of despondency and despair, which I continued under for some days.

At length I was roused out of my reverie, by Mr. Seawell's calling on me one
morning, and showing me an invitation to spend some days in the country, which
had been addressed to him, his wife, and to me, from the gentleman, mentioned
before, with whom I had dined one day, in Leadenhall-street, and who lived
about five miles from London.

It was about the middle of May, and the weather fine. I thought that company
and country air might assist me to relieve my spirits, and at least alleviate,
in some sort, my present disappointment. I accordingly accepted of the
invitation, and the next morning took a coach, called on my two friends, and
drove down to the country, with a design of spending a week there together.

Our host entertained us with great cheerfulness and hospitality; but finding
that wine rather depressed, than raised my spirits, I retired to the ladies,
soon after dinner -- I drank a dish of coffee with them, and perceiving that my
melancholy damped the spirit of their conversation, I stole out of the room,
and went to saunter in the gardens alone.

I had walked there about half an hour, when crossing one of the alleys, I met
Mrs. Seawell, who told me she had made some pretense to quit her company, and
had followed me into the garden out of a friendly curiosity and concern, to
inquire what sudden or extraordinary misfortune had affected me so very
remarkably, the whole day, both in looks, appetite, and manners?

When the mind is full, and the heart softened, solicitation and sympathy are
apt to induce a confidence. It Is a relief besides, to the o'er-burdened soul,
to find a friendly prop to rest its load upon; and in love peculiarly, it is
some solace, even to make the object of our affections, a subject of our
conversation. I treated her then, to the little novel See her own expression,
chap. clxiii. parag. 4.
of my amor; but with such reserve, as still preserved both the lady's
character, and secret.

I told her that I had formerly paid my addresses to a very amiable young lady,
without any design but general galantry; that I had happened unluckily, to have
won her heart, before I perceived that I had lost my own. That after I had
parted from her, and passed through some dangerous and extravagant scenes of
idle and debauched life, I found that my attachments had been already fixed
upon this dear object, without my own consciousness of the matter. That upon
this conviction, I had gone to search for her, at her former residence; and
upon missing, and not being able to gather any account of her, or her family,
there, I had been in quest of her ever since, in vain.

I then concluded my story, with telling her that about a week past, I had
received a letter from this lady, dated from on shipboard, and taking leave of
me, for life. I added also, the circumstance which had, through mistake, been
the unlucky occasion of our ultimate separation. I stopped, I sighed, and shed a
tear -- she took me by the hand, pressed it, and dropped a tear also. Through all
her features was strongly marked the charming morbidezza, or tender languish.
She wished herself the happy fair; or that fortune might throw it in her way to
discover, and present her to my arms.

CHAP. CLXXIV.
THIS conversation had led us a considerable distance from the house, when
happening to pass by an apiary, just as one of the hives began to swarm, she
started at the hum, and sprang over a border, into the opposite alley. But on
her alighting at the other side, she had missed her footing, and fell quite
prostrate on the grass-walk; doing herself, at the same time, an accidental
piece of justice, by revealing the most beautiful limbs, even above her
garters, that I had ever yet beheld.

I walked over the border, to her assistance; pleased, though surprised, at her
remaining motionless on the ground, in such a posture, and deshabille, as if
waiting till I should come to raise her up; but it seemed that she had sprained
her left ancle, and wrenched both her wrists, which had rendered her quite
unable to stir, without assistance.

I took her in my arms, and carried her out of the sun, into a little green
arbor that I spied at some paces off, where I set her down on the grass, as
there was neither chair, or bench, in the place. She moaned greatly, through
pain, and both her hands being disabled, she could not rub, or foment her leg
herself; but perceiving the ancle beginning to swell, I kneeled down before
her, and performed that piece of surgery for her, as we were too far from the
house, to provide her with more decent assistance.

I kept down the swelling, and by degrees she found herself able to move her
ancle sufficiently to limp home. She then returned me thanks for my obliging
care, expressed great concern at the trouble she had given me, and seemed
extremely impatient to be gone from that suspicious place.

I gave her my hand to raise her; but when she attempted to stir, she was
obliged to scream out, from an excess of sudden pain, and remained still on the
ground. This second distress proceeded entirely from her over-scrupulous
modesty; for, that she might expose no more of her leg than was just necessary
to be chafed, she had contracted the sinews of it so much, that it occasioned a
violent cramp in the calf of that limb.

I had now an higher operation to perform, upon my too lovely patient. I began
instantly to rub the gasterocnemium A term in anatomy, for the calf of the leg.
, till the convulsion, rising by degrees into the biceps femoris A muscle of
the thigh, which serves to move the leg,
, and the gemini Vide Harris's Lexicon Technicum.
, I was tempted to pursue the retreating enemy too far, till at length, I had
fallen my self into the ambush. --

CHAP. CLXXV.
POOR Carewe! you see, ladies, that he cannot peep his nose abroad, but
temptation and opportunity stare him full in the face. But in truth, he had for
some time, most unphysically mistaken an ague for virtue, and the hot fit had
now, very naturally succeeded the cold one. Consider his situation. What
constitution can stand unmoved, point blank under the line? He had presumed too
much upon his new-fledged pinions -- pennis non homini datis, and like another
Icarus, by soaring into the region of temptation, the wax was melted before the
flame of desire.

The unfortunate Seawell too! her accident seems to have been entirely owing to
her total ignorance in natural philosophy. Familiarity with men, though upon
the chastest principles imaginable, is always dangerous. The jockeys have a
phrase, that a foal, well handled, is half broke; and the Spaniards have also a
proverb -- That is -- (If you ask me, I Will tell you.)

In short, take my word for it, ladies, those few of you who have had no
experience in this matter, that Platonics are a mere farce. It Is as dull and
uninteresting, as hunting a drag, without any quarry at the end of it. They are
the devil's features, under an angel's mask. In general, they are but
pretended, in order to indulge a vice, under the cloak of virtue; but even
where they are sincere, as in innocent and unexperienced minds they sometimes
may be, yet let such still beware, that refined passions, like dried gunpowder,
are thereby but rendered the more susceptible of a spark; and whether the flame
be caught from an earthly fire, or a celestial ray, it equally raises the
combustible to an explosion.

There happened to be another science too, which the fair, but illiterate
Seawell seems to have been totally ignorant of, upon this crisis; namely,
anatomy. Mr. Carewe appears to be perfectly skilled in the muscles
gasterocnemium, the biceps femoris, and the O gemini! but the poor lady had
unfortunately, never learned the use of the tendon, styled Sartorius This is
called in anatomy, the Taylor's Muscle, as it is that which enables us to cross
our legs.
. Though philosophers generally agree, that this same sinew was originally so
weakened by the fall, that it has not recovered its spring ever since.

There is another piece of natural knowledge also, which Mr. Carewe hints this
lady to have been most shamefully unacquainted with, till then. But let old
Seawell take it for his pains -- When a person happens to have been bound
apprentice to an insufficient master, it cannot certainly be deemed any breach
of indentures, to pick up the trade from a more able instructor.

CHAP. CLXXVI.
WHEN we had recovered from our trance, said Mr. Carewe, for such it might be
truly called, where we were both of us rather patients than agents, she wept
and trembled -- I blushed and started -- she immediately forgot her lameness,
and rushed out of the arbor. I remained behind, calling myself villain,
betrayer, perfidious lover, treacherous friend, inhospitable guest, hypocrite,
apostate, etc. not one of which vile appellations had I in reality merited for
an involuntary deed of phrenzy, without or purpose, or reflection. But such was
my concern, such my contrition, that in my extravagance I charged myself with
the seemings, as with realities.

I pursued her into the garden, and soon overtook her laboring toward the
house, in pain and distraction. I took hold of her hand, threw myself at her
feet, implored her forgiveness, pleaded surprise, passion, madness, nature,
etc. She still continued to weep, and remained some time silent while I was
supporting her under the arm, till I led her near the house, when she made use
of this expression: I neither blame you, Sir, nor myself, said she, but wish
sincerely, that my death, this morning, had been as sudden, and unexpected, as
your crime.

The accident of her fall, the marks of which became now very visible in her
leg and wrists, accounted for her confusion and tears, and my walking off
abruptly, as I did, to London, as soon as I had seated Mrs. Seawell in the
drawing room, was apologized for, by her telling the company the story I had
made her a confidant of, in the garden; and which also made an excuse for my
gloomy reserve, and avoidance of society, all the day.

I did indeed fly precipitately from the house, the moment I had disingaged
myself, being ashamed to look some of the company in the face, and afraid also
of embarrassing the unfortunate fair one, with my presence. I pitied her, and
condemned myself -- but there are contingencies which baffle foresight, and
disgrace philosophy. All that is left for poor virtue to do, is to repair those
evils which it cannot prevent. And this I was resolved to do, by every possible
means in my power.

CHAP. CLXXVII.
I Remained at home, for about a week, spending my time between musings and
books; often kissing and reading over my dear Domino's letter, till I am very
certain that I could repeat every syllable of it by heart. I found that I owed
her eight thousand pounds; which though an heavy debt, gave me this
satisfaction, that by this means I might possibly have the happiness of soon
finding her out; for as it was the whole of her fortune, she must be obliged to
draw bills upon me for the interest; and I was in hopes that I should then be
able to discover the place of her residence, from the date of her first advice.

I thought it prudent, during this avocation and leisure, to look a little into
my own affairs, and make some calculation about my other debts and expenses;
and upon this inquiry had the surprise to find, that besides this eight
thousand pounds, I owed in sundry sums, each of which was too small in itself
to alarm me, to the amount of two thousand pounds, more.

Thus had I the shame and mortification of reflecting that almost half my
fortune had been the prey of vanity and extravagance, without having purchased
me any one responsible pleasure, even a transitory one, except the five hundred
pounds which I had bestowed upon the Divorcee, and which will ever remain a
solid and permanent one, to me. For all the joys I had ever yet experienced,
had been contingencies merely, without having been either my purchase, or
pursuit.

The cheapest thing a man can possibly do, is to pay his debts; and it is
cheaper still to sell, than borrow. I applied immediately to a land-jobber, for
this purpose, and marked out a distinct portion of my estate to him, which I
was resolved to dispose of. We soon agreed upon the terms, but when he came to
look into the title, I was discovered to have been made but bare tenant for
life, with remainder over, to some distant relation of the testator.

This was the first knowledge I ever had received, of the restriction which my
fortune was tied down to. My honor was extremely shocked, upon this
information, on account of the danger to which my unfortunate creditors, but
principally my dear wife and child, were exposed, upon the precariousness of my
life.

I held a frequent correspondence with my dear mother, during her life, and had
several interviews with her, by her appointments, at a relation's house of
here is, about a day's journey from my father's -- From her I learned that he
was, at this time, but just entering into his fiftieth year, and was of a
robust, hale, fox-hunter's constitution.

In these circumstances, I thought it would be extremely idle in me, to live on
upon contingency, and very dishonest too, to refer my creditors to so
insufficient a security. I therefore, for the safety of all parties,
immediately resolved upon a scheme of economy, which I accordingly put in
practice the very next day.

I found that though I had been made tenant for life, by the will, yet I was
left dispunishable for waste, so I disposed of my woods, to a person who had
been in treaty with me for them, upon my advertisement, for the sum of five
thousand pounds. I might perhaps have raised more money, upon this sale, had I
given notice of it in the public papers; but I transacted the matter
clandestinely, as it were, lest it might possibly have come to the knowledge of
my dear wife, and have given her an alarm, with regard to her own fortune, or
rendered her generous mind uneasy, about mine.

I laid out this money in the funds, with a resolution to confine my expenses
to the income of it. I also vested the rents of my estate, in the hands of a
trustee, a bencher of the Inner Temple, and a friend of mine; giving him a
schedule of my debts, directing principally, that the interest of the eight
thousand pounds should be kept sacred, against all half-yearly demands, and
three thousand pounds of the principal provided for likewise, out of the first
receipts, the wood-money being deposited as a security for the remainder; and
that the rest of my creditors should be paid off in course, with a preference
still, in favor of the most needy.

CHAP. CLXXVIII.
ONE morning, about a fortnight after my adventure in the arbor, as I was
reading in my chambers, Mr. Seawell came into the room, after a very abrupt
manner, shut the door hastily, and turning the bolt of the lock, You Will excuse
my manners, Sir, said he, but my business with you, at present, requires
privacy.

He appeared to be much disturbed, and you must imagine, gentlemen, said Mr.
Carewe, that I could not have been perfectly at ease myself, upon this
extraordinary interview. O what a powerful thing is guilt! That spirit of youth
and nature, which but a minute before dared have braved a lion, now trembled at
a man.

This affair, my dear Andrews, said he, had like to have ended very fatally,
both to you and me, for it was that very five hundred pounds, which the
unfortunate man's difficulties then called upon me to join him in a bond for,
that some time after involved your generosity, in so much distress and danger.
But this relief happened not to be at all effectual to the poor man, for his
disappointments and losses in trade, fell so quick upon him, that he was
obliged to quit the kingdom soon after, and absconded with his wife, into
Holland.

When the honest man found that he could not stand his ground, he sent me
private notice to lay on an execution, in order to secure myself in a debt
which he had contracted solely with a view of preserving his credit, on the
'Change. I did as he directed, and received the five hundred pounds, upon the
sale of his effects.

The next day I paid a visit to the Jew merchant, already spoken of, and
deposited this sum in his hands, with directions to remit it over to his friend
in Holland, as a support to these poor unhappy fugitives. He executed this
commission with punctuality, and I had the satisfaction, some time after, to
hear that by this help, joined to the assistance of some Dutch merchants, who
had been his correspondents at London, he had been enabled to establish himself
very comfortably in trade again, at Amsterdam.

This debt, now becoming my own, I immediately added to the schedule which I
had already given in to my trustee.

CHAP. CLXXIX.
HAVING now prudently contracted my expenses to the bare interest of five
thousand pounds, I thought it proper to quit the Temple, and retire from among
a set of cotemporaries, with whom I had been used to spend a much larger
income.

I took lodgings at a milliner's, a widow, in London, and kept myself pretty
much retired there, seldom stirring abroad, except to sup, now and then, with
my friend and trustee; or sometimes spending a night or two with him, at a
little villa he had near town.

Some evenings when I happened to be tired of reading, or not in a fit
disposition of mind to sit down to it, I would invite my landlady and her
daughter up stairs, to drink tea, or sup with me. The mother used to entertain
me with mistaking one word for another that had a similar sound, and would
really have been a treasure to Fielding, when he was drawing the character of
his Slip-Slop.

Her daughter was young, handsome, and forward. The mother would frequently
leave us together, when she was called down stairs, about the business of her
shop. These are hazardous experiments. I had before experienced male chastity
to be a jest, and am apt to believe too, that opportunity is generally an
over-match for female virtue, also. The Parthian exercise is their best
discipline An happy expression made use of by the lady who translated the
memoirs and writings of Ninon de l'Enclos.
. This adventure soon added another five hundred pounds, to my schedule.

A batchelor's life, who has any principles of honor, is a very awkward and
distressing one. I have often wished that philosophy could point out some way
or other, to reconcile morals with nature, and strike every thing out of the
catalogue of vices, which is not entered in the list of reason. I would marry,
but could not. The person upon whom my virtue and affections had been fixed,
was snatched from my arms; and while even the most distant hope of recovering
her, remained, it would have been dishonorable in me to have entered into
engagements, with any other woman. Quoi fair, donc?

It was here I lodged, my dear Andrews, said Mr. Carewe, when your bravery and
generosity rescued me on Ludgate Hill; and from the day of our parting at
Islington, I retired into the country of England, without remaining long in any
one place, in order to avoid fixing my affections on any woman, who might,
during the uncertain and fluctuating state of my mind, have possibly attached
them too much, either for my honor, or repose.

The interval of my life, between that day and this, continued Mr. Carewe, has
been chiefly employed in reading, or amused with a very few desultory
adventures, without connection, or consequence, and therefore not worth
relating; excepting one, which being equally whimsical and ridiculous, I shall
entertain you with, at present.

CHAP. CLXXX.
HOLD, Mr. Carewe -- You see, reader, that he is at one of his short catches,
here again See chap. cxlvi. parag. 2.
. Just touch, and go -- Give you hints, and then leave you to guess. Perhaps he
scorned to descend into a detail of Mrs. Benson's bons mots, before the refined
Messieurs Andrews and Beville; and to say the truth, I should be as nice
myself, were I to perform before such audiences only; but pit, box, and gallery
must be regarded, nowadays, by every writer who honestly means to pay his
bookseller See Preface, parag. 12.
. Besides, you may see by the list of my subscribers, what a farrago of readers
I am bound down to; and I am now going to fulfill my engagements, to the last
class of them.

I knew this Mrs. Benson extremely well, and have spent many an hour with the
mother, below stairs, for the mere pleasure of hearing her knock words out of
joint, while Charles Carewe perhaps, was spelling, and putting together with
the daughter, above stairs. I did not know Mr. Carewe, at that time, and only
visited Mrs. Benson in order to complete a Slip-Slop dictionary I was then
framing, which I have since completed, and shall be soon published, for the
benefit of the many persons who are apt to catch words by ear, and repeat them
by rote, without knowing either the meaning, or derivation of them.

In this very useful dictionary, it may be necessary, in order to prevent
mistakes, to acquaint the belles and beau's that the wrong word is placed
first, and the right word opposite to it; as for example: Digest -- digest.
Ingenious (for sincere) ingenuous. Male (joined with ocean) main. Twilight (for
a dressing-table) toilet. Concubine (for a quilt) counter-pane. Metrolopus --
metropolis. Separation (for the ripening of a wound) suppuration. Regiment (for
health) regimen. Crazy (for lunatic) crazed. Cruds -- curds. Cleopatra (for the
doxology) Gloria Patri. Harpsicol -- harpsichord. Dissolute (for lonely)
desolate. Contagious (for proximity) contiguous. Immediantly -- immediately.
Sermont -- sermon. Laudable (for loud) audible. Cock-getting -- coquetting.
And so forth. But to return to mother Benson.

She complained to me one day, that a woman in the neighborhood, upon some
quarrel that happened between them, had given her very unproarious language.

Another time, she expressed great pity for a poor gentleman who lived over the
way, because his fortune, she said, was much produced of late.

I was going to Norwich once, and she advised me to set up at a particular inn,
which she had been well entertained at, because she said I might depend on good
commendation there.

She asked my advice, one day, about a lawsuit she was going to commence, on
her brother's dying attested.

She missed some tea and sugar, one morning, and calling her maid to account
for it, said she would forgive her, if she would own the truth, for that open
confusion was good for the soul.

Speaking once of two young women of her acquaintance, who were sisters, Pray
observe, said she, the difference of natures, in the same family, and under the
very same education too. There Is Sally now, imports herself with perfect
modesty, and that vile Nancy has turned out an arrant proselyte.

But to return again to my dictionary -- I dare say that this work cannot fail
of encouragement, in such a dictionary age as the present. To what sublimated
pitch of learning have some of our great chemists in literature arrived, in the
current century, who deal out science in essence, without the difficulty of
study, as empirics do health in phials, without the restraint of regimen. Both
of which quintessences of refinement, may be well compared to our late invented
spring post-chaises, which so expeditiously convey the modern youth of Britain,
from stage to stage, without the fatigue of exercise. But the dictionary
library must still remain imperfect, till the publication of my Slip-Slop
Expositor, for the rest only teach you what you are to say, but this will
inform you also, what you are not to say, which is absolutely necessary to
render the circle of arts and sciences, full and complete.

CHAP. CLXXXI.
IN one of the villages where I lodged, said Mr. Carewe, I happened to become
acquainted with a gentleman in the neighborhood, by his dining sometimes with
my landlord, with whom I boarded. He had great fund of entertainment in him,
not indeed derived from any extraordinary sense, wit, or learning; but he was
an humourist, had a peculiar cast of character, and was what the French style
un diseur des bons mots, but seasoned high with sarcasm, which rendered him, at
once, the delight, and terror, of all his acquaintance; for he was very free of
speech, and his descriptions of the principal personages, male and female, of
that country, which he usually made the topics of his conversation, were doubly
pointed, both critical and severe.

One evening he invited me, along with a good deal of company, to supper at his
house. His wife was a pretty kind of woman, handsome, lively, good-humoured,
and about thirty years of age. He was himself an hale man, somewhat above
forty. They had been just seven years married, that day, without ever having
had a child; or the least alarm about one.

We spent the night very cheerfully and agreeably together, some in dancing,
and others in playing cards, till supper was served; which was a very elegant
one, in honor, as he told us, of his wedding day. About twelve o'clock, the
company divided, the ladies retired up-stairs, with his wife, and the men staid
below with our landlord, to finish what wine was upon the table, and to escort
the ladies home.

In about a quarter of an hour, a bell was rung, and our host immediately
rising up from his chair, Gentlemen, said he, ye were most of you present, this
very night seven years, at the ceremony of throwing the stocking, and I have
invited you all, this evening, in order to be spectators of a rite, which I
design to introduce, of casting the nightcap. We smiled at the expression,
though without thoroughly comprehending the meaning of it, and followed him up
stairs into his wife's apartment.

We found her in bed, with the rest of the ladies standing round it. As soon as
her husband entered the room, he took up his nightcap, which had been placed
upon his own pillow, and with an audible voice, repeated the following lines:
Vainly I Have in the vineyard plied,
Seven years of fruitless love have tried,
An hard apprenticeship, alack!
When ever it is served the trade grows slack!
With equal wish though toiled my dame,
Love's labor lost was all our game.
What folly 'twere then, to repeat it,
So thus I cast my nightcap at it.


When he had finished his rhimes, he raised up the clothes with one hand, and
with the other slung his brown beaver into the middle of the bed. The whole
company laughed heartily, and seemed highly pleased with the humor. For my
part, I confess that I could not much relish the indecency of the action, in
itself, though his being a sort of privileged person, and this frolic a stroke
in character, did in some measure, take off a good deal from the impropriety of
it.

When I was taking my leave, I stooped down, and saluted the fair prostrate;
then turning about to the husband, Issue, Sir, said I, is more the gift of
Providence, than of nature; and those from whom this blessing is withheld,
would do well to think that in the dispensations of Heaven, some parents may be
left without children, because some children are left destitute of parents.

He seemed to be struck with my expression. Your hint shall not be thrown away
upon me, replied he. We shook hands, and parted. In a few days after, I had the
pleasure to hear that he had adopted two orphans in the parish, a boy and a
girl, whom he clothed, and put to school, with a declared, and provided
purpose, of apprenticing and portioning them, hereafter.

CHAP. CLXXXII.
THIS Mr. Carewe seems really to be a most excellent young man. You Will pardon
him, ladies, the few snacks of wenching he takes, now and then, as you see that
this is not his purpose, and that he would do better, if he could. His
sentiment in this place, is extremely beautiful. The reflection is fine, and
the thought entirely new. But in truth, it were a shame if a Christian had not
been able to have expressed himself in such a manner, when a Pagan, Epictetus,
was capable of saying, that there were no orphans, for Jupiter, the parent of
mankind, lives for ever.

I wish I could persuade your old maids to pick up a little moral, out of this
sentiment of Mr. Carewe: It would be much better for their poor souls, than
peevishness, envy, and scandal. It might possibly, also recommend them
sometimes to widowers; and after they were past the hopes of being ever made
mothers, themselves, give them a chance of becoming step-mothers to others, at
least.

Where women of this class in life, happen to be well disposed, they may
frequently be very useful members of society; for having no connections, or
vocations of their own, they might be ready, upon occasion, to supply the
places of those who had. Insomuch, that I really think no large family in the
country, can well be without one or two familiars, or led-cousins, of this
sort, who should be maintained at the subscriptional expense of all their
married male relations, to the third degree, inclusive.

And in towns, I would have one, two, or or three women, past their teemings,
established in every parish, according to the size of it, who should be ready
to be summoned, in aid, to prevent husbands from gandering away their health,
and squandering their substance, when wives lie in; and when they die, to take
upon them the government of the house and family, in order to keep widowers
from injuring their children, by second marriages.

These succedaneums to matrimony, should be always lodged at the apothecary's,
ready to be administered, as occasion may require; and ought to be supported by
a parish cess, to be levied along with the poor-house rates, and watch-money.
And with regard to the moral of the matter, in polity, as well as war, may it
not be sometimes necessary to appoint des enfans perdues, or a forlorn-hope, to
be sacrificed, for the good of the community?

I think proper, in this place, to explain and vindicate myself, upon a
passage, in my subscription-list, where I make a distinction between old maids
and old virgins, which it seems, has given great offense to a very respectable
society, as I have been informed by a letter I received lately, from a lady who
styles herself president to an academy of old maidens, in the city; and who
concludes her epistle in these words: It Is very hard truly, Sir, that you will
not allow us even the virtue of necessity; nor leave us the merit of chastity,
to make us some small amends, for the mortification of it.

But these ladies have misapprehended me greatly, if they imagine that I meant
to cast any manner of reflection upon their purity, by this distinction -- far
from it: but my philosophy about the matter, is really this: Let maidens guard
their virginity, ever so vigilantly, from man, that sly, slow ravisher, which
besieges them, both night and day, time will, at length, steal it imperceptibly
away, in despite of chastity, even while they are at their last prayers, or
wrangling at quadrille.

For virginity, like other flowers, though you should not pluck it, falls off
itself, when ripe, leaving a dry and sterile stalk behind it. Milton says, It
withers on the stalk, with languish'd head; And Shakespeare, But earthlier
happier is the rose distilled,
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.
So that old maids, be they never so chaste, cannot, with any manner of
propriety, be styled virgins -- but the haums of virginity, only.

Old maids and batchelors may be compared to ram-pikes, which remain solitary
in the woodland, after their fellows have been made into utensils for the use
and services of society.

CHAP. CLXXXIII.
I Passed the tedious interval since our parting, in this sort of vagrant life,
in the country of England, except several half-yearly excursions, which I took
to France, Italy, Germany, and Holland, in pursuit of my dear Domino, upon
receiving her bills from any of those places. But all my search was vain, for
it seems she had provided herself with a letter of credit, upon going abroad,
by depositing my bonds in the hands of her banker, which enabled her to receive
value for her bill, at the time of signing it. However, she never did this,
till she was just setting out upon her purposed tour; and I found it impossible
to trace her course by any inquiries I could make at her banker's, or even at
her lodgings, which I had sometimes hit upon.

About a month ago, I was summoned up to London, upon the death of my worthy
friend and trustee, in order to settle accounts with his executor, and to
transfer the trust. Just as I had finished this business, I received a foreign
letter, directed to my former apartments at the Temple.

I knew the hand, kissed it, and trembled. But when I turned it about to tear
open the seal, finding the wax black, and the edges of the paper mourning, my
heart gave one loud throb, and ceased all motion. My stomach grew instantly
sick, and my voice was just able to falter out, My Hermes is no more.

In this opinion I was but too much confirmed, after I had had resolution
enough to open the letter, by seeing, at the top of it, an order to her banker,
to cancel my first bond of four thousand pounds, which was the very provision I
had allotted as a portion for my dear child.

The letter dropped from my hands, and I walked about the room, for some time,
before I had power to take it up again. For to the loss of my son, upon whose
honors was built my whole ambition, was added the despair of ever recovering
his dear mother again; all tender, all natural, all virtuous connection, thus
at once cut off!

Mr. Carewe then presented the letter to Mr. Andrews, who read as follows:

SIR,
I TAKE the liberty of returning you the portion you had conferred upon our
dear Hermes, as he has now no longer any occasion for your maintenance, and
that perhaps it may, at present, be necessary to your own.

My life has been pursued by losses and misfortunes, since I left England. Last
year, my dear grandfather died, of the gout in his stomach; and about a month
ago, my gallant cousin, who had by his bravery raised himself to the rank of
major, was killed in the late action in Germany. I have most sincerely lamented
their deaths, though an estate of two thousand pounds a year has, by these
losses, devolved to me.

I shall continue the same course of life I have hitherto pursued abroad, by
spending my time in reading, prayer, and travel. I shall never love again, for
your sake; nor marry, for my own. I have however, at length brought my mind to
be able to think of you without perturbation, though not without regret; and
thanks to religion, have now the power of subscribing myself, my still too dear
Abelard, yours Eloisa -- but without her conflicts.

Our charming Hermes continues to improve in every amiable quality of face,
person, sense, and disposition. His fondness and attention toward me, surpass
those of a child; for ignorant as he is of my being his parent, even his young
mind seems already to impute an higher merit than duty, to my love and
attachment toward him.

Adieu.

The last part of this letter, said Mr. Carewe, revived my spirits. It
cancelled my fears indeed, but the former part of it, had before bereft me of
my hopes. I lamented my forlorn condition, I considered myself as her husband,
or rather her mournful widower, and put on black for her relations, as if they
had been my own. At the same time I directed one thousand pounds, out of my
adventitious fortune, to be given to the trustees for the Magdalen-House, in
aid of that great and twofold charity, toward both soul and body.

The very day I got to London I had inquired for you, my dear friend, at your
house, said he to Mr. Andrews, and being there referred to your attorney, had
the satisfaction of hearing that you were settled in this country; and the
moment I had finished my business in town, I flew down hither, to throw myself
into the arms of friendship and philosophy, with a determined purpose of taking
some lodge near you, and spending the remainder of my days in study,
contemplation, resignation, and retirement.

CHAP. CLXXXIV.
MR. Andrews and Mr. Beville were extremely charmed and entertained with Mr.
Carewe's account of himself. The adventures he had related, both of his own,
and those of others, were uncommon, interesting, and extraordinary; and the
generous and virtuous tenor of conduct he had preserved throughout, though
interrupted now and then, by the natural lapses of human frailty, had stamped a
character for him, as perfect, I am afraid, as flesh, male flesh at least, is
capable of.

They highly approved and commended the honor and virtue of his design, in
marrying the most amiable and excellent Eloisa; and joined cordially in
condoling with him, on account of the unlucky disappointments he had met with,
in so honest and proper a pursuit. They rejoiced extremely at his purpose of
taking a house in their neighborhood, and that declaration had now rendered
this friendly Triumvirate as happy, as it was possible for them to be, in their
present respective circumstances.

They lived together in perfect harmony, at the farm, during the remainder of
the summer; but there was one particular, with regard to Mr. Carewe, that
puzzled and surprised his two friends extremely. He had related his memoirs to
them, with all the appearance of frankness and confidence imaginable, so as
that no person who had heard him, could possibly have suspected that any one
secret, or anecdote, even of the most trifling consequence, had still remained
behind. And yet, they had seen him frequently receive letters, the
superscription a sair and female hand, which he never communicated the least
of, to either of them; and whatever answers he wrote, he always used the
reserve of carrying to the post office himself.

There was another circumstance, with regard to this correspondence, that
joined to raise their surprise still higher; which was, that these letters were
written on mourning paper, and sealed with black wax. This particular inclined
them to suspect that they had come from the fair fugitive, or mistaken exile;
and what further article, relative to her, need now remain a mystery between
them, was both their curiosity and wonder. However, it was too delicate a point
to touch upon -- We have no right over other people's secrets; so let this
continue one, till he may himself think proper to reveal it.

The three friends remained together on these terms, till about the middle of
September, when Mr. Carewe, on the receipt of one of these uncommunicated
epistles, told Mr. Andrews that he should be obliged to take leave of him for a
short time, upon business of some consequence, which was not then ripe enough
to communicate with his good friends at the farm.

Mr. Beville who was present, joined with Mr. Andrews in wishing him a good
journey, a successful event to his new adventure, and a quick return into his
present society. Mr. Carewe thanked them, and appeared for the rest of that
day, more cheerful and disengaged in his conversation and manners, than he had
been at any time during his residence among them. The next morning he rose
before day, and rode off from the farm, without disturbing his friends.

CHAP. CLXXXV.
ABOUT a fortnight after their separation, Mr. Andrews received the following
most extraordinary letter from Mr. Carewe, dated from Condisciple-Hall:

My dear friend,
AFTER so unreserved and voluntary a relation of the various incidents of my
life, it must certainly appear a great instance of disingenuousness in me, to
have secreted any one particular of my private history from you. But your
having mentioned the name of Ethelinda, with Mr. Bevill's unfortunate passion
for her, was the reason of my not informing you sooner, that my connections
with that lady, were of a much ealier date, than his acquaintance with her.

I happened to be out of the kingdom, when she was married; she too easily
submitted to the arbitrary commands of a father, and yielded to duty, without
approbation, or choice. I became acquainted with this misfortune, time enough
only to lament, but not prevent the too discordant union.

She was however, soon released from her heavy bondage; for your friend died in
a few days after your departure from hence, of the disorder you had left him
laboring under, last Christmas; and leaving her a childless widow, has, in
consideration of her merit and behavior toward him, endowed her with his
whole fortune, amounting to fifteen hundred pounds a year.

I shall not detain you longer, on a subject which must be extremely uneasy to
Mr. Beville, consequently to you, and am in haste to inform you that in a sort
of clandestine correspondence which I held with this lady, while I was at your
house, I have had the fortune to prevail on her to adventure upon the state of
matrimony again; and I must now beg leave to entreat the pleasure of yours and
Mr. Beville's company to spend the honey-moon with us, at this place, from the
beginning of next month. I should not have had the presumption to make this
request, if the fair Ethelinda did not join me in it. Ye were both present at
her first marriage, at another's fuit, and ye are now invited to her second, at
her own.

Let not my sincerity be at all impeached, upon this occasion. I do still love
the dear Eloisa, with all that warmth of passion I have so lately expressed
before you, and declare that were she within my grasp, I would this instant,
kneel down with her, before the altar. But even hope is fled! this lady then,
holds only the second rank in my affections -- but I sincerely wish her happy,
and may perhaps, without vanity, pronounce that I have it in my power to render
her so. The fond lover wishes his own happiness; the generous one that of his
mistress. This for Mr. Beville. Adieu.

Charles Carewe.


CHAP. CLXXXVI.
MR. Andrews was both astonished and perplexed, upon reading this letter. He
did not know how to reconcile the purport of it, to honor; nor yet could he
say upon what punctilio of moral, to reprehend it. Mr. Carewe's having entered
into an engagement with one woman, while he was riding post after another; his
supplanting a man, with whom he had appeared voluntarily to have linked himself
in a league of friendship; and his rivalling a real lover, without even
pleading passion for an excuse; seemed all perfectly inconsistent with the
ingenuousness and generosity of his character.

And yet, on the other hand, might he not have engaged himself in this amor,
at some interval before his honor and virtue had been awakened toward the
amiable Eloisa? Might not the interposition of parents have snatched this fair
one from his arms, when he had just won her affections? Might not the despair
of ever being able to recover his first object, have suffered the second to
take place? like mercantile bills, Pay this my second of exchange, the first
not paid. Whenever a question can admit of a favorable construction, charity
should ever adopt it; as in the English laws, every person is supposed to be
innocent, till the contrary is proved.

After these reflections, Mr. Andrews ventured to communicate the letter to his
friend. He received it like a man -- with resentment and resolution. He
lamented his having never heard of the Condisciple's death, till it was too
late to profit of it. And yet what a mortification and disappointment had he
escaped, by his ignorance of it! he regretted his death, which had afforded him
at least the hope of possibility, merely to shut it out for ever.

He then seemed generously to rejoice in an event, which had yielded his adored
Ethelinda so fair a prospect of happiness for life. He had himself sustained no
wrong, had suffered no injustice. The injury he had received was from fate
alone, and he was resolved to disappoint its malice, by showing himself,
through resignation, unworthy of the infliction.

Mr. Andrews seconded his philosophy, by adding the latter part of his own
reflections, mentioned above, in order to reconcile him to Mr. Carewe, and
prevail on him to accept of his invitation to the wedding. This however, he
obstinately refused, for some time. But Mr. Andrews urging Ethelinda's request,
whose knowledge of his passion he had never been informed of, and which
entirely screened the impropriety of her invitation, at length prevailed upon
him to exert a bravery which Mr. Andrews was charmed with; for after that
effort should be over, he was in hopes of retrieving his dear friend back again
into the world, once more.

These two philosophic friends then immediately began to prepare themselves for
the ungrateful journey; but were prevented by Mr. Beville's falling ill of a
slow fever, which had been creeping on him for several days, and at last
confined him to his room, the very day that had been fixed on for their
departure. His feelings were too strong for his philosophy, and though the mind
had triumphed, its victory was over the body.

Mr. Andrews sent directly for a physician, and wrote an apology to Mr. Carewe,
wishing him and the fair Ethelinda complete happiness, both in his own name,
and Mr. Beville's also, who had generously desired his compliments to be added,
upon this occasion. Mr. Andrews was extremely alarmed at his friend's danger,
and a good deal puzzled also, with regard to the widow's character. From Mr.
Carewe's letter did it not appear that there had been an engagement between
them, before her marriage; and yet, at the time she was made acquainted with
Mr. Beville's unfortunate passion, did she not speak, though with a becoming
prudence and modesty, yet in such a manner, as might have inspired the fondest
hopes, should her hand have ever been again at her own disposal? and yet -- but
woman is woman -- varium et mutabile! and love has its own laws; arbitrary, and
capricious!

CHAP. CLXXXVII.
MR: Beville declined every day, notwithstanding all the aid of physic, and his
life was almost despaired of, when to poor Mr. Andrews's great satisfaction, he
saw his worthy friend, the clergyman, alight at the door. This visit had an
happy effect upon our patient, his conversation soothed his spirits, the
society of a friend ranks high among the Materiae Medicae, and his prescription
soon restored his health. He administered James's powders to him, and his fever
quitted him the next day.

The reunion of these three friends, was such a pleasure, as the reader, who
has either virtue or sentiment, must suppose to himself, better than I can
express it; and if he wants sense or feeling, no words can convey an idea of it
to him. Mr. Beville continued for some days confined to his bed, which left Mr.
Andrews an opportunity of communicating to his friend the clergyman, when they
were alone, Mr. Carewe's letter, with just so much of his story, and of
Beville's, as was necessary to explain, and render it unaccountable, at the
same time.

The morning that Mr. Beville found himself able to quit his chamber, and while
they were walking about the parlour, and conversing together in a more free and
disingaged manner than usual, they perceived a coach and six, with a large
retinue, driving toward the house. They all looked out at the window, without
being able to guess what new adventure was going to occur, when the equipage
stopped at the door, and they saw Mr. Carewe alight, leading forth the fair
mourning bride, by the hand.

Mr. Andrews and the clergyman were much embarrassed, upon this occasion, on
account of poor Mr. Beville, who changed color at the sight, and walked
instantly away from the window; but quickly recollecting himself, he turned
about briskly again, saying, My friends, fear me not -- I have already paid the
fine of disappointment, and am henceforth free of misfortune, for life.

CHAP. CLXXXVIII.
MR. Andrews was in such confusion, that he suffered his new guests to come
into the room before he could step forward to meet them. Welcomes, embracings,
and wishing of joy, were given, and received, with equal stiffness; "And Venus
to the loves around,
"Remarked how ill they all dissembled."
It must have been a greater painter of the passions than Le Brun, who could
have drawn this groupe of persons up to the life. For though our new guests
might have been ever so capable of justifying their own conduct, upon logical
principles, yet beyond the fixed and settled rules, there is an undefinable
moral; and in the slightest appearance of disingenuousness, something highly
offensive to liberal minds.

The beauty of the lovely widow transcended her wedding charms, which had then
wanted a year of their perfection. Her person was now completely formed, her
carriage easier, and more free her air. A lively spirit had informed her eyes
-- not by supplanting modesty, but correcting bashfulness. The roses in her
cheeks were fuller blown, the cherries became more ripened in her lips, and the
pearly whiteness of her skin, shone with superior luster set in weeds.

This garb declared her still to be a widow, which added to the distress of the
three friends, who were in hopes the marriage-ceremony had been over, without
their being obliged to be the mournful witnesses of it. After about two hours
constrained conversation, among four of the company, Mr. Beville doing nothing
all the while, but gaze and sigh, dinner was served; which did not hold them
long at table, for Mr. Andrews had not been sufficiently prepared for a wedding
feast.

After tea and coffee was over, and that Ethelinda had retired to the library,
Mr. Carewe, turning to the clergyman, said that he looked upon it as a
fortunate circumstance, to meet him at the farm, upon this occasion, as the
character he had been taught to conceive of him, from Mr. Andrews's
representation, might promise an happy event to any business he should become a
party in; he therefore requested the favor of him to tie the indissoluble, or
death-resolving knot, the next morning; for which, said he, taking a license
out of his pocket, and presenting it to him, this shall be your sufficient
warrant.

It is now full time for me, continued Mr. Carewe, to reveal to you the only
memoir of my life, that has hitherto been kept a secret from you, and which I
shall do in as few words as possible, by informing you that my acquaintance
with your fair guest within here, commenced even so early as her birth; for
about three years before I had been exiled from my father's house, my dear
mother groaned her into the world.

The surprise and astonishment of the rest of the company, is not to be
described; they stood mute, near a minute, staring at each other, before they
could recollect themselves, or be able to form any manner of conclusion from
such unexpected premises, till the clergyman, upon looking into the license,
pronounced aloud the name of William Beville; who, at the sound, cried out, Too
much, too much, too -- and sunk back again into his chair, after he had raised
himself out of it, to fly into Carewe's arms.

Mr. Carewe ran up to embrace, and wish him joy, and the mutual happiness of
these four friends was inexpressible, but by tears. Mr. Carewe then took his
brother under the arm, and led him alone into the library, where the fair widow
sat reading, reclined upon a sopha. She blushed at seeing them come together
into the room, and rose to receive them. Carewe joined their hands, and retired.

Beville still holding his grasp, threw himself instantly at her feet, unable
to speak to her, but with his eyes. She cast a regard toward him, of tenderness
and modesty, and raising him up, the contract was sealed by a mutual and fond
embrace.

CHAP. CLXXXIX.
THE next day the lovely Ethelinda's nuptials were celebrated, with all the
decency and decorum imaginable. No commonplace jests, no arch innuendo's, no
privileged manners. One might have imagined themselves present at the
initiating of a vestal, rather than a modern marriage. The morning after Mr.
Beville taking Mr. Andrews aside, addressed him thus:

My dear brother and benefactor, my unhappy sister brought you no fortune, and
her worth needed no addition; but as her loss wants much repair, you will give me
leave to present you with this bill, which Providence seems to have kept
detached from the rest of its unmerited bounties to me, in order to enable me
to pay my debts, both of obligation and of honor.

So saying, he laid a paper on the table, and quitted the room. It was a bill
of exchange, on a banker in London, for five thousand pounds; which his friend
the Condisciple had received as a marriage-portion with Ethelinda, and which
happened to have remained unexchanged, at the time of his death.

This amiable society enjoyed the seraphic harmony of love, friendship, and
halcyon skies, together, for about a fortnight, till Mr. and Mrs. Beville took
their leave, and were just setting out one morning, for Condisciple-Hall, when
their journey was interrupted by the threatening of a storm; which rising by
degrees, to the extremest height, seemed as if Tempest was collecting its
forces together, from all the elements, to shake the earth's foundation to the
center:

The air grew sudden dark, the clouds quick blend
Their floating waters in one troubled mass,
O'ershadowing the gloomy face of nature.
The rumorous winds moan'd through the trembling woods,
And the earth's caverns echoed back the groan.
The multitudinous sea soon grew convulsed,
The waves came riding over each other's heads,
Like roaring lions hunger-driven abroad,
Or foaming boars slipped by unbridled hell,
Against its victim weak defenseless man.
While he upon the beach stands unappall'd,
In wonder only, and religion lost,
Still resting sure on that coercive word,
Which taught the insensate surge to know its bound.
The lurid flashes of the lightning's glare,
Added new horror to factitious night;
The rolling thunders seemed in adverse war,
From East to West in clamorous opposition.
The rains descend in torrents through the plain,
And swelling rivers rushing to the sea,
Repelled, run back affrighted to their source.
The tempest raged, and over the boisterous deep,
Gigantic terror scowl'd, and mute despair.
While the elements at civil strife, proclaimed
Creation's wreck, this globe to atoms hurled,
And restoration of old Chaos' reign.
CHAP. CXC.
THE storm commenced at ten o'clock in the morning, was at the height at five
in the evening, and continued without abatement, till twelve at night. It then
began to subside, and about four the next morning, the wind seemed to cease, as
being out of breath; when Mr. Andrews was awakened by his servants coming into
his chamber, to tell him that one of the neighboring villagers had just then
run up to the house, to acquaint him that a ship had been stranded and beat to
pieces, near the farm; that the few passengers who had escaped the waves, were
in the highest distress, and that the country was hastening down upon the
shore, to make a wreck of the vessel.

Mr. Andrews, whose whole soul had received the inspiration of public virtue,
had taken out a commission of the peace for the shire of York, as soon as his
house was built; which with the character he had established, even in the short
time of his residence in that country, entitled and encouraged the inhabitants
within his district, to call upon him, preferably, on any occasion where an
extraordinary exertion of spirit, humanity, or justice, was deemed necessary.

He arose instantly, and sent to Mr. Carewe and the clergyman, to do the same.
They all dressed with the utmost dispatch, armed themselves, their servants,
and the laborers, without disturbing Mr. Beville, for fear of alarming the
bride; mounted their horses, and galloped down to the shore. At about a mile's
distance, they saw the ship, in a shattered condition, lying on its side, in
shallow water, on the tide's ebb.

They perceived many bodies floating, several persons wading through the sea,
some standing still, with imploring arms extended toward the strand, others
fainting through weakness, and thrown often on their faces by the slightest
wind or wave. The populace that had lined the shore, awed by authority, and
arms, dispersed immediately upon the appearance of Mr. Andrews, who with Mr.
Carewe rode through the tide, attended by their party, to the succor of this
poor ship-wrecked crew, and soon brought them all, the dead, the dying, and the
surviving, to a little village near the shore.

Here they were distributed among the several cabbins, where every manner of
hospitable assistance was administered, to recover the seeming dead, revive the
drooping, and refresh the strong. The three friends divided the charge equally;
and separating themselves, took different portions of the village under their
respective care.

Mr. Andrews dispatched horsemen up to his house, for garments of all kinds,
both male and female; for there were some women among the distressed, who by
their appearances and apparel, even under the strong disguise of their
misfortune, seemed to be persons of some distinction. The messengers soon
returned, and in a short time after, followed Mr. and Mrs. Beville, who having
been awakened by the hurry in the house, and informed of this distressful
adventure, arose and ran down to the village, in order to join their ready
assistance, in so humane an office.

CHAP. CXCI.
MR. Carewe, in visiting one of the hospitals in his department, was told by
the woman of the house, that a beautiful young lady had been given into her
charge, who appeared to be dead, but that on holding her up by the heels, for
some time, till a great quantity of water had run off from her stomach, then
putting on a warm shift, and placing her in an aired bed, she had seemed to
afford some tokens of returning life, and might probably be saved, if any one
could be got to bleed her instantly.

Mr. Carewe quick ran through the streets, crying out for a surgeon, a barber,
or even a lance; when the clergyman hearing him, came out of a cottage, with a
bloody lancet in his hand, and offered his assistance; saying that he had just
then performed an operation with success, on a young gentleman who was mourned
as dead, by his weeping servants. Mr. Carewe ran back with him to his fair
patient. The clergyman pierced her arm, and some blood flowed slowly for about
half a minute, toward the end of which she seemed to breathe, and at length her
eyes opened.

During this interval, Mr. Carewe leaned over the bed, examining the features
of the patient, with a look of earnestness, of doubt, and inquiry; but on her
opening her eyes, he threw himself on his knees, and catching her in his arms,
cried out, My lost, my recovered love, my constancy's reward, my virtue's
praemium! O turn, and behold your friend, your lover, your husband, a penitent
at your feet! O let -- He was going on, when at the sound of these last
expressions, she interrupted him with a sudden start, and turning her languid
eyes upon him, endeavored to utter something, when her arm stopped bleeding,
and she, without a figh or struggle, instantly expired in his arms.

The wretched Carewe stared wildly on the corpse for a time, without drawing
his breath, or speaking a word; then clasped its cold bosom close to his
breast, endeavoring, but in vain, to weep; when after holding it there for a
minute, with his eyes fixed, as in death, he cast it suddenly from him, and
springing upon his feet, cried out, I am damned -- she is gone, Heaven's
messenger, to send the furies for me! Infinite justice must have atonement for
innocence defiled! No salvo's here! I have but one life to pay, but give it
freely -- O may it be accepted like the widow's mite, and wipe from out my
score, the multitude of my offenses!

At these words he snatched up the lance, which the clergyman, through his
astonishment and terror at this extraordinary and affecting scene, had left
neglected on the table, and would have destroyed himself with it, if he had
not, on the instant, recovered presence of mind enough to spring forward with a
brisk action, and catch hold of his arm. The poor distracted Carewe struggled
for a while, till wasting his strength in exclamation, and dropping the lance
on the floor, he sunk into a chair.

Just at this moment the door opened, and the young man who had been recovered
by bleeding, walked slowly into the room, leaning on Mr. Beville, with his arm
tied up, his air languid, and his face sicklied over with weakness, fatigue,
and grief. But under all these disadvantages, it was easy to perceive a most
beautiful composition of features, a fine proportioned shape, with a most
graceful figure. He was led toward the bed, but upon viewing the corpse,
expressed an heavy moan, and fainted on the body.

CHAP. CXCII.
MR. Carewe, whose chair had been turned from this scene, being roused by the
noise, started hastily up, and beholding the dying embrace, cried out, What, a
rival in death, also! O hapless youth -- O happy rather -- no more the object
of my jealousy, but envy -- whose grief equalling thy love, has forbid thy
life one moment to survive thy loss!

In the mean time, Mr. Beville and the clergyman did every thing in their power
to recover the young man from his swoon; and after they had raised him up,
sprinkled water in his face, and applied salts to his nose, they had the
pleasure to find him coming a little to his senses; upon which they placed him
in a chair, and spread a covering over the corpse, to hide it from the view of
the distracted corrivals.

Mr. Carewe stood all this while in the middle of the room, with his arms
folded across, his eyes fixed on the ground, and his soul laboring with the
most dismal reflections; when upon hearing the young man's voice, who had now
begun to make acknowledgments to his kind assistants, he stared, he listened,
he started, and extending wide his arms, Gracious Heaven! cried he out, what
will the fates do with me? What! dead, and alive, at once! does Providence then
make sport of torments! it is impossible -- and yet it is certain -- It Is she, my
Harriot lives! O let me catch her in these arms, once more, though the extreme
of bliss should prove too strong for life itself to bear!

He sprung forward at these words, fell kneeling at her feet, grasped her hand
with rapture, and gazed upon her face with fondness, surprise, and joy. Her
astonishment was likewise great, and her difficulties no less; though Mr.
Beville, upon the first alarm of this discovery, was so polite as to remove
some of them, by quitting the room, and taking the clergyman along with him.

Eloisa trembled all over, and could not resist the first transports, her own
passion sympathising with his; but recollecting herself soon, and forcing
herself from his hold, Mr. Carewe, said she, with a blush, the surprise of this
adventure, has thrown us both too much off our guard -- there is one, I
presume, to whom these professions, these regards, more properly belong; and I
entreat that you may no longer injure your own honor, nor attempt to disturb
my peace, again.

Oh! my lamented, far-sought love, my ever-esteemed, and long-purposed wife,
cried he out with impatience, your mistake in this particular, has been the
fatal cause of our tedious and unhappy separation. The expression I made use of
to your steward, was fondly meant toward you; and I had before then been for
some time in quest of you, and have ever since, with constant ardour, pursued
your flight in vain, through most of the countries in Europe.

I do confess my truant youth had been too insensible of the love I bore you,
at our parting; but upon comparing my sentiments of you, with the transient and
unsatisfactory passions, with which all other objects had been capable of
inspiring me since, I soon perceived my happiness wound up in yours; your love
alone the means, and your alliance the sole end of all my future bliss.

As he pronounced these last words, a sudden burst of triumphant tears flowed
down her lovely cheeks, and she sunk into his arms, supporting herself from
falling, by a close embrace; while the o'erpowered Carewe could answer only
with his arms, his looks, and sighs. Shakespeare is dead, nor is there now alive
one capable of language or feelings, able to describe a scene of such
contrasted passions; of love, of gratitude; of honor, of contrition; of
surprise, of joy; of silence, and expression!

CHAP. CXCIII.
MR. Carewe, as soon as he could recollect any thing which did not immediately
relate to his passion, led his Eloisa out of the room where the corpse lay,
into one adjoining it, on pretense that she might remain more private here to
change her dress, and commence a woman now for life. In order to which
transformation, he sent into the next cottage, where the farm-wardrobe had been
deposited, and obtained for her a complete suit of female clothes and linen.

He was extremely unhappy about his son, whom he apprehended to have been
swallowed up in the waves, but was too tender to make any inquiry concerning
him, which might awaken his Eloisa to distraction. However, upon finding her,
without either lamentation or inquiry after him, returning again to tears and
exclamations, on the death of the lady in the next room, he stopped her short, by
crying out, But first my Hermes, O what of him? Thanks to all-protecting
Heaven, replied she, in a transport, I left him behind at Thoulouse, when my
dear sister, who has just expired, called on me there with her husband, in
their route from Montpelier to Portugal.

I loved her, said she, renewing her tears, with the fondness of a sister
enlivened by the warmth of a friend. It was some years since we had parted
last, I found myself unhappy at the thought of her quitting me so soon, and
resolved to accompany her on her tour; so leaving our dear child in the care of
my faithful steward, I proceeded on the journey along with my sister and
brother, and arrived safe at Lisbon.

This most amiable pair, continued she, about a year before, had lost two
lovely children, their whole stock, in the smallpox. The grief of the parents
was immoderate, and in a short time affected both their healths. My poor sister
had got the addition of a severe cold, by sitting up day and night with her
children. Her disorder fell upon her lungs, and soon showed certain symptoms of
a decay.

My dear brother, who loved her passionately, had a consultation of physicians
upon her case; who after having practiced on her, without effect, advised her
going to Spa; from thence she was sent to Aix, thence to Montpelier, and then
to Lisbon. This course, which we may better style a tour, had it been capable
of answering any other end than mere amusement, was as necessary to her
husband, as to herself.

Men's minds, they say, are stronger than ours, and I believe it; but then, I
am of opinion also, that their strength serves them better to resist, than to
endure misfortune. Throw them but a moment off their guard, till calamity shall
have slipped into their breasts, their resentments and struggles being greater,
the sooner weaken their force. The convulsions of a giant are an earthquake to
those of a dwarf.

Whether such was the case, or no, with regard to this worthy man, or whether
his unhappiness infinitely exceeded here is, by foreseeing her early death, I
cannot determine, but about a month ago, after we had been at Lisbon near a
quarter of a year, he was attacked by a fever on his spirits, which put an end
to his life in ten days.

What a wretch did he leave behind him! she was deprived of reason for three
days, and the moment she recovered it, she resolved upon quitting the kingdom
instantly. She was reduced now to a weaker state than ever, and I would have
deferred her voyage till the spring, but she was inflexible.

I asked the physicians there, what climate they would now recommend to my dear
sister, to breathe in; but they replied, that Lisbon was the ne plus ultra of
health, and that since it had not done her any service, they feared no other
region on the globe would avail, except the returning again to her native air,
might produce some salutary effect; and which was a thing frequently
recommended, by the college.

We then began to prepare for our voyage, for I was resolved to accompany her
into England, and retire with her to some private country scene, where she had
never seen either her children, or her husband, or any thing which might remind
her particularly of either.

There would I have remained with her, till she should be either released from
a sickly and unhappy life, or so far restored to health, as to be able to
accompany me in my scheme of traveling, and purpose of living abroad. We
waited some time for a ship, at last we embarked, the wind changed and shifted
us out of our course, and after some days sailing to and fro, drove us at
length, amidst this perilous storm. The rest you know.

Mr. Carewe embraced her at this period, wiping away her tender tears with
kisses; then leaving her to change her dress, went out to inquire after some of
the passengers, whom she said were persons she had lately become acquainted
with, and conceived a friendship for; and whose safety therefore, she was
sincerely interested in.

When he got into the street, he met Mr. Beville coming from visiting one of
the cottages, and taking him by the arm, You see, my dear brother, said he,
that Providence has at length, thought fit to bless my wishes with the
possession of the amiable Eloisa again; but I must insist upon it that you
never reveal the secret history of our love, to any person whatsoever, not
excepting my sister -- Had I retained the least glimpse of hope, of ever
recovering her again, I should not have been so unguarded, even to my dearest
friends. But though there is nothing in her most private memoirs, so
circumstanced, and so uninformed as she really was, at a certain era, which
ought to affect her character, in the opinion of philosophy or candor, yet
women or the world are apt to censure failings, which their own feelings should
incline them to excuse.

Enough, replied Mr. Beville, and more than was necessary to me, my most
excellent friend -- may she make you as happy, as you have rendered me; and if
confirmed virtue, on one side, and approved honor, on the other, can render
you so, your union must be blessed. They then walked down together to Mr.
Andrews's quarters, and met Mrs. Beville at one of the doors, having just stepped
out to refresh herself, after the fatigue of administering cordials to two
ladies, who had been among the wretched passengers, and helping them to put on
dry clothes, which she had provided for them.

CHAP. CXCIV.
DURING all these transactions, Mr. Andrews was extremely active in his
department, supplying wine which he had ordered down from his own house, and
raiment which he purchased from the inhabitants, to the sailors, and poor
passengers who had escaped the wreck, and came half naked to the shore.

The captain of the vessel too, was one of the objects which fell under his
attention; but he refused any kind of help, except brandy; nor did he afford
the least manner of assistance to any one of the crew, though well enough able
to have done it, as he had escaped free from all damage, but wetting. He sat by
a cabin fire, drying the clothes, on his back, smoking a pipe, quaffing off
half pints of brandy at a draught, and swearing at the storm so loud and
impiously, as were enough to have provoked a second tempest.

Mr. Andrews, having now finished his circuit, and provided for every thing in
his rounds, came at length to the house where we are at present, to rest
himself, and pay his particular compliments to the ladies whom he had before
left under the care of Mrs. Beville. He arrived just at the time that Beville
and Carewe came to the door, and they all walked into the parlour together;
where they were hardly seated, when the clergyman, who had been active in his
office of visiting, praying by, and exhorting of the sick, came in, and took
his seat among them.

Mr. Carewe, impatient to communicate his joy, taking Mr. Andrews by the hand,
cried out, in a transport, O my dear friend, my Eloisa is found among the
wreck, is recovered to life, and has this moment accepted my hand. Mr. Andrews,
overcome both with pleasure and surprise, had power to express himself no other
way, than by catching him in his arms, and shedding silent, speaking tears.

As soon as Mr. Carewe could disengage himself, he turned toward Mrs. Beville
and the clergyman, who though one of them knowing nothing at all, and the other
nothing material of his story, were both most heartily wishing him joy, and
immediately related to them a short extempore novel of his love, which
satisfied their curiosity, as well as the real adventure would have done.

The greatest difficulty his invention had to struggle with here, was how to
account for his Harriot's appearance in men's clothes; but the turn he gave to
it at last, was, that being resolved to inform herself of every thing worth
seeing or knowing, while she was in Portugal, she had disguised her sex under a
male habit, that attended by her brother-in-law, she might enjoy a freedom
which by the manners of that country, women are restrained from.

Mr. Andrews quick perceived the delicacy of Mr. Carewe's intention, and was
highly pleased with his address and readiness of invention -- Splendide mendax
-- He then sent up his compliments to the two ladies above stairs, to inquire
how they were; and being answered that they were not yet prepared to admit a
visit, he with the rest of his company, went out together to pay their
compliments to their new and fair ally -- They found her completely dressed, in
Ethelinda's first wedding suit, and rivalling the beauties of her bridal day.

A roral blush, which had diffused itself over all her features, on seeing this
unexpected company come into the room, enriched her charms, and banished from
her face all traces of fatigue or grief. They became enamoured of her, at first
sight; and Mr. Carewe also confessed improved beauties, and acquired graces,
both in her ripened features, and now finished form.

He performed the office of gentleman usher, and introduced the company to the
bride, mentioning the relation, connection, or character, of each person,
respectively. She received them all with the polite address of new
acquaintances, joined to the generous warmth of old friendships; and after the
usual congratulations, and occasional civilities had been passed and repassed
among them, Mr. Andrews took Eloisa by the hand, and led the way back to the
house he had just come from, as it was the largest in the village, and that he
had some further hospitalities to offer to the two distressed ladies who were
lodged there.

CHAP. CXCV.
SOON after they had come into the house, a message was delivered to Mr.
Andrews, from the ladies above stairs, that they would be glad of his company,
along with his friends, to return them all thanks for the humane and charitable
assistance afforded them, in this great article of distress and danger. They
obeyed the summons, and went up together. They found a lady alone in the room,
of a genteel person, and about fifty years of age, sitting on the side of a
bed, who upon their entrance, rose up to receive them, and addressed them thus:

My generous friends, I have the extremest gratitude to acknowledge to you all,
for your timely and necessary aid, in this our great calamity; but my thanks
are more particularly due to you, Sir, said she, turning herself toward Mr.
Andrews, who I have the pleasure to learn has been the first mover, and chief
instrument, under Providence, upon this occasion. As soon as I was capable,
continued she, of inquiring upon what coast of England I had been thrown, and
had heard your name sounded from below, it afforded me a singular joy, to find
that we had owed our lives to a person, for whom, though but little known, I
had been taught by others, to conceive so true a friendship and esteem.

Mr. Andrews was equally surprised and confounded at so partial a compliment,
but moving up slowly toward her, and beginning by degrees, to recollect her
person, cried out at length, Thou generous parent of my lost Fanny! welcome
from death, and to these arms again! O! since thy kindness could not save her
precious life, yet let it be some alleviation of my grief, that I have had the
fortune to rescue yours.

After they had tenderly embraced each other, the lady begging leave to sit
down, and entreating all the company to do the same, applied herself again to
Mr. Andrews, saying, with great emotion, O my dear nephew, urge not a subject
over again, which is now past lamenting for you, and but revives a fruitless
grief in me; who if I feel it less, at present, am weaker still, to bear it!
speak to me rather of yourself, your children, and your fortunes. These be our
only cares now, say what of these?

Mr. Andrews then gave her as short an account of himself and his family, as
possible, by saying that he was rich, and they were well; being impatient to
inquire about her daughter's health, which he pleaded his emotion and surprise,
for not having done sooner. She answered, with the fondness of a mother, My
dear and only child, thank Heaven and you, is in the room within there, and out
of danger; but both her mind and body, being more easily affected than mine,
have prevented her from being able yet to appear, and join in my
acknowledgments.

CHAP. CXCVI.
JUST then, Mr. Andrews's steward, who had been appointed to land the
passengers effects from the ship, came into the room to inform him, that he had
brought all the luggage safe ashore, and lodged them in the parlour below. The
aunt, upon hearing this, immediately ordered a large deal box to be brought up
stairs.

She then told Mr. Andrews that she had two presents to make him, on condition
that he would summon his philosophy, in aid, and arm the whole man within him,
to abide the test. O! madam, exclaimed he, and clasping his hands together,
Losses which can be ever forgot, may have their sense renewed; but in me what
monument can awaken griefs, which never yet have slept!

When the box was opened, she took out a picture, and placed it on a chair
before him. It was the horrid spectacle of his wife, ghost-like, and slow
expiring, on a deathbed. He started at first, though prepared; then standing
mute, and motionless, before it, with uplifted hands, and head reclined, gazed
at the portrait, till it almost became his own. Fond Beville wept, the rest
joined too, in silent grief; and even the aunt, to whom notwithstanding this
object had now grown familiar, here dropped her sympathetic tear.

After she had suffered them for a while, to indulge in this sad luxury, to
vulgar minds unknown, she took out another picture, and placed it on the same
chair, before the first. This object surprised the whole company, more than the
last; because it puzzled them, with regard to the order of its succession.

It was the portrait of Mrs. Andrews, drawn in perfect health, and beauty's
bloom. The astonished husband viewed it over with rapture, crying aloud, Just
such she was, just such she is again, an angel heavenly bright! but where the
crown of glory, where the seraph's plumes, which should have marked her spirit
for the skies! He was continuing thus to rave, when his ecstasy was suddenly
interrupted, by the original rushing into the room, and flying into his arms.

CHAP. CXCVII.
IN imitation of the great Timanthes, in his famous picture upon the sacrifice
of Iphigenia, I must here let fall the curtain, to hide those features, which
no painting can express. O reader, there is no describing of this scene! the
wonder, the joy, the emotion!

I was present at this interview, and so I happened to be on the late execution
at Lisbon. But this affected me much more. In the criminal case, one goes
prepared with resolution, a reflection on the crime, abates compassion, and
justice acquiesces in the rack. Philosophy besides, informs us, that pain is
tolerable, only to a certain degree, beyond which, it ceases, with life
together. But here, the spectator is first taken by surprise, and then a
willing captive, surrenders himself up, bound hand and foot, to a transport of
pleasure, exceeding into pain.

After the first effects of amazement and joy, had a little subsided, the
clergyman stepping forward, begged, that before any one should call for an
explanation of this miracle, the whole company should join him in worship, to
that Almighty Being, who is the worker of all miracles, who stilleth the raging
of the sea, and the noise of his waves, and the madness of the people. Psalm
lxv. ver. 7.


The proposal was readily embraced, and the rest of the house being called
together, they all kneeled down to prayer. In the midst of it he introduced
part of the 107th Psalm, from the 19th to the 32d verses, both inclusive; which
was so extremely applicable to the present occasion, that the whole
congregation repeated it after him, with as much fervency of devotion, as if it
had been an extempore hymn.

When this pious duty to Providence, was ended, and that proper instructions
had been given, about the unfortunate widow's funeral, they all prepared to set
out for the farm. The gentlemen subscribed a purse among them, for the relief
of the crew, and to reward the villagers. Eloisa, Mrs. Andrews, and her aunt,
having suspended their votive garments, were taken by Mrs. Beville, into her
equipage; and the gentlemen attended them on horseback.

As soon as the coach arrived at the farm, little Harry and Fanny ran out to
the door, to meet their father -- Mrs. Andrews, and her children! Here let me
draw the veil, again.

CHAP. CXCVIII.
AFTER dinner, tea, and the happy Eloisa's wedding, were over, and that all
interruption of servants was removed, Mrs. Beville seemed very impatient to
have the mystery explained, of Mrs. Andrews's recovery, her long absence from
her husband and children, with her total silence toward them, during that so
interesting an interval.

She looked first at Mr. Andrews, then at Mr. Beville, thinking it most natural
for one or other of them, to begin the inquiry -- But their whole souls were so
much wrapped up, in the reality of her existence, that the least thought about
reconciling of appearances, never once entered into their heads.

She then turned herself toward the clergyman, wtth an eye of curiosity,
hinting the question she would have proposed; but he happened to be so entirely
occupied, in contemplations of an higher nature, that he did not remark the
expressions of her countenance, any more than Beville or Andrews had done.

After these disappointments, applying herself to her brother, she begged of
him, in a low voice, to make the proposition; but neither he, nor Eloisa, to
whom she also addressed herself, gave the least attention to her request; for
their hearts and minds were so happily engaged in their own mutual discoveries,
he of her person, and she of his love, that they seemed to have no manner of
curiosity, at that time, about any matter, foreign to their own concerns.

The impatience of the fair Ethelinda, increased at every difficulty -- Women
love little novels extremely, as Mrs. Seawell says Chap. clxiii. parag. 4.
, and finding that the opening of the scene, rested solely upon herself, she at
length addressed herself directly to the old lady, in these words: Madam, said
she, I have borne my share, with great sincerity, in the general joy, which
this happy and unexpected event in your family, has diffused among us all; but
as I happen to be one of those persons, who are not sufficiently satisfied with
merely being happy, wihout knowing how they have become so, I must entreat the
favor of you, to afford us a detail of all the extraordinary incidents, which
must have happened to this lady and to you, since your leaving this kingdom
together.

This proposition immediately engaged the attention of the rest of the company,
and they all joined their voices in the same request. The good old lady bowed,
and prepared herself to satisfy their curiosity -- but, upon opening her mouth,
she was suddenly seized with such a fit of yawning, that she was not able to
utter one syllable, for a considerable time; and when she had composed her
muscles sufficiently to speak, it was only to desire a respite, till the next
morning; saying, that the fatigue she had undergone, both of body and mind, the
foregoing day and night, was then calling upon her so pressingly, for rest,
that she must beg leave for the present, to retire to bed. The whole company
bowed, and some of them nodded too; upon which hint, the aunt's motion soon
became general; and each party following her example, took up a candle, and
walked away supperless to their chambers.

CHAP. CXCIX.
PErhaps, reader, if you are a female, you may feel yourself as much
disappointed here, madam, as the inquisitive Ethelinda appears to have been,
last night -- but if you are a man, you have reason, I assure you, Sir, to be
greatly rejoiced at this interruption, for it is much better that she should
yawn herself to sleep, before she began the story, than that you should be
obliged to stretch your jaws, at her narration.

Women have such a tedious manner of telling a story! with a said he, and said
she; then again, he said, and she said; then she came into the room, and coming
into the room -- with other needless repetitions, conversations without
subjects, characters without manners, language without style, families without
likeness, passion expiring in declamation, and action standing stock still,
staring at narrative running by itself till it is out of breath.

But prithee, are we to receive no manner of satisfaction upon this point, at
all? and because an old woman is apt to talk too much, must every one else be
dumb? No, Sir, by no means. I shall do you reason, myself; but will give you a
story, in a few pages, which would have taken her up a volume; for she
commenced it the next morning, immediately after breakfast, and kept the
company up to yawning-time, after supper, before she had got herself on
shipboard.

CHAP. CC.
AFTER Mrs. Andrews had been given over by the physicians, at Spa, the aunt was
writing a letter, one night, to Mr. Andrews, when her daughter came crying into
the room, saying that her dear cousin had just then expired, in her arms. The
aunt ran immediately to her bedside, and judging from all appearances, that
she was really dead, after some effusions of grief, returned to her letter, and
added these words, Alas! our Fanny is no more! then sealing it with black wax,
sent it off to the post.

Our Fanny, it seems, had only fainted, through weakness, at this time; and the
nurse-tender perceiving still some signs of life in her patient, called for
assistance, and by the application of proper remedies, she was recovered to
sense again, before the next morning.

The aunt would then have recalled the last paragraph of her letter, but it was
too late for that, and yet too soon to venture to contradict it. Her death
seemed only delayed, and she thought it would have been cruel, after he had
received the shock, to have amused Mr. Andrews with a fruitless hope, which
none of her physicians had in the least encouraged.

Her fair cousin, who was herself in a deep decay, and loved her with a double
sympathy, of affection and disorder, prevailed upon her, a day or two after her
swoon, to suffer her picture to be drawn, in the very situation she then lay;
for which she gave this virtuous and philosophic reason, that the looking on it
sometimes, might serve to mortify every vain, proud, or presumptuous thought,
which should ever hereafter happen to arise in her own breast, by showing to
what a condition, even health, youth, and beauty, might be so suddenly reduced.

Mrs. Andrews continued in this languishing way, all the winter; one week
giving hopes, and another despair, of her recovery, till at length, toward
spring, the physicians, upon finding her still holding out in a fluctuating
state, pronounced that possibly, the warm air of Lisbon might establish her
health; which hint was readily taken hold of by the aunt, both out of affection
to her niece, and that she imagined her own daughter might also receive some
benefit from the same climate.

As soon as it was possible for them to begin their journey, this female
Triumvirate set out from Spa, traveling to Breast, by slow marches, to prevent
fatigue to the two invalids. The daughter happened to catch cold on the road,
her sea-sickness was extreme, and two days after she had landed at Lisbon, she
was seized with a diarrhoea, which carried her off in about a week.

CHAP. CCI.
HERE, reader, have I saved you a world of embarrassment, in this part of the
story, by snatching it out of the mother's mouth. Why should you be reduced to
grieve for a person, whom you knew not sufficiently, to be concerned about? and
why should you be delayed the pleasure of hearing, that upon this loss, the
aunt, to whom by her husband's will, the daughter's estate of twelve hundred
pounds a year, had devolved, immediately adopted her niece, our old
acquaintance and favorite, for her heir. It was this circumstance which
afforded the good old lady the equivocation, of saying, at the village, that
her dear and only child was in the room within.

Whether the motion of the sea, like stirring up of land, might have given some
latent seeds of health a power to germinate -- whether the spring of the air,
in this dry climate, might have caused a brisker circulation in her blood -- or
finally, which is by no means the least physical hypothesis of the three,
whether the satisfaction created in her mind, by finding herself, her husband,
and her children, thus redeemed from difficulty and want, to affluence and
ease, might have given a salutary elasticity to her nerves, I am not
philosopher enough to pronounce; nor indeed is it worth our inquiry here, while
this truth is certain, that Mrs. Andrews began visibly to recover at Lisbon, in
a short time after her landing.

As soon as she was restored to health and features again, her aunt got her
portrait taken Chap. cxcvi. last parag.
, for a reason of pretty much the same religious cast, with her daughter's; to
show, by placing it near the former, that the hand which, to prove the vanity
of mortal boasts, can reduce health and beauty, to deformity and distemper,
can, in manifestation of its goodness and mercy, restore them both again, to
their former vigor and luster.

CHAP. CCII.
WHILE Mrs. Andrews continued in a desperate state of health, and even after
her recovery appeared to be possible, the physicians at Spa, had laid all
persons about her, under an injunction to keep her mind, as much, or even more
than her body, free from all manner of emotion, either of joy or grief,
suffering every passion and affection of the soul to subside to wholesome
apathy.

Our aunt took advantage of this restriction. She had never ventured to tell
her niece of the mistaken paragraph, in her letter to Mr. Andrews; and yet
without doing so, how could she be able to account for so fond an husband's
never writing a line to his wife, or troubling himself, even with inquiring
about her health, from the aunt?

This precept of the physician, then, most luckily removed that difficulty; and
having been delivered before the patient herself, the aunt immediately declared
that she would acquaint Mr. Andrews of this restriction, by the next post;
forbidding him to write any letter to his wife, thenceforward, till he should
receive a license from her, to renew his correspondence.

At the same time, she assured her that she would direct her steward to send
her constant accounts, of her husband, father, and children, which she would
communicate freely to her, while they all continued in an uniform and
uninteresting tenor of health; but that she must not expect to hear even of a
toothache, or a kibed heel, till her mind should be able to stand upon its own
legs again.

The expiring Mrs. Andrews acquiesced in this disposition of things, not so
much for the expediency of the advice, as because her mind had for some time,
begun to wean itself from all human connections; not in the least by weakening
their force in her breast, but by infinitely outweighing them, with the regards
of another life.

The good old woman did accordingly direct her steward, in the manner she had
promised, and received continued advice from him, of every change in Mr.
Andrews's situation and circumstances; his debrise in Hertfordshire; his
father's death, and will, with his present residence near Scarborough; it was
by knowing of this last particular, that she had discovered him so quickly, at
the village, upon just hearing the name of Andrews pronounced.

CHAP. CCIII.
HOwever, all these articles of his fortunes, both good and bad, with old
Beville's death also, she kept still a secret from her niece, till after her
being pronounced out of danger, at Lisbon; and then, upon her beginning to
recommence a correspondence with her husband, she was made acquainted with the
truth of the story. This information rendered her extremely unhappy, she
reflected with vast uneasiness, upon her dear husband's still continuing in the
same error; and was for immediately letting fly an express to England, with a
letter from her own hand, to acquaint him of her recovery.

But her aunt restrained all this ecstasy, by saying that the too sudden
surprise and joy, of such an unlocked and unhoped-for discovery, might possibly
produce some dangerous effect upon his health, or mind; that she might have the
happiness of seeing him, and her children together, much sooner by setting out
immediately for England, herself, than by waiting for his coming to Lisbon;
that she would hire a ship, and sail directly to Harwich, which was near her
own seat; and that an express from thence, would reach him sooner than the
packet from Lisbon, going round by London.

The design of this very good old gentlewoman, was to have wrote to Mr.
Andrews, as soon as she should arrive at her own house, to come to her, and
bring his children along with him; without undeceiving him about his wife. This
miracle she meant to have opened to him, by degrees; and one of the methods
which she had purposed to have employed toward that end, was to show him the
two portraits, in the same order that she did at the village.

She imagined that upon his seeing the living picture, so reversely succeed the
dying one, it might naturally raise some hope, some suspicion, some inquiry, in
him, at least, how it was possible to have obtained the second portrait, after
death. But we have already seen how little success she had upon that
experiment; for the hurry of Mr. Andrews's passions, when his dear Fanny was
the object, left him no leisure for the exercise of his reason or reflection.
Which, joined to the impatience of the fond Mrs. Andrews, precipitated the
denouement, before the plot had ripened to maturity.

Mrs. Andrews approved extremely, of this whole plan of operation, and they
began to prepare themselves for the voyage, with the utmost expedition; and
hired a ship to set sail the next morning, for England; when an extraordinary
accident happened, which detained them at Lisbon, for above four months after
their preparations for setting out.

CHAP. CCIV.
THERE was a priest, who lodged in the same house with them, and with whom they
had become very intimate, by their frequent intercourse with the people of the
family. He was a lively agreeable person, with an elegant taste in polite
literature; and having been born and bred a Frenchman, had something extremely
easy and polite, in his address and manners.

The only point of good breeding, in which he seemed to be deficient, was his
too frequently urging the argument of religion, in conversation. But all his
scholastic divinity, and jesuitical sophistry, were with ease exposed, by Mrs.
Andrews, from the extreme perspicuity of her own natural sense, assisted by the
instructions she had so frequently received, from her learned and ingenious
friend, the clergyman.

Mrs. Andrews's understanding, with her returning beauty, began soon to attract
the regards of the abbe; and his particular address toward her, became at
length, so remarkable, as to give her offense. When she perceived it, she
commenced a reserve, by degrees, till she had withdrawn herself entirely from
any manner of society with the family where she lodged; and afterward refused
the visits of the abbe, on pretense of indisposition.

Affairs were in this situation, when a ship was hired, and the ladies were to
have set sail the next morning, at ten o'clock. But at the hour of twelve, the
night before, after they had both been in bed for some time, they were awakened
by a loud knocking at the portal of the house. The door was opened, and the
noise ceased there for a few minutes, but was again repeated at the bedchamber
door, where Mrs. Andrews and her aunt lay.

They immediately called out to inquire the cause of this disturbance, and were
answered by their landlady, who in a most doleful tone of voice, informed them
that the most high and holy court of Inquisition, had sent their secretary with
a guard, to take Mrs. Andrews into safe custody, till a trial should be
appointed her, for certain blasphemies, and profane expressions, uttered by her
against holy mother the church, in derogation of ancient relics, modern
miracles, and divine saint-worship.

The unhappy Mrs. Andrews quick perceived the priest's hand, and the
cloven-foot together, in this most horrid prosecution; which appeared still
plainer, after she and her aunt had dressed themselves, and opened the door,
when she saw the abbe enter the room, alone, with his arms folded, and his
countenance masked under an assumed vizard of sorrow and compassion. But soon
shifting his saint's look to a satyr's leer, he whispered to her in French,
that it was in her power to dismiss the suit, on the instant; and that upon
such very easy terms as these -- merely to prefer love, liberty, and life, to
prison, death, and torture.

I hope that none of my readers will harbor the least manner of doubt, with
regard to Mrs. Andrews's option, upon this occasion. My female readers, I dare
swear, have already determined the choice for her, between these alternatives,
as the story of the nuns of Collingham Who cut off their noses to preserve
their chastity.
, is one of their strongest articles of faith.

I doubtless do prefer, said she, speaking aloud, love, liberty, and life, to
prison, death, and torture -- but then, by infinitely greater odds, do I prefer
prison, death, and torture, before prostitution, infamy, and wrath. I therefore
submit myself, not to the jurisdiction of this court, but to the dispensations
of Providence, which has already rescued me from a more imminent danger, even
than the present; but if a second miracle in my favor, may be too much for me
to expect, I shall still hope, that implored Heaven will proportion my strength
to the struggle, and raise my virtue above my torments.

CHAP. CCV.
THE condition of the unhappy aunt, who remained in uncertainty about her dear
niece's life or death, during several months, may well be imagined, without the
aid of description. For the walls of the Inquisition cut off from the wretched
prisoner, all manner of communication with the world, during her dismal
confinement in that purgatory.

She frequently applied to the judges of that most iniquitous court, for leave
only to see her niece, even in the presence of any of their own officers; but
was inhumanly denied that satisfaction. She then drew up a petition, and
watched an opportunity of presenting it, in person, to his Portuguese majesty;
which happened to have this good effect, that though it did not obtain her
release, it preserved her, by the king's intercession, from sustaining any
manner of violence, or undergoing a trial, during her confinement there. For
the minister, upon hearing that a British subject of some note, was in
question, thought it politic to temporise with so potent an ally as England,
while a Spanish war was depending.

The aunt, at one time, drew up a memorial, setting forth the real state of the
case, with the iniquity and malice of the abbe's prosecution; which she had
designed to have delivered into the court of Inquisition. But upon
communicating it to her landlord, he advised her most strenuously, against it;
saying that instead of redeeming her niece by this method, she would infallibly
involve herself, in the same misfortune, even without the least hope of
redemption; for that the defamation of a priest, or the least censure against
the church, was held, among them, to be an infinitely more deadly sin, than the
highest profanation of God, or religion itself.

In this dreadful situation had both these unhappy women remained, for about
four months, without any manner of consolation; except this only, which they
each separately enjoyed, that poor Mr. Andrews had not been yet undeceived,
with regard to his dear Fanny's supposed death. At the end of this period,
Eloisa, with her brother and sister, arrived at Lisbon, and happening to take
lodgings in the same hotel with our aunt, became soon acquainted with this
unhappy story.

They all most cordially commiserated her misfortune; and the brother-in-law
happening fortunately to be nephew to the new ambassador, who had lately
arrived from England to renew a treaty of alliance between the two crowns, went
instantly to wait upon him, and obtained his promise that he would solicit the
minister of Portugal, for Mrs. Andrews's release, and if refused, would even
proceed so far, as to interest his own court, on her behalf.

He kept his word punctually, with his nephew, and succeeded in his suit; but
not time enough to afford him the satisfaction of knowing it; for that good and
unhappy man died before Mrs. Andrews had been set at liberty, which she
obtained but just time enough to acknowledge her obligations to the ladies, and
to accompany them, along with her aunt, in their voyage to England.

CHAP. CCVI.
BUT to return to the farm. These eight persons formed one of the most
extraordinary and most amiable societies, that can well be imagined. The sense,
virtue, fondness, friendship, and cheerfulness of the whole company, rendered
them not only agreeable to each other, but the objects of envy or admiration,
to all the world besides.

The only interruption to their enjoyments, was what Mrs. Carewe's grief for
her brother and sister, used often to occasion, at first, till it had subsided
by degrees, to a tender, but composed concern for their loss, which was
confined to her own breast, and rarely broke out any more, to the disturbance
of the company.

This charming groupe of friends continued together at the farm, till the
middle of December, when Mr. Beville invited them all to spend the Christmas
with him, at Condisciple-Hall -- From thence they proceeded to the deceased
colonel's seat, to pass their Easter with Mr. Carewe; and then returned to the
farm, on the Whitsuntide following.

In this stated rotation of friendly visits, the Triumvirate engaged to each
other, to enjoy the three great festivals of religion together, during their
lives; appointing the worthy clergyman to be chaplain and almoner to this
society, which subscribed among them, a purse of three hundred pounds a year,
to be distributed in charity, at his sole discretion.

The union and harmony of this happy family of friends, subsist unbroken still,
and ever must subsist; for their connections are founded on virtue, and
reciprocal obligation. Nothing worth relating has since occurred among them,
except the birth of children, and the death of Mr. Carewe's father, by which
his fortune has received an addition of three thousand pounds a year,

FINIS.

