A WEEK at a COTTAGE a Pastoral Tale.

Gent: antiq:



LONDON Printed for HAWES, CLARKE and COLLINS, in Paternoster Row.

MDCCLXXV

SUNDAY. OPENS the SCENE.
FOR ever sacred to TRANQUILLITY! -- sweet rural scenes, where CONTEMPLATION
sits, and meditates on God's benevolence!

RETIREMENT plaud the poets peaceful seat, with hands of grave HUMILITY,
forbidding OSTENTATIONS steps, PRIDE'S arrogance, or fickle TASTE to tread her
hallowed bounds.

Hither! -- O hither come, sweet social SCIENCE; leading on CONTENTMENT with
countenance serene! -- here hand in hand let MEDITATION walk with grave
MORALITY -- whilst IGNORANCE with contumelious look, averts her rustic foot,
and tells an awkward tale to ENVY and her sister fiends, who minister in her
unlettered reign.

The varied scene of HUMAN LIFE, at once displays; on this hand, all the
anxious grandeur of the GREAT, on that, sad INDIGENCES tears; from whence
REFLECTION turns with a sigh, and by her just comparisons, disposes all my mind
to GRATITUDE. --

-- Hail MEDIOCRITY! thou blessed estate, depart not from thy happy votary! --
seated on the center of PLEASURES wheel, safe from AMBITIONS giddy flights and
POVERTY'S depression, thou ensures me PEACE.

For this RETREAT, I leave the busy Town, where TRAFFIC, with a brow beset
with cares, and shoulders bending to the burden, walks Adventures restless
mazes and her labyrinths of Hope -- on whose hard indefatigable heel, full
often sullen DISAPPOINTMENT treads, whilst from her meagre visage she rubs the
sickly sweat with rags disconsolate -- or if attended by some better fate,
perchance comes sportive LUCK in steps fantastic, and with prosperity rewards
the Toils of TRADE: relieves INDUSTRY'S soul of doubtfulness, yet teints the
jaundic'd eye with AVARICE, and gives another countenance to CARE.

Away, away ATTENTION! hither haste, to rove the Sylvan scene, the plain, the
valley, and the grove: leave the dull haunts of mercenary men, and gains
insatiable gaze, to court the smiles of rural INNOCENCE, and catch the living
Virtues as they rise -- peruse the flowery page of NATURE'S book, and reaping
WISDOM with the arms of scientific pleasure, soar aloft, and breath thy
adoration to the GOD OF ALL.

There stands the COTT, where fancy strays A WEEK, and gathers up the beauties
of the scene.

On elevated ground erected, it commands extensive PROSPECTS, stretching every
way: placed on the skirts of a small VILLAGE, where lofty Sycamores, with
spreading boughs, dispense their shade around its tenements -- beneath the
leafy covert, often at ease, the Peasant fits sagacious, musing on the evening
clouds, as weather-wise -- there the rustic Damsel, loit'ring in the day-fall
gloom, communes with tell-tale intimates; describing LOVE, so natural and
naked, that each fond confidant, with sympathetic Sighs, salutes the well
discovered passion; whilst each stands wishing, panting, and on fire -- there
too at seasons, sits the Matron of the Village, whose wrinkled brow confesses
Age, but yet denies severity: for as she bends her weakened sight, upon the
polished needles whilst she knits, she courts facetious prattle from the Babes,
who pull the pansies on the green; and smiles to hear them lisp their Granny's
tale, and imitate her prayer.

Surrounded with a shadowy grove, the RUINS of an ABBEY, lift their solemn
fronts, and show their bending arches -- in the distracted pomp of wasting
columns, tot'ring walls, and gasping windows, all the havoc of infatuated zeal,
stands uncharacterized: whilst in widow-weeds of mantling Ivy, sage RELIGION
sits, and mourns the desolation of her house, and the sad sins of her
degenerate Sons.

There the Groves of R -- k -- by stretching round her park, o'ertop the wall
-- sweet scenes of Rural ease and Elegance -- where G -- A flying from the
heathy mountains, precipitates her streams from rock to rock, 'till in the
bosom of exulting T -- s, the river Nymph resigns her auburn tresses, and
nutbrown charms, in murmurs o^ soft extacy and Love -- high hanging woods
repeat the sounds, mixed with the plaintive voice of amorous Doves who coo
their tale of jealousy for every absent mate --

-- Here Nature with dignity sublime, excells the works of Art, and forms a
solemn walk, where massive rocks, with august Columns prop the oaken grove,
that hangs upon their towering Cliffs -- the far projecting trees, spread wide
their boughs, and give a leafy Canopy* umbriferous; forming a scene, when where
WISDOM would delight to contemplate, where MEDITATION met with PIETY, would
hold their holy converse; and sage PHILOSOPHY would sit unseen, to study Nature
-- once made the haunt of sad DISSATISFACTIONS gloomy steps, where MELANCHOLY
measured out her pensively reiterated Walk -- there unredeeming R -- k -- by
often strayed, to meditate on the forlorn fate of his paternal Lands -- there
too projecting R -- b -- n has sat, to see his sweet Demesnes, from his
unfeeling genius, transformed to Stone; to plan the proud devouring Edifice,
which swallowed up these fertile fields, and all this paradise -- now M -- TT
is thy Lord, whose elegance of Taste, is with the zone of PRUDENCE girt, and
whose provident sagacity engrafts DESCRETION on his PLEASURES.

Near to thy streams O G -- A, once the Prefect lay of famed SOLENCES, and the
plain was burdened with a Roman Host -- often in thy waters have the Heroes
laved their valarous Limbs, and often along thy channel strayed, delighted with
fertility -- here too the Altar blazed to festive CERES, and the Grove
resounded with the rights of PAN --

-- to them another Host succeeded, usurped their Lustrals and their Altars,
and pitched their Tent on M -- R -- NS plains; to foster foreign Piety in these
rich Lands -- the fair Exotic asked for happy vales, where Nature lavished her
luxuriancy: the mountain and the rock, where in the days of Yore, the Sage had
sought the presence of his God, the gloomy Forest, and the dark damp Cave, were
not befitted to her soft Italian Constitution.

Too long my Pen, dwells on thy scenes OR -- K -- BY, whilst other objects wait
my Muse -- where T -- PE in rural opulence surmounts the Hill, and to the
Eastern sun extends its golden meads. --

-- beneath whose feet, deep in the silent and sequestered Dale, a friend to
Science lives, a lettered Sage; devoted to Tranquillity and sacred Truth: where
pious W -- K -- FF, once conversed with God.

Wide spreading Groves, and deep embow'ring shades, wrap up in solemn stillness
T -- L'S Mansion -- where the discontented Genius of the Glades, sits sighing
for the absence of her Lord; who from her haunts, estranges science and
Philosophy, the Muses and the Graces; and carries them as Captives, far from
his long deserted Lands.

Those lines of dusky Pines, which mark D -- N -- 'S rich Demesnes, shut up the
prospect.

There, through an Arch of Boughs, the elevated Fane of K -- Y strikes the eye,
and gives its sacred Tower, to form a noble distant Obelisk. --

-- And here, the woody banks of B-R-G-M, are bent up to the mountains brow;
where M -- K still inherits the Patrician Virtues, and marks the ways of Life
with such benevolence, as purchased for his Ancestors, immortal Love. --

-- Still nearer lie the Lands of E -- N where cultivation with a comely
countenance, sits smiling in its youth; and makes abashed the neighboring
hills; where Nature sleeps in native russet, wrapped in indolence and barrenness
-- where H -- E forlorn, creeps from the gloomy mountains side, and hides its
clay-built Cottages -- from whence a winding way is marked aloft, ascending to
the summit of the steep; conducting to the golden regions and the Mines of
Patriotic T -- R, and Paternal S --, whose knees benevolent, are crowded with
his Childrens Children.

The SOUTHERN PROSPECT calls for my Attention. --

-- the nearest object is the TOWN OF B --, where on the hanging steep, the
streets extend, and pour their Thousands forth. --

-- There on the Cliff a ruined CASTLE stands, and frowns, impending over the
foaming streams, where T -- s precipitates his noisy floods, and drives his
frighted Neiades from the scene of Horror -- ghastly and wild the disconcerted
Walls stand sullenly, and brave the wrath of Time -- gloomy and dark their
aspect, as the Age, in which the Scottish founder formed his Plan, and labored
up these Bulwarks, and this mass of stone -- the work of Vassalage -- once the
seat of Slavery and arbitrary sway -- in after Ages, made the holds of cursed
Rebellion and a thousand Crimes -- now left the monument of Tyranny expired,
and great in Ruins, tells the Age of Liberty restored -- become an object now
for PLEASURES Eye, augustly reverent, thy Ivy mantled arches, shattered walls
and rifted Towers, thy nodding Battlements, now domineer not, but adorn the
Place. --

-- Rich in Meadows, with hangin^ Woods and scenes of Pleasure girt, (...) B
--, thou art highly favored of the hand of Providence, and yet ungracious and
unhappy -- declining TRADE sits sighing in thy streets, and lean INDUSTRY,
^angs languishing upon her Loom -- forsaken of thy PATRON, an outcast of thy
LORD, a Prodigal, yet to thy father's house a Stranger -- the joys of LEARNING
beam not on thy bosom, where yet the SOCIAL VIRTUES never dwelt -- where
feigned COMPASSION prostitutes the Countenance divine, to many a slanderous
Tale, and trimmed in mask of PITY MALICE walks -- where MUTUAL FRIENDSHIPS yet
remain unknown, and ENVY poisons every breath of young BENEVOLENCE -- how
graceful are the Labors of the few, who struggle by example to envigorate the
fainting VIRTUES -- where H -- K, for fraternal Love and filial Piety revered,
teaches the delights of doing good.

Beyond the Town, on rising ground, the mansion of the Sons of ISRAEL stands;
commanding to the East, a varied Prospect, full of Beauties -- Woods which deck
the Rivers banks -- bright broad Canals and flowery Vales, o'ertop'd by
HAMILTON'S high sky tinged hills -- thy Lord excells in his Paternal Duty and
hospitable Board, famed for the Chastity of each excentric Toast, that flows
superior to his Military habits. --

Adjoining, on a grassy brow, a Church is seen, whose humble architecture, (not
debasing divine Worship,) retains this Christian maxim, that pure RELIGION,
dwells in Simplicity -- the gaudy robe, the gilded fane, are ostentations own,
in which Hypocrisy is seen to sit -- PRIDE is religions profanation, and
arrogance in her Priests is Blasphemy -- the Villagers crowd the Tombstones,
and thoughtless over the dead, their rustic Jests propound, or Love-tales
whisper; till THE HOLY MAN, in Robes of White, Religions Emblem, and the Type
of Innocence, convokes the giddy Herd, and with his doctrines, lulls them to
repose -- -- beneath the Hill, the hasty river falls in hoarse cascades, and as
it laves the sounding shores, yields a loud plaudit to its bounteous Author;
whilst the leaping floods, exulting clap their Hands -- all on the verdant
steep, the green turf marks the Peasant's grave, where many an honest heart has
fled from woe, and yielding up the spirit to its God, sleeps in a Mother's lap
serene -- there in the verdant mantle, many a Maid has wrapped her Cares, has
hushed her wishes for the world, and given an Angel to the Skies.

On the gently rising hills behind, the Hamlets stand, diversifying the
extended Prospect -- there B -- N scatters out her Cottages, crouching beneath
the smoke of burning Lime, that clouds the sultry Sun, with its expanding
volumes -- and here the dusty road leads up to B -- S, beat by the feet of
Travelers, and at the instant of my observation, crowded with Cattle, and a
flock of Sheep, which, from the washpool bleat, and shake their stripping
Fleeces -- B -- S once of Roman fame, lifts up her ruined Tower in frowns, and
mocks the ST -- MORE Storm where CAESAR'S Tungrian Troops in garrison in
ancient times secured the important pass.

To the right, sweet D -- ^DALE picturesque and fanciful, presents her
Landscape -- a bending arch yields to the T -- ^ her gurgling rills, whose
utmost might maintains the Mill, which clacks he^ humble Honors -- above, the
beaten roa^ appears, winding by hedge-row Elms where many a Peasant, to the
drea^ Moors, his languid Steps directs -- the nodding woods, on hanging steeps,
the^ Oaken branches play, along the windin^ dell; whose little plains and
sparkling Pools peep through the Trees, and give variety to sport with rural rude
Simplicity -- the elevated ground which terminates the View, rises in rocks,
that lift their storm bleach'd Countenance, from out the fringes of the
Brushwood, and support some Shepherds Huts; under whose Brow, which battles
with the blustering North, sits R -- N -- T; where Cultivation kisses the
extremest skirts of barren B -- S, and mocks her Indolence with growing Corn.

The western View courts my description, -- where just beneath this seat, the T
-- S expands his shining bosom to the day, and in one long extended Lake,
reflects the waving Woods, and flowery Meads, which make his margin gay -- a
little further L -- N attempts to hide her humble Village with her Trees;
except where M -- S old hospitable Mansion stands, divested of the Insignia of
its woe, forbearing now to mourn for her departed Lord, blessed in the Virtue
of his Heir. --

-- There L -- E, from the bank of B -- R peeps, the outside show o^ an
imperfect plan.

-- Beneath whose foot, calm C -- R -- ^ extends her stretching Village through
the flowery Meads, abounding like the and of Promise, with the flowing wealth
of Milk and Honey. --

-- At the conflux of the Rivers, on a Rocky eminence, the Ruins of FITZ
HENRY'S CASTLE stand, assuming still ^he sullen frown of Feudal Tyranny; a
mimikry of ancient insolence and sway, unhallowed as the Templars arms which
girt her arbitrary Lord.

Far as the Eye can reach, up B -- R'S dreary dale, the sable Huts of H -- N --
R -- TE are scattered, skirting the Desert; descriptive to the view, of CAIN'S
sad Camp within the Land of Nod, exiled of Eden, and accursed of Heaven.

Deep in the Vale lies moping R -- K, which like DESPONDENCY retires to gloomy
walks and secret shades, to ruminate upon her unpropitious History -- yet there
A MAN resides, who, with a Taste refined, a Mind that is polished with the
polite Arts, and disciplined in Erudition's School, neglects the gayest scene;
of Human life, and MEDITATION courts, in these her most sequestered haunts; his
daily pleasure to instruct Mankind, that SACRED RULES and SOCIAL VIRTUES are
the same.

Beneath yon mountain's Brow, stands E -- N, and spreads her white front to the
Western Sun: under whose foot, flows long-lamenting T -- S; in murmurs mourning
for his PRINCE deceased -- over whose Tomb attired in HONORS garb, in Tears A
BROTHER stands, inscribes his Urn with Characters of Love, and saves his Memory.

Northward I turn, and over the Pasture Land, where crowds of Cattle crown the
Hill, and court the Breeze, stands W -- Z on her woody Banks; whilst all love
are seen the Royal chase of M -- D and her Parks: whose gracious PRINCE has
dignified his Titles, by great Examples, that alone in VIRTUE true NOBILITY
consists.

Delightful scenes, where Nature with a lavish Hand diffuses all her Beauties.

The LITTLE COTT which now invite my Muse, with humble charms abounded -- calm
TEMPERANCE and CLEANLINESS had made it pleasing. --

-- Within its walls a bending MATRO^ took her abode, and cherished in he^
bosom one fair blossom, AN ONLY DAUGHTER -- in this retirement long had she
been hid, and on a scanty income lived content, with strict frugality -- her
Daughter had attained her seventeenth year, and now she sat attentive to the
History of her Progenitors.

MONDAY Reveals our HEROINE'S Birth.
STRICKEN in years, the MATROS sat bending on her Couch -- the sable Crape, and
Widow-weeds which clothed her, were adorned with Linne^ white as snow -- her
face, (on which BENEVOLENCE was dressed with BEAUT^ IN DECAY,) shone with a
Grace divine -- soft silver Hairs hung on her elevated brow, -- and SENSIBILITY
was in her looks, mixing with fond AFFECTION, as she gazed upon her Daughter --
one hand extended, leaned upon her staff; the other pressed her bosom as she
spoke.

My MARIANNE, it is time that thou should know, from whence thou sprang; and
what thy Fortune is -- MY ANCESTORS were Men of little note for Pedigree, or
Opulence; but HONESTY had marked them for her own; -- humble in Station, with
Humility they smoothed the days of Life -- as useful members of community, they
lived beloved, and ^mented died. --

-- thy FATHER, was a man of b^ter birth, the eldest son of an exal^ Family --
his VALOR was well try'd^ his LOYALTY was warm and HON^ without stain. -- the
good man's yo^ was flattered by the smiles of fi^ Fortune -- but, alas! his
Parent w^ imprudent, and in his follies, ow^ whelmed as fair a Race, as ever
ble^ a father. --

-- DISTRESS, which to m^ minds brings on DESPAIR, served only to exhilirate
the genius and s^vour of thy father -- WORTHIN^ is seldom blessed with WORLDLY
HONORS! -- for so corrupt are COURTS, that manly MERIT, when it comes
suspended on the arm of POVERTY, is turned aside abashed; and gives its place
to Babylooks of TITLE, and the insolence of INTEREST. --

-- "the fate of thy dear FATHER -- -- long lingering Wars he served, cruel
Campaigns, drear Voyages, and many a bloody Seige -- whilst I, the choice of
his affection, hapless left at home, passed on a Life of Languishment and Love
-- my soul was full of his indelible dear Image -- regard possessed my Bosom
with its purest fervor; and whilst my thoughts were ever with my Lord, they
were ever filled with doubts of Danger, and with fears forlorn. -- how could I,
MARIANNE, but dread the Tale of battles and of slaughter, when he I lov'd^ my
soul's sole Lord, all that was dear on Earth, was braving the attack? -- --
FANCY went forth, and dipped her wings in Blood; FANCY returned, and laved her
plumes with Tears. -- Imaginations visionary scenes, were all displayed, I
heard the dire confusion of fire Arms, I saw the gleam of Swords unsheathed by
the advancing Cavalry; I heard the Ordonance, and thought Battalions fell to
the tremendous battery; I saw the rushing Phalanx, with the Bionet, breaking
down ranks, and bearing Victory before them -- horror beset me at the shouts of
Victory -- and coldness crept upon my nerves, when ever I bethought me of the
wounded -- of the Conquered -- of the slain. --

-- Oh! what could Love, Oh! what could such affection as my soul possessed,
under such circumstances, but lament, and languish out in sighs, the dismal
seasons of my Solitude? -- day after day, REFLECTION sat associate with
DESPONDENCY -- night after night, my Tears bedewed my Bed^ sacred to LOVE, to
INNOCENCE to VIRTUE -- dear scene of mutual Happiness felicity as delicate as
true affections vows, and yet as passionate -- on the dear sacred Couch I still
repose, an^ wait, resigned, the will of fate -- 't^ there -- my Tears are spent
upon thee -- Tears thy daily tribute -- there MARIANNE -- it is there -- --
There lay the best of MEN! --

She ceased her Tale, to shed a Tear and with her, MARIANNE wept.

Kind fortune called thy Father home safe and in health he came -- his brow was
sunburnt and entwined with Laurels. -- Yet what is HONOR, but an empty title!
-- for he returned, yet UNPROMOTED, and yet POOR -- my little portion just
maintained me; his pay preserved him from the hand of Hunger; but to his steps
succeeded NECESSITY'S numerous retinue. --

-- A twelvemonth's stay at home, gave me for Life a comforter -- Thou were the
issue of that blessed intercourse- a twelvemonth ended called him forth to War,
and to my widowed Arms restored old anxious TRIBULATION and DISMAY. -- Alas!
the misery of parting Lovers, lives upon my Mind^ Love grown into Life --
entwisted w^ the heart strings -- Soul of each other Soul -- blessed union of
mutual min^ and wedded bosoms -- I feel his sad ^ dieu stamped on my acking
heart^ I see his noble Image in my lively ^ collection -- a Man in figure,
portly^ great in Spirit -- feeling and humane stately he stood, and braved in
sen^ment, the accidents of Life; but p^ful and tender on his wife he gaze and
what he suffered, Oh! he suffer^ in compassion of my Woe. -- O MA^ANNE, thou
were in my arms -- t^ eyes just taught to look with love upon thy Father -- thy
innocence in smiles, making distress more exquisite, as thy first smiles were
spent on sorrow -- thy looks, appeared to claim protection from above; as God
delights in Cherubs -- Affliction stood upon our countenances -- our tongues
were silent, for the Woe was inexpressible -- the good AMINTOR sighed -- Oh!
the energy of such a sigh! -- he dropped his Arms from the embrace -- and tears
^od in his parting Eyes. --

Deep drawn sighs, obstructed the Widow's narrative -- and MARIANNE sat
^rowing at the picture of her Parent.

Thy prattling tongue soon learnt lisp the name of Father -- my ears (...)
joicing at the voice, have tingled w^ delight -- and yet for years past --
(...) years! -- that Name, repeated from (...) same Tongue, has tortured eve^
thought, and wrench'd my ack^ heart --

-- for, Oh! my MARIANNE, (...) two short years were past, the drea^ news was
heard, of the Battalions verthrow, in which thy Father served*

-- sent on a forlorn hope, on drea^ful passes, under the horrid rage^
thundering Batteries, and showers shot; the blood of Britain streamed, satiate
the zeal of some mad General, who glowed for that dishonest HONOR, which is
purchased by the certain Massacre of Thousands --

-- all language ceases, when such woe demands description -- the feelings of
the Heart, the sorrows of the soul, alone can comprehend it.

But from this state of wretchedness, some little time relieved me; for I heard
AMINTOR yet survived --

-- but wounded -- rendered incapable of further service -- returning home,
with HALF HIS PAY!

O PATRIOTS blush! -- blush PRINCES -- BRITONS blush! -- Military pride,
sibling fame, and baubling Honor, len^ an Ear! -- the voice of TRUTH repeat
your INFAMY, and tells your SHAME!

Full of a thousand Labors a^ Distresses, AMINTOR'S youth and co^stitution
were expended in the se^vice of his Country. -- Valor and H^nour could not be
purchasers of (...) PROMOTION -- promotion was procur^ by favorites only -- a
scanty pay s^tain'd him many years, just on ^verge of bare necessity -- and
when (...) fit for service -- wounded -- bleeding his King -- in anguish for
his country's cause, pouring out Life in Tribulation -- with redoubled wants,
the lost AMINTOR was sent home, with a piteous portion, to languish out
existence -- one consolation yet was left me, that the little mite entrusted to
my hands, through my Industry and care, remained still unreduced.

I watched his coming steps, and formed a thousand projects in my mind, ^ow we
should try to better our small ^come -- my wishing bosom heaved to ^reet his
last return, and with affection to console his Sorrows and his pains --
wearisomely I watched -- a pleasing messenger foretold his approach -- no
Letter stamped with ch^racters of Love, described his suffe^ings, or promulg'd
his wishes -- anxious hope, I waited yet for man months, ever he arrived.

As sighing, at my needle work sat, behold, the dear beloved Impassing by,
alarmed my sight. --

-- with agitated heart, I ran to g^ his coming -- I beheld his face retai^
AMINTOR'S countenance, but it (...) pale and spiritless -- I hasted to rece^
his loved Embrace -- I stretched my Arms and fell upon his bosom. --

-- My bosom was alarmed, my raptures were suspended, when unsupported on the
breast I loved, I sunk and dropped upon the floor --

-- doubting the affection of my Husband, I shrunk back to view the man, and
trace my misfortune in his looks; if there discovery was written, to teach me
what he thought. --

-- thy Father MARIANNE, had sunk upon a knee, to bend himself toward ^e --
and to my tortured sight displayed, the cause why my Embrace was unreturn'd --

-- for, Oh! my Daughter! h^ right arm extended, showed a miserable Limb,
without a hand; which mocked his wishes to enclasp me -- an^ his left side, was
totally bereft (...) Hand and Arm.

Then from her breast she drew the Picture of AMINTOR, and kissing it,
delivered it to MARIANNE -- crying, Ho^ changed was this sacred Image! -- Alas!
then how unlike to this dear Portrait, which I wear upon my bosom within my
heart a still more delicat^ resemblance is retained! --

-- Poor MARIANNE, with trembling and, on bended knee, received the Por^it; and
looking on it with devotion, ^pt.

After some moments, amidst interrup^ sobs, the Matron thus continued. -- --
"Oh! horror not to be described! poor maimed Trunk! -- by one accursed shot,
bereft of those two members, and bereft of help!

A miserable silence, for some time pos^s'd the scene. --

-- I on my knees, with extended arms, shrinking back from sights of woe; which
touched compassions finest feelings, and gave acutest horror -- he still
silent, with tearfill'd ey^ and grief too great for Words, di^playing to my
Pity and my Love (...) mangled figure --

-- Hopeless sorrows, are the occ^pation of weaker Minds -- AMINT^ taught me to
desist from Lamentatio^ when all remedy and all redress past away -- we studied
to acco^modate our minds to our condition and with our little pittance, to ens^
to Life, as many consolations, as (...) within our compass -- we changed o^
dwelling to a country spot, and for^ our frugal Plan --

-- but there, alas! it was (...) long, ever the dear Man, with constitution
harrass'd by his Toils, maimed and helpless, languid and forlorn, departed
hence; and in the realms of HEAVEN, sought for rewards, which VIRTUE is denied
amongst degenerate Men.

Thy Mother then a Widow -- Thou an Infant, just advanced to four years old --
our All but little -- little more than one poor hundred Pounds. -- I quitted
that abode, and hither fled, where no one knew my sorrows -- where the dear
name, and sad adversities of my AMINTOR never were rehearsed -- here have I
brought thee up, and by Industry earned our sustenance, without reducing this
thy little Portion, which I have never dared intru^ beyond my reach. --

-- Oh! MARIANNE, little cannot thou comprehend, what sorrows I su^tain'd, when
on the Bed of languishment he laid -- the dear beloved Manthen dearer to me in
his helpless sta^ as exercising both my Love and care^ he once was amiable for
his Person (...) his Virtues -- then were his Virtues le^ as monumental
distichs, to rehear^ what the poor Martyr was. --

-- Could soft affections Eye, be touched with more afflicting fights, than to
behold the HERO (who amidst terrors, had despised the threats of Death,
advancing in multitudes of dangers, horrible as various) to see the man who
braved the slaughter of the Field of Battle, in whose soul the ardour of
HONOR, kindled up intripid Courage and despite of wounds sitting the mangled
Image of a Man, and like a child submitting to be fed. -- So the aspiring Pine
on Mountains ^brow, which scorned the storms of Ages, smote by Lightning,
yields its shattered Arms, and shows its cloven mutilated Trunk, a spectacle of
Terror to the Plains around.

As he declined, his wants increased -- his diet and his drink must be made
Cordial -- expenses grew, as he sunk down, and often in Tears I sat, an^ hoped
the affluent would learn his Woes, and kind Compassion com^ and cheer his
drooping soul -- bu^ AFFLUENCE besotted with its self enjoyment, was absorbed
in sad insens^bility -- COMPASSION was detained i^ Heaven -- and CONSOLATION
was wit^ God -- the minist'ring Angel, w^ received his soul, let fall a Tear;
and from before mankind his miseries expunged; that suffering VIRTUE might no
longer weep, in sorrows Vale, but waft her way to Heaven.

TUESDAY Brings on the SUBJECT of the TALE
RISING Morn had opened the eastern Gates of Heaven, an^ glowing clouds
confessed the comi^ Sun. -- Aurora with a modest Blust and looks averted from
connubial rite called forth the God of day, who linger on the couch of Thetis
-- the Birds (...) waked soft melody in every Grove -- (...) Cuckoo rousing
from his summer-dream, ^mmer'd his inebriated Song.

Early as sun rise, sighing, MARIANNE ^lk'd forth to breath the morning Air, ^d
meditate upon the mournful Tale, ^r Mother yesterday related.

Led by the Muse, I visit the Events ^ich TUESDAY brings.

The sun beems play upon the CO^^GE windows -- the swallow chirms up^ the
Chimney-top -- the Cock assiduous, ^ws the morning watch -- Ducks wad^ to the
Brook -- and in the pasture, play the sportive Lambs, amidst the gold cups
spangled with the dew --

-- beneath yon hanging grove, a litt^ Plain, secludes her solitary scene from
public eye; and wraps itself in stilln^ -- there the Brook thronged with be^ing
Willows, creeps along the curli^ Pool, and hushes all the tumult of t^ streams,
which at some little dista^ rushed their murmuring Waters o^ rocks, and foamed
among retarding F^bles -- fast by the Waters brink, ancient Elm, of form
grotesque knotty, spreads its crooked Arms, y^ing a shade over the broken grou^
whose sliding banks, whilst shrinking ^e Brook, leave grassy edges, to invite
^pose, upon their easy seats -- there ^t my Muse presents to me the Image
MARIANNE -- there first reveals the ^ces of the Maid, whose Story claims (...)
Sylvan Reed, and tunes it to MEL^MENE and LOVE --

-- there MARIANNE sat -- in Sta^e tall, and straight as Rushes of the ^ulet --
clad in Russet, her beauty (...) confusion to the Pride of Ornament ^er arms
like alabaster, displayed their ^teness with a delicate proportion; her ^k was
lofty, and a hat of straw sha^'d her Countenance, where MODESTY sat trimming
WISDOM with the ve^ of DIFFIDENCE. --

-- With clasping hands, she sat (...) meditate her humble Lot, and sighed for
the adversity which overwhelmed her father. -- She ruminated on the peacess
hours of rural Life, with unambitio^ Mind; and blessed with CONTENTMEN^ she
called it HAPPINESS --

-- within her breast, young Lov^ had learnt to sport with INNOCENCE; an^ HOPE,
by the flatterings of Fancy, ha^ entangled her desires -- she wished not (...)
be greater, for her humble Passion h^ its birth without AMBITION -- there w^
(...) YOUTH, on whom her Virgin Wishes rested, a SHEPHERD.

As on the Image of her Love, she ^ent a rapturous thought; with eyes ^st up to
Heaven, her pure desires breathed into a Prayer. -- It was then, that she
revealed her Face, where beauty, such as adorned Eden's Eve, shone forth (...)
MARIANNE -- her Eyes of blue, were ^eek and languishing; her brow was e^vated,
and adorned with pale brown ^ir; her cheeks were tinged with blush^, like roses
scattered upon snow; her ^ps were glowing with full tides of Health, and in
attention separated, shew'^ her Teeth of Ivory --

-- FAIR FLOWER, the bosom of RETIREMENT dressing! -- sweet as the spring tide
Hawthorn Blossom, trimming MAIA'S chaplet, as she walks the Dale! -- fair (...)
the wild Rose on the rivers brink, tha^ brightens her attire, by the reflection
o^ the shining stream! -- humble and chas^ as yonder pretty stem of
Lilly-of-the Vale, that in its verdant mantle hides i^ charms, contented with
its purity and Peace! -- Such was FAIR MARIANNE.

Her Mother bending on her Staff, forsakes the COTTAGE, to salute her Daughter,
and see the Linen bleach which ^read the green -- the Matron soon per^eiv'd,
some new anxiety sat on her Mai^a's looks, and feared the Tale of their
^alamities, had born too hard upon her ^ind -- thus she assays to comfort her
--

-- My MARIANNE, forbear to cherish sorrows -- Lamentation is in vain, when
Remedy is gone -- the fittest duties of the Mind, are to enumerate the
consolations which are left us -- to weigh the blessings which we taste, to
estimate the good things we enjoy, compare them with the fortunes of the many
who experience greater ills than we; and then in gratitude, give praises to the
God of Heaven, who ye^ preserves us from worse estate -- the way of HAPPINESS
leads not on stee^ asse^ts, trod by AMBITION and INORDINATE DESIRE -- no -- she
has made her passes in the deep sequestered Val^ of still CONTENT -- all that
I wish (...) to secure my MARIANNE, and in he^ happy marriage, harbor the
Bark, i^ which my treasure is laid up; in which my care for ever sails, and
seeks the hoped for shore -- but perils wait the Voyage. -- LOVE, like the
Ocean, is (...) inconstant scene; for now it tempt^ with smoothness and with
smiles, and you would think, that PLEASUR^ played upon its shining bosom, with
SECURITY -- but soon the sun-reflecting Plain, is curled by rising Breezes; up
the billows heave, and swell as bosoms panting with their passion -- rougher it
rises, till the leaping surge, confounds its waters with the clouds, the winds
with ruffled wings dash on the Tide, and stir the direful tumult up to Tempest
-- the little FEMALE BARK that launched from shore, with only INNOCENCE on
board, plays thoughtless on the pleasurable Mirror, and sees but INNOCENCE in
its reflection -- but when the Ocean troubled with the Wind, his countenance
deforms, confounded, she perceives that her ret^ is rendered impossible,
without (...) Rudder of EXPERIENCE; without SU^PICIONS Mariners to hand the S^
without the Oars of RESOLUTION (...) struggle with the Tempest, with PRUDENCE,
and without PERSPICU^ to guide the Helm; with only P^ on board, who calls on
CHASTITY^ go to Prayers -- the Vessel fills wi^ floods tremendous, and
immersing (...) for ever lost -- LOVE is insidious -- the passion first
advances with soft insinuating Joys -- the Eyes delight to gaze -- the ear is
charmed with sweet professions, corresponding with the hearer^ wish, and what
the sympathetic Lover feels -- the clasping hand receives the mutual grasp --
advancing wishes, rising on a growing intimacies soft gradations, at length
break the bounds of Modesty's reluctance, and glowing kisses kindle feverish
raptures -- each Breast beats with impatient throbs -- Eyes in their humid
gaze, grow languid -- and Passion soon advances beyond the barriers of PRUDENCE
-- what we wish to credit we confide in -- and INNOCENCE as void of Suspicion
as of Guile, lays all abroad for TREACHERY and TREASON.

As thus the Matron spoke, fair MARIANNE, placing her clasped hands upon her
knees, with unshifting gaze, kept her Eyes upon her Mother; whilst her tears in
trickling showers fell fast -- (...) she ceased, thus the sweet Maid replied --

The tender Care, and parental love of my dear Mother, command my Duty and
Gratitude -- my bosom knows no thought, my Mother ought not to know -- my soul
can breath no wish, you should not govern -- do you suspect your daughter of
Imprudence? -- alas! my Mother, have I disobeyed? -- I do confess -- dear EMMA,
I admit. --

-- What does my Child intend to say? --

-- Whilst you described the dangers of the Passion, I trembled for myself --
indeed my Mother -- nay, let not anger grow into your loving looks -- let not a
thought of condemnation touch your mind, or wrestle with affection -- your
MARIANNE has not a sentiment unworthy of her Mother's Ear. --

-- "You keep me in suspense," EMMA interrepts, whilst doubt and apprehension
raise their visionary terrors -- spare a Parents fears. --

-- Oh! blessed Matron, do I give you pain? -- let it be increased a thousand
times on me, could I but save my Mother's anguish! -- If your beloved MARIANNE
has listened to the tale of Love -- alas! I see the frown is gathering on your
brow, and I have erred. --

-- With confidence, my child, reveal the Story of thy Passion -- my experience
may conduct thee in the Labyrinth, and lead thee safely to the paths of Honor.
--

-- My Passion, (said the fair one with a blush) do you suspect your Child of
such imprudence as to have yielded up her heart to passions, without a Mother's
knowledge? -- when I examine into all my Mind, I think myself as free as ever
-- but some how, I perceive a sigh steals from my breast, and tells me that I
am not easy, and yet I feel no pain -- a tender anxiety sits on my thoughts --
sometimes I wish I were in these retirements, and when I am here, I wish I were
away -- a listlesness hangs on me, I know not how, that gives me little rest;
and yet it is a kind of melancholy pleasure. --

-- Tell me, my MARIANNE, from whence these new sensations come. --

-- My heart is open to my Mother's Eye -- Concealment is not known within my
soul -- you know the gay OLISSUS, the lord of yonder rich Demesnes -- he talked
to me of LOVE -- and with a graceful person, flowery Tongue, and strange
humility of tenderness, discovered to me first the Character of a LOVER; for
indeed I had not formed the least Idea what a Lover meant. --

-- "And what ensued my Girl?" the Matron hastily replied, for to her bosom,
glowing with wishes for her Daughter's welfare, AMBITION had insinuated its
delusive visions.

On his pursuit of Pleasure, here he strayed -- his Dogs were in the Thicket
after game -- he bearing on his Arm a Gun, surprised me at my Work -- then it
was I first beheld OLISSUS -- he seemed to eye me with a fond attention --
abashed to beat the looks of this rich man, I blushed and walked away -- he
followed me, and asked my Name, and where I dwelt, and who belonged I to --
never ashamed to own my Habitation, or my dear Mother, I replied with Truth;
and showed him where our COTTAGE stood, and talked of you -- he looked upon me
steadfastly, and smiled, as if I pleased him with my sincerity -- your speech,
says he, distinguishes you are not a Native of this Dale; your Manners tell me
you are better bred -- he seized my hand -- I trembled -- observing my
confusion, h^ bowed and left me --

-- I never thought of the ever for many days, till again I saw OLISSUS coming
toward me in the Grove where I sat to shelter me from Noo^ tide heat -- when
he approached, beheld the character of benevolen^ imprinted on his looks; his
eyes we^ flashing with good humor -- I attempted to arise, but he prevented
me, ar^ sat down by my side -- with a degree of fervor which I never had
perceived i^ any man, he talked to me of Love, assured me that his soul was
languishing, and all his Happiness depend^ on my smiles. -- I wondered at his
words, and grew afraid -- his face began to glow like the Countenance of a Man
in Wrath, his lips were trembling, and his eyes grew piercing -- then seizing
my hand, he grasped me passionately -- I shrunk away -- with soft persuasion
and the gentlest accents, he stilled my apprehension -- as I grew bolder, he
grew bolder too -- he cast one Arm about my waist, and kissed my cheek -- I
thought his lips were burning -- he sighed and seemed uneasy -- I was abashed
-- Confusion grew upon me -- I was overwhelmed with shame, and yet I gained
recollection sufficient to enable me to reprove him for his boldness -- you
kill me with your frown, says he -- you make me tremble Sir, -- indeed I am
much ashamed and terrified -- your blushes set my bosom in a blaze, your eyes
dissolve my soul, says he, and press a^ himself upon me -- I bent back and
shunned his Kisses. -- I tumbled on the Green. --

-- "Alas, my MARIANNE," the Matron cries. --

Then unbounded in his Kisses, he planted them upon my Bosom -- his hands were
wandering over my Neck -- I was fluttered, distressed, and out of breath -- he
saw my Misery -- Oh! my Mother, the remembrance agitates me grievously -- for
giddy with the strange unusual freedom and my fright, I was ready to expire
within his Arms -- when he perceiving my Distress and weak Estate, seized the
occasion, -- he paused --

-- With eyes and hands directed up to ^eaven, the Matron sat mute --

-- Again she breaks the awful, though ^omentary silence, At that instant he
displayed himself in the most amiable Character -- he arose, and bending
toward me, took my trembling hand, and raised me -- He seemed to pity me --
how godlike was his figure in h^^ Pity -- the expressions of Charity and
Benevolence were stamped upon h^^ features -- a gracious greatness sho^^ upon
his Countenance, and like the saving Angel he appeared, who le^ the
brokenhearted HAGAR'S fainting steps, to streams of water in the W^^^derness
-- your Images of Love, str^^^^ my mind with the just similitude o^ my mishap,
and brought your co^demnations home upon my own imprudence -- for 'till the
strange event was past, I never conceived the danger I was exposed to, or
weighed the wi^^ disparities of fortune, the inequalities between us -- I
thought he uttered truths, and entertaining no impulse of guile, I doubted no
deceit -- but since that time, dear Mother, I have trembled at the recollection
of myself -- for I have heard say, that Man is often base, and can dissemble
and counterfeit the Passions of a Lover -- can vow such Vows, and tell such
Tales, as cheat poor Innocents -- can like the barbarous Man who slays a Lamb,
divest himself of all Humanity, possess the Virgins moment of distress, and
whilst she places all her virtuous confidence and holy faith upon delusive
promises; and whilst he plants the rapturous kiss, to seal the lips which
breath her Innocence, his heart is harboring the worst of wishes, and the
Maiden is lost in Wiles -- alas! my Mother, -- I tremble at the precipice, on
which I trod. --

The Matron shook her head and sighed -- and yet thou art not from that
precipice escaped -- within thy bosom lurks the Traitor, that will yield thee
back into OLISSUS' Arms.

The affrighted MARIANNE dropped upon her knee, and holding forth her hands,
beseech'd her Mother to discover the insiduous sentiment, which threat'ned to
^ndo her.

What was that listlesness, my MA^IANNE, of which you talked, that gave you
little rest, yet seemed to be a melancholy pleasure?

OLISSUS name," replies the Maid, has no connection with those sentiments -- of
him or his professions I have never thought, but with a blush -- no tenderness
of mind is due to him -- if Love is known by such sensations, as I heretofore
spoke of, that Love belongs not to OLISSUS -- no; another claims my sighs. --

The Matron's silence, gave liberty to MARIANNE to tell her Tale.

Some months since, when winter clothed the ground with snow, I went to visit
my poor Lamb, which went with neighbor SYMKINS Flock upon the Fell -- the
pretty Animal was given to me by ALCIRIS, CYMON'S son -- its mother, dear
creature, died, soon after it was born, and then the little Orphan wanting
sustenance, was trusted to my tenderness and Care -- with great compassion I
beheld its desolate Estate, helpless and harmless -- in its looks were soft
distresses written, and in languid eye expressed dejected Innocence, its cries
were pitiful complainings, and my compassion succeeded to its moan. -- I fed it
with my hands, I made its couch of Wool; I heard its calls of hunger, and I
tended it with tenderness -- the pretty female grew in strength -- as if its
little heart was moved with gratitude, it followed to my call, and lifted up
its face to court my looks; its Countenance expressed the pleasures of its
mind, whilst on its curling wool I stroak'd my hand -- grown older, in my walks
it walked; and whilst I sat, it crop'd the blades of grass, played round my
seat, and when some length of time elapsed without my calling on its name, it
came and bleated in my face, and seemed to court continuance of my care, or
seemed to fear I had neglected her -- these were pretty tricks which won my
heart, and of its innocence and sweetness, sure I was enamored -- for I loved
the Lamb, as now I seem to love a Swain, whom may the Heavens be pleased, my
Mother may approve. --

-- ALCIRIS met me trudging in the snow -- the sheep were gathered on the
Hillocks, where they stood lamenting and dismayed, hungry and trembling, -- for
my Lamb I wept -- he caught it up and bare it in his arms, home to our COTT --
as then I loved the Lamb, I liked the man who saved it from the misery it felt
-- he asked a poor reward for such his care, and with good will I yielded it --
he asked a kiss, he took it for his pains; and for my Lamb I gave him one again
-- my transport made me bold, for all my mind was full of the dear Lamb; I
never thought of what it was I did -- but recollection soon rushed upon me, my
confusion was almost immediate, and blushes were incessant -- he gazed upon me
with looks of languishment mixing with smiles; an expression not to be
described, was in his eyes -- then was the time, I first perceived peculiar
pleasure in the conversation of a Man -- and thence I first began to observe
the image of his Sex, with more than cold indifference -- for my involuntary
gaze, ran rambling over his figure, with a curiosity fraught with pleasure -- I
beheld him tall and well proportioned -- his limbs are not robust, but of a
gentle turn -- his jetty Locks break careless over his neck in ringlets, his
garb, though homely, shows his form to some advantage -- his brow is open -- his
eyes as dark as sloes, look quick as sparks struck from the Travelers
horse-shoe in the Lanes at night, and make one start with the acuteness of the
flash -- his cheek is ruddy with the glow of Health, where smiles sit
good-naturedly in dimples; and from his lips, the softest Voice, in sweet, in
mild and modest accents fall -- his education far beyond his station, gives him
sentiments and phraze, would make my Mother wonder -- a SHEPHERD in his
occupation, but above OLISSUS in his Wisdom -- My MARIANNE, he says, the Lamb's
an Orphan, bereft of aid -- it has lost its Parent -- Animals of Prey will soon
devour it, if it is not fostered by thee -- all ORPHANS are exposed to perils
-- preserve my Lamb, and let me be thy Shepherd -- I wondered at his talk --
thou art, says he, just as this Lamb, bereft of that good Parent, who might
defend, sustain, and bring thee out of Dangers -- thy ancient mother may
instruct thee, b^ the wisdom of all precept is confounded by evil Fortune, and
subject to the subtilties of Knaves; as Aspines tremble to every breeze -- the
Woodbine unsupported, dangles in the dust; and untimely, all her sweets and
beauties languish and expire -- my Arm methinks, could find for thee
Protection; my bosom could ensure a resting place; my Industry could earn thee
Competency and Comfort; -- I guessed not at his wishes --

-- And I could love my Lamb forever, he cries. --

-- then it was I first was struck with comprehension -- I told him, that my
Mother ruled my Actions, and that I had not entertained a Wish to call my own
--

-- but will thou, (adds he, with a degree of impatiency) hear me tell my
Passion? for I love thee as my Life -- I first observed thee at the Chapel, and
I thought I saw an Angel pray -- my Soul was set on fire, and I was all
Enthusiasm, my Devotion was carried to a fervor beyond what I had before
experienced -- yet whilst I kneeled, my mind began to wander, and my thoughts
would often stray from heaven, replete with Love of thee -- I cherished the
fond flame, and often it led me musing in the Grove; and often my fancy wandered,
inspired by thy image, as on the Hill I lay to tend my Sheep -- when ever I
tuned my Pipe, thou were the music of my Mind; and full of thee each warbling
sonnet tril'd -- often to myself I talked, and praised thy Charms, and prayed for
thy embrace -- the Beachen bark stands lettered with thy name, the Lime-tree
bears the emblems of my Love. --

-- as thus he talked, my Bosom heaved with hasty breathing; on my cheeks the
color arose, and tears stood in my eyes -- he pressed my hand to his soft
lips, whilst my impatient bosom throb'd, to exchange the pleasure. --

-- he added, to wedlock fairest MARIANNE my wishes lead, for it would equal a
state of Paradise to have thee mine. --

-- I bid him talk to you of Marriage -- here in this Dale he often comes, in
these sequestered Plains we walk, and in yonder long green Lane, beneath the
shade of Hawthorns; our talk is full of gentleness, and the more he professes
himself the Lover^ seems the more abashed, timorous, and doubtful to offend --
not like OLISSUS, whose impetuous Passion kindling up from sparks, blazed out
in vehemence, and terrified me with a flood of Kisses -- when ALCIRIS is here,
the hours seem enviously short, and he is departing, before I think I have
welcomed him -- his kindness delights my recollection -- I could think of him
for ever. -- If this is LOVE, dear Matron, then your MARIANNE has been
ensnared.

WEDNESDAY. Is spent in COUNTER PLOTS.
AS the panting Zephyr, arises from the opening Rose loaded with sweets, the
Muse enraptured with the Image of fair MARIANNE, withdraws her wing, fraught
with the simple beauties of meek Innocence; and lingering on the haunts of
Pleasure, with reluctance bends her way to yonder VALE, which from thronged
Alders, thriving in their watery situation, give to CYMON'S lands the name of
ALLER COPSE.

The Dwelling of this family, is placed on a low ground, where Rushes are
abundant -- a creeping stream winds through the flat, worn in the Peaty Earth,
which stains the muddy Waters -- a grove of Alders crowd the marsh, obstructing
the view from CYMON'S COTTAGE; and in^ercepting every object, save the elevated
Mountains which o'ertop the Trees --

-- Close to the Windows, in a miry track, the Cattle trudge -- at the door, on
dunghill laid, the sow delights in Indolence, and courting Ease with many a
sigh, extended pants, full in the Sun -- the entrance is distinguished by its
flags, rude and irregular; where beneath a ragged shed, some peats and withered
Wood are heaped -- dark, damp and melancholy the habitation looks -- cold Ivy
mantles on the Front, where Sparrows nestle -- some strunted Thorns, spread
their green bosoms around the door, and dry the dangling dishclouts, and give
air to Stockings blue and brown -- the scanty Windows scarce sufficient to
admit at Noon a twilight ray, are patched with paper -- on the Hearth the fuel
blazes, circled round with bricks, whose smoke ^n winding Volumes eddies in the
open ^ange; where many an iron instrument ^f Household, as decorations hang --
a ^ong settee, the fireside throngs, covered with Calf-skin; beneath whose
frame, old CYMON'S wooden shoes keep holy^ay, and harbor Tabbys Kittens -- a
^hining Table, spreads its ample board ^eneath the window, laden with a lea^en
loaf, a cheese, and scattered leeks -- ^ull opposite, an oaken Cupboard stands,
where carving is benumbed in stiff stalked Lillies, lumps of Grapes and wooden
foliage -- the pillars swell protuberant with timber, and half reveal each
private recess and carved closet door -- with pewter doublers, all the top
stands furnished -- the white washed walls are pictured with the sufferings of
Saints, gash'd and bedaub'd with crimson and yellow -- here CYMON lives in
wealth -- for he, laborious in his youthful years and crafty, had amas'd a
fortune -- Riche^ obtained by the sweat of toil, and many a subtle bargain; yet
saved by abstinence pinching penury, and self-denial snatched from the hand of
Hunger, an^ the lip of Thirst, with coarse and homel^ food sustained, not
knowing comfort bu^ in Gain -- all his delight was Gold -- the yellow store,
which neither accommodations purchased, or ease, was his felicity -- it joy'd
his ear -- transports diffused on his Soul, as gold possessed his eyes -- its
touch was exquisite -- its numbers heavenly -- without an estimate to give it
^n importance, he adored the Ore -- so the infatuated Indian, bows in worship,
to the mute log, whose strange distorted features his own rude carving rendered
hideous; and of whose impotence and insensibility he was fully conscious from
its beginning. --

-- Bending with age, the sage Old Man, sat multiplying in his mind, the store
he had amassed by numbers, to which his love of life, had bid him hope he
should increase his Years -- a little white hair silvered his brow, beneath a
cap of woolen, stripped with green and gray -- his heavy eye-brow^ hid his eyes
with tufts of yellow hair -- on his sharp nose two shattered glasses hung --
hollow was his cheek, brushed with a bristly beard -- his party colored Coat,
bound with a leathern Girdle, had wearied Industry to patch, and Avarice to
gather --

-- The partner of this wealthy man, sat over the Embers, whiffing fragrant
fumes from out a sooty Pipe -- her small and meagre figure was attired in home
spun gray -- girt with blue bands, her catter'd apron waved in fringes to her
Knees -- her fallow skin, hung shrivel'd ^n her brow in many a Plait -- her
cheeks were lean and lank -- her acute looks ^eem'd with suspicion keen, and in
her withered carcass, hollow sounds incessant^y croak'd and wandered -- ALCIRIS
was the Issue of their youth -- a Child they had, born in their elder years, a
DAUGHTER -- ALCIRIS was the day^ong from their sight, he was the guardian of
their Flocks -- but their JENNET^A was employed at home in domestic Duties --
her occupations were the Dairy and the Fold.

This Daughter, sad Misfortunes had ^ishapen -- her shoulders were protuberant
-- her ankles twisted, and her Countenance was crooked -- as her frame, so was
her Mind distorted -- for though the Cow's benevolence supplied her daily Pail,
and filled her Bowls with riches; though the meek flocks their heavy fleeces
yielded to her Arms, and filled the grasp of Avarice with wealth -- though the
prolific Stye with Litters teemed, the Roost poured forth her hidden hoards and
living Troops -- although fertility had blessed the Furrow and the Mead; yet void
of gratitude, untouched by daily bounties and examples, her soul remained as
sullen as the Rocks, which frowned upon the Dale; and tasteless of the gifts of
Providence, as the dark barrenness of ^hought. which broode^ only on the ^opes
of future Gain. --

-- led by chance, as she returned from the Town, JENNETTA passed the COTTAGE
of fair MARIANNE -- within the ^ong green Lanes ALCIRIS strayed and with his
lovely Maid, in tales of soft affection, unsuspiciously enjoyed the shadowy
haunts, where blowing Woodbines ^ent round the Hazel boughs, and where they
thought themselves in secret and secure -- JENNETTA viewed the Pair, and with
sour looks a-skance, gave up ^er mind to malice; for within her Soul, soft
sympathetic Pleasures never beem'd --

-- Homeward JENNETTA hey'd, and to her Parents gave descriptions of the scene
she hated -- At her approach, the bolt was drawn with cautious hand -- with eye
placed to the latch-hole of the door, the Matron viewed JENNETTA'S face ever
she would give her passage -- haste had made her breathings short^ wrath
enflamed her cheek, and glared upon her eye -- the Parents saw their Daughters
Image changed, and feared some danger had beset her Steps -- the Maid impatient
of their error, cries, Stay your mistaken apprehensions, it is not for me, that
your Parental hearts should pant with Terror, but for your Son ALCIRIS. -- as
she paused, Dread stole into their souls, and struck them dumb: for with the
^tmost tenderness, they lo^'d ALCIRIS -- -- He (says JENNETTA) is betrayed --
deluded by the Arts and fly insinuations of that MARIANNE, of whom too busy
fame has often spoken ill. --

-- Of MARIANNE (the Mother interrupts) and who is she? --

-- One (cries the Maid) whom the world has treated with contempt, -- of
spurious birth -- or if of birth legitimate; of Father, and of stock unknown --
she with her Mother lives an homely Life; but how they are sustained the
Neighbors have not learnt, save what their Needle Work procures them; a sorry
Pittance -- yet with their poverty so proud, they scorn all intercourse with
the People, despising to be social with the Cottagers who dwell within their
Dale they live unneighbourly, and hid^ their wants in a sequestered solitary
Life. --

-- The old Man, from his stoo^ edge, with projecting figure, fat uneasy; with
hand extended and impatient looks, attentive to the Tale -- -- yet with their
Poverty so proud that all their converse, when the^ condescend to talk with
Peasants, is of Romantic Virtues, lofty Views, presuming Maxims, Manners
dictating, and Modes ambitious -- they scorn the little talk of Dairy duties
and the Reapers joys -- this MARIANNE has filled her simple soul with empty
tales of times past by, and what she calls Philosophy; and gives her wandering
thoughts up to the stars -- a Mate unfit for our ALCIRIS. --

-- The old Man interrupts -- Whence know thou that she has snared my Boy?
-- for him I toiled -- I love the Lad -- for him, I have rejoiced to multiply
my Gains -- the Youth deserves my Care, for disobedience since his earliest
breath, has never marked his Life. --

-- Comes not disobedience soon enough replied JENNETTA, when ALCIRIS would
dispose his Heart, on other objects than his Father's will? -- I saw him in
yonder gre^ Lanes walk, hid from the beams of day, by shading Trees and hanging
Woodbines; concealing from the eye of Man his odious intercourse with MARIANNE
-- I saw her stretch her neck aloft, exulting in the Vows he paid -- her lofty
neck, extended with the empty Pride of this her conquest, like the giddy Goose
that looks around, rejoicing in the empire of her gadling Gander -- so simple
looked the Man amidst her Triumph -- with portly gait she walked and seemed to
think herself a Goddess -- and when she deigned to smile, the Swain around her
waist, cast his transported Arms, and in a strain of Phrenzy caught a kiss --
whence can such fond infatuation flow? -- Such fascination of the human Mind?
-- I neither feel nor fancy the sensation, which can beget such transports. --

-- The Mother with a scream, clasp^ng her hands, interrupts the Story; asking
a thousand questions in a breath, which in the same breath she resolves into
the darkest doubtfulness.

The Father heard the Tale, and thus harrangues, -- "Here all my days have been
consumed in Toil -- my years in Labor spent, have yielded riches, which
hitherto I have not enjoyed -- for in those Riches, self-denial has withdrawn
my Lip from Comforts Cup and Appetite has often yearn'd at my most
parsimonious board; whilst self-enjoyment, held in Chains of Avarice, has
languish'd out existence -- I loved my Boy, and for his happiness forsook my
own -- yet what is Happiness? -- with him it is Love -- his undeserning Mind is
occupied by present objects, and perceives not what futurity is pregnant with
-- he thinks the smiles of MARIANNE are smiles of Heaven, and tastes in Kisses
Love's infatuating fond felicity -- once I was young, and ELLEN on my breast,
was all my wishes craved. -- I loved my ELLEN with a transport not to be
expressed. -- My daily toils, though wearisome, were sweet, since they supplied
my Wife with Comfort -- my Cares were for her pleasures, for the cares
proceeding from Necessity, were weighed alone by ELLEN'S wants. -- Labor was
cheerfully sustained, as it purchased us such Blessings -- Ease so seldom
tasted, was an inestimable Joy, as it indulged our intercourse of Love, and
made the Sunday, Happinesses Sabbath -- but years came on and cooled our
Passions -- when Nature cooled, Felicity fell from Transport into Temperance,
and Love extinguished his fervor and his fires -- the various Estimates of Life
were changed -- Necessities grew irksome -- Care came on in frowns -- and all
the sweets which once could meliorate the sorrows of our station, like the
Roses on the Briars, with the Seasons drooping, died away, and left the Thorns
naked -- we thence perceived that money was the only source of lasting Peace,
as it secured our Ease -- for our Infants we became anxious, to gain them
property, was to secure them Pleasure -- Love is the seasoning of Youth -- but
Youth is as a span in human Life, which when elapsed, resigns mankind to Care.

JENNETTA sighed -- the Father ceased -- the Maid cries out, Why, what am I? --
of what am I compounded? unlike my Parents, and unlike my Brother -- I neither
feel the pleasure which my father pictures, or my Brother tastes; nor does my
mind conceive what kind of Joy, this Love inspires. I often thought the strang^
contagion was a kind of Madness, i^ which the Patient was busied with eternal
fever of the Mind, and Image extravagant -- a malady of thought -- a wild
conception of delights, delusive as the Images of a delirium -- a other times I
looked upon it as a^ intoxication; a disease that drowns the Judgment, and
benumbs the nerves -- am I by nature blighted, misshapen i^form, and in my
sensations untoned and unharmonized? -- I feel myself in no wise made
deficient, Judgment rules my thoughts, and all my senses own the same impulse,
as others of my Sex experience -- Surely this deficiency is in the soul; for,
by my Father's talk, it seems this Love is sentiment, not mere sensation. -- I
cannot comprehend it -- to yield to conjectures is to lead to anxiety -- but of
ALCIRIS'S father -- if your experience shows, that Love's a transitory scene,
of vague instable transports, and that wealth procures a life-long Joy;
wherefore do- you hesitate? you love your Son, and from parental principles,
would save him from his follies -- forbid his intercourse with MARIANNE: I hate
he haughtiness and arrogance of Wi^dom -- A girl who thinks she is prett^ will
be disagreeable and vain; b^ one who thinks she is wise, will a^ways render
herself detestable -- wake his mind from this Letharg^ Love, and banish the
Visions of I^fatuation, give him new pursuits, a^ try if Love can battle Love:
try ANNA'S prudent years and wealt^ portion, with a parent's kind Commands,
will not move the Youth testify his Obedience and Jud^ment. --

-- The name of ANNA roused old CY^ON'S ear, there was music in her Por^ion --
he cast up his Countenance and ^rind a smile, glancing at JENNETA -- ^ooks of
approbation over his spectacles -- "wherefore talkest thou of ANNA?" says the
Sage. --

-- ANNA sighs in vain for your ALCIRIS, but he derides her Passion -- she
often tells me of his scorn in tears -- you know her large estate -- she has
not yet attained her fortieth year -- her form is comely, though not beautiful --
her Education rural and domestic -- her Acres spread the Valley with grassy
walks, for Pleasure's steps -- her golden furrows laugh with Opulence, and on
her lap prosperity and Prudence have been fostered -- unlike this MARIANNE --
for she is bred with notions arrogant and impious; and all your little wealth^
would squander to indulge her fellies. --

-- A frown stood lowering on OLD CYMON'S brow -- he sighed -- and from his
murmurs no Articulation escaped, but just the name of Money. --

-- Extravagance would hold revels in the stores which your Industry gained,
and a progeny of Beggars would enthral your Sons sad steps. --

-- OLD CYMON cast an angry glance toward Heaven, and knit his tusks with
^ehemence. --

-- For what are all the empty tales, reaped from the pens of Poets? Visions
and drunken dreams which constitute the Drama -- vain tittle tattle, fit only
to become the conversation of those who hold the hands of indolence -- but ANNA
can adorn the marriage Life with maxims plucked from the pinions of Prudence
and propriety of Judgment, ensuring wealth, with hand assiduous, and the
measures of frugality. --

The father clasping both his hands upon his breast, replied, -- I love my Son
-- such is the human Mind, that if the Lad should be restrained in this his
early passion, all the wealth that I can give may but increase his wretchedness
-- Love sometimes is so fickle, that with indulgence, it grows languid, sickens
and dies; if Love is well established, if it depends not on outward beauties,
but is fed by excellencies of the mind, and Virtue, and is supported by pure
Judgment it will never be liable to extinction -- nay, there is even a bias of
the Mind which arises in Nature; and Nature herself from Sympathy, influences
man's heart -- the common proverb is, that marriages are made in Heaven;
implying, that our Love is involuntary -- but how we, for the sake of Prudence,
may counteract this Passion? there is the rub! -- by indulgence, in a course of
years, it may grow faint, but then becoming temperate, it may grow into an
indissoluble Friendship -- so was my Love of ELLEN -- a friendship which, with
mutual pleasure flows, and all the measures of a mutual mind: Friendship on
mutual offices and aids sustained. -- Perhaps my boy has centered all his soul
on this his choice, an^ shapes his happiness from mutu^ Love and sympathetic
sentiments -- we should blight this blossom of la(...) Life, the Plant would
sicken, would untimely fade, and prematurely without fruit expire -- for by
resistanc^ Love like an impeded River gathe^ strength, and grows impetuous; the
banks at length are overflowed, the barriers broken down, and all become a
Deluge -- his happiness is all my ai^ -- to purchase it, I gave my Life for
wealth, to purchase it, I will all m^ wealth resign -- thou art no Judg^
JENNETTA of his thoughts -- for in hi^ youth I gave him an Education, from
whence manly judgment forms the maxims of his mind, above the bounds of our
unlettered sentiments -- for Learning pours into the human stores collected
Laws for regulating Life -- from thence one mind attains the reasonings of
thousands, is taught to judge from others Judgments, accumulates the experience
of multitudes, and the examples of Ages, ten (...) its Wisdom with the
knowledge ^thered by Sages of all times -- the M^ of Learning, tries Discretion
in Examples Scale, and like the Be which carries to his Hive the honey of each
flower, his understanding is enriched from all the Science of the World. --

-- JENNETTA, from impatiency, sa^ knawing from her nails the bleeding flesh.
--

-- ALCIRIS may discover in hi^ MARIANNE Virtues and Excellency which lay
concealed from vulgar eyes a treasure for the enjoyment of hi^ Understanding --
but the fairest of the feminine accomplishments, is VIRTUE -- possessed of that
--

-- "Possessed of VIRTUE Father," interrupts the Maid with Vehemence Pray what
is VIRTUE? -- is it is CHASTITY alone, or in DISCRETION -- perhaps in neither
can this Sorceress make boast, that she possesses VIRTUE -- the world is
busied with her Friendship for the gay OLISSUS -- they meet, they walk, they
hold their intercourse in every Grove, and each sequestered bower -- and what
OLISSUS leaves, ALCIRIS takes -- to a young man's mind, perhaps her Vices have
allurements more infatuating than the pale faced VIRTUES; and SENSUALITY may
fascinate beyond pure LOVE -- in case Discretion be the Characteristic or the
Type of VIRTUE, it is not known to MARIANNE -- for famed OLISSUS, full of
opulence and arts polite, never blushes at the Title of Lascivious and famed
OLISSUS is the Devotee o^ MARIANNE -- as the Sun and Moon a^tend this Earth,
OLISSUS and ALCIR^ wait the Maid -- OLISSUS like the day is all glowing
rapture; ALCIRIS lik^ the cool and languid Moon, gazes alone upon the shadowed
side, when all her imperfections lay enveil'd -- Female VIRTUE gone, her place
is soo^ occupied by craft and Treachery-betray'd by Man, Man is a Woman prey,
to gratify Revenge -- and to appease despoiled Chastity, as is the fashion of
the World, some cunnin^ Wedlock, must expunge the Stain.

The Vices of OLISSUS, and the dark insinuations, inflame the Mother's Mind,
where, in a strain of Enthusiasm VIRTUE reigned -- she glowed with Vehemence
and to the Sire such arguments enforced, of lavishing and Waste. Intemperance
and Pride, Inchastity and Vice, Ruin and Misery, as overpowered the old Man's
Judgment, and Love for his ALCIRIS; and gave him back to AVARICE, and all her
train of Images, unfeeling and unkind.

THURSDAY. In LOVE'S Distress abounds.
AT the accustomed hour of Assignation, came ALCIRIS to the Vale to meet his
MARIANNE; and true as Fidelity, the Maid his presence waits -- but, ah! his
looks how changed --

-- Wan wore his cheek, and dimly shone his eye through woe -- his lip hung
trembling on the long protracted kiss, and sighs disturbed his Speech. --

-- MARIANNE affrighted, burst into Tears, and in apprehension trembling, sunk
her head upon his Bosom -- so the Narciss when burdened with the shower,
conceals her languid Countenance in dew, and bends her pale face to the Earth
-- they both forbore to speak their sentiments, and silence stood encumbered
with their woe -- at length with smiles forced on the face of grief, as
sunshine shed on rain, ALCIRIS to her anxious ear, the dread silence brake --

-- Let us, dear Maid, from these love-haunted Walks retire with speed, for
even these sweet scenes are treacherous, and tell our intercourse and mutual
vows -- we'll seek the more sequestered walks which skirt the rivers brink; and
there, from all the busy world concealed, I Will tell thee such a Tale, as rocks
alone should witness to, and Mountains shadow with their frowns --

-- through all the winding tracks they haste, with silent steps they pass the
mazes of the Wood, and gain the solemn haunts, where Echo sits lamenting over
the never returning Stream, and repeats with sighs the murmurs of the Water
Nymph, whose lovesick soul forlorn, wastes all its languishment on Faun^
haunting green wood shades -- close b^ the river's brink a sandy plain, left by
the Winter Torrents affords a narrow walk -- the hasty river, hurried over
rocks, with a hoarse voice murmurs -- the Cliffs are high and horrid which ^em
in the river's bounds, on whose black brows Hazels and Thorns with Heckberries
in thickets thronged, protect the precipice, and yield a solemn shade -- the
mossy rocks with trilling streams are wet, and melancholy seems to hold her
moping meditations in their Cells -- there the two Lovers strayed -- and there
ALCIRIS told the sorrowing MARI^IANNE the story of his Misery and ^ears.

Envy's eye has overlooked ou^ walks, and from JENNETTA'S Lips our mutual Love
is in piously traduced -- she in acts of Cruelty has joy and in dissimulations
arts, has he perfections -- my Father is a Man enslaved by AVARICE -- the
sordid habit of his saving mind, have worn awa^ all sentiments, but thoughts of
gainone only Passion is preserved to sa^ the universal wreck of all that that
human in him -- LOVE TO ME -- tha^ love alone holds conflicts with his
Co^vetousness -- for me he quits his estmates of Gold, and I alone stand the
competitor with Riches, in my Father's Judgment -- my Mother yet of weaker
mind, is yet more bigoted, and to the bitter drench adds such suspicions and
such Jealousies, as only want of Judgment, could devise -- to them, JENNETTA
has revealed our meetings and OUR MUTUAL LOVE. --

-- What estimation (interrupts the Maid) bear they of thy MARIANNE? -- what
value do they set upon her Virtues? --

-- He ligh'd -- Alas! with them her Virtues are despised -- her fortune is the
estimate they give into the wretched balance, where far outweigh'd by Lucre,
the light beam is kicked aloft, and gives thy Virtues only to the Skies. --

-- And of thy Love (says she) are they insensible? against thy happiness
obdurate? --

-- My Father puts my filial Duty in Competition with my Love, -- he measures
happiness by Hundreds, and by wealth -- his tenderness is sap'd by treachery,
and JENNETTA has de^poil'd ALCIRIS of a father's Love? --

-- I tremble with the apprehensio^ of my Fate (the Maid replies) -- i^ then
our intercourse forbidden? --

-- Alas! my MARIANNE, (answer^ ALCIRIS dropping a tear) perhaps the night
shall prove our Severance so Years. --

-- The Maid affrighted, on her quivering knees, scarce for a moment was
supported -- down she sunk from her ALCIRIS'S Arm, on the sand her lovely
Visage drooped as she shed a flood of Tears -- ALCIRIS bending on his knee,
relieved the fair one, and sustained her pale cheek on his throbbing Bosom --
grief choked her Words, and deep despair heaved her afflicted heart -- ALCIRIS
in his soul experienced a Woe most exquisite; for the idea of the hated ANNA,
present to his mind, was undiscovered to his MARIANNE: in his heart the
conflict betwixt LOVE AND DUTY waged, and stirred up wild confusion in his Brain.

-- Alas! she cries, What is the Wretchedness that shall beset my Orphan steps?
-- I had already given to my soul, consolotary hopes, sustaining them on thee.
--

-- How heavy are the troubles o^ my Mind (replied ALCIRIS) -- Amids^ this
scene of FILIAL DUTY, enforced by all that is religious in my Principles, by
Gratitude, by early bred Affection, what measures can ALCIRIS move in? --

-- SUSTAIN THY VIRTUE (interrupted MARIANNE) though I am yielded to a desolate
Estate -- for even MARIANNE could look upon ALCIRIS with disdain, if passion
should divest him of his Duty, and take away his principles of Honor -- amidst
the sorrows of Life, I could adore thee, beaming with thy RECTITUDE OF MANNERS
-- but in thy Errors, even thy beloved bosom, could not sooth my Condemnations
and my Grief, for thy misconduct -- No! I love ALCIRIS with such purity of
passion, that severed from thee, by propriety of Duty, I could love thee, for
ever -- but given to thee by thy DISOBEDIENCE, my approbation, ravished by the
Thief that stole thy Honor, would leave the fruits o^ Love, blighted and
despoiled. --

-- Whilst thus thou would persuade me (says: ALCIRIS) to forsake thee, thou
bind'st the Fetters with a Adamantine Rivet; and makes my Admiration gather
Strength from excellencies which Adversity has give Existence to -- No;
MARIANNE, I will not leave thee! --

-- And will thou leave thy Duty -- (she replies) thou, who tastes religious
Sense of filial Virtues -- the Duty of a Child is an implicit Obedience to a
parents will -- by birth our Sovereigns, we by birth their Subject unto Death
-- next to the Deity we owe existence to them; and for their tender Care,
parental assiduity and Love, over our Infant state, what Compensation can our
Gratitude and Duty make? -- what are the Sorrows which a Sire sustains, in the
unnatural wand'rings of his Child, from his Commands? which, by the Laws of
Nature, and of God, are Ordonances not to be eluded or opposed. -- I cannot
feel the Sorrows -- all my thoughts are not so powerful as to collect sad
Images enough to give Imagination half their horrors -- often amongst inferior
Animals; I have viewed with tears, an Image of this sad Estate; and often as I
observed it, cried aloud, wi^ then must be the Parents Lot, wh^ sees her human
race undutiful? --

-- Give me thy sentiments (says h^ in all their Energy, thy Images in a their
force; that even against the Strength, I yet may strengthen my determined
Choice. --

With a sigh she thus delivered her f^ Simile. -- Often I perceived the Pare^
Hen, lead forth her infant brood Ducklings, nourished by her assidui^ and Care;
and as she called her wa^ ward flock, with wondering Eye s^ stood and gazed
upon the negroe race; expressing, in her looks, maternal disappointment and
distress, that she should foster such a monstrous tribe, who showed their
disobedience in their earliest age -- and when in bold defiance of her Voice,
they hastened to the neighboring Pools and Ponds; with plumes disordered, and
with drooping Wings bemired, in strange distraction round she ran, and called
to them aloud, and wail'd the dangers which their wilful Natures tempted --
then on some eminence she stood, the Image of Despair, and saw them lave the
Stream: with head projected, hanging Pinions quivering with Agony of mind,
feathers with fright erect, and Eye enflamed in Wrath, she breathed out her
Condemnations -- the direfu^ semblance of a despairing Parent, who in broken
heartedness beholds a sinfu^ race of disobedient Children, unnatura^ in their
Crimes. --

-- ALCIRIS thus replied -- From your Examples I new Arguments derive to aid my
fixed resolves -- I own the Image striking -- but reflect tha^ this maternal
bird, was giving Law^ unnatural to her brood, and from he^ own improper
Judgment, she derived her own distress -- so Nature has no^ given to mankind
Authority to chain the marriage Choice -- it is Nature's Work, from Sympathy
derived -- an influence which Nature throws through all existence; an
involuntary impulse, an attraction irresistible -- but further in thy Images I
read, that Children may possess superior powers, and excellences unknown unto
their Parents -- for the Ducks enjoyed amphibious Nature; Earth or Water were
alike to them, the Elements for their Existence -- and what is duty when it
should restrain the bounteous Gifts of Providence? and what is disobedience,
when it is the exercise of Powers by Parents unexperienced, of which their
Judg^ment is not competent from want o^ knowledge and from Ignorance, tasting
despair? --

-- What does ALCIRIS mean? (crie^ she) -- amidst the purest Love, I tremble at
the very sentiments which flatter my flame. --

-- And is my MARIANNE so very cool (ALCIRIS interrupted with a sigh^ -- Can my
deluded heart have bee^ mistaken in its views of happiness? o^ was my Passion
blinded by its energy so that it could not decern, that cold indifference had
possession of thy Hear^ -- nay, start not MARIANNE, yet I will not doubt thy
Love -- my soul is full of Confidence, though full of grief: yesterday my cruel
parents laid injunctions on their Son, to quit thy Arms for ever. --

The Maid affrighted, started from his side --

-- To quit my MARIANNE, and by the Wealth of ANNA to increase my Father's
Avarice, from bands unhallowed, and a hateful Marriage. --

With extended hands -- with trembling knees -- with Countenance of Beauty in
distraction, stood the Fair one, growing into Madness. --

-- Ye cruel stars, she cries, y^ fates presiding on the hour of my N^tivity;
you marked me out for Wretc^edness and Woe -- robbed of my Father in my infancy
-- portion'd with little more than stern necessity, ye bligh^ed me, even in the
bud of Life; a^ marked my years with Sorrow, a^ progressive Miseries. --

-- ALCIRIS full of pity, full of Lov^ with open Arms rushed upon the Mai^ and
clasped her to his Bosom. --

-- No, my MARIANNE, I still w^ save thee, still will be thy Shepher^ and
protect my Orphan from a^ wretchedness to come: thy ALCIR^ will support, all
that is laudable in Duty -- for though I marry not my MARIANNE, yet to these Arms
shall ANNA never come -- perhaps relenting rigor may consent to give me back
my happiness and thee -- perhaps elapting time may touch their hearts -- but
time and stern command, obduracy of power, and will grown obstinate, shall
never change my Love, shall never fever me from this fidelity, shall never
shake my Vows -- for as the God who gave us mutual Love, first formed our
sympathetic Hearts, conformed our Natures passions, Dispositions and
Affections, he will delight in Vows born of the feelings which he has i^
spir'd; and Angels will record the^ in the book of Approbation -- in t^
tremendous presence, Lord, I swea^ that only death shall sever us. --

-- As on his knee, he breathed t^ Vow; she on her knee repeated, the only
Death should sever them. --

-- Sinking into each other's Arm^ they wept aloud. --

-- Amidst their Wretchedness, b^ hold JANNETTA lurking in the rock^ impatient
of the scene, discovered her malicious Countenance -- ALCIRIS met he frowns
with steadiness; but MARIANNE like SORROW, struck with sudden terror, good the
Statue of DISCONSOLATION. --

Invectives teinted each expression of JENNETTA'S lips -- she with ALCIRIS
moved toward OLD CYMON'S COPSE, whilst MARIANNE stood fixed in silent Misery.
--

At EMMA'S COTTAGE sat the gay OLISSUS, and watched the slow return of MARIANNE
-- with EMMA, thus conver^ing --

-- Long I had felt this passion for your Daughter -- the flame defied
resistance -- as I strove to conquer Love, his conquest still improved --
defiance was impossible -- I found myself a Slave to Beauty -- to you I
supplicate -- you^ mediation is my Hope -- without her^ am wretched. --

-- Consider, Sir, (Sage EMMA cried,) the vast disparity between your Fortunes
-- the World with Men of wealth is to be served; and approbation from Mankind,
is half a rich Man's happiness -- the World despises VIRTUE, in the garb of
POVERTY -- the world would scoff at improprieties in Wedlock, such as these --
and what was due to great OLISSUS'S wife, would become ridicule for MARIANNE --
such marriage, Sir, would bring upon you Scorn from equals, and from inferiors
strange impertinence and Laughter -- FELICITY is born of tranquil Parents,
VIRTUE and CONSCIOUS RECTITUDE OF MATTERS -- but POMP AND FASHION, VANITY AND
CUSTOM, are the MAIDS who trim the modern nuptial Couch, and strew the Pillows
with the poisons of the World -- LOVE may unloose the wedding Girdle; but after
him comes stale SATIETY; and if his steps stray unsupported by the GRACES, the
scene of WEDLOCK is a scene of WOE. --

-- "Wherefore so much of WEDLOCK?" -- (he interrupts)

-- So much of Wedlock, (Sir, cries she) good Heaven forbid, that yo^ could
think of MARIANNE, on an^ other Terms! -- do you reproach u^ with our poverty,
and think that wan^ of wealth, brings with it want of Honor? -- do you
conceive that in thi^ state forlorn, in which a Mother^ gifts have only been
her admonition^ and her tenderness, that MARIANN^ amidst her poverty, has not
endow'^ her Soul with RICHES, far above the rust of this vain World; and
treasure up a portion in the Heavens, a wealt^ of VIRTUE AND RELIGION. --

-- Stay EMMA, stay, (he eagerl^ replies) brand me not with a thought that I
could wish her Infamy, or dared project her ruin -- but yet your picturing of
married Life, brought back upon me all the Arguments, which I had conquered,
and over which I triumphed -- all that was wanting to confirm my resolution,
was the history of, who and what you are? -- my Love and honorable principles
excuse this promptitude, which, in an other matter, might bear the likeness of
impertinence. --

-- The History of what we are (says EMMA, casting her Eyes to Heaven in memory
of him departed) is dolorous to recollection -- the scenes which this inquiry
must revive, are miseries to (...) renewed upon my sorrowing Soul -- b^ what we
were, still worse -- Through poverty I hid my MARIANNE, in the sequestered Dale,
far from her nativ^ Land; and with her, hid her Nam^ -- her Ancestors were Men
of Wealth her father was by fate decreed to b^ unfortunate. --

-- Whence was the fair one brough^ (cried OLISSUS) and what her name -- my
Love's impatiency brooks no d^lay -- I long to ravish the wished for history,
and prove her birth is not b^neath her Fortune, which I offer f^ her Love.

-- In SURRY the Maid was born (replied the Matron -- her Ancestors. Demesnes
were large -- her Father's family of great Antiquity, and in the walks of
Honor their Achievements had acquired them an immortal fame -- her Father was
a Soldier -- a gallant Man, who, full of Valor, full of Wounds, descended to
the Grave, marked only by ADVERSITY. --

-- OLISSUS seemed to feel the History, a sensibility was visible upon him,
more than the common incidents could move; as if touched by recollection of
some ^earer subject -- silent, and in himself absolved he sat; and as he
meditated, Tear^ stood in his Eye. --

EMMA ceased her Story for some moments, e're OLISSUS roused attention t^
entreat her to proceed. --

-- My MARIANNE'S name is RAILTON. --

-- Startled at the Voice, as if an Angel called OLISSUS from the Clouds, h^
arose up in haste -- her name is RAILTON (interrupting) -- Oh! Heavens, what is
it ye decree for your OLISSUS? -- but pardon me, kind EMMA, I blush for my
extravagance -- the name is no^ uncommon -- I had yielded my Mind to Images and
wild Ideas, which wound me up to phrenzy -- I know a multitude of Families of
the like name -- Love is extravagant, and dreams of miracles -- I had
imprudently given way to strange infatuations; and conceived that MARIANNE, was
of a Race of RAILTON'S, which put a total bar to all my hopes, and bid my Love
despair -- a race with whom I could not intermarry. --

(E) -- A SURRY family was that? --


(O) -- Of Surry, EMMA. --


(E) -- Alas, my MARIANNE! -- her father was a Soldier. --

(O) -- A Circumstance not quite so fortunate. --


(E) -- His name AMINTOR. --


(O) -- Astonishment still grows upon me -- where it will end, the Eye of
Providence alone foresees. --


(E) -- I was the daughter of an honest Merchant. --


(O) -- A melancholy confirmation of my dread. --


(E) -- AMINTOR'S Father in King Charles's reign, being an unfortunate
Partizan, his great possessions were despoiled and wasted: and with a numerous
family -- alas! -- AMINTOR fell. --


(O) -- Oh! EMMA -- Oh! my heart -- truth beams in every sentence, and I am
ravished from my MARIANNE by interfering fate. --


Poor EMMA of her hopes bereft was drowned in Tears -- immovable, OLISSUS
stood with folded Arms, revolving over the Tale in Sighs. --

Thus OLISSUS addressed the wondering Matron.

-- Oh! gracious Matron, I revere thy VIRTUES, and I feel thy Griefs! feel them
as mine -- my friendship you command -- and though the Will of Heaven is such,
as robs my Bed of MARIANNE; yet Heaven ordains that I relieve her Sorrows. --

-- Despond not EMMA; for before it is long, I Will bring to thee a Comforter;
whose saving hand, shall snatc^ fair MARIANNE from Poverty an^ Care: Shall set
her Virtues forth, t^ beam in Life conspicuous, and show he^ Honors to the
wondering World. --

OLISSUS with the Voice of Consolation, soothed poor EMMA'S soul.

FRIDAY. In TEARS consumes the DAY.
THE MORNING lingered in the Gloom -- the heavy Sky rent with the rough Winds
raked the Mountains ^row -- the Clouds dragged their ragged Skirts along the
dark Heath -- mirkey ^ain beat up the Vale -- daybreak was ^id behind the
driving Vapors -- when the Sun surmounted the dull Horizon, from his enflamed
Countenance, the Clouds were lined with Crimson -- up t^ vault of Heaven, far
stretching bea^ of light in scarlet Streaks burst throu^ the broken Curtains of
the Morn, a^ shed upon the ruffled Atmosphere angry glow, like Etna's Flames
refra^ted on Sicilian Skies at Midnight -- t^ dreary day advanced drenched in
heav^ showers, and distant thunders, told the the Elements in Conflict, waged
t^ Battle, weaponed with fire -- the Gloo^ involved Old EMMA'S COTT, where
pe^sive MARIANNE, with wringing han^ and sad despondency, sat sighing over h^
hapless Love, and her precarious Fo^tunes -- the mistick promises OLISS^ gave,
bewildered Hope, and all her Hearts ambition stood in Wishes, that ^alth was
here is to gain her loved AL^IRIS -- Often as she sat, she gave the ^ings of Hope
to Fancy, and conceived ^at some rich Chance was in the hand of Heaven decreed
for her -- with beating heart and expanded breast, she fancied herself already
bearing tidings of such her happy fortune to ALCIRIS; and fond Imagination
pictured his surprise, his wonder and his raptures: whilst love exulting in her
bosom, in acts of such benevolence, gave her extacy -- but soon the bubble,
painted with its sunshine beauties burst, and gave her back to Tears renewed,
and conscio^ness of her Calamities --

-- the dark day, to the misera^ Mind, increased its gloomy Images the Spinning
Wheel on which OLD E^MA toiled, with melancholy hum, soun^ed Eligiac Notes --
the Cricket chirp^ upon the Hearth -- the disconcerted Ca^ with mewing sung the
Song of restl^ness -- the Wind through Crannies mourn^ -- the Rain upon the
Windows stream -- the dripping thatch with heavy drop the Channels filled, and
with incessa^ dashing tired the Ear. -- the mopin^ fowls with watery feathers
crept beneat the Cart -- the harsh voiced Hog lamente^ ^e unremitting Latch
that barred him from the Stye -- the bleating Sheep re^red to rocks and shelves,
the Cattle ought the shed -- all Nature wore a ^loom, as if the hapless Lot of
MARIANNE had moved her to lament. --

-- For at old CYMON'S Copse, Distress ^d taken up her residence, and gave a
^ith to Sorrows, yet unfancy'd by the ^ve-sick Soul of EMMA'S Daughter. --

-- JENNETTA all unfeeling, inhumane, ^ed vengeful, to her parents told the
Scene, to which she had been present; and pictured to their inflamed minds, the
want of duty in ALCIRIS, and his ^edfast Vows.

Enraged IGNORANCE is unremitting for of Ignorance, stern OBSTINACY h^ her
Pedigree -- with Oaths and Impre^tions CYMON vowed ALCIRIS should disinherited,
sent abroad a beggar, a^ never more should see his face, if (...) should look
again on MARIANNE -- the the meagre Mother, like the figure of il^ luck on
trembling legs shaken with pa^sion, with uplifted hands, blasphemin^ God with
most impious Vows, confirmed the dread decree -- whilst o^ JENNETTA'S
Countenance sat hellis^ smiles, as with malicious Eye she view'^ the passions
which stamped ALCIRIS features with despair. --

ALCIRIS overwhelmed with grief, bent down his knee to supplicate for Pity --
but as he kneeled, his agitated heart, as if with tumult overcome, choked his
Expressions with its throws; and from his mouth, and swollen features, flowed
(...) torrent of Blood, such as a bursting heart might be conceived to send
from bleeding Arteries. --

-- A while the Vehemence of Wrath extinguished apprehension, and the unfeeling
Spectators, looked on and laughed; and talked of disappointed Love with
ridicule and Scorn -- but still ALCIRIS bled.

The Spectacle grew serious -- the youth exhausted, fainted -- Affection in the
Father's heart was seized with the alarm, and fear for his ALCIRIS'S safety,
grew upon his softening Soul. --

-- Within some little distance lived the PRIEST, whose benevolent mind had
bent its studies, on the Art of Surgery, and knew the physic of some salutary
Simples; which, to the Cottagers with religious Love, he was known assiduously
to minister -- to him affrighted CYMON sent for Aid. --

In holy ANTHONY a thousand Virtue dwelt -- Old Age had grown upon hi^ Steps,
within his little Chapelry; for VIRTUE was his only friend: all his
excellencies could not purchase his promotion -- with acts of Benevolence his
days were filled -- with Love and Honor were his days enriched. -- In holy
office from his Piety he was revered; and as exemplary was his Life, so was his
life inestimable to his Parishioners -- with him they prayed with fervor; and
when he preached, his Doctrine was believed, and Admonitions praised, though
sometimes past unprosecuted -- his scanty income scarce sustained him with the
hand of Comfort; and yet for Charity he had a multitude of Gifts -- he visited
the Sick, their Spirit's Doctor, and their Malady's Physician: and often was he
seen to cloth NECESSITY with his ow^ Coat, and with unshod feet return from
the Steps of Misery relieved -- such wa^ the godly ANTHONY. --

He came -- he took the tremblin^ hand of languishing ALCIRIS -- he aske^ his
Pain -- he touched the throbbin^ Artery -- he sunk his head, and sighed.

JENNETTA hardened with malevolenc^ and unsusceptable of Love, esteemed h^
Brother's Malady was all Hypocrisy; a^ artful guise, to cheat his parents in
false Compassion, and to procure the purpose to relent -- but when the Ho^
Father, from a slow and solemn Voi^ declared a raging Fever had beset ALCIRIS'S
frame, the Cottagers stood mute, as Images upon the cloistered Walls, a-down
whose stoney faces cold Sweats trill. --

Then ANTHONY ever he prescribed his Medicines, required the circumstances
which brought on the Malady -- ALCIRIS to his questions, replied with Sighs and
Tears, with Sobbings from his sickening heart --

-- the melancholy narrative, from confusion and prevarication given, gave
ANTHONY an apprehension that of disappointed Love, all his disease was born --
he bent him over ALCIRIS bed, and gained the Secret from his sorrowing Lips. --

-- Thus the good Man to weeping CYMON spoke. --

-- Unhappy CYMON, all thy day have been a toil for Gain; and wha^ has all thy
Industry procured; a mas^ of moldy Ore, and with it a dying Son -- thy Avarice
has filled thy Soul with Poison, and thou has be come inhuman -- a Parent
without Pity for his Child, a Parent for his wealt^ forsaking Nature and become
a Savage -- often I Have heard thee say, that all thy hopes on Earth were centered
in thy Son's felicity; and all thy Joys were wrapped up in the Lad's well-doing
-- but thy mistaken Judgment rested all its Estimates on Wealth -- WEALTH,
TITLES, HONORS, give not happiness; for Happiness depends upon the Mind --
AMBITION is the rankest Weed that springs within the Field of human Life: as
Nightshade noxious -- AMBITIONS wishes are insatiable; they overlook what is in
possession, and give a ten-fold Estimate on things pursued: -- FELICITY is
fostered by CONTENT, prescribed by narrow bounds, restrained within the Fence
of PRUDENCE, and sustained by WISDOM -- the Value of all earthly Riches in
their Use -- your Son had placed his View of Happiness on other Objects than on
Opulence; his soul was readily resigned to MODERATION in this World's wealth*
his heart was fixed upon a Maid, whose Education has endowed her Mind, with
knowledge, Prudence, and Propriety -- whose VIRTUES are a luster to her Sex. --

-- Old CYMON gazed on ELLEN. --

-- Whose form is beautiful -- whose manners are simple as rural Life, yet full
of Elegance -- descended of a Family of Honor. --

-- JENNETTA sat impatiently. --

-- Unfortunate it is true; but though unfortunate, she is humble and resigned --
Of her the Sex may form their models for procuring Praise -- Of her the Sex may
make their imitations honorable. --

MALICE lighted up an ugly sneer, which stood awry on JENNET'S looks. --

-- With her, ALCIRIS saw that Happiness depended on the social Joys of
domestic Harmony -- a Friend, -- a Councellor -- a Comforter and Wife, blended
by Love, united in one Person -- Happiness has few demands for earthly riches;
for Necessity is all that craves their sustenance -- Hard-hearte^ Man --
Obdurate ELLEN -- unmedia^ing JENNET -- could not thy female So^ touched with a
Sister's Love, plea^ for thy Brother's life? for life w^ in it -- could not thy
phrase be shap^ by pity into Mediation; to soften b^ thy prayers, thy wrathful
parents* could thou not feal a sympathy (...) Lovers, to sooth the sorrows of
the fearful thoughts; and interpose b^tween thy unapproving SIRE, and (...)
ALCIRIS? --

The Youth made efforts to express I Woes -- the Priest attentive caught t^
fault'ring accents. --

-- Alas! JENNETTA wrought my misery -- traduced my MARIANNE -- embittered the
wrath of my Parents, and gave to Avarice the dreads of dissipation -- my Father
laid injunctions on his Son -- to MARIANNE I bid adieu -- my heart was here is,
and with the stream of life my passion flowed; and as they flowed united -- I
find the hand of Death arrests me -- but I die in Duty. --

The conscious Wretch sat crouching on the Hearth, confounding her deformities,
her bosom heaved a sigh, born from disappointment, not compunction: for she had
vowed that ANNA should e^pouse ALCIRIS. --

CYMON was touched with Pity -- E^LEN wept aloud.

ALCIRIS faintly cries, My paren^ tears afflict my fainting Soul, for from
their obstinate resolves, Fate wres^ their Son -- Tears born of conscio^ errors
-- Errors which Conscience wi^ perpetuate, and when the green gra^ shall have
hid my Grave, the sad existing Image of ALCIRIS, shall li^ upon their Memory:
and Memo^ shall tell them, that their Cruelty sle^ me for AVARICE; whilst time
shall on the records of the World, inscribe the Tale of my Obedience, together
with my Fate. --

CYMON drew near the bed and wept. --

-- Hapless Old Man, thou shall behold the detestation which the God of Mercies
bears, to idolized wealth -- the Cares of Covetousness shall be confounded --
thou have hoarded for thy Son, and death shall bring confusion to thy Wisdom,
and disappointments to thy Wish -- for thy ALCIRIS goes hence, where Gold
shall lose its Estimates, and where the Moth shall not have power upon the
Wardrobe of Felicity. --

CYMON took ALCIRIS'S hand which burnt with fever, pressed it with a kiss and
bent upon it with a Groan. --

-- Is there, cries he, no hope? -- Is death so hasty? -- Can we not ease thy
sorrows and relieve thy pains? -- Has my ALCIRIS any wish, his father can
indulge? -- Shall my dear Son depart, and from his dying lips breath
condemnation on his miserable Parent? -- Oh! hapless fate of AVARICE -- men
hoard up wealth, but know not who the will of Heaven appoints Inheriters -- I
saved for happiness to thee, and purchased thy Sorrow -- Fate gives the gains
to JENNET -- and fate has marked her as a Monument to reprimand Man's impious
and erroneous purposes -- with thee, my Son, the name of WRIGHTSON, which I
would perpetuate and enrich, is lost for ever. --

The view of riches to JENNETTA'S mind gave Consolation for a Brother's death.
--

-- If you would bless ALCIRIS'S parting Soul, (cries he with a fault'ring
voice), let me once more behold my MARIANNE, my fainting Eyes would gladden at
the View. --

-- Shall MARIANNE approach these doors JENNETTA interrupted; she wh^ has
wrought our Misery and Tears -- she who has robbed my Parents of their
happiness -- she who has lured ALCIRIS'S soul from his Obedience, and
fascinating with her hellish Charms, has given her beauty triumph in his Woes
-- she has the powers of Witchcraft, and conceals her vices and her infamy
with Wiles -- If MARIANNE is here, JENNETTA must depart. --

-- Cruel JENNETTA, with a voice almost extinct (ALCIRIS says) will not my
Death be Sacrifice enough to your inveteracy; but you would send my Soul into
Eternity, without one earthly consolation to calm the hour of Death? --

The PRIEST with sorrow and surprise, ^ook as he gazed upon the Woman, and cold
sweat stood upon his brow from Detestation and abhorrence. --

CYMON supporting ELLEN on his Arm, food trembling, like withered leaves, moved
by November's blasts.

-- It Is all an Artifice, JENNETTA, quick replies -- it is all a plot to terrify
my father from his purposes, and working on his passions and his Love, with
fictious Malady and feigned distress; to gain his MARIANNE -- to gain from his
relenting Parents their consent, that his infatuations and hi^ feelings,
inordinate and wild, man gain their Gratification -- impossibl^ that such a
thing as Love, could wor^ such tumults in the human frame pervert the reason of
the Mind, betray the principles from honor an^ Obedience; and full of vehemen^
like Madness bound in Chains, brin^ on Extravagance of Passion, burstin^
blood vessels, and destroying all the frames economy with fever and
di^traction -- this must be Witchcraf^ -- EMMA old in Sin, and with t^ Devil
holding her Commune, ha^ power upon the Man -- sure they sustain them by their
Sorcery -- their Poverty is wretched -- and Witches we have heard, have filled
despighted Infants full of Pins -- have given the malice marked Maid to
languish -- the Youth to rave -- the Herds in murrain slain -- the Flocks with
rottenness -- the Winds have rent the roofs of Cottages, and let in torturing
Sprights -- the Rivulets have shrieked, and flowed with sheets of flame: and
mischief has prevailed against the Peasants prayers -- Specter have set the
Shepherds hair upright, and rattling Pewter and disturbed Chains, have terrified
the Villagers for many Night. --

ALCIRIS lifting up his trembling ha^ and tear-fill'd Eye, sent up his though^
to Heaven, breathed on a Sigh.

Alarmed with JENNETTA'S talk, o^ ELLEN gaped with fright, and Ign^rance glared
in her open Eye -- CYMO^ disapproving of her cruel talk, turn his face away.
--

The pious ANTHONY could not endu^ the slanderous Tale; but interruptin^
JENNET, thus rebuked her. --

If JENNET know not what is Love, she ought not to condemn that which she
cannot judge of -- sure though her form was molden in the hands of sad mischance,
and Nature with such Nagligence, had her existence given; I should have thought
the Organs of her sense, might have afforded passage to her soul, for feelings
such as human Creatures have in common -- but as in outward form distorted, so
in her inward make, her soul is occupied in Organs as deformed, denying an
Existence to the heartfelt sympathizings of Humanity, to tender-eyed
Compassion, to Charity of open Soul, to sisterly Affection -- for to an Enemy
none but Savages deny the Consolations craved by dying Men -- to support her
cruelty she trespasses upon the dark credulity of her infatuate Parents with
untruths: and to instigate their Minds to hatred does traduce the fairest
Characters with foule^ Crimes -- if there is Witchcraft in superior VIRTUES?
EMMA owns the Charge -- if there is Sorcery in WISDOM? if there is Sin in
PRUDENCE? i^ there are Crimes in PATIENCE, and i^ RESIGNATION? EMMA is guilty
-- a^ way JENNETTA with such Sins as these -- the Eye of Heaven is on thee --
the brother's Soul is now required of him; and his Condemnations will ever
long, touch sorrowing Seraphs and the Ear of Judgment -- tremble JENNETTA for
the wrath to come. --

JENNETTA'S Countenance was red with Wrath; and nothing but the sacred
character of ANTHONY secured him from her Violence. --

-- AVARICE is blind as MALICE. JENNETTA says, that MARIANNE is poor -- true,
she in Infancy had tasted of Adversity's embittered Cup -- but God regards the
virtuous -- the ways of Providence are to the human Mind unsearchable: and in
Heaven's good time, its wondrous works are brought to pass -- for hitherto the
name of EMMA, her family and fortunes were unknown -- discoveries fair dawn
appears, and opens out prosperities bright day to MARIANNE -- for she perhaps,
before this hour is passed, will be as superior to CYMON'S son, in wealth; as
CYMON'S Son was estimated to exceed poor EMMA'S daughter. --

Amazement gathered on the face of CYMON, and ELLEN'S bowels yearn'd. --

-- For ever I heard of your ALCIRIS'S woe, OLISSUS, Lord of these Demesnes,
was with me in my Churchyard walking through the Yews.

JENNETTA with a sneer exclaims, and she will wed OLISSUS. --

-- Pray restrain thy envy JENNET, (says the Priest) OLISSUS loves the Maid;
but in her history he has acquired some secret which prevent his Wish for
Wedlock. --

-- "Her Vices" (JENNET cries.) --

Deep sighed ALCIRIS, uneasy turned ^n on his bed, and wept. CYMON im^tient of
the Tale, presaged a wealthy Wife would save ALCIRIS. --

Good ANTHONY, though armed wit^ patience and the Christian Virtues, exclaims, --
Thou Serpent get thee fort -- thy hiss has poison in it for the Soul -- no
CYMON, no ALCIRIS, fai^ MARIANNE has not a stain upon he^ PRUDENCE, or a shade
to cast upon her VIRTUE -- OLISSUS is a Man discreet, and with precaution makes
resolves -- he whispered to me, no on^ knows this Maid, but I -- and to reveal
a secret to her Ear of such importance, calls upon the incest Judgment and the
greatest Care -- I know her family -- I know her fortunes -- hear she loves a
Swain of low estate; and I will make them wealthy. --

As if an Oracle had touched the Ear of some ambitious Devotee, and with the
fall of Empires, flattered his desire, ^tood CYMON stooping on his half-bent
knees, extending both his Arms, and gaping with impatiency of Joy. --

ALCIRIS with a groan replies, It cannot be -- for Death will sever us -- I
feel his cold hand freezes on my nerves; rapid Tides of ruin flood upon my
broken heart -- and Fate advances my inevitable doom. --

-- JENNETTA left the room. --

-- ELLEN in lamentations loud affect Love, but felt alone the fear, of losi^
so much wealth with her ALCIRIS.

-- Whether my MARIANNE be po^ or rich, my love for her with my li^ blood lives
-- my love for her will only die with me -- Oh! Father, in Compassion to my
Woes, let me on MARIANNE but fix my dying Eyes, smile shall mock the frowns of
fate; and t^ the Throne of Grace, from my exp^ring breath I Will send to Heaven a
praye^ for CONSOLATION, and the pardon o^ your God, to bless your latest hour.

CYMON endured a strange conflict in his Mind, touched at once with Love for
his ALCIRIS, and the desire of rich OLISSUS's gifts -- his stubborn heart
re^ented. --

The pious ANTHONY assumes the solemn duty, and seeks the COTT OF EMMA, to
escort the weeping MARIANNE.

SATURDAY. Is full of the Catastrophe.
THE morning wakes the pious ANTHONY -- he walks to EMMA's COT, and calls the
mourning MARIANNE abroad -- with gentle converse he at first insinuates to her
mind an apprehension of the sickness of ALCIRIS, and with gradual cautions
tells the import of his Visit -- she heard his Tale with tears, and hasted to
behold her well-loved Swain.

As they pass on, thus she entertained the Priest -- Here by this Elm I often
sat, to taste Tranquillity, and think of that Peace which I enjoyed, before
ever Love had moved my youthful heart, or wishes of ambitious tendency, to
bless my Lover, stole upon my Mind: possessed of all necessity required, I knew
CONTENT -- but with my wretchedness I will not wound your Mind --

-- this Elm reminds me of the Pain I suffered, through my Compassion for a
little Wren -- and little as the Object was, it caused me, with a thousand
tears, to think of my dear Mother; and to feel the supposition, that the Case
might once be here is. --

-- Within a little Cell, a Wren had built her nest; as every day I sat within
her Eye, she grew familiar, as she grew assured, I was no foe -- for every day
I scattered Crumbs to feed the little pair -- with pleasure I beheld their
mutual Care and Assiduity, whilst they constructed all their pretty nest, and
formed the safe repository of the Eggs with which she teemed -- I often viewed
his tenderness and Love, how he would play gay anticks on the bough, and chirm
his wild Notes, to divert his incubating Mate -- how he would peck the insect
from the leaf, and with exulting Pinions bear the dainty to his Hen; over whose
repast he sat with fluttering feathers, as if he tasted transport in her
Appetite indulged -- this daily pleasure I possessed: but after all, as if the
joys of human Minds were pre-ordain'd to be dashed out, by disappointment's
hand; as I was sitting there, a fullen Hawk with savage Eye decerned the Wren,
and stooping, struck him with his cruel Tallons -- the Hen perceived the blow
and screaming, left her nest -- distra^tion throb'd within her little brea^ her
Eye-ball rolled with frantic Wrat^ and disappointed Love; and ever feather
ruffled, stood upright, as s^ beheld her dying Bird, and mourn^ her widowed
Lot. --

"Affecting was the Circumstance." --

-- It was distressful to me -- wept and watched the Wren, and sa^ her to her
Nest retire, disconsolate a^ sick with Woe -- amidst the misery (...)
Widowhood, she brooded over h^ young yet unbrought forth; and f^ of hunger and
despondency, she st^ fulfilled the duties of her Nature, and hatched the little
Creatures -- tedious seemed her duty; for, on her nest, she laid with hanging
looks of wretched thought, and hopeless meditation -- five little Wretches
filled the tenement -- Wretches I call them, for their misfortunes had
existence ever they had birth -- their Father was no more! --

-- Oh! MARIANNE, your tender Images at once delight and torture -- (interrupts
the Holy Man) the picture is so striking, that my Mind transports its sad Ideas
to another Scene. --

-- A parent Wren, (says she) can, give but small protection to his progeny --
but Wrens have their proportion to their Enemies; and Man can nothing boast
superior; for the wrath of Fortune, the enmity of an inveterate World, will
ever be superior to the bravest Father of the human race.

-- "A melancholy truth." --

-- Five little Wretches filled the Nest -- the Mother, in her tenderness and
Care, absorbed the Sorrows of he^ Widowhood, and tasted hopes for he^ small
progeny -- I saw her passage to an^ fro in quest of food -- I heard their Call^
and her Reply, and saw her swift retur^ when ever their Voice expressed
Calamity -- and when she brought the diet, over her brood with lapsing
quivering Wing she hung, expressing the soft feelings of her Maternal Heart. --

-- The birds were almost fledged and fit for flight -- the Mother's assiduity
was ripe for a reward, and often had she thought of leading forth her
infant-train to Woods and Fountains, and the World of Liberty and Joy -- when
from yonder Village spoiling Boys, in cruel pastime ranged the fields, in quest
of hapless tenants of the Spray -- they came -- they ravaged all the labors of
my Wren -- despoiled her Nest, and took the young ones forth. -- In human minds
what early strain of Cruelty appears! -- Strang^ disposition in the heart of
Man! uncultivated and unpruned by Learning thou would give the human race t^
Forests and to Dens, as barbarous an^ savage as the Tiger. --

-- But of the Mother Wren -- with food encumbred, home she cam^ exulting in
the labors of her flight -- she found her Nest despoiled, and rui^ marked the
havoc made by sacriligious hands, in the destruction of Widow's house --
distracted she sun^ down, and in the dust expired.

The good Man gazed on MARIANNE with Eyes brim-full of tears -- and MARIANNE
looked languishing and pale! --

-- Such is my Mother's fate, for Cruelty has laid her Iron grasp upon my Life
-- I loved ALCIRIS with the purest Passion, and Happiness was in our View --
but CYMON, of unfeeling Soul, of Nature like the Clod he tills, he tasting only
Avarice, will slay us both. --

-- Not so fair MARIANNE, (replied ANTONIE) for fortune dawns upon thee, and
OLISSUS once a Lover, now thy friend, will give thee such a portion, as shall
overshadow OLD CYMON's rankest boddings of Ambition. --

-- Happy the hour which gave OLISSUS to the World (she cried) -- bu^ what is
wealth to me, if my ALCIRIS dies -- it is but dust to sprinkle on our Tombs. --

The holy Man was smitten with he^ Talk, for he was fearful of the young man's
fate -- he dared not weep, least his affliction should touch her troubled
Spirit with increase of Woe -- he smothered in his breast the secret Sigh. --

They reached the the House of CYMON. --

The pious ANTHONY conducted the sorrowing fair One to the sick Man's bed --
he bowed -- he dropped a Tear, and quitted the room -- the Parents now with true
compunction stung, beheld the danger of their Child, and were smitten with
freezing Terror and incessant grief -- Self-condemnation galled their aching
hearts, and many a fruitless Prayer they breathed to angry Stars, for pardon of
their sad Obduracy and sinful Avarice -- unable to sustain the wretched scene,
they both withdrew -- JENNETTA only staid -- and that no Vow, no Voice, might
from her wicked Ear escape, fast at the sick Man's back she laid, to cut off
all the tenderness which true Love's delicacy, hates should bear another's Eye.
--

Fair MARIANNE sat on her Knees close by the sick Man's bed, and in her hands
clasping his hand, she prayed -- her Voice was heard by Cherubims; her virtuous
Prayer was wafted up to Heaven, where Angels with a Tear repeated -- SPARE HIM
GOOD LORD! --

-- With ghastly smiles the Youth's diffigured Countenance was set -- the
clotted blood hung in his hair -- deep in their sockets sunk his languid Eyes
-- his lips were scorching hot -- his nostrils parched, and in a tumult beat
the blood on every Artery -- the Image which she often had gazed on with delight,
how wretchedly transformed -- her looks fixed on his looks -- with tears to
tears -- with sighs to sighs they mourned their Fate in Silence. --

JENNETTA like a Demon lurked behind, and felt no impulse but inveteracy. --

ALCIRIS with a languid Voice breathed out "MY MARIANNE:" and MARIANNE With her
affliction choked, scarce uttered to be heard, "Alas! my dear ALCIRIS," --
dreadful Grief set all her Frame in torture -- aching throbs affected her head
-- her heart was sick -- her limbs were shook in burning Ague. -- Indulge us,
dear JENNETTA, (says ALCIRIS,) and give us but a Moment to ourselves.

-- JENNETTA was not moved --

-- Oh! MARIANNE, breaths out the Swain, often interrupted by his Sighs, thy
faithful Youth has fallen amongst Murderers -- inhuman Wretches, who rejoice
in slaying every Comfort, which the heart can taste on Earth -- Assassins of
the Soul -- Parents and Sister murdering a Son, a Brother -- putting his Soul
upon the rack, and wrenching out of Joint his Spirits sensibility. --

-- Alas! ALCIRIS replies the Maid, think not that the World permits existence
to such Wickedness. -- I bring thee Comfort -- all the bar to our felicity is
taken from us -- to satiate thy Father's wishes, I come enriched -- to thee I
come endowed with Virtue and the truest Love. --

-- It is too late, cries he -- the Act is perpetrated -- my Death's wound has
its seat within my heart; and Medicine and Hope are Vanities -- I love thee,
MARIANNE; and if an Angel did not tell me false, we soon shall have our
Nuptials in the Tomb -- ou^ Souls they cannot sever -- After Death their
Tyranny cannot prevail against us. --

-- I love ALCIRIS, says MARIANNE with an equal fervor, I die with thee -- I
court the nuptial funeral -- the joy o^ spirits is infinite -- in heaven alone
is Justice -- is Mercy -- is festivity without alloy. --

On the hand of MARIANNE he pressed his burning lips -- the fluttered spirits
overcame her strength -- she fainted. --

-- JENNETTA'S screams alarmed them all without -- they bore the breathless
Maiden forth -- the fresh air in a little time restored her strength -- but
apprehensive that such Agitation would increase ALCIRIS'S Malady; they denied
her re-admittance to the room.

Onward in the way, CYMON attends the mourning MARIANNE on her return -- with
silent steps she quits the Vale of Sorrow. --

-- When left alone the wretched Maiden strayed, in unknown paths, and wandered
in the Woods 'till Night drew on -- the pale Moon from the broken Clouds, by
intermissions gleam'd; and glancing through the trees, with many a shadow
trimmed the solemn Grove, and many a pale shine cast; that to the frighted Eye,
of fanciful dejection, often stood the semblance of sad Specter, and the Ghost
of her ALCIRIS, haunted every Glade -- whilst boding birds shrieked from the
ivy'd Shade, and hooted out misfortunes dire presage. --

During this absence of the Maid, OLISSUS to poor EMMA'S COTTAGE hastened,
impatient to relate his knowledge of her Family. --

Dejected, EMMA sat, and mused upon the melancholy Scene, of which her MARIANNE
was then a Visitor. --

-- Let me salute my Sister, and my Friend, OLISSUS cries -- and fell upon the
astonished EMMA'S neck! --

-- "What means my Lord," the Widow enclasp'd in his Arms, scarce uttered from
the strange profusion of his kisses -- she trembled as he held her to his
bosom. --

-- Thy surprise, dear MATRON, is not yet arrived to its pitch (cries he) --
Good EMMA, look upon me -- in OLISSUS you behold, the brother of AMINTOR. --

-- Tears dimmed the Matron's Eyes; Astonishment was big within her heart. --

-- I was more fortunate than thy beloved Husband. -- I was bred a Merchant --
to foreign Climes in early youth transported, I remained a Stranger to my
father's house for forty years -- when I returned, alas! my Father was no more!
-- his mansion and his lands were possessed by others -- your AMINTOR was dead
-- and I (presumed the last remains of all my Family), Here fixed my residence,
in rural Ease, to take Enjoyment of the Wealth my industry acquired -- the hand
of Providence pointed out dear MARIANNE -- her Innocence and beauty taught me
Love -- her History revealed, despoiled my Marriage Bed, but gave to me a Neice
whom I rejoice to honor.

-- The happy Event overcame the Strength of EMMA, she was ready to expire with
Joy. --

-- OLISSUS saw the strong emotions of her Soul, in her fainting looks, and led
her to the Air. --

-- There is a rumor that your MARIANNE'S enamored of a meritorious Youth,
whose avaritious Father interferes, and stays their Happiness -- I Will send to
CYMON and promote the Match, and with her give a dowry equal to his Wishes. --

-- Alas! my Lord, (replies EMMA) that Youth from disappointed Love lies sick;
and now is visited by MARIANNE. --

-- We'll send him comfort instantly (says he) -- for time in Love forlorn,
amidst the languishing of hopelesness, is often precious beyond Estimation --
we'll hasten MARIANNE's return, nor longer let her lingering fears prevail, but
cheer her Soul with Consolation, and the knowledge of her Fortune. --

OLISSUS scarce had uttered these last words, when breathless, and in haste,
the fair One entered. --

DISTRACTION stood upon her wandering looks, and sported with her smiles --
(...) little Butterfly sat on her hand, to which she held discourse, in
frantic phraze regardless of OLISSUS, and the ^hrieks of her affrighted Mother
-- her Clothes were all disordered, and in her hair were plaited roses mixed
with Ivy leaves. --

-- Struck with the sad disastrous Spectacle, distressed with disappointed
Views of his benevolence, OLISSUS sunk his face toward the Earth, and over his
manly Countenance the bigh tear tumbled. --

-- EMMA fell upon her Couch and hld her face. --

-- See here, cries MARIANNE -- this little fluttering Insect here -- it is a
Butterfly you say -- you see not what it is -- for outward forms deceive us --
Providence has cast deception on the face of every thing -- I thought OLISSUS
was a lover once, but he is unmasked, and stands bereft of his disguise, a very
Man. --

-- Pretty little painted thing -- I know full well of what thou came, and
what thou art -- I saw thee in thy mortal State, a Caterpillar, breathing
breath of animal Existence; and sustaining life with herbs and flowers. --
Mankind, like thee, in this terrestrial State, superior Animals, subsisting on
the vegitation of the Earth, crawl out a life of larger Caterpillars, Reptiles
more noxious. -- And when old Age and full accomplished time had brought thee
to the solemn Period which closes every breathing Being, I beheld thee laid
enshrowded in thy Chrisalis, and given to the Tomb -- then in an other Season
from the realms of Death thou 'rose, dressed in these beauteous plumes, arrayed
in dust of Gold, and winged as the Cherubs with celestial Beauty; Ether thy
Element; thou winged thy way, above the drowsy haunts of thy primeval State --
such, such is Man -- true Emblem of Humanity -- true Emblem of the three
Estates of human Race -- fair Monitor for MARIANNE -- Preceptor, teaching
confidence, of Resurrection -- pointing her to Joys, of whose Attainment she
already stands upon the brink. --

She ceased -- OLISSUS with endearing phraze, attempted to calm her wandering
Senses -- but in vain -- for all was disconcerted -- all was wild and wretched.
--

-- EMMA could not bear to look upon on her miserable Daughter -- OLISSUS burst
into a flood of Tears. --

-- Whilst witnessing her frantic fancies, EMMA with OLISSUS sorrowing sat --
the Solemn Sound of Death-bell, down the Vale, repeatedly knell'd -- the
breezes on their sighing Bosoms bore the fatal Tale -- they touched the
startled Ear of MARIANNE -- forth from the COT she ran, to listen to the Voice
which told the Mortal Tale -- six'd as the Marble which adorns the Monument,
with the pale Effigy of weeping VIRTUE, stood the Maid attentive, motionless,
and sad. --

-- At length she started -- exclaimed. He Is gone! he is gone! ALCIRIS is no
more! --

-- Then down she sunk, upon the dewey Flowers, and yielded up her Soul to
Heaven. --

ONE TOMB received the faithful PAIR, and tells to after times, THEY DIED FOR
LOVE!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 1. line 5. for Plaud read Plan'd. -- 8. last line for Meditation read
Wisdom -- 67. line 11. for interrepts read interrupts -- 99. line 8. for board
read board -- 133. line 1. for fo, read for -- 145. line 6. for elapting read
elapsing -- 152. line 15. for her read the -- 190. line 13. for incest read
nicest.

