FAMILY SECRETS, LITERARY AND DOMESTIC.

BY MR. PRATT.

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

Here Is much to do with LOVE, and more with HATE. SHAKESPEARE. LONDON: PRINTED
FOR T. N. LONGMAN, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1797.

TO MRS. COCKBURNE, OF MADRAS.
IT was the opinion of Mrs. COCKBURNE, that much of the literary matter which
the author had some thoughts of offering to the public, separately, in an
introductory volume, with a delineation of some of the characters, and a design
of the work, might be wrought, with better effect, into the work itself. He
leaves the public to judge how far he is authorized in adopting that opinion.
The accurate and able manner in which this lady, at a very early period of
life, transfused into the English language, as well the profound and abstract,
as gay and elegant, "THOUGHTS" of the celebrated citizen of Geneva Thoughts of
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, translated by Miss Henrietta Colebrooke.
, -- where he "re-echoes, in the character of the Genius and Representative of
human nature, and communicates to his readers that enthusiastic love of nature
and virtue which glowed in his own breast," at the same time that she has
avoided intermixing the eccentricities and errors of what is excellent and
useful in the writings of that exalted genius, -- sufficiently evinces the
sterling value of her observations. The author, therefore, has again ventured
to incorporate part of what he had, indeed, twice before embodied and
withdrawn, from a sincere doubt of his own powers to interweave it with
advantage to the general interests of the book; for therein only can there be
hazard. Of the POSSIBILITY of raising the general character of the English
romance, by the interspersion of subjects of weight and sublimity, either in
science or morals, so as likewise to raise the passions and affections of the
fable, there cannot be a doubt: and it has, indeed, been by several authors
occasionally attempted, and with success to a degree, but with apparent
apprehension. The author of these pages is, therefore, perfectly satisfied that
the IDEA with which Mrs. COCKBURNE has honored him, will receive the
unequivocal suffrage of the professional critics, to whom his attempt to
realise it is submitted: and could he have a moment's apprehension of that IDEA
meeting disapprobation, he would certainly not have subjected her to any part
of the censure he may incur from his own failure in the management of it.

But the obligation which the author owes to Mrs. COCKBURNE on the score of
literary arrangement is not the sole motive for addressing to her a proportion
of this work, and that without any previous solicitation. The selecting of a
patron is, he conceives, amongst the inherent RIGHTS of literature, which,
however, he is aware her delicacy would, in the present instance, have disputed
or denied: but there are privileges of an independent nature, the assertion of
which should rest on our own judgment and discretion; and any petition to
exercise these, implies a doubt even that they exist. The freedom of election,
as to the choice of a virtuous person to exemplify a virtuous, even though it
may be an unsuccessful endeavor, ought to be looked upon as amongst the most
inalienable rights attached to the charter of literature. On that authority a
writer should feel that he has The world before him where to choose: and, on
that authority, the author of these sheets takes leave to illustrate, by the
conduct of Mrs. COCKBURNE, his attempted portrait of a female, which may serve
as an example of the filial, fraternal, and conjugal, virtues: and to sanction
this illustration, he refers to that lady's family and friends, nay, to a yet
stronger testimony, -- her own CONSCIOUS HEART!

CONTENTS OF VOLUME THE SECOND.
CHAP. I. Topsy-turvy: the art of inversion. CHAP. II. Confusions. CHAP. III. A
groupe of strangers. CHAP. IV. Simplicity and experience, nature and the world.
CHAP. V. Examinations. CHAP. VI. Innocence and guilt. CHAP. VII. A rarity:
woman pitying the fall of woman. CHAP. VIII. Tears of joy. CHAP. IX. The
servant the master. CHAP. X. Escapes. CHAP. XI. Alarms. CHAP. XII. Perplexities
of love. CHAP. XIII. One of the family secrets in danger. CHAP. XIV. The secret
rescued. CHAP. XV. Augmented involvements at the castle. CHAP. XVI. And at the
abbey. CHAP. XVII. The progress of hypocrisy. CHAP. XVIII. Prospects clear.
CHAP. XIX. Prospects cloud again. CHAP. XX. Recapitulation. CHAP. XXI. The
storm increases. CHAP. XXII. Struggles. CHAP. XXIII. The tempest at its height.
CHAP. XXIV. Continues to rage. CHAP. XXV. Hypocrisy triumphant. CHAP. XXVI. A
noble mind in humble life. CHAP. XXVII. The phrenzy of passion. CHAP. XXVIII.
Its resolves and irresolutions. CHAP. XXIX. A hero of the canine race. CHAP.
XXX. Suspicion, candor, confession, and concealment. CHAP. XXXI. A tender
father sacrifices a duteous child. CHAP. XXXII. The achievements of the canine
hero. CHAP. XXXIII. A lesson for parents. CHAP. XXXIV. Promises made, broken,
re-made, and re-broken. CHAP. XXXV. Fine dissembling. CHAP. XXXVI. Sincerity.
CHAP. XXXVII. The dark side of human nature. CHAP. XXXVIII. A dialogue to prove
it. CHAP. XXXIX. More proofs. CHAP. XL. Virtue in danger. CHAP. XLI. Guilty
passion. CHAP. XLII. Innocent affection. CHAP. XLIII. Transport of parents.
FAMILY SECRETS.
CHAPTER I.
SHORTLY after John's departure, another day of unremitting embarrasment
happened to Henry: the provoking cross purposes began in the morning, and
continued until the evening, and were indeed resumed the next morning.

A gentleman now arrived at the castle, of a very singular character and
conversation. His youth had been past partly at sea, and partly in foreign
climes; and being in possession of a very competent fortune, as well from
patrimony as from successful adventure, he had, for some years back, quitted
the ocean, and all its enterprises, and set himself down on shore, in a very
comfortable dwelling, within a neighbourly distance of Fitzorton Castle. Mr.
Partington had many peculiarities; -- there was a rough honesty in his manner,
and a fredom of expression corresponding to it, which, at first sight, seemed
more boisterous and rugged than the element on which he had been educated. His
person was something under the middle size, and his features had little more of
smoothness than his manners: but, beneath this uninviting exterior, beat a
heart, every pulsation of which was genuine good will to mankind, without the
least alloy of sentimentality, -- that shining dross which makes so much
glitter in these tinsel times. Partington, if he liked you, was a friend
indeed! but, the more he fancied you, the rougher would you find his address;
and this rule held good in all the degrees of his approbation: -- for, exactly
proportioned to his good opinion was his jocular rudeness. If he thought
tolerably well of you, he would call you a sad fellow; if, on farther
acquaintance, you improved in his good graces, you would advance also in the
scale of abuse, and he would speak of and to you as a cursed good-for-nothing
devil: and when he had taken you into his heart, -- wherein, by the bye, you
might confide your honor, your happiness, and your life, -- he would honor
you by the appellation of a damned insufferable scoundrel! This being the
highest and most distinguishing mark of his esteem, could be boasted of by few;
for Partington never thought any man or woman deserving of this mark of his
affection, unless they appeared to him pre-eminently great or good. We say,
"man or woman," because the sex of the person made no manner of difference to
him.

His dislike, on the other hand, was expressed in quite a contrary way; but
still he marked it by the same gradations. If neither your head nor your heart
was satisfactory to him, -- that is, if the first was not worth carrying upon
your shoulders, nor the other in your bosom, -- he would, if he spoke to you at
all, accost you in very civil language. If you had any thing remarkably base in
your disposition, he would be yet more polite, calling you sir, or madam; and
if he thought you deserved a box on the ear, or the gallows, instead of a bow,
he would even pull off his hat! -- which being the last evidence of his
abhorrence, bore the same proportion of contempt that his damned insufferable
scoundrel did of affection. Nor were even his benevolences themselves less
remarkably his own, than his modes of expression. He never talked of doing any
person a kindness, and yet was kindness itself. In truth, while other people
were only talking, he would be doing the very thing they talked about; for he
would slip out of company, on fifty different pretenses, none of which you
could suspect, -- and have had an interview with the party he had heard
commiserated, -- then return to the company with no alteration in his general
manner, but that of loading with exaggerated scurrility the person to whom he
was indebted for the opportunity of being bountiful: for, as this was the
highest obligation his heart was capable of receiving, he had no other way of
returning it. But more frequently he would appear altogether inattentive to
tales of distress, or, if he did give ear to them, would break out into --
"Psha! -- don't tell me! riff-raff! stuff! a pack of beggars! I should not have
thought of their impudence! I say distress too!" and many such like
exclamations: yet he would be at the door, or at the bedside of the sufferers,
and have every thing that was really of comfort in their habitations, before
any other man of the party thought of leaving company. If, for instance, an
apothecary was wanted, he would arouse him in the middle of the night, drag him
out of bed, or some way or other get him under his arm: and if common
necessaries were to be supplied, he would run to his little poor-rascal's
warehouse, as he used to call it, -- and, making up his bundle according to the
case, carry it in his hand, and have done his work before his orders to an
uninterested domestic could have been well given.

CHAPTER II.
PARTINGTON had been long in the habits of intimacy with Sir Armine, and
honored the family with a liberal share of his loving abuse, whenever he made
it a visit; and each individual was as jealous of that abuse as desirous of his
company. The trio of brothers filled his scale of epithets! James was only one
of his middling sort of fellows; John had the pleasure to be ranked his cursed
good-for-nothing caitiff; and Henry enjoyed the supreme distinction of being
almost the first of his damned insufferable scoundrels. "Hark'ee, you Mr.
middling sort of fellow," addressing himself to James after dinner, "how goes
on the affair between this damned, insufferable scoundrel," -- here he shook
Henry by the hand -- "and you know who -- you cursed good-for-nothing little
devil?" -- tapping Olivia on the cheek -- "What say you, you old rascal?" added
he, turning to Sir Armine: "are you getting your gouty legs in order, to dance
at the wedding? 'Sbud! man, you ought, upon that occasion, to give us an
hornpipe upon your stumps, like Witherington; for two such pretty caitiffs as
these do not come together every day, I can tell you! But, what are you all
about, you lazy vagabonds, -- shilly shally? If I were a parson, they should be
married before I left the house: -- young folks cannot begin to be happy too
soon. -- Now look how that insufferable poltroon" (to Henry) "shakes and
trembles: -- why, one would think, instead of feeling the flames of love on
sitting so close to a fine girl, whose tell-tale blushes ought to make him
blaze out like a bonfire, that the ague had got hold of him. By the arm of my
body, he quivers like a Lapland witch! Well, come, I will give him my blessing
in a bumper. However, marry when they will, may the pledges of their love be
just as good-for-nothing as their parents! the girls abominable husseys, and
the boys damned insufferable scoundrels! Put it round, old Vulcan!" said he,
pushing the bottle to Sir Armine: he then stood up, and sung some stanzas, so
replete with humor in themselves, and in so quaint and ludicrous a manner,
that the whole company caught the hilarity of their worthy guest.

"Was there ever such a comical creature?" exclaimed Olivia smiling. -- "But
hold, what is this I hear about Henry's going to be hanged for his fine
devil's-works at the abbey?"

Henry's confusion was now re-doubled upon another account: for he did not at
all doubt but that the subject which had been remotely alluded to by John,
would be fully explained by this unqualifying son of the waves. Henry winked,
nodded, and made other signs of keeping silence, which not only increased the
curiosity of the company, but made Partington more determined. "I don't care
for your wry faces a brass button, you scoundrel," said he: "I say,
notwithstanding all your antics, you will come to the gallows: -- it is a
serious matter to knock down a baronet on the very spot where he is to be
buried, then throw his daughter into fits, and run away from both of them."

"Knock him down?" said Olivia. "Why, good heavens! if it had not been for
Henry, Sir Guise would have been murdered. And as to Miss Stuart, for whom my
soul still bleeds, her fits were occasioned (God knows) by the loss of her
sweet mother: for, as her brother could not attend, Henry was her only
comforter. This is the whole of the matter, I do assure you, Mr. Partington."

The earnest simplicity with which she uttered this, in the defense, and to the
honor, of him she loved, and for whom she had always a vindication, had a
visible effect upon all, but more particularly on Henry, who, torn betwixt the
sensations of gratitude and shame, tenderly caressed her.

"You are both of you a couple of insufferable scoundrels, and encourage one
another. For that matter, I Would lay my life, if this egregious villain" -- to
Henry -- " should be hanged, this dimpling caitiff would tie herself up in her
garters the next morning, that she might lovingly dangle by his side, upon the
same gibbet. So, as I hope yet to see them tied up together, I think it is the
best way to pinion them now, till their time comes." -- Here he drew them close
to his own bosom, formed their arms into the wreathe of love, and ordering the
whole party to follow their example, conducted them into the garden.

CHAPTER III.
THUS were matters reinstated, to the general satisfaction; and even Henry felt
it might have been much worse; for, though it had been so long the wish and
endeavor of his heart to come to an explanation of its fatal secret, -- any
disclosure of it at such a time, in such a place, and under such circumstances,
would have been the most overwhelming event that could have happened to him.

Partington, who had the romping playfulness of a boy, without the least of
that mischief which usually attaches to the sport of youth, continued his
pleasantries, amongst which was a proposition to run upon the green-sward along
the park with Henry, -- the winner to be entitled to a kiss from Olivia, and
Olivia herself to be the umpire.

He pointed to a clump of elms, as the given distance: the putting himself into
a starting posture, "There -- I Will give you law, you villain -- so away with
you!" Henry was, perhaps, never less in disposition for a frolic; but knowing
that Partington, -- who had now doubled his fists, -- would have pushed him
headlong forward, had he suffered himself to be overtaken, he soon sprung to
the goal; in doing which, however, he contrived to trip up Partington's heels,
to the no small diversion of the company. "A bubble bet!" cried Partington,
scrambling up: "the race was obtained only by a fraud, else I should have beat
him hollow: -- a contrived thing! I saw both the villains laying their heads
together, concerting how it should be, before I set off." The truth is, he
loitered behind, while he counterfeited exertion, purposely that the supposed
lovers might be thrown into each other's arms.

These sallies were interrupted by a knot of travelers, who were passing that
part of the park, which sir Armine left free for the accommodation of the
public.

The wanderers had the attractions of indisputable affliction, and of sickness
its too frequent attendant, strongly impressed in their air, looks, and
motions. Yet there was no external appearance of want in any of the groupe; all
were habited neatly, and one of them bore a wallet laden with food: but the
moment you beheld them, your own heart would have told you they were destitute
of comforts, which were not to be found in that wallet. There are certain signs
and tokens of misery, so visible in the human form and countenance, that every
man, without an insult upon the human character and understanding, must see and
feel them at a glance.

The groupe consisted of an elderly man, leading a boy about twelve years old,
-- a woman, something under the age of the man, with a child at her back, --
and a beautiful young woman, who, sad and sorrowing, followed the rest. As the
first and last mentioned objects stood by the side of the venerable Fitzorton,
and the blooming Olivia, they exhibited, in striking contrast, the wonderful
difference which sickness and health, happiness and misery, produce in beings
of the same species, and at the same period of life. "Please your honors,"
said the old man, respectfully, "I hope we are not upon trespass here; a man on
the other side told us, there was a foot-way here to the place we are going: we
have come clean from west to north, and are somewhat footsore; and every bit of
ground saved, therefore, is something. Our Jane here, poor thing, can hardly
drag one foot before the other: so, as night is coming on, and we are not
acquainted with the country hereabouts, may-hap your honors, who, I suppose
are masters of thatun great house, would be so kind to give us barn-room, till
the morning." -- To this Partington made answer, "he was afraid the vagabonds
had staid in their own parish till they were driven out of it bag and baggage;
and were living now by accident in a barn, or a stable, or the open field, as
they could manage it." -- The old man answered, "Please your worship, none of
us have been ever a burden to the parish yet; and I hope, with the blessing of
God upon our labor, we sha'n't. But, we are burnt, stick and stone, out of our
parish, where we lived upon our earnings, and a little matter besides, for
these forty years. May be, your honor would like to hear a little about us. I
am a mason, your honor, -- so I bought a bit of ground, and built a house on
him, and furnished him, a thing at a time; and there 'twould have done your
heart good, to see how we lived, till a sort of quarrel betwixt me and a great
rich person, who has an estate thereabout, and has a house like a town, --
where nobody lives for a constancy, but a savage old servant or two, -- for the
master only comes a week or two in the spring season, or to gather rents, when
the steward, who, by the same token, is worth a hundred of his master, cannot
come down." -- "God bless his goodness!" said the woman, who appeared to be the
mother of the family: "if it had not been for him, I do believe it would have
been bad off for us long before; for the baronet was pecking and pecking at us,
years a-gone: our Jerome, who is gone forward with the mule, got himself made a
freeholder, and would not vote for a friend of this great baronight -- for he
is one who is 'titled to do as he likes with poor folk, -- bore us all a
grudge." -- "And somehow or other, your worship," resumed the old man, "about
August, in the summer after, I shut up house, whilst I and dame and youngster
went a making a little harvesting at friend Armstrong's, a cousin of my wife's,
who has a bit of a farm, and who wished me to bring all my family; and as we
could make ourselves tolerably tight and smart at that time, we rigged
ourselves out, and off we went; but when we got home from merry-making, --
(what a world it is, your worship!) -- I saw the top of my house where the
bottom should be, and the walls as black as my hat." -- "Why, Reuben,"
exclaimed the wife! "how can you be so milk-livered and mealy-mouthed, Reuben?
Please your worship, as sure as you stand there, this great baronet, I told you
about, set it a-fire." -- "O impossible!" cried Olivia. -- "Set it a-fire,
Miss, I say," resumed the wise, emphatically slapping her hands together: "and
I Will tell him so to his head, and bring all my ruinated family in my hand, to
show him what he has done; for we left neither fire nor candle: and I Will take
my affy-david that I put up the shutters, and locked the door, and clapped the
key in our pockets, and the same to the little garden gate; and God knows, the
keys are all now we have for it: here they are, your worship: aye, and they
shall go with us to the wicked wretch, though all the keys in the world cannot
open his heart, because it is harder than they: but a' shall hear on it; and if
there is law in the land, he shall have it." -- "Hold your tongue, Sal!" said
the old man: "I don't think, Sir Devil's-come, as we call him in our parts,
would go to set a man's house on fire, when there wa'n't a soul in it, either
to please or to tease him, or to say, why do ye so? though to be sure my house,
as I said, is down, and all that was in it, burned or moved off; and what was
worse, I had put into a drawer a little modukin of money, shillings and half
crowns at a time, -- now and then a golden guinea; and they are gone too;
though I have been pottering about with my stick, and my family have all been
on their knees grubbing in the ashes; but it was all to no purpose. This fellow
would have gone to pot too," continued the old man, pointing to a curl-tail
black dog that followed him, "and so would the kitten under our Jenny's arm
there, if we had not luckily put she to 'bide with Goody Brabson, a neighbor
of ours; so here is the whole family, your honor, counting Jerome and Dorothy."
-- Olivia, who had before put a trifle into the young woman's hand, now stroked
the kitten; and Henry, long before the story had arrived at this stage, had
made his offering; James, patted the dog, called him a lucky fellow, and
assured him, considering such dangers, he had a very narrow escape. At the
suggestion of the house being maliciously set on fire, every particle of blood
that supplied the body of Partington, flew in his face; he cried out, "O that
the worthy baronet had been in the middle of the flames! I would have set fire
to my own house, to have had him in the center! but I don't believe a word
on it! it is a lie! it must be a lie! I will have it a lie! Are you sure, fellow,
you did not see it on fire yourself? And why do you keep that child, woman,
swinging at your back all this time, when there is such a fine soft bank by the
side of you, and the grass full of flowers, and as dry as my walking-stick?"
Here Partington loosed the bandages, took the infant in his arms, repeating,
"Answer me that! answer me that! down with ye, down with every one, -- you two
old sinners, in particular," -- Partington appearing to bend them to the ground
forcibly, but, in truth, lowering them with all possible gentleness. "As for
you," continued he, "good people," addressing himself to his own party, "the
evening begins to draw in: the dew falls: see how your fine neckcloths and
handkerchiefs shrink at it: -- sun-flowers can bear nothing but fair weather:
-- the dew will not suit your gouty limbs, you old scoundrel," -- to Sir Armine --
"nor your delicate ancles, Mrs. Abominable," -- to Olivia -- "the vagabonds may
remain: they are used to clouds: and so in with the family, you blubbering,
water-headed rascal!" -- to Henry -- He spoke this as in rebuke, though, by the
bye, his own face was covered with tears. -- "Pack off, I say: I will have it
so: I Will be with you presently: -- but you are to know that I smoke a damned
lie, all through this business; and I am determined to have it out with the
ragamuffins; and I don't doubt but I shall have the satisfaction of seeing
every one of them sent to the house of correction; and that I shall bring them
to old Armine here, to make out their mittimus." All this time they had been
moving, or rather Partington had been pushing them forwards: and as the Clares
and Fitzortons knew the poor creatures would be left in good hands, they bent
their steps back toward the castle.

CHAPTER IV.
"GOOD heaven!" exclaimed Olivia to her father, as the party were walking home,
"do you think there ever was such a shocking thing done in the world, as for a
person to set fire to his neighbor's house on purpose? I have read of such
horrid actions in newspapers, and once, I think, in a book, but never believed
either to be possible; indeed, I felt a kind of disgust at the author of such
incredible fictions."

"It is almost a sin, my sweet girl," said Mr. Clare, "to destroy your opinion
of human kind, formed on the basis of your own innocence. Painful as it is to
oppose the wisdom of experience to the blissful simplicity of a pure and
unpractised heart, -- I have known more instances than one of it."

"Yet we seldom -- I never did," resumed Olivia, "hear of people coming to an
untimely end for these horrid crimes." -- "That too is amongst the vices of the
times," rejoined Sir Armine. "People make their fortunes nowadays by being
ruined and undone. In a few months after these lucky misfortunes, we behold new
trades carried on by those who had been turned pennyless out of their shops:
and we see new houses rising, like so many phoenixes, out of the ashes of the
old."

"My dear girl," cried her father, "who can detail the history of modern
inventions in the art of living? -- There is, comparatively, a poor livelihood,
child, now to be picked up out of the real miseries of life; but luxury and
independence pour in their stores on the designing; -- thus, some impositions
are a decent maintenance, and others a very comfortable sinecure: in short, to
make fictitious distress the instrument of real good fortune, is amongst the
most dextrous refinements of this improving age; vice is always at work, and
works with the greatest success on the sensibility of virtue."

"Dreadful!" exclaimed Olivia. "But I cannot think the poor creatures we have
just left, are of this description; for, surely, that old miserable man, who
asked for nothing but the charity of a bed of straw in our barn, could not
trump up such a falsehood against the person he spoke of; -- and, indeed, I
have blamed myself, every step I have come, that I did not beg my dearest Sir
Armine to let him have some comfortable place to rest his family tonight: --
the young woman really looked ready to sink into the earth with fatigue; and
yet she kept the poor kitten in her arms; and I heard her ask her mother to let
her carry the child, twenty times. -- Indeed, indeed, Mr. Partington judges too
harshly of them! Gracious heaven! Henry, if the world is half so wicked as you
and your brother John have painted it to me, I do not see how such a simpleton
as your Olivia is to live in it."

Here the lovely girl ran to Henry, and, placing herself betwixt him, her own
father, and Sir Armine, she said, in a tone that might have taught hypocrisy to
forego its victim, "Well! thank God! while I am thus protected, not all the bad
people in the world can do me any harm!" saying which, she entwined her arms,
and clung toward her parent and lover, as if she felt herself in a sanctuary.

"But," said James, with his usual good sense and moderation, "the miseries of
human life, induced by inevitable misfortunes, are, alas! so manifold, and so
various, that the soul is not to be frozen up, because vice can assume the
appearance of virtue in distress, and, by applying to the same source, may
partake of the same bountiful stream."

"Respecting the wretched family we have been talking with," said Henry, "we
have all seen they are both sick and sorrowful, my dearest father: and I dare
pledge myself, every tittle of their story is true." -- "Truth may, perhaps,
lie between," interposed James. -- "I would go barefoot a thousand leagues,"
exclaimed Henry, "to punish the author of their ruin; but if, having found him,
he was evidently under the pressure of any heart-wringing misery, pining with
want, or wasting in disease, I hope I should do what I could to comfort him."
-- "It is certainly right," said James, half conceding, "to take care that vice
does not run away with the perquisite of virtue: but it is, nevertheless,
better that they should divide our bounty, than that, from sear of encouraging
the one, we should refuse to reward the other."

"The virtue of designing well," said Sir Armine, with a deciding voice, as he
reached the portico of the castle, "if it fails of some, is seldom deprived of
all its rewards. -- Let the honorable passions and emotions of our frame
declare the unrivalled privileges of a gentle and unsuspicious heart: -- let
the power which it gives us, in the energies of our loves and friendships,
pronounce its eulogy: -- let pity, charity, candor, benevolence, easiness to
believe the best, and tardiness to credit the worst, -- yea, and the sweet,
very sweet, simplicity that sometimes conducts us to the precipice down which
we are hurled by the villain guide, -- let even the pure and innocent heart
itself, through all its meanders of sensibility, -- let it, in vibrations of
transport, declare, it is the prime delight of man, and the choicest gift of
God."

Olivia here pressed the hand of her father, then that of Sir Armine, upon her
heart; "You have now all settled it so entirely to my satisfaction, and have
brought me again into such good humor with that world, which some of you had
almost put me out of conceit with, that I will not stay to hear another word."
-- The whole company went into the house.

Chapter V.
"IT is among the wonders of the world, when I wonder," quoth Partington, to
the family in the park: "and yet I must confess, the audaciousness of your
telling that impudent lie about some worthy gentleman's burning down your
house, because you would not vote against your conscience, does throw, even me,
into astonishment." -- "Sir," answered the old man, with some dignity, "I do
not pretend to say it is so for sartain: but Goody Brabson is ready to swear
it; for she was disturbed the night before, and saw ill-looking fellows lurking
about; and before that day come-week, my house was down; -- but as for a lie, I
don't know whether I would tell one to have it built up again." -- "No!"
answered Partington: -- "then give me your hand, you scoundrel!" -- "But, for
that matter," resumed the old man, "there are hotter doings at electioneering,
than burning down poor men's houses. -- Why, bless your worship, I have seen
the candidates, as they call themselves, ready to set fire to one, another." --
"Aye, your honor," interposed the old man's wife, "that is not half the
mischief! there was something worse than 'lection riots in this affair: --
naughty Jenny there, and this poor brat at my back, if it could speak, could
tell you all about that." -- Here the young woman whom she called Jenny, made
signs for her mother to keep silence; upon which the mother exclaimed, "Hussy,
I will speak! his honor here shall know who are scoundrels, and who are not!
Mayhap his honor is a justice of the peace, and will give us some law. -- An'
please your worship, that baronet is the father of this babe; after my Reuben
had refused his vote, this baronet grew so kind, that we thought, God help us
he repented his hashness to us; whereupon I was a kind of a char-woman now and
then at the great house, when he came down for a week or two: and if I was
wanted at home, why, I sent Jenny there, backwards and forwards, as well spoken
and likesome a girl, your honor, aye, and as shame-faced then, and for that
matter now, though she has had a bastard, as any she of the country; -- and so,
behold ye', this villain of a baronet was only kind for the sake of she; and,
behold ye, he contrived to get to the sight and speech of her, and soon put the
girl aside herself; she could talk of nothing but the baronet: -- the baronet
told her this -- the baronet gave her that! -- I believe in my conscience he
turned her silly head, and overset her in such a way, that she was crazy enough
to think of becoming my lady: -- aye, and he put a new golden ring on her
finger, and called her wife -- though he was married before, and, they do say,
to a moral of a woman -- not that he ever brought maddam down -- and he
persuaded silly Jane she was dead -- thof a maddam he had there too; and there
she comes at times still, for a month in the summer, and says she is the
baronet's cozen -- marry come up! a dainty cozen! I warrant, she cozens his
virtuous wife finely. But to return to our Jenney: -- Reuben and I began to
think it odd the girl should get so much into favor, seeing how we were hated
before: but we still were fools enough to believe that Sir Guise -- "

"Sir Guise!" exclaimed Partington: "is he the baronet? It Is all true, -- get
up -- tell the rest of your story as you go along. I see you are a pack of sad
scoundrels; and I shall insist upon Fitzorton's house covering all of you
somewhere until morning. And do you hear, girl? -- Jane, I think is your name
-- do you lean on my arm; and do you, mother Blab, take hold of the other arm
-- you, young varlet, keep close by your father -- hussy, keep you by your
mother -- but as to the suckling, you must carry that sin yourself, Jane; for
the devil seduce me if I touch any thing belonging to that pretty gentleman,
unless I should have the felicity of tucking him up under the gallows. Well,
but that happy day may come yet!"

Partington had the family all up on the march before he had got to the
ejaculation with which he finished his harangue, -- and disposed the several
persons in the order described. In this manner they were moving along toward
the castle, when they encountered Henry, who, partly in consequence of Olivia's
whisper, and partly to gratify his own curiosity, -- or, perhaps, from a better
principle, -- was returning to the spot where he left the groupe. Without
relating stories, or entering into causes, Partington ordered Henry to run as
fast as his legs would carry him back to the castle, order a comfortable
supper, but not among the servants, and half a dozen well aired beds, and tell
old square-toes it was his command: -- "Nay that it is the old caitiff's duty,"
said he; "for here is justice business enough for a whole sessions; and
moreover, if he don't choose to accommodate them, come back again and tell me
so, that I may take them to the Fitzorton-arms public house; for they shall not
go out of my custody till I sift the affair to the bottom; and as it is
moonlight, a mile or two more less, for good suppers and good beds, can make
little difference." -- Henry, who was ever ready to assist the unfortunate,
without paining them by a recital of distressful stories, hasted, without
asking a single question, to execute his commission.

Partington returned to the travelers, who began to think him insane, and put
himself nearly in his former situation, with the difference only of taking the
child gently from the young woman, who had been giving it suck, and saying, at
the same time, "Come, as that little rascal may one day be brought in evidence
against its virtuous father, I think I will give it a lift: and so go on with
your walk and your story, old caitiff."

"As I was saying then, your worship, we foolishly thought Sir Guise Stuart --
" "Proceed," cried Partington, "if you can, without any more mentioning that
worthy gentleman's name, for it puts me in a fever: call him -- call him --
baronet."

"The baronet, then," answered Mrs. Atwood, "was never easy but when some of us
was at the great house; he wanted Reuben to give up masonry: -- we staid in the
parish a twelvemonth after the fire, with Goody Brabson: -- the baronet wished
us to take one of his farms, -- sometimes he said he would pull down the great
house, and build up a finer, which would do for his son, when he married, and
give Reuben the job: and as for Jenny, I don't know what he was to do for she,
-- he would take her to his other great seat in these parts; -- I never was
there, your honor; but I will be there, and sooner than he thinks. -- Well, he
would pull this other down, and let her live with miss -- miss Caroline: -- so
we even let her go; and coil enough there was about it, from Reuben, who had
been told by neighbors, what would become of it; however, I thought it for the
best; and away she went."

"Accursed be the hour she did!" said Reuben.

"Don't interrupt her, you vagabond," cried Partington, doubling his fists, --
not at Reuben, however, nor at any person present.

"The upshot of it was, an' please your worship, that one Valentine Miles, a
man that used to do all Sir Guise's -- I beg your honor's pardon, I mean --
the -- the -- baronet's dirty work, such as pounding our strays, suing for
rents, and the like, -- Miles, I say, your honor, took Jane, as he said, to
Guise Abbey; but in fact, far enough afield from that: he carried her up to
London; always calling her my lady -- and, as the foolish girl was in love, she
believed it: -- and for that matter, she lived like a lady, sure enough --
lady's maids, lady's livery-men, and what not! -- no wonder, your worship, poor
Jane believed it all gospel, for I thought it so myself -- for a'ter this, he
had her married over again: but that was sham too, just like the ring business
before; for the fellow who married her, was as little of a parson, and as great
a rogue, as himself: -- so your worship sees the end on it -- this poor boy! --
" "Whew!" whistled Partington. -- "And we might have lived in ignorance, and
she in wickedness, poor thing, a great while longer," continued the afflicted
father, caressing his betrayed daughter, "had not somebody sent us a nonmus
letter, as they call it, saying our daughter was a double U, Sir Guise Stuart
an R -- and the child a B --."

Partington here gave the old mason another shake by the hand, and then bade
the wife proceed.

She then related a variety of other heinous particulars, unfolding the villainy
of Sir Guise and his agents, and ending with the recovery of the deluded Jenny
to the arms of her family. "Yes, your honor," said Mrs. Atwood, in conclusion
-- "and so this very day was six weeks brought Jenny and her brat home to us
again, dressed in the very gown she went away in, -- a good stuff of our own
honest buying, and which she has got on, you see, at this present. -- But, with
the blessing upon us, we'll make the baronet ashamed of it yet; for we are
going to settle, not passing more than thirteen or fourteen miles on the other
side of his abbey; and we have come a matter of that about, purposely to tell
him a piece of our mind: and if your worship can do any thing in this affair,
give us some justice; for we'll have none of his money: so far contrary,
indeed, that one of the mule's paniers, with Jerome, is loaded with all the
things, -- some of 'em pretty smart ones too, -- that he gave us before Jenny
went from us. -- As to the fine clothes, and trinkum-trankums he gave she, they
were all left behind at the wicked place where we found her."

Their walk and their recital ended together; for they had now arrived at the
castle, where they were again met by Henry, who told Partington, all things
would be done as he had directed. -- "Then lead the way," said Partington; "for
these are much greater vagabonds than you think, and must be taken care of
accordingly."

Henry conducted them to a large apartment adjoining the steward's. --
Partington ushered them in, ordered the servant to place chairs, -- assisted in
the business himself, observing, that, "though they were vagabonds, they were
every one to be treated with the utmost respect." -- He desired them to eat,
drink, and be merry, -- to be in good humor with one another; but, above all
things, not to say a single cross word to that good-for-nothing hussy, Jane;
and to take care that the child had some pap.

CHAPTER VI.
HENRY and Partington returned to the company, where Olivia was still presiding
at the tea-table, declaring Mr. Partington should not go without his usual
beverage. This was a pint basin filled with tea, and milk, and honey, in equal
proportions. "If you would not have me choked with rage, give me the slop!" --
so he always called it: -- and seeing the basin before him, he spilled one part
of it, and swallowed the other; then taking breath, he threw himself into a
chair, the blood starting into his face, while he recited the history of the
Atwoods, making no other variations than distinguishing Sir Guise by the words
"fine fellow! pretty gentleman! the hero of the tale!". But, though thesee
pithets were not bitter in language, they were intolerably so in the manner of
their delivery: for, at the mention of his atrocities, he would sometimes leap
up, take the room at a couple of strides, exclaiming to a chair, to a table, to
one of the company, or even to his own shadow in the glass, supposing it were
Sir Guise, "Your most obedient very humble servant, my noble baronet! I trust
your execution is not very far off; for other facts are coming out, I dare say;
and all the crimes of human nature will conduct your honor to Tyburn, I
flatter myself! Would to heaven they could all be bundled with you into the
same cart, that you might be put out of the world together! I would empty my
cellar, -- aye, and almost my strong box too, -- to celebrate that glorious
event."

The effect which the narration had upon the company, was various. Lady
Fitzorton lifted up her hands, and wept silently. -- Mr. Clare exclaimed,
"Execrable wretch!" -- Sir Armine knit his brows, and said, "Poor Charles! what
does he not deserve, to atone for the curse of such a parent?" -- Olivia said,
"The poor girl and child deserved every care, that innocence betrayed, and
helpless infancy, could receive from pity." -- "These old caitiffs too have
their merits," cried Partington. "But what can be a sufficient tribute of
admiration for Miss Stuart?" exclaimed Olivia -- "so good! so considerate! --
how, my dear Henry, shall we do honor to her?" -- Henry held his tongue, and
spoke nothing, yet looked as if he subscribed fully to the eulogy.

Partington, however, was the most busy of the groupe. His hands, head, and
heart, seemed to be full; and he divided the evening between his insufferable
scoundrels above stairs, and his abominable vagabonds below.

Olivia, too, frequently stole out, and whispering Henry, who always
disappeared soon after, hasted to Partington's guests; and, under pretense of
asking if they had every thing comfortable about them, took occasion to show
many little marks of a generous nature and of genuine good will.

She had particularly directed her own maid to provide all things proper for
the child, and would have sent to the manor-house for her own cradle, but was
prevented by Henry, who reminded her there were several in the castle. --
"Gracious! perhaps your own -- what an honor, if we could procure that!"
exclaimed Olivia: "the poor babe is innocent, you know: alas! and its mother
can scarcely be called guilty, my Henry." -- She took care that a comfortable
change of every thing was provided from her own wardrobe, and placed ready for
Jane Atwood, in her bedchamber; nor was she unmindful of the rest, in such
little additions as might be proper to the general happiness.

Prior again to this, true George had been dispatched by Partington to the
eastern gate of the park, at which Atwood's eldest son Jerome, with Dorothy, was
appointed to wait his family's joining him. -- "The boy will stand stock at the
gate, please your worship," said old Atwood, as he overheard Partington giving
directions: "he said he would, thof it were for a couple of nights. I never
see'd such a boy for that: bid 'un do a thing: and if he answers 'Aye,' the
thing's done; but then again, if he gives you one of his noes, i'cod, your
worship, he is more of a mule than Dorothy!"

"I see into the vagabond's character at once," replied Partington. "Go then,
George: you will find him stuck to the gate; and if he will not leave it, take
Armine's team, and bring gate and all."

True George, when he had a good-natured thing to do, never addicted himself to
unnecessary delays, and was, besides, one of the most active young fellows in
the world. He set off, therefore, for the eastern gate, as if his own bed and
board depended on his dispatch.

To confess the truth, this honest fellow had been more in the secrets of
Atwood's family than any other of the servants. Indeed, he was a youth of most
insatiable curiosity, where the gratification thereof had but the probable
aspect of being attended by a good office; in searching after which, he was
indefatigable. And judging from his beloved master Henry's second visit to the
park, by moonlight too, that some new adventure was near, he had contrived to
take his usual station of an out-post, for fear of being discovered. By a
little bush-fighting, however, which is extremely honorable, he formed his
ambuscade behind some flowering thorns, which grew in that part of the park
where Mr. Partington recapitulated, in an audible voice, so much of the
Atwoods' story as had then been told.

CHAPTER VII.
WERE it our intention to give to each of the heroes and heroines of this epic
history a day of prowess, after the manner of the great Maeonides, who
dedicated one book of his Iliad to Ajax, another to Agamemnon, and so on, -- we
should certainly consecrate this chapter to the achievements of Olivia, who,
from the orient sun, even to his down-going, and again to his uprising, was
employed in doing at least as much good as any illustrious ancient or modern,
whom fable or truth has yet celebrated, were we to begin with Philip of
Macedon, and end with Frederick of Prussia; and we do not at all deem it
unreasonable to declare that we expect, the very abridgment of her acts, during
the abovementioned space, will make the reader more in love with her, though
rehearsed in humble prose, than if, in imitation of those royal butchers, she
had laid a thousand of her fellow creatures, with her own hand, dead at her
feet, in the field of battle.

The day, then, of the fair Olivia Clare, was ushered in by an act, mild and
lovely as the first ray of the morn which shone on it, -- even by an early walk
round the garden with the unfortunate Jane Atwood. Luckless victim! thy modest
appearance and blushing graces, and all the deep regrets of downcast
consciousness streaming from thy eyes; thy keen sense of the novelty of a
virtuous woman soothing and not aggravating the fate of a woman betrayed, --
justified thy mother's description, and made the compassion and loving kindness
of thy protectress a virtue worthy to be imitated by thy sex! a sex, too often
cruel and unrelenting to most pitiable victims. -- After several turns about
the walks, Olivia conducted her still trembling protegee to the breakfast-room,
where the Atwoods had been invited by Sir Armine to join the family: but
seeming to feel themselves farther from home there than in the apartment where
they had passed the preceding evening, they were again committed to the care of
Partington and true George.

Olivia, understanding this, begged permission to seat Jane between Henry and
herself, saying in a whisper to her father, "Because, you know, we can comfort
and make her cheerful." Besides the shyness which only an intercourse with the
world can remove, a painful consciousness of her error, and of the knowledge
which the company had of it, made the timid Jane discover so much uneasiness,
that the good-natured Olivia perceiving it, led her first to the window, and
then out at the door, saying, "her young friend was not very well, and, though
sensible of the honor intended her, wished to take breakfast with her own
family." Partington's proposal to blend the Atwoods and Fitzortons at
breakfast, was amongst the generous little inconsistencies or rather
indiscriminations which were interwoven into his character, insomuch that you
would sometimes see at his table persons whom, from their difference of
character and condition, any man who attended to the ceremonies of the world,
and indeed to the distinctions of ranks in society, would have thought it
impossible he could bring together. But the same objection by no means held
against the propriety of Olivia bringing this young woman into so much good
company: -- the best and most justifiable motives influenced the fair
protectress; and there was a natural grace and gentility about the no less fair
protected, which Sir Guise, in giving her the best masters, had not a little
improved. In truth, Jane attributed her misfortune, and all its fatal
consequences, to the violence of the baronet's passion for her; and she looked
on the mock nuptials as so solemn a pledge of his love, that she herself
encouraged the wish of Sir Guise, that the union should remain secret, from an
idea which sprung from the purity of her affection, that having the joy to tell
her own heart he was her wedded lord, she had rather continue to be thought
herself dishonored, than that he should be degraded. Her father's finding and
carrying her off, she long considered as the sole cause by which she had been
separated from the baronet: -- and although none of these motives wholly
obliterated the inward sense of her first indiscretion prior to her supposed
honorable union, or suppressed the sigh so often as she turned her thoughts
toward her deserted father and his family, -- she cheared herself by
reflecting that if ever she should qualify herself so as to justify Sir Guise
in owning her as his lawful lady, all would still be well. Inspired by the
expectation of such a reward, -- she applied with unwearied diligence to
whatever might render her more attracting in manners, and cultured in mind. --
Her grand object, in attempting the adornment of both, was, to deserve the
honor which she believed Sir Guise had conferred on her; and to enable him to
acknowledge her with less comparative disgrace: -- and as the baronet sometimes
found relief in her gentleness, from the violence of Mrs. Tempest, and the
disturbance of his thoughts on his usage to the real Lady Stuart, -- his kind
treatment of her made her still lay much of his deception to his fear of losing
her by a discovery of the truth; and although her parents, more especially her
mother, never uttered his name without annexing to it a curse, -- she
acknowledged to Olivia in the garden, that, although she too well knew she had
herself acted very wrong, she did not believe he was half so bad as people
represented him. "This I must say: though, except we happen to meet with him at
home this morning, I must never hope, and indeed, I do not -- de -- desire --
that is -- I do not -- ought to desire, ever to see him more." -- "This
morning, child?" questioned Olivia: "what do you mean?" -- "Yes, madam, my
father and mother, and my brother Jerome, are determined to see him; and -- and
Jerome swore on his knees -- But what good can it do, madam, to drag me before
his family? And then my brother is so passionate! -- If, indeed, Sir Guise
could be sent for to any other place but his own house -- and -- and -- talked
-- to -- about me, or about the poor child -- or if -- if -- I -- if -- I -- I
-- "

Here grief awhile choked her utterance. -- "Not that my father," added she,
"would suffer either of us to receive another farthing of his money: he would
sooner work his poor fingers to the bone; nay, all which Jerome has in one of
those great panniers, are presents sent by Sir Guise or myself, from town,
since I imagined, alas! myself, and assured them, I was his sacred though
secret wife; and my father and brother have worked night and day for these four
months past, -- indeed, ever since they knew of my disappointment, -- and
almost starved themselves, to save up the money they have received, that they
may throw it back to the baronet; -- though, if any thing should happen to my
brother, or to my father, or -- or -- or -- to -- any -- body -- else, -- I
know not what would become of me. Would I were dead, miss! I am a wicked girl,
and have no right to live, bringing the gray hairs of my poor father and mother
to the grave. You do not know how they are altered -- they are not like the
same people, since they heard of my misfortune -- though they have not given me
one harsh word since I came home; yet I cannot curse poor Sir Guise, as they
do, -- indeed I cannot: pray forgive me, miss; I tried to make him love me, --
indeed I did: -- I shall never see him again, so I do not speak on that
account; but were he as much to blame as myself, I had rather die than be the
death of -- of -- of -- any -- body in the world, much less the father of -- my
-- my -- pray forgive me -- yet I would to heaven, some kind-hearted person,
though I know I do not deserve it, would try to persuade my father from going
to the abbey. Would to heaven, Miss Caroline Stuart did but know, or that I
could any way get a letter to her! I have one ready written -- I am sure she
would contrive -- O miss, you do not know what an angel she is; -- not that I
ever saw her but once -- but that once, I shall never forget it -- she almost
broke my heart: -- one Mr. Dennison, the baronet's steward, whom we sometimes
saw at Clare Place, brought her unawares to my lodgings, when he knew his
master was gone a journey; then it was that she told me, if I would return home
to my poor father, and make my family a visit, and then find some excuse to
stay with them, without letting any body else know of it, except Mr. Dennison,
she would take all the care of the child to herself, nurse and provide for it
as her own, and that she would promise I should not only hear about its
welfare, but contrive, now and then, to let me see it, by means of Mr.
Dennison; and none of my family being let into the secret; and that as to Sir
Guise, said the sweet young lady -- (except yourself, miss, I never saw her
equal, either in goodness, or in beauty) -- it will be easy for us to manage
matters with him: for you know, Jane, continued she, he must at times be as
grieved as yourself, for the injury you are both of you doing to the most
affectionate wife in the whole world. -- Then it was, I first discovered his
former marriage, and on authority, alas! I could not disbelieve. She saw the
agonies into which the information threw me, and tried to sooth them; -- ah!
why are not all good people, all virtuous ladies, so mild as her when they
speak to -- to unhappy women? Sure the gentle accent would have more proselytes
than the stern rebuke. -- What an atonement it will be -- exclaimed the angel
daughter of the unfortunate Sir Guise -- what an atonement, Jane, for the
wrongs you have done my poor mother, who is, both in spirits and health, a
sufferer, if you, -- who were so often the unknown cause, though, I own, an
unconscious one, of her husband's estrangement and absence from home, -- should
also be the secret cause of his return to her! I am sure I, as his child, shall
be bound to pray for you during my whole life! and shall look upon the
attentions I show this poor little thing -- (my child, you must know, was then,
continued the weeping Jane, asleep in the cradle just by me) -- I say, I shall
look upon the attention paid to your babe, Jenny, as part of the gratitude I
owe the mother, for the amiable consideration shown for my own parent; and,
indeed, your merit, my good girl -- she called me so, miss, though I did not
deserve it -- will be much greater than mine, on this occasion: for you,
perhaps, will sacrifice a strong, though an improper passion, to a much
superior principle, and I shall be but an humble instrument to reward you for
so doing! But your reward, Jenny, will be much greater, and administered to you
by an infinitely higher power, whose forgiveness of the past will be
accompanied by eternal happiness in future! -- Here, miss, the sweet lady took
my child in her arms, and kissed it several times, and putting it again into
the cradle, said -- Yes, and this dear little thing too shall honor its
mother; the first words I will teach it to lisp shall be bless my mother for
all her goodness! If you consent to this, Jenny, -- Dennison and I will devise
some means for you to have the child properly disposed of, when you go into the
country; and it will be as true as easy for you to say, you know a person who
will take care of the infant till you come back. -- Then, taking my hand, and
again kissing my poor little one, she went down with Mr. Dennison, who wept as
he assured Miss Caroline that my infant -- was like the -- the -- I -- I -- I
-- forget what, miss -- but something about its likeness to Sir Guise: -- I
often thought there was a resemblance; -- and, I am sure I could not but kiss
the hand of good Mr. Dennison, for what he said about it -- pray forgive me,
madam.

"But all Miss Stuart's intended kindness was put a stop to by a wicked woman,
Mrs. Tempest, -- and a tempest she is by name and by nature, -- who ferreted me
out, and called me all manner of names; I deserved them indeed; she pulled the
hair from my head, by handfuls, before his face; she made him promise I should
go away from him, before she would quit the house; and, after repeating all the
shocking names she had before made use of, and cursing me several times (for
she swore terribly), she threw herself out at the door, declaring, she would be
the death of us both, if her own soul was the forfeit, unless he brought her
word I had left the lodgings, never to return: so that you see Sir Guise was
forced into that he did: yet I thought on what his good daughter had said to
me, though it was no time to make him more wretched by my reproaches, or speak
of the fatal truths which had been told to me. But I was going to send my
father word, if he would receive me I would return home, and never see the
baronet more, -- when my father himself, and my cousin Jonathan, entered the
room, while Sir Guise was there: they found me-with my hair dishevelled, and
every part of my dress in disorder; which led them to suppose that Sir Guise,
who looked no less terrified than myself, had been beating of me: for it was
just after Mrs. Tempest had gone away. But I never breathed the name either of
good Mr. Dennison or his young lady, to Sir Guise, or to Mrs. Tempest; so that
they cannot come to any harm on my account, -- there is some comfort in that."

Here the tender and afflicted Jane talked to the infant, kissed, and wept over
it, while Olivia experienced strong emotions of grief, love, and admiration, as
well for the friend of her infancy, Miss Stuart, as for the mother and the
child.

CHAPTER VIII
UPON the return of Olivia to the breakfasting parlour, which was immediately
after she had placed Jenny more at her ease with her own family, she seated
herself, even though her beloved Henry was in the room, between Mr. Clare and
Sir Armine; and in that situation recapitulated, with great fidelity, -- but
with many comments and illustrations, supplied from that rich repository, her
own good mind, -- all that had passed between her and the humble companion of
her walk. Both the old gentlemen were much affected, and experienced, in their
turn, the sensations, though perhaps in a less vivid degree, which had before
been felt by Olivia; nor were those of Lady Fitzorton, who had a very tender
disposition, less animated. But what shall be said of the emotions of Henry?
especially at the passages that depicted the virtue of Caroline Stuart, on whom
Olivia passed an eulogy that would not have been unworthy of Henry himself! --
regretting, at every sentence, that the friendship formed between them in
childhood had ever been destroyed.

We must, in truth, leave this matter, as we have done many others, to the
reader's own imagination. -- If he has been, or is, a lover, he will not be at
a loss to conjecture; -- if he has not, he may be still able, faintly, to judge
what a young man of an ardent temper, and under Henry's circumstances, would be
likely to feel on such an occasion.

Be it noted also, to the honor of Olivia, that in her recital she sunk upon
her little auditory, probably in consideration of Henry's friendship for
Charles Stuart, as many of the indefensible parts of the baronet's conduct as
she could; or, rather, she gave to truth its most candid form. At this moment
Partington entered the room, took a chair, and sat thoughtfully down. "To let
the Atwoods meet the Stuarts, you know," -- said Olivia, addressing herself to
Lady Fitzorton, and looking at the old gentlemen, -- "would be little short of
actual madness, -- at least till matters are in better train; and to allow them
to take possession of the cottage they mentioned, just at present, while left
to the guidance of their own resentments, would be as bad. Suppose then" --
here she had a long whisper with her father, at the end of which, she sprung
up, and running to Henry, asked him if he was disposed for a walk to the poor
deserted manor-house, that fine morning? -- "My father," said she, "has given
me a commission, which must be executed immediately."

Henry was rising to attend her, when Partington getting up, cried out, "Hold
hold, you little villain! I see you, and your old scoundrel of a father, are
upon some scheme to trick me out of my vagabonds: -- but it will not do: -- I have
settled the whole business. They are getting ready to go with me; and I have
ordered your little message-cart, Armine, to come in tow of my chaise; and I
had a good mind to have ordered your chaise into the bargain."

"And you might have done so," said Sir Armine, warmly, -- "and my coach too."
-- "And my curricle," cried Olivia, putting on her cloak. -- "And all our
carriages," added Mr. Clare; -- "but then, you must not cheat my poor Olivia
out of her share of the Atwoods. -- She tells me, the eldest daughter is to
succeed the foolish young woman who is marrying off." -- "O!" exclaimed Olivia,
"I cannot do without dear Jane; -- she is the only woman in the world to
replace Lucy: -- and her child will be no hindrance; and the manor-house is
really catching cold, for want of company. -- You know, my dear Lady Fitzorton,
you never let us live any where but with you, at the castle; -- and we are ten
times greater vagabonds, as Mr. Partington calls them, than any of the Atwoods.
-- So do not interfere with my part of the property, pray, Mr. Insufferable!"

"Be it so: -- you are a sad fellow, though," answered Partington: -- "but as
that is the case, my chaise and the cart will do. -- I have sent the caitiff,
true George, after Jerome and his Dorothy, as he calls her; -- and I will go
before, upon one of your horses, -- not your mad-cap, Bucephalus, though,
Henry; you have taught him some of your poetical flights. -- Od's pranks! the
high-mettled rascal would throw Apollo; -- one would think he was making
Pindarics, while mere mortal man was upon his back! -- No, no, James's
even-going pad for me." -- "Order white Surry for the field tomorrow," quoth
Henry, sportingly. -- "But whither," demanded Lady Fitzorton, -- "are you going
to carry the good folks?"

"To where all vagabonds ought to be carried -- to a place of safety: -- so
don't ask any more questions: -- look to the hussy and her brat, who are to go
into your custody."

"But shall we not," -- resumed Lady Fitzorton -- "see them again before they
go? I have not seen any but the eldest daughter and her infant yet."

"No," answered Partington: -- "no leave-takings. The people are sick and
sorry; -- and as to gratitude, and all that, time enough to settle these
matters when our work is done. We are officers of justice, you know, and of
course are responsible for our prisoners.

"Meantime, it is easy to suppose the men and boys have made their bows, and
the women and girls dropped their curtsies. I hate blushing and blubbering: -- so
good bye to you -- I hear the carriages wheeling round; -- aye, and there I see
steps on Steady, -- your youngest villain, Armine, is leading him. -- I shall
have the vagabonds come whimpering, if I do not stop them. -- Not a step,
therefore, on your lives, you scoundrels, till we have got through the park."

"But promise me," -- said Olivia, following Partington to the door; -- "you
will leave my property; I ought to go and settle that matter myself."

"Settle nonsense!" cried Partington. -- "I Will tell the girl, she and her child
are to be put into prison, by you instead of me."

"Oh! but another thing," said Olivia: -- "I would not have you go to the
abbey, nor within sight of it, for the world: -- you know not what may be the
consequence. -- Gracious! -- Mr. Partington, you are the best man in the world
-- almost -- but -- but -- are so precipitate -- so -- "

"Did you ever hear such a saucy, vexatious, talkative, prittle-prattle,
insolent, insufferable scoundrel, since you were born?" cried Partington,
taking her hand and kissing it. -- "Why, you little impertinent villain, do you
pretend to instruct an old rascal like me, where I am to go, and what I am to
do? -- Do I ask, how you intend to dispose of your share of the ragamuffins? --
whether strangling, shooting, or only whipping, is to be their portion? -- As
to the abbey, do you suppose I will carry such a set of abominables before the
worthy gentleman" -- here he took off his hat, and bowed respectfully -- "who
has been so kind to them, till they are in a proper condition to bring him to
the gibbet? -- But you have kept me talking here, while I could have got, with
my whole crew, almost halfway to my journey's end: -- so ask no questions --
stay, all of you, in this room, without ringing the bell, twenty minutes, by
Olivia's watch: -- and so God mend you all."

Saying this, he opened the door, and meeting Henry, he thrust him into the
room also, crying out, "God mend you too, you scoundrel!" -- then locking the
door, gave the key to one of the servants. "Here, sirrah, if you let them out
before the expiration of twenty minutes by the click of that pendulum opposite,
to which I now station you" -- pointing to the castle clock -- "I Will anatomize
you: -- nay more, I will have an hole dug, chin deep, in the very spot where I
now place you, -- and turning you into a sun-dial, with a brass plate nailed to
your head, make you learn to keep time for the rest of your life! -- Stay, here
comes George, -- you are released, sirrah, -- this rascal will serve my purpose
better. -- Here Mr. Scoundrel," said Partington: -- "twenty minutes, to a
moment, keep this key, -- then open that door, -- and have an eye to the
windows too; but as I know you to be a thorough-paced villain, and therefore to
be depended on, -- you may move about a little, just to stretch your legs."

Partington mounted Steady, after a short conference with Jerome and his mule,
who now came up, -- packed the Atwoods into the carriages -- and George took
his station.

CHAPTER IX.
THE Clares and Fitzortons had too sincere a veneration for the virtues of this
excellent man, not to let him conduct them in his own way.

Sir Armine and Lady Fitzorton could not, however, but smile at the conceit of
their own castle being converted into a jail, and one of their own servants
into the jailor; -- and they were puzzling themselves, to know in whose custody
they were placed, when a voice, which they knew to be that of true George,
addressed them through the keyhole.

"Pray, my ladies and gentlemen, don't be angry; -- I hope you will be pleased
to be shut up for as long a time as Mr. Partington has ordered; -- not that I
mind being 'natomised, a pin's point; -- but, says he, you are a scoundrel of
honor, George, -- this was in a whisper -- shaking my hand at the same time --
your worship knows his way. -- So I am sorry I cannot let you out, my ladies and
gentlemen: but I know, if I did, he would never call me a scoundrel again, --
though, mayhap, I should be more of a scoundrel then than I am now. -- The time
will soon be gone; fourteen minutes and almost a half now. -- They say, time
has wings: but I think, I never knew him creep so slow in my life. -- I wish I
could tell you any pretty story, or sing a good song, or do any thing, to keep
your honors in spirits, while you are my prisoners. As for that, had your
honors been confined in a dark room, you would have been better off than poor
me, or Mr. Partington either: -- for there was such kissing and crying with the
old folks, on leaving Jenny and her child behind, -- and Jenny, I believe is
hardly out of her fits yet!" -- "In fits!" answered Olivia: -- "let me out this
instant -- no -- run and tell her -- I will be with her in -- a -- very few
minutes." -- "I cannot go to tell her, miss, though I had rather be in fits
myself, than she: -- yet I may not budge till my time is out."

Among the other good qualities of George, he had one well worthy the adoption
of all his party-colored brethren, -- to wit, that simple but rare property of
doing what he was ordered.

"But here she comes with the child in her arms, and the tears all about her
pretty face: -- now I can tell her, miss, -- nay, for that matter, in about
another minute and three quarters you may tell her yourself." -- Here he
entered into a short conversation with Jane, -- looking alternately at her and
at his watch, -- then he exclaimed -- "Huzza! -- Huzza! -- the time's out! the
time's out!" -- and he vaulted in the air as if he himself had gained his
freedom after years of slavery. -- He unlocked the door, entered the room, and
entreated their honors pardon, on receiving which, he went comforted away. --
Olivia hasted to her charge -- Henry was about to take his share in the
business, when his father requested him to stop a few moments, as he had
something to communicate, to which the presence of his mother, and their mutual
friend Mr. Clare, could be no objection, -- being, indeed, parties concerned.
"No," added he recollecting himself, -- "it will do rather better tomorrow
morning. -- I forgot a few points which I have to adjust previously with you,
my dear Clare. -- Tomorrow morning then, Henry, we will have our conference;
the result of which, I trust, will be as perfect happiness to you, as can be
expected in a world like this."

Henry stood irresolute, whether to speak or not; -- and, while he was
balancing, Olivia came back, light as the gossamer, and said to him in
undeniable accents, -- "Now, then, for our walk to the manor-house, -- and
Jenny Atwood will be of our party: the air will do her good; -- and besides,
she will be wanted, -- or if she should be fatigued, my good papa has commanded
me to take the coach going and coming, if necessary: -- and why should not dear
Jane, and you and I, Henry, have an airing this morning, as well as the rest of
the Atwoods and Mr. Partington? -- We will be back by dinnertime, sir," --
added she to her father -- and then distributing, to the rest of the family,
her little caresses, with a grace perfectly her own, as she always did before
she went out, -- she took her Henry's arm: and as Jenny Atwood modestly
declined the carriage, they all three walked through the park of Fitzorton, and
to the manor-house of Clare.

CHAPTER X.
THIS little excursion was productive of an event, which had well nigh brought
about that very explanation which Henry had so long desired, yet dreaded,
should take place.

Olivia had, at this first setting out, arranged Jane Atwood between Henry and
herself, -- each insisting upon taking an arm; but soon after, Olivia made a
little alteration by putting herself in Jenny's place, declaring "That she was
resolved to have the charge all to herself." Whether this was the whole, or
only in part, the reason for the change, it is impossible for us to say, but it
was that which she thought fit to assign; and there was no time to dispute it;
for just as the trio had gained an eminence in Mr. Clare's park, Jenny was led
by curiosity, or some other motive, to ask, "Whether the fine seat to the right
did not belong to -- to -- to -- "

Perceiving her faulter, Olivia relieved her by saying "Yes, that is the abbey:
but we shall have a better view of it presently; -- yet the manor-house will be
quite jealous if you give the preference, Jane, to the abbey."

Henry suppressed a sigh as he directed his view to the latter.

"And I suppose, then, that forest," resumed Jane, with increased emotion, "is
-- is -- is -- the one I have heard -- so -- so much about?"

"You are right," answered Olivia: "those are the abbey woods; -- but I would
have you to know, our dear little groves and shrubberies will supply you with
more fragrant flowers and enchanting walks; -- do not you think so, Henry?"

Jane appearing faint, Olivia proposed resting a few minutes in one of the
small alcoves. Hither they repaired: -- Jenny and Henry sat on the same bench,
-- perhaps by accident, or out of respect to Olivia; for they left to her one
which commanded an extensive prospect, whereas theirs had nothing to recommend
it but an indistinct view of the abbey, and a skirt of its forest. -- Olivia
did not profit by this mark of their politeness, rather preferring a seat on
the same bench; -- and, no doubt, by a like chance, or compliment, thinking she
had sufficiently asserted her claims, placed herself by the side of Henry; --
almost in the next instant her attention was drawn to some pencillings on the
opposite panel of the wainscot; -- she rose to read them. -- Henry, impelled
by a sudden recollection, caught her gown, and gently drawing her toward him,
she again sat down, without in the least suspecting there was any other motive
in the mind of Henry than that which, to her own, was the most delightful --
the sweet thought of Henry; -- and she would have left the alcove, without,
perhaps, thinking of her former intention, had not Jane Atwood, as she was
going out, exclaimed, "Good Heaven! here are the names of that angel, Miss
Caroline, and Lady Stuart! and -- and -- " had Olivia permitted her to stay
another moment in the alcove, she would have discovered the rest: but that
amiable girl, believing she could not get her away too soon, hurried out,
protesting, "They should not have time to settle their business, and be back by
dinner." -- She took, however, the first opportunity, when they had got into a
path which did not admit their all walking together, to assure Henry she was
doubly indebted to him for his considerate goodness in preventing her from
running on to, perhaps, fatal discoveries: -- "Generous Henry! you feared
Jenny, who finds, alas, but too many occasions to speak of Sir Guise, would
have been led, by seeing the names of his fair daughter, and deceased wife,
into a train of thought, that it is not for her peace she should indulge. --
But I wonder we have never observed these names before; -- indeed, it has not
been the manor-house summer this year; -- the castle has made us truants from
this our other home. I do not think," continued Olivia, availing herself of
being behind Henry, in this narrow pathway, and Jenny's walking before, the
grass on the opposite side being left for mowing, and almost ready for the
scythe, -- "I do not think any of the family has been in that alcove since July
was twelvemonth, when, you remember, we all dined and passed the day there. I
do not remember any penciling then; and it is odd enough, how the names of the
Stuarts should be there, as none of them, except Charles, would be likely even
to come upon our grounds, since our unfortunate quarrel, you know. -- Is it not
strange Henry? But hush," said she, -- "Do not answer me now: dear Jane will
think we neglect her: -- stop, let me pass you, and join her: -- but do not
loiter behind."

Saying this, she bounded beside him at a place where the grass happened to be
scanty; -- and, like Camilla, seemed scarcely to bend the blade. -- Thus did
Henry escape a discovery of an imprudence, which the excess of disappointed
love alone could excuse; -- for, had Olivia put her first design into
execution, or Jane continued to go on, the following verses would have been
found pencilled, in a smaller character, immediately under the names of
Caroline, Lady Stuart, Sir Guise, and Henry.

O potent Love! that thy true sighs,
Could reconcile antipathies!
Ah, then, thy rosy bands should join
Henry and faithful Caroline.
Then too, their long contending sires,
Warmed by thy soul-cementing fires,
To thy pure shrine should incense bear,
And parents aid their children's prayer.
Ah! try then, Love, thy potent sighs,
To reconcile antipathies!
This effusion escaped Henry in one of his tender migrations; -- for there was
scarce a spot on any one of the estates, which had not received some memorial
of his disappointed passion -- and in not a few places his Muse had been called
upon to celebrate the fair object of his afflicted heart -- except in those
exigencies, when he was really too much distracted by his passion for Caroline,
to indulge his passion for poetry, or even to know that the fictions of poetry
had a place in his heart; -- so entirely was it at those times rapt by the
realities of love. Happening to be one day sitting in the alcove which we have
just left, when he was far from happy, yet as far from being hopeless, -- the
precise state of mind, perhaps, which admits a poetic description of real
feelings, his thoughts took that turn, in prose, which he afterward versified
in the manner we have seen. The warm-breathed prayer, for the moment, soothed
the woe: but how he suffered such a tell-tale evidence, in which "his hand
appeared against his heart," to remain, we know not: -- certain, however, it
is, that a future hazard, from the same cause, was put at defiance; for the
verses were rubbed out so effectually the same evening, that not a trace was
left for the searching eye either of curiosity or jealousy.

CHAPTER XI.
AS Henry and his fair companions were ascending the flight of steps which led
to the front of the manor-house, Olivia observed, "That two persons on
horseback were near the paddock," which was at the distance only of a few paces
from the back of the mansion. -- Olivia, with Jenny, ran to the edge of the
steps to see; and Henry followed, as the persons on horseback were passing the
great gate, -- the iron-work adjoining to which, ran the full length of the
house and courtyard: -- Jenny cried out, "Oh heaven! there is my guardian
angel herself! -- there is Miss Stuart! -- I should know her from a thousand!
-- that is she, madam! -- the beautiful lady on horseback! -- and the person
with her, is good Mr. Dennison: -- I must, indeed I must go and pay them my
humble respects."

She was down the steps, and round to the iron railing, in a moment,
exclaiming, at every step, "Heaven bless your ladyship! -- God preserve you,
Miss Caroline, and you too, Mr. Dennison!" -- They were returning from their
morning ride round the parks, by the public road, which encircled the three
estates. -- Olivia, hearing the name of Caroline, impelled by the recollected
fondness of infant days, and by veneration, to see a lady, for whose virtues
she bore such respect, ran with no less speed; -- and Henry, agitated by a
thousand emotions, rather flew than ran, to behold the cause of all his bliss
and all his anguish. Caroline having stopped her horse on the first hearing of
Jenny's ejaculations, recognized the person who had uttered them, but had
scarcely time to exclaim, "Whom do I behold? -- Is it possible? -- Can it be
Jenny Atwood?" -- before the sight of Henry and Olivia put all her ideas to
flight. "Dear associate of our blooming hours!" said Olivia, -- "has chance at
last permitted me again to offer, personally, to your virtues, that tribute,
which Henry Fitzorton has a thousand times heard me pay you, -- and which my
secret heart had mingled with my constant prayers for the choicest blessings of
heaven upon the good?"

Caroline was about to reply, but was so visibly affected by the emotions of
admiration and astonishment, excited by the unexpected sight of, perhaps, the
three persons upon earth most calculated to raise those emotions, -- and,
possibly, by some other not undelightful reflections, -- that she could not
utter a word, and with great difficulty kept her seat on the horse: and when
Dennison reminded her, "That Sir Guise must be within a very short distance, as
he heard the gate shut, which belonged to the cottage, where they had left him
conversing with the labourer; -- and as the sudden sight of Jane might occasion
some disturbance," the good old man recommended a separation of the parties for
the present. -- "Gracious heaven!" exclaimed both the ladies, as if inspired by
the same wish, and vexed at the same disappointment, -- "How cruel!" -- "I have
ten thousand things to say," cried Caroline. -- "And I a million!" observed
Olivia.

"Sir Guise Stuart coming! did you say?" questioned the trembling Jane Atwood.

"O how long my heart has ached for this meeting! But you shall hear all from
our dear Henry," said Olivia to Caroline. -- "And I hope some favorable moment
will arrive, when -- but at present this deserving object of your attention
might make it, perhaps -- "

"I hear the sound of the horses' feet," cried Caroline: -- "Barbarous
fortune!" -- "Ride on, for goodness' sake, miss," exclaimed the alternately
flushed and pallid Dennison, guiding her horse from the railing again into the
road. -- "Jenny Atwood, get out of sight, I charge you: -- my master is just
behind." Then beckoning Henry toward him, the old man whispered -- "Joyful
news, dear young squire! joyful news! you will hear it soon; -- but master must
not see Jenny: -- we shall be in a peck of trouble again if he does: -- joyful
news! joyful news!"

The rapidity with which all the parties conversed and separated, and the
characteristic actions and looks of each person, were such as to exceed our
powers of description. Dennison and Caroline were soon out of sight; for when
they had past the iron rails, the interposing trees and thickening hedge-rows,
shut them from the view. Henry and Olivia, though scarcely able to support
their own emotions, were engaged in carrying, rather than leading, poor Jane
Atwood into the house; -- where they were no sooner arrived, than the hapless
victim of love and conscience almost fell on her knees; burning, at the same
instant, with her blushes, as she implored permission to be taken where she
might just have a glance, one glance, at Sir Guise, without being herself seen;
-- promising, that it should be the last request she would ever dare to make
concerning him: -- "and, oh! pray, pray consider, whatever be his faults he is
the father of --." Then seeing Olivia give a half assenting, half denying look,
betwixt compassion and reluctance, as she raised her up, -- the hapless girl
followed to a chamber in the second story, without seeming to want any of the
strength or life which had before left her; -- and, running to the window that
looked into the road, she clasped her hands together, crying, "There -- there
-- there is -- there is -- the father, alas! of my poor -- poor -- dishonored
-- " and, without finishing the sentence, fell senseless upon the floor, lost
to the view of what she had so earnestly supplicated.

It was not easy to recover her: for when she had any return of life and
reason, her quick sensibility of shame for the confusion she had caused, and
the weakness she had betrayed, produced such terrifying relapses, that, had not
True George been dispatched to the manor-house, to say dinner waited, and gone
back with his usual speed, seeing the posture of affairs, and asking no
questions, but taking it for granted the coach, with which he soon returned,
would be necessary, -- it is not probable they would have regained the castle
that day.

When Olivia and Henry had leisure to separate the reflections which the
foregoing scenes had crowded upon them, a new light was thrown over many old
subjects. -- First, it appeared very clear to them both, as it afterward did
to the whole family, that such was the dominion Sir Guise Stuart had still over
the affections of Jane Atwood, it would be highly improper, and indeed
impossible, to place her at the manor-house, or any where else in the
neighborhood of the abbey. Secondly, Olivia was struck with the increased
personal beauty and graceful manners of Caroline, set off as they were by an
ineffable kind of smile, which seemed to open upon the person addressed the
warmest and most brilliant rays of her heart and understanding; -- indeed, she
saw Caroline also, under the influence of unusually happy feelings, proceeding
from the joyful news that Dennison hinted at; she therefore, gently reproached
Henry for not having done her justice; -- she doubted whether, even his candid
mind had not suffered the insults received from the father, in some small
degree, to create a prejudice against the daughter; -- but this idea was done
away on her reconsidering the matter, "for," said she, with the most
unsuspicious simplicity, "if this were the case, it would have operated
equally, and perhaps more so, to the disadvantage of the son." -- She then
tried to account for the matter in many other ways; and it ended in her
reasoning, as usual, to her Henry's credit: she told her own heart -- and the
intelligence communicated to her cheeks a suffusion of that beautiful bloom,
which is produced by conscious pleasure, -- she told her own heart, that the
tender partiality which Henry entertained for herself, made him blind to much
greater perfections in every other woman. -- This settled the point to that
heart's content; and he was again honorably acquitted, as to prejudice, but
found guilty, sweetly guilty of injustice; -- yet love pardoned him even that
offense; "For in truth," said she, "injustice to Caroline is love to Olivia."
-- It is at any rate, very certain, that, amongst all her ways of investigating
this want of rhapsody in Henry, on a subject whereon she thought its whole
scope would have been warranted, -- she never once hit upon the only cause to
which it might have been attributed, and to which a thousand other young ladies
would, most likely, have assigned it. -- Reader, whatever be thy sex, in the
degree that thou art armed with knowledge of the world, -- or art arrayed only
in that natural innocence, which has no suspicions or concealments, and which
may long be the amiable victim of its credulity, without at all supposing it is
so, -- thou will pronounce upon this part of Olivia's conduct and character. If
thou have the world's wisdom about thee, thou will condemn her as a silly girl,
wanting penetration, where the most stupid are said to be sharp sighted; --
but, if thou art endowed with that unsuspecting quality we have mentioned,
proceeding from unpractised innocence, thou will love her for possessing that,
which, were thou united to congenial virtue, would make thy home a paradise,
and thy partner such as the old poet has described, where he observes, thou
might Lay thy sleeping life within her arms But, whether thou believe such
excellence for natural or not, we can only re-assure thee, such was the
excellence of Olivia Clare; -- and if thou art a man, the worst we wish thee
is, that thou may be convinced of its possibility, by marking such another
woman for thine own.

CHAPTER XII.
IN the progress of the evening after these occurrences, Jenny, by the tender
assiduities of Olivia, became much more composed, though at the first sight of
her own little one, she burst into a flood of tears, amidst which she told the
infant, she had encountered her namesake -- she tried to impart to it a share
of her own emotions, -- and concluded by asking the poor babe, -- as if it were
of an age to feel and reason on its misfortune, "Whether it would be possible
for Sir Guise to look upon that innocent face, without kissing, loving, and
affording it some protection?"

But the greatest difficulty for the historian of these pages, is to enter
into, or explain the result of Henry's sentiments and feelings on the various
incidents of this eventful day, every hour of which, as indeed of several
preceding ones, had gradually wrought him to a tension of thought and
sensation, almost too oppressive and tumultuous for his reason to sustain. --
Every time he beheld Olivia, he witnessed not only her particular attachment to
himself, but the general excellence of her character. -- He saw all that is
most graceful, and most worthy, uniting in her disposition: -- he perceived
that she was so guarded by the ingenuousness of her own heart, -- it would have
required none of the refined arts of a hypocrite to deceive her, in whatever
most concerned her peace, even for her whole life together: -- he observed,
that her faith was so entire in him, that, as he never did, and indeed never
had opportunity to intimate her affection was not returned, -- it is doubtful
whether any thing but the strongest confirmation of positive proofs could have
persuaded her to believe it. For his deepest mysteries, she had an explanation
supplied by her love, and satisfactory to her reason; -- and, for his very
languors, -- (we will not use so chilling a word as coldness, -- it was,
perhaps, not possible to his nature) -- for his languors, her own delicacy
suggested an apology, or rather a vindication. Her warm encomiums on his
Caroline evinced the superiority of her soul to that petty jealousy, which too
often takes alarm at the charms of another woman; -- and her behavior to the
poor Atwoods, more especially to the dishonored Jane, notwithstanding her
trespass in a point which few females can pardon in each other under any
circumstances, no, not even where their conscience tells them, for the most
selfish reasons, they ought to have a degree of fellow feeling, -- was a fresh
instance, amongst innumerable others, of her liberal and forgiving spirit; --
placing her conspicuously on the list of the truly good, though not on the
catalogue of those whom Mr. Addison has emphatically called the "outrageously
virtuous."

These considerations, reinforced by those which, as auxiliaries, he placed
before his eyes, -- the family arguments in her favor, such as a similarity of
religion, -- the ardent hopes of both their parents, -- the reward which so
much constancy, such unwearied tenderness and goodness claimed from him; --
with the sad reverse in case of his remaining insensible, or undecided, -- such
as a religious dispute, the most of all human contentions to be dreaded,
whether in families or in states, -- the misery, perhaps the death, of Olivia's
father, and of his own parents, -- the despair, perhaps the distraction, of
Olivia herself, should she discover not only that she had not been the object
beloved, but that he had all along loved another; -- these reflections, we say,
with the impressions left on his mind by the keen observations and cautionary
hints of his brother John, had, at intervals, since he returned from the
funeral of Lady Stuart, almost reconciled him to the idea of surrendering up
his love, as a sacrifice to his friendship, gratitude, and filial duty: -- and
how powerfully these three advocates can plead their cause in a heart like that
of Henry Fitzorton, those who are acquainted with their eloquence, alone can
tell.

At times, he even pleased himself with the proud triumph he supposed he should
feel on such a sacrifice, and thought, for a moment, the felicity of many ought
to outweigh, in a generous mind, all considerations for the happiness of one.
-- To encourage him in these sentiments, he now paid more than his wonted
attention to the words and actions of Olivia, -- expatiated on her various
attractions, personal and mental, -- talked to others, and to himself about
her, and absolutely set himself seriously down to the task of trying to ripen
his affectionate friendship for her into love, -- at least such a degree of it,
as would guard her from his own wandering feelings, should they join their
hands: -- the natural effect of all which was, that although he did not make
Olivia more in love with him, because that was impossible, he riveted the
affection she sincerely felt for him, in a manner that death alone, and that
her own death, could break the chain; for she had been heard to declare, (and
truth guarded, while it graced her lips) that Henry's descending first to the
grave could not impair her attachment, "since I am convinced," said she,
weeping at there being a human possibility that he might die first, -- "the
memory of him would be infinitely more dear to me than the life of any other
man, be his professions or pretensions what they might." But, alas! the very
attentions which we have observed Henry had imposed himself, were imposed as a
task, and -- like other forced formalities, and coercive lessons, which must be
learned, -- turned the whole into a reluctant, but necessary toil; -- Hic labor
hoc opus est, was its motto, which, in the end, made him recede from the point
he thereby proposed to gain, in the very proportion that Olivia, whose
tenderness was prepared to receive every the least impression, and expression
of his, -- and whose own tenderness was her heart's spontaneous joy, --
advanced toward it.

And, indeed, those efforts in favor of Olivia were always made by Henry after
several days' absence from Caroline: but the bare mention of the name of the
latter, the sight of her miniature, which the reader certainly recollects he
was in possession of, and to which, "though it be not here written down," we
trust the said reader has represented the too faithful lover, as frequently
paying his secret devotion, -- or even the most trivial circumstance that had
allusion to Caroline, would, in a single moment, level with the dust the
labored fortification he had built in his fancy, for the reception and defense
of Olivia. -- And, when he supposed his partiality to that last-mentioned
amiable girl was greater than it used to be, after he had heard her launch
forth into eulogies on the person, manners, voice, or recorded deeds of
Caroline, it was then most demonstrable, that his esteem was the greater for
the one, because she had then done most justice to the other: -- in fact,
because Olivia, his friend, had offered homage to Caroline, his love: -- and
thus did the former become the victim of her own unsuspicious generosity.

CHAPTER XIII.
AFTER this explanation, it will not be matter of surprise to the reader, that,
though Henry neither spoke, nor was spoken to, in the momentary interview he
had with Caroline at the manor-house, -- the sight of her, and perhaps another
look, of which he only knew the sense and sentiment, -- for lovers alone can
translate, with accuracy, the silent language of love, -- the most recent
cordial poured into his heart by honest Dennison, in those brief but potent
sounds of "Joyful news at home, young squire!" -- these were more than enough
to make him forget the little he had learnt from contemplating the virtues of
his fair inmate; -- and convinced him, that his heart was neither a convert to
Olivia, nor an apostate to Caroline.

While yet in this disposition, the hour appointed for his interview with his
father approached, and he determined it should also be the hour of his long
smothered confidence: -- but, what was his surprise, what his disappointment,
when, betwixt the time of True George's coming into his apartment, to announce
his father's being prepared to receive him in his chamber, and his ascending
the stairs, to obey that summons, his mother hastened, in much disorder, to
say, the interview must be postponed! as a sudden return of his poor father's
complaint made it impossible to speak on any subject in which his feelings were
interested; but that, if he found himself not sufficiently recovered in a day
or two, he would depute her to communicate his sentiments, "which, I am sorry
to say, my dear Henry," added she, "are of a nature not to brook delay; -- and
I am not without my fears, that something he has just heard respecting you,
Henry, has been the chief means of bringing on a fit of the illness, to which
you know he is unfortunately subject."

The trembling Henry, after expressing the most sincere sorrow for his father's
sudden attack, earnestly entreated to know how he had been the unhappy cause?

"I have received your father's strong injunctions," replied Lady Fitzorton,
"not to breathe the subject either to you or to any of the family till farther
notice, and must now return to his chamber: for, alas! Sir Armine is all this
time in extreme pain." Turning round, however, as she was going out at the
door, and looking steadfastly, -- "Henry," said she, "if the intelligence which
has reached us be true, your own conscience will point it out: and if happily
it be false, the same bosom instructor will acquit you, and leave on your mind
no other regret, than that your father must suffer from the misconception, till
it can be done away. -- In either case," added his mother, "the report, we
trust in God, has reached only to your father and myself: -- heaven forbid that
it should have extended farther!"

Henry's bosom instructor told all, and more than all, perhaps, of the tale to
which his mother alluded; -- it did not hesitate a moment to suggest to him,
that the fatal secret of his heart was beginning to circulate. He still
suspected it had come to the ears of John; and he did not at all doubt but it
was now rapidly making its progress through the castle. -- The first wish of
his soul, we have seen, was that this might be the case: but all the feelings
of gratitude, of delicacy, of duty, and, as it will speedily appear, of
interest, -- made him desire the discovery should be attended by those
preparatory explanations, which, if they could not exculpate, might qualify his
conduct.

Indeed he began now to suspect that the secret was already more spread than he
had before supposed, though it was plain, from Olivia's whole demeanor, that
it had not yet been communicated to her.

And this, reader, seems to be the place at which we must speak to thee again,
though not perhaps for the last time, in the character of recorder of these
annals. -- We are not to learn, that a printed book is a very perilous, and in
some sort an assuming undertaking, and that the wit and wisdom of a reader are
upon guard and in arms, like jealous sentinels, to espy the weakness, vanity,
negligence, and ignorance of the man who comes forward as an entertainer, or
instructor of the public.

Some of these errors are of course obvious: and it is extremely probable that
thy acumen has enabled thee to detect many, many more, not generally apparent:
and in good time thy fault-finding powers may assist thee in discovering
others: but, as we would not perversely, maliciously, or wittingly, leave any
of the stumbling blocks in thy way, we will at all times do our best to remove
them, as well for thy ease as our own: for it is as sorry a thing in books as
in life, -- and we hold it alike villainous, -- to put people, whether writing
or talking to them, out of temper, when it is in any possible way to be
prevented.

Now it may happen, that, before thou have gained this stage of our history, we
have put thee a little out of humor by a seeming violation of probability: it
may have offended thy critical talents, that we should have, as it may seem to
thee, maliciously contrived to lock this Family Secret in our Henry's breast,
although such a number of keys, not only in his own house, but in the
neighborhood, were ready to open it. Perhaps, thou have long since exclaimed,
"Go to! -- Can it be supposed an impetuous youth should pay his court to a lady
in the neighborhood, to the daughter of his father's bitterest enemy, for so
long a period, undiscovered; that many of the servants of her family and of
his, that a brother of each house, and now perhaps of both, notwithstanding all
the private and public tumults, -- can it be supposed that this matter should
be any secret to half the surrounding parishes? and was there not to be found
one officious enemy, or "good-natured friend," or idle gossip, who, on the
swift wing of folly or curiosity, or the yet more rapid one of malice, would
have even panted to carry the tidings to the only two persons most interested
in its truth or falsehood, namely, Olivia and her father? or was the
neighborhood of Fitzorton-castle, the only spot in the whole world where no
such friend, enemy, or gossip in petticoats or in breeches, resided?"

In reply to such interrogations, it behoved us to search somewhat deeply, not
only into Henry's secret, but into the secrets of human nature: and having so
done, we firmly believe, that our knowledge in these hidden mysteries --
reverentially and not vauntingly be it spoken -- will clear up to our reader's
entire satisfaction, whatever talents he may have for discontent, all that
remains to be discovered on this at present questionable subject; -- and that
in a way, that may justify us in keeping Olivia and her father out of Henry
Fitzorton's secret, should it be necessary, a great while longer.

At present it may be sufficient to remind the reader, that if he looks into
the history of life, he will find that the persons most interested in any
family secret are generally the last of that family to whom it is imparted.

CHAPTER XIV.
No wonder, therefore, that Olivia and her father were, in the castle, the last
and the only persons who heard the secret that so nearly related to themselves:
-- for although love-tales, being amongst the most light, are the most easy of
carriage -- yet it may very possibly happen, that even the strong temptation
which naturally arises out of a strict inhibition to do the very thing
forbidden, may, in some minds, be contrasted by a yet stronger desire to
resist. -- And this was the exact case at present: -- that stronger desire was
the sincere love which was entertained for Olivia by every part of the family:
even the gossiping part of it in the servants' hall would sacrifice the delight
of doing what was commanded not to be done, to the superior pleasure of saying
and doing every thing that could keep her from the knowledge of whatever might
give her pain. And, as to Sir Armine and his lady, there were other obvious
reasons why the intelligence that might reach them would be withheld from Mr.
Clare and his daughter.

Now, in regard to Caroline Stuart, though the same motives would operate the
same way toward concealing from her the secret of Olivia and Henry, -- for
Olivia could not be more the object of domestic good will amongst the servants,
-- it was, in her case, less necessary to act upon those motives: for Sir Guise
scarcely ever had a guest at home since his disgrace, but Henry and father
Arthur; and there was not the smallest intercourse between the kitchens of the
two houses, from whence most of the materials for secret history are collected;
-- and she really had no opportunity of knowing, nor did she hear any thing
that related to the Fitzortons, since the separating quarrel, save what Henry
and her brother Charles chose to communicate: -- and whether those unhappy
friends were likely to tell Caroline, as matters now stood, the reader may by
this time well judge.

Henry Fitzorton's ill-fated passion, therefore, yet remained to be told to
those at the castle, who were the most deeply interested in its effects. -- Yet
in the proportion that he imagined it known to others, he panted for its being
communicated even where he most trembled to confide it: and in the perplexity
which his long suppression produced, he began to wish that it were unravelled
by any means, rather than it should not be unravelled, -- and the more
especially since the mystery of his love was not the only one that oppressed
his heart. -- Sometimes he determined to write, sometimes to speak the whole
story to Olivia, and throw himself on her generosity. Sometimes he had thoughts
of making her father first acquainted with the history, "whereof by parcels he
has somewhat heard perhaps," says he, "but naught distinctly." -- This was,
however, rejected; and all his hopes were again anchored on Olivia, whom he
fully resolved to inform of every thing, -- and that the very first opportunity.

On the heel of this determination, Olivia herself, who had been giving her
assistance to Henry's mother, to mitigate the sharp agonies which his father
had been enduring, came running into the room, and presented a letter to Henry,
-- saying, as she delivered it, -- "I hope it will prove a cordial to your
spirts, which I know your father's sickness must depress; -- it comes from the
abbey, -- and who knows but our good stars may be working together so far for
our good, that Sir Guise may permit his angel of a daughter to be upon the same
terms at the castle, as are enjoyed by his son Charles? -- For know, my Henry,
I am a great dreamer, and I have had a sort of vision about this: -- I see,
it is a lady's hand. -- I would lay any thing, we shall find that our Caroline
is the writer; -- but even if it should be so, and my dream should come true,
we must keep it to ourselves, and not say a word of it to any of the family, --
because it will be so delightsul so have the secret between us, and divulge it
just at the time we have brought about a reconciliation. -- Ah! Henry, if you
and I should, after all, be the means of such a happiness, how comfortable will
it be to all parties! -- for it is such a shocking thing for neighbors to bear
malice for so long a time! -- and though, perhaps, we can do little good with
Sir Guise, we might put up with a great deal from him, to be in friendship with
Miss Stuart. -- Do, then, read the letter, and tell me what it says, -- that
is, if it goes at all to my last night's dream."

Henry, who know at the first glance, that the letter was directed at least by
Caroline, had been trying by every means in his power to conceal his agitation,
-- when a servant came to desire Olivia's immediate attendance upon Lady
Fitzorton. She had scarcely left the room when the trembling and impatient
Henry opened the billet, which contained these words: "Scarcely can I hold my
pen, -- such is the satisfaction of my heart, to inform you I write by the
command of my father, to invite you to the abbey, where we may enter into the
particulars of the extraordinary, but endearing and renovating encounter of
yesterday morning, -- an encounter which presented to my view three persons I
had long most anxiously desired again to behold, -- Jane Atwood, my lovely
playmate Olivia, and Henry Fitzorton. -- Do not write any thing in reply to
this hasty billet, part of which is confidential, -- but come yourself tomorrow
noon, the time appointed by my father to receive you. You will imagine how I
rejoice in a reconciliation betwixt my father, and my brother's dearest friend.
-- Ah, Henry! guess the emotions of Caroline Stuart."

He had just finished the perusal, when True George came hastily into the
apartment, presenting another letter, -- "Just brought by the post, your
honor: and I came with it as quick as I could, because I believe it is from
'Squire Stuart the lieutenant, and I thought it might bring your honor good
news."

Honest George was partly right in his conjecture; -- it brought tidings at
once of the most pleasing and painful nature. -- Charles acquainted his friend,
-- "that he would listen to no terms of accommodation with his father, unless
the restoration of Henry at the abbey was made the preliminary condition of the
treaty;" observing to his father, that -- "he had plainly discovered the
strange conduct of Caroline had originated in her father's cruel commands." --
Then followed these expressions: -- "If you ever, Sir, hope to see the face of
the son whose heart you have almost broken, -- re-invite my injured friend to
your house, where I have my good colonel's leave to give him the meeting, and
shall hope to be at the abbey almost as soon as this letter: and in a full
confidence of your treating my friend as he deserves, -- I am your dutiful
Charles Stuart." -- "Go then, my dearest Henry! hasten to reassume your
privileges" -- so the letter went on -- "It is but returning to a happiness I
owe to you in kind. -- Ah! I owe to you far more than I can ever pay, till my
sister is your own! -- but pardon the vanity of my affection, if I consider her
hand as a recompense in full, even for all your pain, for all your goodness, --
even for the last -- the commission: -- and yet that disinterested office is so
-- but I accept it -- from you, -- yes I accept it with tears -- of joy: your
brother John too! noble, generous, manly John! -- how shall I ever settle the
account with him? -- You know not the prosessional service he too has done me;
my colonel, I find, and your military brother, have been in correspondence for
my honor. -- The former swore, and, by a hero's oath, the god of war! -- it
would be sinful to conceal it from me, though our glorious John had enjoined
it: yet as I did not promise, it is no breach of trust, you know; and it is fit a
man should know his real friend. -- I have no second Caroline, my Henry, to
offer John: -- indeed I know but one more such woman in the world: -- Oh! if
Caroline could call her sister! -- but it is madness to think that way; yet
such an alliance would bind up all our wounds. It can never be, -- those wounds
must flow, though the lifeblood of Charles mingles in the stream. Had the
heart of my friend been captive to my Olivia, -- pardon me for the weakness of
calling her what she will never be! -- I think my own would have been guarded
from captivity; -- or reflections on the prior claims of my dearest Henry would
have made me look upon his choice with the eyes I look upon my sister, or, as
you yourself, Henry, look upon Olivia: -- or if a tender idea had at any time
obtruded, I would then have expelled it as a traitor, encroaching on the rights
of sacred friendship and mutual love. -- But, as I know your heart is
another's, -- as I know the love is not reciprocal, and as I feel she is dearer
to me, than the breath I now draw in deep and bitter sighs, -- Oh! how peace
would return to us all, Henry, did Olivia experience that sentiment for me,
that she cherishes so fondly, so fatally, for my friend!

"But why do I talk of peace? -- alas! I have never known what it is since last
we parted. -- The loss of my mother, and the little prospect of my ever being
happy with the adored Olivia, preys upon my health, and bears down my spirits.
-- On these subjects, ever dear and ever fatal to my remembrance, I dare not
dwell: -- but the only solace in this long absence, which I have been capable
of receiving, has arisen from proving that my own evil destiny has not rendered
my heart callous to the happier fate of my friend. -- Hasten then, I say, to
the abbey: -- enable me, my dear friend, by your presence, to support that of
Sir Guise Stuart, without forgetting I am his son, or too keenly remembering
that he is the cause why I shall never more behold the face of my dearest
mother. -- Ah! how shall I look -- in vain -- for one of the smiling welcomes
of my return! How shall I feel the change! -- Your society, therefore, will be
even necessary to the dejected spirits of your poor Charles, as well as to our
beloved Caroline: -- surely some happy event will yet take place, to displace
the barriers which appear immovable: -- I speak only of those which oppose the
union of my friend and sister; -- for myself, alas! a barrier stronger even
than the errors of my father, or the just indignation of yours, opposes my
every hope of happiness with Olivia, -- even her own cold indifference to me,
and her heart's warmest though unrequited attachment to my friend. -- Accursed
fortune! -- yet, by heaven, I would rather unite myself to a fiend who loves
me, than to a seraph who could not give me the heart. They talk of a war,
Henry! would it were come! -- selfish, cruel, murderous, as is the wish to
thousands of the human race, -- I cannot but exclaim, would it were come! -- My
fatal passion seems to gain such strength, as to render me weak to every other
tie, -- even to that which holds me to my species. It is not without
difficulty, I conceal my sufferings from the excellent colonel: -- "You droop,
Stuart," said he to me this morning, taking me by the hand, but with a smile of
encouragement: "you droop, my lad. -- I am no talker, Charles: but do you want
any thing within my compass? -- I do not desire to clog you with obligation: I
shall therefore only ask, would you borrow? -- I have heard your father is not
so liberal as his son is deserving. -- Or is there an enemy here" (laying his
hand on my heart) "got into the breast-work, and in possession of this little
fort? -- Is there mutiny within? -- I do not, however, ask for love secrets;
and if I did, you, perhaps, might be disobeying orders even to your colonel; --
Cupid is greater than a generalissimo, and takes command of all the armies in
the world, -- field-marshal, my lad, of the universe. -- But how is this? I
hear you are going to give me up; -- your friend, Henry Fitzorton, I find, has
procured you an advance; -- I wish it had not taken you out of this regiment:
but" -- "I wish so too, sir," said I. -- "But," -- replied the colonel, -- "it
takes you to one in which that Henry Fitzorton's brother John is captain, and
may one day have the command; -- and so, as it moves you only from one friend
to another, I must learn to be content." -- The generous man shook me by the
hand, and walked away. I shall bid adieu to him, and to many of my valuable
brother officers, with infinite regret; -- and, be assured, amongst all my
cares, I am not insensible, that your generous heart, assisted, I cannot but
think, by your good father's heart, should have fixed me in the regiment of
John Fitzorton. -- Why, Henry, have you interdicted the subject? -- but alas!
military and every other ambition, but that which cannot be gratified, is, I
fear, dying in my bosom: -- an unfortunate passion alone lives there: -- it
will consume me, Henry: I shall grow insensible to every thing else; -- no,
surely, the affection I have for my Henry Fitzorton will survive the general
wreck, and holy friendship be preserved entire, amidst the ruins of Charles
Stuart."

So various were the emotions which the perusal of Caroline's billet and this
letter occasioned, that Henry could scarcely read to the end. Love, friendship,
pity, hope, fear, admiration, joy, and sorrow, took possession of him by turns;
and at the conclusion, they all seemed to be at war in his bosom. His friend
Charles, his brother, his parents, Olivia, and Caroline, tyrannized at once. --
The empire was long divided, long contended for: -- but love, as is generally
the case in such dispositions, asserted its dominion, looked upon all other
passions as usurpers, and reassumed its sovereignty on the throne of his
affections. -- Caroline Stuart, appeared to be fixed there too steadfastly for
any usurpation to prevail.

CHAPTER XV.
IT was in this crisis that Olivia re-entered the apartment, eager to know the
contents of Caroline's billet, and to convey to Henry the intelligence of his
father's being much better; -- she never omitted any communication, which she
supposed might obviate pain or promote pleasure. -- "Well!" said she, with
vivacity, -- " is my dream out? -- does Miss Stuart mention any thing of our
yesterday's adventure? -- does she honor her playmate with her remembrance? --
does she notice Jenny Atwood? -- and is there any chance, provided our little
plans succeed with all our fathers, of Olivia and Caroline ever becoming
friends, invested with the privileges of Charles and Henry?"

What a cruel string of questions, -- each kindly conceived, and sweetly
delivered! -- Henry was, however, collected enough to stisfy her, who
attributed all the emotions of his ardent love to sentiments of glowing
friendship; -- and she entered into the reconciliation of the families in
general, and the long-desired intercourse of Caroline and Olivia, in
particular, -- only in a less degree, and on a much more disinterested
principle than himself.

"Miss Stuart," said Henry, -- "is so earnest to hear more of Jane, and to pour
forth the tribute of praise to Olivia, that she has even persuaded Sir Guise to
give me an invitation to the abbey, where I have not been, you know, since the
funeral of lady Stuart; -- and Caroline has written in the most impatient
terms, to acquaint me with her father's acquiescence."

Here Henry pretended to rummage his pockets for the billet itself, and
expressed some surprise what could possibly have become of it, -- though we are
afraid there was very little reason for surprise, -- the said billet being,
probably, not only in his pocket, but often in his hand, during the affected
search; -- and, no doubt, he could have produced it with nearly the same degree
of difficulty, as the taking the hand which held it, out of the aforesaid
pocket.

But Henry simulated, you see, reader; -- this letter having again thrown out
the explanatory bill, he predetermined to withhold the billet, and was,
accordingly, inspired with a due degree of wonder, what could have become of it.

"Never stand looking for the letter," observed Olivia, who appeared always
fated to help him out of his embarrassments, unconscious that she was thereby
plunging deeper into her own: -- "never stand looking for the letter! -- For
heaven's sake! go to the abbey directly: -- I have heard you say, Sir Guise is
a passionate, capricious creature, and has his starts of rage and
reconciliation; and who knows how soon he may change his mind again? -- then we
shall all be at a loss for such another opportunity. -- Beside, your good
father is better, and you can go with perfect ease; -- I need only say to him,
you are taking your beloved wood walk, -- (you can go to the forest, you know)
-- and that you were quite in spirits at the thought of his mending so fast. --
I am sure every word of all this will be true."

Henry now observed, "That an epistle was just come, also, from Charles," --
and without any of that surprise or difficulty attending the production of
Caroline's billet, he drew it from his pocket. -- "See," said he, -- "Olivia,
what a packet!"

There were one or two passages which he could wish to have read to her, as
descriptive of his friend's passion for herself, -- hoping, the knowledge of it
might lead the way to something favorable; -- for, although his own passion,
so far as it depended on Caroline, was now in a better train than it had been
for a considerable time, -- he felt the situation of his faithful Charles, as
one of the most oppressive of the many heavy drawbacks upon his newlyrevived
hopes.

Unfolding, therefore, the packet, to see whether it was not possible to bring
out something like an explanation, of two passions, of which Olivia had, as
yet, no suspicion; -- he was hastily running his eye over the pages, in order
to separate the communicable sentiments, from such as could not safely be read
aloud, -- when Olivia repeated her wish, "That he would repair to the abbey,"
promising to hear his friend's account when he returned. -- You provoking
thing, you!" cried Olivia, -- "I feel that I shall love the sister as well as
you do the brother; -- and here, you are so taken up with your friendship for
the latter, that you are losing the only opportunity which may happen this age,
of bringing me and the former together. -- Upon my life, I shall again suspect
you have taken some unwarrantable prejudice against that sweet girl, and do not
love her half so well as you ought. -- Set off this instant, if you would not
have me feel confirmed in this hard suspicion."

Olivia drew him, betwixt sport and seriousness, toward the door, where Henry
exclaimed -- "Ah! Olivia, if you knew the condition of that excellent young
man, Charles Stuart, at this moment, your gentle heart would pity him." -- "His
condition!" answered Olivia: -- "good heaven! has any thing befallen him?" --
"He is, and long has been, suffering all the tortures of an hopeless passion!"
-- "Then I pity him, indeed!" said Olivia, -- "for I do really think, were such
a misfortune to have happened to me, it would have broken my heart. -- I know
myself, Henry, so well," added she, -- "it would have killed me; -- and,
indeed, the certainty of that would be my only consolation. -- Poor Charles! --
he is an amiable creature." -- "He is one of the noblest young men upon earth,"
answered Henry, -- "and would make the best woman in it the happiest." --
"What, then, prevents the lady of his choice from being so? -- Can she be
insensible to the affection of such a lover?" -- "I do not believe," replied
Henry, -- "though it has been of some standing, and they have been very often
together, -- that she yet so much as suspects his passion." -- "That Is very
strange," said Olivia: -- "you ought to do all you can to assist him, my dear
Henry; -- I am sure the kind youth would do the like good office by you; --
nay, he has spoke to me of you an hundred times, not in so animated a manner,
indeed, as you deserve, but very, very warmly: -- he perceived your virtues
wanted no advocate! -- I protest, if I knew the lady, I would try all the force
of my little eloquence, to win her heart for him. -- Why does not his divine
sister exert her powers? -- Can any one resist her? -- Methinks, we should all
confederate, combat, and conquer in his cause: -- are you not of this opinion?"

Here was another home question, asked in the utmost simplicity of Olivia's
heart, which sincerely ached for Charles. -- Henry turned round, and walked
away to the window. -- "I do not wonder that you are uneasy," continued Olivia:
-- "but what can be the reason of the lady's Indifference? -- Is she already
engaged?"

"Fatally so, I fear," replied Henry. -- "That Is terrible!" answered Olivia.

"And to a man who is himself betrothed in the most solemn manner to another,"
cried Henry.

"Worse and worse!" rejoined Olivia: -- "and does that other lady return her
lover's passion?"

"Entirely!"

"And, I suppose, the gentleman's affection is as great."

"It is, alas! it is."

"I know not, then, what can be done for your poor friend: for the case seems
to have shut out all service, all good offices. -- I do not see a single
opening to promote his suit: -- for who, you know, would attempt to divide two
hearts already united, to make any third happy? -- Make the case our own a
moment, my dear Henry: -- we should never bear even the sight of the wicked
seducer of the affections of Henry and Olivia, for instance, even though we
were both perfectly convinced, all his or her arts would be vain. -- I protest,
my blood runs cold at the very thought of such a monster!

"Nevertheless, the condition of the unhappy Charles," added Olivia, after a
recovering pause, and finding Henry much disturbed, -- "is dreadful indeed! --
And I am not surprised at the misery I see you are suffering on the occasion;
-- I now clearly perceive that your sympathising heart has made this one of the
strongest sources of your late, alas! too frequent, melancholy; -- I cannot
blame you for it; it fills my own breast with grief; and I weep that I cannot
mitigate it."

Henry was extremely affected, more especially as Olivia now applied all that
her tenderness could devise, to give him comfort; -- and, though intended to
promote a very different emotion, to fill up the measure of his despair on his
friend's subject and his own, she took his hand, and carrying it to her lips,
where it received a chaste and delicate pressure, -- "How infinitely grateful
am I to you, my beloved Henry!" she exclaimed, -- "and how grateful ought we
both to be to heaven, for exempting us from those agonising trials, which are,
and must be, inseparable from hopeless love! -- Oh! that your friend could
experience the felicity which is permitted you and me, Henry, to feel at this
moment, with the sanction of both our dear parents upon our heads! -- I cannot
feel my blessed state, without the tears of joy gushing from the fullness of my
happy heart. -- I see you share my sensations; -- long, long may the sacred
sympathy continue! and may these drops -- "she wiped away the tears which were
running along Henry's pallid cheek, -- "may these drops of overflowing felicity
be the only ones Olivia's tenderness or your own shall bring from your eyes!"

"In pity, cease, Olivia!" cried Henry: -- "I can bear no more."

"Let us separate a little while," answered Olivia, with the most bewitching
accents: -- "compose yourself, my dearest friend, and then pursue your walk: --
the air will restore you; and be sure you try to make Caroline love your
Olivia, as Charles does Henry, when we are all friends."

Olivia now made an effort to rally her spirits, that she might recover those
of Henry.

"When we are all friends, and mixed together, you, I, Caroline, and Charles,
-- we may beguile the latter of his griefs: -- at least, our loving endeavors
shall not be wanting; -- I insist, therefore, upon your setting off; and I will
give you, as you have so great an undertaking in hand, leave of absence for the
whole afternoon."

Olivia was again leading Henry out, when, recollecting herself, she cried,
"But stop a moment: I have had something of yours in my pocket these two days:
-- your brother John sent it me; -- and it is very charmingly finished indeed!
My father says, -- and so does yours, -- it is much more like than when you saw
it before; but, for my part, I really think it a thousand times too handsome."

Before Olivia had finished her prefacing speech, she had taken out of her
pocket, and unfolded, a little parcel, which proved to be that miniature of
herself, which the conflicting John had painted for Henry, and which was now
re-given, by the lovely original, with a grace, and at a moment, which might
have ensured its welcome, almost from an enemy, -- much more from the deeply
penetrated, though unfortunate Henry.

As he received it from Olivia, she said, "Tell the truth, now, Henry, -- does
it not flatter me greatly? Yet do not tell me so: for I should weep, if I were
to think your fancy and affection could not draw as partial a likeness as any
painter in the world! -- so take it with you; and, as I can not, with any
propriety, go with you to the abbey just yet, let it be my substitute; -- and
be sure you show it to Miss Stuart, and tell her that I send it as my
representative; and if it could speak, it would soon make out my dream: -- do
not forget this, I charge you. -- So now I will go to poor Jane. -- I declare,
Henry, I can never get from you, and must run away at last."

CHAPTER XVI.
HENRY had an anxious desire to make his personal enquiries after his father,
but was really afraid to encounter him. -- Under the different impressions,
therefore, of that tender father's displeasure, -- of his brother John's
silence, -- of Olivia's overwhelming goodness, -- of Charles's generosity, and
distress, -- of Caroline's summons, -- and of Sir Guise's mysterious
invitation, -- he once more took the road that led to the abbey; -- at the
sight of which mansion, after again reading Caroline's billet, as he past along
the great avenue, his heart began to resume its accustomed emotions; -- and, as
he approached within view of that little window already commemorated in this
history, those emotions increased; -- and, by the time he gained the grand
portico, late so sternly closed upon him, and now to be so wide opened, by
authority, they totally absorbed every other consideration.

To say the truth, Caroline herself had, for some time, thought it strange, --
perhaps taken it a little to heart, -- that Henry had not, since the evening of
the funeral, made an effort to visit at the abbey. -- She was satisfied of the
great propriety of his conduct; it was certainly what prudence prescribed; and,
had he attempted to act otherwise, it is probable she would have marked out the
very line of behavior he ought to have pursued; and declared herself much
dissatisfied, had he not obeyed. -- Yet Love, my good reader, is, -- as
peradventure thine own heart can attest, -- a very inconsistent deity, and can
very much approve and disapprove, be pleased and angry, at the same time, and
at the same thing. Caroline had as lively a remembrance of the parting look she
bestowed upon Henry, at the abbey gates, on the night, or rather on the morning
after the funeral, as if she had seen it on her countenance in a mirror; --
and she thought it expressed enough of gratitude and affection, to hold out a
future welcome, and almost beckon him toward her. -- There was no immediate
probability, indeed, of his meeting with any such welcome, but, on the
contrary, every likelihood of a repulse from Sir Guise, and, consequently, from
herself; -- and yet, perhaps, she would have been better satisfied, had he
hazarded this, than, as it appeared to her, to be so over exact, as wholly to
estrange himself.

If there seems any thing in these observations incongruous to the reader, we
can safely refer him to our patroness, Nature, -- from whom every word has been
faithfully copied. We speak here to readers in general. Of lovers we shall only
request that they will consult the little historian in their own bosoms.

Henry's conduct at the funeral, however, -- his defense of Sir Guise, -- his
attention and delicate consideration at the awful ceremony which preceded the
affray, -- wrought very powerfully in his favor with Caroline; and she was
truly desirous of an opportunity to pay him her heart's acknowledgements; --
indeed, such desire began to take possession of her the very hour she bade him,
or rather looked him, an adieu, and had continued increasing ever since.

Her transport, therefore, at having the power to receive him now by her
father's consent, may more readily be imagined than described. To imagination,
then, we shall leave it: -- but, notwithstanding Caroline's impatience, we are
sorry we are unable to grant them, or our reader, the pleasing interview, till
we shall have shown him the means by which that consent was obtained; -- for
the packet of late ensign, now lieutenant, Stuart, unfolds but a part of these
means.

CHAPTER XVII.
THE reader has in perfect recollection, no doubt, -- because it was a very
materialpoint, -- the worthy resolution of Sir Guise Stuart, to become, at
least in his external behavior to his own family and even to the Fitzortons,
an altered man: -- now, as this could not be done without a considerable degree
of address, he resorted to a power, whose aid and inspiration he always
invoked, whenever he had any great undertaking to perform; -- and, to conceal
the bitterest resentment, and deadliest hate, certainly came under that
description. This tutelary power was neither any of the demons above nor below,
but, simply and solely, that bosom friend which enabled him to effect his
foulest intents more completely than if he had been in league with all the
infernal deities, -- namely, his own fraudful heart. -- This, indeed, was
all-sufficient, as well to suggest evil thoughts, as to devise the means of
carrying them into execution; -- and, in the present case, it not only
empowered him to conceal the hate and resentment abovementioned, but to
substitute, in their places, the fairest appearances of forgiveness and
good will; -- in short, he was a master in that great and useful science to a
determined knave, so finely described by Shakespeare: -- He could smile, and
smile, and be a villain. He began to put in practice a system of this kind,
immediately after the funeral. -- As he sat at breakfast the succeeding day,
"Caroline," said he, -- "your brother having thought proper to leave us at such
a time to ourselves, we must comfort each other as well as we can. -- This is
but a melancholy house at present, my dear: -- suppose we were to leave it, and
walk out a little into the air: -- it may be of service to us both."

He took her hand, and they walked into the garden. -- Meeting Dennison upon
their return into the house, Sir Guise exclaimed, "Tell the gardener to be
particularly careful of those myrtles in the corner of the hothouse, -- they
were the favorites of your poor lady." -- "And one of them, I see, is
drooping," cried Caroline, -- "as if it mourned her loss." -- "Good Dennison,
let this be remembered:" continued Sir Guise. Having said which, he held his
handkerchief to his face, and shed as many tears as were consistent with his
grief. Caroline had herself noticed these myrtles, as she past the green-house,
and bestowed upon them many of those drops of real sympathy, which might give
her father the hint to counterfeit, thinking that as good as any other piece of
hypocrisy, to advance his plan. -- A more perfect example of genuine and
affected sorrow has rarely been seen, than what the father and daughter then
exhibited.

Dennison, like Caroline, was touched by the novelty of this conduct. -- They
were soon convinced it was not the start of the moment, by an increase of good
humor the next day, and so on, in succession, as well to the rest of the
servants, as to Dennison: -- and at length the whole kitchen pronounced their
master to be, bona fide, a new man: -- prior to which, Charles had written, but
not by Caroline's medium, such letters of reproach and menace to his father,
that, possibly, the fear of that which they threatened being put in execution,
might have some weight in bringing about this mavelous reformation. -- The
baronet, however, without communicating the contents of the letters to
Caroline, answered them in the most unexpected manner, to the entire
satisfaction of Charles, who thereupon wrote the letter to Henry, which has
been communicated in a former chapter.

But this was not all. -- The conduct of Sir Guise was of the most general
kind, and extended even to Father Arthur. He made ample confession of the
errors of the past, promising as large atonement in future.

And in regard to Caroline, he was every day proposing some little plan of
consolation, -- gave her one of his favorite horses, -- and not only allowed
Dennison and another servant to attend her, but often accompanied her himself,
more than once introducing the name of the Fitzortons, and particularly
Charles's favorite and her own, without any other allusion to old grievances
than observing that it was a great pity when neighbors could not agree: --
there were always faults on both sides: -- for his part he looked upon
implacable hatred as the blackest amongst the crimes, inasmuch as it was the
farthest removed from the relenting mercy of him who is ready to pardon all our
trespasses whenever his forgiveness is piously and unaffectedly sought. Holding
such sound doctrine as this before Caroline and Dennison, -- particularly in
the presence of Father Arthur, -- he by degrees so thoroughly persuaded these,
and indeed the whole family, that his reformation and repentance were sincere,
that Stuart Abbey now resounded the praises of the man whose vices all its
echoes had before so often repeated.

This happy change was attributed by all to the salutary impressions made on
the good baronet's conscience when he came to reflect on the fate of his lady.
In private discourses of this matter among themselves, Dennison observed, "it
was a long lane that had no turning;" and that "it was better late than never,"
-- recounting, at the same time, an history which he conceived to be in point,
"of a poor wretch who had been in a constant habit of all manner of wickedness,
till he was turned of sixty, and then took up all at once, because his
conscience would not let him sleep a-nights; whereupon he made his peace with
God, and was so good a Christian before he died, that, though he was as sinful
a creature as Sir Guise before, all the parish blessed him, and went to his
burial."

Father Arthur gave the praise of this conversion where he thought it due, --
to the great restorer, -- and took more than his accustomed delight to visit at
the abbey. For the past week, indeed, he had been an inmate, often wandering in
the woods of Stuart, so well calculated to inspire and cherish meditation, till
the hour of repast, which he would take with the family, -- and then, devoting
an evening hour to private prayer, which was his invariable custom, he would
remain in social endearment, yielding to all the felicities of his mind and
constitution till bedtime.

The happiness of Caroline was indeed extreme; -- her gratitude to her father
was in proportion; -- and had she not now and then retired to her chamber to
shed a tear of regret to think that her dear mother lived not to witness and to
share this blessed alteration, her happiness would have been without alloy;
for, besides the above felicity, a prospect of reconciliation opened once more
on the houses of Fitzorton and Stuart. She even had the comfort of hearing, and
being herself permitted to mention, the name of Henry with due respect: -- her
brother was made partaker of her joy, -- and her favorite Father Arthur no
longer withheld his visits on the score of shunning the house of strife, where
he had so often found it impossible to be a peacemaker.

And in so fair a train was the general happiness, that on the day she
encountered the party at the manor-house gate she would assuredly have forgot
she had a little secret quarrel with Henry, for not doing that, which, had he
done, she would have resented, -- and have told him the delightful tidings
which she had in store for him, had not the sudden appearance of Jenny Atwood,
the sight of whom might have thrown a cloud over all these agreeable prospects,
made it impossible for her to say or do more than has already been shown to the
reader.

CHAPTER XVIII.
THE abbey door was opened to the summons of Henry Fitzorton by the good and
trusty Dennison, who gave him a thousand welcomes as he entered, and ensured it
to him afterward in the following words, which, after the fashion of the
speaker, were delivered as he led the way to the object of Henry's wishes. --
"Joyful news, as I told you, dear squire! -- the old gentleman, and God be
praised for it, has renounced the Devil and all his works. He Is clean and
clever another thing, -- and he makes us all weep for joy, more than he used
heretofore to make us cry for grief. He has made young master happy also! --
Miss Caroline is even almost aside herself, -- and my old wits are about to
take leave of me: -- and for the matter of that, if I thought master would be
at his old tricks again, in the way of relapses as they call 'em, I had rather
bid them good bye now; -- for if the Devil should come into the old boy any
more, it would be worse than before, your honor knows."

"True, very true!" answered Henry, who shaking Dennison heartily by the hand,
exclaimed in the words of Othello, thinking perhaps rather of his approaching
interview, than the old man's description of Sir Guise, though it would well
apply to both, -- "If I were now to die," my dear Dennison, "I were now to be
most happy!"

"See what it is to be a scholar! -- Learning is better than house or land,
after all," quoth Dennison; -- "but here," added the old man, opening the door
of that very apartment from which, some weeks before, Henry had been expelled,
-- "here is that which is better and prettier than house, land, and learning,
put 'em all together!"

Sir Guise and Caroline were both in the room, and both rose to receive Henry.
"Mr. Fitzorton," said the former, bowing familiarly, "I had promised myself you
would have obeyed a lady's summons more willingly; in which case I should have
had more of your company: -- but some business calls me out: -- I must
therefore leave Caroline in the double charge of doing the honors of my
welcome and her own." Sir Guise, repeating his bow, went forth.

We see as palpably, dear reader, as if we were now looking thee full in the
face, and through that could penetrate into the recesses of thy heart, that
thou art making thyself up, in this place, to hear some of the many sublime and
beautiful sentiments which now fell from the enamoured Henry, and enraptured
Caroline; and, therefore, though it were extremely easy for us, -- did we
prefer fancies to facts, -- to fill a very honest modern volume with what they
might be supposed to say, -- it would be the most difficult matter in the whole
art of bookmaking, to eke out one sentence, with what, for the space of several
minutes, they really did not say; -- and that, for nearly as substantial a
reason as ever was given, viz. because neither of them, during that period of
time, spoke a single word: -- and upon consulting our goddess, (thou
rememberest the deity here spoken of, is Nature) we find it recorded, in a
minute of her own divine hand writing, -- "These lovers did not for so long a
space enter into discourse, for two of my most powerful reasons, -- first,
because they had too many things to discourse upon, to know which to begin
with, -- and secondly, because their tenderness was unspeakable."

Their actions, however, were sufficiently expressive, leaving indeed other
language unnecessary. Henry held Caroline in his arms; and Caroline, perhaps
for the first time since she became sensible to the thrilling power of his
magic touch, did not shrink from his embrace. In this situation they gazed on
each other with so perfect a joy, that they were deluged in a flood of those
tears which at once enrich and give relief to heartfelt felicity, but are
de^ied to the excesses of woe; -- the transports of the first admitting of
those salutary streams which freshen as they fall; whilst the paroxysms of the
latter are denied this balmy relief. Then it is that the current seems suddenly
to be frozen up, -- the blood itself congealed, -- and every drop of comfort
dried by Despair, -- who may truly be said, in such cases, -- To leave no
channels for the tide of tears.

Having remained, as we have said, several minutes in this situation of
indescribable ecstacy, nature permitted Caroline first to speak, -- and, with a
frankness that demonstrated she was superior to the little pride of giving pain
when it was consistent with her sense of right to impart pleasure, she assured
Henry that, as the happiness of now telling him, as far as words could tell,
how unutterably dear he was to her, was derived from her father's goodness, she
hesitated not to confess it was the only truly consolatory moment she had
experienced since her mother's death, -- and, but for that ever-lamented event,
would perhaps be the most blissful period of her whole life. "Ah! your own good
and just heart, my dearest Henry," said she, "will inform you what mine has
often told me, -- that then only can it dare to avow its felicity, when that
felicity is-sanctioned by those who gave us life." When she had said this, her
beautiful hand was presented in a way that justified her sentiment; and though
perhaps the doctrine wandered a little from his late practice, Henry warmly
subscribed to the theory with his lips, -- giving the aforesaid hand so
impassioned a kiss, that the place on which he thus signed and sealed the
assent sweetly blushed in confirmation.

It is probable that Henry would have given in at the same time some other
reply suitable to the occasion, had he not been prevented by Caroline, who,
anxious to satisfy her heart, in the midst of its own happiness, about that of
others, prefaced her enquiries after Olivia and Jenny Atwood, by observing,
"that she never should quite forgive either Henry, or her brother Charles, for
the niggard manner in which they had both described Miss Clare, who," said
Caroline, "is absolutely a Grace, -- a love, -- a cherubim! -- I have thought
of nothing else, Henry, except yourself. -- Do you know, she has grown out of
my recollection. Ah! in times long past, I remember we flew about our forests,
and her and your father's parks, like wood-nymphs: -- but, to behold her, in a
few years, shot up into such a noble yet elegant creature! -- I declare, I am
suprised that my brother and you have not both lost your hearts."

The tell-tale in his cheek might literally be said too often to put him out of
countenance, -- and either obstruct or contradict the story of his tongue. --
And though there is a blush which denies, and a blush which confesses, -- they
are frequently confounded and mistaken, even by persons who are thought to be
the most skilful interpreters of silent language. -- The manner in which
Caroline construed the blush before us, may be seen in what follows.

"Even so, as I live! and I suppose you are rival friends! -- come, be honest,
Henry: have I not a shrewd guess? -- Indeed I had a suspicion before, as to my
brother: but must confess, I -- I -- I -- yet as I said, it was inevitable! it
was -- that is, -- pshaw! how ridiculous I am! I cannot speak plain to day. --
But, do tell me, Henry, which is to be the happy youth? The all-conquering
Henry Fitzorton, doubtless! -- Alas, poor Charles! and alas, poor Caroline!
prithee inform me, -- "(here, on viewing certain changes of color in Henry's
countenance, her own underwent more serious alterations) "do, I -- I -- I --
beseech you, instruct me, which of you claims my -- my -- felicitations? which
my condolence? -- But -- no -- you may save yourself the trouble: -- I perceive
who I am to congratulate! You -- yes -- yes -- you -- are the happy man, Mr.
Fitzorton: I -- I -- I -- give you joy."

A few minutes previously to this conversation, Henry had, in obedience to
Olivia's wish, presented, with proper comments as he delivered his message,
that lovely girl's miniature: -- but even this, as it turned out, was an
addition to his misfortunes; -- for, as Caroline surveyed the well-imitated
countenance, her own actual visage colored to crimson; -- she admitted the
excessive likeness, the extreme beauty: -- she even pressed it to her lips, and
declared it represented an angel in beauty as in graces: yet her voice
faultered, her eye filled with tears, her lips quivered; and, lest it should
drop from her trembling hand, she laid it down. -- Henry saw, with strangely
mingled emotions, that the sublime Caroline could fear and feel a supposed
rival.

Henry could not but make the discovery with a proud and heartfelt
consciousness, that he was most dear to her whom he adored: but he still found
himself daily more and more entangled in the web of his perplexing destiny, --
even as if he had been as dark and insidious a double-dealer as Sir Guise
Stuart, the difference appearing only in the motives of their conduct; -- but
this difference, indeed, forms the distinction betwixt the evils of vice, and
the trials of virtue. -- While a sensation like this was oppressing him, he
fixed his eyes on those of Caroline, and exclaimed: -- "Good Heaven! when --
when shall the unfortunate Henry be understood by any body?"

"He is understood," answered Caroline, taking his hand, and raising the back
of it to her lips: -- "and thus I solicit forgiveness for the -- I hope --
almost only unworthy emotions, begun in sport, and continued to seriousness,
that ever my bosom harbored. -- Oh! may they never more be its guests! -- how
has Caroline dared for a moment to express a doubt of Henry Fitzorton's faith,
his oaths, his honor? -- I see and acknowledge the justice of his reproach:
the accusing spirit arms his countenance! -- Yes, well may that deep
indignation which overspreads his face, be kindled against Caroline! Would she
had been as incapable of a base suspicion, as he is of the treachery that would
warrant it! -- and yet, Henry, the strongest test of our affection is the
weakness of our fears, even when we are assured they are without a shadow of
foundation! But, as indifference never felt those fears, -- nay, as indeed
nothing but the most unalterable love was ever guilty of this weakness, if
guilt it can be called, -- surely my Henry will forgive it: -- perhaps he will
do more than forgive! should it add energy to his own affection, -- if it be
not more unjust than vain in me, to suppose it capable of addition, -- his
pardon is perhaps the only thing which can teach me to forgive myself: -- alas!
my own anger, I have ever found, -- what you have often told me of the
self-rebuking of the noble John, -- is the most intolerable to bear! -- but
this is a misery my beloved Henry can never have had cause to inflict upon
himself."

Henry caught her passionately in his arms, still struggling with his emotions:
and Caroline, -- feeling that the supposed crime of accusation could not be too
effectually done away, -- entered at once into the plan of happiness, which she
earnestly hoped would result to both families, from her father's present
favorable disposition toward them. -- "Surely, my dearest Henry, this may be
improved; -- our beloved Charles may have his share in the accommodation; -- I
have a whisper for you about him, and the lovelier original of this lovely
similitude: -- I will tell it you, when you have entirely sealed my pardon, and
reconciled me to myself. -- Should it be any way in your power, I know how
readily you will promote the happiness of your friend, and my brother,"

These expressions Caroline accompanied by such atoning smiles, and by those
little endearing attentions which are of such immeasurable magnitude in matters
of affection, -- that, had Henry really been as displeased as he had been
delighted, and but half as much in love as the reader knows he was, -- he must
not only have forgiven but forgotten all her offenses; -- and, moreover,
circumstanced as he was at this oblivious moment, he must himself be pardoned
for neglecting to avail himself of so fair an opportunity to explain his Family
Secret, at least to Caroline. -- Her tenderness, indeed, was as balm and oil
poured upon his wounds: -- and he had almost lost the sense of anguish in the
solace of her love, now as unbounded in expression, as in feeling. But, some
farther questions she put him, by way of finishing the whole, -- and finishers
in truth they were, -- tore open again all those wounds, and made them bleed
with renovated fury. "How -- ah how, my Henry," said she, -- "even now my
father, Sir Guise Stuart, is not averse to our happiness, -- how is yours, --
how is Sir Armine Fitzorton to be reconciled to accept of -- of -- of --?"

Caroline held down her head; and a very different hue -- the hue of fear --
usurped her cheek. -- "Even now that Sir Guise is become fully sensible of his
son's exalted merits, -- how will the venerable father of such a son," said
she, "be persuaded to give his honoring hand to Caroline? -- I suppose it has
been impossible for my Henry even to glance at this circumstance: but possibly
-- for I know your generous solicitude -- possibly you may have employed your
brother John, who, I am sure, bears good will to Charles, and must adore you;
-- or your brother James may have undertaken to sound your father on this
subject: -- or the sweet Olivia herself, who has a face and figure to convert
hate into love, -- by the bye, I cannot think how you came to prefer me to that
angel; -- it is well for me that love is blind: -- I say, Henry, it may be that
you have got that charming creature to speak in favor of Caroline; though I
think, it is as strange that she should not love you, and that you should not
love her -- heigho! -- well, how I run on! yet, methinks I should like to owe
the greatest happiness upon earth to Olivia. And poor Jane At wood! -- I blush
to think my selfish heart has so long neglected her: she is an old acquaintance
of mine: -- but it is impossible to express my astonishment, when I saw her
with you and Miss Clare, -- though, to say the truth, we every one of us
appeared to be planet-struck. -- Do explain all this."

Caroline had hardly ended her interrogatories, before Dennison came to the
door, rather stealing in than delivering a letter, which, he said, was brought
from the castle, in great haste, by Mr. True George, and that he believed it
required an answer. -- Dennison, however, -- having, like George, an high
veneration for the privacy of all true lovers, and especially these, -- no
sooner perceived they were in earnest discourse, than he immediately withdrew,
saying he should answer the bell the moment their honors thought proper to
ring.

Thou have heard of pre-sentiments, reader: peradventure thou have felt them;
at least they may be in the little superstitions of thy secret heart. -- The
very delivery of this letter, and its coming from the castle, had an
inauspicious air and sound: -- the superscription too in Sir Armine's hand was
yet more ominous: and the epistle itself, alas! confirmed all these mystic
tokens.

CHAPTER XIX.
LET the reader go back to the state of Henry's mind, previous to the receipt
of this epistle, -- and he will not wonder that the additional anxiety it
produced, was too vehement to be concealed from Caroline, -- who, suspecting
some misfortune had happened at the castle, earnestly entreated he would break
the seal. -- He obeyed with a trepidation that denoted he knew not in whose
presence he was about to commit this rash act: and having read it to the end,
-- in the progress of doing which, Caroline vigilantly watched the varying
emotions and passions that took possession of his countenance, -- he rose,
traversed the room, and stamped with a vehemence which surpassed all former
displays of his known enthusiasm. -- It was a sudden access of insupportable
phrenzy: -- he smote his breast, earnestly supplicated pardon of Caroline on
his knees, -- then flung from her, deplored he had ever seen her, -- and
execrated his own being. -- "My hour is at last come; -- long desired, long
sought, and now it is arrived. -- Death, sudden death, would be relief, --
mercy, -- blessedness!" -- The affrighted Caroline, who lost all her usual
presence of mind, wanted power to console him; -- speech, color, motion, and
almost lise forsook her; -- the disordered soul of her lover now having
ascended its tremendous climax, he caught her hand, and again smiting his
bosom, exclaimed, -- "Oh Caroline! ill fated Caroline! -- the utmost malice of
antipathy never equalled this constant, this cruel conspiracy of love and
affection, to which I see it is the determination of my whole family to
sacrifice the lost, the agonizing Henry! -- But you, and you only, can prevent
it, Caroline. -- Behold! read! from my dear inhuman father! -- I am bound! -- I
am at the stake; the fires are kindling around me! -- and my peace, my
happiness, my heart itself will be consumed, if you do not this instant devise
some means to save me from being led to the hated altar."

Caroline took the fatal scroll, and read it with such pauses and ejaculations,
as its contents were well formed to create.

HENRY FITZORTON, ESQUIRE.
Fitzorton Castle. Beloved Son,
OLIVIA, -- the pride of all our hearts, the ornament of both our houses, and
the glory of Henry, the sole possessor of her love, -- having informed me you
are gone on a visit to the abbey, to explain the story of Jane Atwood, I take
the earliest opportunity of my being able to hold the pen, to tell you I
rejoice to find, by a letter from our excellent John, this instant come to
hand, that the report is groundless, which insinuated the clandestine disposal
of your heart, where your hand must never be given, without forfeiting all
claims to the affections of your family, -- without indeed, a sacrifice of your
father's, mother's, all our loves, -- the life too of Olivia, and the death,
the annihilation of all your religious principles. -- John, I say, consoles us
with an assurance that the foul report is the wicked invention of some enemy to
our house. -- These good tidings have almost recovered me. I shall be able to
hold you in my aged arms on your return; -- and though this, I trust, will be
within a very few hours, -- for I understand your friend Charles is not come
down, -- I thought it a justice I owed my beloved son, to remove from his mind
the idea of his father's heavy displeasure, in which his blessed mother's would
of course have been included. -- But, thank heaven, we suffered only from the
poisonous insinuations of some dark assassin: -- Olivia's and my dear Clare's
peace is not, we trust, invaded. -- 'Believe it not, Sir,' says John in his
letter, 'neither attempt to trace the infamous falsehood to its source: -- a
life most dear to us all might be sacrificed to a worthless slanderer. Eject
the aspersion, even out of your and my mother's bosom; forget it ever gained
entrance there; -- blame almost your own credulity, as I did mine severely, and
take Henry to your arms.'

Olivia is in my chamber while I write; and seeing that some tears had got
unawares into the furrows of my cheek, she has been kissing them off without
enquiring the cause: and did she know it, -- or rather did she know what had
been the cause of those more bitter ones I have shed upon my pillow,
unwitnessed, -- how would her sweet eyes stream in sympathy! -- but, I told
her, and truly, that I now wept for joy, and for love of her dear Henry, to
whom I was sending agreeable tidings. -- 'Are you, Sir?' said she. -- 'Then,
for heaven's sake, make haste, that he may get them speedily: -- had I wings
which could aid me to fly half as fast as my wishes, he should have what you
have already written: and ere he had read those, I would come back to carry him
the remainder.' -- Henry, I wish not to disparage any amiable woman, whether
the daughter of friend or enemy: -- but, excepting her who gave to me the
blessing of your life, Olivia Clare surpasses all I have yet seen: and I can
truly say, I love her as well as if she were my own blood; -- I do not think it
will be possible to appreciate her more when she is your wife, -- which I hope,
and trust God, she will be in a few days. You know not how busied Mr. Clare,
the too generous Mr. Clare has been, to hasten the hour of your felicity; but
sickness and infirmity, you know, my dear boy, are loitering agents in the
affairs of love. -- Olivia has lost all patience at this length of letter, and
seems to think I never shall have done. -- 'Old men are so tedious!' -- I can
see that expression written on her lovely face. She has been herself to light
the taper, has laid some of her own wax, and a seal which bears true love's
motto -- 'Always the same' -- close to me, and has many times told me your
privy counselor, True George, is ready. Therefore, though I could go
garrulously on, even till I had wearied you, as I have Olivia, I must hasten to
bless you, and bid you farewell.

ARMINE FITZORTON.


CHAPTER XX.
IT is most likely, Henry knew not, in his extreme confusion, more than half
the contents of this epistle, so calculated to astonish, perplex, and terrify
even Caroline: -- the blow precluded all presence of mind, and cut down all
energy of character. While she was reading the fateful letter, the disastrous
Henry sat rocking himself in a chair, with his hands spread over his face.

Caroline now perceived that she had before spoken but too prophetically, --
that she had been long supplanting another woman, -- and that woman an inmate
of her lover's family, -- each, and all of whom, with the concurrence of her
own father, approved of the alliance. -- She had not, for some time, the power
of utterance, or of motion; -- but vainly trying to fold up and return the
packet, she let one of the sheets fall to the ground, and begging Henry's
pardon, attempted to pick it up; -- then tottering toward the nearest chair,
she sunk into it, and remained in tearless consternation, something in the way
we before described her in the dying moments of her mother; -- and, indeed, an
affection cherished, even in the midst of the most trying circumstances, for
many years, even till it had twisted with the fibers of her heart, -- might
now, be said to be in its last agonies, -- and from a wound as sudden as fatal.
-- At length she made an effort to rise, with intent to leave the apartment: --
Henry observing her, rose also, and throwing himself at her feet, "I perceive
you look upon me to be far more culpable than I am," said he; -- "and you
impute to treachery the effect of dire misfortune. -- I call, therefore, as
well upon your justice, as your humanity, to hear me." -- Without waiting for
her permission or reply, he recapitulated, as clearly as he was able, the whole
secret history of his situation with Olivia, -- with the long train of
mysteries, perils, and penalties, that had attended it, from the first moment
of his discovering the family designs, to the very instant of his taking leave
of her at the castle. He pourtrayed, in the most lively colors, his esteem,
gratitude, and brotherly affection, for that amiable girl; -- but asseverated,
with yet greater warmth, that she never had possessed, or could possess, any
part of that tenderness which belonged solely and exclusively to Caroline. --
He then took a retrospective view of the insurmountable difficulties that had
hitherto been placed in the way of his explanation of himself, either to his
own father, to Olivia's, to his brothers, to Olivia herself, or to Caroline. He
enumerated the sundry and manifold attempts he had made toward this, to each,
to all, -- and the ways and means by which all his purposes were defeated.

The forcible manner in which he painted these sad truths, and the agonies he
had endured, from this necessary suppression, -- his abhorrence of all
duplicity, notwithstanding the appearance of having acted the part of a
dissembler, -- the nights he had past in the forest, when the castle was
irksome, and the abbey shut against him, -- brought a shower of tears from the
lovely eyes of Caroline. -- He pathetically conjured her, now that his cruel
condition was at length unfolded, not to add to the miseries he had yet to
encounter, by withholding her tender advice, how best to extend the discovery
to the other parties concerned. -- Her wisdom, goodness, and unalterable
affection, he declared he must now regard as the supporting pillars that were
to sustain him against the anger of his parents, -- the resentment of Mr.
Clare, and the displeasure of his brothers; -- all of which, however, he might
consider as unfair and unwarranted, since they had, though with generous
intentions, ensnared him, without his consent or concurrence, given or implied
in any manner whatever. -- Chiefly he relied on his Caroline for counsel, how
best to break the affair to Olivia, for whose peace of mind, he swore he would
sacrifice every consideration in the world, but the honor, faith, and eternal
happiness of his own. -- "These," said he, passionately, -- "depend on
Caroline; -- and should she persuade me to break them, -- but it is impossible,
-- they find a counterpart in her own soul, and she will strengthen my
resolution, to preserve them, with the most religious care, to my latest hour!
-- And, as to Olivia, so well do I know the goodness of her heart," continued
he, -- "so many instances have I seen of her noble disposition, that I am
convinced, -- were it possible to tell her how much and long I have suffered
from these continued misconceptions, on what resistless antecedent claims my
vows are founded, and what would be the consequence of my breaking them, -- she
would not only resign all pretensions, but even be an advocate with the three
families, to bless and sanction the loves of Henry and Caroline!" -- He then
observed, in conclusion, -- "that her brother Charles only shared the sorrows
of his heart; -- and, he was confident his friend would aid her to remove
them." -- To all this, Caroline only said, faintly, "I am extremely unwell; you
must suffer me to depart: -- the terrifying circumstances which you have
related, and which I have read, shall, when I am able to think, be duly
considered. -- But, oh! if you ever wish me to have the power of thinking
again, do not detain me now." -- She left her chair with great difficulty, --
in tremulous accents bade Henry adieu, -- and quitted him in a state, compared
to which, probably, many of his former situations of mind, thought at the time
to be intolerable, were consoling.

He did not, however, remain long in this condition; -- for a gentleman entered
the room soon after, who came, in this crisis, as a comforter, -- being his
second appearance in that character. -- This was no other than Sir Guise
Stuart, who was extremely surprised to find him alone, and equally concerned at
seeing him so much out of spirits. -- Henry, hereupon, notwithstanding his
former ill-luck when he tried to gain the baronet over to his interest, was now
so thoroughly convinced of the sincerity of that gentleman's reform, that he
repeated the heads of what he had said to Caroline, -- acquainting him with the
abrupt manner in which she had gone out of the room, and conjuring him, by all
those things which have most weight with good friends and fathers, -- namely,
honor, humanity, and the dread of plunging his own child, and the man she
loved, in ruin, -- to use his strongest, dearest influence, to persuade his
daughter to give him such an answer, as, with his own intercessions and
explanations at the abbey, might bring about the general satisfaction, and
their particular happiness. -- All this Sir Guise very kindly promised to do;
-- "And, surely," said the amiable baronet, -- "if I am ready to forget my
wrongs, and acknowledge my share of error in the subjects that divided our
families, -- Caroline may contribute her part to the good work. -- As to poor
Miss Clare, that, to be sure," cries Sir Guise, -- "is the worst part of the
business; and there is no foreseeing how Caroline may take it; -- or, if she
could be brought to pass it over, who knows but the lady's father, and yours,
and all your family, might consider it a stronger objection to an alliance with
our house, even than our other domestic hostilities: -- however, depend on it,
nothing shall be wanting on my part, consistent with my friendship and my own
honor." -- After this, Sir Guise stayed consoling Henry for a considerable
time. -- Caroline's waiting woman coming into the room to enquire whether Mr.
Fitzorton was gone, -- the considerate baronet said in a whisper to Henry,
while he beckoned the servant to stop, -- "Had not you better hear her answer
now?" Henry eagerly assenting, the maid was directed to say, her lady's company
was earnestly entreated for a few minutes; -- and, while the girl was going on
this message, Sir Guise himself departed, saying, at his exit, and with right
dramatic effect, "It will be best to leave you together; -- I may be some check
upon her; -- and it is necessary, you know, to have her own undisguised
sentiments; -- after which, in the degree that they oppose our own, we may take
our measures." -- "You are too good, Sir Guise," said Henry, cordially taking
his hand, and drawing it toward his bosom. -- As Sir Guise went out, he cried,
still dramatic, and at the edge of the scene, -- "I must away: -- she will
surprise us: -- I will take a turn in the garden: -- there is yet half an
hour's light; and as you certainly will not think of leaving us till after
supper, an opportunity may occur for your telling me what she says; -- hush --
I hear her coming down stairs; -- this door, however, will conduct me into the
garden by another way. -- Be sure you tell me all that passes."

Whether it was necessary for this injunction to have been repeated, or
whether, indeed, any mention of it, in the first instance, was not superfluous,
will be shown hereafter. At present, our entire attention is called to Caroline
Stuart, who re-entered the room almost in the same moment her father had left
it. -- She had been in tears. -- Her visage was pale, and her limbs yet
trembled. -- With less interruption, however, than she had herself apprehended,
she at length addressed Henry: -- "Though I expected, from my maid's report, to
find my father with you, I rejoice, -- alas! why do I talk of rejoicing? -- It
is -- it is best you are alone, -- I know not, whether what I feel at this
moment, Henry, deserves so harsh a name as woman's weakness; -- but I am ready
to confess, that the tenderness which is the cause of it, is almost too much
for me to bear. -- Alas! the preparation of a whole life, for a history like
that you have told, -- and for supporting the event which, I -- I -- I foresee,
will -- must -- result from it -- "

"What event?" cried Henry, catching her hand, and looking as if he anticipated
the most dreadful of all the evils which can happen to man. -- "Do not
interrupt me!" resumed Caroline, answering his look of impetuosity and terror,
by one of energy, that commanded his patient attention. -- "You will not take
an undue advantage, Henry, of the tenderness I have, even at a crisis like
this, avowed for you. -- Ah! what an hour have I past since I left you! --
Alas! this apartment seems to be marked out by our ill fortune, as the spot
where I am to meet varieties of wretchedness! -- Here was my poor mother struck
with that which proved her dying disorder! -- Here was asseverated a father's
curse! -- Here! O! why have I forced upon me the remembrance of these
successive calamities? -- they unfit me to endure the present: -- alas! it is
so sudden, so unexpected! -- it has fallen upon me in so cruel a moment! --
Pardon me! -- I feel altogether unequal to the conversation I would wish to
hold, or the conduct I ought to pursue: -- this last dire blow has left me
nothing but powerless tears!" Such tears, indeed, fell from her eyes, in
overwhelming torrents; -- and Henry, instead of drying them up, could only
augment the torrent. -- Relieved, however, at length, Caroline observed, "that
the impression left on her mind by the past intelligence, would be eternal: --
that, amidst all her selfish regrets, and the agonising ideas that gave them
birth, she had sense and honor enough to be convinced Henry Fitzorton and
Caroline Stuart were now placed beyond -- so far beyond the possible reach of
each other, that, even if her father were to lay his sacred commands upon her
to marry, she should, in this second instance of her life, think herself
justified in disobeying him."

CHAPTER XXI.
CAROLINE paused and wept. -- She then recapitulated his situation, -- placed
before him all the strong parts of his duty, and her own, -- showed, in new
points of view, the irresistible claims that Olivia, her father, and both the
families had upon him; -- she observed, that, though strange impediments had
combined to prevent him from an earlier explication, those very impediments had
given force to the pretensions of Olivia, who, never suspecting any impediments
had existence, had been cherishing a pure affection all the while. -- She
gently upbraided Henry, for supposing that she herself would deign to become
his wife, under the corroding consciousness of having made any other woman, who
had so many superior claims, unhappy, -- but more especially Olivia Clare, the
friend of her earliest youth. -- "With respect to myself," -- cries Caroline,
-- "being in the constant habit of meeting ill fortune, I better know how to
struggle with it, in the severest shapes it can present itself: -- and, alas!
the power that punishes me, knows it is now about to take a form the most
dreadful! -- perhaps -- the most insupportable."

Caroline's fortitude again forsook her: and Henry, in the struggle betwixt the
contrary emotions of hope and fear, drew his chair, so as to be within reach of
her trembling hand, which he pressed in his own, -- but could not speak.

"Yes! misfortune, my dear unhappy Henry," continued the firm but faultering
caroline, "has, I hope, inured my heart to bear what would probably break that
of Miss Clare, who has been bred up by every smiling power, in the lap of
indulgence, -- the pride and joy of two respectable families, -- and has
perhaps never known any disappointment but what I have already occasioned. --
Ah, Henry! how would she hate your Caroline! -- alas! yours, did I say? -- how
would she contemn the cause of all the delays and mysteries which have involved
her in one eternal maze, did she know that Caroline Stuart had, like her evil
genius, so often robbed her of Henry's dear society! -- Yet, alas! this
transient pleasure should not be envied me! -- for oh, what vengeance follows
it! Indeed, Henry, I can scarcely bear the thought: -- but -- but -- it must be
borne: and, whatever happens to me, I will endure that, or any other misfortune
it may be the will of Providence to inflict, rather than the consciousness of
carrying grief, distress, hatred, and, perhaps, death, into the houses -- into
the hearts of so many persons! -- Such an abhorred union, indeed, would now
force, even upon you, Henry, a just opinion of my unworthiness. -- And ought I
not to be displeased that you should believe I would take refuge in Olivia's
mercy to me, when I had not shown any to her? -- or, that Caroline, bowed as
she is by many griefs, could be content to owe the possession of Henry's hand
to that bounty which would consign herself, her aged father, and Henry's
parents, to wretchedness and despair? -- Why, Henry, should you suppose, even
Olivia could surpass your Caroline in doing what is right," -- added she,
giving dignity to her before humbling distress, -- "when Caroline has the
advantage of the point of rectitude being first shown her? -- and, had you,
Henry, carried on the concealment longer, and availing yourself of my unhappy
partiality, made me, under these circumstances, your wife -- "something
associated with the word wife fainted on her lips, as she pronounced it; and
many moments past, ere she could conclude the sentence -- "and had I afterward
been proved the dire though innocent scourge of your family, how wretched
should we both have been! -- My disgust -- perhaps my hatred even of Henry
Fitzorton -- might have been the consequence!"

"And will it not," said Henry, starting up with violence, -- "will it not be
far worse, to give my loathing hand to Olivia, -- and the after-proof come out,
that she has been the cause of all my misery and yours? -- and, though she
never can have my hate, she never had my love, and would then be the bane of
Henry's, of Caroline's, and or her own happiness."

"No such proof," cries Caroline, more assuredly, -- "need ever happen. -- You
are too good and generous, to treat any woman who sincerely loves you,
unkindly; -- and kindness from Henry Fitzorton, will be in the place of a
warmer sentiment: -- nay, it is, in him, a sentiment more tender than the love
of an ordinary mind. -- At all events, it is in your power to make Olivia Clare
the happiest of women! -- But Caroline Stuart, whom you have now acquainted
with your situation, you could render even more wretched. -- There remains
nothing for her but accommodation to those severe trials in which, alas! her
whole life has been past. Oh! I blush not, though I weep, to say I would not
yield up the prospect, which delusive hope recently spread before me, on weak
surmises, -- or let any visionary clouds, that might gather to darken it,
prevail. -- No! -- I would embrace whatever might dispel the surrounding
darkness! -- But, cast your eyes on every side; and you will see the fatal
necessity of taking our resolution."

"Hold!" exclaimed Henry: -- "I see the point you aim at: -- your resolution
would not affect the general peace, to which you would thus sacrifice your own
happiness and mine. -- I warn you, that it would subvert it. -- There is a
cause still behind."

"Alas! alas! there can be none," interrupted Caroline, still bathed in tears:
-- "there can be no cause, why I should not here solemnly bind myself by the
most irrevocable vow never more to see Henry Fitzorton, -- the pride, pleafure,
and passion of my soul, -- till -- till he is the husband -- of -- of -- "

The word husband had even a more powerful effect upon the whole frame of
Caroline, than that of wife, for the expression sunk her to the earth.

"The husband! -- of whom?" exclaimed Henry: -- "of Olivia Clare? Oh monstrous!
monstrous! -- Oh God!" -- exclaimed Henry, raising the convulsing form of
Caroline into his arms, -- "yes, this barbarous effect, even of the very
thought, is a fresh proof, dearest life, that, were Henry Fitzorton the husband
of Olivia Clare, he would be the most perjured traitor to love and friendship!
-- he would be the most perfidious viper, to sting and wound every breast most
dear; -- and Caroline Stuart would become accessory to all his fraud, to all
his treachery, -- Alas! my love," continued he, still holding and still
caressing the unresisting, the almost lifeless Caroline, -- "there is yet
another fatal mystery to be explained." -- "Reserve it," said Caroline,
faintly: -- "I can hear -- I can bear no more." -- "Remember," said Henry, --
"remember that I bid you beware, as you would avoid the despair, the
destruction of all that is precious to your blood, -- beware of coming to any
resolution which shall preclude you from acting as your future duty may
prescribe. Your brother can disclose the rest."

Caroline had been several times waving her hand, as a sign for Henry's leaving
her, assuring him, by such broken sentences as she could utter, that he might
depend on her doing what she thought was right, -- but that she could not
answer to what a degree her illness might augment, if he persisted in the
conversation any longer, till she was more recovered. Henry, therefore, went
mournfully but hastily out of the room, and by the greatest good luck, or
something that answered his purpose just as well, met Sir Guise gliding from an
adjoining apartment. He appeared, however, somewhat confused and agitated, --
perhaps at seeing Henry uneasy. Few words, therefore, passed between them; and
those purported, on the part of Henry, a request to defer the particulars of
his discourse with Caroline, on account of her sudden indisposition, till the
next day, alleging, that, as his father was confined to his chamber, it would
be expected he should sup at the castle.

With this requisition the worthy baronet readily complied, -- expressing less
curiosity than might have been expected. He therefore civilly demanded of
Henry, whether he chose any of the servants to attend him; and, on his courtesy
being as handsomely declined, they parted.

CHAPTER XXII.
BUT our sympathy of virtuous and superior woe demands that we should leave
Henry on the road to the castle, and return to Caroline at the abbey. This
truly amiable and as truly unhappy girl remained without words, and almost
without sense, long after her lover's reluctant obedience to her repeated
requisition. The first thing which struck her when she felt herself somewhat
collected, was Olivia's miniature, which Henry had left on the table in his
general agitation. Her examination of this led her to account for several of
the mysterious expressions which fell from Henry toward the close of his
conversation; for, on his way to the abbey, Henry had penciled on the paper
that had been the envelope of the picture, and which remained also on the
table, "This shall be a transfer to dear Charles." Thus, not only the words of
her brother, which were once overheard and asserted to her by Dennison, but
those which Charles himself dropped the same morning previous to his setting out
to join his regiment, were brought forcibly to her mind.

It was hence apparent that her brother loved Olivia; and not less evident that
Olivia had fixed her entire affection upon Henry; and finally, that both Henry
and Charles were, nevertheless, in the strictest friendship. But, although this
discovery developed the maze one way, it involved in it another, beyond all her
power to unravel; yet one inflexible truth pressed on her in a more unrelenting
shape even than it had before, -- that whether Henry and Olivia were or were
not to be united, Henry and Caroline could never join; since, to suppose that
Olivia Clare would ever dispose of her hand to Charles, and that Henry would
thereby be at liberty to offer himself to Caroline Stuart, were points equally
preposterous.

In this state of perplexity, her father entered the room; and although he was
in some perturbation from a cause yet untold, he saw his daughter's dejected
countenance with parental regret, and observed on it, that, as the occasion had
in some measure been related by Mr. Fitzorton, he would not give her the pain
of again telling the story, but do every thing in his power to make her happy;
saying at the same time, she must be sensible, as well as Henry, how ready he
had been to sacrifice himself to their felicity, though he could not take upon
him to answer for events, and that he relied upon both her and Henry doing him
every justice with his son Charles.

The deeply-afflicted Caroline acknowledged that his goodness was written in
the tablets of her heart, and that she was sure Mr. Fitzorton and her brother
would ever retain a due sense of it; then entreated her father's indulgence to
retire for the night.

Sir Guise granted this petition also, as willingly as he had done the other,
and after saying he hoped a good night's rest would set all right again,
desired her to hope the best, called her his dear Caroline, and bade her adieu.

Since the burial of Lady Stuart, Caroline had succeeded to the chamber in
which that amiable woman died; and this succession proceeded from the very
opposite sensation to that, which, had there not been any separation of
sleeping-rooms between Sir Guise and his wife, would have induced the good
baronet to change it for another. Indeed he had moved to one at the other end
of the abbey; but as this motive might have been suggested by the love which
could not endure the sight of the desolated spot which brings to memory the
object of affection, no less than by the hate which survives the grave, or by
the fear which always attends upon guilt, but more particularly when we view
the place where our self-condemned crimes were committed, and of course, where
the consequences of those crimes might be faid to stare us in the face,
inasmuch, as they seem, to the "mind's eye," the ghosts of our past foul deeds,
-- it is but fair that we leave the choice of these several motives to the
reader's own selection.

Certain it is, that the night after the funeral -- on the same night, the
reader remembers, one or other of the above-stated sentiments kept him out of
any bedchamber, -- he did remove far from his from his deceased wife's
apartment; and whatever were his motives, those of his daughter, in giving that
very chamber the preference to every other in the house, proceeded from the
sincere affection which attaches itself to whatever brings to mind the
venerated though departed object. Nevertheless, we are ready to admit, the same
measure of affection that filled the bosom and memory of Caroline, might be
possessed by many other daughters, who might yet find themselves unable to
support the sight of any thing their deceased parents had worn, touched, or
been accustomed to behold: -- and, indeed, we have known some of the most
amiable persons fly from their houses, their estates, and their coutry, on this
principle; and, forbid it nature, that we should be supposed to ridicule any of
the pious terrors, or even the superstitions of filial love! -- we only feel it
necessary to say, -- as has indeed more than once been proved to the reader, --
that the mind of Caroline Stuart, though melting as love itself, had none of
these apprehensions. Yet the resignation of her late apartment, which was also
precious to her remembrance, was connected with some other circumstances that
ought not, as they are in keeping with her character, to be passed over.

We can sometimes better endure the sight of that room where we have seen a
dear parent expiring, than of that where we suppose ourselves to have taken an
eternal leave of a living lover. When Caroline, at her father's command, had
bade, as she thought it to be, an everlasting adieu to Henry, she gave vent to
all the tender effusions which are set down for thy sympathy, reader, in a
former part of this work; but this little spot, late so dear to her, soon
became an object of escape, because she found it more difficult for her to
perform the severe task of obliterating Henry from her mind, while from the
window of that apartment she looked upon many things that brought his image
back too keenly upon her sense; and, although, in her mother's room, when she
was devoid of all the powers of recollection, Henry had supported her in his
arms, her reflections thereupon were more divided than from the view of that
window. -- Has the reader forgotten, that it had in full prospect the grand
avenue, of tender memory, the spot where the loves of Henry and Caroline were
first declared to each other, and, alas! discovered to Sir Guise? And, to close
the whole artillery which it levelled against her lacerated heart, has it
escaped his memory, that it carried the eye to the most appreciated part of
Fitzorton-castle, even to the chamber of Henry himself?

Resolved, therefore, to avoid, as much as in her lay, the objects which fed
her despair, she tore herself from these temptations, and took refuge in a
place where perhaps her grief from one cause was mitigated by the claims from
another; for it is certain that two sorrows equally great, provided they are of
distinct kinds, demand that division of our thoughts, and afford that sad
relief, which, in any single calamity, often overwhelms the sufferer.

Her mother's vacated room, then, she for some time occupied; but since her
father's turn of behavior, she considered the prospect from her old apartment
as both literally and figuratively clearing up, and had therefore moved into it
again. But now that it was overcast by another cloud more dark and menacing
than any of the former, she settled the plan of a third alteration even as she
was ascending the stairs, -- sent her woman for her night-dress, -- and
directed her steps once more to the room of Lady Stuart.

All that was heroic about Caroline was subdued. She had not only exerted, but
exhausted, whatever the natural strength or acquired energy of her mind could
supply, to support her in the last discourse she had held with Henry; and from
the weariness of a soul more harassed than the frame that enclosed it, she had
scarcely gained her mother's room ere an extreme faintness overtook her, and
she fell down in a swoon, in which, without any violence, -- indeed, scarcely
without any sound, or motion, -- she remained till the maid whom she had sent
into the other chamber came to restore her, -- or, more properly speaking, till
persecuted nature by a temporary suspension of life restored herself.

But, with the powers of her life, the sense of that happiness which would have
made life desirable, was not, alas! renewed. On the contrary, she revived to
the most agonizing reflections. Her present appeared less to be endured than
her former fate. To that, if she had not been reconciled, she had in some
measure been resigned. She had imposed on herself the severe but necessary task
of calling to her assistance whatever would be most likely to keep her heart
under some discipline; though she found it impossible to vanquish the host of
tender but powerful enemies that had there gained residence: these, however,
reason, duty, and time, three of the most able and experienced generals, and on
whom she wholly relied for success, might at length have routed. But, when the
enslavers were almost worsted, -- when Love himself, after many desperate
skirmishes, and some pitched battles, with the forementioned chiefs, was made a
captive, and led out of his citadel in Caroline's breast, in chains, -- then to
have reason and duty not only demand a truce, but throwing down their arms,
and, as of old, in the story of the Horatii, run into the embraces of the
opposite party, declaring that the war was unnatural; -- after such a treaty,
approved of by duty, and, indeed, signed and sealed by that aweful power, --
nay, after both the armies, formed by these potentates, were disbanded, a
chosen few only keeping garrison at the abbey, to prevent surprise from the
castle, where, it was imagined, some malcontents, not yet brought over, were
posted, -- then, we say, to have the amicable convention broken by an enemy
from the most unexpected quarter, -- even in the gentle Olivia Clare, -- who,
without herself being as yet conscious of it, involved the houses of Fitzorton
and Stuart in deadlier hate than that which the daughter of king Priam
occasioned; -- this -- this was indeed too much!

Such, however, was the case. -- Hostilities recommenced: -- every passion and
every principle mustered their forces, -- sounded to arms, -- and duty,
compassion, reason, and rival love, were all at once warring in Caroline's
bosom.

CHAPTER XXIII.
WHEN this amiable but unfortunate girl was left, at her strong desire, alone,
she cast a mournful look over the apartment, and derived some little comfort
from reflecting that her dear mother, who breathed her last in it, was now in
her peaceful tomb. -- "That is some comfort yet!" said she: -- "it is the
cordial drop thrown into the bitter cup of my despair!"

Taking from her pocket that handkerchief of which her eyes but too much stood
in need, -- she felt the little packet that Henry left with her, whether
discreetly or not, we cannot now stop to consider, for her brother. -- Her
confusion, at the time it was first shown her, did not allow her to observe it
accurately, -- scarce, indeed, to take it from the paper in which it was wrapped,
or to do more than lay it again on the table: -- indeed, she did not, as yet,
know whether it was intended for her inspection; -- for she seemed now to have
no memory of any thing but her own weighty sorrows. -- On taking it up again,
however, it slipped from the silken envelope which Olivia had folded round it. --
She once more examined the resemblance of the innocent girl who had already
been the cause of so much anguish to the families which she so anxiously
desired to see happy.

It is not an easy matter to describe the mixed sensations that took possession
of Caroline as she attentively looked on this picture: -- how distinct from
those she felt on receiving that of Lady Stuart, and the two others, from the
hands of her dying mother! -- At Olivia's she looked, and to Olivia she spoke,
as if it were the original -- "Beautiful author of the misery which awaits us
all," said she, -- "dear play-mate, when life was young, -- wherefore are we
rivals? -- Yet, how was it to be avoided? -- how could it be possible for thee
to live in the presence of my Henry -- of thy Henry, and his thousand virtues,
and not give him all thy heart, even, alas! as I gave him mine? -- And what but
that pride which must now be severely humiliated, could so long blind me to the
certainty of this? -- But how is it that his own has escaped the magic of thy
merit and thy charms? -- how has it been possible for him not to return thy
passion? -- Yet love is capricious; else had thy empire been unquestioned. --
Ah! had thou honored my dear unhappy brother with thy affection, -- for now
I see into the source of his long concealed distress! -- Yet, thou art not my
rival, but my associate in grief. -- Even the irreparable loss which Caroline
must sustain, will be no gain to thee, Olivia! -- We must both be wretched --
wretched in the extreme!"

The breath of her sighs had dimmed the crystal of the miniature: but her tears
falling fast upon it at the same time, -- "Heaven knows," continued she, -- "I
would not willingly obscure thy sight or happiness; nor would thou mine! --
Ah! that we could relieve the misfortunes which I foresee are in store for us
both! -- for indeed, Olivia, to thy painted image I may, without fear of
wounding thee, confess, Henry Fitzorton cannot be more dear to thee, than he
was -- than he is -- and, I fear, ever, ever must be to -- "

She pressed the miniature to her bosom, without finishing the sentence. --
"Yet," resumed she, -- "in this confession I do not wrong thee, -- I do not
wrong thee, Olivia; -- for I have lost him for ever! -- He is gone from me,
never, never to return! -- And were he thine this moment, or divided from thee,
even as he is from Caroline, -- such is the severe destiny in which we are both
entangled, we must be both miserable."

In the struggle of these emotions, she had turned the miniature on the other
side, which presented several little devices, done with Olivia's hair, such as
Cupid and Hymen binding Venus with her own cestus; -- and, underneath, a motto
in pearls, suitable to the design; -- on seeing which, she uttered many more
sentiments expressive of her feelings; in the course of which, she adverted,
for the first time since the death of her mother, to the circumstance of her
own and brother's miniatures, which she knew had been in Lady Stuart's
possession, and not spoken of at the time when she received the other, on the
very bed which was now spread before her. -- Thinking, however, they were
deposited in some of her mother's drawers, into which she had not yet examined,
all thoughts respecting them soon subsided. -- That of her mother, however, she
drew from her bosom, which had been its "most delicate lodging" ever since, and
kissed it fervently, -- then returning it to its tender but now trembling
throne, she resumed her attentions to Henry and Olivia, who appeared by turns
to occupy, her entire soul. -- It is beyond question, that her affection for
the one, notwithstanding all increase of misery and impediment, was now at its
height; -- and her pity for the other, derived, perhaps, partly from
fellow-feeling, was no less extreme.

The sense of her father's unwonted kindness, the sincerity of which was not
for one moment doubted, relieved her much; -- she thought it far better that
her sorrows should flow from any but the domestic fountain, whose waters of
strife indeed are the most bitter we can possibly taste. -- "Blessed be God! it
is not my father's fault now," cried she, "that I am relapsed into my former
wretchedness, with every aggravation that could be heaped upon it. He, alas! --
which is, indeed, one of those aggravations, -- partakes my grief, after he had
generously sacrificed to me his strongest resentments, and taken my dearest
Henry to his arms."

She then adverted to her brother, -- and again taking up Olivia's picture, she
exclaimed, in a softly rebuking tone, -- "And thou also art the unhappy cause
of my dear Charles's affliction, -- a youth scarce less deserving thy adoration
than Henry himself! -- But for his love of thee, O insensible! he, at least,
might have been happy; and in this dread hour of my own woe, I might have
looked up to him for comfort, courage, and pity. -- He will now, alas! be
absorbed by his own griefs."

She had no sooner uttered these reproaches against Olivia, than she turned
several of a more bitter kind, and with as little reason, against herself, whom
she accused of cruelty, folly, falsehood, and madness, -- recapitulating the
several causes of impediment, why neither Charles and Olivia, nor Henry and
Caroline, could ever hope, even had their own hearts so arranged matters, to be
united by holy vows. -- She next pressed the miniature to her lips, and
bestowed on it a kiss, in token of her reconciliation and repentance. -- In
short, she proved in every reflection, she was in love, and in despair: -- she
proved, indeed, at once, she was tortured by all the feelings of her heart, in
which jealousy was not the least tyrannic.

CHAPTER XXIV.
WHILE the picture was yet at her lips, the door was opened by her woman, who,
seeing her mistress not yet in bed, first announced, and then ushered in,
Charles Stuart. -- "Dearest sister, forgive my impatience: -- I am this instant
dismounted from my horse, -- but your father telling me you had retired to your
chamber at this early hour, I was alarmed, especially as he said our beloved
Henry had passed the afternoon here, and had but just left you. -- I should
have thought such a tete-a-tete, -- for my father intimated he had left you
together, -- under such smiling prospects too, would have kept sleep from your
eyes for this week to come!" -- "My dear, dear Charles!" cried she, tenderly
embracing her brother, -- "sleep was never farther from them than at this
moment: -- or had they been closed, surely nothing but the sleep of death could
have rendered me insensible to the arrival of my ever good and affectionate
brother." -- "Sleep!" answered Charles, surveying her countenance: -- "no --
those eyes, I perceive, have been but too much awake! -- For heaven's sake,
what is the matter?" -- "Is not joy, as well as grief," returned Caroline, --
"the cause of tears?" -- "Ah! my sister," cries Charles, -- "but that pallid
countenance, that desolate air, and the galled borders of those weeping lids,
demonstrate a far different cause than that of joy. -- I thought to have found
you and my friend as happy as mutual love and a father's authority could make
you; -- and I came, with all the speed of friendship for him and affection for
you, to devise some means that might incline those toward your happiness, who
might be averse to it. -- And that miniature in your hand! -- Has our beloved
Henry at last given it to you? -- I chid him once, that he had not done it
before, -- and called him a loitering lover."

"No, truly," said Caroline, sobbing with stifled emotions: -- "It is not his."

"Not his!" returned Charles: -- "surely nothing can have happened between you,
to make him return your own!"

"My own?" exclaimed Caroline. -- "Yes, Caroline," said Charles: -- "I found
yours with mine, on that very bed soon after our ever-lamented mother had
expired, and gave him both with the benediction of her dying breath, still warm
upon them. -- He was entitled to the gifts: for, now that saint is in heaven,
who upon earth can love Caroline and Charles, like Henry Fitzorton? -- I will
not think any thing could induce him to give it back: -- let me see! -- perhaps
he has presented you with mine: -- but could that make you weep?"

"It is yours, Charles," said Caroline, -- "and left with me in trust, to
present to you the moment I should see you."

Caroline gave the miniature to her brother, who, on the first view, exclaimed
-- "Gracious heaven! what do I see, my dear Olivia? -- Tell me, sister, I
conjure you, -- tell me, have our happy destinies been so run together, that
while -- heaven knows how disinterestedly -- I have been laboring for the
felicity of Henry and Caroline, -- they, by some yet unknown good fortune, have
been promoting the happiness of Charles and Olivia? -- Oh! if I could flatter
my heart that this dear, dear resemblance of all which is most precious, was
given by the loved original, to be presented by Henry to Caroline, and by her
to Charles! -- but that is impossible: -- I rave! -- alas! it is no wonder! --
I love: -- forgive! pity me!"

Here, instead of ending his rhapsody, he fell to kiss and caress the
miniature, -- ejaculating as he gazed, "Is she not an angel, Caroline? -- did
you ever behold such a brow? -- such an eye? -- such a lip? -- she certainly
inspired the artist! who is he? -- I could worship him! -- why do you not
speak? -- Oh my foreboding heart! you are weeping still!"

Caroline felt the utmost regret at the sad necessity of dissolving the charm
that bound up her brother's senses, or rather at restoring him to sense, out of
that sweet delirium that carried him beyond the bounds of reason, into that
delicious phrenzy, which, to such dispositions, in such situations, affords
bliss superior perhaps to what reason ever gave. -- Finding, however, that he
was still impatient, -- nay, that he stamped and raved for explanation, -- she
at length reluctantly cried, -- "Alas! Charles, would I could continue the
delusion till it could be realized! -- I grieve to say our disappointments are
reciprocal: yet your friend Henry desired that picture might be given, -- but
told me, you would explain the impossibility of the original ever becoming his
wife!"

" His wife!" reiterated Charles. -- "Friendship forbid! -- Should I live to
see that day! -- but I conjure you to tell me all: -- if the happiness -- the
life of your brother be matter of concern, conceal not a tittle of what I
perceive is now laboring in your bosom. -- The sudden sight of this miniature
has indeed hurried me to a sweet oblivion of all my cares; -- but I now return
to the curse of my reason, and the certainty of my despair! -- Olivia! --
Olivia! -- my delight! -- my destruction!"

He now again renewed his attentions to the picture, -- swore, that, with
whatever intent it was put into his hands, it should never go out of them more,
-- and concluded with asseverating, that, unless Caroline immediately satisfied
his heart in all it panted to know, he would quit the abbey that moment, and
repair to the castle, to demand of Henry a full explanation.

The wild and extravagant manner in which he spoke, terrified Caroline; -- but
looking at him with a softness that might have extracted the sting almost from
despair itself, -- "Alas! my brother," said she, "could my life procure to you
and your friend Henry the bliss you have lost, it should be laid at your feet!"
-- She then explained all that had happened in the conversation betwixt her and
Henry: and when she had brought down her narrative to the deposit of the
miniature, she observed, that she referred, for the particulars respecting
Olivia and Charles, to Charles himself. -- "Our dear father, however," said
Caroline, "deserves our warmest acknowledgements on this occasion: -- he has
shown such indulgence, that my grateful soul avows he has made ample reparation
for all former mistakes; -- nay, I feel assured, that, as much as in him lies,
-- oh! that his power were now equal to his generous inclinations! -- he will
promote the loves of Charles and Olivia. I am persuaded he will. -- If for
Caroline he could condescend so greatly, what exertion will he not make for the
felicity of his darling son? -- But, as yet, my brother, I am to learn how far
you yourself are interested in this matter. -- I long, yet dread to hear!"

"O Caroline!" replied Charles, -- "if I have hitherto concealed from you the
secrets and the sorrows of my heart, it was from the same generous motives that
actuated my beloved friend to keep them from you." -- He then related at length
the story of his unfortunate attachment, -- the friendly behavior of Henry, --
and the noble conduct of John Fitzorton. -- He enlarged upon the cruel kindness
of the whole family to him, -- confessed that his visits at the castle, like
those of Henry at the abbey, were the consequence, rather of love than of
friendship: -- he particularly dwelt on the manifest impossibility of his ever
becoming, in any measure, dear to Olivia, till the passion of Henry for
Caroline was declared; -- yet acknowledged that he did not see, though he had
revolved it ten thousand times in his mind, how such a declaration was to be
made: -- he averred, if so heart-rending an event as the union of Henry and
Olivia were to take place, -- though heaven could witness that his friendship
for the former could be surpassed only by his love of the latter, -- he would
not, dared not, think on what might ensue! -- "It would break my heart! -- it
would make me mad!" -- cried Charles! -- "Would my friend were here at this
moment! -- why did you let him depart? -- Some way must befound to preserve
him, -- Olivia, -- you, -- myself, -- and all that belong to us, -- from the
horrors that are impending! -- consider of it, Caroline! -- oh! consider of it!
-- consult your pillow! -- remember what we have at stake! -- it is an awful
crisis! -- if there is not any expedient to save us from irremediable despair,
what must be the result? -- Oh Caroline! for the sake of pity, friendship,
love, suggest something: -- my brain seems turning as I speak to you. -- My
sister and my friend alone are in the confidence of my affliction! -- it
involves themselves! -- it will spread to all who belong to us! -- Caroline,
weigh the matter well: -- I am distracted."

He broke from her, and hurried down stairs, leaving his sister more perplexed
than ever: for she perceived too plainly, by her brother's vehemence in the
relation, that the designs at the castle were almost ripe for that event which
would determine the destiny of all whom it concerned: -- the miniature of
Olivia had wrought him to a curiosity, whose gratification had proved worse
than the mystery of his sister's distress. -- In short, she perceived, that
Charles had been long as violently in love with Olivia, as Henry could possibly
be with herself: -- but with this strong and unfortunate difference in the
returns of the passion, -- that Olivia was not sensible to, indeed was not
conscious of, the tenderness of Charles; -- whereas Caroline felt in the bottom
of her tyrannized heart, in despite of her disappointment and despair, -- that
it beat only for Henry.

It was no less apparent to her, that her brother and her Henry had been
generously, but unavailingly, playing into each other;s hands, to prosper their
affection by imparting favorable impressions of each other to the beloved
object; -- and that, although the interest of Charles, was not, thereby, in any
measure advanced, Henry had not acted with less zeal, consistent with the
caution it was thought right to observe, than Charles; in fine, that the
friendship of these young men was equally noble, generous, and indefatigable.

CHAPTER XXV.
THE vigilant Sir Guise, like a kind parent who has reason to fear his children
were unhappy, was upon the stairs to receive his beloved son when he came from
Caroline's apartment;mdash;solemnly protesting, the supreme delight of his life
would be to see his offspring as happy as their own wishes could make them, --
which was an exact compromise betwixt sincerity and deceit; for in the case of
Charles it was true, and in that of Caroline it was false. -- In fact, he was
in some sort alienated from the former, by the almost constant upbraidings he
received, on the double scores of his tyranny and cowardice. -- Charles,
however, still retained much of his involuntary affection: -- and if any thing
in the world, except the miscarriage of certain great designs which had been
long rolling in his mind, could have broken down the bulwark of that
impenetrable stuff of which his heart was composed, it would perhaps have been
the total loss of his son's society, so often threatened.

"It is needless, my dear Charles," said this affectionate father, -- "to give
you the pain of repeating your discourse with Caroline: -- I have heard too
much already for my peace, and I see you are much affected. -- This letter,
indeed," added Sir Guise, "is, of itself, a history of the plans carrying on at
the castle: -- but do not read it at present: tomorrow morning you will be more
able to take measures in behalf of your poor sister, and counteract their
stratagems."

Charles received the letter; and seeing it had been written by Sir Armine, --
indeed it was that brought to the abbey for Henry, and left there in his
confusion, -- "I must read it, Sir," said Charles, "though every sentence were
a poignard, and my lifeblood should flow from the wounds." -- He perused the
fatal epistle which had already been the cause of so much distress: and when he
came to the passages, that mentioned the state of the preparation for Olivia's
marriage, he burst forth into the most extravagant gestures and expressions.

"Have you come to that part," said Sir Guise, "where Fitzorton insolently
talks of the disgrace and infamy of an alliance with our family?"

Charles replied to this question, only by a wild, insensible kind of stare.

"And did you take notice, my dear boy, of the saucy air which the
proud-hearted John gives himself, -- insinuating, than an union with the
Stuarts would be pollution?"

"O Sir! breathe not an accent against John Fitzorton," -- answered Charles,
recovering himself. -- "He is the second young man in the world; and his
brother, my friend Henry, is the first; -- my obligations to both are infinite;
and I love Henry next to -- but, perdition! if he marries her! -- it must not
be! -- I will sooner put an end to both their lives, -- to my own!"

Charles crushed the paper between his hands, -- then opened and read it again.

His father began to fear he had carried this exploit too far: -- he saw with
terror these violences increase, -- and did not know how soon they might be
turned upon himself.

"What is this I see?" -- questioned Charles, taking a light to read the
passage more clearly. -- "Who is this? -- Jane Atwood!"

"Jane Atwood!" -- reiterated Sir Guise, who, -- in his eagerness to show his
son, doubtless for some good reason, this letter, -- had forgot what he would
at present have concealed: -- but after the confusion of a moment, he exclaimed
with admirable presence of mind, -- "Yes, they have, I understand, hunted up
that infamous hussy, in order to fortify themselves with fresh malice, and do
me fresh mischief in the country. -- Think, Charles, what I am ready to do for
the happiness of you and your sister, when I am willing to pass over even this
mean insult! -- his low paltry revenge! -- Jenny Atwood, you know, is the girl,
who I told you, ran away from her parish with child, and then put it round the
country forsooth, that I was the father of the brat. -- You remember the
impudent story, I dare say: but heaven knows, I forgive them all: -- nay, my
dear son shall even carry my advances to them, for the sake of my children's
happiness; -- and, indeed, for that of my own, I will meet my bitterest enemies
on the road of reconciliation, more than half way: -- as to Jenny Atwood, old
Fitzorton, and the furious Mr. John, I will, -- I ought, -- I am at peace with
them all."

Sir Guise now strung together, and strewed around his pious harangue, many an
holy text from sacred, and many a moral axiom from profane history, -- ending
with this asseveration: -- "Yes, Charles, I repeat, I forgive them all."

Whether his beloved son was sufficiently collected to hear any part of the
foregoing speech, or was a skeptic as to its sincerity, is uncertain: -- he
only replied to the passage that had reference to Jenny Atwood; -- and to that
he said with some difficulty, but with a marked, though obstructed emphasis, --
"As to the poor girl, by whatever means she found her way to the castle, Sir, I
am sure she will there find those who will pity and protect her."

"Then you did not expect this marriage would take place quite so soon," --
interrupted the Baronet, willing to shift the discourse. -- "I should not
wonder if they were to hurry Henry into it so soon as tomorrow, -- especially
if they should, any how, hear what confusion we are in about it."

"Tomorrow!" -- raved Charles, -- "What! Henry and Olivia! -- marry!
tomorrow! -- does this accursed, this murderous letter say so? -- Have you
heard -- did Henry dare to intimate -- It Is well I am come thus opportunely for
the ceremony! -- I will be there! -- yes! depend upon it, I will be there
tomorrow! -- damnation!"

Sir Guise felt himself now in a worse scrape than ever, and wished he had let
the conversation take its course even about Jenny Atwood. -- Charles tore one
of the sheets of the letter with a vehemence bordering on phrenzy, -- put part
of the fragments into his mouth, and champed them between his teeth.

The affrighted Dennison came in, saying, his poor young lady had, in a great
fright, rung to know what was the matter, and whether her presence could be
useful? -- Charles rose, -- shook the old man by the hand, -- begged him to
entreat his sister's forgiveness for such unseasonable disturbances; and that
if she would try herself to get a little rest, he would withdraw to his
chamber, and not utter another complaining syllable, though his poor heart
should burst in his bosom. "Bear this message to her, good fellow," said
Charles; "and tell her you saw me going to perform my promise: -- but let me be
called early." Then taking a candle, and bidding Sir Guise respectfully a good
night, he went into his bed-room without thinking of any refreshments after the
fatigues of his journey, or the greater weariness of contending passions.

Dennison shook his head, as he went at full trot upon his commission,
observing as he ascended the stairs, -- there must be a place of comfort, bye
and bye, seeing that here upon earth there was none, -- that high and low, rich
and poor, can get no rest in this world for the soles of their feet, -- and
seeing, besides, that if this had been intended as a place of happiness, his
young master, and mistress, and squire Henry, would be as merry as their days
were long.

Sir Guise Stuart's morality was all in soliloquy, for he immediately went to
bed, though we have our reasons for thinking, not to sleep.

Peradventure, courteous reader, thou art disposed to retire into thy chamber
also. Torpid, indeed, must have been thy disposition, if it has permitted thee
to nod while the foregoing scenes were representing. But, as a feeling
spectator enters into, and may be said to partake of, the exertions of the
actor, thy sympathy for the sufferings of some of the principal characters may
have no less fatigued thy spirits, to read, than ours to relate; on which
presumption we here resign thee to what one of our poets has called Nature's
soft restorer: and while thou art refreshing thyself, we will endeavor to
prepare something worthy of thy renovated powers.

CHAPTER XXVI.
IT has been intimated that the worthy baronet had heard, or rather overheard,
the preceding conversation betwixt his son and daughter. In truth, it is very
certain, he knew every syllable of their discourse, as well as if he had been
present the whole time. Indeed those parts of him, best adapted to take in the
intelligence were, in a manner, present; for, though he could not, in
strictness of speaking, be said to be an eye, he had been an ear, witness, and
could have sworn to the facts, on auricular demonstration, in any court of
judicature, as conscientiously as if he had been a spectator. The worthy
baronet constantly put himself in the way of enjoying all the benefits of this
mode of collecting evidence; and as to hearing now and then such a character of
himself as he knew he deserved, -- in drawing which, his servants, or others,
would liberally deal forth the words -- 'profligate -- villain -- coward,' etc.
he treated these things as mere matters of course, which were no more able to
reach his conscience, at least to wound it, than the paper pellet of a pop-gun
from a schoolboy's arm could penetrate the anvil which had stood the heat and
hammer of a century in a blacksmith's shop.

By these laudable means, he knew every body's FAMILY SECRETS, without any
hazard of divulging his own, -- which is frequently an unwelcome interruption
to the business in hand, perplexing it with adventitious matter. Sometimes, it
must be owned, the listener, who is justly said seldom to hear much good of
himself, is a little put to it to maintain his post, which the baronet, like
the poet, -- leaving out only the expletive word "honor" -- found, was "a
private station."

CHAPTER XXVII.
THE meditations of Henry Fitzorton on his second expulsion from the abbey, and
partly by that very clearing up of affairs so long dreaded, and desired, were
not more enviable than those of Caroline. His night scenes, indeed, from this
place, were generally gloomy enough; and some evil planet seemed to rule his
destiny whenever he passed along the famous grand avenue, by which he now again
sought the castle.

His old habit of holding conversations with himself returned strongly upon
him, as he reached the pathway at which the first fatal declaration of his love
for Caroline took place. "Since that moment," cried he, "ah! what has been my
life, but a succession of mysteries and misfortunes? I am driven from the
castle to the abbey, and again from the abbey to the castle, only to be made
more and more the sport of my malicious stars! If a gleam of hope breaks upon
me from Caroline, it is instantly clouded by Olivia! If I labor to teach my
heart to sacrifice itself to the latter, the former seems to pronounce, that my
peace and my vows are broken for ever! Here the misery of my bosom friend! and
there the desolation of my own family! Even the approbation of Sir Guise, which
I thought a blessing beyond my reach, is no sooner obtained, than another
impediment starts up to render that blessing of no avail! I have left those
consecrated walls again in despair; and what awaits me at the place to which I
am directing my steps? If I unravel the like mysterious causes there, the like
effects must ensue, -- the tears of Olivia! and the wrath of my dear -- dear --
father! If I remain silent, which I have already done but too long, that
silence will be again adduced in proof of my consent to their disposal of my
revolting heart!"

All this time True George was within a few paces of Henry, but said not a
word: whenever his master turned, or made any transverse motions, the faithful
servant, who had the legs of a hare though he had not the wings of a bird, was
on the opposite side in a moment: his custom, when there happened, as in the
present instance, to be any trees or hedges, was to keep as near to them as
possible; and in case of necessity, he was in, over, or under them in the
twinkling of an eye.

In truth, this honest fellow, independent on the veneration he bare to Henry
for his book-learning, and especially for his quotations from the poets, had
long suspected, and for some time past looked upon him, to be absolutely mad;
and from the various soliloquies he had overheard, in which the name of
Caroline was so often mentioned, he had set it down that this injury on his
poor master's brain had been occasioned by his being crossed in love. But his
sense of honor was naturally too great to breathe the discovery which he
thought he had made, to any second person upon earth; and his fear of
offending, and indeed, of making his master worse, had, in like manner,
restrained him from speaking of it to Henry himself. In the daytime, George
was pretty easy, thinking Henry sufficiently safe in the society of his friends
or relations: but, from the very instant that the evening drew in, he was as
assiduously upon guard, as if it was his turn to hold watch on the toll of the
curfew; and he attended his master's motions, from nightfall even until
bedtime, making it a constant rule not to leave him till he was ordered to
take away his light.

This general assiduity had not a little endeared him to Henry, whose gratitude
for every degree of kindness shown to him, whatever was the rank or station of
the obliging person, was lively and sincere. Hitherto, however, George's
nocturnal attendance had escaped the discovery of his master.

The dexterity and management with which the poor fellow kept sentry upon
Henry, is curious. -- If any sentence dropped toward evening, signifying his
master's design to take his moonlight stroll, or retire to bed earlier than
usual, on the pretense of sudden indisposition, -- or, if he saw Henry more
than usually merry or sad, -- (for, so well had he studied him, he looked upon
both these extremes as symptomatic) -- he was from that instant at work. -- He
had long known, that no impediments of weather could prevent his master's going
forth, when the wandering spirit seized him. -- If then the night was stormy,
or likely so to be, George would be provided with his comfortables, as he
called them, according to the state of the element. -- He would be as restless
in the kitchen, or servants' hall, as his master in the parlour, or
'drawing-room. -- George was as great a favorite below stairs, as was his
master above; -- and his fellow servants found it difficult to make him sit
down to a dish of tea; or, if they prevailed, and his hour was almost come, he
would swallow it in haste. -- The maids jeered him upon this: -- one said, he
was like a troubled spirit; -- another likened him to a bad conscience; -- and
the butler, who was a great scholar, to the perpetual motion. -- Rachel, one of
the house-maids, who was suspected to have a kindness for him, tossed up her
head, and said, "She supposed, the poor devil was in love, -- and, that he had
some lady or another, who met him every night in a fairy bower: -- but for her
part, she never knew any good come of forward hussies who went skulking after
fellows in lanes and alleys: -- if a man follows a woman," said she, -- "let
him follow her fair and above board; -- for her part, she supposed a brat would
be laid at the gentleman's door, for all his slyness." -- -- "Lord, Mrs.
Rachel," replies Mrs. cook, -- "why, for sartain sure you are jealous: -- Mr.
George has only got the fidgets; and as for brats," here she winked with one
eye at the coachman, and looked steadfastly at Mrs. Rachel's shape, with the
other, -- "as for the matter of brats, -- my notion of theseum things is, that
they are to be had, without going into lanes and alleys, or out of the house
either. -- What say you, coachee?" -- Here the cook began the laugh; the
coachee, as she called him, continued it; and the rest joined in chorus, --
till Rachel would sometimes times bitterly assert, that "heaven knows, nobody
can ever accuse you, Mrs. cook, of having brats! -- you may thank God for that,
however: -- look in the glass, -- that is all -- look in the glass." -- At other
times, she would content herself with calling every one a pack of slanderous,
enviable personages, take herself off into her lady's chamber, where she often
sat at work, -- saying, as she left the room, "It served her right for mixing
with a set of vulgar, vandal-goth souls, who were born to the kitchen! -- She
was naturally a parlour-bred young woman."

None of these gibes or jeers, however, had the smallest effect upon George,
who heard them out, if he was certain of his master; -- and if not, he would
often leave them in the midst of their irony, and pursue his designs. -- Once,
indeed, he was dogged by another of the servants, as far as the outer gate that
led into the park: but, luckily, Henry was then a good way forward; and George,
turning round, told the fellow, that "if he followed him an inch farther, or
ever served him such a trick again, he would pull the skin over his ears, and
throw it in his face, though he were to die a thousand deaths for it! -- I pry
into no man's business," said George; -- "and d*mn me, if I suffer any man upon
earth, except my master whose bread I eat, to pry into mine!" -- The fellow,
hereupon, stole off, while he had the whole of his skin to cover him, -- and,
as it may be supposed, told every servant in the house: for none ever after
presumed to interrupt George, -- though it was universally believed he was
desperately in love with some maid, wife, or widow, in the neighborhood, who
dared only have a stolen interview with him in the evenings.

George, however, was so kind-hearted a young fellow, and so generally beloved,
that every body forgave him, but Mrs. Rachel; and even the man he so dreadfully
menaced, exclaimed, "Why, it is after a woman, I warrant; and there is no harm in
that. -- He that will not go out at pitch dark after a woman, ought to be d****d."
-- But Mrs. Rachel observed, "Such good-for-nothing forward harlots, who draw
young men astray, -- and the fellows too, who can like such filthy, nasty
hussies, -- ought every one of them to be burnt alive" -- To which the learned
clerk of our kitchen, the butler before mentioned, slyly answered, taking her
considerately round the waist, "God forbid, Mrs. Rachel, they should all take
flame, unless you are prepared to go off to the other world in a flash of fire,
like a sky-rocket."

In short, George made use of as many stratagems, and was as much put to his
shifts, to avoid being seen or suspected by his master, as his master put in
practice to escape the detection of Olivia, whose custom of becoming, as
heretofore, the companion of his wanderings, he had for some time as much as
possible prevented.

George, however, was himself in no small hazard of being discovered, as he was
now following his master to the abbey; -- for when Henry had got almost to the
castle-gate, after cursing his fortune at every second step, he all at once
wheeled round* exclaiming, in the language of Romeo, whose destiny he
considered, at the moment, in some respects similar to his own, -- Turn back,
dull earth, and find thy center out! This he uttered with a rant of natural
grief, more truly felt, but with much, also, of the wildness and extravagance
of the theater.

Henry then asked himself, why the Montagues and Capulets should be thus at
variance? -- Then answered his own question. "My only love sprung from my only
hate!" cried he. "Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!

Henry traced such resemblance to his fate in this celebrated love story, --
and rose so high in his heroics, as he ran the parallel betwixt himself and
Romeo, and Caroline and Juliet, -- that he was to the full as much distracted
as they could have been.

"No!" ejaculated he, "'it is past! Oh; never more must I hope

To kiss the wonder of my Juliet's hand,
Or drink delicious poison from her lips.
Then I defy you, stars!
At the end of this rhapsody, he set off at full speed, as if carried away by
the sentiment: -- and he had, indeed, so absolutely made the case his own, --
forcing it to apply where it did not, and appearing almost to think he was the
identical Romeo, where it did, -- that, had not the darkness favored, -- at
the sight of a man running as fast as he could toward the avenue, and then
hiding behind the trees in the vista, -- George would have had good reason to
say, with Mercutio, "A plague of both your houses!"

When George thought all safe, he ventured from his hiding place, -- but not
daring to risque another scene of the same kind that night, suffered his master
to go into the house first; and then stealing softly round to the back gate, of
which he had a key, he was in time to slip on another frock, and get into his
master's chamber, soon after Henry had rung his bell. -- The family, and even
Olivia, had given up all thought of seeing Henry for the night, and had gone to
rest, -- one of the servants having observed, while waiting at supper, that
young squire Stuart was just arrived. -- George, glad that he had escaped so
well, went to bed, but not without strong suspicions that his poor master would
not be long out of Bedlam. -- Nay, the honest fellow began to debate with
himself, whether it would not be better, at once, to tell the melancholy, or
rather raving, state in which he often saw him, to his family, for fear worse
should come of it. -- "Who knows but he may lay violent hands on himself,
before one is aware?" said George: -- "and then what is to become of us? --
Heigho!" sighed George: -- "Love's a sad thing. -- I suppose Jenny Atwood is
a-bed and asleep now. -- Well, God bless her! -- and God bless us all! --
Heigho! -- I Will go to bed too. -- I hope I never shall be so much in love. --
Heigho! -- Yes, I dare say Jenny Atwood is asleep. -- Heigho!"

George repaired to his truckle bed, which was in a closet adjoining his
master's, where he had begged, long before, he might sleep, -- to be within
call, -- in case any thing should happen in the night.

The good fellow quietly undressed himself: but the affair of Romeo and Juliet,
the Montagues and Capulets, had quite settled with him his master's madness,
which he now considered as incurable: and his last words that night were, "Ah!
poor dear gentleman! it is all over with him now, sure enough. -- What a
terrible thing love is, when it comes to this! -- Heigho! -- The Lord deliver
us! -- I wonder how Jenny is to night. -- I hope I never shall love at this
rate!"

CHAPTER XXVIII.
WHATEVER roses hope might strew on the pillow of Olivia, that of Henry was on
this night lined with thorns. -- When, for an instant, he dropped into a
transitory slumber, all the images of a disturbed imagination and tortured mind
rose to his view. -- At one moment his fancy represented him tossing in the
ocean, at another laboring in mud; -- sometimes his ears were assailed by the
shrieks of both Caroline and Olivia, falling in the general ruin; -- and
sometimes he beheld his friend Charles pointing a dagger at his bosom.

In his waking hours, he often resolved on a stratagem to escape the union of
Olivia, by an elopement with Caroline, -- and projected this so as to form a
double plot, including the flight of Olivia with Charles. -- The violent
emotions accompanying this idea, extravagant as it was, operated with such
force on his burning fancy, that he suddenly started upright in his bed, and
exclaimed, "Would it were morning! -- I will be at the abbey by daybreak! --
Surely, Charles is by this time arrived! -- If not, I will go post to meet him!
-- Were he at the end of the earth, I would travel toward him!" -- Then
pressing his repeater, which hung at the bed'^ head, he found, to his infinite
mortification, that it was only two o'clock.

The sound of his exclamations had pierced the ear of the trusty George, who
had himself been kept awake by his own reflections, partly about his master,
and partly about himself; -- for the havoc he had witnessed in a human breast
by disappointment in love, made a very strong impression, and convinced him
more fully of a truth he had before begun to suspect, in regard to his own
heart.

George was certainly much alarmed at the state of his master, yet no less
struck at the prodigious effects of the passion itself; -- and as well from the
dread of his being one day reduced to the same condition, as from the hope that
he should not, -- each lover commonly making himself the happy exception to a
general rule, -- he was effectually kept from closing his eyes.

The moment, therefore, he heard Henry's concluding asseveration, that, were
Charles at the end of the earth, he would travel toward him, -- he leaped out
of his own bed, and was at the side of his master's, just as the watch had
repeated the inauspicious hour.

"For goodness' sake, what is the matter with your honor? -- Can I do any
thing for your honor myself? -- Shall I go for the doctor? -- Shall I call up
the rest of the servants? -- or the family? -- I fear your honor is very bad.
-- How is your honor's head? -- Hot -- very hot -- all of a coal! -- your
honor is in a high fever! -- let me strike a light."

"No," answered Henry, "not so, honest fellow. -- I know you love me, George."

"Love you, your honor! Yes!" though my distracted senses, too, should forsake
me, -- "I Would find, as the play says, and as I have heard your honor say, -- I Would
find some interval, when -- "

"Go then to bed," said Henry: "rise at the first peep of dawn: -- run to the
abbey; -- ask if Lieutenant Stuart is arrived, and bring me word, unknown to
any body."

"He is arrived, your honor: our coachman told me he saw him ride by the park
pales about ten o'clock last night; which must be soon after we -- we -- that
is, after your honor, left the abbey."

"Arrived!" answered Henry. "Then let my own horse and yours be saddled, and
in the stable, ready to mount, by four o'clock. Leave me now; and be sure you
are not after the time, my good George."

"I Will make very sure of that, your honor, by not going to bed any more. --
Try to get a bit of rest yourself, dear good sir; and I will call you to the
click of the quarters, so that you shall be on horseback as the clock is
striking."

George, -- knowing this to be the best mode of arranging the business, both
for his master's ease, and his own, -- did not wait for any objections thereto,
-- but commending Henry's lost wits to God, shut the door of the chamber, and
returned to his own.

At the time appointed, with an accuracy that marked the exactness of his
character, he had not only done his work in the stable, but in the house also;
for he had made a fire, boiled the kettle, had a dish of coffee, and all his
comfortables, smiling upon a table, in what was called the hunting parlour, to
greet his master, on coming down stairs, -- and by calling Henry a few minutes
earlier than the specified hour, had allowed time for taking the refreshment.

What was the nature of his master's business, George never enquired. This
young man had first been in the service of John Fitzorton, as the reader
remembers, while yet a boy, and since a private in John's regiment; and had so
well profited by his military education, that he practiced ever after toward
his commanding officer, -- and such he now looked upon Henry to be, -- the law
of non-resistance and passive obedience. -- Indeed, a slight nod often
testified his assent to what was required of him: but most commonly the last
word of any message sent him off without any sign or token at all.

Henry, however, having had leisure to reflect on the inconsistency,
ingratitude, and even impossibility of carrying his wild scheme into execution,
-- told George that he had altered his mind as to setting out so early, but
should perhaps ride or walk to see his friend Mr. Stuart in the course of the
day, and would try to sleep an hour or two now, that he might be ready to
attend his own family at breakfast; -- and cordially advised George to do the
same.

The joy of our worthy domestic, on seeing his master unexpectedly composed,
was so great, that he sunk involuntarily upon his knees, exclaiming with much
fervency, "The Lord be praised!" -- then drawing the curtains, and closing part
of the shutter next to the bed, that the light might not prove unfavourable to
his master's slumbers, -- he went on tiptoe out of the apartment, reiterating
in whispers, -- "the Lord be praised! the Lord, of his infinite mercy, be
praised! -- He may do yet."

Henry's fixed resolution, however, was, -- let the consequence be what it
might, or whatever involvements it might bring upon the abbey, or the castle,
or both, -- to make a full and free confession of the past and present, and
long-established state of his affections, in the course of that very day, --
and, indeed, at all hazards, to prevent his union with Olivia Clare, even if
the loss of Caroline Stuart, and his own ruin, should be the issue of the
explanation.

CHAPTER XXIX.
AFTER turning this, at length irrevocable determination, as he called it, into
various shapes, -- how best to proceed in it, -- whether to begin by discourse
with Olivia, with James, or with his mother, whose heart he knew was his own.
-- or whether to make his confessions, and his "round unvarnished tale deliver"
in presence of the whole family, -- he lay for some time in a state betwixt
sleeping and waking, -- a state produced by a violent tension of the thoughts
to one of those objects which hurries the animal spirits, till the mind, having
fatigued itself and the body, is compelled, from very heaviness of the flesh
and spirit, to grant the relief of a pause, -- during which we cannot strictly
be said either to sleep or wake: -- the word, which, for lack of a better, we
have for it, is dozing, a kind of intermediate state betwixt a vehement emotion
and no emotion at all; -- the mind still carrying on, though feebly, her former
designs, till the body, relaxed and languid, is unable to keep pace with her;
-- and a person may lie in this state several hours, and find himself, in the
end, without any material refreshment.

Out of this dozing then Henry was aroused by a scratching at the door, as from
the foot of a dog: -- this was presently followed by another, and that again by
a whine, which spoke, as plainly as any language, that, whoever might be the
petitioner, he earnestly desired to be admitted. As Henry was going to the
door, he was saluted by the barking of the said petitioner, accompanied by a
smart pat against the panel of the door, indicating that, having done with
supplication, the said pat might be considered as a sort of threat to effect a
forcible entry in case of longer resistance. -- On opening the door, who should
make his appearance but little Fitz, -- so was he called, -- the favorite and
almost constant companion of Caroline Stuart. -- It had been Henry's gift to
that young lady, who was grown so fond of it, partly for its own sake and
partly for the donor's, that she never suffered it out of her sight without
feeling uneasy. -- It had been present, of course, at all the scenes of joy and
sorrow which had passed between the lovers, and therefore was much in the good
graces of both.

But, how to account for this unexpected visit, Henry could no way conjecture.
-- However, little Fitz came at the right moment to receive a hearty welcome;
-- for Henry no sooner beheld his visitor, than he hugged, kissed, and called
him as many endearing epithets, as if it had been Caroline herself. -- The
fancy of Henry, always ready to encourage the illusions of his heart, soon gave
to this delightful "airy nothing," more than "a local habitation." He called
the dog dear little namesake: -- indeed it was at his own desire Fitz had been
so honored; -- "For," said Henry, "it will make Caroline then think of the
donor." -- He assured little Fitz, that he was more grateful for his attention
now, than at any former period of their friendship for each other, as he was
convinced he came on purpose to comfort him in the hour of his despair: -- "But
how did you find your way to my chamber? -- and how long have thou been sitting
at my door, poor fellow? -- And why did thou not address thyself to me
before? -- So thrive my soul, as I would share with thee my bed and board,
sooner than with the finest object amidst the works of creation, thy mistress
alone excepted. -- But what will she say to thy playing truant? -- does she
know of thy coming? -- or did Caroline send thee in charity to Henry?"

He continued this rhapsody much farther, and kindled in his course, till it is
to be doubted whether he did not really expect regular replies to those
interrogatories. -- Be that as it may, we never understood that the dog gave
any answer whatever, -- save that he had now changed the whine of complaint, to
the exulting note of joy; -- for it admits not of a doubt, that the little
animal was extremely glad to see Henry, who had frequently taken him into the
fields and forests, and treated him with the sight of a hare or partridge; --
for which, as well as other tokens of good will, little Fitz, who was extremely
well born, and well educated too, -- being of the spaniel kind and of a choice
breed, -- was entirely grateful; so that, in fact, there was no love lost
betwixt him and Henry.

But, whatever impression this enthusiastic address to little Fitz might make
upon him, it sunk peculiarly deep into the mind of True George. The door being
open when the dog entered, he heard quite sufficient to convince him that the
few hopes he had before entertained of his master's wits being restored, were
now over, and that the unhappy gentleman was ten times more distracted than
ever.

The various questions he heard put to the dog, gave George the strongest
apprehensions even of raving madness: but when Henry, with the utmost
extravagance of voice, talked about sharing bed and board with the dog, and
giving him the preference to all the objects of created nature except Caroline,
-- the poor fellow could hardly contain his sorrowful emotions, which, in
despite of himself, forced their way between his teeth, as he muttered "Alas!
quite gone! -- mad as a March hare! -- Lord have mercy upon us! -- If I thought
the case would ever be mine, I Would hang myself at once out of the way! Oh Jenny!
-- Jenny! -- All this for a dumb beast! -- very well in his place! I would not
hurt a worm! -- but a worm is a worm; -- and a dog is a dog, -- and a dog is a
beast of the field; -- and what is a beast to do in a man's bed, except a
Christian gives him a pat, and away, or so, to get him down, -- as much as to
say, 'If you please, sir, off my bed, and make room for your betters:' and, to
be sure, Christians are better than dumb beasts at any time; and if they a'n't,
more shame for 'em. -- Poor soul! -- quite lost indeed! -- gone for ever! -- O
merciful father! for pity, how mad he is!"

Most of this speech was delivered as George walked to and fro in the long
gallery, which extending the whole length of the bedchambers, Henry heard only
the words which began and ended it -- viz, "quite lost! -- mad as a March hare!
-- gone for ever," etc. To which he replied, "What Is that you say? -- who is
there? -- George?"

"Yes, your honor," replied George, giving the matter a turn for fear of
making his master worse, -- ever an uppermost idea, -- "'it is only me, sir." --
"Gone for ever -- and mad as a March hare -- what are you talking about?" said
Henry. -- "Little Fitz, please your honor. -- I found, after we -- that is,
your honor -- got home, he had followed us -- followed you, that is -- from
the abbey; so I let him have a night's lodging in my room, knowing he was Lady
Caroline's dog, and made him a snug birth in the corner: and when I got up he
was off; and I was saying to myself, -- says I, -- he is gone -- he is lost --
and if he is, it will make Lady Caroline as mad as a March hare. -- But I see
your honor has him safe; so it is all well. But breakfast waits, your honor."

"Well then," said Henry, "give this dear little fellow something to eat; and
keep him out of sight till I can walk over with him to the abbey; and be sure
you let him have what he likes: for, d**n me if I don't love him almost as well
as if -- "

"He shall be taken good care of, your honor, depend on it," interposed
George, lifting him from the bed, and walking off with him under his arm,
before Henry could finish his asseveration.

Henry had always been much attached to, and not a little superstitious about
the fidelity and genius of dogs: and this friendly visit of little Fitz was, to
his poetic heart, a fresh proof that the canine came very near to the human
species, in those matters, barring some very nice and subtle distinctions,
about which he would sometimes reason with John, till that philosophic youth
would pronounce him, as did True George, sometimes to be mad, and sometimes
only merry.

It was in the present case a yet farther confirmation, when, before Henry had
left his chamber, little Fitz had given George the slip, and again paid his
respects to the lover of Caroline. And at the time of this his second
appearance, Henry was offering his devotions to Caroline's miniature. This, he
told Fitz, lest he should approach it in an unhallowed manner -- this, he told
Fitz, was the picture of her they both adored. "But, you happy creature," added
Henry, you will be fondled by the original when I, perhaps -- " He then fell to
caressing the spaniel and the picture by turns, and concluded, by exclaiming,
as he was going out of his room, "Dear, precious resemblance! -- never -- never
-- will I part with thee! -- not Death himself shall snatch thee from me!"

The chamber door was all this time wide open, and the above words were heard
distinctly, and the speaker of them seen, by Lady Fitzorton, Mr. Clare, and
Olivia, -- the two latter at that instant coming from Olivia's chamber, where
the former had, as usual, given her a gentle summons, to see if her daughter,
as she always called her, was ready to go down to breakfast; and they met Mr.
Clare as he was shutting the door of his apartment.

The trio were all of one mind, as to what they heard and saw. Olivia blessed
herself, and cried, -- "Dear soul! -- how he honors my poor gift! -- See
madam," -- turning to Lady Fitzorton, -- "ought I not to be proud?" -- "It
gives me almost as much joy as it does you," replied her ladyship: "for as he
was not prepared for our coming, as you see by his agreeble confusion, we may
be sure his caresses of the picture are -- Warm from his heart and faithful to
its fires. "Hey, Henry!" exclaimed Mr. Clare, "what signify your prosings, to a
bard caught in so poetical a situation? -- There Is a quotation for him, that
describes him in his own way. --.For my part, I say nothing: -- but were I
Olivia, I should be little pleased with the cold compliment paid to my
inanimate picture, when the original stood blooming like the morning before
him, without his so much as offering to -- "

"Come, madam," said Olivia, "shall we go down stairs?" -- "With all my heart,
my dear," answered Lady Fitzorton: -- "Mr. Clare will have his joke, you know."

"You Will follow, Henry," said Olivia, blushing delightfully and tripping down
stairs. "Is your friend Charles come? and, pray, how fares my sweet
play-fellow, my sweet friend?"

Olivia recollected it might not be quite prudent to mention Caroline's name at
that instant, and so made the best of her way.

Henry had seldom been thrown into a more awkward situation. The mistake of the
miniature, which, on being discovered, he put hastily out of sight, was so
extremely natural, and so impossible to be then explained, that he was utterly
confounded; and his complexion now almost as nearly resembled the carnation as
Olivia's: a circumstance which literally gave a still stronger color to the
supposition that the picture he had been so transported with, was the one that
Olivia had presented.

What became of little Fitz, we never heard: but it is probable he had shyed
off at the sight of so much unexpected company; for he had naturally more
diffidence than belongs to favorites in general, whether of the biped or
quadruped kind. But, indeed, he might very possibly have been at Henry's feet,
and not noticed by either of the parties in their confusion; and, for the
moment, Henry himself forgot, perhaps, that this "dear little soul, whom he
preferred to created nature," had any existence within the bounds of the
universe. Be that as it may, Henry went down to breakfast: -- but from what
happened afterward, -- and, indeed, from what might be expected to happen from
the questions which would arise on the unexpected sight of such a guest, -- we
are rather inclined to think Henry did not perceive his companion till it was
too late. Of this the reader will presently form his own judgment.

CHAPTER XXX.
SIR ARMINE FITZORTON, who stood in the great hall which led from the chambers
to several of the apartments, encountered Henry as he came down stairs, and
received him with an ardour of affection and applause, to which nothing but
Henry's consciousness of not deserving it, could have rendered him insensible.

"It is surely decreed," said Sir Armine, embracing Henry, "that my life is to
be preserved by one or other of my children. Twice has it already been in
danger, and twice have my sons rescued me! -- Here, Henry, is the accursed
scroll, whose contents, had they been true, would have been far more fatal than
the injury which this aged frame received from Sir Guise Stuart's horse: for I
am convinced they would have broken mine and your mother's heart. -- Henry,
therefore, merits, in a still greater degree even than our beloved John, the
title of his Parent's Preserver. -- I am grateful and I am happy."

The venerable man threw his arms round Henry's neck, and wept; -- a
circumstance no way inconsistent with the transport either of gratitude or
happiness, and which nature often adduces in proof of both.

The heart of Henry, though throbbing with love for Caroline, was by no means
unmoved by such an appeal to it. It is more than probable indeed, that at such
a moment his heart had little to do with Caroline, or with any thing in this
world but with the sacred object in his embrace.

"Oh Sir!" exclaimed he, "I cannot, -- indeed I cannot bear it! Spare me, I
conjure you; for I feel powerfully, that these tears, and the goodness which
occasions them, will be more fatal than that paper, whatever it may suggest. --
I cannot speak! -- my dear, -- dear, father! I cannot speak!"

"I perceive, my child, thou can not. -- Blessings upon thee! Let us hasten
then to those whose affection for you is equal to my own."

They proceeded toward the breakfast parlour, the door of which was at that
moment opened by Olivia, who began to be impatient of Henry's delay. -- "Your
tea will be quite cold, gentlemen," said she, complainingly.

Sir Armine turned his face gently from her, and said, "Give me your hand,
Olivia, and let us take a turn or two before we go in. -- There, Henry! do you
follow my example."

Henry took the other hand, and they all three traversed the hall for the space
of some minutes, -- Sir Armine attempting to hide strong emotions, and Henry
laboring in the same way. Both were unsuccessful; Olivia perceived they had
been in tears, and indeed still discovered some which had lodged in the furrows
of Sir Armine's cheek.

"Heavens!" said she, "what can these mean?" wiping them softly away with the
back of her hand: -- "and yours, Henry, are not quite dry," said she, removing
them by the like action.

"Why should we endeavor, my son, to conceal the effects of our transport from
any one, but least of all from her who has a right to share them? -- Daughter,"
continued Sir Armine, "what you have noticed in our countenances, has been
produced by the joy of our hearts; -- and it was churlish in us to wish to rob
you of your just division. This our Henry has -- but no matter, -- I charge you
to love him better than ever, and if he proves to you as good a husband, as he
has done to me a son, -- as I am, thereby, the happiest of fathers, so will you
be the most blessed of wives. Ask no more questions, but let us to breakfast."

"It is very unfair, however, of you," said Olivia with all imaginable
sweetness, as if betwixt sport and earnest, "to have all this transport to
yourselves: for I would have you to know I am as fond of weeping for joy as
either of you, and am now almost ready to cry with grief, at your cheating me
in this cruel manner. And as to being more fond of this creature than I ever
was before, I am sorry, Sir, at the necessity of disobeying you in this
particular; for he very well knows, that -- that -- "

"Knows what?" questioned Sir Armine.

"That it is impossible," whispered she; but the whisper was conveyed in
another of those stage tones which have so amply been discussed in one of the
family conversations; for, when she mentioned to Sir Armine the impossibility
of loving Henry better than she had done, she certainly intended her lover
should hear. Indeed, she resigned her hand to his caresses while this reason
was communicated; and gliding herself between Henry and Sir Armine, -- the
former in almost an oblivion of every thing but his filial love, -- she drew
them into the apartment.

As they entered, little Fitz had placed himself in Olivia's chair, and
thinking, perhaps, he had waited long enough for his breakfast, was helping
himself very cordially to some bread and butter, that stood commodiously near
him; -- Lady Fitzorton and Mr. Clare having entered into a serious tete-a-tete
at the other end of the room.

Olivia, therefore, running to him, said, "Oh! but I forgot, Henry, to tell you
about this dear little dog: -- he is quite taken with me: -- I think he likes
the castle better than the abbey. -- What is his name? -- I see by the collar,
he belongs to -- to -- to -- to -- "

Olivia checked herself on a cautionary hint from Henry: and, though she could
not guess the motive of that hint, as the name of the dog's owner was no longer
proscribed, her Henry's wishes were always followed by prompt and smiling
obedience.

As Sir Armine advanced toward little Fitz, Henry's agitation was so extreme,
he involuntarily took hold of his father's coat, to prevent his examining the
collar.

Olivia was taken up with considering the beauty of the animal, so that Henry's
situation escaped her; -- but Sir Armine gave him such an interrogating look as
sent his very blood into his face to answer it.

"Let me see, Olivia!" said Sir Armine, stooping down, as if to read the
engraved letters.

"Indeed, you must not Sir!" cried Olivia, turning the collar round, till the
engraved part was hid under the dog's throat. -- "Dear Sir, he does not choose
to tell the name of his owner: besides, it is a Family Secret: -- or, perhaps,
he means to change his situation."

"Then he ought to bring a character from his last place," said Lady Fitzorton,
now first joining in the discourse.

"Very true," said Mr. Clare: -- "so pray Mr. what's-your-name, whom do you
belong to?"

"Don't mention Sir Guise! say, he belongs to Caroline," -- whispered Olivia to
Henry, "and -- and -- "

Judge, reader, if this was not helping this lame dog over the style, with a
vengeance.

"If you must know," -- said Olivia, -- "the little fellow belongs to Miss
Stuart: only, you know, we are not to talk about it, as, perhaps, some other
person's name may be on the collar: -- and though I know you are all too good
'to turn your enemy's dog out of doors,'without his breakfast, I -- I -- in
short, I had half a mind to steal him, and love him for his mistresses sake."

"If you will but help me out, this will do nicely," -- added Olivia to Henry,
-- not in a stage whisper.

"Miss Stuart!" -- said Mr. Clare -- "then you ought, I am sure, to be jealous,
either of the dog or his mistress; for I saw Henry almost devouring him with
kisses."

"And I could kiss him myself," -- said Olivia, -- "for he is a dear and a love;
and if I did not think it would break Miss Stuart's heart, I would steal him.
Yes, I would, you dear thing!" added Olivia, renewing her caresses: -- "not
that I saw Henry kiss him at all -- It was something else I saw him kiss."

The bloom which accompanied this observation, covered the cheeks of Olivia,
and was inexpressibly beautiful.

"Admitted," said Mr.Clare, pleasantly: -- "but, methinks, a lover of mine
would not a little anger me, if he were to salute the prettiest cur in the
world, and my picture, in the same breath; -- however, as that is your
business, not mine, you must even settle it between you."

"Let you and I, Lady Fitzorton, finish our breakfast as fast as we can, and go
on with our conversation, which, as is but too often the case, a puppy in
favor has interrupted."

With all these reliefs, Henry had collection enough to say, the dog was a
favorite at the abbey, from whence it had followed him, as it had done more
than once before, though not perhaps noticed; -- but that, as often as it did,
he sent it back immediately, knowing what search there would be after it, -- as
he should have done now, had he discovered it in time.

Henry now patted the dog's head, -- and said, "he supposed, if he did not send
or take it back soon, there would be a search-warrant after it."

Breakfast now went on smoothly, except that Sir Armine and Henry rather
overacted their parts, -- the former being too talkative, and the latter too
taciturn, -- yet both equally anxious to conceal their sensations.

The engraving luckily escaped; -- for the collar bore these words: -- "LITTLE
FITZ; the gift of HENRY TO CAROLINE."

Mr. Clare and Lady Fitzorton disappeared: -- Olivia soon followed, and ran up
stairs with the spaniel in her arms; -- and almost in the same instant she had
so done, True George came whistling through the hall, calling at every step,
"Little Fitz! -- little Fitz!" -- The door of the breakfast parlour being left
open, George came to the threshold, put his head into the room, still whistling
for, and calling after, little Fitz.

"What Is that you say," -- questioned Sir Armine, -- "about Fitz?"

George instantly perceived his error, and trying to repair it, answered --
"Nothing, an't please your honor, -- but that I was looking for the little
spaniel that had strayed from the abbey, and I was saying to myself, says I,
(God forgive me for fibbing! aside) if he should be lost, the person he belongs
to might go into fits: -- that is all, your honor: -- and -- and -- Jenny
Atwood said, -- 'she thought she knew the dog, and -- and had a bit of a fancy
to see him again,'your honor, -- that is all."

"And that is enough," said Sir Armine: -- "go, and shut the door after you,"

George obeyed the word of command in much perturbation.

Sir Armine spoke sternly, and rose himself to shut the door, even while he was
giving orders.

CHAPTER XXXI.
"HENRY, I wish to look at Olivia's miniature, -- that which John painted for
you."

Forgetting, perhaps, in his confusion, he had left it with Caroline, for a
purpose the reader may remember, Henry put his hand into his pocket, as if to
feel for it; and not finding it there, his agitation increased.

"I -- I -- I -- must have left it, Sir," stammered Henry.

"I mean that," said Sir Armine, "on which you bestowed, as your mother told
me, so many caresses this morning."

"That, Sir?" cried Henry, his breath almost gone.

"The same," rejoined his father. -- "Mr. Clare asserted, you have heard, it
more than divided with you the fondness you discovered for Miss Stuart's
spaniel!"

"Heaven! Sir! what a comparison!" said Henry with vehemence. -- "Spaniel!"

"Yes, little Fitz," observed Sir Armine, looking searchingly at Henry.

"But, to leave comparisons, fetch me the picture: -- perhaps it may be left in
your chamber; it may be even at this moment on your pillow. -- It ought, by the
laws of love, let the original be who she may" -- here his eyes seemed to
penetrate into the very heart of his son, -- "it ought, I say, to be always
within reach of your lips. Perhaps it is so now, -- your bosom companion! Let
us see! and pray, sir, what is this?"

His father pointed to a small piece of ribbon which had, perhaps, in his
endeavor to conceal it from the party who surprised him at his chamber door,
insinuated itself on the wrong side of Henry's shirt: and pulling at it
abruptly, that bosom-secret, which had literally been so long suspended, would
then have come forth, and Caroline's well-painted resemblance stood confessed,
had not a little contest ensued between the parties.

Henry defended the passes to his breast with his hand, which grasped the frill
of his shirt, and perhaps, the mystery underneath it.

Sir Armine renewed the attack, saying sarcastically, -- "What can be the
meaning of all this? -- Is it not Olivia's? -- Is it not the 'counterfeit
presentment' of one who is alike dear to us both? -- The fair object of the
father's choice, as well as the son's! what other could be cherished in Henry's
bosom? -- Is it not Olivia Clare's: and if I am any longer denied the pleasure
of paying it my tender respects, I shall ring for Olivia herself, and ask her
consent."

Sir Armine, without letting go his hold, made a step or two toward the bell.

Henry, aiding his father's intentions, tore open his shirt in a kind of
phrenzy, and cried, "It must -- it must be explained! The hour is come! --
thank heaven, the hour is come! -- I am the sport of every accident, and will
here accumulate or put an end to my misery, and all its mysteries, at once."

"Have a care!" said his father, preventing Henry's design; -- "have a care!
your father's happiness, your father's life, and not singly his, but the
happiness and life of a man venerable as myself, of her likewise, who gave life
to you, -- and more than the existence, probably the self-destruction, of the
innocent Olivia. -- "

Sir Armine panted and paused.

"These, my son, are in your hands, as entirely as if you were our fate. --
Beware then! -- I tremble at the omens I have just seen! -- Deep plots are
discovered by trifling occurrences. -- Heaven forbid I should be right in my
present forebodings! -- oh, if I were!"

Sir Armine's looks and accents seemed to anticipate and confirm the sentiments
he was about to utter.

"If I were, loss of fortune and of life would be as the tender mercies of God,
compared to what is reserved for the houses of Clare and Fitzorton."

Henry falling at Sir Armine's feet, exclaimed, "That God is my witness, Sir,
-- if the loss of my life could prolong the happiness of yours, and of my
mother's, but one day, -- with a prayer as earnest as ever came from the heart
of man, I would invoke my death this moment, -- invoke it thus on my knees, a
posture befitting a son to receive it! -- But there are circumstances which
would make my existence so hateful, so dishonorable in my own eyes. -- This
picture, sir, could it speak -- " Here he drew it half from his bosom.

"Forbear, Henry, forbear!" answered Sir Armine, closing his eyes, and averting
his head: -- "I will not look on any thing that may -- "

"I have forborne too long," resumed the madding Henry: -- "enthralled by
inexplicable events, I have been too long involved in a thorny labyrinth; --
and this, O my honored, my almost adored father, -- this is the crisis at
which I must force my way out of it. -- Hear me, sir! hear me with patience,
pity, and parental love, while I confess, -- while I explain, by what a series
of unavoidable delays, entanglements, and almost more than human interventions,
I have, day after day, onward to weeks, months, years, -- to the desolation of
health, happiness, all offices, all studies, even the most sacred -- "

"Henry!" interposed Sir Armine, -- "let me not listen to what would, must, and
ought to turn that heart against you, -- where, perhaps I ought to blush while
I confess, you have been, from the hour of your birth, to this moment, the most
cherished of human beings! -- If you have in your bosom any passion, which has
made its way by stealth, to effect the havoc of soul and body, and derange
every pursuit of duty, and devotion, -- and, if you rashly carry the
resemblance of the unhappy, illfated object of that passion in your breast, --
let the consideration you owe to the united lives and fortunes of united
families, -- to your religion, and to your God, whose ministry you have
promised to assist, though even that promise seems forgotten, -- let all these
sacred motives aid you to expel the intruder."

"I was silent, sir," interrupted Henry; -- "because I could not explain: --
but I did not promise -- "

"It is still in your power to derive additional virtue from the very
sufferings, by which such complicated misery to the aged, and to the young, may
be prevented," resumed Sir Armine. -- "For my own part, I here declare to you,
dearest Henry, that, were my individual felicity, were my single life, the only
points of destruction which would result from what I tremble to name, I would
give up that felicity, and that life, a sacrifice to you -- a willing sacrifice!

"It is enough, my son, I will not expatiate, I will not remonstrate, or
reason. -- Any attempt to subdue you by the force of argument, would lessen you
in your own eyes, even more, perhaps, than they would disgrace you in mine. --
I would rather leave every thing to your own graceful duty, and good
principles; -- and, that I may give you an opportunity of exerting these, I
thus raise you from the earth, fold you in my arms, and leave with you in trust
-- what? -- all that ought to be most important to you on earth."

In vain did Henry attempt to detain his father; -- in vain did he struggle in
his embraces, -- in vain lift up his streaming eyes, and exclaim, "Cruel, cruel
perversity of fortune! -- Detested dissensions! which have thus placed one duty
in opposition to another! -- Accursed domestic feuds! which set even the
virtues at variance with each other!"

At the end of these disordered, and almost frantic ejaculations, Sir Armine
cried out, "I have heard too much. -- Half of this indecent violence would
distract the rest of my family, and murder Olivia.!"

He then rushed out of the room, -- perhaps forgetting he had been exhausting
himself in similar paroxysms.

CHAPTER XXXII.
BY means so apparently insignificant, was this long-delayed and long-projected
discovery brought about: and Sir Armine was strongly confirmed in all his
former suspicions, by the simple circumstances of the miniature and the
spaniel. Thus bad begun, and worse remained behind: for Henry had, hereby,
also, more fully convinced himself that the disclosure was likely to be
attended, in its progress through the families, with worse mischiefs than had
resulted to them or to him, even from the concealment, disastrous as it had
been.

But one of these mischief-makers namely, little Fitz, was destined to be the
small, but important, instrument of several other discoveries; -- for, while
Henry was in the midst of the above distressing reflections, Olivia and her
canine companion, with whom she was, by this time, on the best terms possible,
returned into the breakfast parlour, where she no sooner perceived Henry alone,
than she took up the dog in her arms, and said, "Do you know, my dear Henry,
that this little fellow had like to have thrown poor Jane Atwood into
hysterics? -- He followed me into her sittingroom, where she and your good
George were tete-a-tete; and on perceiving the dog, she caught him up, kissed
him as much as we have done, and said, 'it was the very spaniel that was with
Miss Stuart, when she and Sir Guise paid her a visit in London, and that she
heard Caroline say, she would not have any thing happen to it for half her
father's estate;' adding, that it followed her wherever she went, and shared
her very bed. -- 'But I have another reason for loving it,' said Jane. 'Pray
pardon me, miss! but what is constantly in the sight of -- of -- of an absent
friend, you know, miss, is always dear to us.' -- Her hesitation made it
difficult for her to speak.

"I declare, Henry, when I heard the poor girl say this, -- though I was sorry
for having been the occasion of her shedding tears on a subject I have
constantly endeavored to keep out of her mind, -- I loved her the better for
her tenderness, though I knew it was improper for her to indulge it. -- Ah! I
know by my own feelings," continued Olivia, "that, had you but touched a
flower, a leaf, or the most trivial thing you can imagine, my fancy and heart
would hold it consecrated from that moment; -- and, indeed, it would be
estimable beyond all price. This locket, for instance, -- though that is not a
well chosen example either, because it is not a trifle, and is very dear, -- I
have assured it of my affection, a thousand thousand times." -- Here she took
what she described from her lovely bosom, and forgot, most likely, for the
instant, that little Fitz was in the world.

"I have heard, or read, Henry," continued she, "that it is unsafe, or unwise,
-- some have pronounced it foolish, and philosophers, I am told, have called it
indelicate, -- for a woman to express the extent of her tenderness, to the man
she loves, even if he be most amiable -- Now, that has always appeared very
strange: for it is one of the sweetest, I feel, likewise, it is one of the most
innocent pleasures of my life, to declare how much I esteem, love, and honor
my dearest Henry. -- Where can be the peril of trusting with all his powers,
the man who has long given you an equal degree of confidence and affection in
return? -- I should hate myself, if, situated as we are, I could coldly repress
a sentiment, the declaration of which might produce to Henry but the smallest
added proof of my attachment.

"But how I am running on? -- I know not whether you ought to be angry or love
me the better for it. -- Do set me right; decide for me, Henry."

Before this question could be replied to, True George came to say, Lieutenant
Stuart was in the blue room, and begged to speak to Squire Henry, before he
paid his respects to the family.

"Run to him this moment!" replied Olivia. -- "I see, Henry, you are out of
spirits. -- He and I will make you quite well and happy: and if he assists me
in doing that, I will forgive him even for robbing me of this little fellow, --
for I foresee he will take him.

"But, alas! he is, you say, out of spirits too; then I will nurse and comfort
you both. -- Be very particular in your enquiries about Caroline, Henry. -- I
suppose he is just come down: but you drive every thing, except yourself, out
of my head -- I forgot that you must have seen him last night at the abbey. --
I wonder what he can have to say to you alone. -- Shall I leave the dog? -- No
-- he will go with me, you see. -- I declare, Caroline would be jealous of me,
if she were to know it. -- If you had but seen the face of True George when
Jane fondled the dog -- 'I have no notion of people kissing puppy dogs,'
muttered he: -- 'they could do no more to christians.' -- But suppose we take
off the little fellow's collar -- then, you know, Sir Armine -- " Henry caught
at the hint, -- slipped the strap from the buckle, and put the tell-tale in his
pocket.

"Delightful!" cried the unsuspicious Olivia. -- "Now I think we shall be a
match for the old gentleman's curiosity. But I have forgot to look myself; --
let me see! -- no -- now I think of it, your friend is waiting for you while I
am prating." She then exultingly left the room.

The meeting of Charles and Henry was extremely affecting. They ran into each
other's arms, and forgot, for a while, their sorrows in their embraces.

"Beloved, unhappy friend!" cried Charles, -- "I feel, that even hopeless love,
since you must have been innocent of my despair, would have wanted power to
dissolve our friendship! -- Dissolve it! -- No -- my poor breaking heart would
rather have flown to that friendship for succor and support, as the only good
it could expect in the hour of its despair!

"But I do not despair, Henry: for although I have heard, seen, and read all
that might be distracting on this subject, my friend," -- Charles here held out
a letter -- "still our fate is suspended by one precious hope -- "

"On that letter?" questioned Henry.

"From my father," replied Charles. -- "It proposes, -- in a language so
humiliating, indeed, that though, as I said, all depends thereon, I am at a
loss whether, as a son, I ought to be the bearer -- It proposes, Henry, an
accommodation between our houses, on your father's own terms. -- It paints, in
glowing colors, regret for our long dissensions, and holds out a general
amnesty to each offending party.

"Whatever be the result," continued Charles, -- "the motive which led Sir
Guise to this signal kindness, has more than atoned for all that I have
suffered from his former conduct; and, though I greatly fear, because I greatly
love, lest his generous effort should be in vain, -- I shall remember the
intention with my dying breath. -- Yet, wherefore should I entertain an
unworthy doubt of the success? -- If the aggressor can sue for pardon, the man
whom he has offended, can much more easily forget his wrongs; -- and Sir Armine
Fitzorton, I trust -- "

"Alas!" interposed Henry, "I have to paint a scene which blasts that hope in
the bud."

He now related what had recently past with Sir Armine, in consequence of the
discoveries brought about by Caroline's miniature, and little Fitz; and added
thereto, by way of filling up the gap in their history, all that had fallen out
to oppose the progress of their ill-fated loves, since they parted.

When he had closed the narrative, -- at several passages in which Charles
shuddered with apprehension, especially at the proofs of Olivia's rooted
attachment to his friend, though Henry mentioned as few instances of these, and
touched those few as lightly, as possible.

Charles exclaimed, "Notwithstanding all this, something whispers me, a sudden
and unforeseen good will result from the operation of this epistle on a heart
so noble as your father's. Consider, my friend, we live in a world of wonderful
revolutions: and, amongst the infinity of changes and chances that surround us
on all hands, who can tell but from this source may spring my happiness with
Olivia, and yours with Caroline?"

Until the mention of Caroline's name as a party in this matter, Henry,
notwithstanding the constitutional and habitual intemperance of all his
feelings, could not help considering his friend's hopes as the mere offspring
of a mind violently agitated by the passion that most strongly believes it can
reconcile impossibilities; but now he found out, all at once, there was much
sound reasoning in his friend's observations; and he indulged a credulity that
showed he was again in a disposition to believe every thing practicable, which
favored his ruling passion. He exclaimed "Oh, my friend, if the exertions of
your now generous father should have influence with mine, -- and if the same
kind star that induced the divine Caroline to look favorably on me should
dispose the gentle Olivia at length to incline an auspicious ear to the suit of
my friend -- "

"O, if such bliss should be in store for us!" interrupted Charles: "for I can
with truth inform you, Henry, that my sister's affection for you, in despite of
all that has past, is greater than -- in short nothing but the returns which
are made by your own heart -- and the ardent and unspeakable tenderness with
which mine throbs for Olivia, can truly indicate how much you are beloved by
Caroline Stuart."

"Let us lose no time!" exclaimed Henry, with the utmost impatience. "Sir
Armine ought to have had the important letter long ago. Give it me, my friend:
-- no, -- deliver it yourself. -- Yet, that may not be right. -- Let us think a
moment what is best to be done."

A gentle tap was now given at the door, on opening which, a voice, more gentle
than the summons, said, -- "Forgive my interruption of you, dear friends: but I
long to ask Mr. Stuart how he does: and it is not fair of you, Henry, to keep
him all to yourself in this manner, when I will answer for the whole family
being rejoiced to see him, -- as well as this little fellow," pointing to Fitz,
-- "who, you see, asserts his claims to a share of his company, as well as you,
Mr. Henry."

This sportive reproach ensured the fair speaker a cordial welcome; and both
the friends seemed to be animated by the same sentiment, namely, that of making
Olivia a party in the reconciliation; for they both exclaimed, at the same
instant, with very little variation in the expression, and both with equal
fervor, "Good Heaven! who so proper, so likely, as Miss Clare, to assist us
with her counsel in this exigence?"

"I beg," repeated Olivia, "instantly to be made acquainted with the nature of
it, if either of you suppose there is a probability of my being useful!" Henry,
perceiving his friend too much agitated by the presence of his beloved mistress
to proceed, informed Olivia of Sir Guise's wish of being reconciled to the
family, and his almost supplicatory letter to effect it.

"And who can tell, lovely creature," said Charles, almost forgetting himself,
"but that, if it were presented and supported by such an advocate, it might
succeed, and then -- "

"And then," exclaimed Olivia, "it would make us three of the happiest of
families in the world! you know. I dare say, Mr. Stuart, your friend Henry,
who, I suppose, keeps nothing from you, told you my heart throbs again to
embrace my ever remembered Caroline. Methinks I seel for her a sister's love."
-- "A sister's!" ejaculated Charles. "Good heavens! -- what a thought! -- I
will pledge all my hopes of happiness here and hereafter, she would rejoice to
call you by that endearing name!" -- "Do you think so?" said Olivia. -- "Then
we shall be all as one family! and this little fellow too," added she, patting
the dog upon the head, -- "see! here is the dear creature's spaniel! -- Make
much of him, Mr. Stuart. -- If he could tell your sister how I have fondled
him, -- you know the old proverb -- but what have I to do with proverbs at such
a time as this? -- I see you are both ready to quarrel with me for loitering on
my commission. -- Prosper it, good heaven!"

Give me the letter then this moment! -- Give me the letter this moment!" added
Olivia, taking it from the trembling Charles: "and I could almost worship the
hand of the bearer of such overtures."

The sweet girl held her own hand, in a way that would have made a novice in
the little courtesies of life understand that it might be seized with impunity.
Charles conveyed it in a disordered manner to his lips, from which Olivia drew
it away, and left the room, saying, "You young soldiers are so used to carry
every thing by storm, that the destined object of your attack has no hope of
escaping, when it is a poor damsel like myself, but by running away."

Now, though all this was only the play of a friendly and benevolent heart,
happy at every prospect of promoting happiness, and at being chosen as the
instrument to reconcile alienated minds, the two friends were no sooner left
again to a tete-a-tete, than they derived, even from the alacrity of their
embassadress, a fresh supply of hopes that fortune was turning in their favor.

Charles was too much transported with his having, almost for the first time,
ravished, or rather received as a free-will-offering, the beautiful hand of his
mistress, to think of or feel any thing but the tumult into which it had thrown
him. -- He therefore only seized the hand of his friend, and carrying it to
that side where nature has thought proper to place the heart, -- he cried, --
"God of feeling, how it beats! -- did you ever feel any thing like it, Henry?"
To which question his friend observed, in the words of his favorite
Shakespeare, There is a tide in the affairs of men; perhaps, Charles, we have
now taken it at the flood; and if so, It will lead on to more than fortune.

In honest prose, his friend assured him he was almost weak enough to subscribe
to his opinion. They then proceeded to increase this delightful phrenzy by
every means in their power. Superstition itself is not more credulous than
love, when, in the very bosom of despair, hope, as if by stealth, darts but one
ray upon it.

"And if, after all our disappointments," cried Henry, whose heart was an
admirable sophist, and could, when warmed, overturn the most elaborate
philosophy and reasoning, "if, after all our miseries, this unexpected chance
should be the groundwork of that temple of felicity to which we might at
length conduct our destined brides, -- shall we not --?"

"Shall we not both go out of our senses with joy?" questioned Charles.
"Brides! O Henry! how often have we known one happy change lead on, and prove
as it were the harbinger to, another! And when Fortune does bring her
atonements, she is frequently, like a long tyrannous but at length yielding
mistress, as kind as she had been cruel."

The self-deluding friends then enumerated all the instances their memories
could furnish of one unexpected piece of good luck producing or having been
followed up by others no less unlooked for. Charles related a story of two
young people coming together, whose parents, friends, and fortunes, were all in
opposition to their dearest hopes.

Henry, bringing the matter more into point, said, he had read somewhere the
history of a lady in love with a gentleman whose heart was otherwise engaged;
notwithstanding which, after a course of hopeless years, she was married to the
object of her affections, by an accident that had induced the gentleman to
transfer his passion from his former love.

"And why should not this be the ultimate event in the case of Charles and
Olivia?"

Such was the romance of their hearts, that they could not stop, or indeed
stoop, to examine whether this was not a mere rhapsody of the affections in the
hey-day of youthful blood. Indeed, the wisdom of reason and of common sense is
so unwelcome and disgusting to lovers of this character when the heart is in
this sort of delirium, that it sincerely adopts the maxim of the poet, by
pronouncing it "folly to be wise."

CHAPTER XXXIII.
To this delusion of a fond and lovesick imagination, then, did Henry and his
friend deliver themselves up so entirely, that they had sketched out, and
communicated to each other, several of the delicious plans of happiness which,
it was agreed upon, should take place when Charles became the husband of
Olivia, and Henry of Caroline. The soul of poesy was at work in the bosom of
Henry. His fancy performed miracles. His head and heart were both on fire. The
enraptured Charles caught the flame; and both enjoyed Those painted clouds that
beautify our days; while reason, half-blushing half-smiling, withdrew; and that
species of madness, which indeed can never endure so stern a power, resumed its
reign. The prospect of felicity seemed to approximate as our young friends
looked upon it, and to brighten as it advanced: all the impediments which had
so long stood like a dead wall of separation betwixt the abbey and castle,
were, by the help of reconciling fancy, removed; and in its stead 'a verdant
wall,' like that of paradise, up-reared its florid head. The turrets seemed to
smile on each other, -- the trees on each estate appeared once more to form
their branches into true-lover's knots, and extend their 'marriageable arms'
till they embraced both houses: the very flowers of the different gardens were,
as by instinctive amity, disposed to waft fragrance to each other, 'stealing
and giving odours:' and that this courtesy might be the more expeditiously
done, Henry's muse was commanded to create a Zephyr on purpose, commissioned to
bear upon his balmy wing the rosy sweets of Fitzorton to the abbey, and with no
less celerity to fly back with the violet perfumes of Stuart. Meantime, Henry
had stationed the Loves and Graces, of which he had a warehouse, in different
parts of the groves and gardens, to twist flowers and wreathe chaplets, to
adorn the brows of Caroline and Olivia. Nay, he had placed Cupid in one part of
the forest, aiming a new dart at the tender bosom of Olivia, in favor of
Charles, and had set old Hymen at work, in the sacred form of Sir Armine, to
build a nuptial bower to be ready for that double marriage which was to
complete such infinity of happiness.

Should thou, reader, be either a poet, a lover, or both, thou will here
exclaim, "if this be madness let me rave!" -- but, if thou art a reasoning
being, and wise, that is, cold enough to keep the track of common sense, thou will pity or despise those distracted day-dreamers, and not being able to
conceive any happiness in such phrenzy, think Bedlam, or St. Luke's, the only
places proper to hold our two frantic young gentlemen.

Now as the frozen Caucasus and the burning Aetna do really exist in the
natural world, so do these opposite degrees of heat and cold in the human
temperament; -- and as it would be no less impossible to convince thee of even
the transitory rapture of being mentally distracted, than to persuade the man
of sanguine disposition, -- a Charles or a Henry, -- there was infinite
gratification in carrying a lump of unthawed ice in the bosom by way of a
heart, -- we shall attempt no means of reconciling such extremes, -- satisfied
in our own mind, that intense heat and cold have their separate and peculiar
use in the little globe of man's nature, -- no less than in that great globe,
the world itself.

Thou know, reader, that Greenland is a perfect bagnio to the temperature of
the planet Saturn, to whom the sun himself appears but as a little pallid star,
and that its inhabitants would expire with heat in our coldest countries; --
while, on the other hand, Mercury is so full of fire, that the heat to which
its supposed natives are accustomed, is so excessive, that the most glorious
day here would be to them no more than declining twilight, and they would be
frozen to death in the torrid zone. -- If thou art saturnine, therefore, thou will not hesitate to pronounce our mercurial sparks absolutely mad, and sit
only to live in that planet which has been called the bedlam of the spheres.

Yet, grudge not Henry or his friend the momentary bliss they derived from this
flame of their fancy, although it may have raged in contrast with thy more
sober matter-of-fact sensations. -- It was but as a meteor of the night, that
appeared and passed away, making the darkness that followed, the more horrible,
from the gleam and its coruscations. -- Alas! while these children of
imagination were triumphing in the visionary happiness that blazed about their
eyes, reason and common sense, assuming soon the shapes of a father and mother,
entered the apartment. -- Sir Armine held the opened letter of Sir Guise in his
hand; -- "I suppose," said he, addressing the youths, -- "you are both
acquainted with the contents: your friendship, no doubt, indulges unlimited
confidence; and I take it for granted, whatever is imparted to one, is, in
effect, communicated to both."

Upon Henry's assuring him he had not seen the letter, and that his friend had
only partially mentioned the general purport, Sir Armine gave it to Henry,
desiring him to read it aloud.

TO SIR ARMINE FITZORTON, BART.
Dear, and long-offended neighbor,
THIS method of beginning may indicate the friendly disposition under which I
write. -- Both our sons, as well as ourselves, are the victims of our
antipathy. -- They have pleaded so often for our reconcilement, that I am
unable any longer to resist their amicable intercessions. -- The bond of union
may perhaps, through the medium of our children, be yet more cemented between
our families after this reconciliation, than if no fatal breach had ever
happened.


"What does that mean?" questioned Lady Fitzorton, looking at Henry.

Henry directed his eyes to Charles for the materials of an answer, -- but, not
finding any, was silent and embarrassed; for Charles was at that instant
consulting, for a like reason, the countenance of Henry.

"Proceed with the letter," said Sir Armine.

"But more powerful advocates than even our sons have pleaded for putting an
end to our family feuds. -- Conscious feelings, my good neighbor, urge me to
seek reconciliation. -- I have lifted -- O it was foul! my hand against mine
ancient friend! and I could even humble my unworthy self in the dust of the
earth."

"Should that have been said, -- at least in that grovelling way, -- by the
father of a soldier?" asked Sir Armine, darting his eye on Charles.

Charles blushed.

"Young soldier," said Sir Armine, "let us quit this letter! it will agonize
you more than any wounds you could receive in the defense of your country. I
desire to converse with you on another subject. -- Directly and at once,
therefore, I shall demand of you, in the presence of my wife who has an equal
interest in the matter, whether you have any knowledge of a correspondence
which is said to subsist between your sister Miss Stuart, and your friend here?"

"He has, Sir," answered Henry, relieving Charles, who stood irresolute. -- "He
has the most perfect knowledge of it, and has done his utmost to -- "

"Not to promote it, certainly?" interrupted Sir Armine. -- "He is of an
honorable profession, and incapable of clandestine baseness."

"Baseness, Sir!" exclaimed Charles reddening.

"Yes, young man," returned Sir Armine. -- "It would be the last excess of
baseness to aid and abet an intercourse which would render every individual of
this house, except that rash boy, unhappy, and make him ungrateful and
infamous. You are aware of your friend's solemn engagements to Olivia: -- but
he neglects her! -- his friends! -- his relations! -- his God!"

"Solemn engagements, Sir!" exclaimed Henry: -- "I know not of any I ever made
to that lady: they have all been taken for granted: -- and whatever may be the
issue, I here disclaim them; -- I here declare, that my whole soul is, has
been, and shall for ever be, betrothed only to Caroline Stuart, -- even as
firmly, and irrevocably as is that of my friend Charles to -- "

Henry checked himself a moment, and then proceeded --

"Yes! wherefore should a virtuous but unfortunate passion be thus hid from
those who ought earlier to have known it?"

Lady Fitzorton, perceiving the emotions of Sir Armine were swelling into one
of those dreadful extremities that sometimes tyrannized his bosom, would have
drawn him out of the room, and made signs of silence to Henry, who too much
stirred to regard them with his usual respect, exclaimed, -- "No, madam!
silence has already wrought this mighty complication of mischief and mistake."

"Let me hear all! let me hear all!" cries Sir Armine, his articulation almost
buried in his sensations.

"It is heard in a sentence," replied Henry, throwing himself at his mother's
feet. -- "The sister of my friend is not more precious to your son, than is
Olivia Clare to --

"To whom?" questioned Sir Armine, staring wildly, and stammering violently.

"To the unhappy wretch who now throws himself upon your mercy," answered
Charles, falling on his knees before Sir Armine. -- "Miserable that I am! --
the flame has long been consuming my vitals; and the life and death of us all
depend upon some sudden changes in our favor."

"A sudden change will soon take place," exclaimed Lady Fitzorton. -- "Look at
my poor husband! you have already deprived him of speech! -- you will destroy
him between you! but his death shall be upon your heads!"

"I shall not die," said Sir Armine, exerting himself after a deep struggle
that shook his venerable frame, as if he were contending with death himself: --
"I will not die! the young assassins shall not have that satisfaction." -- He
paused for breath.

"Then I am to understand, Sir," continued Sir Armine, recovering his
utterance, and staggering toward Charles, "that you and my son have availed
yourselves of my permission to carry on your friendship for each other,
independent of my just resentment elsewhere, -- I say I am to understand -- "

"No, Sir!" interposed Charles, still keeping his humble posture, -- "I have
never yet dared to breathe my unhappy passion for Miss Clare, to herself, or to
any other person but my friend, till within these few hours. Even the sister of
my heart, from whom nothing was ever shut out before, did not suspect it."

"That is still something," answered Sir Armine, in a tone much softened.

Henry, still kneeling, perceived the favorable moment, and applied his whole
artillery of moving eloquence, in the cause of himself and friend. -- He
briefly recapitulated the most important parts of the mysterious history of
their unhappy loves, -- he set the honor, generosity, and heroic virtues of
Charles, in the most affecting points of view, and concluded his harangue, by
observing, while he held the lieutenant by the hand, -- that if his father and
mother were disposed to prevent unheard of horror from overwhelming all
parties, it could be done only by devising some means to bring about the double
nuptials, on which they had set their hearts; -- "any thing short of which,"
says Henry, "I foresee, will bring desolation upon the three houses, --
desolation, which, as an earthquake, shall swallow them.

Lady Fitzorton, whose affections were much moved, tenderly wept over the young
men.

Sir Armine gave a hand to each of the youths, and raising them up, addressed
them, trembling as he spoke, yet his manner and tone of voice determined.

"Suspect your enemy when he brings gifts; and have a doubly guarded eye upon
your ancient foe, when he suddenly changes his frowns into smiles, are long
established maxims. -- How far these are applicable to Sir Guise Stuart in his
labored professions, I presume not to say. -- As for you, Charles, when I have
told you, that, added to former impediments, you must pass to the arms of
Olivia Clare through the blood of her father, my own, and the life of this
afflicted woman, -- I shall point to you the alternative of an honorable
action, which will justify the trust I have long reposed in your assertions,
however I may suspect the asseveration of others."

Charles eagerly desired a farther explanation.

"Save us, dear youth, -- save yourself, your sister, and your bosom friend,"
said Sir Armine, -- "by retreating from, if you cannot conquer, a passion,
which it is impossible, without violating every law of friendship and
hospitality, to indulge, -- nay, which, were it sanctioned by our united
suffrages and assistance, could not prosper with Olivia, whose happiness and
life are contracted to your friend."

Charles fetched a deep sigh, and shook his head, as if to express at once the
difficulty of complying with the request, and the too evident strength of
argument in the observation.

"Having done this," continued Sir Armine, -- "your virtue will be complete;
for you will have done all that in you lies to alienate this infatuated boy
from farther pursuit of a sister, whose very tenderness, in this case, calls
upon you to rescue her from herself; -- for inasmuch as she loves, must she be
wretched, -- as it is no less impossible for her to be married to my son, than
for you to wed Mr. Clare's daughter, -- unless at the sacrifice of every thing
in this world, that ought most to be valued by an honest man."

Perceiving Charles was absorbed in grief, and that Henry was about to speak --

"As to you, Henry, I have to trouble you with a very few words: -- let not
your friend, who, I see, is contending with himself, but whose virtue will
triumph in the end, -- let him not surpass you. -- Emulate him. -- Your
parents, aged and infirm, are before you. -- Your union with Miss Stuart would
destroy both, would murder Olivia, and therefore make Caroline far more
wretched, than the disappointment of her passion. -- Dear -- dear son, -- child
of my heart, -- most favored, -- most precious, -- save your family! -- you
know not half the claims, that Olivia has upon you, though you know they are
manifold. -- I will not, in this moment, disguise that her father has preserved
yours, preserved him from unexpected but utter ruin, -- from imprisonment! --
Behold, your weeping mother is borne down with sorrow, with love, with
gratitude: -- behold she kneels, kneels to her son: -- your father joins her
petitions, in a posture no less suppliant: -- must we both supplicate in vain?
-- alas! look upon us, my son!"

The venerable pair were almost suffocated with their sensations.

Charles raised Lady Fitzorton.

Henry lifted his father from the ground into his arms, exclaiming, as he held
him in his embrace, -- "Live! live, my father! -- let me alone be the
sacrifice! -- it shall be so! -- most willingly will I be the victim. -- Do
with me as you both see fit!" (here he embraced his mother) "dispose of my
hand, my life, to your wish: -- I will not murmur. No destiny, no agony, can
equal what I at this moment feel at seeing you in such a situation. And yet my
friend, -- my poor friend -- "

Henry left his mother, and ran into the open arms of Charles.

"Take no thought of me!" exclaimed his friend: "I cannot bear to witness, much
less to create, a scene like that which yet pierces my soul. -- I will banish
myself for ever. -- My own sword should end me, if I could be the cause of such
another, to those who ought to have shut the door which they threw wide open to
give me welcome!"

"Sir! -- Madam," continued Charles, "as Olivia knows not yet of my unhappy
love, I here swear to you, -- although it may, and I hope it will break my
heart, -- I swear never -- never -- "

"Charles," answered Sir Armine, -- "I will have you bound only by the sacred
ties of your own reason, friendship, and honor: -- and thus, from my inmost
soul, do I pour out my thanks."

"In which are included," said Lady Fitzorton, "my heartfelt acknowledgments."

"My house is your own:" cries Sir Armine. "When your visits afflict you, or
interrupt the generous task you have imposed on yourself, you shall be free to
depart unquestioned; and whenever you return, our smiles shall welcome you. --
Neither shall Henry be restrained from the abbey: -- We submit him to your
protection, to the guard of his own duty, wisdom, and virtue, and to the sacred
office for which he will now again prepare his head and heart: -- we yield him
to the counsels of Caroline Stuart herself, who, from those traits of character
and conduct you have at different times related, will, I am sure, when you
explain to her more fully our situations, help us, -- even against herself.

"Another word, and I have done," added Sir Armine: -- "the care with which the
fatal mysteries that have entangled us, has been guarded from Olivia and her
father, my best benefactor, my preserver, -- I consider as more than chance, --
as providence. -- If the peace of innocence be dear, oh! be jealous of dropping
a hint that may lead to any discovery of what has past between us this day. --
But let us part: we may be surprised. -- Do not be seen at present, Henry! and
do you, dear Charles, take to your father my best acknowledgments of his
letter, to which I will return an early answer: -- it shall be such, I pledge
myself, as is consistent with the new system of goodwill, I hope mutually
sincere, that again subsists between us: -- but in the mean-time, I wish you
both to peruse this paper, and to give me, when opportunity favors, your joint
opinion of it."

"Hush! I think I heard Olivia's voice," said Lady Fitzorton. -- "I got her to
write some visiting cards for our next week's annual party, thinking she might
be securely employed in that manner, while our conversation, which, I foresaw,
would be interesting, lasted: -- perhaps she has finished, and is returning."

"Let us separate," said Sir Armine, who led Lady Fitzorton out of the room,
leaving Charles and Henry again together.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
DEPRIVED for some time of the power of speaking to each other, Henry and
Charles could only express by signs, a mutual desire of perusing the paper left
in their hands. Henry opened it, and found the obligation mentioned by his
father.

It consisted in Mr. Clare's having advanced no less a sum than fifty thousand
pounds, to replace the amount of what Sir Armine had lost within the past week,
by the failure of a banker whose credit he had generously attempted to save in
the hour of an exigence that threatened destruction to himself and a whole
family.

To prevent this threatened ruin, Sir Armine, who had been long in friendship
with the banker, put himself to the last difficulty, but had scarce effected
the accommodation before the banker was declared insolvent; and the news
getting air, the person of whom Sir Armine borrowed the money, made sudden
claim for a return of the sum, which was only borrowed for one and twenty days,
to cover sudden losses which the banker had himself sustained. In this
extremity Sir Armine confided the case to Mr. Clare, who immediately deposited
the money, insisting it should not be considered as any part of Olivia's
independent fortune, but what it had been his solemn design, out of his
distinct property, to leave to his oldest, dearest friend, in case he should be
his survivor, and if not, to be divided equally between his young friends,
James and John.

Mr. Clare had farther said, "that as Sir Armine had informed him he had no way
of paying off the sum borrowed, but by trenching on those independencies,
which, though duteously surrendered, he knew his old friend considered only as
a more solemn trust: -- the advance of what he (Mr. Clare) had willed to be
presented after death, would better be offered now; which, "you know my
friend," added Mr. Clare, -- "will give me an opportunity of seeing an
important article of my last will and testament performed in my lifetime, --
besides making Olivia one of the happiest girls in the world; for to tell you
the truth, this is one of her plans, after I had thrice refused the offer of
her own fortune: but that, I have determined, must come clear to one whom I
have long considered as her husband."

Both the young men were greatly affected at this act of generosity on the part
of Mr. Clare, and were not so blinded by their passion, as not to feel it was a
natural and strong, though not, perhaps, altogether justifiable inducement in
Mr. Fitzorton, to promote the match between Henry and Olivia: -- for indeed,
there is not any degree of family distress, though it may be pleaded as a
palliative, can be admitted as a justification.

Following, therefore, the impulse of a similar sensation, they mutually
deplored the cruel destiny which did not give them an apparent pretense to
censure the event of which they were to be the victims. -- On the contrary,
they seemed to catch the spirit of chivalry which characterized the action of
the good old Clare; and, warming by degrees, they worked themselves up to such
a sense of the conduct they ought to pursue, that each resolved to strong then
the other, to the performance of the promise made to Sir Armine and Lady
Fitzorton.

And thus, for a time, in this well-conducted victory over themselves, they
forgot that they were still passionate lovers.

Alas! how nature plays with her children! She seems to rank them even amongst
her sports.

In the midst of all this heroism, a small circumstance happened, to convince
the heroes that theoretical and practical philosophy are somewhat different.

Charles had a glimpse of Olivia, and Henry of Caroline's little spaniel,
exactly as they had settled their point of resolution. -- The sight of these
objects shook the goodly fabric which imagination had reared in their hearts;
and, from the pride of victors, they sunk, in a moment, to the condition of the
captive that had only been dreaming he was free.

"Must I resign thee, beautiful Olivia?" sighed Charles: -- "must I then
relinquish the very hope of thy ever being mine?"

"O thou envied little animal!" exclaimed Henry to the spaniel, -- "how will thou be fondled by my soul's dear Caroline, while I -- must no more indulge the
thought, even that I am beloved!"

Then, as if by sympathy, both the youths embracing, they came to another
settled point, namely, that they were a couple of miserable fellows, who had
nothing left in the world that took the shape of consolation, but that one was
as wretched, as the other; -- a conclusion, which, though not perhaps strictly
generous, has been often thought comfortable, -- proceeding, possibly, from a
social idea; for few can bear to be happy or sorrowful alone.

Olivia and her canine companion soon joined the young gentlemen. -- She was
delighted to see them hand in hand, which she considered as the result of their
mutual happiness. -- Her spaniel, enraptured to behold two of his best friends,
leaped alternately upon them, with every demonstration of gratitude and joy,
but more especially upon Henry, who, we believe, was, of the two, the greater
favorite: and Henry, in turn, received him with undiminished affection, and,
indeed, appeared to be, either for his own sake or some other person's, more
fond of him than ever.

Olivia, with an air of pleasantry, counterfeiting mortification, declared that
"she should now, in reality, be jealous, and would, therefore, the less
reluctantly suffer Charles to take her rival back to his mistress: "For," said
she to Charles, -- "you see plainly, the little seducer receives Henry's first
attentions; and I shall presently be but a secondary object. -- To confess the
truth," said Olivia, -- "I am a little jealous of you too, Mr. Stuart; for you
and your friend, in your last interview with Sir Armine and Lady Fitzorton, --
who, by the bye, insidiously kept me out of their party, -- have contrived to
run away with their hearts, in a manner that throws poor Olivia and the rest of
the family in shadow, quite into the back ground of our domestic groupe --
Nothing now, forsooth! but the praises of the two inseparables, Henry and
Charles, has for the last half hour been heard through the castle! -- 'They are
the best, the noblest young men in the world,' says the old lady. -- 'Excellent
youths!' cries the old gentleman. -- Why what have you done to deserve all
these fine things? -- But do not tell me. -- I hate secrets. -- The knowledge
of them would only serve to increase my jealousy; for I suppose I should have
the mortification to find you have done every thing to effect the charming
reconciliation, which, I find, is to take place between our families; and I
have been only the letter-carrier, you the ambassadors! -- And you are to know,
I am of so perverse a disposition, that I quarrel with the happiness of my best
friends, unless I have been some way, aye, and importantly, the medium."

The friends consulted each other's looks.

"Yes, you may plot, and lay your wise heads together, against a poor feeble
woman," resumed Olivia: -- "but I will have my revenge yet, and with interest
too; -- for, when we are all again as we should be, I am determined there shall
not happen a single thought or word that shall make any one of us wish to part
again, except under the assurance of a speedy return to each other, for the
rest of our lives. -- So, that being the case, I shall now go to your father
and mother, whom I left in the garden, Mr. Henry, -- and see if I can get back
some of my stolen goods -- a little bit of their hearts again.

"Meantime," added she, as she was quiting the apartment, -- "do not forget,
Mr. Stuart, to tell your sister, that if she be but half as happy as I am at
the prospect of our amicable association, she will be almost as blessed as I
wish her to be, -- not that I should be quite contented till she was as happy
as myself either. -- As to you, little Mr. Fitz, -- but you know my mind
already, and so this parting caress, and adieu, sir."

Little is that reader skilled in the history of the human heart, who cannot
suggest to himself the additional dilemma into which the two friends were
thrown by this animated harangue.

When Olivia had departed, Henry caught hold of little Fitz, and turning to his
friend, observed, "From the bottom of my soul, my unhappy Charles, I regret
that you and I ever came into the world!"

"Would to heaven, we were both out of it, my dear Henry!" answered Charles.

"If we were both dead, all would be very well," said Henry.

"You are perfectly in the right," answered Charles.

Henry seemed solemnly to recur to a suspended idea. The expressions were
trite, and, if considered as the language of despairing lovers, are ludicrous
and unmeaning: -- but, on the part of Henry, they betrayed the image that was
but too deeply rooted in his mind.

The lie^tenant, after a mournful pause, observed that, "as, either way, they
must be both miserable, it would be better for only two persons to suffer, than
to increase the number of victims." Hereupon Henry, who had been holding the
silken ears of Caroline's spaniel to his cheek, and wiping away the tears which
had dropped upon them, very gravely demanded of Charles, "What was his opinion of
suicide?"

"To speak of it professionally, I think it the worst sort of desertion, and
flying one's country," answered Charles. -- "To speak of it morally, I feel it
to be sinful: -- in sorrow, as in joy, such have ever been my sentiments. -- I
wish we were both in our graves, my friend, with all my soul: but I do not hold
it right to gratify this wish by shortening our lives. Death would be a
blessing: but could it be purchased by an action accursed?"

Henry gave a sort of dissentient shake of the head, but dropped the subject.

"I can endure this house no longer at present," said Charles, -- "and will
therefore go home, -- but without any hope of greater happiness when I get
there."

"I will attend you -- part -- of -- the way," says Henry, stammeringly
dividing his sentence.

They went out, and little Fitz was still in the arms of Henry. Scarce had they
reached the park, when Charles asked, "Whether the family would not think it
somewhat rude to go without his taking leave? -- Very ill bred, certainly! do
not you think so, my dear Henry?" -- and he was walking again toward the
house, without waiting for Henry's reply. Then, as if changing his mind, he
turned and took the path to the abbey, saying, with a dejected voice, "it was
not material."

They now walked arm in arm, and little Fitz, being set down, ranged the
hedgerows, and traversed the grounds, -- far the happiest being of the trio.

They soon gained the never-to-be-forgotten grand avenue, from which the abbey
and the castle could be viewed distinctly in all their parts. -- It would be no
easy matter to decide, whether Henry gazed more earnestly at the one, or
Charles at the other. They both stood fixed, midway betwixt both edifices,
employing themselves with the view of objects in the most opposite directions;
and, after feeding their separate unhappiness by all those tender thoughts
which they had resolved, but a few minutes before, to consider as the forbidden
fruit of their heart, and therefore never to be tasted.

Charles declared, "That this nursing an unfortunate passion was extremely
wrong; and, if they were wise, they were now taking their last look of the
devoted castle, and the ill-fated abbey."

"Very true," said Henry: -- "here then let us -- yes -- after we have taken
another look, let us separate -- at least for the present. -- No," -- added he,
-- "I will go with you, my friend, just as far as those trees on the left --
for there -- and then -- and then -- "

"Yes," observed Charles, gazing.

"True, my friend, and -- th -- the -- then -- "

Henry absolutely stuttered, and was dragging at the arm of Charles, as he
spoke; -- Charles, in the same degree, hanging back, as the other pressed
forwards. Just as this see-saw situation ended, Charles recollected he had left
his stick at the castle, but protested, "He would not lose it for the world. It
was a gift." -- One of his gloves too was missing. -- This, indeed, he had, the
instant before, taken off and put into his pocket. -- So he strode back some
paces, pulling his friend, whose turn it now was to linger behind. -- "They
will be taken care of," said Henry. -- "You will walk over again soon, you
know, or -- or -- or I can bring -- bring -- bring them -- myself -- to the ab
-- ab -- abbey."

" I walk over again to the castle! -- you bring them to the abbey! -- Alas! my
friend, have you so soon forgot our solemn resolutions? -- Exert yourself,"
cried Charles, -- "bravely. -- What a noble pile is Fitzorton Castle, my
friend!"

"The abbey, methinks, is a more attractive object: -- such grandeur, so many
awful charms -- so many -- only look at it as the sun falls on the western
turrets: -- a long and eternal adieu, thou sacred mansion! farewell, for ever!"

Henry walked toward it with hasty strides, all the while he was speaking. --
"Yes! Adieu! thou venerable edifice, whose very ruins are dear to my soul! --
and ye, O conscious woods, who have often witnessed my sighs and tears -- my
fervent vows, and bitter execrations, against persecuting fortune. -- But
chiefly thou, Oh heart-enshrined bower!"

Henry quickened his steps, till he almost ran.

"Thou receivedst my first trembling declarations of a passion that has not
hitherto, for one moment," continued he, -- "and shall never quit, my troubled
breast! -- and thou, oh well-remembered tree, whose tender bark is still, I
trust, faithful to those names, which, alas! must never, never be united!" --

The spirits of passion and of poesy were now at work; and Henry, desirous that
his feet and tongue should keep pace with each other, had got to the side of
the very tree of which he had been so pathetically taking an everlasting leave;
-- when happening -- then for the first time since his soliloquy began -- to
recollect his friend, he turned round, and saw that no less distracted lover
going, as fast as his legs could carry him, in the contrary direction, toward
the castle, to bid as affectionate and as eternal an adieu to its appreciated
objects.

Henry exalted his voice, and assured his friend "he was going the wrong way:"
-- which Charles retorted upon Henry, -- and thus they stood for a considerable
time, hallooing and beckoning to each other, each steady to follow that part of
the compass to which his own affections pointed.

Alas! the abbey and castle were as the opposite poles, -- Henry and his
friend, the attracted needles.

CHAPTER XXXV.
WHILE they were vibrating to their different points, little Fitz, whom fate
seems to have intended as the small but important instrument of many a great
event in this history, was heard to give tongue, and chase a hare, which he had
started, at full cry, till all the woods of Stuart were made vocal with his
music. -- The animal took up the great avenue, and seeing the unequal enemy she
had to contend with, rather played with her slender legs, than put them on the
stretch, keeping only at a safe distance before the panting little Fitz, as if
she intended to afford him diversion.

Henry, taken by surprise, though not a great admirer of the chase, now
followed the sport, and by turning toward the same side of the hedge with the
hare, whenever she deviated from the track that led immediately to the abbey,
seemed to wish she would keep the straight road; while Charles, who came slowly
after, perhaps would have been better pleased had she taken her course toward
the castle.

It was, however, decreed that the abbey should now be the asylum for the poor
hare; and, having reached the gate of entrance, she sprung through a well-known
meuse, formed among some bushes that clustered at the bottom of the avenue;
and, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of little Fitz, was soon lost in the
windings of the forest.

The hue and cry of the spaniel, however, and of Henry, who, though on very
different motives, was not less vociferous, had not only brought forth into the
front garden that faced the grand avenue, several other four-footed lovers of
the sport, who swelled the thunder of the woods, at they knew not what, but
alarmed Sir Guise, honest Dennison, and lastly Caroline herself, who all ran to
the iron railing to see what was the matter.

Henry, who was, very conveniently for his embarrassment, out of breath from
his pursuit, explained the circumstance, and was relating the heroic
achievements of little Fitz, -- accounting, at the same time, to Caroline for
his delay, when the courageous animal came panting into the garden, where,
hardly finding breath to express his transports at being restored to his
mistress, he threw himself on his side upon one of the grass plats, and, still
the most happy of the groupe, recovered his strength and spirits at leisure.

Presently after, arrived the tardy Charles; and, when Dennison had consulted
the countenances of the whole company, and seeing nothing there either
particularly to delight or to distress him, he patted little Fitz on the head,
telling him, "Puss had led him a fine dance, and, like many other fine folks,
had made a fool of him at last:" and with this pithy remark the good old man
withdrew.

There never perhaps was exhibited in any four faces more characteristic
impatience, than in those of the party then present, -- Henry and Charles, to
disguise their secret emotions, -- Sir Guise and Caroline to discover them.

This threw them all into very awkward situations. -- Caroline, from certain
clouds not unattended with showers, that gathered and fell involuntarily on the
features of Henry, was afraid to ask any questions: and Charles, whispering her
not to be inquisitive, observed that "Ill tidings always arrived too soon,"
augmented her distress.

At length Sir Guise, counterfeiting a generous anxiety to know the result of
his advances to reconcilement, and expatiating on the ardent desire he felt to
complete the good work he had begun, insisted upon his son's telling him, "How
his overtures had been received?"

Charles made shift to acquaint him with the truth, so far as his father was
concerned; -- he said that "Sir Armine received them with proper kindness, and
would be as ready to conciliate as Sir Guise."

Henry, finding that his friend got through this garbled relation but very
lamely, offered him a helping hand, by taking up the narrative, and carrying it
on, so far as had any relation to Olivia's amicable message to Caroline. -- But
Henry was not more successful than his friend: for, though he likewise indulged
pretty copiously in mental reservations, the difficulty which he found to
separate what was unfit for communication, from what might safely be divulged,
rendered the whole story so dismembered and incongruous, that a far less
discerning spectator, than either the baronet or his daughter, might easily
conceive there was a great deal more hid than there had been discovered.

Sir Guise, therefore, choosing to interpret their confusion to a dislike of
relating all that had past, thought fit to act the part of the man of violated
feelings and nice honor, and to exclaim, "Very well, I see how it is! -- I
have been insulted. -- My foolish goodnature has been rejected. -- I might
have expected as much, indeed! -- But you would overruled me. -- You know your
influence, and see the consequence of it! -- However, thank heaven, I have the
consolation to suffer this fresh outrage for my children's sake; and so I
submit. -- But, methinks, when I condescended to make the first advances
toward the Castle, your father, young gentleman, should not have driven me
back to the Abbey with disgrace, or have himself retreated.

Henry was about to reply, and with some generous warmth, in defense of his
father, -- from a tender love of whom, no sufferings of his own, though
proceeding from that father, could detach him; -- when Charles, who was a young
man of high honor and exalted principles, felt it an incumbent duty to take
the justification of Sir Armine upon himself. "Sir," said he, "the overtures
you offered, were, as I before observerd, received with suitable kindness: and
I am convinced your visit will be returned with a confirmation of the most
hospitable assurances -- but -- "

"But what?" questioned Sir Guise.

Henry, who presaged some possible good from concealing, and much positive
mischief from divulging, all that might naturally be supposed to follow,
observed, in an abrupt manner, that "nothing had passed between his father and
friend any way inconsistent with -- that is -- as to that -- he only meant --
he could assure Sir Guise, as to what had past, -- nothing material relative
thereto, he could take on himself to say, -- in regard to the circumstances
which -- "

"Mr. Fitzorton," interposed the baronet, "your attempts to explain away the
repulse I have met with from your family, are as generous as they are
unsatisfactory; there is at the bottom of all this a something -- "

Caroline interrupted the father discussion of this matter, by declaring she
was suddenly seized with so dreadful a giddiness, that if she did not hurry
into the house she should certainly tumble. Indeed, her whole appearance but
too clearly confirmed the description of her situation: she was with difficulty
conducted to the abbey, under the supports of Henry and Charles, -- the former
pressing her to his heart and whispering a thousand tendernesses in her ear as
they passed along, to the total oblivion of every thing on earth but Caroline's
anxiety; and her brother scarce less affectionately tried to recover his
sister's spirits; for he now plainly saw that her disorder originated in the
apprehensions of her mind, as to what had past at the castle.

Sir Guise Stuart, not being quite so much interested in or affected by these
kind of disasters, took a turn or two round the garden, where we shall leave
him to the only person he did really interest himself for -- to himself.

His afflicted daughter now, in a voice of woe and terror, called upon Henry
and her brother to unfold the dreadful mystery which lay hid behind, or was
partly seen struggling in, their expressions. "What new grief has befallen us?"
said she: "it cannot surpass what my despair suggests; and I conjure you, both
by friendship, love, duty, and all that is dear to us, reveal the whole! I know
not wherefore I am thus affected; but I feel as if something more terrible than
any thing I have yet endured was about to involve us all!"

"No!" said Henry, dropping suddenly on his knee, "No, Caroline! neither
father, nor fate itself, -- I here solemnly swear -- "

"Whatever be the nature of your oath, it must not be made," replied Caroline:
"nor could I hear it now; -- for so great, alas! is my present weakness, that
-- O my father, why, when I had yielded myself up to the cold mandates of
despair, -- why did you revive my hopes? -- or how, knowing, as I did, the many
insurmountable evils which environ all of us, -- ah! how could I be so frantic
-- so -- "

While she was proceeding in this apostrophe, the venerable Dennison made his
appearance, bearing two letters, one of which he delivered to Caroline, the
other he laid upon the table, saying, "it was for Sir Guise."

The baronet himself came in immediately after: and Charles desiring Dennison
to leave the room, the rest of the party, before assembled in the garden, were
now grouped in the great hall, where Caroline, it being the first apartment,
had rested.

Although her strength appeared, in the moment before, to have left her, she
rallied sufficiently, to break the seal of the abovementioned letter, and was
just about to read the contents, when Sir Guise, having with no less curiosity
opened that which had been directed to himself, read aloud what follows, --
premising, "that it came from the castle, and appeared to be written by Sir
Armine Fitzorton."

Human attention, or expectation, never perhaps having been more fixed, than
during the perusal of this epistle, we will assign it a distinct place.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
"SIR ARMINE FITZORTON and family receive Sir Guise Stuart's advances to
reconciliation, with all the attention due to them: and although some domestic
concerns prevented an immediate reply in writing, proper acknowledgments were
dispatched by our friend Charles, whose many virtues we all hold in high
regard: and Sir Armine, for himself and his family, in which he includes by
authority that of the Clares, now assures Sir Guise, his welcome to the castle
shall be no less cordial than they expect to find at the abbey; and that the
first visit shall be left to his own nomination, as soon as he pleases, after
an event, arranging between the families of Fitzorton and Clare, has taken
place; which it is now expected to do in the course of a few days."

The consternation of Henry and Charles, while the baronet read this card,
could be surpassed only by that which, like a hurricane, shook the frame of
Caroline. On hearing the last passage, she dropped the paper, which had long
trembled in her hand, upon the floor, and sinking herself after it, cried out
in a feeble yet agonized and interrupted voice, "In -- a -- few -- a -- a --
very -- few days!"

Henry's eye caught the superscription of the card which was addressed to
Caroline, and perceived the hand writing of Olivia. He would, hereupon, have
glided it into his pocket, to prevent at least farther mischief. But Sir Guise,
with a solicitude truly characteristic of his paternal feelings -- wounded, no
doubt, at seeing his now beloved daughter in such profound affiction, observed,
that, "as it was possible the contents of the second might serve as an antidote
to the poison of the first paper, he must gently insist on reading it."

Henry stood by Caroline's side, hovering between sense and insanity: --
Charles was in a kind of stupor, perhaps, at that time, friendly to his reason;
and Caroline seemed to shudder betwixt life and death.

TO MISS STUART.

"THE customs of the world require that I should begin and end my introductory
letter with certain prescriptive formalities; but, in the first place, can I
consider Caroline Stuart as a stranger, when, even in our almost infant days, I
bore to her a sister's love, and have since been intimately acquainted with her
virtues, and as long have loved and honored her for them? And indeed I am so
little an observer of etiquette, where my affections are concerned, that I
should put the greatest restraint imaginable on those affections, were I to
clog them with common ceremonies, in this address which is simply to describe
the happiness I feel in the long-wished and long-sought opportunity of making
it consistently at once with my duty and love.

Sir Guise paused.

"I told you," said Sir Guise, "the young lady would atone amply for the old
gentleman: -- so let us go on."

"The prospect of our family reunion, in which Caroline and Olivia, -- pardon
my boast, -- shall be as sisters, Henry and Charles as brothers, and our
parents scarcely distinguishable from each other, is so delightful to me, and
is, indeed, a transport which has been so long watched, wished, and prayed for,
that you must pardon me if I forget, not only the modes of the world, but the
world itself, in the sensibility with which I reflect upon the completion of
those wishes and prayers. Almost in the instant of their being granted to me --
"

"Dear Sir Guise," said Henry, "it is cruel to proceed, when you see how your
daughter, and indeed all of us are afflicted."

"Afflicted!" reiterated the baronet: "surely there has nothing of an
afflictive kind yet occurred; and I therefore augur well of the rest."

"I entreat," said Caroline, -- "that my father may be permitted to proceed."

Charles was silent.

Sir Guise read on, "I catch up the pen to inform my long-loved Caroline of my
happiness, not only because I could not 'suffer the coldness of delay to hang
on' such heartfelt tidings, but because I cherish the hope that my felicity
will be shared by Miss Stuart."

"Felicity!" exclaimed Caroline.

Henry, who had taken advantage of this pause, having cast his eye over the
residue of Olivia's epistle, which the baronet held carelessly down that he
might the better observe on the parties, took hold of the paper, and cried,
"excuse me, sir! -- we have heard too much already: -- what remains, I see, is
of no consequence. So, if you please, we will -- "

"If you please, Mr. Fitzorton," answered Sir Guise, pretending offense, "we
will go through the rest, and form our own judgment of its consequence."

Charles and his sister seemed to anticipate the sentiments that were to
follow, in Henry's countenance; which was at all times an expressive one, and
might now be said in Shakespeare's language, "to be a book, in which one might
read strange matters." From their perusal of this, they prepared themselves for
something miserable.

The baronet asserted that, hitherto, he saw nothing but what was in good
train, and proceeded thus: "I must inform my dear Caroline -- that -- that -- I
protest I hardly know how to write it -- that -- after a life of wooing -- a
certain event is likely to take place between one of my family -- and -- and
one of -- but, I understand, Henry accompanied his friend home; and as I
suppose him to be still at the abbey, I refer you to him for the particulars;
-- or if he refuses, your brother may be applied to."

If the reader's own mind furnishes not a sketch of the situation of the trio
most concerned in this intelligence, and especially the reference to Henry and
Charles, we must fairly confess the inability of our pen to describe it.

Sir Guise, having insidiously made unobserved observations, read on --

"I only mention the circumstance, as a tender thought, at the moment of my
writing, steals into my heart, purporting the honor and happiness I should
derive, had I the privileges of a friend to invite the gentle Caroline's
service on an occasion which -- in short, as I said before, not being able to
consider her in any other light than an old -- an intimate -- a bosom friend --
I -- I -- "

Sir Guise, masking a cruel purpose in kind expressions, declared that "he
feared, what followed was coming rather too closely to the point. -- However,"
added the baronet, "it is but another sentence; the sooner an unpleasant thing
was over, the better. -- Suspense was the sorest of evils; and he would
therefore get rid of the remainder as fast as possible." He then appeared to
hurry over what follows:

"I feel a degree of anxiety, for which I cannot account, that the, I hope and
trust in heaven, most joyful day of my life, even though I thus tremble at its
approach, should be distinguished by two of the greatest blessings -- the
acquisition of a -- how shall I name it -- of a tender husband! -- I can
scarcely write -- and the recovery of my earliest friend: -- and this double
felicity I am ambitious to mark by the latter undertaking the gentlest, the
most endearing office of friendship. Ah! cannot my Caroline conjecture what the
tumult of my soul permits me not to -- "

"She wishes you to be one of her bridemaids, I suppose," said Sir Guise,
affecting a bluntness, for which, almost in the commission of it, he pretended
to reproach himself.

"Her bridemaid!" ejaculated the trio at the same time: -- "her bridemaid!"

"That, indeed, is too much!" said Sir Guise, affecting to sympathise.

"Damnation!" exclaimed Charles, rising and stamping as he walked toward the
door, -- then turned, and taking Henry by the hand, -- "yet, God bless you
together! It must be so. It ought -- and I submit -- I -- I -- I -- do. -- My
friend, farewell."

Caroline attempted to follow her brother's example; but, catching his arm as
he was going, she could only say -- "I -- too -- resign myself -- and -- and --
from my soul -- repeat the benediction!" She withdrew, supported by Charles.

"My dear Henry," said Sir Guise, almost betraying his triumph in the attempt
to refine upon it, "you perceive I have done my utmost -- I have sought,
petitioned, and almost prostrated, myself, -- but all in vain: my children and
myself remain unhappy, and yet, in this instance, none of us perhaps can blame
any of your family."

The baronet paused, seeing Henry start from his seat, seize his hair in
desperation, and then striking his breast as he ejaculated, "No! my worthy
friend, it is not you nor any body else: -- it is the work of my own cursed,
cursed fortune!"

A servant entered, saying to Sir Guise, "the gentleman you expected, sir, is
come." -- "I will attend him immediately," observed the baronet: then adverting
to Henry, -- "I am really concerned to see you so much affected, Mr. Fitzorton.
I have only to regret that my paternal efforts have not answered the end
proposed: and as some very particular business claims me elsewhere, I must bid
you farewell: but we shall meet: yes, we shall certainly meet. -- The abbey is
still open, you know; and though my good offices have failed, my best wishes
are yours."

CHAPTER XXXVII.
HENRY was now again left to his soliloquies in that house where it seemed
fated for him to meet varieties of distress, disappointment, and despair. -- He
found himself more sorely beset than ever: -- his grand discovery had been made
to some of the parties who were principally concerned in it; -- and he had the
mortification to perceive, his secret might have been better still confined to
his own bosom. -- At the castle, his father, mother, and brother James, were
made partakers of it: letters had been sent on the subject to John: -- at the
abbey it had been communicated to Sir Guise and Caroline, with equal ill
fortune. -- Olivia and her father only had escaped: and were the knowledge of
his involvement even to extend to them, it was plain to be seen, that, although
the secret would then have taken its full range, like the flight of an
empoisoned arrow, it would have lost nothing by its passage though the air, but
scatter desolation in its progress.

Under this conviction, Henry once again left the abbey, staring wildly at
Dennison, who once more opened the door to him in an extreme of his misery, --
and in a state betwixt sense and distraction.

As the reader has several times accompanied the ill-starred Henry in his
gloomy walks to and from these mansions, we will not now press his attendance:
but while Henry is on his way, we shall enter that apartment in the abbey,
where the person who, it has been noticed, came to wait upon Sir Guise Stuart,
was conducted, and whither Sir Guise was now gone to give him audience.

But, previously to our joining them, it may be right to take a short
retrospective view of the points which the worthy baronet had gained, since his
antipathy to the house of Fitzorton, and his no less radical aversion to his
daughter, had arrived at their height, and since, for certain purposes yet in
the womb of time, he had assumed the mask of affection and good will.

From the date of this memorable era when his hate admitted not of
augmentation, the said mask of kindness had continued to thicken, till not only
the innocent victims thereof, Charles, Caroline, Dennison, Henry, and the rest,
were deceived by it, -- but even the principal agent in his own designs was
enabled to penetrate the darkness of its folds.

By this resolute and patient hypocrisy, he had, without any personal hazard,
the only point which his fell nature felt as a check, effected, in a degree,
what was absolutely necessary to his safety in the perpetration of some nobler
works of wickedness. He had, by his pretended reform, taken off the bitter edge
of that detestation in which he was held by every creature of his own household.
-- He had contrived to shift from his own shoulders the weight of whatever
consequences might result from those hapless loves, which his cold heart had
assured him would, at least he was determined to take care they should, be more
sickly under his chilling influence, than if he any longer appeared to oppose
them: and his seeming to shine upon them was but like the transient gleam of
the dog star, that darts upon flowers after an untimely blight had lodged the
worm within their bud. -- He knew, indeed, that even if Henry and his daughter
should come together, as one consequence of his affected reconciliation, the
union itself might be made subservient to his purpose of final revenge, not
only in working the woe of both the husband and wife, but of every individual
of the two detested houses of Clare and Fitzorton, and principally by the
disappointment of their views in the disposal of Olivia, the whole scope of
which he had been made acquainted with before the partial discoveries of
Caroline or Henry, although we have not yet thought proper to communicate his
sources of intelligence to the reader.

But, in fact, he did not seriously believe his advance to good fellowship
would produce a match between his daughter and Henry, and only provided for it
in his own prolific mind; as a possible contingence. He rather anticipated what
really happened, that either the folly of the lovers themselves, or his own
contrivance, would but the more destroy their hopes, the more they were made
known; -- and that, independent on the satisfaction which their vexation would
give him, for the sincere hate he bore them, he should derive from the
appearance of having annihilated all his own resentments, the more solid
happiness he expected from entrapping the credulity of the Fitzortons.

We must not omit the mention of another, and that not the least important
point acquired by his thus "seeming the thing he was not," viz. the measure of
odium he hereby took from himself in the opinion of his neighbors, who heard
of his great change of conduct, not only from the servants, who had before
reprobated his behavior, but from the parties who were the objects of this
extraordinary alteration.

The people of the parish, indeed, interpreted this extraordinary change into a
miracle: but the good monk, who was now one of the most zealous of his
advocates, assured them it was the simple operation of conscience, which it had
pleased God to awake in his heart, in time not only to make atonement to all
whom he had injured in this present world, but effect his future salvation in
the world to come.

To say the truth, the baronet had been at more than usual pains to observe a
consistent conduct in the presence of our monastic, who, though a man of great
simplicity, and devoid of the suspicion, which those who are themselves guilty
cultivate most, was likewise of a very penetrating mind. -- Yet, the uniform
diseretion of Sir Guise was more than a match for the doctor's clearness of
head or purity of heart, -- insomuch that the best, warmest, and most able, as
well as most active defender of the baronet, far and near, at home and abroad,
was now Father Arthur.

It is hence apparent, that Sir Guise, in a very short space of time, but with
a diligence suitable to so great an object, might be said to have done what is
justly to be considered amongst the most arduous of all human labors, -- to
have redeemed a lost character, even when, indeed, it was supposed to be gone,
past redemption -- It was still remembered by many how bad he had been; but it
was generally believed he had, though late, seen his errors, and that if he was
now sometimes as outrageous in doing worthy, as before he had been violent in
committing wicked actions, it should be imputed to him as an over-anxious
desire to make up lost time, and to finish his own career of virtue by
laboring doubly in the vineyard, that he might work out the salvation which
had been so long neglected. Upon the whole, therefore, few persons enjoyed a
fairer regenerated fame, since the death of his lady, as a good father, a good
neighbor, or a sincere penitent, than Sir Guise Stuart.

Perhaps, Sir Armine and John Fitzorton, and one or two more, might still have
their suspicions; -- yet there was only one man living, who, at the moment here
alluded to, could bear witness that he was much more consummate in the ways of
deceit than he had ever been before; -- and this single living person was
HIMSELF.

It was even doubted by the person who now came to discourse with him, and to
whom we shall immediately introduce the reader.

This person was no other than the notorious Mr. Valentine Miles, the active
agent of Sir Guise upon all occasions: -- he collected his rents and improved
his estates, he got in his moneys, and laid them out to what he thought the
best, that is to say, his own advantage. -- He was no less the parasite than
the tyrant of Sir Guise. -- To him the baronet was first indebted for the
honor of Mrs. Tempest's acquaintance; and like other providers of his cast of
character, he was shrewdly suspected to have first tasted the dainty himself:
yet at other times, jack-all as he was, he knew the art to make the lion crouch
at his feet, and tremble before him. -- The abovementioned lady numbered this
gentleman amongst her first impressions, although we hardly know how to call
him or any other person her first love, because there were, about the same
period, so many candidates for her favor, and from a peculiar philanthropy she
was so little disposed to that species of cruelty whereby lovers are said so
often to suffer wounds and death, that it would be narrowing her kind and
relenting nature, to confine her loving kindness to any individual. -- Mr.
Miles was certainly one of her happy men: -- and Mr. Tempest, whom she honored
with her hand, was another; but somehow, the latter soon died, and the former
had at least one rival less. -- Indeed, Miles continued amongst her first
favorites after the lady's heart got more into practice, and even when her
love of mankind, increasing with the knowledge of suffering objects, and her
pity for their sufferings, was unbounded. -- But then her Valentine recommended
himself by more than one congenial passion, -- that of gaming. -- The love of
the dice was paramount over all. Indeed it nearly extinguished every other, or
rather it was, in process of time, so much the master passion, that every other
was in vassalage to it: -- love itself, great, enlarged, and impartial as it
was in the ample heart of this generous pair, became subservient to it: -- for
the lady imagined her mighty flame might be fed by once more lighting at it the
torch of Hymen. A dice-box, in such a hand, seemed to have all the magic power
of that torch; and as Sir Guise Stuart raised his admiring eye to the
enchantress, the dice themselves were as two balls of electric fire; and a
thousand sparks and gentle shocks were drawn from his heart. In love affairs,
Miles was nothing selfish. -- He secretly saw this conquest, and interrupted it
not: -- on the contrary, he had long called the object of it his bosom friend;
and Sir Guise became another happy man, and entered into the gaming association
with a spirit like that of his friend and mistress: and, although the aforesaid
hymeneal torch had not yet lighted our baron a second time to the altar, it was
only consigned to Cupid as a little deity in waiting for a more convenient
season.

Meantime, the loves and games of Valentine and Mrs. Tempest went gaily on: --
what though she had no nuptial torch for him? she had a Cupid still very much
at his service; and that did full as well. -- And as to the gambling affection,
they might both be said to be "pleased with ruin;" for they had very often been
ruined together on the same evening, yet retired in the most benevolent humor,
on the social principle of making each other happy; -- they had, indeed, often
been made whole again the next morning, by their chosen friend, Sir Guise
Stuart, who was altogether unskilful, but whom the lady by the pretenses of
violent love, and the gentleman by those of as vehement friendship, contrived
to pillage of what ought to have been appropriated to his own family: -- for,
whatever praise is due to profusion, when he had money in his purse, Sir Guise
might claim wherever his pleasures or fears were concerned. -- His temper was
sufficiently niggard indeed: but he was coaxed or terrified out of enormous
sums, because, in truth, except by the starts of a moment, which he always paid
for, he dared not refuse; -- his own miserable soul was a reservoir; but Miles
and Mrs. Tempest were the impure streams that exhausted, and literally, played
it off.

Yet so radical was this vice of gaming in the widow and Miles, that sometimes,
after a run of good fortune had sent them home, -- for they were generally
under the same roof, -- laden with spoils, they would pass an hour before they
went to bed in playing against each other, and that with the same desire to
cheat and win, as if they were at work upon some marked novice, upon whom they
had a design: -- and whichever, in this tete-a-tete game, came off loser, was
to undertake the odd trick, -- in other words, it was the loser's part to
wheedle the baronet out of the next supply.

A slight specimen of the abilities of Mr. Miles was exhibited to the reader in
the cheat he attempted to pass upon the family of the Atwoods, after he had
favored the plan for Jenny's journey to London. -- But since the discovery of
his treachery, he had lived wholly with the baronet's mistress as an ami de
maison, and had been the confidential medium betwixt that lady and Sir Guise,
in certain important points that are now to be communicated.

The most material of these, on the part of the lady, was to make good her
ground at the abbey, with a view, as has been intimated, to her becoming no
less than lady of the manor. And the death of lady Matilda gave an unexpected
opening to her bold aspiring.

To accomplish this, however, was an undertaking that called for very
extraordinary powers: and although those of which Mrs. Tempest was in
possession, were certainly of this extraordinary kind, they were yet
insufficient to bring about so great an event, without some congenial
assistance.

For this, she applied to a man whose talents she had employed in various
instances, with unvarying success. -- Indeed, there was not any one amongst her
acquaintance, -- unless she could have brought Sir Guise into a plot against
himself, which indeed she did in many instances, -- so able, or for the rewards
so willing, as her Valentine, to advance a project which he had some time
suspected was going on in the mind of his beloved.

Miles was blessed with a head and heart so strictly in alliance with each other,
that, like copartners, they carried on business in the utmost harmony. -- They
had, indeed, embarked in the same trade, that of devising and carrying into
effect all sorts of commodities which promoted the meum, without considering
the tuum of this life, so early that they were now become, from long habit and
constant practice, equal to any human undertaking that ever has, or may be
done in roguery. -- And, to complete the allusion, it might be said, that the
best established warehouse of all kinds of knavery, ready made for every
possible purpose, was under the firm of Mr. Valentine Miles.

This gentleman was of a good figure and genteel address, and had indeed, in
his youth, been a distinguished favorite of the ladies. -- He was now only in
the maturity of life, somewhat inclined to a corpulence not strictly consistent
with elegance, but in perfect unison with our ideas of confirmed manhood. -- He
was of an assured air, confident expression, ready utterance, versatile
talents, and accommodating manners; -- and from an uncommonly well-knit
construction of limbs, and great natural strength of body, with a certain
constitutional power of drinking others out of their wits while he retained his
own, he had run his career in almost every species of debauchery, without being
checked by one distemper, or punished by any pains of body; and as to those of
mind, he set them gloriously at defiance. -- He had, in short, arrived at that
pre-eminence, at that perfect imperfection, which annihilates the sense of fear
or of shame, and herein was confessedly the superior, even of Sir Guise Stuart,
who had an abundance of the former, though he possessed not a jot of the latter.

Upon all these grounds, he was the fittest for a connection with the baronet,
of any man in the world: for, as there was not an infamous thought which the
heart of man could conceive, but was engendered by Sir Guise, so was there not
any man who had so much intrepidity of practical baseness to carry such
conception into action, as Miles.

This accomplished gentleman, therefore, and Mrs. Tempest, divided the baronet
between them, and had been for some time contriving how to dispose in a more
legal manner of his family and fortune to their wishes: for as the widow had,
after sounding him, avowed her design to Miles, of becoming lady Stuart, -- so
had Miles, in return of confidence, then first mentioned a long-cherished
intention of making proposals to the baronet, for getting rid of the
encumbrance of his daughter Caroline.

Now his was a kind of underplot, to be woven into their domestic plan, in
order to strengthen their interests. -- This little episode, indeed, rather
endeared the expected catastrophe to Mr. Miles, who, at the fall of the
curtain, promised himself from this double marriage, which might indeed be
called the title of the farce, more than double advantage; -- while Mrs.
Tempest was reconciled to it, on principles of equal convenience and
accommodation, differing only a little in the idea as to Caroline. -- She did
not love Miles well enough, to feel any jealousy about the division of his
personal favors: but she indulged the secret thought, that she should come in
not only for an equal division of Caroline's fortune, -- Miles having promised
her a moiety in case the match should be brought about, -- but for the sole and
sovereign authority over the estates of Sir Guise Stuart; meditating, indeed,
to hold these so much at control, that neither her Sir Guise nor her Valentine
should have a greater proportion than their good behavior to her seemed to
merit from her bounty. -- As to the baronet's person, her discovery of his
infidelity with Jane Atwood was the finishing stroke to the remains of what she
was pleased to call love: -- she held it more cheap than that of Miles; but not
being over nice in her sensations, she foresaw the possibility of still
retaining both in the voluminous list of her happy men.

In regard to the nature of Valentine's attachment to Caroline, it as little
partook of the troublesome and avaricious tenderness which confines the great
passion of love to one person, as that which Mrs. Tempest bore either to her
intended husband, or to her old protector: for though Mrs. Tempest was a woman
of some violence, in all respects, she professed sovereign scorn of those who
affected to argue against pluralities in the belle passion: and though she
declared she doated on Miles to distraction, it was thought various others were
her doting pieces also: and a domestic of her father's had distracted her in
the same manner so effectually some months before, that the outward and visible
signs of it were obvious even when her elopement from her family was determined
on, and the arms of the accommodating Valentine were open to receive her with
all encumbrances. It was a long-balanced point on her part, whether she should
stay with Mr. Thomas the footman, or run away with Mr. Valentine Miles, her
papa's engrossing clerk; for at that time her father was an attorney, and Miles
was his assistant. A compromise, however, took place between all parties. Mr.
Thomas had a parting douceur, and a promise of future provision; and Mr. Miles
agreed to the arrangement, in all its parts, and so carried off the lady; but,
whether they did, or did not, provide for Mr. Thomas, cannot at this moment be
made known.

Miles had often seen Miss Stuart both in her mother's lifetime, and since her
death, but had never intimated his passion, otherwise than by certain sighs and
smiles, moral sentences, and well-turned compliments, from time to time, which,
partly his subordinate situation in life as her father's agent, and partly her
own pre-occupied sentiments, had prevented Caroline from seeing, in the least
degree, the drift of. He intended, indeed, at first only to seduce her: but he
now entertained honorable sentiments, as the most profitable. In regard to the
former objection to him, Miles considered it, on reflection, now done away by
his profession, as he always maintained, before those who were disposed to
question his titles, that a gambler was a gentleman, seeing it mixed him
constantly in the very best company: and if ever the baronet disputed the
claim, Miles would rise up in great displeasure, use some terrifying menace,
and insist either on receiving a suitable apology, or the satisfaction due to a
gentleman.

Of late, indeed, some pretty smart contests, about division of spoil, had past
between Miles and the widow: their affection for each other was almost worn
out; and yet their ties of interest were so strong, that fear operated now, as
love had done before, to keep them together; for each well knew, a very little
treachery on either side -- as is the case with most rogues who confederate, --
would destroy both.

Believing that the reader is by this time as perfectly acquainted with these
great personages, as it is necessary for him to be, to the right understanding
the events which chain our history, -- we shall proceed to unfold the business
which brought Mr. Miles to the abbey. But as what past between the worthy agent
and his illustrious employer, will be, in part, best given in dialogue, we
shall, as being indeed fit company only for each other, give them a chapter to
themselves.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
MILES. WHAT am I to believe, my dear friend? Is it true that you have offered
your daughter in marriage to the son of your direst foe? Is it fear, or is it
madness, that induced you to this step? Whatever was the motive, it was
carrying the point too far: it was passing my prescribed line of policy, and
giving an advantage, which --


SIR GUISE, (with conscious pride.) Ha, ha, ha! and have I deceived the
deceptive Valentine Miles? Then is my art triumphant indeed!


MILES. Not so triumphant as you may suppose, sir. You are the dupe of your own
artifice: and if especial care be not taken, you will yourself fall into the
trap you have set for others.


SIR GUISE. I understand you not.


MILES. Our trusty emissary brings certain intelligence that your enemies at
the castle, with the tremendous John at their head, design to take advantage of
this your pacific disposition, -- and, breaking the truce when you least
suspect it, cut you off at once.


SIR GUISE, (in consternation.) Cut me off! murderous villains!


MILES. But we are, I hope, yet in time, to circumvent them.


SIR GUISE (in terror.) You hope! Is there still a doubt then? Let us take our
measures this moment! What are they? What could induce the assassins to this?
at a moment, too, when I supposed the credulous fools --


MILES. That is the misfortune of it. While we are attempting to succeed in our
design upon others, we are apt to forget they may be as wise as ourselves, and
have their plans upon us. Thus it is with the Fitzortons and Stuarts. -- It
would be distraction to suppose the former, toward whom it has been the
business of years to show every mark of obloquy you dare safely hazard, should
ever believe your sudden overtures to good fellowship sincere, or be so blind
to the human passions as to accept them if they were, -- the lovesick boys
alone excepted. This cobweb artifice may pass on children, and lovers who are
more weak than children; -- it may serve, perhaps, to amuse the hearts of your
daughter and Henry Fitzorton; -- it may hoodwink your neighbors, -- and so
much I expected from the measure: -- but you and I, who know the world, ought
to throw out of our experienced minds such infantile and such frivolous
credulities. The practiced and politic Sir Guise ought to know that his
proffered hand was received with precisely the same degree of sincerity with
which it was tendered. To have rejected it would have been as unwise in old
Fitzorton, as in Sir Guise not to have presented it. But, this done, -- both
parties, judging naturally, should put themselves in preparation for war the
very instant peace was talked of. Ask your own heart, my friend, whether its
hate has diminished, or its hope of revenge has ceased, since you extended the
hand of fictitious amity, and held out the olive branch?


SIR GUISE. O Miles! my heart rankles with more deadly poisons; and my
pretended treaty of friendship was, as you know, but the more securely to give
that blow which your sublimer genius and wisdom told me would be most
effectually struck when my hated foes were off their guard. My seeming to smile
upon them was but as the gleam of the Dogstar darting upon flowers after the
blight has lodged a worm within the bud.


MILES. True! our only apprehension is, -- since those foes are alike diligent,
-- lest they should have the start of us. The tender Mrs. Tempest has
dispatched me, on the wing of affection, to communicate the information I have
given you, that your speedy assassination is intended; since nothing short of
your death can pacify Sir Armine Fitzorton, or his inveterate son John, (these
are their words) for the insult sustained, the sense of which, notwithstanding
a pretended patched up reconciliation, has been brooding in their minds ever
since. They have their plots, as wily and as well-concerted as our own.


SIR GUISE (ready to expire with fear.) Bloody-minded villains! Haste, my
friend, to prevent them. I may, this night, be murdered in my bed! and who
knows but Henry and Caroline, or even Charles, may be concerned in the plot? It
is always the wisest way to suspect every body. Ungrateful wretches! while I
have been thus generously sacrificing to them, -- at least, such it must have
appeared to them --


MILES. Sir Guise, I need not, at this time of day, enter into professions of
attachment to you. My friendship toward you is as unquestionable, as Mrs.
Tempest's love. We would both live or die for you. You have had proof of it:
and if you should (which heaven forbid!) fall a victim to the secret and
deep-laid machinations of your enemies, -- if you should be destined to breathe
your last --


SIR GUISE (inconceivably agitated.) Talk not of breathing my last! but hasten
to prevent it. Save my life, and gratify me with complete vengeance on the
execrable villains who are now plotting my destruction: and there is nothing
within the purchase of my fortune, that shall not be yours in reward of the
deed.


MILES. The intention at the castle, I understand to be this: -- Jenny Atwood,
who is there protected as an instrument against you, is to be an evidence of
your disgrace, which is to be of the most public kind. Your cowardice, your
falsehood, (thus they vilify you) your receiving a blow, your abuse of your
late lady, your avarice to your son, your cruelty to your daughter, your
seduction of Jane, your criminal intercourse with Mrs. Tempest, (this is their
vile language) your oppression of your neighbors, and your assumed change of
character and conduct, which they pretend to see through, -- all these are
forming into one mass, first to effect your disgrace --


SIR GUISE (gloriously disregarding mere loss of character.) But my life! -- my
LIFE, Valentine!


MILES. First, to effect your disgrace, I say, and then -- but indeed their
purpose is too horrible; -- I know not how to divulge it.


Having wrought the baronet to this, the proper pitch of curiosity,
expectation, and terror, Mr. Miles paused, -- when, seeing Sir Guise in a
disposition to believe every thing, and to dread what he believed, he
exclaimed, "But there is some satisfaction in the thought, that, unless we all
become victims at the same time, you shall not, my dear friend, -- no, you
shall not die unrevenged."

Sir Guise answered, "I tell you, I will, not die! -- I will sooner leave the
abbey -- I will sooner fly from the hated face of man -- of you, and Tempest,
and all the world!"

"Fly from me and Tempest! you cannot! shall not!" cries Miles: "for her love,
and my friendship, shall follow you to the uttermost ends of the earth. -- Ah!
my good friend, were we all united by ties as sacred as they are strong, were
we all of one family, and our fates and fortunes run together, what could hurt
us? I should defy the powers of hell confederated then to molest you; but while
we are thus divided -- "

"I see your wishes," answered the baronet: -- "your long-desired happiness
shall be granted. -- I here pledge myself that my hand shall be Tempest's, and
my daughter's yours, -- if you will, in this instance, rescue me from the
designs of the accursed Fitzortons, and effect my revenge upon them without
hazard to my person.

"It is enough," said Miles. "I know you are a man of honor; and the instant I
have informed Mrs. Tempest of her happiness, -- you know how it will rejoice
her tender soul, which doats on you, -- those measures shall be taken, --
indeed I had concerted them previously, without other inducement than pure
disinterested friendship, -- which will complete your triumph, and the defeat
of your enemies, at one and the same instant. Meantime, as our double marriage
cannot, you know, take place immediately, it might be wrong to let the idea go
abroad to any part of your own family, till the impending danger to your
precious life is over; and then, my dear father, -- for I may now call you by
that tender name, -- we may shape the intelligence according to events. Indeed,
I am ambitious to deserve the honor of an alliance with Sir Guise Stuart, by
saving his life before I receive the bright reward, the promise of which,
should I even die myself in preserving you, I shall think a full atonement;
for, though I have not, like that puny lover, the sensitive Henry Fitzorton,
been playing at the game of declaration, I have an affection which -- an
affection which -- but your dear life, my future parent, is in danger, -- and
this is no time to talk sentimentally about my passion: -- so, if you will
consider of these little articles of family affection which I have drawn up,
supposing the family convention between us to take place, -- and just put your
name thereto, I will clap the saddle on my horse to convey the glad tidings to
Mrs. Tempest, -- and return with such plans, and powers of putting them into
execution, as shall rid you of all your fears. Meantime, you will intimate
nothing of what has past, to your family, but wait my return, in assured
expectation that my life shall be the guarantee of yours. -- Alas! Sir Guise,"
continued Miles, taking the baronet by the hand, "what would have been the
event, had not my incessant vigilance and secret intelligence traced the
hellish plot now forming against you at the castle! I am sorry to say, Henry is
almost the ringleader; your own son is not without a hand in the conspiracy;
and in less than eight-and-forty hours, your death, -- your concerted murder --
"

"Eight-and-forty hours! Mercy defend me!" -- cries the baronet.

"Your death, I say, within that time, would have been as certain, as will now
be your preservation."

At the end of this sentence, Sir Guise leaped on the neck of Miles, with the
most extravagant demonstrations of joy, -- called him and Tempest his only
friends, protectors, and preservers, -- swore they only should be his future
heirs, his present asoc;ociates, -- declared he longed for the hour which
should give to one the claims of a wife, and to the other those of a son, --
and protested he only waited till the forms of mourning for Lady Stuart were
past, personally to make a graceful offer. He then opened the paper which Miles
had given, glanced his eye hastily over the contents, which he approved, --
caught up a pen and signed his name, -- called in Dennison and another domestic
as witnesses, telling them it was a mere deed of trust, -- dismissed them the
instant they had made their signatures, and thus bound himself to obligations,
the nature of which he scarcely knew, being under terrors which would have
induced him to sign away the globe, -- and again hugging Miles to his bosom,
and calling him his best friend, urged him not to spare horseflesh, to greet
Tempest with the most lavish epithets of fondness, and to return with the
utmost speed; adding as Miles departed, that he should not dare to take food,
or rest, till he again embraced his dear Valentine, -- so the dastard now
called a man whom he had long feared and despised, and such was the message he
sent by that man to a woman who was both his aversion and his dread.

Miles had not left the room more than a minute, when he re-entered, saying, as
upon recollection, that, in his zeal to accomplish the baronet's safety, he had
forgot all other matters, especially to intimate that as the design of
counter-plotting the Fitzortons would be attended with considerable expense --

"I understand you," said Sir Guise, taking out some banker's checks, and
scribbling at random. "You will pass the house: get these cashed: and should
more be wanted, I have always some running cash with my country banker."

"We are wasting time," said Miles, pocketing the drafts. "God bless you!
Expect me soon. Be silent and be safe!"

CHAPTER XXXIX.
BUT, great as were the motives already assigned for this invention of plots
and intended counterplots to work upon the fears of Sir Guise, -- the inventor,
and his fair associate, Mrs. Tempest, were influenced by other inducements,
more potent than all the advantages they had hopes of deriving, in the issue,
from the operation of those fears, and the well-connected fable on which they
were founded.

The primary wheels in this grand machine were the lust of revenge, and a lust
yet more fordid, more violent, which the widow and her Valentine bore toward
the Clares and Fitzortons.

Mr. Clare had been the first to intimate to his friend Fitzorton, that there
was something more wicked, though better disguised, in the disposition of Miles
than that of the baronet, -- adding that he had heard a story of his being
drummed out of a regiment somewhere in Ireland, for mal-practices, -- amongst
which, "it hangs in my memory," said Mr. Clare, -- "that theft and perjury were
not the most atrocious."

This happening to be communicated to Sir Armine in the presence of one David
Otley, a domestic of Mr. Clare's, and a shrewd fellow, but to whom Mr. Clare
was somewhat attached, the caution reached, by this medium, the ear of Mr.
Miles. -- John Fitzorton had been at some pains to trace this rumor, not only
in compliance with Mr. Clare's suspicions, but in confirmation of his own,
which had secretly fastened upon this man, even when he had the privileges of a
visitor at the castle, in common with Sir Guise, who introduced him. -- John
soon profited of those opportunities which his military connexions gave him,
and made a report at the castle, not covertly, but consistent with the intrepid
decision of his character.

One day, when the same David Otley was waiting at the back of his master's
chair, and when, indeed, Sir Guise himself, -- it being prior to the public
breach, -- was at Sir Armine's table, -- "It is matter of astonishment to me,"
said John, who happened to be the only person of his family then present, "that
a fellow who has every vice in human nature, but cowardice, -- and that single
exception proceeding only from a fearless constitutional impudence, -- should
gain the protection of any person of credit."

Then turning to Sir Guise, he added, "If, on your return to the abbey, you
should meet with a friend of yours who answers to this character, do me the
honor, sir, to tell him what I have said. And farther, should his being in
possession of the single quality I have alluded to, namely, his insolent
courage, be thought a counterbalance for the stain of every baseness, by the
use and exercise you may have for it, Sir Guise, I have only to desire, in the
name of my family, that the gentleman who may be so gifted, from this moment
for evermore, may forbear coming to the castle, -- and I think I may venture to
add, or the manor-house."

It is unnecessary to observe, that this pointed message was carried, at the
time, to the party concerned. -- Indeed, lest any thing should be lost in its
journey from the castle to the abbey, it was kindly taken to the latter mansion
by two persons. -- Sir Guise faithfully related it, the very same night, to Mr.
Valentine Miles; and David Otley took it in his budget of castle and
manor-house intelligence, the next morning.

A natural consequence, arising from this inhibition, was, of course, cutting
the acquaintance of Mr. Miles: but another very natural consequence, of course
also, took place between the truly brave John Fitzorton and the truly audacious
Valentine Miles.

No sooner was the latter in possession of the favorable sentiments borne him
by the former, than he sent, in turn, a scarce less civil message to John, who
instantly observed the contents, without so much as uttering a syllable to any
of the family, save and except to True George, then his domestic. -- Miles had
contrived to get the baronet to accompany him to the place of rendezvous,
without letting him know the design. -- Accordingly, the parties met at the
dawn of the third day from the communication of John's opinion. -- At the sight
of John, whose very countenance was a rebuke to cowardice, Sir Guise
involuntarily drew back a few paces; and the view of the pistols, a brace of
which both antagonists took out of their pockets at the same time, made him so
expert at the science of tergiversation, that he had got several yards in his
way home, exclaiming, "Miles had betrayed him," -- before the said Miles
perceived he had taken fright. -- Valentine, however, who wanted him as a
witness of that prowess which might be one day of service in his own cause,
soon brought him back, asserting, that " He was in no danger:" -- and the
duellists prepared for action.

John condescended only to say, sternly, "Fellow, I am admitting you to an
undeserved honor." -- Then settling their distance, and taking aim, almost in
the same instant John discharged his shot and received that of Miles, without
any injury to either. -- John's ball, however, whizzed so near to the body of
Sir Guise, who had shifted about, that the good baronet again took to his
heels, and George after him, leaving the field of battle solely to the
combatants. -- John's next ball took effect in the neck of his adversary, who
dropping on the ground, John demanded "if he was satisfied with his being still
of opinion he was a scoundrel:" -- and upon being answered by Valentine that
"he was satisfied for the present," -- John left him to the care of True
George, who by this time returned without the fearful game of which he had been
in chase. -- John now walked home, saying to True George, "When you have
conveyed that fellow to the abbey, return to me at the castle; and do not
inform any of my family, I have disgraced either them or myself, by such a
contest, I charge you. -- And as for you, sir," added he, addressing Miles, as
George lifted him from the ground, -- "if you live, and are again as impudent
as you are infamous, I may be tempted to confer on you the dignity of a second
leaden token of my esteem for your virtues: and if you die, public honors
ought to be adjudged me, for being the author of that inestimable blessing to
the community, your invaluable death!"

Although neither John, who was too much ashamed of his exploit, nor True
George, who was too faithful to his trust, revealed this transaction to any
other person at home or abroad, -- and, perhaps, both had long since thrown it
from their memories, as unworthy of preservation, -- the whole business was
still smarting in the recollection of Miles, who, -- although he did not think
proper to call John to a second account, nor to assign it amongst his motives
for taking part in the vengeance of Sir Guise, -- had been inwardly consuming
with the most implacable hatred to the whole family ever since.

He had, indeed, long watched his occasion, -- had assiduously, though
secretly, fomented every cause and effect of hatred in the baronet, -- and was
almost in despair of an opportunity falling out suitable to his design, when at
length he came to the knowledge of circumstances which will presently be no
secret to the reader, and which, if well managed, he did not doubt, would
produce a rich harvest of events favorable to his love, his avarice, and his
vengeance. -- The fabrication of the welltimed story of the assassination of
Sir Guise was simply a necessary prelude to the bringing this about; and, as to
the degree of probability of the tale, he was the less careful to construct it,
as he had often perceived that when the baronet's terrors were once excited by
a sudden shock, none of his faculties were sufficiently at his command to
reflect how the history hung together, or how the parts were in harmony with
the whole. -- On the contrary, every sense seemed to take the alarm, at the
moment he heard of a possible danger; and, like an affrighted family running
from a house at the cry of fire, every passion of his soul, but that of fear,
left his bosom.

Now, in accounting for the hatred which the widow Tempest bore to the house of
Fitzorton, we fear we must be under the disagreeable necessity of telling yet
another Family Secret, and one which a more prudent biographer would conceal.
But the truth, that guides our pen, demands the discovery; and the human
nature, to which our history is dedicated, must plead excuse for whatever
offenses the developement of mysteries behind her curtain may bring to light.

CHAPTER XL.
HENRY became acquainted with Mrs. Tempest, without knowing any thing of her
attachment to Valentine Miles, or her connection with Sir Guise Stuart. -- The
time was critical.

It was during Henry's visit in London to a female relation: and his first
interview happened at a very remarkable moment. -- It was, in truth, in the
evening of the day on which, with his accustomed punctuality and ardour, he had
dispatched a large packet of "everlasting love and constancy" to his dear
Caroline, under cover to the trusty Dennison.

The soft duty of his heart discharged, he went to the theater, full of the
tenderest vows, the fondest ideas; but having made, in company with some young
friends, larger libations to the purple god of the grape, or rather, to the
health of his beloved, than his reason could bear, though his passion seemed to
augment at every glass, -- he happened to walk, we had almost written, stagger,
into a box, where the widow was then smiling at Mr. Congreve's pleasant comedy
of Love for Love. Seeing a place to the left vacant, and near a beautiful lady,
the right side being occupied by another female, who appeared to be in the
character of a foil, rather than of a rival brilliant, -- he made one of those
bows which were sure to procure him a gracious reception; and, perceiving his
welcome insured, by the brilliant's sitting closer to the foil, in order to
make more room for him, -- he took possession of the seat.

Rather as an effect of high youth and high spirits animated by love and wine,
than a spirit of gallantry, he entered at once into some glowing remarks on the
scene which was then representing. -- The lady being one of those females who
follow first impressions, and have the talent of being desperately in love at a
glance, contrived to forget, in the space of half an hour, that Sir Guise
Stuart (for it was his widow Tempest) had any claims for money, or her
Valentine Miles for love, -- or, indeed, that Mr. Congreve had any wit, or that
her muse companion required any more of her attention than if she had been part
of the bench she sat on, -- or, in short, that there was any body but the
enchanting young stranger at her side in the creation. -- She presently gave
the youth such manifest and manifold proofs of her so thinking, by certain
little tendernesses, innuendoes, languishing looks, and gentle pressures, every
one of which, -- though they were perfectly new to him, -- being altogether in
a different style from the attentions of the chaste and charming Caroline, --
it was impossible for him not to comprehend their meaning: and before the
couples in the comedy were brought tegether in the last act, an union of a
different kind was settled in the lady's mind, and ratified in her eyes, which
seemed to insist on the consent of the young gentleman. -- In a word, the widow
thought her new object -- and, indeed, she decided rightly -- one of the
handsomest and most elegant young men she had ever seen, -- and, agreeably to
her first-sight system, was, by the time the first act of the farce was over,
in love with him to distraction!

It is probable she heard not a sentence of act the second, though it was upon
a subject congenial to her feelings: so entirely was she engrossed by her new
conqueror. At the conclusion, common gallantry required he should see her safe
out of the house, and put her and her still dumb companion into their carriage,
-- to which as he was handing them, the widow said, even as she set her foot on
the step, "I hope, sir, I shall have the honor to set you down, in return for
your civility." -- Which offer being accompanied by certain invisible signs and
tokens, as potent as the secrets of freemasonry, or the ancient art of
palmistry, -- Henry got into the coach, and seated himself on the same side,
without attending to the other lady quite so much as the forms of politeness
might seem to prescribe.

Henry, new to the town, thought it right, in point of etiquette, to see the
lady home, before he took the liberty of using her carriage, which was,
therefore, driven to a very handsome house in Grosvenor Square; where,
alighting to hand the ladies out, it is certainly possible that Henry might
have taken leave of his ladies, had not the sprightly widow sportingly
exclaimed, with certain accompaniments, having still hold of his arm, "We may
as well make it the romance of a night, sir, if you are not better engaged: --
for you must know, I dreamed of an adventure of this sort, and am just in the
humor to have my dream out. -- What say you, Priscilla?" -- turning to her
companion. -- "I should like it of all things:" replied the lady. -- Henry was
not in a disposition to be rude: so the widow informed the coachman she should
have no farther occasion for the carriage; and the trio of choice spirits
tripped into the house.

Voluptuous elegance now began its fascination. -- A collation was soon served
up, after which the servants disappeared; the most costly wines circulated; for
neither the widow nor her companion was unknown to the jolly god; and either of
them would have taken off her bottle, with more ease than Olivia Clare, or
Caroline Stuart, or any such "puny whipster" of the sex, could have managed her
first and half sipped her second glass.

Indeed, our fair seducers were frequent votaries at the court of Comus,
insomuch that Mrs. Tempest might have represented, and, in truth, often did
represent, upon the stage of life, the part of Euphrosyne; and her associate
had as often done equal justice to the character of the principal bacchante.

It is with reluctance we tell the reader that Henry was not so much alarmed at
finding himself in such company, as was Milton's lady when she discovered the
danger of her situation; -- yet the situation was but too similar with respect
to the surrounding magic.

Mrs. Tempest was, in all senses of the character, a siren. -- Her voice,
though neither sweet nor tender, either like that of Olivia or Caroline, was
yet seductively harmonious. -- Her eyes, though possessing neither the modest
luster of Olivia's, nor the appealing softness of Caroline's, darted such
intolerable fire through her long dark eyelashes, that a less ardent gazer than
Henry might have been scorched by their burning beams. -- She was somewhat
under the size of Olivia, and, by the same proportion, above that of Caroline:
-- she wanted the chaste dignity that gave command to the one, and was utterly
destitute of the interesting graces, shifting with every attitude, that adorned
the other. -- But she had to boast a symmetry of shape, a certain voluptuous
roundness of limbs, a contour of visage, and an alluring government of
countenance, so entirely the reverse of both, that while their features were
formed to instruct the beholder that real beauty, love, and virtue, were the
same, -- those of the widow were calculated to excite, suddenly, a train of
impetuous emotions, formed to seduce from the youthful bosom all its heavenly
guards, and lure the gazer to indulge in the fatal contrast. -- All the
lineaments of her face offered the most infallible marks of passion
unrestrained, an inordinate love of pleasure, and a total disdain of the decent
laws by which passion and pleasure, and more especially in women, ought to be
regulated. -- Her lips were in exact correspondence with her eyes, and as
constantly employed in expressing the same emotions; and the regularity and
color of her teeth could only yield to the beauty of her arms and bosom, which
were in the highest perfection of female loveliness, but were displayed or
shaded with a studied attention, that denoted she was at once proud and
conscious of their attraction.

The then extreme youth of Henry, the novelty of the situation, the combining
enchantments, and the state of the poor lad's head, will, we hope, mitigate his
offense, should we own, as own we must, that he was far from being a mere
neutral listener or looker on during the hilarities of the evening. -- He
looked at the widow, indeed, with a timid admiration: and as she sung several
couplets from the l' Allegro, Henry's manly and pathetic voice, which the
reader has already heard celebrated, joined in the chorus, with a spirit that
showed he had been gradually enchanted out of himself.

"Here Is a health to those that we love." cries the widow, filling the glass
while she sung.

"Here Is a health to those that love us!' answered her companion, in the same
style, putting the bottle, which contained some excellent champaigne, to Henry,
who then, for the first time, probably, since the intoxication began, blushed
and sighed, as at the remembrance of Caroline.

This, however, though noticed by the piercing eyes of the widow, was construed
rather into growing passion for herself, than tenderness for another. -- With
renewed fervency, therefore, she proceeded with the song, increasing in
animation as she went on; -- and when they came to the following line, which
the widow trilled with uncommon melody, O my love, love thou me? she cast an
enflaming and decided look at Henry; and her redundant hair dropped from its
slight bondage, and covered her with its luxurious mantle.

The heart of Henry must have been made of "impenetrable stuff," indeed, had
he, at such a time, in such a place, and at such an opportunity, affected not
to understand the drift of such a question, breathed in harmony, through the
lips of beauty.

The companion, on some pretense or other, withdrew; and the very few remains
of modesty, which had been reluctantly confined in the room before, followed
her, or rather flew blushingly out of the apartment, the moment the door
opened, and seemed to wish for an asylum in Caroline's or Olivia's bosom.

Mrs. Tempest and Henry were now together; and very few moments more might have
completed the triumph of youthful folly and infidelity, had not Henry's good
angel, in the imaged form of Caroline herself, interposed: -- and that pure
image was brought forward even by Mrs. Tempest herself.

"Come, one more brimmer to the woman of your heart," said Mrs. Tempest,
replenishing her own, and then Henry's glass. "This one bumper more, thou
enchanting stranger! who -- without my knowledge of, or desire to know, thy
name, family, fortune, or aught but thy enchanting self, -- have turned a
moment of time into an age of love!"

She quoted, theatrically, various rhapsodies from the old dramatic poets: and
then seizing Henry's hand, every artery of which trembled, she pressed it to
her lips, exclaiming, "Ah! dear unknown, tell me who she is? -- What is her
name? -- Whose health am I to drink? -- Who is my too happy rival? -- For to
suppose -- to flatter myself, I have the bliss to find the heart of such a
love-inspiring fellow unengaged -- and still at liberty to devote itself to
this throbbing breast -- "

She thought proper to hesitate, and imitate bashful difficulty, -- then went
on --

"To dare even hope that I meet such a treasure undisposed of, is a bliss too
great! too mighty! -- No, 'twas too presumptuous! and yet to think this hand,
those lips, that form, this panting heart another's -- O! it would destroy me!
-- By my soul it would!"

After a trembling pause, she cried, "You are silent -- you blush -- your lips
turn pale -- and, good heavens! -- ah! what do I see? there are tears in your
eyes! -- Accursed fortune! -- perhaps, perhaps you love! -- confusion! perhaps
-- no, you are not -- surely you are not married! -- but if you are -- "

"Curse! as the sweet poet says, -- curse on all laws but those which love has
made!"

Love, free as air, at sight of human ties
Spreads its light wing and in a moment flies!
CHAPTER XLI.
HAVING finished her poetical justifications, which have been many a pretty
libertine's, and tripping lady's apology, she observed Henry extremely troubled.

"What can be the matter with you? -- Yes, I know my fate. -- It is not the
fetters of wedlock only I have to contend with: -- these might be broken --
these, I could snap asunder; -- but, you are bound in the chains of love --
almighty love! -- and I -- wretched woman! -- But I am resolved to know all. --
Here, since you cannot speak the cruel word, write -- write the dreaded name --
write on the back of this letter, and with my pencil -- there -- who am I to
hate -- curse -- exterminate? -- mark the detested name."

" Detested name!" reiterated Henry: "oh! she is an angel! and her precious
name would be profaned, were I to breathe it now with these unfaithful lips, to
those polluted ones which have tempted me to injure her."

" Polluted lips!" in her turn re-echoed the widow, springing up, and
disdainfully withdrawing her hand from Henry's, -- " Polluted lips! -- have a
care, sir! -- you do not perhaps know, that, as I can dote to distraction, so
can I abhor to madness! -- yes, and both with equal speed! -- Polluted lips! --
they have seldom been rewarded for their partiality by such an epithet!"

She took the room three or four times, backwards and forwards, in a violent
passion, sometimes throwing herself down into a chair, sometimes tossing by
Henry, without deigning to mark her rage, except through the flashes of her
indignant eyes, -- from which shot now as intense flames of fury, as had, a few
moments before, darted burning beams of desire. -- Her whole person was
rendered terrifying, and might perhaps have alarmed Henry, though by no means
apt to be appalled, had not another object, more fraught with terrors than an
hundred thousand angry men or even women, with an equal number of armed troops
in their train, fastened upon his attention, namely, the sight of the address
of that letter which the widow had produced for the purpose of his penciling
her rival's name, and which the said widow had hurled in disdain upon the sofa,
where Henry and she had before been seated.

This superscription opened on Henry's eyes the following discoveries -- first,
that he had entangled himself, almost past redemption, in an affair of
gallantry with the mistress of his beloved Caroline's father! and secondly,
that it was directed to the said father's mistress, in the well-known
handwriting of Sir Guise Stuart!

"Merciful Heaven!" exclaimed Henry, -- "what do I see? -- is it possible,
madam, you should be Mrs. Tempest?"

"And what then, sir?" demanded the widow, snatching the letter from Henry, and
throwing it into the fire with a dreadful execration.

" That Mrs. Tempest, continued Henry, of whom I have heard so much? -- whom
Sir Guise Stu --?"

"And who then are you?" questioned the widow, stopping him in the middle of
the name. -- "Are you that enemy of mine, his detested son, whose hate I have
long felt, but whose person I have never yet -- "

"No, Madam!" replied Henry, interrupting in his turn, -- "I am not so great,
so just, so honorable a man, as that noble, that distinguished youth, whom I
now blush to call my friend! -- but, unworthy as I am, I bless heaven for this
timely discovery, -- this miraculous escape!"

Henry caught up his hat, and, without considering the lateness of the hour, or
any thing else but what he had mentioned, hurried to the door.

"Escape! -- escape! -- insolent! -- impudent!" -- raved forth Mrs. Tempest,
running after him, and pulling him back. -- "Confusion to my soul! -- if you
provoke me, -- whosoever you are, were you the father who gave me life -- "

Henry struggled in her grasp: -- and a violent rapping at the street door made
him step a few paces back.

The lady exclaimed, still keeping her hold, and perfectly agonized with rage,
shaking Henry while she spoke, -- "God be thanked! -- that is either Valentine
or Sir Guise! -- now, sir, will my triumph be complete!"

As she said this, a noise was heard upon the stairs; and presently the former
of the abovementioned persons made his appearance.

He had come to town, as the reader may remember, post haste, on the business
of Jane Atwood. Arriving with Sir Guise in the middle of the night, and having
left the baronet in Jane's lodgings, which had been provided by Miles, -- he,
Miles, had made up his excuse for visiting the widow at so unseasonable an
hour, as at that time he observed some etiquette with her.

At the sight of Henry, whom he had seen more than once at the abbey, and whose
passion for Caroline he had heard from Sir Guise, he started, as at that of an
apparition.

"Mr. Henry Fitzorton!" exclaimed he.

"Who? -- Henry Fitzorton!" cried the widow. -- "No wonder, then, these
unheard of outrages have been heaped on me! -- and I have not the smallest
doubt, but that one wickedness would have led to another, till it had ended in
my death! -- oh, Valentine! -- sure heaven sent you at this moment to my
rescue! -- could you conceive what I have endured from this, till now, unknown
wretch, -- your heart would bleed for me!"

She then related the foregore scene, so as exactly to reverse the several
actual circumstances, observing, with an admirable accuracy of transposition,
that, "he had rudely seated himself in the same box at the playhouse, --
watched her out, -- thrust himself into her coach, -- ran up stairs as soon as
they got home, -- forced poor Priscilla, her companion, out of the room, --
locked the door, -- swore that he would destroy the first person who offered to
approach, -- and, on casting his eye upon a letter she had received from her
dear, dear Sir Guise, whose handwriting he knew, he slandered both him and
Valentine, with a volley of execrations, -- and was proceeding to every thing
shocking, when her good stars brought her friend Valentine to her aid! -- 'Twas
surely providence," etc. etc. etc.

As soon as she had finished this speech, which the gentleman whom she
addressed believed as much of as she did herself, -- yet the former thought it
might be most productive to give it credit, -- Valentine went into another
room, observing, "he should return in a moment."

The widow then sallied up to Henry, and, in a malicious whisper, accompanied
by a sarcastic sneer, her arms akimbo, demanded, "whether he thought another
miracle would happen, to befriend his escape from the vengeance of her injured
friend!"

Henry disdained to make her any reply; and indeed, before he could have done
so, Miles returned with his pistols, at the sight of which, Mrs. Tempest,
affecting to be alarmed, flung herself on her knees, and interceded for the
life of Henry; -- then, by a gentle whisper, suggested to Miles, "that if the
outrage were well managed, it would be worth more to them both, than a million
of such lives." -- This intercession wrought so on the tender heart of Miles,
that all would have gone off, for the moment, with a gentle reprimand or
menace, had not Henry, -- who felt the Fitzorton blood rush in boiling torrents
through his veins, walked toward Valentine, and snapping his fingers in his
face, observed loftily, "that the trick was too stale, and that, as he was too
infamous a wretch to be met on a level by a man of honor, whose family had
justly banished him from their presence, he should be warranted to treat him in
the only way such a scoundrel was entitled to, if he did not let him pass out
of the private brothel which Sir Guise and himself kept between them. -- "I
have concealed your vile secret, which has been long communicated to me by the
injured Charles, only out of delicacy to my angel. -- I will no more sully her
pure name by breathing it in a pest house. -- But, if an accent, respecting the
shameful company into which I have been trepanned by that vicious and artful
woman, is mentioned either in my hearing, or in that of any person dear to me,
and it should reach me, I will set fire to a train that shall destroy you both!
-- so be warned."

It was with great difficulty Miles now held the arms of Mrs. Tempest, who
maddened with rage, shame, and disappointment. -- Miles was himself scarce less
inflamed: but certain ideas rose in his mind suddenly, that induced him to let
Henry go unmolested out of the room, and also to hold the widow by main force
till the street door was shut, even to the hazard of Valentine's own face,
which received several lusty blows; -- but, when Henry was fairly off, it did
not take either much pains or time to convince the lady, that, "though her
whole story was well put together, he knew it had not one syllable of truth in
it, and that, even had it been as veritable as it was false, it would be better
for all parties to hush up the affair at present. -- Till we provoke the
stripling farther, he will keep our secret for the sake of his own; and the
bringing upon us the fury of Charles, and of the d *** d Fitzortons, -- and, in
consequence of our illtimed resentment, arousing that nest of hornets, the
magistrates, -- would ruin the fruit of those plans which a little discretion
will mature. -- And as to Sir Guise himself," added Miles, archly, -- "it would
be as impossible to persuade him as me, or indeed yourself, that a young fellow
should come here, and drink champaigne, or burgundy, -- which, I perceive by
these tell-tale bottles, has been the case, -- without your consent, unless he
committed a rape upon the key of your cellar also! -- No! -- no! -- let us be
merry and wise, my dear widow: leave the event of this business with me. -- I
have a memory and mind, very faithful to my resentments; and depend upon it,
when opportunity favors, though it should be the length of the siege of Troy
before it arrives, I shall cherish the freshest recollection of whatever has
been done or said in this business, even down to the saucy snap of his fingers
in my face, which his heart's dearest blood shall one day pay for! -- no
matter! -- leave the thoughts of revenge to me. -- When time is ripe, do you
assist the deed; and depend on it, we shall both be satisfied."

This consideration pacified her; and as Miles knew Sir Guise was safely
disposed of in the apartments of the deluded Jane Atwood for the night, he
entered into the explanations he thought fit to make the widow for his untimely
visit; and the amiable pair retired, after the bustles of the night, to the
consolation of each other's faithful arms.

But, though this happy couple, reconciled by mutual deception, were satisfied
with each other, they were by no means so with Henry: -- for, notwithstanding
the happy turn which the widow gave to the affair at the time, and her
incessant assurances since, so often as it was mentioned, it was beyond the
reach of policy, casuistry, or the most solemn oaths, to make Valentine believe
there had not been some previous intercourse between Henry and herself, and
that he caught them only in some quarrel of love, which would have ended in the
usual way, had not his coming at the moment made it expedient for her to
pretend violence, outrage, and displeasure. -- And the idea did not a little
aggravate the hate he bore to the Fitzortons, who appeared, at every turn, the
bane of his purposes. -- Indeed, John and Henry were now alike detestable to
him, especially as at this time the person of Mrs. Tempest, -- though, for
reasons good, he consented to divide her with Sir Guise, -- was not then
indifferent to him: for he had only begun to plot alienating the affections of
the recently seduced Jane from the baronet.

And as to Mrs. Tempest herself, the sudden gust of love -- or by whatever
other name the reader thinks it ought to be called, for Henry, was presently
succeeded by as sudden an aversion, when she found that no less than three
penitently- tender letters, and one madly accusing epistle, which she caused to
be clandestinely delivered to him by the means of David Otley, produced not one
word of reply.

The caution, and dread of consequences, however, suggested by Miles,
restrained her from public and avowed revenge; but the thirst of vengeance kept
raging within, and threatened one day to burst upon his head. Meantime, she
availed herself of more than one occasion to do him secret mischief, by way of
giving earnest of her future designs. -- The anonymous letters to John and his
father, respecting Caroline, were from this lady's pen: -- and had she known,
at the time, his situation with Olivia, that would probably have been the
subject of a third epistle. -- Why she did not, since that, do him this
kindness also, is yet in our confidence, and also, the farther proof, in her
instance, how great truth there is in that celebrated distich of the poet --

Heaven has no plague like love to hatred turned,
Nor Hell a fury like a woman scorned.
In regard to Henry, candid reader, his error, and his repentance, are both
before you. -- His trespass, and his temptations, have been delineated.

We are writing certain parts of the history of Human Nature, the
inconsistencies of which, we must again repeat, it is our office rather to
describe than account for. -- The foregoing scene has nothing irreconcilable
with the frail though interesting subject of our book, the human heart; and it
is to be wished that every young man who began an adventure of this kind as
imprudently, might finish it as amiably as Henry Fitzorton.

To suppose that this his approach to infidelity will recommend him to the
virtuous reader, would be insulting: but to imagine he has lost that virtuous
reader's good will for his first and last indiscretion of this kind, would be
to suspect that the reader has either great ignorance of human nature, or great
hypocrisy; -- there seems to us no other alternative. -- Leaving, therefore,
the point to be settled by the only power which can settle it, the reader's
conscience, we shall return to the place from whence we have digressed.

CHAPTER XLII.
ABOUT the time that the disastrous Henry left the abbey, the impatient Olivia
bent her steps toward that venerable mansion; -- and never, perhaps, was an
evening walk undertaken by two persons in situations of mind, and with
reflections, more opposite. Henry, impelled by despair, and driven by
irremediable necessity from the presence of his dear but deeply distressed
Caroline, literally felt that "he dragged at each remove, the lengthening
chain:" every step hurried him farther from the object of his affections, while
Olivia, animated by hope, was by every step brought nearer to him whom she
loved with unspeakable tenderness, and whom she fondly believed she was about
to make the happiest of mankind.

They met about the mid way of the memorable grand avenue; and the sudden sight
of each other inspired very distinct emotions. -- Henry wished for the velocity
of thought to escape so unseasonable a rencontre, and Olivia sighed for the
speed of light to reach his hand. -- Yet both were alike embarrassed, the one
by trembling joy, the other by variety of sorrow. -- By an involuntary impulse,
Henry receded a few paces with the degree of rapidity that Olivia advanced; the
wings of fear are even more rapid than those of love. -- But Henry soon
recovered himself and his steps; and by one of those hazards, which have all
the air of design, and yet are common enough in life, Olivia and Henry joined
each other immediately parallel to the place where the first avowal of love had
been made by Henry to Caroline; -- a circumstance, we trust, in the full
recollection of the reader.

Anxious to know Caroline's reply to the request stated in the letter which had
already produced so much mischief in the abbey family, Olivia was covered with
blushes, and, hesitating almost to a stammer, alluded to the subject most
likely to increase Henry's confusion. -- "What would I give," said she, "to
have been a sylph, or some other spirit, to have been present, yet unseen, at
the reading of my hurried but heartfelt letter to Caroline!"

"Present at it! -- you present! -- good heaven!" exclaimed Henry, throwing up
his hands and eyes.

"I dare say," continued Olivia, "you all thought me -- but yet -- I hope -- "

Her blushes deepened, and the faultering of her voice augmented.

"I hope Caroline did not show it? -- Gracious! -- if she did, I should never
forgive her! yet," recovering herself, "wherefore should I talk thus? wherefore
attempt to conceal the pride and triumph of my life? O Henry, my dear -- dear
-- Henry, grant me a portion of your eloquence, that I may express what I feel
at the thought of calling Henry -- I know not what I would say, -- I only know
that I am the most honored and blessed of human beings, -- and that it is his
goodness, love, and constancy, have made me so."

Her eyes were directed to those of Henry, as her artless heart thus poured
itself forth to her now almost husband; for, in his late absence the two
fathers had at last fixed the eventful day of those nuptials which had a
thousand times come into the sport and seriousness of the family conversation;
but Lady Fitzorton had communicated it in form to Olivia a few minutes before
she set out to meet Henry.

The eyes of Henry were now cast a different way, -- and they were filled with
tears.

"Ah! hope and glory of my life!" exclaimed Olivia, -- "wherefore do you weep?
If, those tears, like mine, proceed not from excess of tenderness, -- excess of
felicity, -- the earth b^ars not such a wretch as Olivia!"

"They do -- the almighty searcher of hearts knows -- they do proceed," said
Henry, passionately, "from tenderness!"

"That omnipotent witness be praised!" ejaculated Olivia. "And yet, methinks I
would not have such drops as these flow from my Henry's heart, even though they
spring from joy!"

Archangels might have sanctioned the movement with which Olivia now laid her
cheek to that of Henry, and dried up his tears. Alas! the fountain was full,
and streamed afresh.

"Yonder is an arboring tree with a bench round it. -- I see it through the
underwood," said Olivia, gently drawing Henry toward the place.

"Let us rest awhile," continued she: "for I have something -- very -- very
dear to impart to my Henry."

Henry suffered himself to be led passively on; when reaching the bench, he sat
down, Olivia placing herself by his side.

"I protest," said Olivia, resuming her cheerfulness, that Henry might catch
the gaiety, "this spot seems formed for tender hearts; -- does it not, Henry?
-- One would imagine these bowering hawthorns and these o'er-arching shades,
branching from this romantic oak, had been the scene of some gentle assignation
in days of chivalry."

Every word she spoke, though designed to convey more than the rose's fragrance
to his sense, was sharper than a thorn pressing into his heart. His
disappointments were all brought close under his very eye: and wherever he
turned, memory presented some bleeding image of former felicity, untimely
destroyed even in the spot which was at once the place of its birth and burial.

He turned his head, as to conceal his agitations, when those initials of
Caroline's name which his own hand had carved in the rind of the oak, met his
view, and the words, "O my only life and love!" burst spontaneously from his
heart. The name of Caroline which was about to follow this passionate
exclamation, quivered and died on his lips; yet wholly subdued by a situation
so affecting, he sunk down on Olivia's shoulder; and he had only strength
enough to sigh out, "This -- this -- is too much!"

Olivia naturally applied to herself the abovementioned tender expression so
characteristc of Henry's habits, and so congenial to the rahpsody of her own
heart: and she supposed -- as how, indeed, could she imagine otherwise? -- he
was melted by that overwhelming sensibility which might well be excited in a
disposition like his, by the avowal she had made of boundless returns of her
affection. "And, ah! in what language but your own," cried she, chastely but
fondly caressing him, her own lovely eyes repaying him with largest interest
every tear, -- "oh in what language but Henry's can I answer such tenderness?
-- My only life! my only love! Yes," added she, exalting her voice without
diminishing its sweetness, "that divinity to whom my beloved had just appealed
in testimony of his own faith, can tell how truly my love and life are devoted
to him alone."

Henry raised himself up, as if to rectify the misconstruction which had been
put on an expression that Olivia had so naturally appropriated: but the sudden
appearance of little Fitz, and, in the ensuing moment, the sound of a voice,
exclaiming, "there is the dog, -- depend upon it his friends are not far off,"
-- pointed his attention to other objects.

CHAPTER XLIII.
HENRY and Olivia, without expressing their surprise to each other, hasted
through the opening in the bushes to explore the cause, when they observed Sir
Armine and Lady Fitzorton coming up the avenue, and within a few paces of them.

Olivia, who had caught up little Fitz, in silent rapture ran down the avenue
to meet them, and in a whisper assured Lady Fitzorton that Henry was the best
creature in the world, and had made her the happiest. -- "With all his ardours
you know, my dear madam," said she, "he is not a man of professions, -- more
delicately trusting to actions than words, in attestation of his feelings; -- a
conduct I have often vainly attempted to imitate, and which I have admired,
even when I could have quarrelled with him for it. But, had you heard the
endearing expressions he just uttered, accompanied by his tears, and witnessed
by his love-declaring eyes -- O heaven! -- indeed, -- indeed, -- I am the
happiest -- and he is the best of human beings!"

During the display of this delusion, which those who admire Olivia will wish
might end with her life, Henry was advancing, but with steps that little
justified Olivia's description, on an occasion which would have carried him, --
had he been indeed her lover, -- with a speed and impatience like her own.

Indeed he seemed at first undetermined whether to make his escape by rushing
into the woods, or to join the family party. Perceiving, however, the latter
were moving toward him, he thought it would be impossible to recede; and after
assuring his stars that he now defied their utmost malice, and should resign
himself to their malignant power without any farther resistance, he somewhat
quickened his pace, like a man giving himself up despairingly to the worst that
could happen. Notwithstanding this, he saluted his parents with those graces of
filial duty which the sight of them always enkindled, and which even
disappointed love, of whose pangs they were in great measure the cause, could
not extinguish.

The sight, however, of little Fitz, whom he had not before seemed to notice,
had nearly overset his plan of non-resistance. "Would it not be best for me,
dearest madam, to step home with that spaniel?" said he to his mother. "I dare
say he watched the opening of the abbey gate to follow me."

Henry held out his arm to receive him from Olivia, who sportingly said, "she
was sure he came again on a message to her from his fair mistress; for there
was more than ordinary accident in the dog's returning so soon and at such a
moment, they might depend on it; and she would therefore give him a fair chance
either to go or stay."

She gently patted him, and set him down, observing that she would use no
bribery to detain, nor any chiding to dismiss him. "Let him follow his own
unbiassed inclinations," said Olivia: "if he goes toward the abbey, I declare
I will not say a word to call him back; but if he attends any of us uncalled, I
shall, -- yes, you may laugh at my superstition as much as you please, -- but I
shall think there is more in it than common chance, -- and expect a welcome for
him at the castle, till I can have an opportunity to return him to his lovely
owner, in person. -- There -- now for it! -- He is now to do as he likes. Say
nothing; but let us walk on, and leave him to himself."

Little Fitz was no sooner set upon the ground, than he paid his compliments,
first to Henry, then to the rest of the company, and bounding along the avenue
in the direct line toward the castle, seemed to confirm the prepossession of
Olivia, who now roundly re-asserted, nothing should persuade her there was not
more in it than even the philosophy of John, had he been present, could find
out.

Sir Armine, who had attended rather to the history of his son's face than to
what had been said about the dog, caught the eye of Henry, and overruled
whatever farther arguments or objections he might have been disposed to make:
so the whole groupe went together to the castle. At first they walked arm in
arm, in a row; but soon after they divided two and two. -- Olivia and Lady
Fitzorton, Sir Armine and Henry. This arrangement was again altered, by design
or accident: for Sir Armine proposed that his wife and Olivia should make the
best of their way home, and that he and Henry would take a poetical saunter,
and follow at leisure; averring that he wished to discuss with him a knotty
point.

The emphasis with which he pronounced these words, and the smile that
accompanied them, was so well understood by her ladyship, that she pleasantly
exclaimed, walking away with Olivia at the same time, "Pray, my dear daughter,
let us leave these poetic philosophers to settle their knotty points by
themselves, while you and I," whispered she to Olivia, who crimsoned at the
remark, "go and prepare some other knots that shall prove too hard for both
their worships." Olivia turned back thrice on pretense of seeing whether little
Fitz preferred the male or the female division of the party, but, possibly, for
a more affectionate reason. The sagacious and political little animal, however,
seemed to keep, like James Fitzorton, the midway between them, and so continued
to hold well with both parties: -- a line of conduct which has been faithfully
followed by much greater politicians.

We would forbear to insert these minutiae, were we not assured that the real
great events in life are, as some one has profoundly observed, produced by a
nice train of little circumstances.

For example, this apparenly trifling matter of filing off the family groupe
into divisions led to an incident of as great importance to Henry, and perhaps
to our readers, as any hitherto recorded in this history.

END OF VOL. II.

