ALCIPHRON: OR, THE MINUTE PHILOSOPHER. IN SEVEN DIALOGUES. Containing an
APOLOGY for the Christian Religion, against those who are called Free-thinkers.

VOLUME the SECOND.



The Balances of Deceit are in his Hand. Hosea xii. 7. (...). Plato. DUBLIN:
Printed for G. Risk, G. Ewing, and W. Smith, Booksellers in Dame-Street,
MDCCXXXII.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
The SIXTH DIALOGUE.
SECT 1. Points agreed. 2. Sundry Pretenses to Revelation. 3. Uncertainty of
Tradition. 4. Object and Ground of Faith. 5. Some Books disputed, others
evidently spurious. 6. Style and Composition of Holy Scripture. 7. Difficulties
occurring therein. 8. Obscurity not always a Defect. 9. Inspiration neither
impossible nor absurd. 10. Objections from the Form and Matter of Divine
Revelation, considered. 11. Infidelity an Effect of Narrowness and Prejudice.
12. Articles of Christian Faith not unreasonable. 13. Guilt the natural Parent
of Fear. 14. Things unknown, reduced to the Standard of what Men know. 15.
Prejudices against the Incarnation of the Son of God. 16. Ignorance of the
Divine Economy, a Source of Difficulties. 17. Wisdom of God, foolishness to
Man. 18. Reason, no blind Guide. 19. Usefulness of Divine Revelation. 20.
Prophecies, whence Obscure. 21. Eastern Accounts of Time older than the Mosaic.
22. The Humor of Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and other Nations extending
their Antiquity beyond Truth, accounted for. 23. Reasons confirming the Mosaic
Account. 24. Profane Historians inconsistent. 25. Celsus, Prophyry, and Julian.
26. The Testimony of Josephus considered. 27. Attestation of Jews and Gentiles
to Christianity. 28. Forgeries and Heresies. 29. Judgment and Attention of
Minute Philosophers. 30. Faith and Miracles. 31. Probable Arguments a
sufficient Ground of Faith. 32. The Christian Religion able to stand the Test
of rational Inqairy.
The SEVENTH DIALOGUE.
Sect. 1. Christian Faith impossible. 2. Words stand for Ideas. 3. No Knowledge
or Faith without Ideas. 4. Grace, no Idea of it. 5. Abstract Ideas what and how
made. 6. Abstract general Ideas impossible. 7. In what Sense there may be
general Ideas. 8. Suggesting Ideas not the only use of Words. 9. Force as
difficult to form an Idea of as Grace. 10. Notwithstanding which useful
Propositions may be formed concerning it. 11. Belief of the Trinity and other
Mysteries not absurd. 12. Mistakes about Faith on occasion of profane Raillery.
13. Faith its true Nature and Effects. 14. Illustrated by Science. 15. By
Arithmetic in particular. 16. Sciences conversant about Signs. 17. The true End
of Speech, Reason, Science and Faith. 18. Metaphysical Objections as strong
against Human Sciences as Articles of Faith. 19. No Religion, because no Human
Liberty. 20. Farther Proof against Human Liberty. 21. Fatalism a Consequence of
erroneous Suppositions. 22. Man an accountable Agent. 23. Inconsistency,
Singularity, and Credulity of Minute Philosophers. 24. Untrodden Paths and new
Light of the Minute Philosophers. 25. Sophistry of the Minute Philosophers. 26.
Minute Philosophers ambiguous, aenigmatical, unfathomable. 27. Skepticism of
the Minute Philosophers. 28. How a Skeptic ought to behave. 29. Minute
Philosophers why difficult to convince. 30. Thinking not the epidemical Evil of
these times. 31. Infidelity not an Effect of Reason or Thought, its true
Motives assigned. 32. Variety of Opinions about Religion, Effects thereof. 33.
Method for proceeding with Minute Philosophers. 34. Want of Thought and want of
Education Defects of the present Age.
THE MINUTE PHILOSOPHER.
The SIXTH DIALOGUE.
I. Points agreed. II. Sundry pretenses to Revelation. III. Uncertainty of
Tradition. IV. Object and Ground of Faith. V. Some Books disputed, others
evidently spurious. VI. Style and composition of Holy Scripture. VII.
Difficulties occurring therein. VIII. Obscurity not always a defect. IX.
Inspiration neither impossible nor absurd. X. Objections from the form and
matter of divine Revelation, considered. XI. Infidelity an effect of narrowness
and prejudice. XII. Articles of Christian Faith not unreasonable. XIII. Guilt
the Natural Parent of Fear. XIV. Things unknown, reduced to the standard of
what Men know. XV. Prejudices against the Incarnation of the Son of God. XVI.
Ignorance of the divine Economy, a source of difficulties. XVII. Wisdom of
God, foolishness to Man. XVIII. Reason, no blind guide. XIX. Usefulness of
Divine Revelation. XX. Prophesies, whence obscure. XXI. Eastern accounts of
Time older than the Mosaic. XXII. The humor of Egyptians, Assyrians,
Chaldeans, and other Nations extending their Antiquity beyond Truth, accounted
for. XXIII. Reasons confirming the Mosaic account. XXIV. Profane Historians
inconsistent. XXV. Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian. XXVI. The Testimony of
Josephus considered. XXVII. Attestation of Jews and Gentiles to Christianity.
XXVIII. Forgeries and Heresies. XXIX. Judgment and attention of Minute
Philosophers. XXX. Faith and Miracles. XXXI. Probable arguments a sufficient
ground of Faith. XXXII. The Christian Religion able to stand the test of
rational Inquiry.

I.
THE following day being Sunday, our Philosophers lay long in bed, while the
rest of us went to Church in the Neighboring Town, where we dined at
Euphranor's, and after evening Service returned to the two Philosophers, whom
we found in the Library. They told us, That, if there was a God, he was present
every where, as well as at Church; and that if we had been serving him one way,
they did not neglect to do as much another; inasmuch as a free exercise of
Reason must be allowed the most acceptable service and Worship, that a rational
creature can offer to its Creator. However, said Alciphron, if you, Gentlemen,
can but solve the difficulties which I shall propose tomorrow morning, I
promise to go to Church next Sunday. After some general conversation of this
kind, we sat down to a light Supper, and the next morning assembled at the
same place as the day before, where being all seated, I observed, that the
foregoing Week our Conferences had been carried on for a longer time, and with
less interruption than I had ever known, or well could be, in town, where Men's
hours are so broken by visits, business, and amusements, that whoever is
content to form his notions from conversation only, must needs have them very
shattered and imperfect. And what have we got, replied Alciphron, by all these
continued Conferences? For my part, I think my self just where I was, with
respect to the main point that divides us, the Truth of the Christian Religion.
I answered, That so many points had been examined, discussed, and agreed
between him and his adversaries, that I hoped to see them come to an entire
agreement in the end. For in the first place, said I, the principles and
opinions of those who are called Free-thinkers, or Minute Philosophers, have
been pretty clearly explained. It has been also agreed, that Vice is not of
that benefit to the Nation, which some Men imagine: That Virtue is highly
useful to Mankind: But that the beauty of Virtue is not alone sufficient to
engage them in the practice of it: That therefore the belief of a God and
Providence ought to be encouraged in the State, and tolerated in good Company,
as a useful notion. Further, it has been proved that there is a God: That it
is reasonable to worship him: And that the Worship, Faith, and Principles
prescribed by the Christian Religion have a useful tendency. Admit, replied
Alciphron, addressing himself to Crito, all that Dion says to be true: Yet
this does not hinder my being just where I was, with respect to the main point.
Since there is nothing in all this that proves the Truth of the Christian
Religion: Though each of those particulars enumerated may, perhaps, prejudice
in its favor. I am therefore to suspect my self at present for a prejudiced
person; prejudiced, I say, in favor of Christianity. This, as I am a lover of
Truth, puts me upon my guard against deception. I must therefore look sharp,
and well consider every step I take.

II.
CRI. You may remember, Alciphron, you proposed for the subject of our present
conference the consideration of certain Difficulties and Objections, which you
had to offer against the Christian Religion. We are now ready to hear and
consider whatever you shall think fit to produce of that kind. Atheism, and a
wrong notion of Christianity, as of something hurtful to Mankind, are great
Prejudices; the removal of which may dispose a Man to argue with candor and
submit to reasonable proof: But the removing Prejudices against an opinion, is
not to be reckoned prejudicing in its favor. It may be hoped therefore, that
you will be able to do justice to your cause, without being fond of it. ALC. O
Crito! that Man may thank his stars to whom Nature has given a sublime Soul,
who can raise himself above popular opinions, and, looking down on the herd of
Mankind, behold them scattered over the surface of the whole earth, divided and
subdivided into numberless Nations and Tribes, differing in Notions and Tenets,
as in Language, Manners, and Dress. The Man who takes a general view of the
World and its Inhabitants, from this lofty stand, above the reach of Prejudice,
seems to breathe a purer air, and to see by a clearer light: But how to impart
this clear and extensive view to those who are wandering beneath in the narrow
dark paths of Error! This indeed is a hard task; but, hard as it is, I shall
try if by any means,

Clara tuae possim praepandere lumina menti. Lucret. Know then, that all the
various Casts or Sects of the sons of Men have each their Faith, and their
religious System, germinating and sprouting forth from that common grain of
Enthusiasm, which is an original ingredient in the composition of Humane
Nature, they shall each tell of intercourse with the invisible World,
Revelations from Heaven, divine Oracles, and the like. All which pretensions,
when I regard with an impartial eye, it is impossible I should assent to all,
and I find within my self something that withholds me from assenting to any of
them. For although I may be willing to follow, so far as common Sense, and the
light of Nature lead; yet the same reason that bids me yield to rational proof,
forbids me to admit opinions without proof. This holds in general against all
Revelations whatsoever. And be this my first Objection against the Christian in
particular. CRI. As this Objection supposes there is no proof or reason for
believing the Christian, if good reason can be assigned for such belief, it
comes to nothing. Now I presume you will grant, the authority of the reporter
is a true and proper reason for believing reports: And the better this
authority, the juster claim it has to our assent: But the authority of God is
on all accounts the best: Whatever therefore comes from God, it is most
reasonable to believe.

III.
ALC. This I grant, but then it must be proved to come from God. CRI. And are
not Miracles, and the accomplishments of Prophecies, joined with the excellency
of its Doctrine, a sufficient proof that the Christian Religion came from God?
ALC. Miracles, indeed, would prove something: But what proof have we of these
Miracles? CRI. Proof of the same kind that we have or can have of any facts
done a great way off, and a long time ago. We have authentic accounts
transmitted down to us from eyewitnesses, whom we cannot conceive tempted to
impose upon us by any humane Motive whatsoever; inasmuch as they acted therein
contrary to their Interests, their Prejudices, and the very Principles in which
they had been nursed and educated. These accounts were confirmed by the
unparalled subversion of the City of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the
Jewish Nation, which is a standing testimony to the Truth of the Gospel,
particularly of the Predictions of our blessed Savior. These accounts, within
less than a Century, were spread throughout the World, and believed by great
numbers of People. These same accounts were committed to writing, translated
into several languages, and handed down with the same respect and consent of
Christians in the most distant Churches. Do you not see, said Alciphron,
staring full at Crito, that all this hangs by Tradition? And Tradition, take my
word for it, gives but a weak hold: It is a chain, whereof the first links may
be stronger than steel, and yet the last weak as wax, and brittle as glass.
Imagine a picture copied successively by an hundred Painters, one from another;
how like must the last copy be to the original! How lively and distinct will an
image be, after an hundred reflections between two parallel Mirrours! Thus
like, and thus lively do I think a faint vanishing Tradition, at the end of
sixteen or seventeen hundred years. Some Men have a false heart, others a wrong
head; and where both are true, the memory may be treacherous. Hence there is
still something added, something omitted, and something varied from the Truth:
And the sum of many such additions, deductions, and alterations, accumulated
for several ages, do, at the foot of the account, make quite another thing.
CRI. Ancient facts we may know by Tradition, oral or written: And this latter
we may divide into two kinds, private and public, as Writings are kept in the
hands of particular Men, or recorded in public Archives. Now all these three
sorts of Tradition, for ought I can see, concur to attest the genuine antiquity
of the Gospels. And they are strengthened by collateral evidence from Rites
instituted, Festivals observed, and Monuments erected by ancient Christians,
such as Churches, Baptisteries, and Sepulchers. Now allowing your objection
holds against oral Tradition, singly taken, yet I can think it no such
difficult thing to transcribe faithfully. And things once committed to writing,
are secure from slips of memory, and may with common care be preserved entire
so long as the Manuscript lasts: And this, experience shows may be above a
thousand years. The Alexandrine Manuscript is allowed to be above twelve
hundred years old; and it is highly probable there were then extant copies four
hundred years old. A Tradition therefore of above sixteen hundred years, need
have only two or three links in its chain. And these links, notwithstanding
that great length of time, may be very sound and entire. Since no reasonable
Man will deny, that an ancient Manuscript may be of much the same credit now,
as when it was first written. We have it on good authority, and it seems
probable, that the primitive Christians were careful to transcribe copies of
the Gospels and Epistles for their private use, and that other copies were
preserved as public records, in the several Churches throughout the World, and
that portions thereof were constantly read in their assemblies. Can more be
said to prove the writings of Classic Authors, or ancient Records of any kind
authentic? Alciphron, addressing his discourse to Euphranor, said, It is one
thing to silence an adversary, and another to convince him. What do you think,
Euphranor? EUPH. Doubtless it is. ALC. But what I want, is to be convinced.
EUPH. That point is not so clear. ALC. But if a Man had ever so much mind, he
cannot be convinced by probable arguments against Demonstration. EUPH. I grant
he cannot.

IV.
ALC. Now it is as evident as demonstration can make it, that no divine Faith
can possibly be built upon Tradition. Suppose an honest credulous Countryman
catechized and lectured every Sunday by his Parish Priest: It is plain he
believes in the Parson, and not in God. He knows nothing of Revelations, and
Doctrines, and Miracles, but what the Priest tells him. This he believes, and
this Faith is purely humane. If you say he has the Liturgy and the Bible for
the foundation of his Faith, the difficulty still recurs. For as to the
Liturgy, he pins his faith upon the civil Magistrate, as well as the
Ecclesiastic: neither of which can pretend divine Inspiration. Then for the
Bible, he takes both that and his Prayer Book on trust from the Printer, who,
he believes, made true Editions from true Copies. You see then faith, but what
faith? Faith in the Priest, in the Magistrate, in the Printer, Editor,
Transcriber, none of which can with any pretense be called Divine. I had the
hint from Cratylus; it is a shaft out of his quiver, and believe me, a keen
one. EUPH. Let me take and make trial of this same shaft in my hands. Suppose
then your Countryman hears a Magistrate declare the Law from the Bench, or
suppose he reads it in a Statute Book. What think you, is the Printer or the
Justice the true and proper object of his Faith and Submission? Or do you
acknowledge a higher authority whereon to found those loyal acts, and in which
they do really terminate? Again suppose you read a passage in Tacitus that you
believe true; would you say you assented to it on the authority of the Printer
or Transcriber rather than the Historian? ALC. Perhaps I would, and perhaps I
would not. I do not think my self obliged to answer these points. What is this
but transferring the question from one subject to another? That which we
considered was neither Law nor profane History, but religious Tradition, and
Divine Faith. I see plainly what you aim at, but shall never take fro an answer
to one difficulty, the starting of another. CRI. O Alciphron, there is no
taking hold of you who expect that others should (as you were pleased to
express it) hold fair and stand firm, while you plucked out their prejudices:
How shall he argue with you but from your concessions, and how can he know what
you grant except you will be pleased to tell him? EUPH. But to save you the
trouble, for once I will suppose an answer. My question admits but of two
answers; take your Choice. From the one it will follow, that by a parity of
reason we can easily conceive, how a Man may have Divine Faith, though he never
felt Inspiration or saw a Miracle: inasmuch as it is equally possible for the
mind, through whatever conduit, oral or scriptural, divine Revelation be
derived, to carry its thought and submission up to the source and terminate its
faith, not in Humane but Divine authority: not in the instrument or vessel of
conveyance, but in the great origin it self as its proper and true object.
From the other answer itwill follow, that you introduce a general skepticism
into Humane Knowledge, and break down the hinges on which civil Government, and
all the affairs of the World turn and depend: in a word that you would destroy
Humane Faith to get rid of Divine. And how this agrees with your professing
that you want to be convinced I leave you to consider.

V.
ALC. I should in earnest be glad to be convinced one way or other, and come to
some concluclusion. But I have so many objections in store, you are not to
count much upon getting over one. Depend on it you shall find me behave like a
Gentleman and lover of Truth. I will propose my objections briefly and plainly,
and accept of reasonable answers as fast as you can give them. Come, Euphranor,
make the most of your Tradition; you can never make that a constant and
universal one, which is acknowledged to have been unknown, or at best disputed
in the Church for several Ages: And this is the Case of the Canon of the new
Testament. For though we have now a Canon as they call it settled; yet every
one must see and own that Tradition cannot grow stronger by Age; and that what
was uncertain in the primitive times cannot be undoubted in the subsequent.
What say you to this, Euphranor? EUPH. I should be glad to conceive your
meaning clearly before I return an answer. It seems to me this objection of
yours supposes, that where a Tradition has been constant and undisputed, such
Tradition may be admitted as a proof, but that where the Tradition is
defective, the proof must be so too. Is this your meaning? ALC. It is. EUPH.
Consequently the Gospels and Epistles of St. Paul, which were universally
received in the beginning, and never since doubted of by the Church, must,
notwithstanding this objection, be in reason admitted for genuine. And if these
Books contain, as they really do, all those points that come into controversy
between you and me; what need I dispute with you about the authority of some
other Books of the new Testament, which came later to be generally known and
received in the Church? If a Man assents to the undisputed Books he is no
longer an Infidel; though he should not hold the Revelations, or the Epistle of
S. James or Jude, or the latter of S. Peter, or the two last of S. John to be
Canonical. The additional authority of these portions of Holy Scripture may
have its weight, in particular controversies between Christians, but can add
nothing to arguments against an Infidel as such. Wherefore though I believe
good reasons may be assigned for receiving these Books, yet these reasons seem
now beside our purpose. When you are a Christian it will be then time enough to
argue this point. And you will be the nearer being so, if the way be shortened
by omitting it for the present. ALC. Not so near neither as you perhaps
imagine: For, notwithstanding all the fair and plausible things you may say
about Tradition, when I consider the Spirit of Forgery which reigned in the
primitive times, and reflect on the several Gospels, Acts, and Epistles
attributed to the Apostles, which yet are acknowledged to be spurious, I
confess, I cannot help suspecting the whole. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you
suspect all Plato's Writings for spurious, because the Dialogue upon Death, for
instance, is allowed to be so? Or will you admit none of Tully's Writings to be
genuine, because Sigonius imposed a Book of his own writing for Tully's
Treatise de Consolatione, and the imposture passed for some time on the World?
ALC. Suppose I admit for the Works of Tully and Plato those that commonly pass
for such. What then? EUPH. Why then I would fain know, whether it be equal and
impartial in a Free-thinker, to measure the credibility of profane and sacred
Books by a different rule. Let us know upon what foot we Christians are to
argue with Minute Philosophers; whether we may be allowed the benefit of common
maxims in Logic and Criticism? If we may, be pleased to assign a reason why
supposititious Writings, which in the style and manner and matter bear visible
marks of imposture, and have accordingly been rejected by the Church, can be
made an argument against those which have been universally received, and handed
down by an unanimous constant Tradition. There have been in all Ages and in all
great Societies of Men, many capricious, vain or wicked Impostors, who for
different ends have abused the World by spurious Writings, and created work for
Critics both in profane and sacred Learning. And it would seem as silly to
reject the true Writings of profane Authors for the sake of the spurious, as it
would seem unreasonable to suppose, that among the Heretics and several Sects
of Christians, there should be none capable of the like Imposture.

VI.
ALC. But, be the Tradition ever so well attested, and the Books ever so
genuine, yet I cannot suppose them wrote by persons divinely inspired, so long
as I see in them certain Characters inconsistent with such a supposition.
Surely the purest language, the most perfect style, the exactest method, and in
a word all the excellencies of good writing, might be expected in a piece
composed or dictated by the Spirit of God: But Books, wherein we find the
reverse of all this, it were impious, not, to reject, but, to attribute to the
Divinity. EUPH. Say, Alciphron, are the Lakes, the Rivers, or the Ocean bounded
by straight Lines? Are the Hills and Mountains exact Cones or Pyramids? or the
Stars cast into regular figures? ALC. They are not. EUPH. But in the works of
Insects, we may observe figures as exact as if they were drawn by the rule and
compass. ALC. We may. EUPH. Should it not seem therefore that a regular
exactness, or scrupulous attention to what Men call the rules of art, is not
observed in the great productions of the Author of Nature? ALC. It should.
EUPH. And when a great Prince declares his Will in Laws and Edicts to his
Subjects, is he careful about a pure style or elegant composition? Does he not
leave his Secretaries and Clerks to express his sense in their own words? Is
not the phrase on such occasions thought proper if it conveys as much as was
intended? And would not the divine strain of certain modern Critics be judged
affected and improper for such uses? ALC. It must be owned, Laws and Edicts and
Grants, for Soloecism and Tautology, are very offensive to the harmonious ears
of a fine Writer. EUPH. Why then should we expect in the Oracles of God an
exactness, that would be misbecoming and beneath the dignity of an earthly
Monarch, and which bears no proportion or resemblance to the magnificent works
of the Creation? ALC. But granting that a nice regard to particles and critical
rules is a thing too little and mean to be expected in Divine Revelations; and
that there is more force and spirit and true greatness in a negligent, unequal
style, than in the well-turned periods of a polite writer; Yet what is all this
to the bald and flat compositions of those you call the Divine Penmen? I can
never be persuaded, the supreme Being would pick out the poorest and meanest of
scriblers for his Secretaries. EUPH. O Alciphron, if I durst follow my own
judgment, I should be apt to think there are noble beauties in the style of the
Holy Scripture: in the narrative parts a strain so simple and unaffected; in
the devotional and prophetic, so animated and sublime: and in the doctrinal
parts such an air of dignity and authority as seems to speak their original
divine. But I shall not enter into a dispute about Taste; much less set up my
judgment on so nice a point against that of the wits, and Men of genius, with
which your Sect abounds. And I have no temptation to it, inasmuch as it seems
to me, the Oracles of God are not the less so for being delivered in a plain
dress rather than in the enticing words of Man's wisdom. ALC. This may perhaps
be an apology for some simplicity and negligence in writing.

VII.
But what apology can be made for Nonsense, crude Nonsense? Of which I could
easily assign many instances, having once in my Life read the Scripture through
with that very view. Look here, said he, opening a Bible, in the forty ninth
Psalm, the Author begins very magnificently, calling upon all the inhabitants
of the Earth to give ear, and assuring them his mouth shall speak of wisdom,
and the meditation of his heart shall be of understanding.

Quid dignum tanto seret hic promissor hiatu? He has no sooner done with his
Preface, but he puts this senleless question. Wherefore should I fear in the
days of evil; when the wickedness of my heels shall compass me about? The
iniquity of my heels! What Nonsense after such a solemn introduction! EUPH. For
my own part, I have naturally weak eyes, and know there are many things that I
cannot see, which are nevertheless distinctly seen by others. I do not
therefore conclude a thing to be absolutely invisible; because it is so to me:
And since it is possible it may be with my understanding, as it is with my
eyes, I dare not pronounce a thing to be Nonsense, because I do not understand
it. Of this passage many interpretations are given. The word rendered heels may
signify fraud or supplantation: By some it is translated past wickedness, the
heel being the hinder part of the foot; by others iniquity in the end of my
days, the heel being one extremity of the body; by some the iniquity of my
Enemies that may supplant me; by others my own faults or iniquities which I
have passed over as light matters, and trampled under my feet. Some render it
the iniquity of my ways; others my transgressions which are like slips and
slidings of the heel: And after all might not this expression so harsh and odd
to English ears have been very natural and obvious in the Hebrew Tongue, which,
as every other Language, had its idioms? the force and propriety whereof may as
easily be conceived lost in a long tract of time, as the signification of some
Hebrew words, which are not now intelligible, though no body doubts but they
had once a meaning as well as the other words of that Language. Granting
therefore that certain passages in the Holy Scripture may not be understood, it
will not thence follow that its Penmen wrote Nonsense: For I conceive Nonsense
to be one thing and unintelligible another. CRI. An English Gentleman of my
acquaintance one day entertaining some Foreigners at his House, sent a Servant
to know the occasion of a sudden tumult in the yard, who brought him word, the
Horses were fallen together by the ears: his Guests inquiring what the matter
was, he translates it literally; Les Chevaux sont tombez ensemble par les
oreilles. Which made them stare; what expressed a very plain sense in the
original English, being incomprehensible when rendered word for word into
French: And I remember to have heard a Man excuse the bulls of his Countrymen,
by supposing them so many literal translations. EUPH. But not to grow tedious,
I refer to the Critics and and Commentators where you will find the use of this
remark, which clearing up several obscure passages you took for Nonsense, may
possibly incline you to suspect your own judgment of the rest. In this very
Psalm you have pitched on, the good sense and moral contained in what follows,
should, methinks, make a candid reader judge favorably of the original sense
of the Author, in that part which he could not understand. Say, Alciphron, in
reading the Classics, do you forthwith conclude every passage to be Nonsense,
that you cannot make sense of? ALC. By no means; difficulties must be supposed
to rise from different idioms, old customs, hints and allusions, clear in one
time or place, and obscure in another. EUPH. And why will you not judge of
Scripture by the same rule. Those sources of obscurity you mention are all
common both to sacred and profane Writings: And there is no doubt, but an
exacter knowledge in Language and Circumstances would in both, cause
difficulties to vanish like shades before the light of the Sun. Jeremiah to
describe a furious invader says; Behold, he shall come up as a Lion from the
swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong. One would be apt to
think this passage odd and improper, and that it had been more reasonable to
have said, a Lion from the mountain or the desert. But travelers, as an
ingenious Man observes, who have seen the River Jordan bounded by low Lands
with many reeds or thickets affording shelter to wild Beasts, (which being
suddenly dislodged by a rapid overflowing of the River, rush into the upland
Country) perceive the force and propriety of the Comparison; and that the
difficulty proceeds, not from Nonsense in the Writer, but from Ignorance in the
Reader. It is needless to amass together instances which may be found in every
Commentator: I only beg leave to observe, that sometimes Men, looking higher or
deeper than they need for a profound or remote sense, overlook the natural
obvious sense, lying, if I may so say, at their feet, and so make difficulties
instead of finding them. This seems to be the case of that celebrated passage,
which has created so much work in St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians.
What shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at
all? why are they then baptized for the dead? I remember to have heard this
text explained by Laches the Vicar of our Parish to my Neighbor Lycon, who was
much perplexed about its meaning. If it had been translated as it might very
justly, baptized for the sake of the dead, I do not see, said Laches, why
people should be puzzled about the sense of this passage; for tell me, I
beseech you, for whose sake do you think those Christians were baptized? For
whose sake, answered Lycon, but their own? How do you mean, for their own sake
in this life, or the next? Doubtless in the next, for it was plain they could
get nothing by it in this. They were then, replied Laches, baptized not for the
sake of themselves while living, but for the sake of themselves when dead; not
for the living, but the dead. I grant it. Baptism therefore must have been to
them a fruitless thing, if the dead rise not at all. It must. Whence Laches
inferred, That St. Paul's argument was clear and pertinent for the
Resurrection: And Lycon allowed it to be argumentum ad hominem to those who had
sought Baptism. There is then, concluded Laches, no necessity for supposing,
that living Men were in those days baptized instead of those who died without
Baptism, or of running into any other odd Suppositions, or strained and
far-fetched Interpretations to make sense of this passage. ALC. Here and there
a difficult passage may be cleared: But there are many which no art or wit of
Man can account for. What say you to those discoveries, made by some of our
learned Writers, of false citations from the Old Testament found in the Gospel?
EUPH. That some few passages are cited by the Writers of the New Testament, out
of the Old, and by the Fathers out of the New, which are not in so many words
to be found in them, is no new discovery of Minute Philosophers, but known and
observed long before by Christian Writers; who have made no scruple to grant,
that some things might have been inserted by careless or mistaken Transcribers
into the Text, from the Margin, others left out, and others altered; whence so
many various readings. But these are things of small moment, and that all other
ancient Authors have been subject to; and upon which no point of Doctrine
depends, which may not be proved without them. Nay further, if it be any
advantage to your cause, it has been observed, that the eighteenth Psalm, as
recited in the twenty second chapter of the second book of Samuel, varies in
above forty places, if you regard every little verbal or literal difference:
And that a Critic may now and then discover small variations, is what no body
can deny. But to make the most of these concessions, what can you infer from
them, more than that the design of the Holy Scripture was not to make us
exactly knowing in Circumstantials? and that the Spirit did not dictate every
Particle and Syllable, or preserve them from every minute alteration by
Miracle? which to believe, would look like Rabinical Superstition. ALC. But
what marks of Divinity can possibly be in writings which do not reach the
exactness even of Humane Art? EUPH. I never thought nor expected that the Holy
Scripture should show it self divine, by a circumstantial accuracy of
Narration, by exactness of Method, by strictly observing the rules of Rhetoric,
Grammar, and Criticism, in harmonious Periods, in elegant and choice
Expressions, or in technical Definitions and Partitions. These things would
look too like a Humane Composition. Methinks there is in that simple,
unaffected, artless, unequal, bold, figurative Style of the Holy Scripture, a
character singularly great and majestic, and that looks more like divine
Inspiration, than any other Composition that I know. But, as I said before, I
shall not dispute a point of Criticism with the gentlemen of your Sect, who, it
seems, are the modern standard for Wit and Taste. ALC. Well, I shall not insist
on small slips, or the inaccuracy of citing or transcribing: And I freely own,
that Repetitions, want of Method, or want of Exactness in circumstances, are
not the things that chiefly stick with me; no more than the plain patriarchal
Manners, or the peculiar Usages and Customs of the Jews and first Christians so
different from ours; and that to reject the Scripture on such accounts would be
to act like those French Wits, who censure Homer because they do not find in
him the Style, Notions and Manners of their own Age and Country. Was there
nothing else to divide us, I should make no great difficulty of owning, That a
popular uncorrect Style might answer the general ends of Revelation, as well,
perhaps, as a more critical and exact one: But the Obscurity still sticks with
me. Methinks if the supreme Being had spoke to Man, he would have spoke clearly
to him, and that the Word of God should not need a comment.

VIII.
EUPH. You seem, Alciphron, to think Obscurity a defect; but if it should prove
to be no defect, there would then be no force in this Objection. ALC. I grant
there would not. EUPH. Pray tell me, are not Speech and Style instrumental to
convey Thoughts and Notions, to beget Knowledge, Opinion, and Assent? ALC. This
is true. EUPH. And is not the perfection of an instrument to be measured by the
use to which it is subservient? ALC. It is. EUPH. What therefore is a defect in
one instrument, may be none in another. For instance, edged tools are in
general designed to cut; but the uses of an Ax and a Razor being different, it
is no defect in an Ax, that it has not the keen edge of a Razor; nor in a
Razor, that it has not the weight or strength of an Ax. ALC. I acknowledge
this to be true. EUPH. And may we not say in general, that every instrument is
perfect, which answers the purpose or intention of him who uses it? ALC. We
may. EUPH. Hence it seems to follow, that no Man's Speech is defective in point
of Clearness, though it should not be intelligible to all Men, if it be
sufficiently so to those who, he intended, should understand it; or though it
should not in all parts be equally clear, or convey a perfect knowledge, where
he intended only an imperfect hint. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Ought we not
therefore to know the intention of the Speaker, to be able to know whether his
style be obscure through defect or design? ALC. We ought. EUPH. But is it
possible for Man to know all the ends and purposes of God's Revelations? ALC.
It is not. EUPH. How then can you tell, but the obscurity of some parts of
Scripture may well consist with the purpose which you know not, and
consequently be no argument against its coming from God? The books of Holy
Scripture were written in ancient languages, at distant times, on sundry
occasions, and very different subjects: Is it not therefore reasonable to
imagine, that some parts or passages might have been clearly enough understood
by those, for whose proper use they were principally designed, and yet seem
obscure to us, who speak another language, and live in other times? Is it at
all absurd or unsuitable to the notion we have of God or Man, to suppose that
God may reveal, and yet reveal with a reserve, upon certain remote and sublime
subjects, content to give us hints and glimpses, rather than views? May we not
also suppose from the reason of things, and the analogy of Nature, that some
points, which might otherwise have been more clearly explained, were left
obscure merely to encourage our diligence and modesty? Two virtues, which, if
it might not seem disrespectful to such great Men, I would recommend to the
Minute Philosophers. Lysicles replied, This indeed is excellent: You expect
that Men of sense and spirit should in great humility put out their eyes, and
blindly swallow all the absurdities and nonsense that shall be offered to them
for divine Revelation. EUPH. On the contrary, I would have them open their
eyes, look sharply, and try the Spirit, whether it is of God; and not supinely
and ignorantly condemn in the gross, all Religions together, Piety with
Superstition, Truth for the sake of Error, matters of Fact for the sake of
Fictions; a conduct, which at first sight would seem absurd in History,
Physic, or any other branch of Humane Inquiry: But to compare the Christian
System, or Holy Scriptures, with other pretenses to divine Revelation, to
consider impartially the Doctrines, Precepts, and Events therein contained;
weigh them in the balance with any other religious, natural, moral, or
historical accounts; and diligently to examine all those proofs internal and
external, that for so many ages have been able to influence and persuade so
many wise, learned and inquisitive Men: Perhaps they might find in it certain
peculiar characters, which sufficiently distinguish it from all other Religions
and pretended Revelations, whereon to ground a reasonable Faith. In which case
I leave them to consider, whether it would be right to reject with peremptory
scorn a Revelation so distinguished and attested, upon account of Obscurity in
some parts of it? and whether it would seem beneath Men of their Sense and
Spirit to acknowledge, that, for ought they know, a light inadaequate to
things, may yet be adaequate to the purpose of Providence? and whether it might
be unbecoming their sagacity and critical skill to own, that literal
Translations from Books in an ancient Oriental tongue, wherein there are so
many peculiarities, as to the manner of writing, the figures of Speech, and
structure of the Phrase, so remote from all our modern Idioms, and in which we
have no other coaeval writings extant, might well be obscure in many places,
especially such as treat of subjects sublime and difficult in their own nature,
or allude to things, customs or events, very distant from our knowledge? And
lastly, whether it might not become their character, as impartial and
unprejudiced Men, to consider the Bible in the same light they would profane
Authors? They are apt to make great allowance for Transpositions, Omissions,
and literal Errors of Transcribers in other ancient Books, and very great for
the difference of Style and Manner, especially in eastern Writings, such as the
remains of Zoroaster and Confucius, and why not in the Prophets? In reading
Horace or Persius to make out the sense, they will be at the pains to discover
a hidden Drama, and why not in Solomon or St. Paul? I hear there are certain
ingenious Men who despise King David's Poetry, and yet profess to admire Homer
and Pindar. If there be no prejudice or affectation in this, let them but make
a literal version from those Authors into English Prose, and they will then be
better able to judge of the Psalms. ALC. You may discourse and exspatiate; but
notwithstanding all you have said or shall say, it is a clear point that a
Revelation, which does not reveal, can be no better than a contradiction in
terms. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you not acknowledge the light of the Sun to
be the most glorious production of Providence in this natural World? ALC.
Suppose I do. EUPH. This light, nevertheless, which you cannot deny to be of
God's making, shines only on the surface of things, shines not at all in the
Night, shines imperfectly in the twilight, is often interrupted, refracted, and
obscured, represents distant things, and small things dubiously, imperfectly,
or not at all. Is this true or no? ALC. It is. EUPH. Should it not follow
therefore, that to expect in this World a light from God without any mixture of
shade or mystery, would be departing from the rule and analogy of the Creation?
and that consequently it is no argument the light of Revelation is not Divine,
because it may not be so clear and full as you expect. ALC. As I profess my
self candid and indifferent throughout this debate, I must needs own you say
some plausible things, as a Man of argument will never fail to do in
vindication of his prejudices.

IX.
But, to deal plainly, I must tell you once for all, that you may question and
answer, illustrate and enlarge for ever, without being able to convince me that
the Christian Religion is of Divine Revelation. I have said several things, and
have many more to say, which, believe me, have weight not only with my self,
but with many great Men my very good friends, and will have weight whatever
Euphranor can say to the contrary. EUPH. O Alciphron, I envy you the happiness
of such acquaintance. But, as my lot fallen in this remote corner deprives me
of that advantage, I am obliged to make the most of this opportunity, which you
and Lysicles have put into my hands. I consider you as two able Surgeons,
and you were pleased to consider me as a Patient, whose cure you have
generously undertaken. Now a Patient must have full liberty to explain his
case, and tell all his Symptoms, the concealing or palliating of which might
prevent a perfect cure. You will be pleased therefore to understand me, not as
objecting to, or arguing against, either your Skill or Medicines, but only as
setting forth my own case and the effects they have upon me. Say, Alciphron,
did you not give me to understand that you would extirpate my prejudices? ALC.
It is true: a good Physician eradicates every fiber of the disease. Come, you
shall have a patient hearing. EUPH. Pray, was it not the opinion of Plato, that
God inspired particular Men, as Organs or Trumpets, to proclaim and sound forth
his Oracles to the World? Plato in Ione.
And was not the same opinion also embraced by others the greatest Writers of
Antiquity? CRI. Socrates seems to have thought that all true Poets spoke by
Inspiration; and Tully, that there was no extraordinary Genius without it. This
has made some of our affected Free-thinkers attempt to pass themselves upon
the World for Enthusiasts. ALC. What would you infer from all this? EUPH. I
would infer that inspiration should seem nothing impossible or absurd, but
rather agreeable to the light of reason and the notions of Mankind. And this, I
suppose, you will acknowledge, having made it an Objection against a particular
Revelation, that there are so many pretenses to it throughout the World. ALC. O
Euphranor, he, who looks into the bottom of things, and resolves them into
their first principles, is not easily amused with words. The word Inspiration
sounds indeed big, but let us, if you please, take an original view of the
thing signified by it. To inspire is a word borrowed from the Latin, and
strictly taken means no more than to breathe or blow in: nothing therefore can
be inspired but what can be blown or breathed, and nothing can be so but wind
or vapor, which indeed may fill or puff up Men with fanatical and
hypochondriacal ravings. This sort of Inspiration I very readily admit. EUPH.
What you say is subtle, and I know not what effect it might have upon me, if
your profound discourse did not hinder its own operation. ALC. How so? EUPH.
Tell me, Alciphron, do you discourse or do you not? To me it seems that you
discourse admirably. ALC. Be that as it will, it is certain I discourse. EUPH.
But when I endeavor to look into the bottom of things, behold! A scruple
rises in my mind how this can be; for to discourse is a word of Latin
derivation, which originally signifies to run about; and a Man cannot run
about, but he must change place and move his Legs; so long therefore as you sit
on this Bench, you cannot be said to discourse. Solve me this difficulty, and
then perhaps I may be able to solve yours. ALC. You are to know, that discourse
is a word borrowed from sensible things, to express an invisible action of the
mind, reasoning or inferring one thing from another; and in this translated
sense, we may be said to discourse, though we sit still. EUPH. And may we not
as well conceive, that the term Inspiration might be borrowed from sensible
things to denote an action of God, in an extraordinary manner, influencing,
exciting, and enlightening the mind of a Prophet or an Apostle? who, in this
secondary, figurative, and translated sense, may truly be said to be inspired,
though there should be nothing in the case of that wind or vapor implied in
the original sense of the word? It seems to me, that we may by looking into our
own minds plainly perceive certain instincts, impulses, and tendencies, which
at proper periods and occasions spring up unaccountably in the Soul of Man. We
observe very visible signs of the same in all other Animals. And these things
being ordinary and natural, what hinders but we may conceive it possible for
the humane Mind, upon an extraordinary account, to be moved in an extraordinary
manner, and its faculties stirred up and actuated by a supernatural Power? That
there are and have been, and are likely to be wild visions and hypochondriacal
ravings, no body can deny; but to infer from thence, that there are no true
Inspirations would be too like concluding, that some Men are not in their
senses, because other Men are fools. And though I am no Prophet, and
consequently cannot pretend to a clear notion of this matter; yet I shall not
therefore take upon me to deny, but a true Prophet or inspired Person, might
have had as certain means, of discerning between divine Inspiration and
hypochondriacal fancy, as you can between sleeping and waking, till you have
proved the contrary. You may meet in the Book of Jeremiah with this passage:
The Prophet that has a dream let him tell a dream: And he that has my word,
let him speak my word faithfully: what is the chaff to the Wheat, says the
Lord? Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that
breaks the rock in pieces? *You see here a distinction made between Wheat and
Chaff, true and spurious, with the mighty force and power of the former. But I
beg pardon for quoting Scripture to you, I make my appeal to the general sense
of Mankind, and the Opinion of the wisest Heathens, which seems sufficient to
conclude Divine Inspiration possible, if not probable, at least till you prove
the contrary.

X.
ALC. The possibility of Inspirations and Revelations I do not think it
necessary to deny. Make the best you can of this concession. EUPH. Jerem. c.
xxiii. 28. 29.
Now what is allowed possible we may suppose in fact. ALC. We may. EUPH. Let us
then suppose, that God had been pleased to make a Revelation to Men; and that
he inspired some as a means to instruct others. Having supposed this, can you
deny, that their inspired Discourses and Revelations might have been committed
to Writing, or that being written, after a long tract of time they might become
in several places obscure; that some of them might even originally have been
less clear than others, or that they might suffer some alteration by frequent
transcribing, as other Writings are known to have done? Is it not even very
probable that all these things would happen? ALC. I grant it. EUPH. And
granting this, with what pretense can you reject the Holy Scriptures as not
being divine, upon the account of such signs or marks, as you acknowledge would
probably attend a Divine Revelation transmitted down to us through so many
Ages? ALC. But allowing all that in reason you can desire, and granting that
this may account for some obscurity, may reconcile some small differences, or
satisfy us how some difficulties might arise by inserting, omitting or changing
here and there a letter, a word, or perhaps a sentence: Yet these are but small
matters, in respect of the much more considerable and weighty objections I
could produce, against the confessed doctrines, or subject matter of those
Writings. Let us see what is contained in these sacred Books, and then judge
whether it is probable or possible, such Revelations should ever have been made
by God? Now I defy the wit of Man to contrive any thing more extrayagant, than
the accounts we there find of Apparitions, Devils, Miracles, God manifest in
the flesh, Regeneration, Grace, Self-denial, Resurrection of the dead, and such
like aegri somnia: things so odd, unaccountable, and remote from the
apprehension of Mankind, you may as soon wash a Blackamore white, as clear them
of absurdity. No critical skill can justify them, no tradition recommend them,
I will not say for Divine Revelations, but even for the inventions of Men of
Sense. EUPH. I had always a great opinion of your sagacity, but now, Alciphron,
I consider you as something more than Man; else how should it be possible for
you to know, what or how far it may be proper for God to reveal? Methinks it
may consist with all due deference to the greatest of Humane Understandings, to
suppose them ignorant of many things, which are not suited to their faculties,
or lie out of their reach. Even the Counsels of Princes lie often beyond the
ken of their Subjects, who can only know so much as is revealed by those at the
helm; and are often unqualified to judge of the usefulness and tendency even of
that, till in due time the scheme unfolds, and is accounted for by succeeding
events. That many points contained in holy Scripture are remote from the common
apprehensions of Mankind, cannot be denied. But I do not see, that it follows
from thence they are not of Divine Revelation. On the contrary, should it not
seem reasonable to suppose, that a Revelation from God should contain something
different in kind, or more excellent in degree, than what lay open to the
common sense of Men, or could even be discovered by the most sagacious
Philosopher? Accounts of separate Spirits, good or bad, Prophesies, Miracles
and such things are undoubtedly strange; but I would fain see how you can prove
them impossible or absurd. ALC. Some things there are so evidently absurd, that
it would be almost as silly to disprove them as to believe them: and I take
these to be of that class.

XI.
EUPH. But is it not possible, some Men may show as much prejudice and
narrowness in rejecting all such accounts, as others might easiness and
credulity in admitting them? I never durst make my own observation or
experience, the rule and measure of things spiritual, supernatural, or relating
to another World, because I should think it a very bad one, even for the
visible and natural things of this; It would be judging like the Siamese, who
was positive it did not freeze in Holland, because he had never known such a
thing as hard water or ice in his own Country. I cannot comprehend why any one,
who admits the union of the Soul and Body, should pronounce it impossible for
the Humane Nature to be united to the Divine, in a manner ineffable and
incomprehensible by Reason. Neither can I see any absurdity in admitting, that
sinful Man may become regenerate or a new Creature, by the grace of God
reclaiming him from a carnal Life to a spiritual Life of Virtue and Holiness.
And since, the being governed by Sense and Appetite is contrary to the
happiness and perfection of a rational Creature, I do not at all wonder that we
are prescribed Selfdenial. As for the Resurrection of the dead, I do not
conceive it so very contrary to the Analogy of Nature, when I behold Vegetables
left to rot in the earth, rise up again with new Life and Vigor, or a Worm to
all appearance dead change its Nature, and that, which in its first being
crawled on the Earth, become a new species, and fly abroad with Wings. And
indeed when I consider, that the Soul and Body are things so very different and
heterogeneous, I can see no reason to be positive, that the one must
necessarily be extinguished upon the dissolution of the other; especially since
I find in my self a strong natural desire of Immortality, and I have not
observed that natural Appetites are wont to be given in vain, or merely to be
frustrated. Upon the whole those points, which you account extravagant and
absurd, I dare not pronounce to be so till I see good reason for it.

XII.
CRI. No, Alciphron, your positive airs must not pass for proofs; nor will it
suffice to say, things are contrary to common sense, to make us think they are
so: By common Sense, I suppose should be meant either the general sense of
Mankind, or the improved reason of thinking Men. Now I believe that all those
Articles, you have with so much capacity and fire at once summed up and
exploded, may be shown to be not disagreeable, much less contrary to common
sense in one or other of these acceptations. That the Gods might appear and
converse among Men, and that the Divinity might inhabit Humane Nature, were
points allowed by the Heathens; and for this I appeal to their Poets and
Philosophers, whose Testimonies are so numerous and clear, that it would be an
affront to repeat them to a Man of any Education. And though the notion of a
Devil may not be so obvious, or so fully described, yet there appear plain
traces of it, either from Reason or Tradition. The latter Platonists, as
Porphyry and Iamblichus, are very clear in the point, allowing that evil
Demons delude and tempt, hurt and possess Mankind. That the ancient Greeks,
Chaldaeans, and Egyptians, believed both good and bad Angels, may be plainly
collected from Plato, Plutarch, and the Chaldaean Oracles. Origin observes,
That almost all the Gentiles, who held the being of Demons, allowed there were
bad ones Origin. l. 7. contra Celsum.
. There is even something as early as Homer, that is thought by the learned
Cardinal Bessarion In calumniat. Platonis. l. 3. c. 7.
to allude to the fall of Satan, in the acount of Ate, whom the Poet represents
as cast down from Heaven by Jove, and then wandering about the Earth, doing
mischief to Mankind. This same Ate is said by Hesiod, to be the Daughter of
Discord; and by Euripides, in his Hippolitus, is mentioned as a tempter to
evil, And it is very remarkable, that Plutarch, in his Book, De vitando aere
alieno, speaks after Empedocles, of certain Demons that fell from Heaven, and
were banished by God, (...). Nor is that less remarkable which is observed by
Ficinus from Pherecydes Syrus, That there had been a downfall of Demons who
revolted from God; and that Ophioneus (the old Serpent) was head of that
rebellious Crew Vid. Argum. in Phaedrum Platonis.
. Then as to other articles, let any one consider what the Pythagoreans taught
of the Purgation and (...), or Deliverance of the Soul: What most Philosophers,
but especially the Stoics, of subduing our Passions: What Plato and Hierocles
have said of forgiving Injuries: What the acute and sagacious Aristotle writes,
in his Ethics to Nicomachus, of the spiritual and divine Life, that Life,
which, according to him, is too excellent to be thought Humane; insomuch as
Man, so far forth as Man, cannot attain to it, but only so far forth as he has
something divine in him: And particularly, let him reflect on what Socrates
taught, to wit, That Virtue is not to be learned from Men, that it is the Gift
of God, and that good Men are not good by virtue of Humane Care or Diligence,
(...) Vid. Plat in Protag: and alibi passim.
. Let any Man, who really thinks, but consider what other thinking Men have
thought, who cannot be supposed prejudiced in favor of Revealed Religion; and
he will see cause, if not to think with reverence of the Christian Doctrines of
Grace, Self-denial, Regeneration, Sanctification, and the rest, even the most
mysterious, at least to judge more modestly and warily, than those who shall,
with a confident air, pronounce them absurd, and repugnant to the Reason of
Mankind. And in regard to a future State, the common sense of the Gentile
World, modern or ancient, and the opinions of the wisest Men of Antiquity, are
things so well known, that I need say nothing about them. To me it seems, the
Minute Philosophers, when they appeal to Reason and common Sense, mean only the
Sense of their own Party: A coin, how current soever among themselves, that
other Men will bring to the touchstone, and pass for no more than it is worth.
LYS. Be those notions agreeable to what or whose Sense they may, they are not
agreeable to mine. And if I am thought ignorant for this, I pity those who
think me so.

XIII.
I enjoy my self, and follow my own courses, without remorse or fear; which I
should not do, if my Head were filled with Enthusiasm; whether Gentile or
Christian, Philosophical or Revealed, it is all one to me. Let others know or
believe what they can, and make the best on it, I, for my part, am happy and
safe in my Ignorance. CRI. Perhaps not so safe neither. LYS. Why, surely you
will not pretend that Ignorance is criminal? CRI. Ignorance alone is not a crime.
But that wilful Ignorance, affected Ignorance, Ignorance from Sloth, or
conceited Ignorance, is a fault, might easily be proved by the testimony of
Heathen Writers; and it needs no proof to show, that if Ignorance be our fault,
we cannot be secure in it as an excuse. LYS. Honest Crito seems to hint, that a
Man should take care to inform himself, while alive, lest his neglect be
punished when he is dead. Nothing is so pusillanimous and unbecoming a
Gentleman, as Fear: Nor could you take a likelier course to fix and rivet a Man
of honor in Guilt, than by attempting to frighten him out of it. This is the
stale, absurd Stratagem of Priests, and that which makes them, and their
Religion, more odious and contemptible to me than all the other Articles put
together. CRI. I would fain know why it may not be reasonable for a Man of
honor, or any Man who has done amiss to fear? Guilt is the natural Parent of
fear; and nature is not used to make men fear where there is no occasion. That
impious and profane Men should expect divine punishment, does not seem so
absurd to conceive: And that under this expectation they should be uneasy and
even afraid, how consistent soever it may or may not be with honor, I am sure
consists with reason. LYS. That thing of Hell and eternal Punishment is the
most absurd, as well as the most disagreeable thought that ever entered into
the head of mortal Man. CRI. But you must own that it is not an absurdity
peculiar to Christians, since Socrates, that great Free-thinker of Athens,
thought it probable there may be such a thing as impious Men for ever punished
in Hell Vid Platon. in Gorgia.
. It is recorded of this same Socrates, that he has been often known to think
for four and twenty hours together, fixed in the same posture, and wrapped up in
meditation. LYS. Our modern Free-thinkers are a more lively sort of Men. Those
old Philosophers were most of them whimsical. They had in my judgment a dry,
narrow, timorous way of thinking, which by no means came up to the frank humor
of our times. CRI. But I appeal to your own judgment, if a Man, who knows not
the nature of the Soul, can be assured by the light of reason, whether it is
mortal or immortal?

An simul intereat nobiscum morte perempta,
An tenebras orci visat vastasque lacunas?
LYS. But what if I know the nature of the Soul? What if I have been taught
that whole secret by a modern Free-thinker? a Man of science who discovered it
not by a tiresome introversion of his faculties, not by amusing himself in a
labyrinth of notions, or stupidly thinking for whole days and nights together,
but by looking into things and observing the analogy of nature.

XIV.
This great Man is a Philosopher by fire, who has made many processes upon
vegetables. It is his opinion that Men and Vegetables are really of the same
species; that Animals are moving Vegetables, and Vegetables fixed Animals; that
the mouths of the one and the roots of the other serve to the same use,
differing only in position; that blossoms and flowers answer to the most
indecent and concealed parts in the humane body; that vegetable and animal
bodies are both alike organized, and that in both there is Life or a certain
motion and circulation of juices through proper Tubes or Vessels. I shall never
forget this able Man's unfolding the nature of the Soul in the following
manner. The Soul, said he, is that specific form or principle from whence
proceed the distinct qualities or properties of things. Now, as Vegetables are
a more simple and less perfect compound, and consequently more easily analyzed
than Animals, we will begin with the contemplation of the Souls of Vegetables.
Know then, that the Soul of any Plant, Rosemary for instance, is neither more
nor less than its essential Oil. Upon this depends its peculiar fragrance,
taste, and medicinal virtues, or in other words its life and operations.
Separate or extract this essential Oil by Chymic art, and you get the Soul of
the Plant: what remains being a dead Carcass, without any one property or
virtue of the Plant, which is preserved entire in the Oil, a Dram whereof
goes further than several pounds of the Plant. Now this same essential Oil is
it self a composition of Sulphur and Salt, or of a gross unctuous substance,
and a fine subtle principle or volatile Salt imprisoned therein. This volatile
Salt is properly the essence of the Soul of the Plant, containing all its
virtue, and the Oil is the vehicle of this most subtle part of the Soul, or
that which fixes and individuates it. And as, upon separation of this Oil from
the Plant, the Plant died, so a second death or death of the Soul ensues upon
the resolution of this essential Oil into its principles; as appears by leaving
it exposed for some time to the open air, so that the volatile Salt or Spirit
may fly off; after which the Oil remains dead and insipid, but without any
sensible diminution of its weight, by the loss of that volatile essence of the
Soul, that ethereal aura, that spark of entity, which returns and mixes with
the Solar light, the universal Soul of the World, and only source of Life,
whether Vegetable, Animal, or Intellectual; which differ only according to the
grossness or fineness of the vehicles, and the different textures of the
natural Alembics, or in other words, the organized Bodies, where the
abovementioned volatile essence inhabits and is elaborated, where it acts and
is acted upon. This Chemical System lets you at once into the nature of the
Soul, and accounts for all it is phenomenon. In that compound which is called
Man, the Soul or essential Oil is what commonly goes by the name of Animal
Spirit: for you must know, it is a point agreed by Chemists, that Spirits are
nothing but the more subtle Oils. Now in proportion, as the essential Oil of
Man is more subtle than that of other Creatures, the volatile Salt that
impregnates it is more at liberty to act, which accounts for those specific
properties and actions of Humane Kind, which distinguish them above other
Creatures. Hence you may learn why among the wise ancients, Salt was another
name for wit, and in our times a dull Man is said to be insipid or insulse.
Aromatic Oils maturated by great length of time turn to Salts: this shows why
Humane Kind, grow wiser by age. And what I have said of the twofold death or
dissolution, first of the compound, by separating the Soul from the organical
Body, and secondly of the Soul it self, by dividing the volatile Salt from the
Oil, illustrates and explains that notion of certain ancient Philosophers: that
as the Man was a compound of soul and body, so the Soul was compounded of the
mind or intellect, and its ethereal vehicle; and that the separation of Soul
and Body or death of the Man is, after a long tract of time, succeeded by a
second death of the Soul it self, to wit the separation or deliverance of the
intellect from its vehicle, and reunion with the Sun. EUPH. O Lysicles your
ingenious friend has opened a new Scene, and explained the most obscure and
difficult points in the clearest and easiest manner. LYS. I must own this
account of things struck my fancy. I am no great lover of Creeds or Systems;
but when a notion is reasonable and grounded on experience I know how to value
it. CRI. In good earnest, Lysicles, do you believe this account to be true?
LYS. Why then in good earnest I don't know whether I do or no. But I can assure
you the ingenious Artist himself has not the least doubt about it. And to
believe an Artist in his art is a just maxim and short way to Science. CRI. But
what relation has the Soul of Man to Chymic art? The same reason, that bids me
trust a skilful Artist in his art, inclines me to suspect him out of his art.
Men are too apt to reduce unknown things to the standard of what they know, and
bring a prejudice or tincture from things they have been conversant in, to
judge thereby of things in which they have not been conversant. I have known a
Fiddler gravely teach that the Soul was Harmony; a Geometrician very positive
that the Soul must be extended; and a Physician, who having pickled half a
doozen embryos and dissected as many Rats and Frogs, grew conceited and
affirmed there was no Soul at all, and that it was a vulgar error. LYS. My
notions sit easy. I shall not engage in pedantic disputes about them. They who
don't like them may leave them. EUPH. This, I suppose, is said much like a
Gentelman.

XV.
But pray, Lysicles, tell me whether the Clergy come within that general rule
of yours; that an Artist may be trusted in his art? LYS. By no means. EUPH. Why
so? LYS. Because I take my self to know as much of those matters as they do.
EUPH. But you allow, that in any other profession, one who has spent much time
and pains may attain more knowledge, than a Man of equal or better parts, who
never made it his particular business. LYS. I do. EUPH. And nevertheless in
things religious and divine you think all Men equally knowing. LYS. I do not
say all Men. But I think all Men of sense competent judges. EUPH. What! are the
divine attributes and dispensations to Mankind, the true end and happiness of
rational Creatures, with the means of improving and perfecting their Beings,
more easy and obvious points than those which make the subject of every common
profession? LYS. Perhaps not: but one thing I know, some things are so
manifestly absurd, that no authority shall make me give into them. For
instance, if all Mankind should pretend to persuade me that the Son of God was
born upon earth in a poor Family, was spit upon, buffeted and crucified, lived
like a Beggar and died like a Thief, I should never believe one syllable of it.
Common sense shows every one, what figure it would be decent for an earthly
Prince or Ambassador to make; and the Son of God, upon an ambassy from Heaven,
must needs have made an appearance beyond all others of great eclat, and in all
respects the very reverse of that which Jesus Christ is reported to have made,
even by his own Historians. EUPH. O Lysicles, though I had ever so much mind to
approve and applaud your ingenious reasoning, yet I dare not assent to this for
fear of Crito. LYS. Why so? EUPH. Because he observed just now, that Men judge
of things they do not know, by prejudices from things they do know. And I fear
he would object that you, who have been conversant in the grand Monde, having
your head filled with a notion of Attendants and Equipage and Liveries, the
familiar badges of Humane Grandeur, are less able to judge of that which is
truly divine; and that one who had seen less, and thought more, would be apt to
imagine a pompous parade of worldly greatness, not the most becoming the Author
of a spiritual Religion, that was designed to wean Men from the world, and
raise them above it. CRI. Do you think, Lysicles, if a Man should make his
entrance into London in a rich suit of Clothes, with a hundred gilt Coaches,
and a thousand laced Footmen; that this would be a more divine appearance, and
have more of true grandeur in it, than if he had power with a word to heal all
manner of diseases, to raise the dead to life, and still the raging of the
Winds and Sea? LYS. Without all doubt it must be very agreeable to common sense
to suppose, that he could restore others to life who could not save his own.
You tell us, indeed, that he rose again from the dead: but what occasion was
there for him to die, the just for the unjust, the Son of God for wicked Men?
and why in that individual place? Why at that very time above all others? Why
did he not make his appearance earlier, and preach in all parts of the World,
that the benefit might have been more extensive? Account for all these points
and reconcile them, if you can, to the common notions and plain sense of
Mankind. CRI. And what if those, as well as many other points, should lie out
of the road that we are acquainted with; must we therefore explode them, and
make it a rule to condemn every proceeding as senseless, that does not square
with the vulgar sense of Man; If the precepts and certain primary tenets of
Religion appear in the eye of Reason good and useful; and if they are also
found to be so by their effects; we may, for the sake of them, admit certain
other points or doctrines recommended with them, to have a good tendency, to be
right and true; although we cannot discern their goodness or truth by the mere
light of Humane Reason, which may well be supposed an insufficient judge of the
proceedings, counsels, and designs of Providence, and this suffices to make
our conviction reasonable.

XVI.
It is an allowed point that no Man can judge of this or that part of a machine
taken by it self, without knowing the whole, the mutual relation or dependence
of its parts, and the end for which it was made. And, as this is a point
acknowledged in corporeal and natural things, ought we not by a parity of
reason to suspend our judgment of a single unaccountable part of the Divine
Economy, till we are more fully acquainted with the moral System, or world of
Spirits, and are let into the designs of God's Providence, and have an
extensive view of his dispensations past, present, and future? Alas! Lysicles,
what do you know even of your self, whence you come, what you are, or whither
you are going? To me it seems, that a Minute Philosopher is like a conceited
Spectator, who never looked behind the Scenes, and yet would judge of the
machinery; who from a transient glimpse of a part only of some one scene, would
take upon him to censure the plot of a Play. LYS. As to the plot I will not say;
but in half a Scene a Man may judge of an absurd Actor. With what color or
pretext can you justify the vindictive, froward, whimsical behavior of some
inspired Teachers or Prophets? Particulars that serve neither for profit nor
pleasure I make a shift to forget; but in general the truth of this charge I do
very well remember. CRI. You need be at no pains to prove a point I shall
neither justify nor deny. That there have been humane passions, infirmities,
and defects in persons inspired by God, I freely own; nay, that very wicked Men
have been inspired, as Balaam for instance and Caiaphas, cannot denied. But
what will you infer from thence? Can you prove it impossible, that a weak or
sinful Man should become an instrument to the Spirit of God, for conveying his
purpose to other Sinners? Or that Divine Light may not, as well as the light of
the Sun, shine on a foul vessel without polluting its rays? LYS. To make short
work, the right way would be to put out our eyes, and not judge at all. CRI. I
do not say so, but I think it would be right, if some sanguine persons upon
certain points suspected their own judgment. ALC. But the very things said to
be inspired, taken by themselves and in their own nature, are sometimes so
wrong, to say no worse, that a Man may pronounce them not to be divine at first
sight; without troubling his head about the System of Providence or Connection
of Events: As one may say that Grass is green, without knowing or considering
how it grows, what uses it is subservient to, or how it is connected with the
mundane System. Thus for instance, the spoiling of the Egyptians, and the
extirpation of the Canaanites, every one at first glance sees to be cruel and
unjust, and may therefore without deliberating pronounce them unworthy of God.
CRI. But, Alciphron, to judge rightly of these things, may it not be proper to
consider how long the Israelites had wrought under those severe Taskmasters of
Egypt, what injuries and hardships they had sustained from them, what crimes
and abominations the Canaanites had been guilty of, what right God has to
dispose of the things of this World, to punish Delinquents, and to appoint both
the manner and the instruments of his Justice? Man, who has not such right over
his fellow creatures, who is himself a fellow-sinner with them, who is liable
to error as well as passion, whose views are imperfect, who is governed more by
Prejudice, than the Truth of things, may not improbably deceive himself, when
he sets up for a judge of the proceedings of the holy, omniscient, impassive
Creator and Governor of all things.

XVII.
ALC. Believe me, Crito, Men are never so industrious to deceive themselves, as
when they engage to defend their Prejudices. You would fain reason us out of
all use of our Reason: Can any thing be more irrational? To forbid us to reason
on the Divine Dispensations, is to suppose, they will not bear the test of
reason; or, in other words, that God acts without reason, which ought not to be
admitted, no, not in any single instance: For if in one, why not in another?
Whoever therefore allows a God, must allow that he always acts reasonably. I
will not therefore attribute to him Actions and Proceedings that are
unreasonable. He has given me Reason to judge withal; and I will judge by that
unerring Light, lighted from the universal lamp of Nature. CRI. O Alciphron! as
I frankly own the common remark to be true, That when a Man is against Reason,
it is a shrewd sign Reason is against him; so I should never go about to
dissuade any one, much less one who so well knew the value of it, from using
that noble talent. On the contrary, upon all subjects of moment, in my opinion,
a Man ought to use his Reason; but then, whether it may not be reasonable to
use it with some deference to superior Reason, it will not, perhaps, be amiss
to consider. ALC. It must surely derogate from the Wisdom of God, to suppose
his conduct cannot bear being inspected, not even by the twilight of Humane
Reason. EUPH. You allow, then, God to be wise? ALC. I do. EUPH. What!
infinitely wise? ALC. Even infinitely. EUPH. His Wisdom, then, far exceeds that
of Man. ALC. Vastly. EUPH. Probably more than the Wisdom of Man, that of a
Child. ALC. Without all question. EUPH. What think you, Alciphron, must not the
conduct of a Parent seem very unaccountable to a Child, when its inclinations
are thwarted, when it is put to learn the Letters, when it is obliged to
swallow bitter Physic, to part with what it likes, and to suffer, and do, and
see many things done contrary to its own judgment, however reasonable or
agreeable to that of others? ALC. This I grant. EUPH. Will it not therefore
follow from hence by a parity of reason, that the little child, Man, when it
takes upon it to judge of the Schemes of Parental Providence, and a thing of
yesterday, to criticize the Economy of the Ancient of days? will it not
follow, I say, that such a judge, of such matters, must be apt to make very
erroneous judgments? esteeming those things in themselves unaccountable, which
he cannot account for; and concluding of some certain points, from an
appearance of arbitrary carriage toward him, which is suited to his infancy
and ignorance, that they are in themselves capricious or absurd, and cannot
proceed from a wise, just, and benevolent God. This single consideration, if
duly attended to, would, I verily think, put an end to many conceited
reasonings against Revealed Religion. ALC. You would have us then conclude,
that things, to our wisdom unaccountable, may nevertheless proceed from an
abyss of Wisdom which our line cannot fathom; and that prospects viewed but in
part, and by the broken tinged light of our Intellects, though to us they may
seem disproportionate and monstrous, may nevertheless appear quite otherwise to
another eye, and in a different situation: In a word, that as Humane Wisdom is
but childish Folly, in respect of the divine, so the Wisdom of God may
sometimes seem Foolishness to Men.

XVIII.
EUPH. I would not have you make these conclusions, unless in reason you ought
to make them: But if they are reasonable, why should you not make them? ALC.
Some things may seem reasonable at one time, and not at another: And I take
this very apology you make, for Credulity and Superstition, to be one of those
things. When I view it in its Principles, it seems naturally to follow from
just concessions; but when I consider its consequences, I cannot agree to it. A
Man had as good abdicate his Nature, as disclaim the use of Reason. A Doctrine
is unaccountable, therefore it must be Divine! EUPH. Credulity and Superstition
are qualities so disagreeable and degrading to Humane Nature, so surely an
effect of weakness, and so frequently a cause of wickedness, that I should be
very much surprised to find a just course of reasoning lead to them. I can
never think that Reason is a blind guide to folly, or that there is any
connection between Truth and Falsehood, no more than I can think a thing's being
unaccountable a proof that it is Divine: Though at the same time I cannot help
acknowledging, it follows from your own avowed principles, that a thing's being
unaccountable, or incomprehensible to our Reason, is no sure argument to
conclude it is not Divine; especially when there are collateral proofs of its
being so. A Child is influenced by the many sensible effects it has felt, of
paternal love and care and superior wisdom, to believe and do several things
with an implicit faith and obedience: And if we in the same manner, from the
truth and reasonableness which we plainly see in so many points within our
cognizance, and the advantages which we experience from the seed of the Gospel
sown in good ground, were disposed to an implicit Belief of certain other
points, relating to schemes we do not know, or subjects to which our Talents
are perhaps disproportionate, I am tempted to think it might become our duty
without dishonouring our Reason; which is never so much dishonored as when it
is foiled, and never in more danger of being foiled, than by judging where it
has neither means nor right to judge. LYS. I would give a good deal, to see
that ingenious Gamester Glaucus have the handling of Euphranor one night at our
Club. I own he is a peg too high for me in some of his notions: But then he is
admirable at vindicating Humane Reason against the impositions of Priestcraft.

XIX.
ALC. He would undertake to make it as clear as day light, that there was
nothing worth a straw in Christianity, but what every one knew, or might know,
as well without as with it, before as since Jesus Christ. CRI. That great Man,
it seems, teaches, that common sense alone is the Pole Star; by which Mankind
ought to steer; and that what is called Revelation must be ridiculous, because
it is unnecessary and useless, the natural talents of every Man being
sufficient, to make him happy, good, and wise, without any further
correspondence with Heaven either for light or aid. EUPH. I have already
acknowledged how sensible I am, that my situation in this obscure corner of the
Country deprives me of many advantages, to be had from the conversation of
ingenious Men in Town. To make my self some amends, I am obliged to converse
with the dead and my own Thoughts, which last I know are of little weight
against the authority of Glaucus, or such like great Men in the Minute
Philosophy. But what shall we say to Socrates, for he too was of an opinion
very different from that ascribed to Glaucus? ALC. For the present we need not
insist on authorities, ancient or modern, or inquire which was the greater Man
Socrates or Glaucus. Though, methinks, for so much as authority can signify,
the present times, gray and hoary with age and experience, have a manifest
advantage over those that are falsely called ancient. But not to dwell on
authorities, I tell you in plain English, Euphranor, we do not want your
Revelations; and that for this plain reason, those that are clear every body
knew before, and those that are obscure no body is the better for. EUPH.
Whether it was possible for Mankind to have known all parts of the Christian
Religion, besides mysteries and positive institutions, is not the question
between us; and that they actually did not know them, is too plain to be
denied. This, perhaps, was for want of making a due use of Reason. But, as to
the usefulness of Revelation, it seems much the samething whether they could
not know, or would not be at the pains to know, the Doctrines revealed. And as
for those Doctrines which were too obscure to penetrate, or too sublime to
reach, by natural Reason; how far Mankind may be the better for them is more, I
had almost said, than even you or Glaucus can tell.

XX.
ALC. But whatever may be pretended as to obscure Doctrines and Dispensations,
all this has nothing to do with Prophecies, which, being altogether relative
to Mankind, and the events of this World, to which our faculties are surely
well enough proportioned, one might expect should be very clear, and such as
might inform instead of puzzling us. EUPH. And yet it must be allowed that as
some Prophecies are clear, there are others very obscure; but left to my self,
I doubt I should never have inferred from thence that they were not Divine. In
my own way of thinking I should have been apt to conclude, that the Prophecies
we understand are a proof for Inspiration; but that those we do not understand
are no proof against it. Inasmuch as for the latter our ignorance or the
reserve of the Holy Spirit may account, but for the other nothing, for ought
that I see, can account but Inspiration. ALC. Now I know several sagacious Men,
who conclude very differently from you, to wit, that the one sort of Prophecies
are nonsense, and the other contrived after the events. Behold the difference
between a Man of free thought and one of narrow principles! EUPH. It seems then
they reject the Revelations because they are obscure, and Daniel's Prophecies
because they are clear. ALC. Either way a Man of sense sees cause to suspect
there has been foul play. EUPH. Your Men of sense are, it seems, hard to
please. ALC. Our Philosophers are Men of piercing eyes. EUPH. I suppose such
Men never make transient judgments from transient views; but always establish
fixed conclusions upon a thorough inspection of things. For my own part, I dare
not engage with a Man, who has examined those points so nicely, as it may be
presumed you have done: But I could name some eminent writers of our own, now
living, whose Books on the subject of Prophecy have given great satisfaction to
Gentlemen, who pass for Men of sense and learning, here in the Country. ALC.
You must know. Euphranor, I am not at leisure to peruse the learned Writings of
Divines, on a subject which a Man may see through with half an eye. To me it is
sufficient, that the point it self is odd and out of the road of nature. For
the rest, I leave them to dispute and settle among themselves, where to fix the
precise time when the Scepter departed from Judah; or whether in Daniel's
Prophecy of the Messiah we should compute by the Chaldaean or the Julian year.
My only conclusion concerning all such matters is, that I will never trouble my
self about them. EUPH. To an extraordinary genius, who sees things with half an
eye, I know not what to say: But for the rest of Mankind, one would think it
should be very rash in them to conclude, without much and exact inquiry, on the
unsafe side of a question which concerns their chief interest. ALC. Mark it
well: a true Genius in pursuit of Truth makes swift advances on the wings of
General maxims, while little minds creep and grovel amidst mean
particularities. I lay it down for a certain Truth; that by the fallacious arts
of Logic and Criticism, straining and forcing, palliating, patching and
distinguishing, a Man may justify or make out any thing; and this remark, with
one or two about prejudice, saves me a world of trouble. EUPH. You, Alciphron,
who soar sublime on strong and free pinions, vouchsafe to lend a helping hand
to those whom you behold entangled in the birdlime of prejudice. For my part, I
find it very possible to suppose Prophecy may be Divine, although there should
be some obscurity at this distance, with respect to dates of time or kinds of
years. you your self own Revelation possible; and allowing this I can very
easily conceive it may be odd, and out of the road of nature. I can without
amazement meet in Holy Scripture diverse Prophecies, whereof I do not see the
completion, diverse texts I do not understand, diverse mysteries above my
comprehension, and ways of God to me unaccountable. Why may not some Prophecies
relate to parts of History I am not well enough acquainted with, or to events
not yet come to pass? It seems to me that Prophecies unfathomed by the hearer,
or even the speaker himself, have been afterward verified and understood in the
event; and it is one of my maxims, That, what has been may be. Though I rub my
Eyes, and do my utmost to extricate my self from prejudice, yet it still seems
very possible to me, that, what I do not, a more acute, more attentive, or more
learned Man may understand: At least thus much is plain; the difficulty of some
points or passages does not hinder the clearness of others, and those parts of
Scripture, which we cannot interpret, we are not bound to know the sense of.
What evil or what inconvenience, if we cannot comprehend what we are not
obliged to comprehend, or if we cannot account for those things which it does
not belong to us to account for? Scriptures not understood, at one time, or by
one person, may be understood at another time, or by other persons. May we not
perceive, by retrospect on what is past, a certain progress from darker to
lighter, in the series of the Divine Economy toward Man? And may not future
events clear up such points as at present exercise the faith of Believers? Now
I cannot help thinking (such is the force either of truth or prejudice) that in
all this, there is nothing strained or forced, or which is not reasonable and
natural to suppose.

XXI.
ALC. Well, Euphranor, I will lend you a helping hand, since you desire it, but
think fit to alter my method: For you must know, the main points of Christian
Belief have been infused so early, and inculcated so often, by nurses,
paedagogues, and priests, that, be the proofs ever so plain, it is a hard
matter to convince a mind, thus tinctured and stained, by arguing against
revealed Religion from its internal characters. I shall therefore set my self
to consider things in another light, and examine your Religion by certain
external characters or circumstantials, comparing the system of Revelation with
collateral accounts of ancient Heathen writers, and showing how ill it consists
with them. Know then, that the Christian Revelation supposing the Jewish, it
follows, that if the Jewish be destroyed the Christian must of course fall to
the Ground. Now, to make short work, I shall attack this Jewish Revelation in
its head. Tell me, are we not obliged, if we believe the Mosaic account of
things, to hold the world was created not quite six thousand years ago? EUPH. I
grant we are. ALC. What will you say now, if other ancient records carry up the
History of the world many thousand years beyond this period? What if the
Egyptians and Chinese have accounts extending to thirty or forty thousand
years? What if the former of these nations have observed twelve hundred
eclipses, during the space of forty eight thousand years, before the time of
Alexander the great? What if the Chinese have also many observations antecedent
to the Jewish account of the Creation? What if the Chaldaeans had been
observing the Stars for above four hundred thousand years? And what shall we
say if we have Successions of Kings and their Reigns, marked for several
thousand years before the beginning of the world, assigned by Moses? Shall we
reject the accounts and records of all other nations, the most famous, ancient,
and learned in the world, and preserve a blind reverence for the Legislator of
the Jews? EUPH. And pray if they deserve to be rejected, why should we not
reject them? What if those monstrous Chronologies contain nothing but names
without Actions and manifest fables? What if those pretended observations of
Egyptians and Chaldaeans were unknown or unregarded by ancient Astronomers?
What if the Jesuits have shown the inconsistency of the like Chinese
pretentions with the Truth of the Ephemerides? What if the most ancient Chinese
observations allowed to be authentic, are those of two fixed Stars, one in the
winter Solstice, the other in the Vernal Equinox, in the reign of their King
Yao, which was since the Flood? Bianchini Histor. Univers. c. 17.
ALC. You must give me leave to observe, the Romish Missionaries are of small
credit in this point. EUPH. But what knowledge have we, or can we have, of
those Chinese affairs, but by their means? The same persons that tell us of
these accounts refute them; if we reject their authority in one case, what
right have we to build upon it in another? ALC. When I consider that the
Chinese have annals of more than forty thousand years, and that they are a
learned ingenious and accute People, very curious, and adicted to Arts and
Sciences, I profess I cannot help paying some regard to their accounts of time.
EUPH. Whatever advantage their situation and political maxims may have given
them, it does not appear they are so learned or so acute in point of Science as
the Europeans. The general character of the Chinese, if we may believe
Trigaltius and other writers, is that they are men of a trifling and credulous
curiosity, addicted to search after the Philosopher's Stone, and a Medicine to
make Men immortal, to Astrology, Fortune-telling, and Presages of all kinds.
Their ignorance in Nature and Mathematics is evident, from the great hand the
Jesuits make of that kind of knowledge among them. But what shall we think of
those extraordinary annals, if the very Chinese themselves give no credit to
them for more than three thousand years before Jesus Christ? If they do not
pretend to have begun to write history above four thousand years ago? And if
the oldest books they have now extant in an intelligible character, are not
above two thousand years old? One would think a Man of your Sagacity, so apt to
suspect every thing out of the common road of nature, should not without the
clearest proof admit those annals for authentic, which record such strange
things as the Sun's not setting for ten days, and Gold raining three days
together. Tell me, Alciphron, can you really believe these things without
inquiring by what means the tradition was preserved, through what hands it
passed, or what reception it met with, or who first committed it to writing?
ALC. To omit the Chinese and their Story, it will serve my purpose as well to
build on the authority of Manetho that learned Egyptian Priest, who had such
opportunities of searching into the most ancient accounts of time, and copying
into his Dynasties the most venerable and authentic records inscribed on the
pillars of Hermes. EUPH. Pray, Alciphron, where were those chronological
pillars to be seen? ALC. In the Scriadical land. EUPH. And where is that
country? ALC. I don't know. EUPH. How were those records preserved for so many
ages down to the time of this Hermes, who is said to have been the first
inventor of letters? ALC. I do not know. EUPH. Did any other writers, before or
since Manetho, pretend to have seen, or transcribed, or known any thing about
these pillars? ALC. Not that I know. EUPH. Or about the place where they are
said to have been. ALC. If they did, it is more than I know. EUPH. Do the Greek
Authors that went into Egypt, and consulted the Egyptian priests, agree with
these accounts of Manetho? ALC. Suppose they do not. EUPH. Does Diodorus, who
lived since Manetho, follow, cite, or so much as mention this same Manetho?
ALC. What will you infer from all this? EUPH. If I did not know you and your
principles, and how vigilantly you guard against imposture, I should infer that
you were a very credulous Man. For what can we call it but credulity to believe
most incredible things on most slender authority, such as fragments of an
obscure writer, disagreeing with all other Historians, supported by an obscure
authority of Hermes's pillars, for which you must take his word, and which
contain things so improbable as Successions of Gods and Demigods, for many
thousand years, Vulcan alone having reigned nine thousand? There is little in
these venerable Dynasties of Manetho, besides names and numbers; and yet in
that little we meet with very strange things, that would be thought Romantic in
another writer: For instance, the Nile overflowing with honey, the Moon grown
bigger, a speaking Lamb, seventy Kings who reigned as many days one after
another, a King a day Scal. Can. Isag. l. 2.
. If you are known Alciphron, to give credit to these things, I fear you will
lose the honor of being thought incredulous. ALC. And yet these ridiculous
fragments, as you would represent them, have been thought worth the pains and
lucubrations of very learned Men. How can you account for the work that the
great Joseph Scaliger and Sir John Marsham make about them? EUPH. I do not
pretend to account for it. To see Scaliger add another Julian period to make
room for such things as Manetho's Dynasties, and Sir John Marsham take so much
learned pains to piece, patch, and mend those obscure fragments, to range them
in Synchronisms, and try to adjust them with sacred Chronology, or make them
consistent with themselves and other accounts, is to me very strange and
unaccountable. Why they, or Eusebius, or yourself, or any other learned Man
should imagine those things deserve any regard I leave you to explain.

XXII.
ALC. After all it is not easy to conceive what should move, not only Manetho,
but also other Egyptian Priests, long before his time, to set up such great
pretenses to antiquity, all which however differing from one another, agree in
this, that they overthrow the Mosaic History? How can this be accounted for
without some real foundation? What point of pleasure or profit, or power, could
set Men on forging Successions of ancient names, and periods of time for ages
before the world began? EUPH. Pray, Alciphron, is there any thing so strange or
singular in this vain humor of extending the antiquity of nations beyond the
Truth? Has it not been observed in most parts of the world? Does it not even
in our own times show it self, especially among those dependent and subdued
people, who have little else to boast of. To pass over others of our
Fellow Subjects, who, in proportion as they are below their neighbors in
wealth and power, lay claim to a more remote antiquity; are not the pretensions
of Irish men in this way known to be very great? If I may trust my Memory O
Flaherty, in his Ogygia, mentions some transactions in Ireland before the
Flood. The same humor, and from the same cause, appears to have prevailed in
Sicily, a Country for some Centuries past, subject to the Dominion of
Foreigners: During which time, the Sicilians have published diverse fabulous
accounts, concerning the original and antiquity of their cities, wherein they
vye with each other. It is pretended to be proved by ancient Inscriptions,
whose existence or authority seems on a level with that of Hermes's Pillars,
that Palermo was founded in the days of the Patriarch Isaac by a colony of
Hebrews, Phoenicians and Syrians, and that a Grandson of Esau had been Governor
of a tower subsisting within these two hundred years in that city Fazelli Hist.
Sicul. decad. 1. lib. 8.
. The antiquity of Messina has been carried still higher, by some who would
have us think it was enlarged by Nimrod Reina Notizie Istoriche di Messina.
. The like pretensions are made by Catania, and other Towns of that Island, who
have found Authors of as good credit as Manetho to support them. Now I should
be glad to know why the Egyptians, a subdued people, may not probably be
supposed to have invented fabulous accounts from the same motive, and like
others valued themselves on extravagant pretensions to Antiquity, when in all
other respects they were so much inferior to their Masters? That people had
been successively conquered by Ethiopians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians,
and Grecians, before it appears that those wonderful Dynastics of Manetho and
the Pillars of Hermes were ever heard of; as they had been by the two first of
those Nations before the time of Solon himself, the earliest Greek that is
known to have consulted the Priests of Egypt: Whose accounts were so
extravagant that even the Greek Historians, though unacquainted with Holy
Scripture, were far from given an entire credit to them. Herodotus making a
report upon their authority, says, Those to whom such things seem credible may
make the best of them, for himself declaring that it was his purpose to write
what he heard Herodotus in Euterpe.
. And both he and Diodorus do, on diverse occasions, show the same Diffidence in
the narratives of those Egyptian Priests. And as we observed of the
Egyptians, it is no less certain that the Phoenicians, Assyrians and
Chaldaeans were each a conquered and reduced People, before the rest of the
world appear to have heard any thing of their pretensions to so remote
Antiquity. CRI. But what occasion is there to be at any pains to account for
the humor of fabulous Writers? Is it not sufficient to see that they relate
Absurdities; that they are unsupported by any foreign Evidence; that they do
not appear to have been in Credit, even among their own Countrymen, and that
they are inconsistent one with another? That Men should have the Vanity to
impose on the World by false accounts, is nothing strange; it is much more so,
that after what has been done toward undeceiving the world by so many learned
Crities, there should be Men found capable of being abused by those paltry
scraps of Manetho, Berosus, Ctesias, or the like fabulous or Counterfeit
Writers. ALC. Give me leave to observe, those learned Critics may prove to be
Ecclesiastics, perhaps some of them Papists. CRI. what do you think of Sir
Isaac Newton, was he either Papist or Ecclesiastic? Perhaps you may not allow
him to have been in Sagacity, or Force of mind, equal to the great Men of the
Minute Philosophy: But it cannot be denied that he had read and thought much
upon the subject, and that the result of his inquiry was a perfect contempt of
all those celebrated Rivals to Moses. ALC. It has been observed by Ingenious
Men, that Sir Isaac Newton, though a Layman, was deeply prejudiced, witness his
great regard to the Bible. CRI. And the same may be said of Mr. Lock, Mr.
Boil, Lord Bacon, and other famous Laymen, who, however knowing in some
points, must nevertheless be allowed not to have attained that keen
Discernment, which is the peculiar distinction of your Sect.

XXIII.
But perhaps there may be other reasons beside prejudice, to incline a Man to
give Moses the preference, on the Truth of whose History the Government,
Manners, and Religion of his Countrymen were founded and framed; of whose
History there are manifest traces in the most ancient books and traditions of
the Gentiles, particularly of the Brachmans and Persees; whose history is
confirmed by the late Invention of arts and sciences, the gradual Peopling of
the world, the very Names of ancient nations, and even by the Authority and
Arguments of that renowned Philosopher Lucretius, who, on other points, is so
much admired and followed by those of your Sect. Not to mention that the
continual Decrease of fluids, the Sinking of hills, and the Diminution of
Planetary motions afford so many Natural Proofs, which show this world had a
beginning; as the Civil or Historical proofs abovementioned do plainly point
out, this beginning to have been about the time assigned in Holy Scripture.
After all which I beg leave to add one Observation more. To any one who
considers that, on digging into the earth, such quantities of shells, and, in
some places, bones and horns of animals are found, sound and entire after
having lain there in all probability some thousands of years; it should seem
probable, that Gems, Medals, and Implements in metal or stone, might have
lasted entire, buried under ground forty or fifty thousand years, if the world
had been so old. How comes it then to pass that no remains are found, no
antiquities of those numerous ages preceding the Scripture accounts of time; no
fragments of buildings, no public monuments, no intaglias, cammeos, statues,
basso relievos, medals, inscriptions, utensils, or artificial works of any kind
are ever discovered, which may bear testimony to the existence of those mighty
Empires, those Successions of Monarchs, Heroes, and Demigods, for so many
thousand years? Let us look forward and suppose ten or twenty thousand years to
come, during which time we will suppose, that plagues, famines, wars, and
earthquakes shall have made great havoc in the world, is it not highly
probable that at the end of such a period, Pillars, Vases, and Statues now in
being of Granite, or Porphyry, or Jasper, (Stones of such hardness, as we know
them to have lasted two thousand years above ground, without any considerable
alteration) would bear record of these and past ages? or that some of our
current Coins might then be dug up, or old Walls and the foundations of
Buildings show themselves, as well as the shells and stones of the Primaeval
World are preserved down to our times. To me it seems to follow from these
considerations, which common sense and experience make all men judges of, that
we may see good reason to conclude, the world was created about the time
recorded in Holy Scripture. And if we admit a thing so extraordinary as the
Creation of this World, it should seem that we admit something strange, and
odd, and new to Humane Apprehension, beyond any other miracle whatsoever.

XXIV.
Alciphron sat musing and made no answer, whereupon Lysicles expressed himself
in the following manner. I must own I should rather suppose with Lucretius,
that the world was made by chance, and that Men grew out of the earth, like
Pompions, than pin my faith on those wretched fabulous fragments of Oriental
History. And as for the learned Men, who have taken pains to illustrate and
piece them together, they appear to me no better than so many musty Pedants. An
ingenious Free-thinker may perhaps now and then make some use of their
Lucubrations, and play one absurdity against another. But you are not therefore
to think, he pays any real regard to the authority of such apocryphal Writers,
or believes one syllable of the Chinese, Babylonian, or Egyptian Traditions. If
we seem to give them a preference before the Bible, it is only because they are
not established by Law. This is my plain sense of the matter, and I dare say it
is the general sense of our Sect; who are too rational to be in earnest on such
trifles, though they sometime give hints of deep Erudition, and put on a grave
face to divert themselves with Bigots. ALC. Since Lysicles will have it so, I
am content not to build on accounts of time preceding the Mosaic. I must
nevertheless beg leave to observe, there is another point of a different
nature, against which there do not lie the same exceptions, that deserves to be
considered, and may serve our purpose as well. I presume it will be allowed
that Historians, treating of times within the Mosaic account, ought by
impartial Men to be placed on the same foot with Moses. It may therefore be
expected, that those, who pretend to vindicate his Writings, should reconcile
them with parallel accounts of other Authors, treating of the same times,
things, and persons. And, if we are not attached singly to Moses, but take our
notions from other Writers, and the probability of things, we shall see good
cause to believe, the Jews were only a crew of leprous Egyptians, driven from
their Country on account of that loathsome Distemper; and that their Religion,
pretended to have been delivered from Heaven at mount Sinai, was in truth
learned in Egypt, and brought from thence. CRI. Not to insist, on what cannot
be denied, that an Historian writing of his own times is to be believed, before
others who treat of the same subject several ages after, it seems to me that it
is absurd to expect we should reconcile Moses with profane Historians, till you
have first reconciled them one with another. In answer therefore to what you
observe, I desire you would consider in the first place, that Manetho,
Chaeremon, and Lysimachus had published inconsistent accounts of the Jews, and
there going forth from Egypt Joseph. contra Apion. l. 1.
: In the second place, that their Language is a plain proof they were not of
Egyptian, but either of Phoenician, of Syrian, or of Chaldaean, original: and
in the third place, that it does not seem very probable to suppose, their
Religion, the Basis or Fundamental principle of which was the Worship of one
only Supreme God, and the principal Design of which was to abolish Idolatry,
could be derived from Egypt, the most Idolatrous of all nations. It must be
owned, the separate situation and institutions of the Jews occasioned, their
being treated by some Foreigners, with great ignorance and contempt of them and
their original. But Strabo, who is allowed to have been a judicious and
inquisitive Writer, though he was not acquainted with their true History, makes
more honorable mention of them. He relates that Moses, with many other
Worshippers of one Infinite God, not approving the Image worship of the
Egyptians and other nations, went out from Egypt and settled in Jerusalem,
where they built a Temple to one only God without Images Strab. l. 16.
.

XXV.
ALC. We who assert the cause of Liberty against Religion, in these later ages
of the world, lie under great disadvantages, from the loss of ancient Books,
which cleared up many points to the eyes of those great Men, Celsus, Porphyry,
and Julian, which at a greater distance and with less help cannot so easily be
made out by us: but, had we those Records, I doubt not we might demomolish the
whole System at once. CRI. And yet I make some doubt of this; because those
great Men, as you call them, with all those advantages could not do it. ALC.
That must needs have been owing to the Dullness and Stupidity of the world in
those days, when the art of reasoning was not so much known and cultivated as
of late: But those Men of true genius saw through the deceit themselves, and
were very clear in their opinion, which convinces me they had good reason on
their side. CRI. And yet that great Man Celsus seems to have had very slight
and inconstant notions: One while, he talks like a thorough Epicurean; another,
he admits Miracles, Prophesies, and a future state of rewards and punishments.
What think you, Alciphron, is it not something capricious in so great a Man,
among other advantages which he ascribes to Brutes above Humane Kind, to
suppose they are Magicians and Prophets; that they have a nearer commerce and
union with the Divinity; that they know more than Men; and that Elephants, in
particular, are of all others most religious animals and strict observers of an
Oath Origin. contra Celsum, l. 4.
. ALC. A great genius will be sometimes whimsical. But what do you say to the
Emperor Julian, was not he an extraordinary Man? CRI. He seems by his writings
to have been lively and satirical. Further, I make no difficulty of owning that
he was a generous, temperate, gallant, and facetious Emperor: But at the same
time it must be allowed, because his own Heathen Panegyrist Ammianus
Marcellinus Am. Marcellin. l. 25.
allows it, that he was a prating, light, vain, superstitious sort of Man. And
therefore his Judgment or Authority can be but of small weight with those, who
are not prejudiced in his favor. ALC. But of all the great Men who wrote
against Revealed Religion, the greatest without question was that truly great
Man Porphyry, the loss of whose invaluable work can never be sufficiently
lamented. This profound Philosopher went to the bottom and original of things.
He most learnedly confuted the Scriptures, showed the Absurdity of the Mosaic
accounts, undermined and exposed the Prophesies, and ridiculed allegorical
Interpretations Luc. Holstenius de vita and scriptis Porphyrii.
. The moderns, it must be owned, have done great things and shown themselves
able Men; yet I cannot but regret the loss of what was done by a person of such
vast abilities, and who lived so much nearer the Fountainhead; though his
authority survives his writings, and must still have its weight with impartial
Men, in spite of the enemies of Truth. CRI. Porphyry, I grant was a thorough
Infidel, though he appears by no means to have been incredulous. It seems he
had a great opinion of Wizards and Necromancers, and believed the Mysteries,
Miracles, and Prophesies of Theurgists and Egyptian priests. He was far from
being an enemy to obscure Jargon; and pretended to extraordinary Ecstasies. In a
word this great Man appears to have been as unintelligible as a Schoolman, as
superstitious as a Monk, and as fanatical as any Quietist or Quaker; and, to
complete his character as a Minute Philosopher, he was under strong temptations
to lay violent hands on himself. We may frame a notion of this Patriarch of
Infidelity, by his judicious way of thinking upon other points as well as the
Christian Religion. So sagacious was he as to find out, that the Souls of
insects, when separated from their bodies, become rational: That Demons of a
thousand shapes assist in making Philtrums and Charms, whose spiritual bodies
are nourished and fattened by the Steams of libations and sacrifices: that the
Ghosts of those, who died violent deaths, use to haunt and appear about their
Sepulchers. This same egregious Philosopher advises a wise Man not to eat
flesh, lest the impure Soul of the Brute that was put to violent death should
enter, along with the flesh, into those who eat it. He adds, as a matter of
fact confirmed by many experiments, that those who would insinuate into
themselves the Souls of such animals, as have the gift of foretelling things to
come, need only eat a principal part, the heart for instance of a Stag or a
Mole, and so receive the Soul of the animal, which will prophesy in them like a
God Vide Porphyrium de abstinentia, de sacrificiis, de diis and daemonibus.
. No wonder if Men whose minds were preoccupied by Faith and Tenets of such a
peculiar kind should be averse from the reception of the Gospel. Upon the
whole, we desire to be excused if we do not pay the same deference to the
judgment of men, that appear to us whimsical, superstitious, weak and
visionary, which those impartial Gentlemen do, who admire their Talents, and
are proud to tread in their Footsteps. ALC. Men see things. in different views:
what one admires another contemns; it is even possible for a prejudiced mind,
whose attention is turned toward the Faults and Blemishes of things, to fansy
some shadow of defect in those great Lights which in our own days have
enlightened, and still continue to enlighten the world.

XXVI.
But pray tell me, Crito, what you think of Josephus? He is allowed to have
been a Man of learning and judgment. He was himself an asserter of revealed
Religion. And Christians, when his authority serves their turn, are used to
cite him with respect. CRI. All this I acknowledge. ALC. Must it not then seem
very strange, and very suspicious to every impartial Inquirer, that this
learned Jew writing the History of his own Country, of that very place, and
those very times, where and when Jesus Christ made his appearance, should yet
say nothing of the character, miracles, and doctrine of that Extraordinary
Person? Some ancient Christians were so sensible of this, that, to make amends,
they inserted a famous Passage in that Historian; which imposture has been
sufficiently detected by able Critics in the last age. CRI. Though there are
not wanting able Critics on the other side of the question, yet, not to enter
upon the discussion of that celebrated passage, I am content to give you all
you can desire, and suppose it not genuine, but the pious fraud of some
wrong-headed Christian, who could not brook the omission in Josephus: But this
will never make such omission a real objection against Christianity. Nor is
there, for ought I can see, any thing in it whereon to ground either admiration
or suspicion; inasmuch as it should seem very natural, supposing the Gospel
account exactly true, for Josephus to have said nothing of it; considering that
the view of that writer was to give his country some figure in the eye of the
World, which had been greatly prejudiced against the Jews, and knew little of
their history, to which end the Life and Death of our Savior would not in any
wise have conduced; considering that Josephus could not have been an
eyewitness of our Savior or his Miracles; considering that he was a Pharisee
of Quality and Learning, foreign as well as Jewish, one of great Employment in
the State, and that the Gospel was preached to the poor; that the first
Instruments of spreading it, and the first Converts to it were mean and
illiterate, that it might not seem the work of Man, or beholding to Humane
interest or power; considering the general prejudice of the Jews, who expected
in the Messiah a temporal and conquering Prince, which prejudice was so strong,
that they chose rather to attribute our Savior's miracles to the Devil, than
acknowledge him to be the Christ: Considering also the hellish Disorder and
Confusion of the Jewish State in the Days of Josephus, when Men's minds were
filled and astonished with unparalled wars, dissensions, massacres, and
seditions of that devoted people. Laying all these things together, I do not
think it strange, that such a man, writing with such a view, at such a time,
and in such circumstances, should omit to describe our Blessed Savior's life
and death, or to mention his miracles, or to take notice of the State of the
Christian Church, which was then as a grain of Mustard seed beginning to take
Root and germinate. And this will seem still less strange, if it be considered,
that the Apostles in a few years after our Savior's death departed from
Jerusalem, setting themselves to convert the Gentiles, and were dispersed
throughout the world; that the Converts in Jerusalem were, not only of the
meanest of the people, but also few; the three thousand, added to the Church in
one day upon Peter's preaching in that city, appearing to have been not
Inhabitants but Strangers from all parts assembled to celebrate the feast of
Pentecost; and that all the time of Josephus and for several years after,
during a Succession of fifteen Bishops, the Christians at Jerusalem observed
the Mosaic Law Sulp. Sever. Sacr. Hist. l 2. and Eusebius. Chron. lib. poster.
, and were consequently, in outward appearance, one people with the rest of the
Jews, which must have made them less observable. I would fain know what reason
we have to suppose, that the Gospel, which in its first Propagation seemed to
overlook the great or considerable men of this world, might not also have been
overlooked by them, as a thing not suited to their apprehensions and way of
thinking? Besides, in those early times might not other learned Jews, as well
as Acts v.
Gamaliel, suspend their judgment of this new way, as not knowing what to make
or say of it, being on one hand unable to quit the Notions and Traditions in
which they were brought up, and, on the other, not daring to resist or speak
against the Gospel, lest they should be found to fight against God? Surely at
all events, it could never be expected, that an unconverted Jew should give the
same account of the Life, Miracles, and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as might
become a Christian to have given; nor on the other hand was it at all
improbable, that a Man of sense should beware to lessen or traduce what, for
ought he knew, might have been a heavenly Dispensation, between which two
courses the middle was to say nothing, but pass it over in a doubtful or a
respectful silence. And it is observable, that where this Historian
occasionally mentions Jesus Christ in his account of St. James's death, he does
it without any reflection, or saying either good or bad, though at the same
time he shows a regard for the Apostle. It is observable, I say, that speaking
of Jesus his expression is, who was called the Christ, not who pretended to be
the Christ, or who was falsely called the Christ, but simply (...) Jos. Ant. l.
20. c. 8.
. It is evident Josephus knew there was such a Man as Jesus, and that he was
said to be the Christ, and yet he condemns neither him nor his followers; which
to me seems an Argument in their favor. Certainly if we suppose Josephus to
have known or been persuaded that he was an Impostor, it will be difficult to
account for his not saying so in plain terms. But if we suppose him in
Gamaliel's way of thinking, who suspended his judgment, and was afraid of being
found to fight against God, it should seem natural for him to behave in that
very manner, which according to you makes against our Faith, but I verily think
makes for it. But what if Josephus had been a Bigot, or even a Sadducee, an
Infidel, an Atheist? What then! we readily grant there might have been Persons
of Rank, Politicians, Generals, and Men of Letters, then as well as now, Jews
as well as Englishmen, who believed no revealed Religion: And that some such
persons might possibly have heard of a man in low life, who performed miracles
by Magic, without informing themselves, or perhaps ever inquiring, about his
Mission and Doctrine. Upon the whole, I cannot comprehend, why any Man should
conclude against the Truth of the Gospel, from Josephus's omitting to speak of
it, any more than from his omitting to embrace it. Had the first Christians
been Chief Priests and Rulers, or Men of science and learning, like Philo and
Josephus, it might perhaps with better color have been objected, that their
Religion was of Humane Contrivance, than now that it has pleased God by weak
things to confound the Strong. This I think sufficiently accounts, why in the
beginning the Gospel might overlook or be overlooked by Men of a certain rank
and character.

XXVII.
ALC. And yet it seems an odd argument in proof of any Doctrine, that it was
preached by simple people to simple people. CRI. Indeed if there was no other
attestation to the Truth of the Christian Religion, this must be owned a very
weak one. But if a Doctrine begun by instruments, mean as to all Humane
Advantages, and making its first progress among those, who had neither wealth
nor Art nor power to grace or encourage it, should in a short time by it is own
innate Excellency, the mighty force of Miracles, and the demonstration of the
Spirit, not only without, but against, all worldly Motives spread through the
world, and subdue Men of all ranks and conditions of life, would it not be very
unreasonable to reject or suspect it, for the want of humane means? And might
not this with much better reason be thought an Argument of its coming from God?
ALC. But still an inquisitive Man will want the Testimony of Men of learning
and knowledge. CRI. But from the first Century onwards, there was never wanting
the testimony of such Men, who wrote learnedly in defense of the Christian
Religion, who lived, many of them, when the memory of things was fresh, who had
abilities to judge and means to know, and who gave the clearest proofs of their
conviction and sincerity. ALC. But all the while these Men were Christians,
prejudiced Christians, and therefore their Testimony is to be suspected. CRI.
It seems then you would have Jews or Heathens attest the Truths of
Christianity. ALC. That is the very thing I want. CRI. But how can this be? or
if it could, would not any rational Man be apt to suspect such Evidence, and
ask, how it was possible for a Man really to believe such things himself and
not become a Christian? the Apostles and first Converts were themselves Jews,
and brought up in a veneration for the Law of Moses, and in all the prejudices
of that people: many Fathers, Christian Philosophers, and learned Apologists
for the Faith, who had been bred Gentiles, were without doubt imbued with
prejudices of Education: and if the finger of God and force of Truth converted
both the one and the other from Judaism or Gentilism, in spite of their
prejudices to Christianity, is not their Testimony so much the stronger? You
have then the suffrages of both Jews and Gentiles, attesting to the Truth of
our Religion in the earliest ages. But to expect or desire the attestation of
Jews remaining Jews, or of Gentiles remaining Gentiles, seems unreasonable: nor
can it be imagined that the Testimony of Men, who were not converted
themselves, should be the likeliest to convert others. We have indeed the
Testimony of Heathen Writers to prove, That about the time of our Savior's
birth, there was a general expectation in the east of a Messiah or Prince, who
should found a new Dominion: That there were such people as Christians: That
they were cruelly persecuted and put to death: That they were innocent and holy
in life and worship: And that there did really exist in that time, certain
persons and facts mentioned in the New Testament: And for other points, we have
learned Fathers, several of whom had been, as I already observed, bred
Heathens, to attest their Truth. ALC. For my part I have no great opinion of
the capacity or learning of the Fathers, and many learned Men, especially of
the reformed Churches abroad, are of the same mind, which saves me the trouble
of looking my self into their voluminous Writings. CRI. I shall not take upon
me to say, with the Minute Philosopher Pomponatius Lib. de immortalitate animae.
, that Origin, Basil, Augustine, and diverse other Fathers, were equal to Plato,
Aristotle, and the greatest of the Gentiles in Humane Knowledge. But, if I may
be allowed to make a judgment from what I have seen of their writings, I should
think several of them Men of great parts, eloquence, and learning, and much
superior to these who seem to undervalue them. Without any affront to certain
modern Critics or Translators, Erasmus may be allowed a man of fine taste, and
a fit judge of sense and good writing, though his judgment in this point was
very different from theirs. Some of our reformed Brethern, because the
Romanists attribute too much, seem to have attributed too little to them, from
a very usual, though no very judicious opposition; which is apt to lead men to
remark defects, without making proper allowances, and to say things which
neither piety, candor, nor good sense require them to say.

XXVIII.
ALC. But though I should acknowledge, that a concurring Testimony of many
learned and able Men throughout the first ages of Christianity may have its
weight, yet when I consider the great number of Forgeries and Heresies that
sprung up in those times, it very much weakens their credit. CRI. Pray,
Alciphron, would it be allowed a good Argument in the mouth of a Papist against
the Reformation, that many absurd Sects sprung up at the same time with it? Are
we to wonder, that when good seed is sowing, the enemy should sow tares? But at
once to cut off several Objections, let us suppose in fact, what you do not
deny possible, that there is a God, a Devil, and a Revelation from Heaven
committed to writing many Centuries ago. Do but take a view of Humane Nature,
and consider, what would probably follow upon such a supposition; and whether
it is not very likely there should be Halfbelievers, mistaken Bigots, holy
Frauds, ambitious, interested, disputing, conceited, schismatical, haeretical,
absurd Men among the Professors of such revealed Religion, as well as after a
course of ages, various readings, omissions, transpositions, and obscurities in
the text of the sacred Oracles? And if so, I leave you to judge, whether it be
reasonable to make those events an Objection against the being of a thing,
which would probably and naturally follow upon the Supposal of its Being. ALC.
After all, say what you will, this variety of Opinions must needs shake the
faith of a reasonable Man. Where there are so many different Opinions on the
same point, it is very certain they cannot all be true, but it is certain they
may all be false. And the means to find out the Truth! when a Man of sense sets
about this Inquiry, he finds himself on a sudden startled and amused with hard
words and knotty questions. This makes him abandon the pursuit, thinking the
game not worth the chase. CRI. But would not this Man of sense do well to
consider, it must argue want of discernment, to reject divine Truths for the
sake of Humane Follies? Use but the same candor and impartiality in treating
of Religion, that you would think proper on other subjects. We desire no more,
and expect no less. In Law, in Physic, in Politics, wherever men have refined,
is it not evident they have been always apt to run into disputes and chicane?
But will that hinder you from admitting, there are many good rules and just
notions, and useful truths in all those professions. Physicians may dispute,
perhaps vainly and unintelligibly, about the Animal System: they may assign
different causes of Distempers, some explaining them by the elementary
qualities, hot and cold, moist and dry, yet this does not hinder, but the Bark
may be good for an Ague, and Rhubarb for a Flux. Nor can it others by chemical,
others by mechanical principles, be inferred from the different sects, which
from time to time have sprung up in that profession, the Dogmatic, for
instance, Empiric, Methodic, Galenic, Paracelsian, or the hard words and knotty
questions and idle theories which have grown from them, or been engrafted on
them, that, therefore, we should deny the Circulation of the Blood, or reject
their excellent rules about Exercise, Air, and Diet. ALC. It seems you would
screen Religion by the example of other professions, all which have produced
Sects and Disputes as well as Christianity, which may in itself be true and
useful, notwithstanding many false and fruitless Notions engrafted on it by the
wit of Man. Certainly if this had been observed or believed by many acute
Reasoners, they would never have made the multiplicity of Religious Opinions
and Controversies an Argument against Religion in general. CRI. How such an
obvious Truth should escape Men of sense and inquiry I leave you to account:
But I can very easily account for gross mistakes in those, who pass for
Free-thinkers without ever thinking; or, if if they do think, whose meditations
are employed on other points of a very different nature, from a serious and
impartial Inquiry about Religion.

XXIX.
But to return: what or where is the profession of Men, who never split into
schisms, or never talk nonsense? Is it not evident, that out of all the kinds
of knowledge, on which the Humane mind is employed, there grow certain
excrescences, which may be pared off, like the clippings of hair or nails in
the body, and with no worse consequence. Whatever Bigots or Enthusiasts,
whatever notional or scholastic Divines may say or think, it is certain the
Faith derived from Christ and his Apostles, was not a piece of empty Sophistry;
they did not deliver and transmit down to us (...) but (...), to use the
expression of a holy Confessor Socr. Histor. Eccles. l. 1.
. And, to pretend to demolish their foundation for the sake of Humane
Superstructure, be it hay or stubble or what it will, is no Argument of just
thought or reason; any more than it is of fairness, to suppose a doubtful sense
fixed, and argue from one side of the question in disputed points. Whether, for
instance, the beginning of Genesis is to be understood in a literal or
allegorical sense? Whether the Book of Job be an History or a Parable? Being
points disputed between Christians, an Infidel can have no right to argue from
one side of the Question, in those or the like cases. This or that Tenet of a
Sect, this or that contraverted Notion is not what we contend for at present,
but the general Faith taught by Christ and his Apostles, and preserved by
universal and perpetual Tradition in all the Churches down to our own times. To
tax or strike at this Divine Doctrine, on account of things foreign and
adventitious, the speculations and disputes of curious Men, is in my mind an
absurdity of the same kind, as it would be to cut down a fine tree yielding
Fruit and Shade, because its leaves afforded nourishment to Caterpillars, or
because Spiders may now and then weave cobwebs among the branches. ALC. To
divide and distinguish would take time. We have several Gentlemen very capable
of judging in the gross, but that want of attention for irksome and dry Studies
or minute Inquiries. To which as it would be very hard to oblige Men against
their will, so it must be a great wrong to the world, as well as themselves, to
debar them from the Right of deciding according to their natural sense of
things. CRI. It were to be wished those capable Men would employ their judgment
and attention on the same objects. If theological Inquiries are unpalatable,
the field of nature is wide. How many Discoveries to be made! how many Errors
to be corrected in arts and sciences! how many Vices to be reformed in life and
manners! Why do men single out such points as are innocent and useful, when
there are so many pernicious mistakes to be amended? Why set themselves to
destroy the hopes of Humane Kind and encouragements to Virtue? Why delight to
judge where they disdain to inquire? Why not employ their noble Talents on the
Longitude or Perpetual Motion? ALC. I wonder you should not see the difference
between points of Curiosity and Religion. Those employ only Men of a genius or
humor suited to them; but all Mankind have a right to censure, and are
concerned to judge of these, except they will blindly submit to be governed, by
the stale wisdom of their Ancestors and the established Laws of their Country.
CRI. It should seem, if they are concerned to judge, they are not less
concerned to examine before they judge. ALC. But after all the examination and
inquiry that mortal Man can make about Revealed Religion, it is impossible to
come at any rational sure footing.

XXX.
There is, indeed, a deal of specious talk about Faith founded upon Miracles;
but when I examine this matter thoroughly, and trace Christian Faith up to its
original, I find it rests upon much darkness and scruple and uncertainty.
Instead of points evident or agreeable to Humane Reason, I find a wonderful
narrative of the Son of God tempted in the wilderness by the Devil, a thing
utterly unaccountable, without any end, or use or reason whatsoever. I meet
with strange Histories of Apparitions of Angels and Voices from Heaven, with
surprising accounts of Daemoniacs, things quite out of the road of common Sense
or Observation, with several incredible feats said to have been done by Divine
Power, but more probably the Inventions of Men; nor the less likely to be so,
because I cannot pretend to say with what view they were invented. Disigns
deeply laid are dark, and the less we know the more we suspect: But, admitting
them for true, I shall not allow them to be miraculous, until I thoroughly know
the power of what are called second causes and the force of Magic. CRI. You
seem, Alciphron, to analyze, not Faith, but Infidelity, and trace it to its
Principles; which, from your own account, I collect to be dark and doubtful
scruples and surmises, hastiness in judging, and narrowness in thinking,
grounded on a fanciful notion which over-rates the little scantling of your own
Experience, and on real ignorance of the views of Providence, and of the
qualities, operations, and mutual respects of the several kinds of beings,
which are, or may be, for ought you know, in the Universe. Thus obscure,
uncertain, conceited, and conjectural are the Principles of Infidelity. Whereas
on the other hand, the Principles of Faith seem to be points plain and clear.
It is a clear point, that this Faith in Christ was spread abroad throughout the
world soon after his death. It is a clear point, that this was not effected by
humane Learning, Politics, or Power. It is a clear point, that in the early
times of the Church there were several men of Knowledge and Integrity, who
embraced this Faith not from any, but against all, temporal motives. It is a
clear point, that, the nearer they were to the fountainhead, the more
opportunity they had to satisfy themselves, as to the Truth of these facts
which they believed. It is a clear point, that the less interest there was to
persuade, the more need there was of Evidence to convince them. It is a clear
point, that they relied on the Authority of those who declared themselves
Eyewitnesses of the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ. It is a clear point,
that those professed Eyewitnesses suffered much for this their Attestation,
and finally sealed it with their Blood. It is a clear point, that these
Witnesses, weak and contemptible as they were, overcame the world, spread more
light, preached purer morals, and did more benefit to Mankind, than all the
Philosophers and Sages put together. These points appear to me clear and sure,
and, being allowed such, they are plain, just, and reasonable motives of
assent; they stand upon no fallacious ground, they contain nothing beyond our
sphere, neither supposing more knowledge nor other faculties than we are really
masters of; and if they should not be admitted for morally certain, as I
believe they will by fair and unprejudiced Inquirers, yet the allowing them to
be only probable is sufficient to stop the mouth of an Infidel. These plain
points, I say, are the Pillars of our Faith, and not those obscure ones by you
supposed, which are in truth the unsound, uncertain Principles of Infidelity,
to a rash, prejudiced, and assuming Spirit. To raise an Argument, or answer an
objection, from hidden powers of Nature or Magic is groping in the dark; but by
the evident light of sense men might be sufficiently certified of sensible
Effects, and matters of Fact, such as the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ:
and the Testimony of such Men may be transmitted to After-ages, with the same
moral certainty as other Historical Narrations: and those same miraculous
Facts, compared by Reason with the Doctrines they were brought to prove, do
afford to an unbiassed mind strong Indications of their coming from God, or a
superior Principle, whose Goodness retrieved the Moral World, whose Power
commanded the Natural, and whose Providence extended over both. Give me leave
to say, that nothing dark, nothing incomprehensible, or mysterious, or
unaccountable, is the ground or motive, the principle or foundation, the proof
or reason of our Faith, although it may be the object of it. For it must be
owned, that, if by clear and sure principles we are rationally led to believe a
point less clear, we do not therefore reject such point, because it is
mysterious to conceive, or difficult to account for, nor would it be right so
to do. As for Jews and Gentiles, anciently attributing our Savior's Miracles
to Magic, this is so far from being a proof against them, that to me it seems
rather a Proof of the Facts, without disproving the Cause to which we ascribe
them, As we do not pretend to know the Nature and Operations of Demons, the
History, Laws, and System of rational Beings, and the Schemes or Views of
Providence, so far as to account for every action and appearance recorded in
the Gospel; so neither do you know enough of those things, to be able from that
Knowledge of yours to object against Accounts so well attested. It is an easy
matter to raise Scruples upon many authentic parts of Civil History, which,
requiring a more perfect knowledge of Facts, Circumstances, and Councils, than
we can come at to explain them, must be to us inexplicable. And this is still
more easy with respect to the History of Nature, in which, if Surmises were
admitted for Proofs against things odd, strange, and unaccountable, if our
scanty Experience were made the rule and measure of Truth, and all those
Phenomenon rejected, that we, through ignorance of the Principles, and Laws,
and System of Nature, could not explain, we should indeed make Discoveries, but
it would be only of our own Blindness and Presumption. And why Men that are so
easily and so often gravelled in common Points, in things natural and visible,
should yet be so sharpsighted and dogmatical about the invisible World, and its
Mysteries, is to me a point utterly unaccountable by all the Rules of Logic and
good Sense. Upon the whole, therefore, I cannot help thinking there are Points
sufficiently plain, and clear, and full, whereon a Man may ground a reasonable
Faith in Christ: but that the attacks of Minute Philosophers against this faith
are grounded upon Darkness, Ignorance, and Presumption. ALC. I doubt I shall
still remain in the dark as to the Proofs of the Christian Religion, and always
presume there is nothing in them.

XXXI.
For how is it possible, at this remote distance, to arrive at any Knowledge,
or frame any Demonstration about it? CRI. What then? Knowledge, I grant, in a
strict sense cannot be had without Evidence or Demonstration; but probable
Arguments are a sufficient ground of Faith. Who ever supposed that scientifical
Proofs were necessary to make a Christian? Faith alone is required; and
provided that, in the main and upon the whole, Men are persuaded, this saving
Faith may consist with some degrees of Obscurity, Scruple, and Error. For
although the Light of Truth be unchangeable, and the same in its eternal
Source, the Father of Lights: Yet, with respect to us, it is variously weakened
and obscured, by passing through a long Distance or gross Medium, where it is
intercepted, distorted, or tinctured by the Prejudices and Passions of Men. But
all this notwithstanding, he that will use his Eyes may see enough for the
purposes either of Nature, or of Grace; though by a light, dimmer indeed, or
clearer, according to the Place, or the Distance, or the Hour, or the Medium.
And it will be sufficient, if such Analogy appears between the Dispensations of
Grace and Nature, as may make it probable (although much should be
unaccountable in both) to suppose them derived from the same Author, and the
workmanship of one and the same Hand. ALC. Those who saw and touched and
handled Jesus Christ after his Resurrection, if there were any such, may be
said to have seen by a clear Light: But to us the Light is very dim, and yet it
is expected we should believe this Point as well as they. For my part, I
believe, with Spinosa, that Christ's Death was Literal, but his Resurrection
Allegorical V. Spinosae Epist. ad Oldenburgium.
. CRI. And for my part, I can see nothing in this celebrated Infidel, that
should make me desert matters of Fact, and moral Evidence, to adopt his
Notions. Though I must needs own I admit an allegorical Resurrection that
proves the real, to wit, a Resurrection of Christ's Disciples from Weakness to
Resolution, from Fear to Courage, from Despair to Hope, of which, for ought I
can see, no rational Account can be given, but the sensible Evidence that our
Lord was truly, really, and literally risen from the dead: But as it cannot be
denied that his Disciples, who were Eyewitnesses of his Miracles and
Resurrection, had stronger Evidence than we can have of those Points: So it
cannot be denied, that such Evidence was then more necessary, to induce Men to
embrace a new Institution, contrary to the whole System of their Education,
their Prejudices, their Passions, their Interests, and every Humane Motive.
Though to me it seems, the moral Evidence and probable Arguments within our
reach, are abundantly sufficient to make prudent thinking Men adhere to the
Faith, handed down to us from our Ancestors, established by the Laws of our
Country, requiring Submission in Points above our Knowledge, and for the rest
recommending Doctrines the most agreeable to our Interest and our Reason. And,
however strong the Light might have been at the Fountainhead, yet its long
Continuance and Propagation, by such unpromising Instruments throughout the
World, have been very wonderful. We may now take a more comprehensive View of
the Connection, Order, and Progress of the divine Dispensations, and, by a
retrospect on a long Series of past Ages, perceive a Unity of Design running
throughout the whole, a gradual disclosing and fulfilling the purposes of
Providence, a regular Progress from Types to Antitypes, from things Carnal to
things Spiritual, from Earth to Heaven. We may behold Christ crucified, that
stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Greeks, putting a final
Period to the Temple Worship of the one, and the Idolatry of the other, and
that Stone, which was cut out of the Mountain without Hands, and brake in
Pieces all other Kingdoms, become it self a great Mountain.

XXXII.
If a due Reflection on these things be not sufficient to beget a Reverence for
the Christian Faith in the Minds of Men, I should rather impute it to any other
Cause, than a wise and cautious Incredulity: When I see their easiness of Faith
in the common concerns of Life, where there is no Prejudice or Appetite to bias
or disturb their natural Judgment: When I see those very Men that in Religion
will not stir a step without Evidence, and at every turn exspect Demonstration,
trust their Health to a Physician, and their Lives to a Sailor with an implicit
Faith, I cannot think they deserve the honor of being thought more incredulous
than other Men, or that they are more accustomed to know, and for this reason
less inclined to believe. On the contrary, one is tempted to suspect, that
Ignorance has a greater share than Science in our modern Infidelity, and that
it proceeds more from a wrong Head, or an irregular Will, than from deep
Researches. LYS. We do not, it must be owned, think that Learning or deep
Researches are necessary to pass right Judgments upon things. I sometimes
suspect that Learning is apt to produce and justify Whims, and sincerely
believe we should do better without it. Our Sect are divided on this Point, but
much the greater part think with me. I have heard more than once very observing
Men remark, that Learning was the true humane Means which preserved Religion in
the World, and that, if we had it in our power to prefer Blockheads in the
Church, all would soon be right. CRI. Men must be strangely in love with their
Opinions, to put out their Eyes rather than part with them. But it has been
often remarked, by observing Men that there are no greater Bigots than
Infidels. LYS. What a Free-thinker and a Bigot, impossible! CRI. Not so
impossible neither, that an Infidel should be bigoted to his Infidelity.
Methinks I see a Bigot, wherever I see a Man over-bearing and positive without
knowing why, laying the greatest stress on Points of smallest moment, hasty to
judge of the Conscience, Thoughts, and inward Views of other Men, impatient of
reasoning against his own Opinions, and choosing them with Inclination rather
than Judgment, an Enemy to Learning, and attached to mean Authorities. How far
our Modern Infidels agree with this Description, I leave to be considered by
those who really consider and think for themselves. LYS. We are no Bigots, we
are Men that discover Difficulties in Religion, that tie Knots and raise
Scruples, which disturb the Repose and interrupt the golden Dreams of Bigots,
who therefore cannot endure us. CRI. They who cast about for Difficulties, will
be sure to find or make them upon every subject: But he that would, upon the
foot of Reason, erect himself into a Judge, in order to make a wise Judgment on
a Subject of that nature, will not only consider the doubtful and difficult
Parts of it, but take a comprehensive View of the whole, consider it in all its
Parts and Relations, trace it to its Original, examine its Principles, Effects,
and Tendencies, its Proofs internal and external; he will distinguish between
the clear Points and the obscure, the certain and the uncertain, the essential
and circumstantial, between what is genuine and what foreign: he will consider
the different sorts of Proof, that belong to different things, where Evidence
is to be expected, where Probability may suffice, and where it is reasonable to
suppose there should be Doubts and Scruples: He will proportion his Pains and
Exactness to the Importance of the Inquiry, and check that Disposition of his
Mind to conclude all those Notions, groundless Prejudices, with which it was
imbued before it knew the Reason of them. He will silence his Passions, and
listen to Truth: He will endeavor to untie Knots as well as to tie them, and
dwell rather on the light parts of things than the obscure: He will balance the
force of his Understanding with the difficulty of the Subject, and to render
his Judgment impartial, hear Evidence on all sides, and, so far as he is led by
Authority, choose to follow that of the honestest and wisest Men. Now it is my
sincere Opinion, the Christian Religion may well stand the Test of such an
Inquiry. LYS. But such an Inquiry would cost too much Pains and Time. We have
thought of another Method, the bringing Religion to the Test of Wit and Humor:
This we find a much shorter, easier, and more effectual Way. And as all Enemies
are at liberty to choose their Weapons, we make choice of those we are most
expert at: And we are the better pleased with this Choice, having observed that
of all things a solid Divine hates a Jest. To consider the whole of the
Subject, to read and think on all sides, to object plainly, and answer
directly, upon the foot of dry Reason and Argument, would be a very tedious and
troublesome Affair. Besides it is attacking Pedants at their own Weapons. How
much more delicate and artful is it, to give a hint, to cover one's self with
an Aenigma, to drop a double Entendre, to keep it in one's Power to recover,
and slip aside, and leave his Antagonist beating the Air? This has been
practiced with great Success, and I believe it the top Method to gain
Proselytes, and confound Pedants. CRI. I have seen several things written in
this way, which, I suppose, were copied from the Behavior of a sly sort of
Scorners one may sometimes meet with. Suppose a conceited Man that would pass
for witty, tipping the Wink upon one, thrusting out his Tongue at another; one
while waggishly smiling, another with a grave Mouth and ludicrous Eyes; often
affecting the Countenance of one who smothered a Jest, and sometimes bursting
out in a Horse-laugh: What a Figure would this be, I will not say in the Senate
or Council, but in a private Visit among well-bred Men? And yet this is the
Figure that certain great Authors, who in this Age would pass for Models, and
do pass for Models, make in their polite and elaborate Writings on the most
weighty Points. ALC. I who profess my self an Admirer, an Adorer of Reason, am
obliged to own, that in some Cases the Sharpness of Ridicule can do more than
the Strength of Argument. But if we exert our selves in the use of Mirth and
Humor, it is not for want of other Weapons. It shall never be said that a
Free-thinker was afraid of Reasoning. No, Crito, we have Reasons in store, the
best are yet to come; and if we can find an Hour for another Conference before
we set out to morrow morning, I Will undertake you shall be plied with Reasons,
as clear, and home, and close to the Point as you could wish.

The SEVENTH DIALOGUE.
I. Christian Faith impossible. II. Words stand for Ideas. III. No Knowledge or
Faith without Ideas, IV. Grace, no Idea of it. V. Abstract Ideas what and how
made. VI. Abstract general Ideas impossible. VII. In what Sense there may be
general Ideas. VIII. Suggesting Ideas not the only use of Words. IX. Force as
difficult to form an Idea of as Grace. X. Notwithstanding which useful
Propositions may be formed concerning it. XI. Belief of the Trinity and other
Mysteries not absurd. XII. Mistakes about Faith an occasion of profane
Raillery. XIII. Faith its true Nature and Effects. XIV. Illustrated by Science.
XV. By Arithmetic in particular. XVI. Sciences conversant about Signs. XVII.
The true End of Speech, Reason, Science, and Faith. XVIII. Metaphysical
Objections as strong against Humane Sciences as Articles of Faith. XIX. No
Religion, because no Humane Liberty. XX. Farther Proof against Humane Liberty.
XXI. Fatalism a Consequence of erroneous Suppositions. XXII. Man an accountable
Agent. XXIII. Inconsistency, Singularity, and Credulity of Minute Philosopher.
XXIV. Untroden Paths and new Light of the Minute Philosophers. XXV. Sophistry
of the Minute Philosophers. XXVI. Minute Philosophers ambiguous, aenigmatical,
unfathomable. XXVII. Skepticism of the Minute Philosophers. XXVIII. How a
Skeptic ought to behave. XXIX. Minute Philosophers why difficult to convince.
XXX. Thinking not the epidemical Evil of these times. XXXI. Infidelity not an
Effect of Reason or Thought, its true Motives assigned. XXXII. Variety of
Opinions about Religion, Effects thereof. XXXIII. Method for proceeding with
Minute Philosophers. XXXIV. Want of Thought and want of Education Defects of
the present Age.

I.
THE Philosophers having resolved to set out for London next Morning, we
assembled at break of day in the Library. Alciphron began with a Declaration of
his Sincerity, assuring us he had very maturely and with a most unbiassed Mind
considered all that had been said the day before. He added that upon the whole
he could not deny several probable Reasons were produced for embracing the
Christian Faith. But, said he, those Reasons being only probable can never
prevail against absolute Certainty and Demonstration. If therefore I can
demonstrate your Religion to be a thing altogether absurd and inconsistent,
your probable Arguments in its defense do from that Moment lose their Force,
and with it all Right to be answered or considered. The concurring Testimony of
sincere and able Witnesses has without question great weight in humane
Affairs. I will even grant that things odd and unaccountable to Humane Judgment
or Experience, may sometimes claim our Assent on that sole Motive. And I will
also grant it possible, for a Tradition to be conveyed with moral Evidence
through many Centuries. But at the same time you will grant to me, that a thing
demonstrably and palpably false is not to be admitted on any Testimony
whatever, which at best can never amount to Demonstration. To be plain, no
Testimony can make Nonsense Sense; no moral Evidence can make Contradictions
consistent. Know then, that as the Strength of our Cause does not depend upon,
so neither is it to be decided by any critical Points of History, Chronology,
or Languages. You are not to wonder, if the same sort of Tradition and moral
Proof, which governs our Assent with respect to Facts in civil or natural
History, is not admitted as a sufficient Voucher for metaphysical Absurdities
and absolute Impossibilities. Things obscure and unaccountable in humane
Affairs, or the Operations of Nature, may yet be possible, and, if well
attested, may be assented unto: But religious Assent or Faith can be evidently
shown in its own nature to be impracticable, impossible, and absurd. This is
the primary Motive to Infidelity. This is our Citadel and Fortress, which may,
indeed, be graced with outworks of various Erudition, but, if those are
demolished, remains in it self and of its own proper Strength impregnable.
EUPH. This, it must be owned, reduces our Inquiry within a narrow Compass: Do
but make out this, and I shall have nothing more to say. ALC. Know then, that
the shallow Mind of the Vulgar, as it dwells only on the outward Surface of
things, and considers them in the gross, may be easily imposed on. Hence a
blind Reverence for Religious Faith and Mystery. But when an acute Philosopher
comes to dissect and analyze these Points, the Imposture plainly appears: And
as he has no Blindness, so he has no Reverence for empty Notions, or, to speak
more properly, for mere Forms of Speech, which mean nothing, and are of no use
to Mankind.

II.
Words are Signs: They do or should stand for Ideas; which so far as they
suggest they are significant. But words that suggest no Ideas are
insignificant. He who annexeth a clear Idea to every Word he makes use of
speaks Sense; but where such Ideas are wanting, the Speaker utters Nonsense. In
order therefore to know whether any Man's Speech be senseless and
insignificant, we have nothing to do but lay aside the Words and consider the
Ideas suggested by them. Men, not being able immediately to communicate their
Ideas one to another, are obliged to make use of sensible Signs or Words; the
use of which is to raise those Ideas in the Hearer, which are in the Mind of
the Speaker: And if they fail of this End they serve to no Purpose. He who
really thinks has a train of Ideas succeeding each other and connected in his
Mind: And when he expresses himself by Discourse, each Word suggests a
distinct Idea to the Hearer or Reader; who by that means has the same train of
Ideas in his, which was in the Mind of the Speaker or Writer. As far as this
Effect is produced, so far the Discourse is intelligible, has sense and
meaning. Hence it follows, that whoever can be supposed to understand what he
reads or hears must have a train of Ideas raised in his Mind, correspondent to
the train of Words read or heard. These plain Truths, to which Men readily
assent in Theory, are but little attended to in Practice, and therefore deserve
to be enlarged on and inculcated however obvious and undeniable. Mankind are
generally averse from thinking though apt enought to entertain Discourse either
in themselves or others: the Effect whereof is, that their Minds are rather
stored with Names than Ideas, the husk of Science rather than the thing. And
yet these Words without meaning do often make Distinctions of Parties, the
Subject matter of their Disputes, and the Object of their Zeal. This is the
most general Cause of Error, which does not influence ordinary Minds alone, but
even those who pass for acute and learned Philosophers are often employed about
Names instead of Things or Ideas, and are supposed to know when they only
pronounce hard Words without a meaning.

III.
Though it is evident that as Knowledge is the Perception of the Connection or
Disagreement between Ideas, he who does not distinctly perceive the Ideas
marked by the terms, so as to form a mental Proposition answering to the
verbal, cannot possibly have Knowledge: No more can he be said to have Opinion
or Faith which imply a weaker Assent, but still it must be to a Proposition,
the Terms of which are understood as clearly, although the Agreement or
Disagreement of the Ideas may not be so evident, as in the case of Knowledge. I
say, all degrees of Assent whether founded on Reason or Authority, more or less
cogent, are internal Acts of the Mind which alike terminate in Ideas as their
proper Object: Without which there can be really no such thing as Knowledge,
Faith, or Opinion. We may perhaps raise a Dust and Dispute about Tenets purely
verbal; but what is this at bottom more than mere trifling? All which will be
easily admitted with respect to Humane Learning and Science; wherein it is an
allowed Method to expose any Doctrine or Tenet by stripping them of the Words,
and examining what Ideas are underneath, or whether any Ideas at all? This is
often found the shortest way to end Disputes, which might otherwise grow and
multiply without end, the Litigants neither understanding one another nor
themselves. It were needless to illustrate what shines by its own Light, and is
admitted by all thinking Men. My endeavor shall be only to apply it in the
present Case. I suppose I need not be at any pains to prove, that the same
Rules of Reason and good Sense which obtain in all other Subjects ought to take
place in Religion. As for those who consider Faith and Reason as two distinct
Provinces, and would have us think good Sense has nothing to do where it is
most concerned, I am resolved never to argue with such Men, but leave them in
quiet Possession of their Prejudices. And now, for the particular Application
of what I have said, I shall not single out any nice disputed Points of School
Divinity, or those that relate to the Nature and Essence of God, which being
allowed infinite you might pretend to screen them, under the general Notion of
Difficulties attending the Nature of Infinity.

IV.
Grace is the main Point in the Christian Dispensation, nothing is oftener
mentioned or more considered throughout the New Testament; wherein it is
represented as somewhat of a very particular kind, distinct from any thing
revealed to the Jews, or known by the light of Nature. This same Grace is
spoken of as the Gift of God, as coming by Jesus Christ, as reigning, as
abounding, as operating. Men are said to speak through Grace, to believe
through Grace. Mention is made of the Glory of Grace, the Riches of Grace, the
Stewards of Grace. Christians are said to be Heirs of Grace, to receive Grace,
grow in Grace, be strong in Grace, to stand in Grace, and to fall from Grace.
And lastly, Grace is said to justify and to save them. Hence Christianity is
styled the Covenant of Dispensation of Grace. And it is well known that no
Point has created more Controversy in the Church than this Doctrine of Grace.
What Disputes about its Nature, Extent, and Effects, about universal,
efficacious, sufficient, preventing, Irrisistible Grace have employed the Pens
of Protestant as well as Popish Divines, of Jansenists and Molinists, of
Lutherans, Calvinists, and Arminians, as I have not the least curiosity to
know, so I need not say. It suffices to observe, that there have been and are
still subsisting great contests upon these Points. Only one thing I should
desire to be informed of, to wit, what is the clear and distinct Idea marked by
the Word Grace? I presume a Man may know the bare meaning of a Term, without
going into the depth of all those learned Inquiries. This surely is an easy
Matter, provided there is an Idea annexed to such Term. And if there is not, it
can be neither the subject of a rational Dispute, nor the Object of real Faith.
Men may indeed impose upon themselves or others, and pretend to argue and
believe, when at bottom there is no Argument or Belief, farther than mere
verbal trifling. Grace taken in the vulgar Sense, either for Beauty, or Favor,
I can easily understand. But when it denotes an active, vital, ruling
Principle, influencing and operating on the Mind of Man, distinct from every
natural Power or Motive, I profess my self altogether unable to understand it,
or frame any distinct Idea of it; and therefore I cannot assent to any
Proposition concerning it, nor consequently have any Faith about it: And it is
a self evident Truth, that God obliges no Man to Impossibilities. At the
request of a Philosophical Friend, I did cast an Eye on the Writings he showed
me of some Divines, and talked with others on this Subject, but after all I had
read or heard could make nothing of it, having always found whenever I laid
aside the Word Grace, and looked into my own Mind, a perfect vacuity or
privation of all Ideas. And, as I am apt to think Men's Minds and Faculties are
made much alike, I suspect that other Men, if they examined what they call
Grace with the same exactness and indifference, would agree with me that there
was nothing in it but an empty Name. This is not the only Instance, where a
Word often heard and pronounced is believed intelligible, for no other reason
but because it is familiar. Of the same kind are many other Points reputed
necessary Articles of Faith. That which in the present case imposes upon
Mankind I take to be partly this. Men speak of this holy Principle as of
something that acts, moves, and determines, taking their Ideas from corporeal
things, from Motion and the Force or Momentum of Bodies, which being of an
obvious and sensible Nature they substitute in place of a thing spiritual and
incomprehensible, which is a manifest Delusion. For though the Idea of
corporeal Force be never so clear and intelligible, it will not therefore
follow that the Idea of Grace, a thing perfectly incorporeal, must be so too.
And though we may reason distinctly, perceive, assent, and form Opinions about
the one, it will by no means follow that we can do so of the other. Thus it
comes to pass, that a clear sensible Idea of what is real produces, or rather
is made a pretense for, an imaginary spiritual Faith that terminates in no
Object; a thing impossible! For there can be no Assent where there are no
Ideas: And where there is no Assent there can be no Faith: And what cannot be,
that no Man is obliged to. This is as clear as any thing in Euclid.

V.
The same Method of Reasoning may be applied by any Man of Sense, to consute
all other the most essential Articles of the Christian Faith. You are not
therefore to wonder that a Man who proceeds on such solid Grounds, such clear
and evident Principles, should be deaf to all you can say from moral Evidence,
or probable Arguments, which are nothing in the balance against Demonstration.
EUPH. The more Light and Force there is in this Discourse, the more you are to
blame for not having produced it sooner. For my part, I should never have said
one Word against Evidence. But let me see whether I understand you rightly. You
say, every Word in an intelligible Discourse must stand for an Idea; which
Ideas as far as they are clearly and distinctly apprehended, so far the
Discourse has meaning, without which it is useless, and insignificant. ALC. I
do. EUPH. For instance, when I hear the Words Man, Triangle, Color,
pronounced; they must excite in my Mind distinct Ideas of those things whereof
they are Signs, otherwise I cannot be said to understand them. ALC. Right.
EUPH. And this is the only true use of Language. ALC. That is what I affirm.
EUPH. But every time the Word Man occurs in Reading or Conversation, I am not
conscious that the particular distinct Idea of a Man is excited in my mind. For
instance, when I read in St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians these Words: If a
Man thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
Methinks I comprehend the Force and Meaning of this Proposition, although I do
not frame to my self the particular distinst Idea of a Man. ALC. It is very
true, you do not form in your Mind the particular Idea of Peter, James, or
John, of a fair or a black, a tall or a low, a fat or a lean, a straight or a
crooked, a wise or a foolish, a sleeping or waking Man, but the abstract
general Idea of Man, prescinding from, and exclusive of all particular Shape,
Size, Complexion, Passions, Faculties, and every individual Circumstance. To
explain this Matter more fully, you are to understand there is in the Humane
Mind, a Faculty of contemplating the general Nature of things, separate from
all those Particularities which distinguish the Individuals one from another.
For Example, in Peter, James, and John, you may observe in each a certain
Collection of Stature, Figure, Color, and other peculiar Properties by which
they are known asunder, distinguished from all other Men, and, if I may so say,
individuated. Now leaving out of the Idea of a Man, that which is peculiar to
the Individual, and retaining only that which is common to all Men, you form an
abstract universal Idea of Man or Humane Nature, which includes no particular
Stature, Shape, Color, or other quality whether of Mind or Body. After the
same manner you may observe particular Triangles to differ one from another, as
their sides are equal or unequal, and their Angles greater or lesser; whence
they are denominated aequilateral, aequicrural, or scalenum, obtusangular,
acutangular, or rectangular. But the Mind excluding out of its Idea, all these
peculiar Properties and Distinctions frames the general abstract Idea of a
Triangle; which is neither aequilateral, aequicrural, nor scalenum, neither
obtusangular, acutangular, nor rectangular, but all and none of these at once
See Lock on Humane Understanding, b. 4. c. 7.
. The same may be said of the general abstract Idea of Color, which is
something distinct from and exclusive of Blue, Red, Green, Yellow, and every
other particular Color, including only that general Essence in which they all
agree. And what has been said of these three general Names, and the abstract
general Ideas they stand for may be applied to all others. For you must know,
that particular Things or Ideas being infinite, if each were marked or
signified by a distinct proper Name, Words must have been innumerable, and
Language an endless impossible thing. Hence it comes to pass, that appellative
or general Names stand, immediately and properly, not for particular but for
abstract general Ideas, which they never fail to excite in the mind, as often as
they are used to any significant Purpose. And without this, there could be no
Communication or Enlargement of Knowledge, no such thing as universal Science
or Theorems of any kind. Now for understanding any Proposition or Discourse, it
is sufficient that distinct Ideas are thereby raised in your mind,
correspondent to those in the Speaker's, whether the Ideas so raised are
particular or only abstract and general Ideas. Forasmuch, nevertheless, as
these are not so obvious and familiar to vulgar minds, it happens that some Men
may think they have no Idea at all, when they have not a particular Idea; but
the truth is, you had the abstract general Idea of Man, in the instance
assigned, wherein you thought you had none. After the same manner, when it is
said, that the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones; or that
Color is the Object of Sight, it is evident the Words do not stand for this or
that Triangle or Color, but for abstract general Ideas, excluding every thing
peculiar to the Individuals, and including only the universal Nature common to
the whole kind of Triangles or of Colors.

VI.
EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, are those abstract general Ideas clear and distinct?
ALC. They are above all others clear and distinct, being the only proper Object
of Science, which is altogether conversant about Universals. EUPH. And do you
not think it very possible for any Man to know, whether he has this or that
clear and distinct Idea or no? ALC. Doubtless. To know this he needs only
examine his own Thoughts and look into his own mind. EUPH. But upon looking
into my own mind, I do not find that I have or can have these general abstract
Ideas of a Man or a Triangle abovementioned, or of Color prescinded from all
particular Colors See the Introduction to a Treatise concerning the Principles
of Humane Knowledge Printed in the year MDCCX. where the absurdity of abstract
Ideas is fully considered.
. Though I shut mine Eyes, and use mine utmost Efforts, and reflect on all that
passes in my own mind, I find it utterly impossible to form such Ideas. ALC.
To reflect with due Attention and turn the mind inward upon it self, is a
difficult Task and not every one's Talent. EUPH. Not to insist on what you
allowed, that every one might easily know for himself whether he has this or
that Idea or no: I am tempted to think no body else can form those Ideas any
more than I can. Pray, Alciphron, which are those things you would call
absolutely impossible? ALC. Such as include a Contradiction. EUPH. Can you
frame an Idea of what includes a Contradiction? ALC. I cannot. EUPH.
Consequently whatever is absolutely impossible you cannot form an Idea of. ALC.
This I grant. EUPH. But can a Color or Triangle, such as you describe their
abstract general Ideas, really exist? ALC. It is absolutely impossible such
things should exist in Nature. EUPH. Should it not follow then that they cannot
exist in your mind, or in other words that you cannot conceive or frame an Idea
of them? ALC. You seem Euphranor not to distinguish between pure Intellect and
Imagination. Abstract general Ideas I take to be the Object of pure Intellect,
which may conceive them although they cannot perhaps be imagined. EUPH. I do
not perceive that I can by any Faculty, whether of Intellect or Imagination,
conceive or frame an Idea of that which is impossible and includes a
Contradiction. And I am very much at a loss to account for your admitting that
in common Instances, which you would make an Argument against Divine Faith and
Mysteries.

VII.
ALC. There must be some mistake in this. How is it possible there should be
general Knowledge without general Propositions, or these without general Names,
which cannot be without general Ideas by standing for which they become
general? EUPH. But may not words become general, by being made to stand
indiscriminately for all particular Ideas, which from a mutual Resemblance
belong to the same kind, without the Intervention of any abstract general Idea?
ALC. Is there then no such thing as a general Idea? EUPH. May we not admit
general Ideas, though we should not admit them to be made by abstraction, or
though we should not allow of general abstract Ideas? To me it seems, a
particular Idea may become general by being used to stand for or represent
other Ideas; and that, general Knowledge is conversant about Signs or general
Ideas made such by their signification; and which are considered rather in
their relative Capacity, and as substituted for others, than in their own
Nature, or for their own sake. A Black Line, for Instance, an Inch long, though
in it self particular, may yet become Universal, being used as a Sign to stand
for any Line whatsoever. ALC. It is your Opinion then, that words become
general by representing an indefinite Number of particular Ideas. EUPH. It
seems so to me. ALC. Whenever therefore I hear a general Name, it must be
supposed to excite some one or other particular Idea of that Species in my
mind. EUPH. I cannot say so neither. Pray, Alciphron, does it seem to you
necessary, that as often as the word Man occurs in Reading or Discourse, you
must form in your Mind the Idea of a particular Man? ALC. I own, it does not:
And not finding particular Ideas always suggested by the Words, I was led to
think I had abstract general Ideas suggested by them. And this is the Opinion
of all Thinking Men who are agreed, the only use of Words is to suggest Ideas.
And indeed what other use can we assign them?

VIII.
EUPH. Be the use of Words or Names what it will, I can never think it is to do
things impossible. Let us then inquire what it is? and see if we can make Sense
of our daily Practice. Words it is agreed are Signs: It may not therefore be
amiss to examine the use of other Signs in order to know that of Words.
Counters, for instance, at a Card-Table are used, not for their own sake, but
only as Signs substituted for Money as Words are for Ideas. Say now Alciphron,
is it necessary every time these Counters are used throughout the whole
Progress of a Game, to frame an Idea of the distinct Sum or Value that each
represents? ALC. by no means: It is sufficient the Players at first agree on
their respective Values, and at last substitute those Values in their stead.
EUPH. And in casting up a Sum, where the Figures stand for Pounds, Shillings,
and Pence, do you think it necessary, throughout the whole Progress of the
Operation, in each Step to form Ideas of Pounds, Shillings, and Pence? ALC. I
do not, it will suffice if in the Conclusion those Figures direct our Actions
with respect to Things. EUPH. From hence it seems to follow that Words may not
be insignificant, although they should not, every time they are used, excite
the Ideas they signify in our Minds, it being sufficient, that we have it in
our power to substitute Things or Ideas for their Signs when there is occasion.
It seems also to follow, that there may be another use of Words, besides that
of marking and suggesting distinct Ideas, to wit, the influencing our Conduct
and Actions; which may be done either by forming Rules for us to act by, or by
raising certain Passions, Dispositions, and Emotions in our Minds. A Discourse,
therefore, that directs how to act or excites to the doing or forbearance of an
Action may, it seems, be useful and significant, although the Words whereof it
is composed should not bring each a distinct Idea into our Minds. ALC. It seems
so EUPH. Pray tell me, Alciphron, is not an Idea altogether inactive? ALC. It
is. EUPH. An Agent therefore, an active Mind, or Spirit cannot be an Idea or
like an Idea. Whence it should seem to follow, that those Words which denote an
active Principle, Soul, or Spirit do not, in a strict and proper Sense, stand
for Ideas: And yet they are not insignificant neither: since I understand what
is signified by the term I, or my self, or know what it means although it be no
Idea, nor like an Idea, but that which thinks and wills and apprehends Ideas
and operates about them. ALC. What would you infer from this? EUPH. What has
been inferred already, that Words may be significant although they do not stand
for Ideas See the Principles of Humane Knowledge. Sect. 135. and the
Introduction. Sect. 20.
. The contrary whereof having been presumed seems to have produced the Doctrine
of abstract Ideas. ALC. Will you not allow then that the Mind can abstract?
EUPH. I do not deny it may abstract in a certain sense, inasmuch as those
things that can really exist, or be really perceived asunder, may be conceived
asunder, or abstracted one from the other; for instance a Man's Head from his
Body, Color from Motion, Figure from Weight. But it will not thence follow,
that the Mind can frame abstract general Ideas, which appear to be impossible.
ALC. And yet it is a current Opinion, that every substantive Name marks out and
exhibits to the Mind one distinct Idea separate from all others. EUPH. Pray,
Alciphron, is not the Word Number such a substantive Name? ALC. It is. EUPH. Do
but try now whether you can frame an Idea of Number in abstract exclusive of
all Signs, Words and Things numbered. I profess, for my own part I cannot. ALC.
Can it be so hard a matter to form a simple Idea of Number, the Object of a
most evident demonstrable Science? Hold, let me see, if I cannot abstract the
Idea of Number, from the numeral Names and Characters, and all particular
numerable things. Upon which Alciphron paused a while and then said; to confess
the Truth I do not find that I can. EUPH. But though, it seems, neither you nor
I can form distinct simple Ideas of Number, we can nevertheless make a very
proper and significant use of numeral Names. They direct us in the disposition
and management of our Affairs, and are of such necessary use, that we should
not know how to do without them. And yet, if other Men's Faculties may be judged
of by mine, to attain a precise simple abstract Idea of Number, is as difficult
as to comprehend any Mystery in Religion.

IX.
But to come to your own Instance, let us examine what Idea we can frame of
Force abstracted from Body, Motion, and outward sensible Effects. For my self,
I do not find that I have or can have any such Idea. ALC. Surely every one
knows what is meant by Force. EUPH. And yet I question whether every one can
form a distinct Idea of Force. Let me entreat you, Alciphron, be not amused by
Terms, lay aside the word Force, and exclude every other thing from your
Thoughts, and then see what precise Idea you have of Force. ALC. Force is that
in Bodies which produces Motion and other sensible Effects. EUPH. It is then
something distinct from those Effects. ALC. It is. EUPH. Be pleased now to
exclude the consideration of its Subject and Effects, and contemplate Force it
self in its own precise Idea. ALC. I profess I find it no such easy matter.
EUPH. Take your own Advice, and shut your eyes to assist your Meditation. Upon
this Alciphron having closed his eyes, and mused a few Minutes, declared he
could make nothing of it. And that, replied Euphranor, which it seems neither
you nor I can frame an Idea of, by your own Remark of Men's Minds and Faculties
being made much alike, we may suppose others have no more an Idea of than we.
ALC. We may. EUPH. But, notwithstanding all this, it is certain there are many
Speculations, Reasonings, and Disputes, refined Subtilties and nice
Distinctions about this same Force. And to explain its Nature, and distinguish
the several notions or kinds of it, the Terms Gravity, Reaction, vis inertiae,
vis insita, vis impressa, vis mortua, vis viva, impetus, momentum, solicitatio,
conatus, and diverse other such like Expressions have been used by learned Men:
And no small Controversies have arisen about the Notions or Definitions of
these terms. It had puzzled Men to know whether Force is spiritual or
corporeal, whether it remains after Action, how it is transferred from one Body
to another. Strange Paradoxes have been framed about its Nature, Properties,
and Proportions: For instance, that contrary Forces may at once subsist in the
same quiescent Body: That the Force of Percussion in a small particle is
Infinite: For which and other Curiosities of the same sort, you may consult
Berellus de vi percussionis, the Lezioni Academiche of Toricelli, the
Exercitations of Hermanus, and other Writers. It is well known to the learned
World, what a Controversy has been carried on between Mathematicians,
particularly Monsieur Leibnitz and Monsieur Papin in the Leipsic Acta
Eruditorum about the Proportion of Forces, whether they be each to other in a
Proportion compounded of the simple Proportions of the Bodies and the
Celerities, or in one compounded of the simple Proportion of the Bodies and the
duplicate Proportion of the Celerities? A Point, it seems, not yet agreed; As
indeed the reality of the thing it self is made a Question. Leibnitz
distinguishes between the nisus elementaris, and the impetus, which is formed
by a repetition of the nisus elementaris, and seems to think they do not exist
in Nature, but are made only by an abstraction of the Mind. The same Author
treating of original, active Force, to illustrate his Subject has recourse to
the substantial Forms and Entelecheia of Aristotle. And the ingenious Toricelli
says of Force and Impetus, that they are subtle Abstracts and spiritual
Quintessences; and concerning the momentum and the velocity of heavy Bodies
falling, he says they are un certo che, and un non so che, that is in plain
English he knows not what to make of them. Upon the whole therefore, may we not
pronounce, that excluding Body, Time, Space, Motion and all its sensible
Measures and Effects, we shall find it as difficult to form an Idea of Force as
of Grace? ALC. I do not know what to think of it.

X.
EUPH. And yet, I presume, you allow there are very evident Propositions or
Theorems relating to Force, which contain useful Truths* for instance, that a
Body with conjunct Forces describes the Diagonal of a Parallelogram, in the
same time that it would the Sides with separate. Is not this a Principle of
very extensive use? Does not the Doctrine of the Composition and Resolution of
Forces depend upon it, and, in consequence thereof, numberless Rules and
Theorems directing Men how to act, and explaining Phenomenon throughout the
Mechanics and mathematical Philosophy? And if, by considering this Doctrine of
Force, Men arrive at the Knowledge of many Inventions in Mechanics, and are
taught to frame Engines, by means of which things difficult and otherwise
impossible may be performed, and if the same Doctrine which is so beneficial
here below, serves also as a Key to discover the Nature of the Celestial
Motions, shall we deny that it is of use, either in Practice or Speculation,
because we have no distinct Idea of Force? Or that which we admit with regard
to Force, upon what pretense can we deny concerning Grace? If there are
Queries, Disputes, Perplexities, diversity of Notions and Opinions about the
one, so there are about the other also: If we can form no precise distinct Idea
of the one, so neither can we of the other. Ought we not therefore by a parity
of Reason to conclude, there may be diverse true and useful Propositions
concerning the one as well as the other? And that Grace may be an Object of our
Faith, and influence our Life and Actions, as a Principle destructive of evil
habits and productive of good ones, although we cannot attain a distinct Idea
of it, separate or abstracted from God the Author, from Man the Subject, and
from Virtue and Piety its Effects?

XI.
Shall we not admit the same Method of arguing, the same Rules of Logic,
Reason, and good Sense to obtain in things Spiritual, and things Corporeal, in
Faith and Science, and shall we not use the same Candor, and make the same
Allowances, in examining the Revelations of God and the Inventions of Men? For
ought I see, that Philosopher cannot be free from Bias and Prejudice, or be
said to weigh things in an equal Balance who shall maintain the Doctrine of
Force and reject that of Grace, who shall admit the abstract Idea of a
Triangle, and at the same time ridicule the Holy Trinity. But, however partial
or prejudiced other Minute Philosophers might be, you have laid it down for a
Maxim, that the same Logic which obtains in other Matters must be admitted in
Religion. LYS. I think, Alciphron, it would be more prudent to abide by the way
of Wit and Humor, than thus to try Religion by the dry Test of Reason and
Logic. ALC. Fear not: By all the Rules of right Reason, it is absolutely
impossible that any Mystery, and least of all the Trinity should really be the
Object of Man's Faith. EUPH. I do not wonder you thought so, as long as you
maintained that no Man could assent to a Proposition, without perceiving or
framing in his Mind distinct Ideas marked by the Terms of it. But although
Terms are Signs, yet having granted that those Signs may be significant, though
they should not suggest Ideas represented by them, provided they serve to
regulate and influence our Wills, Passions, or Conduct, you have consequently
granted, that the Mind of Man may assent to Propositions containing such Terms,
when it is so directed or affected by them, notwithstanding it should not
perceive distinct Ideas marked by those Terms. Whence it seems to follow, that
a Man may believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, if he finds it revealed in Holy
Scripture, That the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are God, and that there
is but one God? Although he does not frame in his Mind, any abstract or
distinct Ideas of Trinity, Substance, or Personality, provided, that this
Doctrine of a Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier makes proper Impressions on his
Mind, producing therein, Love, Hope, Gratitude, and Obedience, and thereby
becomes a lively operative Principle influencing his Life and Actions,
agreeably to that Notion of saving Faith which is required in a Christian. This
I say, whether right or wrong, seems to follow from your own Principles and
Concessions. But for further satisfaction, it may not be amiss to inquire,
whether there be any thing parallel to this Christian Faith in the Minute
Philosophy. Suppose, a fine Gentleman or Lady of Fashion, who are too much
employed to think for themselves, and are only Free-thinkers at second hand,
have the advantage of being betimes initiated in the Principles of your Sect,
by conversing with Men of Depth and Genius, who have often declared it to be
their Opinion, the World is governed either by Fate or by Chance, it matters
not which; will you deny it possible for such Persons to yield their Assent to
either of these Propositions? ALC. I will not. EUPH. And may not such their
Assent be properly called Faith? ALC. It may. EUPH. And yet it is possible,
those Disciples of the Minute Philosophy may not dive so deep, as to be able to
frame any abstract, or precise, or any determinate Idea whatsoever, either of
Fate or of Chance. ALC. This too I grant. EUPH. So that according to you, this
same Gentleman or Lady may be said to believe or have Faith where they have not
Ideas. ALC. They may. EUPH. And may not this Faith or Persuasion produce real
Effects, and show it self in the Conduct and Tenor of their Lives, freeing them
from the Fears of Superstition, and giving them a true Relish of the World,
with a noble Indolence or Indifference about what comes after. ALC. It may.
EUPH. And may not Christians, with equal Reason, be allowed to believe the
Divinity of our Savior, or that in him God and Man make one Person, and be
verily persuaded thereof, so far as for such Faith or Belief to become a real
Principle of Life and Conduct, inasmuch as by Virtue of such Persuasion they
submit to his Government, believe his Doctrine, and practice his Precepts,
although they frame no abstract Idea of the Union between the Divine and Humane
Nature; nor may be able to clear up the Notion of Person to the Contentment of
a Minute Philosopher. To me it seems evident, that if none but those who had
nicely examined, and could themselves explain, the Principle of Individuation
in Man, or untie the Knots and answer the Objections, which may be raised even
about Humane Personal Identity, would require of us to explain the Divine
Mysteries, we should not be often called upon for a clear and distinct Idea of
Person in relation to the Trinity, nor would the Difficulties on that Head be
often objected to our Faith. ALC. Methinks, there is no such Mystery in
Personal Identity. EUPH. Pray in what do you take it to consist? ALC. In
Consciousness. EUPH. Whatever is possible may be supposed. ALC. It may. EUPH.
We will suppose now (which is possible in the Nature of Things, and reported to
be fact) that a Person, through some violent Accident or Distemper, should fall
into such a total Oblivion, as to lose all Consciousness of his past Life, and
former Ideas. I ask, is he not still the same Person? ALC. He is the same Man,
but not the same Person. Indeed you ought not to suppose that a Person loses
its former Consciousness; for this is impossible, though a Man perhaps may; but
then he becomes another Person. In the same Person, it must be owned, some old
Ideas may be lost, and some new ones got; but a total Change is inconsistent
with Identity of Person. EUPH. Let us then suppose that a Person has Ideas,
and is conscious during a certain space of Time, which we will divide into
three equal Parts, whereof the later Terms are marked by the Letters A, B, C.
In the first Part of Time, the Person gets a certain Number of Ideas, which are
retained in A: During the second Part of Time, he retains one half of his old
Ideas, and loses the other half, in place of which he acquires as many new
ones: So that in B his Ideas are half old and half new. And in the third Part,
we suppose him to lose the Remainder of the Ideas acquired in the First, and to
get new ones in their stead, which are retained in C, together with those
acquired in the second Part of Time. Is this a possible fair Supposition? ALC.
It is. EUPH. Upon these Premises I am tempted to think, one may demonstrate,
that Personal Identity does not consist in Consciousness. ALC. As how? EUPH.
You shall judge; but thus it seems to me. The Persons in A and B are the same,
being conscious of common Ideas by supposition. The Person in B is (for the
same Reason) one and the same with the Person in C. Therefore the Person in A,
is the same with the Person in C, by that undoubted Axiom, Quae convenient uni
tertio convenient inter se. But the Person in C has no Idea in common with the
Person in A. Therefore Personal Indentity does not consist in Consciousness.
What do you think, Alciphron, is not this a plain Inference? ALC. I tell you
what I think: You will never assist my Faith, by puzzling my Knowledge.

XII.
There is, if I mistake not, a practical Faith, or Assent, which shows it
self in the Will and Actions of a Man, although his Understanding may not be
furnished with those abstract, precise, distinct Ideas, which, whatever a
Philosopher may pretend, are acknowledged to be above the Talents of common
Men; among whom, nevertheless, may be sound, even according to your own
Concession, many Instances of such practical Faith, in other matters which do
not concern Religion. What should hinder therefore, but that Doctrines relating
to Heavenly Mysteries, might be taught in this saving Sense to vulgar Minds,
which you may well think incapable of all Teaching and Faith in the Sense you
suppose. Which mistaken Sense, said Crito, has given occasion to much profane
and misapplied Raillery. But all this may very justly be retorted on the Minute
Philosophers themselves, who confound Scholasticism with Christianity, and
impute to other Men those Perplexities, Chimaeras, and inconsistent Ideas,
which are often the Workmanship of their own Brains, and proceed from their own
wrong way of Thinking. Who does not see that such an ideal abstracted Faith is
never thought of by the Bulk of Christians, Husbandmen, for Instance, Artisans
or Servants? Or what Footsteps are there in the Holy Scripture to make us
think, that the wiredrawing of abstract Ideas was a Task injoined either Jews
or Christians? Is there any thing in the Law or the Prophets, the Evangelists
or Apostles that looks like it? Every one whose Understanding is not perverted
by Science falsely so called, may see, the saving Faith of Christians is quite
of another kind, a vital operative Principle, productive of Charity and
Obedience. ALC. What are we to think then of the Disputes and Decisions of the
famous Council of Nice, and so many subsequent Councils? What was the Intention
of those venerable Fathers the Homoousians and the Homoiousians? Why did they
disturb themselves and the World with hard Words, and subtle Controversies?
CRI. Whatever their Intention was, it could not be to beget nice abstracted
Ideas of Mysteries in the Minds of common Christians, this being evidently
impossible: Nor does it appear that the Bulk of Christian Men did in those Days
think it any Part of their Duty, to lay aside the Words, shut their Eyes, and
frame those abstract Ideas; any more than Men now do of Force, Time, Number, or
several other things, about which they nevertheless believe, know, argue and
dispute. To me it seems, that, whatever was the Source of these Controversies,
and howsoever they were managed, wherein Humane Infirmity must be supposed to
have had its Share, the main End was not, on either side, to convey precise
positive Ideas to the Minds of Men, by the use of those contested Terms, but
rather a negative Sense, tending to exclude Polytheism on the one hand, and
Sabellianism on the other Sozomen. l. 2. c. 8.
. ALC. But what shall we say of so many learned and ingenious Divines, who from
time to time have obliged the World with new Explications of Mysteries, who,
having themselves professedly labored to acquire accurate Ideas, would
recommend their Discoveries and Speculations to others for Articles of Faith?
CRI. To all such Innovators in Religion I would say with Jerome, Why after so
many Centuries do you pretend to teach us what was untaught before? Why explain
what neither Peter nor Paul thought necessary to be explained? Hieronym. ad
Pammachium and Oceanum de erroribus Origenis.
And it must be owned, that the Explication of Mysteries in Divinity, allowing
the Attempt as fruitless as the Pursuit of the Philosopher's Stone in
Chemistry, or the Perpetual Motion in Mechanics, is no more than they,
chargeable on the Profession it self, but only on the wrongheaded Professors of
it.

XIII.
It seems, that what has been now said may be applied to other Mysteries of
our Religion. Original Sin, for Instance, a Man may find it impossible to form
an Idea of in abstract, or of the manner of its Transmission, and yet the
Belief thereof may produce in his Mind a salutary Sense of his own
Unworthiness, and the Goodness of his Redeemer: from whence may follow good
Habits, and from them good Actions, the genuine Effects of Faith, which
considered in its true Light, is a thing neither repugnant nor
incomprehensible, as some Men would persuade us, but suited even to vulgar
Capacities, placed in the Will and Affections rather than in the Understanding,
and producing holy Lives, rather than subtle Theories. Faith, I say, is not an
indolent Perception but an operative Persuasion of Mind, which ever works
some suitable Action, Disposition or Emotion in those who have it; as it were
easy to prove and illustrate by innumerable Instances, taken from Humane
Affairs. And, indeed, while the Christian Religion is considered as an
Institution fitted to ordinary Minds, rather than to the nicer Talents, whether
improved or puzzled, of speculative Men; and our Notions about Faith are
accordingly taken from the Commerce of the World, and Practice of Mankind,
rather than from the peculiar Systems of Refiners; it will, I think, be no
difficult Matter to conceive and justify the Meaning and Use of our Belief of
Mysteries, against the most confident Assertions and Objections of the Minute
Philosophers, who are easily to be caught in those very Snares, which they have
spun and spread for others. And that Humor of Controversy, the Mother and
Nurse of Heresies, would doubtless very much abate, if it was considered that
things are to be rated, not by the Color, Shape, or Stamp, so truly as by the
Weight. If the Moment of Opinions had been by some litigious Divines made the
Measure of their Zeal, it might have spared much Trouble both to themselves and
others. Certainly one that takes his Notions of Faith, Opinion, and Assent from
Common Sense, and Common Use, and has maturely weighed the Nature of Signs and
Language, will not be so apt to controvert the Wording of a Mystery, or to
break the Peace of the Church, for the sake of retaining or rejecting a Term.

XIV.
ALC. It seems, Euphranor, and you would persuade me into an Opinion, that
there is nothing so singularly absurd as we are apt to think, in the Belief of
Mysteries; and that a Man need not renounce his Reason to maintain his
Religion. But if this were true, how comes it to pass, that, in proportion as
Men abound in Knowledge, they dwindle in Faith? EUPH. O Alciphron, I have
learned from you, that there is nothing like going to the Bottom of things, and
analyzing them into their first Principles. I shall therefore make an Essay of
this Method, for clearing up the Nature of Faith: with what Success, I shall
leave you to determine; for I dare not pronounce my self on my own Judgment,
whether it be right or wrong: But thus it seems to me. The Objections made to
Faith are by no means an Effect of Knowledge, but proceed rather from an
Ignorance of what Knowledge is; which Ignorance may possibly be sound even in
those who pass for Masters of this or that particular Branch of Knowledge.
Science and Faith agree in this, that they both imply an Assent of the Mind:
And, as the Nature of the First is most clear and evident, it should be first
considered in order to cast a Light on the other. To trace things from their
Original, it seems that the Humane Mind, naturally furnished with the Ideas of
things particular and concrete, and being designed, not for the bare Intuition
of Ideas, but for Action or Operation about them, and pursuing her own
Happiness therein, stands in need of certain general Rules or Theorems to
direct her Operations in this pursuit; the supplying which Want is the true,
original, reasonable End of studying the Arts and Sciences. Now these Rules
being general, it follows, that they are not to be obtained by the mere
Consideration of the original Ideas, or particular Things, but by the means of
Marks or Signs, which, being so far forth universal, become the immediate
Instruments and Materials of Science. It is not therefore by mere Contemplation
of particular Things, and much less of their abstract general Ideas, that the
Mind makes her Progress, but by an apposite Choice and skilful Management of
Signs: For Instance, Force and Number, taken in concrete with there Adjuncts,
Subjects, and Signs, are what every one knows; and considered in abstract, so
as making precise Ideas of themselves, they are what no Body can comprehend.
That their abstract Nature, therefore, is not the Foundation of Science, is
plain: And that barely considering their Ideas in concrete, is not the Method
to advance in the respective Sciences, is what every one that reflects may see;
nothing being more evident, than that one who can neither write nor read, in
common Use understands the meaning of Numeral Words, as well as the best
Philosopher or Mathematician.

XV.
But here lies the Difference: the one, who understands the Notation of
Numbers, by means thereof is able to express briefly and distinctly all the
Variety and Degrees of Number, and to perform with ease and dispatch several
arithmetical Operations, by the help of general Rules. Of all which Operations
as the Use in Humane Life is very evident, so it is no less evident, that the
performing them depends on the aptness of the Notation. If we suppose rude
Mankind without the Use of Language, it may be presumed, they would be ignorant
of Arithmetic: But the Use of Names, by the Repetition whereof in a certain
Order they might express endless Degrees of Number, would be the first Step
toward that Science. The next Step would be, to devise proper Marks of a
permanent Nature, and visible to the Eye, the Kind and Order whereof must be
chose with Judgment, and accommodated to the Names. Which Marking, or Notation,
would, in Proportion as it was apt and regular, facilitate the Invention and
Application of general Rules, to assist the Mind in reasoning, and judging, in
extending, recording, and communicating its Knowledge about Numbers: in which
Theory and Operations, the Mind is immediately occupied about the Signs or
Notes, by Mediation of which it is directed to act about Things, or Number in
concrete (as the Logicians call it) without ever considering the simple,
abstract, intellectual, general Idea of Number. I imagine one need not think
much to be convinced, that the Science of Arithmetic, in its Rise, Operations,
Rules, and Theorems, is altogether conversant about the artificial Use of
Signs, Names, and Characters. These Names and Characters are universal,
inasmuch as they are Signs. The Names are referred to Things, and the
Characters to Names, and both to Operation. The Names being few, and proceeding
by a certain Analogy, the Characters will be more useful, the simpler they are,
and the more aptly they express this Analogy. Hence the old Notation by Letters
was more useful than Words written at length: And the modern Notation by
Figures, expressing the Progression or Analogy of the Names by their simple
Places, is much preferable to that for Ease and Expedition, as the Invention of
Algebraical Symbols is to this for extensive and general Use. As Arithmetic and
Algebra are Sciences of great Clearness, Certainty, and Extent, which are
immediately conversant about Signs, upon the skilful Use and Management whereof
they entirely depend, so a little Attention to them may possibly help us to
judge of the Progress of the Mind in other Sciences, which, though differing in
Nature, Design, and Object, may yet agree in the general Methods of Proof and
Inquiry.

XVI.
If I mistake not, all Sciences, so far as they are universal and demonstrable
by Humane Reason, will be found conversant about Signs as their immediate
Object, though these in the Application are referred to Things: the Reason
whereof is not difficult to comprehend. For as the Mind is better acquainted
with some sort of Objects, which are earlier suggested to it, strike it more
sensibly, or are more easily comprehended than others, it is naturally led to
subtitute, those Objects for such as are more subtle, fleeting, or difficult
to conceive. Nothing, I say, is more natural, than to make the Things we know,
a Step toward those we do not know; and to explain and represent Things less
familiar by others which are more so. Now, it is certain we imagine before we
reflect, and we perceive by Sense before we imagine; and of all our Senses the
Sight is the most clear, distinct, various, agreeable, and comprehensive. Hence
it is natural to assist the Intellect by the Imagination, the Imagination by
Sense, and the other Senses by Sight. Hence, Figures, Metaphors, and Types. We
illustrate spiritual Things by corporeal; we substitute Sounds for Thoughts,
and written Letters for Sounds; Emblems, Symbols, and Hieroglyphics for Things
too obscure to strike, and too various or too fleeting to be retained. We
substitute Things imaginable, for Things intelligible, sensible Things for
imaginable, smaller Things for those that are too great to comprehend easily,
and greater Things for such as are too small to be discerned distinctly,
present Things for absent, permanent for perishing, and visible for invisible.
Hence the Use of Models and Diagrams. Hence right Lines are substituted for
Time, Velocity, and other things of very different Natures. Hence we speak of
Spirits in a figurative Style, expressing the Operations of the Mind by
Allusions and Terms, borrowed from sensible Things, such as apprehend,
conceive, reflect, discourse, and such like: And hence those Allegories which
illustrate Things intellectual by Visions exhibited to the Fancy. Plato, for
Instance, represents the Mind presiding in her Vehicle by the Driver of a
winged Chariot, which sometimes moults and droops: this Chariot is drawn by two
Horses, the one good and of a good Race, the other of a contrary kind,
symbolically expressing the Tendency of the Mind toward the Divinity, as she
soars or is born aloft by two Instincts like Wings, the one in the Intellect
toward Truth, the other in the Will toward Excellence, which Instincts moult
or are weakened by sensual Inclinations, expressing also her alternate
Elevations and Depressions, the Struggles between Reason and Appetite, like
Horses that go an unequal Pace, or draw different Ways, embarrassing the Soul
in her Progress to Perfection. I am inclined to think the Doctrine of Signs a
Point of great Importance, and general Extent, which, if duly considered, would
cast no small light upon Things, and afford a just and genuine Solution of many
Difficulties.

XVII.
Thus much, upon the whole, may be said of all Signs: That they do not always
suggest Ideas signified to the Mind, That when they suggest Ideas, they are not
general abstract Ideas: That they have other Uses besides barely standing for
and exhibiting Ideas, such as raising proper Emotions, producing certain
Dispositions or Habits of Mind, and directing our Actions in pursuit of that
Happiness, which is the ultimate End and Design, the Primary Spring and Motive,
that sets rational Agents at work: That the true End of Speech, Reason,
Science, Faith, Assent in all its different Degrees, is not merely, or
principally, or always the imparting or acquiring of Ideas, but rather
something of an active, operative Nature, tending to a conceived Good, which
may sometimes be obtained, not only although the Ideas marked are not offered
to the Mind, but even although there should be no possibility of offering or
exhibiting any such Idea to the Mind: For Instance, the Algebraic Mark, which
denotes the Root of a negative Square, has its Use in Logistic Operations,
although it be impossible to form an Idea of any such Quantity. And what is
true of Algebraic Signs, is also true of Words or Language, modern Algebra
being in fact a more short, apposite, and artificial Sort of Language, and it
being possible to express by Words at length, though less conveniently, all the
Steps of an Algebraical Process. And it must be confessed, that even the
Mathematical Sciences themselves, which above all others are reckoned the most
clear and certain, if they are considered, not as Instruments to direct our
Practice, but as Speculations to employ our Curiosity, will be found to fall
short in many Instances of those clear and distinct Ideas, which, it seems, the
Minute Philosophers of this Age, whether knowingly or ignorantly, expect and
insist upon in the Mysteries of Religion.

XVIII.
Be the Science or Subject what it will, whenever Men quit Particulars for
Generalities, things Concrete for Abstractions, when they forsake practical
Views, and the useful Purposes of Knowledge for barren Speculation, considering
Means and Instruments as ultimate Ends, and laboring to attain precise Ideas
which they suppose indiscriminately annexed to all Terms, they will be sure to
embarrass themselves with Difficulties and Disputes. Such are those which have
sprung up in Geometry about the Nature of the Angle of Contact, the Doctrine of
Proportions, of Indivisibles Infinitesimals, and diverse other Points;
notwithstanding all which, that Science is very rightly esteemed an excellent
and useful one, and is really sound to be so in many Occasions of Humane Life,
wherein it governs and directs the Actions of Men, so that by the Aid or
Influence thereof those Operations become just and accurate, which would
otherwise be faulty and uncertain. And from a parity of Reason, we should not
conclude any other Doctrines which govern, influence or direct the Mind of Man
to be, any more than that, the less true or excellent, because they afford
matter of Controversy and useless Speculation to curious and licentious Wits:
Particularly those Articles of our Christian Faith, which, in proportion as
they are believed, persuade, and, as they persuade, influence the Lives and
Actions of Men. As to the perplexity of Contradictions and abstracted Notions,
in all parts whether of Humane Science or Divine Faith, Cavillers may equally
object, and unwary Persons incur, while the judicious avoid it. There is no
need to depart from the received Rules of Reasoning to justify the Belief of
Christians. And if any pious Men think otherwise, it may be supposed an Effect,
not of Religion, or of Reason, but only of Humane Weakness. If this Age be
singularly productive of Infidels, I shall not therefore conclude it to be more
knowing, but only more presuming, than former Ages: And their Conceit, I doubt,
is not the Effect of Consideration. To me it seems, that the more thoroughly
and extensively any Man shall consider and scan the Principles, Objects, and
Methods of proceeding in Arts and Sciences, the more he will be convinced,
there is no weight in those plausible Objections that are made against the
Mysteries of Faith, which it will be no difficult matter for him to maintain or
justify in the received Method of arguing, on the common Principles of Logic,
and by numberless avowed parallel Cases, throughout the several Branches of
Humane Knowledge, in all which the Supposition of abstract Ideas creates the
same Difficulties.

XIX.
ALC. I will allow, Euphranor, this Reasoning of yours to have all the Force
you meant it should have. I freely own there may be Mysteries: That we may
believe, where we do not understand: And that Faith may be of use although its
Object is not distinctly apprehended. In a word, I grant their may be Faith and
Mysteries in other Things but not in Religion: And that for this plain Reason:
Because it is absurd to suppose, there should be any such thing as Religion;
and if there be no Religion it follows there cannot be Religious Faith or
Mysteries. Religion, it is evident, implies the Worship of a God; which Worship
supposes Rewards and Punishments, which suppose Merits and Demerits, Actions
good and evil, and these suppose Humane Liberty, a thing impossible; and
consequently Religion a thing built thereon must be an unreasonable absurd
thing. There can be no rational Hopes or Fears where there is no Guilt, nor any
Guilt where there is nothing done, but what unavoidably follows from the
Structure of the World and the Laws of Motion. Corporeal Objects strike on the
Organs of Sense, whence ensues a Vibration in the Nerves, which, being
communicated to the Soul or Animal Spirit in the Brain or Root of the Nerves,
produces therein that Motion called Volition: And this produces a new
Determination in the Spirits, causing them to flow into such Nerves as must
necessarily by the Laws of Mechanism produce such certain Actions. This being
the Case, it follows that those things which vulgarly pass for Humane Actions
are to be esteemed Mechanical, and that they are falsely ascribed to a free
Principle. There is therefore no Foundation for Praise or Blame, Fear or Hope,
Reward or Punishment, nor consequently for Religion, which, as I observed
before, is built upon and supposes those things. EUPH. You imagine, Alciphron,
if I rightly understand you, that Man is a sort of Organ played on by outward
Objects, which according to the different shape and texture of the Nerves
produce different Motions and Effects therein. ALC. Man may, indeed, be fitly
compared to an Organ; but a Puppet is the very Thing. You must know, that
certain Particles issuing forth in right Lines from all sensible Objects
compose so many Rays, or Filaments, which drive, draw, and actuate every part
of the Soul and Body of Man, just as Threads or Wires do the joints of that
little wooden Machine vulgarly called a Puppet: With this only difference that
the latter are gross and visible to common eyes, whereas the former are too
fine and subtle to be discerned by any but a sagacious Free-thinker. This
admirably accounts for all those Operations, which we have been taught to
ascribe to a thinking Principle within us. EUPH. This is an ingenious Thought,
and must be of great use in freeing Men from all Anxiety about Moral Notions,
as it transfers the Principle of Action from the Humane Soul to things outward
and foreign. But I have my Scruples about it. For you suppose the Mind in a
literal sense to be moved and its Volitions to be mere Motions. Now if another
should affirm, as it is not impossible some or other may, that the Soul is
incorporeal, and that Motion is one thing and Volition another, I would fain
know how you could make your Point clear to such a one. It must be owned very
clear to those who admit the Soul to be corporeal, and all her Acts to be but
so many Motions. Upon this Supposition, indeed, the Light wherein you place
Humane Nature is no less true, than it is fine and new. But let any one deny
this Supposition, which is easily done, and the whole Superstructure falls to
the ground. If we grant the abovementiond Points, I will not deny a fatal
Necessity must ensue. But I see no reason for granting them. On the contrary it
seems plain, that Motion and Thought are two Things as really and as manifestly
distinct as a Triangle and a Sound. It seems therefore, that in order to prove
the necessity of Humane Actions, you suppose what wants Proof as much as the
very Point to be proved.

XX.
ALC. But supposing the Mind incorporeal, I shall, nevertheless, be able to
prove my Point. Not to amuse you with far fetched Arguments, I shall only
desire you to look into your own Breast and observe how things pass there, when
an Object offers it self to the Mind. First the Understanding considers it: In
the next Place the Judgment decrees about it, as a thing to be chosen or
rejected, to be omitted or done, in this or that manner: And this Decree of the
Judgment does necessarily determine the Will, whose Office is merely to execute
what is ordained by another Faculty: Consequently there is no such thing as
Freedom of the Will: For that which is necessary cannot be free. In Freedom
there should be an Indifference to either side of the Question, a Power to act
or not to act, without perscription or control: And without this Indifference
and this Power, it is evident the Will cannot be free. But it is no less
evident, that the Will is not indifferent in its Actions, being absolutely
determined and governed by the Judgment. Now whatever moves the Judgment,
whether the greatest present Uneasiness, or the greatest apparent Good, or
whatever else it be, it is all one to the Point in hand. The Will being ever
concluded and controlled by the Judgment is in all Cases alike under Necessity.
There is, indeed, throughout the whole of Humane Nature, nothing like a
Principle of Freedom, every Faculty being determined in all its Acts by
something foreign to it. The Understanding, for Instance, cannot alter its
Idea, but must necessarily see it such as it presents it self. The Appetites by
a natural Necessity are carried toward their respective Objects. Reason cannot
infer indifferently any thing from any thing, but is limited by the Nature and
Connection of things, and the eternal Rules of Reasoning. And as this is
confessedly the Case of all other Faculties, so it equally holds with respect
to the Will it self, as has been already shown. And if we may credit the
Divine Characterizer of our Times, this above all others must be allowed the
most slavish Faculty. Appetite (says that noble Writer) which is elder Brother
to Reason, being the Lad of stronger growth, is sure on every contest to take
the Advantage of drawing all to his own side: And Will, so highly boasted, is
but at best a Football or Top between those Youngsters who prove very
unfortunately matched, till the youngest, instead of now and then a kick or
lash bestowed to little purpose, forsakes the Ball or Top it self, and begins
to lay about his elder Brother. CRI. This beautiful Parable for Style and
Manner might equal those of a known English Writer, in low Life renowned for
Allegory, were it not a little incorrect, making the weaker Lad find his
account in laying about the stronger. ALC. This is helped by supposing the
stronger Lad the greater Coward: But, be that as it will, so far as it relates
to the Point in hand, this is a clear state of the Case. The same Point may be
also proved from the Prescience of God. That which is certainly foreknown will
certainly be. And what is certain is necessary. And necessary Actions cannot be
the Effect of Free Will. Thus you have this fundamental Point of our
Free-thinking Philosophy demonstrated different ways. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron,
do you think it implies a Contradiction, that God should make a Man Free? ALC.
I do not. EUPH. It is then possible there may be such a thing. ALC. This I do
not deny. EUPH. You can therefore conceive and suppose such a Free Agent. ALC.
Admitting that I can; what then? EUPH. Would not such an one think that he
acted? ALC. He would. EUPH. And condemn himself for some Actions and approve
himself for others? ALC. This too I grant. EUPH. Would he not think he deserved
Reward or Punishment? ALC. He would. EUPH. And are not all these Characters
actually found in Man? ALC. They are. EUPH. Tell me now, what other Character
of your supposed Free Agent may not actually be found in Man? For if there is
none such, we must conclude that Man has all the marks of a Free Agent. ALC.
Let me see! I was certainly overseen in granting it possible, even for Almighty
Power, to make such a thing as a Free Humane Agent. I wonder how I came to make
such an absurd Concession, after what had been, as I observed before,
demonstrated so many different ways. EUPH. O Alciphron, it is vulgarly observed
that Men judge of others by themselves. But in judging of me by this Rule, you
may be mistaken. Many things are plain to one of your Sagacity, which are not
so to me, who am often bewildered rather than enlightened by those very Proofs,
that with you pass for clear and evident. And, indeed, be the Inference never
so just, yet so long as the Premises are not clear, I cannot be thoroughly
convinced. You must give me leave therefore to propose some Questions, the
Solution of which may perhaps show what at present I am not able to discern.
ALC. I shall leave what has been said with you, to consider and ruminate upon.
It is now time to set out on our Journey; there is, therefore, no room for a
long String of Question and Answer.

XXI.
EUPH. I shall then only beg leave in a summary Manner, to make a Remark or two
on what you have advanced. In the first place I observe, you take that for
granted which I cannot grant, when you assert whatever is certain the same to
be necessary. To me, Certain and Necessary seem very different; there being
nothing in the former notion that implies Constraint, nor consequently which
may not consist with a Man's being accountable for his Actions. If it is
foreseen that such an Action shall be done: May it not also be foreseen that it
shall be an Effect of Humane Choice and Liberty? In the next place I observe,
that you very nicely abstract and distinguish the Actions of the Mind,
Judgment, and Will: That you make use of such Terms as Power, Faculty, Act,
Determination, Indifference, Freedom, Necessity, and the like, as if they stood
for distinct abstract Ideas: And that this Supposition seems to ensnare the
Mind into the same Perplexities and Errors, which, in all other Instances, are
observed to attend the Doctrine of Abstraction. It is self evident, that there
is such a thing as Motion; and yet there have been found Philosophers, who, by
refined Reasoning, would undertake to prove there was no such thing. Walking
before them was thought the proper Way to confute those ingenious Men. It is no
less evident, that Man is a free Agent: and though by abstracted Reasonings you
should puzzle me, and seem to prove the contrary, yet so long as I am conscious
of my own Actions, this inward Evidence of plain Fact will bear me up against
all your Reasonings, however subtle and refined. The confuting plain Points by
obscure ones, may perhaps convince me of the Ability of your Philosophers, but
never of their Tenets. I cannot conceive why the acute Cratylus should suppose
a Power of Acting in the Appetite and Reason, and none at all in the Will?
Allowing, I say, the Distinction of three such Beings in the Mind, I do not see
how this could be true. But if I cannot abstract and distinguish so many Beings
in the Soul of Man so accurately as you do, I do not find it necessary, since
it is evident to me in the gross and concrete that I am a free Agent. Nor will
it avail to say, the Will is governed by the Judgment, or determined by the
Object, while, in every sudden common Case, I cannot discern nor abstract the
Decree of the Judgment from the Command of the Will; while I know the sensible
Object to be absolutely inert: And lastly, while I am conscious that I am an
active Being, who can and do determine my self. If I should suppose things
spiritual to be corporeal, or refine things actual and real into general
abstracted Notions, or by metaphysical Skill split things simple and individual
into manifold Parts, I do not know what may follow: But if I take things as
they are, and ask any plain untutored Man, whether he acts or is free in this
or that particular Action, he readily assents, and I as readily believe him
from what I find within. And thus, by an Induction of Particulars, I may
conclude Man to be a free Agent, although I may be puzzled to define or
conceive a Notion of Freedom in general and abstract. And if Man be free he is
plainly accountable. But if you shall define, abstract, suppose, and it shall
follow that according to your Definitions, Abstractions, and Suppositions,
there can be no Freedom in Man, and you shall thence infer that he is not
accountable, I shall make bold to depart from your metaphysical abstracted
Sense, and appeal to the common Sense of Mankind.

XXII.
If we consider the Notions that obtain in the World of Guilt and Merit, Praise
and Blame, Accountable and Unaccountable, we shall find the common Question in
order to applaud or censure, acquit or condemn a Man, is, whether he did such
an Action? and whether he was himself when he did it? which comes to the same
thing. It should seem therefore that in the ordinary Commerce of Mankind, any
Person is esteemed accountable simply as he is an Agent. And though you should
tell me that Man is inactive, and that the sensible Objects act upon him, yet
my own Experience assures me of the contrary. I know I act, and what I act I am
accountable for. And if this be true, the Foundation of Religion and Morality
remains unshaken. Religion, I say is concerned no farther than that Man should
be Accountable: And this he is according to my Sense, and the common Sense of
the World, if he acts; and that he does act is self evident. The Grounds,
therefore, and Ends of Religion are secured; whether your philosophic Notion of
Liberty agrees with Man's Actions or no, and whether his Actions are certain or
contingent, the Question being not whether he did it with a Free Will, or what
determined his Will? not, whether it was certain or foreknown that he would do
it? but only whether he did it wilfully? as what must entitle him to the Guilt
or Merit of it. ALC. But still, the Question recurs, whether Man be Free?
EUPH. To determine this Question, ought we not first to determine what is meant
by the word Free? ALC. We ought. EUPH. In my Opinion, a Man is said to be Free,
so far forth as he can do what he will. Is this so or is it not? ALC. It seems
so. EUPH. Man therefore acting according to his Will, is to be accounted Free.
ALC. This I admit to be true in the Vulgar Sense. But a Philosopher goes
higher, and inquires whether Man be free to will? EUPH. That is, whether he can
will as he wills? I know not how Philosophical it may be to ask this Question,
but it seems very unintelligible. The Notions of Guilt and Merit, Justice and
Reward are in the Minds of Men, antecedent to all Metaphysical Disquisitions:
And according to those received natural Notions, it is not doubted that Man is
accountable, that he acts, and is self-determined.

XXIII.
But a Minute Philosopher shall, in virtue of wrong Suppositions, confound
things most evidently distinct; Body, for Instance, with Spirit, Motion with
Volition, Certainty with Necessity; and an Abstracter or Refiner shall so
analyze the most simple instantaneous Act of the Mind, as to distinguish
therein diverse Faculties and Tendencies, Principles and Operations, Causes and
Effects; and having abstracted, supposed, and reasoned upon Principles
gratuitous and obscure, such a one he will conclude it is no Act at all, and
Man no Agent but a Puppet, or an Organ played on by outward Objects, and his
Will a Top or a Football. And this passes for Philosophy and Free-thinking.
Perhaps this may be what it passes for, but it by no means seems a natural or
just way of Thinking. To me it seems, that if we begin from things particular
and concrete, and thence proceed to general Notions and Conclusions, there will
be no Difficulty in this Matter. But if we begin with Generalities, and lay our
Foundation in abstract Ideas, we shall find our selves entangled and lost in a
Labyrinth of our own making. I need not observe, what every one must see, the
ridicule of proving Man no Agent, and yet pleading for free Thought and Action,
of setting up at once for Advocates of Liberty and Necessity. I have hastily
thrown together these Hints or Remarks, on what you call a fundamental Article
of the Minute Philosophy, and your Method of proving it, which seems to furnish
an admirable Specimen of the Sophistry of abstract Ideas. If in this summary
way I have been more dogmatical than became me, you must excuse what you
occasioned, by declining a joint and leisurely Examination of the Truth. ALC. I
think we have examined Matters sufficiently. CRI. To all you have said against
Humane Liberty, it is a sufficient Answer to observe that your Arguments
proceed upon an erroneous Supposition, either of the Soul's being corporeal, or
of abstract Ideas. And on the other hand, there is not need of much Inquiry to
be convinced of two Points, than which none are more evident, more obvious, and
more universally admitted by Men of all sorts, learned or unlearned, in all
Times and Places, to wit, that Man acts and is accountable for his Actions.
Whatever Abstracters, Refiners, or Men prejudiced to a false Hypothesis may
pretend, it is, if I mistake not, evident to every thinking Man of common
Sense, that Humane Minds are so far from being Engines or Foot-balls, acted
upon and bandied about by corporeal Objects, without any inward Principle of
Freedom or Action, that the only original true Notions that we have of Freedom,
Agent, or Action, are obtained by reflecting on our selves, and the Operations
of our own Minds. The Singularity and Credulity of Minute Philosophers, who
suffer themselves to be abused by the Paralogisms of three or four eminent
Patriarchs of Infidelity in the last Age, is, I think, not to be matched; there
being no Instance of bigoted Superstition, the Ringleaders whereof have been
able to seduce their Followers more openly and more widely from the plain
Dictates of Nature and common Sense.

XXIV.
ALC. It has been always an Objection against the Discoverers of Truth, that
they depart from received Opinions. The Character of Singularity is a Tax on
Free-thinking: And as such we most willingly bear it, and glory in it. A
Genuine Philosopher is never modest in a false Sense, to the preferring
Authority before Reason, or an old and common Opinion before a true one. Which
false Modesty, as it discourages Men from treading in untrodden Paths, or
striking out new Light, is above all other Qualities the greatest Enemy to
Free-thinking. CRI. Authority in disputable Points will have its Weight with a
judicious Mind, which yet will follow Evidence wherever it leads. Without
preferring we may allow it a good Second to Reason. Your Gentlemen, therefore,
of the Minute Philosophy, may spare a World of Common Place upon Reason, and
Light, and Discoveries. We are not attached to Authority against Reason, nor
afraid of untrodden Paths that lead to Truth, and are ready to follow a new
Light when we are sure it is no ignis fatuus. Reason may oblige a Man to
believe against his Inclinations; but why should a Man quit salutary Notions
for others not less unreasonable than pernicious? Your Schemes and Principles,
and boasted Demonstrations have been at large proposed and examined. You have
shifted your Notions, successively retreated from one Scheme to another, and in
the End renounced them all. Your Objections have been treated in the same
Manner, and with the same Event. If we except all that relates to the
particular Errors and Faults of private Persons, and Difficulties which, from
the Nature of Things, we are not obliged to explain, it is surprising to see,
after such magnificent Threats, how little remains, that can amount to a
pertinent Objection against the Christian Religion. What you have produced has
been tried by the fair Test of Reason; and though you should hope to prevail by
Ridicule when you cannot by Reason, yet in the upshot, I apprehend you will
find it impracticable to destroy all Sense of Religion. Make your Countrymen
ever so vicious, ignorant, and profane, Men will still be disposed to look up
to a supreme Being. Religion, right or wrong, will subsist in some Shape or
other, and some worship there will surely be either of God or the Creature. As
for your Ridicule, can any thing be more ridiculous, than to see the most
unmeaning Men of the Age set up for Free-thinkers, Men so strong in Assertion,
and yet so weak in Argument, Advocates for Freedom introducing a Fatality,
Patriots trampling on the Laws of their Country, and Pretenders to Virtue,
destroying the Motives of it? Let any impartial Man but cast an eye on the
Opinions of the Minute Philosophers, and then say if any thing can be more
ridiculous, than to believe such things, and at the same time laugh at
Credulity.

XXV.
LYS. Say what you will, we have the Laughers on our side: And as for your
Reasoning I take it to be another Name for Sophistry. CRI. And I suppose by the
same Rule you take your own Sophisms for Arguments. To speak plainly, I know no
sort of Sophism that is not employed by Minute Philosophers against Religion.
They are guilty of a Petitio Principii, in taking for granted that we believe
Contradictions; of non Causa pro Causa, in affirming that uncharitable Feuds
and Discords are the Effects of Christianity; of Ignoratio elenchi, in
expecting Demonstration where we pretend only to Faith. If I was not afraid to
offend the Delicacy of polite Ears, nothing were easier than to assign
Instances of every kind of Sophism, which would show how skilful your own
Philosophers are in the practice of that Sophistry you impute to others. EUPH.
For my own part, if Sophistry be the Art or Faculty of deceiving other Men, I
must acquit these Gentlemen of it. They seem to have led me a progress through
Atheism, Libertinism, Enthusiasm, Fatalism, not to convince me of the Truth of
any of them, so much as to confirm me in my own way of Thinking. They have
exposed their fairy Ware not to cheat but divert us. As I know them to be
professed Masters of Ridicule, so in a serious sense I know not what to make of
them. ALC. You do not know what to make of us! I should be sorry you did. He
must be a superficial Philosopher that is soon fathomed.

XXVI.
CRI. The ambiguous Character is, it seems, the sure way to Fame and Esteem in
the learned World, as it stands constituted at present. When the ingenious
Reader is at a loss to determine whether his Author be Atheist or Deist or
Polytheist, Stoic or Epicurean, Skeptic or Dogmatist, Infidel or Enthusiast, in
jest or in earnest, he concludes him without hesitation to be aenigmatical and
profound. In fact, it is true of the most admired Writers of the Age, That no
Man alive can tell what to make of them, or what they would be at. ALC. We have
among us Moles that dig deep under ground, and Eagles that soar out of sight.
We can act all Parts and become all Opinions, putting them on or off with great
freedom of Wit and Humor. EUPH. It seems then you are a pair of inscrutable,
unfathomable, fashionable Philosophers. ALC. It cannot be denied. EUPH. But, I
remember, you set out with an open dogmatical Air, and talked of plain
Principles and evident Reasoning, promised to make things as clear as Noonday,
to extirpate wrong Notions and plant right in their stead. Soon after, you
began to recede from you first Notions and adopt others: you advanced one while
and retreated another, yielded and retracted, said and unsaid: And after having
followed you through so many untrodden Paths and intricate Mazes I find my self
never the nearer. ALC. Did we not tell you the Gentlemen of our Sect are great
Proficients in Raillery? EUPH. But, methinks, it is a vain Attempt, for a plain
Man of any settled Belief or Principles to engage with such slippery, fugitive,
changeable Philosophers. If seems as it a Man should stand still in the same
place, while his Adversary chooses and changes his Situation, has full range
and liberty to traverse the Field, and attack him on all sides and in all
shapes, from a nearer or farther distance, on Horseback or on Foot, in light
or heavy Armor, in close Fight or with missive Weapons. ALC. It must be owned,
a Gentleman has great Advantage over a straitlaced Pedant or Bigot. EUPH. But
after all, what am I the better for the Conversation of two such knowing
Gentlemen; I hoped to have unlearned my Errors, and to have learned Truths from
you, but, to my great disappointment, I do not find that I am either untaught
or taught. ALC. To unteach Men their Prejudices is a difficult task: And this
must first be done, before we can pretend to teach them the Truth. Besides, we
have at present no time to prove and argue. EUPH. But suppose my Mind white
Paper, and without being at any pains to extirpate my Opinions, or prove your
own, only say what you would write thereon, or what you would teach me in case
I were teacheable. Be for once in earnest, and let me know some one Conclusion
of yours before we part; or I shall entreat Crito to violate the Laws of
Hospitality toward those who have violated the Laws of Philosophy, by hanging
out false Lights to one benighted in Ignorance and Error. I appeal to you (said
he turning to Crito) whether these Philosophical Knight-errants should not be
confined in this Castle of yours, till they make Reparation. Euphranor has
Reason, said Crito, and my Sentence is that you remain here in durance, till
you have done something toward satisfying the Engagement I am under, having
promised, he should know your Opinions from your selves, which you also agreed
to.

XXVII.
ALC. Since it must be so, I will now reveal what I take to be the Sum and
Substance, the grand Arcanum and ultimate Conclusion of our Sect, and that in
two Words, (...). CRI. You are then a downright Skeptic. But, Skeptic as you
are, you own it, probable there is a God, certain that the Christian Religion
is useful, possible it may be true, certain that if it be the Minute
Philosophers are in a bad way. This being the Case, how can it be questioned
what course a wise Man should take? Whether the Principles of Christians or
Infidels are truest may be made a Question, but which are safest can be none.
Certainly if you doubt of all Opinions you must doubt of your own; and then,
for ought you know, the Christian may be true. The more doubt, the more room
there is for Faith, a Skeptic of all Men having the least Right to demand
Evidence. But, whatever uncertainty there may be in other Points, thus much is
certain: either there is or is not a God: there is or is not a Revelation: Man
either is or is not an Agent: The Soul is or is not Immortal. If the Negatives
are not sure, the Affirmatives are possible. If the Negatives are improbable,
the Affirmatives are probable. In Proportion, as any of your ingenious Men
finds himself unable to prove any one of these Negatives, he has grounds to
suspect he may be mistaken. A Minute Philosopher, therefore, that would act a
consistent part, should have the Diffidence, the Modesty, and the Timidity, as
well as the Doubts, of a Skeptic; not pretend to an Ocean of Light, and then
lead us to an Abyss of Darkness. If I have any Notion of Ridicule, this is most
ridiculous. But your ridiculing what, for ought you know, may be true, I can
make no sense of. It is neither acting as a wise Man with regard to your own
Interest, nor as a good Man with regard to that of your Country.

XXVIII.
Tully says somewhere, aut undique religionem toll aut usquequaque conserva:
Either let us have no Religion at all or let it be respected. If any single
Instance can be shown of a People that ever prospered without some Religion, or
if there be any Religion better than the Christian, propose it in the grand
Assembly of the Nation to change our Constitution, and either live without
Religion, or introduce that new Religion. A Skeptic, as well as other Men, is
Member of a Community, and can distinguish between God and Evil, Natural or
Political. Be this then his Guide as a Patriot, though he be no Christian. Or,
if he does not pretend even to this discernment, let him not pretend to correct
or alter what he knows nothing of: Neither let him that only doubts behave as
if he could demonstrate. Timagoras is wont to say, I find my Country in
possession of certain Tenets: they appear to have an useful Tendency, and, as
such, are encouraged by the Legislature; they make a main part of our
Constitution: I do not find these Innovators can disprove them, or substitute
things more useful and certain in their stead: out of regard therefore to the
Good of Mankind, and the Laws of my Country, I shall acquiesce in them. I do
not say Timagoras is a Christian, but I reckon him a Patriot. Not to inquire in
a Point of so great concern is folly, but it is still a higher degree of folly
to condemn without inquiring. Lysicles seemed heartily tired of this
Conversation. It is now late, said he to Alciphron, and all things are ready
for our departure. Every one has his own way of Thinking; and it is as
impossible for me to adopt another Man's, as to make his Complexion and
Features mine. Alciphron pleaded that, having complied with Euphranor's
Conditions, they were now at Liberty: And Euphranor answered that, all he
desired having been to know their Tenets, he had nothing further to pretend.

XXIX.
The Philosophers being gone, I observed to Crito how unaccountable it was,
that Men so easy to confute should yet be so difficult to convince. This, said
Crito, is accounted for by Aristotle, who tells us that Arguments have not an
Effect on all Men, but only on them whose Minds are prepared by Education and
Custom, as Land is for Seed Ethic. ad Nicom. l. 10. c. 9.
. Make a Point never so clear, it is great odds, that a Man, whose Habits and
the Bent of whose Mind lie a contrary way, shall be unable to comprehend it. So
weak a thing is Reason in Competition with Inclination. I replied, this answer
might hold with respect to other Persons and other Times: but when the question
was of inquisitive Men, in an Age wherein Reason was so much cultivated, and
Thinking so much in vogue, it did not seem satisfactory. I have known it
remarked, said Crito, by a Man of much Observation, that in the present Age
Thinking is more talked of but less practiced than in ancient times; and that
since the Revival of Learning Men have read much and wrote much but thought
little: insomuch that with us to think closely and justly is the least part of
a learned Man, and none at all of a polite Man. The Free-thinkers, it must be
owned, make great Pretensions to Thinking, and yet they show but little
Exactness in it. A lively Man, said he, and what the World calls a Man of sense
are often destitute of this Talent, which is not a mere gift of Nature, but
must be improved and perfected, by much Attention and Exercise on very
different Subjects, a thing of more pains and time than the hasty Men of parts
in our Age care to take. Such were the Sentiments of a judicious Friend of
mine: And, if you are not already sufficiently convinced of these Truths, you
need only cast an eye on the dark and confused, but nevertheless admired,
Writers of this famous Sect: And then you will be able to judge, whether those
who are led by Men of such wrong Heads can have very good ones of their own.
Such, for instance, was Spinosa the great Leader of our modern Infidels, in
whom are to be found many Schemes and Notions much admired and followed of late
years: such as undermining Religion under the pretense of vindicating and
explaining it: The maintaining it not necessary to believe in Christ according
to the Flesh: The persuading Men that Miracles are to be understood only in a
spiritual and allegorical sense: That Vice is not so bad a thing as we are apt
to think: That Men are mere Machines impelled by fatal Necessity. I have heard,
said I, Spinosa represented as a Man of close Argument and Demonstration. He
did, replied Crito, demonstrate; but it was after such a manner, as any one may
demonstrate any thing. Allow a Man the privilege to make his own Definitions of
common Words, and it will be no hard matter for him to infer Conclusions, which
in one sense shall be true and in another false, at once seeming Paradoxes and
manifest Truisms. For example, let but Spinosa define natural Right to be
natural Power, and he will easily demonstrate, that whatever a Man can do he
has a right to do Tractat. Politic. c. 2.
. Nothing can be plainer than the folly of this Proceeding: but our Pretenders
to the lumen siccum are often so passionately prejudiced against Religion, as
to swallow the grossest Nonsense and Sophistry of weak and wicked Writers for
Demonstration.

XXX.
And so great a Noise do these Men make, with their thinking, reasoning, and
demonstrating, as to prejudice some well-meaning Persons against all Use and
improvement of Reason. Honest Demea, having seen a Neighbor of his ruined by
the Vices of a Free-thinking Son, contracted such a Prejudice against Thinking,
that he would not suffer his own to read Euclid, being told it might teach him
to think; till a Friend convinced him the epidemical Distemper was not
Thinking, but only the want and affectation of it. I know an eminent
Free-thinker, who never goes to bed, without a Gallon of Wine in his Belly, and
is sure to replenish before the Fumes are off his Brain, by which means he has
not had one sober Thought these seven Years; another, that would not for the
World lose the Privilege and Reputation of Free-thinking, who games all Night,
and lies in bed all Day: And as for the Outside or Appearance of Thought in
that meagre Minute Philosopher Ibycus, it is an Effect, not of thinking, but of
carking, cheating, and writing in an Office. Strange, said he, that such Men
should set up for Free-thinkers! But it is yet more strange that other Men
should be out of Conceit with Thinking and Reasoning, for the sake of such
Pretenders. I answered, that some good Men conceived an Opposition between
Reason and Religion, Faith and Knowledge, Nature and Grace; and that,
consequently, the way to promote Religion was, to quench the light of Nature,
and discourage all rational Inquiry.

XXXI.
How right the Intentions of these Men may be, replied Crito, I shall not say;
but surely their Notions are very wrong. Can any thing be more dishonorable to
Religion, than the representing it as an unreasonable, unnatural, ignorant
Institution? God is the Father of all Lights whether natural or revealed.
Natural Concupiscence is one thing, and the Light of Nature another. You cannot
therefore argue from the Former against the Latter: Neither can you from
Science falsely so called, against real Knowledge. Whatever therefore is said of
the one in Holy Scripture is not to be interpreted of the other. I insisted,
that Humane Learning in the hands of Divines, had from time to time, created
great Disputes and Divisions in the Church. As abstracted Metaphysics, replied
Crito, have always had a Tendency to produce Disputes among Christians, as well
as other Men, so it should seem that genuine Truth and Knowledge would allay
this Humor, which makes Men sacrifice the undisputed Duties of Peace and
Charity to disputable Notions. After all, said I, whatever may be said for
Reason, it is plain, the Skeptics and Infidels of the Age are not to be cured
by it. I will not dispute this Point, said Crito; in order to cure a Distemper,
you should consider what produced it. Had Men reasoned themselves into a wrong
Opinion, one might hope to reason them out of it. But this is not the Case; the
Infidelity of most Minute Philosophers seeming an Effect of very different
Motives from Thought and Reason, little Incidents, Vanity, Disgust, Humor,
Inclination, without the least assistance from Reason, are often known to make
Infidels. Where the general Tendency of a Doctrine is disagreeable, the Mind is
prepared to relish and improve every thing that with the least Pretense seems
to make against it. Hence the coarse Manners of a Country Curate, the polite
ones of a Chaplain, the Wit of a Minute Philosopher, a Jest, a Song, a Tale can
serve instead of a Reason for Infidelity. Bupalus preferred a Rake in the
Church, and then made use of him as an Argument against it. Vice, Indolence,
Faction, and Fashion produce Minute Philosophers, and mere Petulancy not a few.
Who then can expect a thing so irrational and capricious should yield to
Reason? It may, nevertheless, be worth while to argue against such Men, and
expose their Fallacies, if not for their own sake, yet for the sake of others;
as it may lessen their Credit, and prevent the growth of their Sect, by
removing a Prejudice in their Favor, which sometimes inclines others as well
as themselves to think they have made a Monopoly of Humane Reason.

XXXII.
The most general Pretext which looks like Reason, is taken from the Variety of
Opinions about Religion. This is a resting Stone to a lazy and superficial
mind: But one of more Spirit and a juster way of Thinking, makes it a Step
whence he looks about, and proceeds to examine, and compare the differing
Institutions of Religion. He will observe, which of these is the most sublime
and rational in its Doctrines, most venerable in its Mysteries, most useful in
its Precepts, most decent in its Worship? Which creates the noblest Hopes, and
most worthy Views? He will consider their Rise and Progress; which owes least
to Humane Arts or Arms? Which flatters the Senses and gross Inclinations of
Men? Which adorns and improves the most excellent Part of our Nature? Which
has been propagated in the most wonderful Manner? Which has surmounted the
greatest Difficulties, or showed the most disinterested Zeal and Sincerity in
its Professors? He will inquire, which best accords with Nature and History? He
will consider, what savours of the World, and what looks like Wisdom from
above? He will be careful to separate Humane Allay from that which is Divine;
and upon the whole, form his Judgment like a reasonable Free-thinker. But
instead of taking such a rational Course, one of these hasty Skeptics shall
conclude without demurring, there is no Wisdom in Politics, no Honesty in
Dealings, no Knowledge in Philosophy, no Truth in Religion: And all by one and
the same sort of Inference, from the numerous Examples of Folly, Knavery,
Ignorance, and Error, which are to be met with in the World. But, as those who
are unknowing in every thing else, imagine themselves sharpsighted in Religion,
this learned Sophism is oftenest levelled against Christianity.

XXXIII.
In my Opinion, he, that would convince an Infidel who can be brought to
Reason, ought in the first place clearly to convince him of the Being of a God,
it seeming to me, that any Man who is really a Theist, cannot be an Enemy to
the Christian Religion: And that the Ignorance or Disbelief of this fundamental
Point, is that which at bottom constitutes the Minute Philosopher. I imagine
they, who are acquainted with the great Authors in the Minute Philosophy, need
not be told of this. The being of a God is capable of clear Proof, and a proper
Object of Humane Reason; whereas the Mysteries of his Nature, and indeed
whatever there is of Mystery in Religion, to endeavor to explain, and prove by
Reason, is a vain Attempt. It is sufficient if we can show there is nothing
absurd or repugnant in our Belief of those Points, and, instead of framing
Hypotheses to explain them, we use our Reason only for answering the Objections
brought against them. But on all Occasions, we ought to distinguish the
serious, modest, ingenuous Man of Sense, who has Scruples about Religion, and
behaves like a prudent Man in doubt, from the Minute Philosophers, those
profane and conceited Men, who must needs proselyte others to their own Doubts.
When one of this Stamp presents himself, we should consider what Species he is
of: Whether a first or a second-hand Philosopher, a Libertine, Scorner, or
Skeptic? Each Character requiring a peculiar Treatment. Some Men are too
ignorant to be humble, without which there can be no Docility: But though a Man
must in some degree have thought and considered to be capable of being
convinced, yet it is possible the most ignorant may be laughed out of his
Opinions. I knew a Woman of Sense reduce two Minute Philosophers, who had long
been a Nuisance to the Neighborhood, by taking her Cue from their predominant
Affectations. The one set up for being the most incredulous Man upon Earth, the
other for the most unbounded Freedom. She observed to the first, that he who
had Credulity sufficient to trust the most valuable Things, his Life and
Fortune, to his Apothecary and Lawyer, ridiculously affected the Character of
Incredulous, by refusing to trust his Soul, a Thing in his own account but a
mere Trifle, to his Parish Priest. The other, being what you call a Beau, she
made sensible how absolute a Slave he was in point of Dress, to him the most
important thing in the World, while he was earnestly contending for a Liberty
of Thinking, with which he never troubled his Head; and how much more it
concerned and became him to assert an Independency on Fashion, and obtain Scope
for his Genius, where it was best qualified to exert it self. The Minute
Philosophers at first hand are very few, and considered in themselves, of small
consequence: But their Followers, who pin their Faith upon them, are numerous,
and not less confident than credulous; there being something in the Air and
Manner of these second-hand Philosophers, very apt to disconcert a Man of
Gravity and Argument, and much more difficult to be born than the Weight of
their Objections.

XXXIV.
Crito having made an end, Euphranor declared it to be his Opinion, that it
would much conduce to the public Benefit, if, instead of discouraging
Free-thinking, there was erected in the midst of this Free Country a Dianoetic
Academy, or Seminary for Free-thinkers, provided with retired Chambers, and
Galleries, and shady Walks and Groves, where, after seven Years spent in
Silence and Meditation, a Man might commence a genuine Free-thinker, and from
that time forward, have License to think what he pleased, and a Badge to
distinguish him from Counterfeits. In good earnest, said Crito, I imagine that
Thinking is the great Desideratum of the present Age; and that the real Cause
of whatever is amiss, may justly be reckoned the general Neglect of Education,
in those who need it most, the People of Fashion. What can be expected where
those who have the most Influence, have the least Sense, and those who are sure
to be followed, set the worst Example? Where Youth so uneducated are yet so
forward? Where Modesty is esteemed Pufillanimity, and a Deference to Years,
Knowledge, Religion, Laws, want of Sense and Spirit? Such untimely Growth of
Genius would not have been valued or encouraged by the wise Men of Antiquity;
whose Sentiments on this Point are so ill suited to the Genius of our Times,
that it is to be feared modern Ears could not bear them. But however ridiculous
such Maxims might seem to our British Youth, who are so capable and so forward
to try Experiments, and mend the Constitution of their Country, I believe it
will be admitted by Men of Sense, that if the Governing part of Mankind would
in these Days, for Experiment's sake, consider themselves in that old Homerical
Light as Pastors of the People, whose Duty it was to improve their Flock, they
would soon find that this is to be done by an Education very different from the
Modern, and otherguess Maxims than those of the Minute Philosophy. If our Youth
were really inured to Thought and Reflection, and an Acquaintance with the
excellent Writers of Antiquity, we should soon see that licentious Humor,
vulgarly called Free-thinking, banished from the Presence of Gentlemen,
together with Ignorance and ill Taste; which as they are inseparable from Vice,
so Men follow Vice for the fake of Pleasure, and fly from Virtue through an
abhorrence of Pain. Their Minds therefore betimes should be formed and
accustomed to receive Pleasure and Pain from proper Objects, or, which is the
same thing, to have their Inclinations and Aversions rightly placed. (...).
This according to Plato and Aristotle, was the (...), the right Education Plato
in Protag. and Aristot. ethic ad Nicom, l. 2. c. 2. and l. 10. c. 9.
. And those who, in their own Minds, their Health, or their Fortunes, feel the
cursed Effects of a wrong one, would do well to consider, they cannot better
make amends for what was amiss in themselves, than by preventing the same in
their Posterity. While Crito was saying this, Company came in, which put an end
to our Conversation.

AN ESSAY TOWARD A NEW THEORY OF VISION.

First Published in the Year, MDCCIX.

DUBLIN: Printed for G. Risk, at the Shakespeare's Head, G. Ewing, at the Angel
and Bible, and W. Smith, at the Hercules, Booksellers in Dame-Street, MDCC
XXXII.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. 1. Design. 2. Distance of it self Invisible. 3. Remote Distance
perceived rather by Experience, than by Sense. 4. Near Distance thought to be
perceived by the Angle of the Optic Axes. 5. Difference between this and the
former manner of perceiving Distance. 6. Also by Diverging Rays. 7. This
depends not on Experience. 8. These the common Accounts, but not satisfactory.
9. Some Ideas perceived by mediation of others. 10. No Idea which is not it
self perceived, can be the means of perceiving another. 11. Distance perceived
by means of some other Idea. 12. Those Lines and Angles mentioned in Optics,
are not themselves perceived. 13. Hence the Mind does not perceive Distance by
Lines and Angles. 14. Also because they have no real Existence. 15. And because
they are insufficient to explain the Phenomenon. 16. The Ideas that suggest
Distance are 1st the Sensation arising from the turn of the Eyes. 17. Betwixt
which and Distance there is no necessary Connection. 18. Scarce room for mistake
in this matter. 19. No regard had to the Angle of the Optic Axes. 20 Judgment
of Distance made with both Eyes, the Result of Experience. 21. 2dly.
Confusedness of Appearance. 22. This the Occasion of those Judgments attributed
to Diverging Rays. 23. Objection answered. 24. What deceives the Writers of
Optics in this matter. 25. The Cause why one Idea may suggest another. 26. This
applied to Confusion and Distance. 27. 3dly, The straining of the Eye. 28. The
Occasions which suggest Distance, have in their own Nature no Relation to it.
29. A difficult Case proposed by Dr. Barrow as repugnant to all the known
Theories. 30. This Case contradicts a received Principle in Catoptrics. 31. It
is shown to agree with the Principles we have laid down. 32. This Phenomenon
Illustrated. 33. It confirms the Truth of the Principle whereby it is
explained. 34. Vision when Distinct, and when Confused. 35. The different
Effects of Parallel, Diverging, and Converging Rays. 36. How Converging and
Diverging Rays come to suggest the same Distance. 37. A Person extreme Purblind
would judge aright in the forementioned Case. 38. Lines and Angles why useful
in Optics. 39. The not understanding this, a Cause of Mistake. 40. A Query
proposed by Mr. Molyneux in his Dioptrics, considered. 41. One born Blind would
not at first have any Idea of Distance by Sight. 42. This not agreeable to the
common Principles. 43. The proper Objects of Sight, not without the Mind, nor
the Images of any thing without the Mind. 44. This more fully explained. 45. In
what Sense we must be understood to see Distance and external Things. 46.
Distance and Things placed at a Distance, not otherwise perceived by the Eye
than by the Ear. 47. The Ideas of Sight more apt to be confounded with the
Ideas of Touch, than those of Hearing are. 48. How this comes to pass. 49.
Strictly speaking, we never see and feel the same thing 50. Objects of Sight
twofold, mediate and immediate. 51. These hard to separate in our Thoughts. 52.
The received Accounts of our perceiving Magnitude by Sight, false. 53.
Magnitude perceived as immediately, as Distance. 54. Two kinds of sensible
Extension, neither of which is infinitely Divisible. 55. The Tangible Magnitude
of an Object Steady, the Visible not. 56. By what means Tangible Magnitude is
perceived by Sight. 57. This farther enlarged on. 58. No necessary Connection
between Confusion or Faintness of Appearance, and small or great Magnitude. 59.
The Tangible Magnitude of an Object, more heeded than the Visible, and why. 60.
An Instance of this. 61. Men do not measure by Visible Feet or Inches. 62. No
necessary Connection between Visible and Tangible Extension. 63. Greater Visible
Magnitude might signify Lesser Tangible Magnitude. 64. The Judgments we make of
Magnitude depend altogether on Experience. 65. Distance and Magnitude seen as
Shame or Anger. 66 But we are prone to think otherwise, and why. 67. The Moon
seems greater in the Horizon, than in the Meridian. 68. The Cause of this
Phenomenon, assigned. 69. The Horizontal Moon, why greater at one time than
another. 70. The Account we have given, proved to be true. 71. And confirmed,
by the Moon's appearing greater in a Mist. 72. Objection answered. 73. The way
wherein Faintness suggests greater Magnitude, illustrated. 74. Appearance of
the Horizontal Moon, why thought difficult to explain. 75. Attempts toward the
Solution of it made by several, but in vain. 76. The Opinion of Dr. Wallis. 77.
It is shown to be unsatisfactory. 78. How Lines and Angles may be of use in
computing apparent Magnitudes. 79. One born Blind, being made to see, what
Judgment he would make of Magnitude. 80. The Minimum Visible the same to all
Creatures. 81. Objection answered. 82. The Eye at all times perceives the same
number of visible Points. 83. Two Imperfections in the Visive Faculty. 84.
Answering to which, we may conceive two Perfections. 85. In neither of these
two Ways do Microscopes improve the Sight. 86. The Case of Microscopical Eyes,
considered. 87. The Sight admirably adapted to the ends of Seeing. 88.
Difficulty concerning Erect Vision. 89. The common way of Explaining it. 90.
The same shown to be False. 91. Not distinguishing between Ideas of Sight and
Touch, Cause of Mistake, in this matter. 92. The Case of one born Blind, proper
to be considered. 93. Such a one might by Touch attain to have Ideas of Upper
and Lower. 94. Which Modes of Situation he would attribute only to things Tangible.
95. He Would not at first Sight think any thing he saw, High or Low, Erect or
Inverted. 96. This Illustrated by an Example. 97. By what means he would come to
denominate Visible Objects, high or low, etc. 98. Why he should think those
Objects highest, which are painted on the lowest part of his Eye, and vice
versa. 99. How he would perceive by Sight the Situation of external Objects.
100. Our Propension to think the contrary, no Argument against what has been
said. 101. Objection. 102. Answer. 103. An Object could not be known at first
Sight by the Color. 104. Nor by the Magnitude thereof. 105. Nor by the Figure.
106. In the first act of Vision, no Tangible Thing would be suggested by Sight.
107. Difficulty proposed concerning Number. 108. Number of Things Visible would
not at first Sight suggest the like Number of things Tangible. 109. Number, the
Creature of the Mind. 110. One born Blind would not at first sight number
Visible Things as others do. 111. The Situation of any Object determined with
respect only to Objects of the same Sense. 112. No Distance, great or small,
between a Visible and Tangible Thing. 113. The not observing this, cause of
Difficulty in Erect Vision. 114. Which otherwise includes nothing
unaccountable. 115. What is meant by the Pictures being inverted. 116. Cause of
Mistake in this Matter. 117. Images in the Eye, not Pictures of external
Objects. 118. In what Sense they are Pictures. 119. In this Affair we must
carefully distinguish between Ideas of Sight and Touch. 120. Difficult to
explain by Words the true Theory of Vision. 121. The Question, whether there is
any Idea common to Sight and Touch, stated. 122. Abstract Extension inquired
into. 123. It is Incomprehensible. 124. Abstract Extension not the Object of
Geometry. 125. The general Idea of a Triangle, considered. 126. Vacuum or pure
Space, not common to Sight and Touch. 127. There is no Idea or kind of Idea,
common to both Senses. 128. First Argument in Proof hereof. 129. Second
Argument. 130. Visible Figure and Extension, not distinct Ideas from Color.
131. Third Argument. 132. Confirmation drawn from Mr. Molyneux's Problem of a
Sphere and a Cube, published by Mr. Lock. 133. Which is falsely solved, if the
common Supposition be true. 134. More might be said in proof of our Tenet, but
this suffices. 135. Father Reflection on the foregoing Problem. 136. The same
thing does not affect both Sight and Touch. 137. The same Idea of Motion not
common to Sight and Touch. 138. The way wherein we apprehend Motion by Sight,
easily collected from what has been said. 139. Qu. How Visible and Tangible
Ideas came to have the same name if not of the same Kind? 140. This accounted
for without supposing them of the same Kind. 141. Obj. That a Tangible Square
is liker to a Visible Square than to a Visible Circle. 142. Answ. That a
Visible Square is fitter than a Visible Circle to represent a Tangible Square.
143. But it does not hence follow, that a Visible Square is like a Tangible
Square. 144. Why we are more apt to confound Visible with Tangible Ideas, than
other Signs with the Things signified. 145. Several other Reasons hereof,
assigned. 146. Reluctance in rejecting any Opinion, no Argument of its Truth.
147. Proper Objects of Vision the Language of the Author of Nature. 148. In it
there is much admirable and deserving our Attention. 149. Question proposed
concerning the Object of Geometry. 150. At first View we are apt to think
Visible Extension the Object of Geometry. 151. Visible Extension shown not to
be the Object of Geometry. 152. Words may as well be thought the Object of
Geometry as Visible Extension. 153. It is proposed to inquire, what Progress an
Intelligence that could see but not feel, might make in Geometry. 154. He
cannot understand those Parts which relate to Solids, and their Surfaces, and
Lines generated by their Section. 155. Nor even the Elements of plain Geometry.
156. The proper Objects of Sight incapable of being managed as Geometrical
Figures. 157. The Opinion of those who hold plain Figures to be the immediate
Objects of Sight, considered. 158. Plains no more the immediate Objects of
Sight, than Solids. 159. Difficult to enter precisely into the Thoughts of the
abovementioned Intelligence.
AN ESSAY TOWARD A New Theory of Vision.
I. MY Design is to show the Manner, wherein we perceive by Sight the Distance,
Magnitude, and Situation of Objects. Also to consider the Difference there is
betwixt the Ideas of Sight and Touch, and whether there be any Idea common to
both Senses.

II. It is, I think, agreed by all, that Distance, of it self and immediately,
cannot be seen: For Distance being a Line directed end-wise to the Eye, it
projects only one Point in the Fund of the Eye, which Point remains invariably
the same, whether the Distance be longer or shorter.

III. I find it also acknowledged, that the Estimate we make of the Distance of
Objects considederably remote, is rather an Act of Judgment grounded on
Experience, than of Sense. For Example, when I perceive a great Number of
intermediate Objects, such as Houses, Fields, Rivers, and the like, which I
have experienced to take up a considerable Space, I thence form a Judgment or
Conclusion, that the Object I see beyond them is at a great Distance. Again,
when an Object appears faint and small, which at a near Distance I have
experienced to make a vigorous and large Appearance, I instantly conclude it to
be far off: And this, it is evident is the result of Experience; without which,
from the faintness and littleness I should not have inferred any thing
concerning the Distance of Objects.

IV. But when an Object is placed at so near a Distance, as that the Interval
between the Eyes bears any sensible Proportion to it, the Opinion of
speculative Men is, that the two Optic Axes (the Fancy that we see only with
one Eye at once being exploded) concurring at the Object do there make an
Angle, by means of which, according as it is greater or lesser, the Object is
perceived to be nearer or farther off See what Descartes and others have
written on this Subject.
.

V. Betwixt which, and the foregoing manner of estimating Distance, there is
this remarkable Difference: That, whereas there was no apparent, necessary
Connection between small Distance and a large and strong Appearance, or between
great Distance and little and faint Appearance, there appears a very necessary
Connection between an obtuse Angle and near Distance, and an acute Angle and
farther Distance. It does not in the least depend upon Experience, but may be
evidently known by any one before he had experienced it, that the nearer the
Concurrence of the Optic Axes, the greater the Angle, and the remoter their
Concurrence is, the lesser will be the Angle comprehended by them.

VI. There is another way mentioned by Optic Writers, whereby they will have us
judge of those Distances, in respect of which the Breadth of the Pupil has any
sensible bigness: And that is the greater or lesser Divergency of the Rays,
which issuing from the visible Point, do fall on the Pupil: That Point being
judged nearest, which is seen by most diverging Rays; and that remoter, which
is seen by less diverging Rays: And so on, the apparent Distance still
increasing, as the Divergency of the Rays decreases, till at length it becomes
infinite, when the Rays that fall on the Pupil are to Sense Parallel. And after
this manner it is said we perceive Distance when we look only with one Eye.

VII. In this Case also, it is plain we are not beholding to Experience: It
being a certain, necessary Truth, that the nearer the direct Rays falling on
the Eye approach to Parallelism, the farther off is the Point of their
Intersection, or the visible Point from whence they flow.

VIII. Now though the Accounts here given of perceiving near Distance by Sight
are received for true, and accordingly made use of in determining the apparent
places of Objects, they do nevertheless seem very unsatisfactory: And that for
these following Reasons.

IX. It is evident that when the Mind perceives any Idea, not immediately and
of it self, it must be by the means of some other Idea: Thus, for Instance, the
Passions which are in the Mind of another, are of themselves to me invisible. I
may nevertheless perceive them by Sight, though not immediately, yet by means
of the Colors they produce in the Countenance. We often see Shame or Fear in
the Looks of a Man, by perceiving the Changes of his Countenance to Red or Pale.

X. Moreover it is evident that no Idea, which is not it self perceived, can be
the means of perceiving any other Idea. If I do not perceive the Redness or
Paleness of a Man's Face themselves, it is impossible I should perceive by them
the Passions which are in his Mind.

XI. Now from SECT. II. it is plain that Distance is in its own nature
imperceptible, and yet it is perceived by Sight. It remains, therefore, that it
be brought into view by means of some other Idea, that is it self immediately
perceived in the Act of Vision.

XII. But those Lines and Angles, by means whereof some Men pretend to explain
the Perception of Distance, are themselves not at all perceived, nor are they
in truth ever thought of by those unskilful in Optics. I appeal to any one's
Experience, whether upon Sight of an Object, he computes its Distance by the
bigness of the Angle, made by the meeting of the two Optic Axes? Or whether he
ever thinks of the greater or lesser Divergency of the Rays, which arrive from
any Point to his Pupil? Every one is himself the best judge of what he
perceives, and what not. In vain shall any Man tell me, that I perceive certain
Lines and Angles which introduce into my Mind the various Ideas of Distance, so
long as I my self am conscious of no such thing.

XIII. Since therefore those Angles and Lines are not themselves perceived by
Sight, it follows from SECT. X. that the Mind does not by them judge of the
Distance of Objects.

XIV. The Truth of this Assertion will be, yet, farther evident to any one that
considers those Lines and Angles have no real Existence in Nature, being only
an Hypothesis framed by the Mathematicians, and by them introduced into Optics,
that they might treat of that Science in a Geometrical way.

XV. The last Reason I shall give for rejecting that Doctrine, is, that though we
should grant the real Existence of those Optic Angles, etc. and that it was
possible for the Mind to perceive them; yet these Principles would not be found
sufficient to explain the Phoenomena of Distance, as shall be shown hereafter.

XVI. Now, it being already shown that Distance is suggested to the Mind, by
the Mediation of some other Idea which is it self perceived in the Act of
Seeing, it remains that we inquire what Ideas, or Sensations there be that
attend Vision, unto which we may suppose the Ideas of Distance are connected,
and by which they are introduced into the Mind. And First, It is certain by
Experience, that when we look at a near Object with both Eyes, according as it
approaches, or recedes from us, we alter the Disposition of our Eyes, by
lessening or widening the Interval between the Pupils. This Disposition or Turn
of the Eyes is attended with a Sensation, which seems to me to be that which in
this Case brings the Idea of greater or lesser Distance into the Mind.

XVII. Not that there is any natural or necessary Connection between the
Sensation we perceive by the Turn of the Eyes, and greater or lesser Distance;
but because the Mind has by constant Experience found the different Sensations
corresponding to the different Dispositions of the Eyes, to be attended each
with a different Degree of Distance in the Object; There has grown an Habitual
or Customary Connection between those two sorts of Ideas, so that the Mind no
sooner perceives the Sensation arising from the different Turn it gives the
Eyes, in order to bring the Pupils nearer, or farther asunder, but it withal
perceives the different Idea of Distance which was wont to be connected with
that Sensation: Just as upon hearing a certain Sound, the Idea is immediately
suggested to the Understanding, which Custom had united with it.

XVIII. Nor do I see, how I can easily be mistaken in this Matter. I know
evidently that Distance is not perceived of it self. That by consequence, it
must be perceived by means of some other Idea which is immediately perceived,
and varies with the different Degrees of Distance. I know also that the
Sensation arising from the Turn of the Eyes is of it self immediately
perceived, and various Degrees thereof are connected with different Distances,
which never fail to accompany them into my Mind, when I view an Object
distinctly with both Eyes, whose Distance is so small that in respect of it the
Interval between the Eyes has any considerable Magnitude.

XIX. I know it is a received Opinion, that by altering the Disposition of the
Eyes, the Mind perceives whether the Angle of the Optic Axes, or the lateral
Angles comprehended between the Interval of the Eyes and the Optic Axes, are
made greater or lesser; and that accordingly by a kind of Natural Geometry, it
judges the Point of their Intersection to be nearer, or farther off. But that
this is not true, I am convinced by my own Experience, since I am not
conscious, that I make any such use of the Perception I have by the Turn of my
Eyes. And for me to make those Judgments, and draw those Conclusions from it,
without knowing that I do so, seems altogether incomprehensible.

XX. From all which it follows, that the Judgment we make of the Distance of an
Object, viewed with both Eyes, is entirely the Result of Experience. If we had
not constantly found certain Sensations arising from the various Disposition of
the Eyes, attended with certain Degrees of Distance, we should never make those
sudden Judgments from them, concerning the Distance of Objects; no more than we
would pretend to judge of a Man's Thoughts by his pronouncing Words we had
never heard before.

XXI. Secondly, An Object placed at a certain Distance from the Eye, to which
the breadth of the Pupil bears a considerable Proportion, being made to
approach, is seen more confusedly: And the nearer it is brought, the more
confused Appearance it makes. And this being found constantly to be so, there
arises in the Mind an Habitual Connection between the several Degrees of
Confusion and Distance; the greater Confusion still employing the lesser
Distance, and the lesser Confusion, the greater Distance of the Object.

XXII. This confused Appearance of the Object does therefore seem to be the
Medium, whereby the Mind judges of Distance in those Cases, wherein the most
approved Writers of Optics will have it judge by the different Divergency, with
which the Rays flowing from the Radiating Point fall on the Pupil. No Man, I
believe, will pretend to see or feel those imaginary Angles, that the Rays are
supposed to form according to their various Inclinations on his Eye. But he
cannot choose Seeing whether the Object appear more or less confused. It is
therefore a manifest Consequence from what has been demonstrated, that instead
of the greater, or lesser Divergency of the Rays, the Mind makes use of the
greater or lesser Confusedness of the Appearance, thereby to determine the
apparent Place of an Object.

XXIII. Nor does it avail to say, there is not any necessary Connection between
confused Vision, and Distance, great or small. For I ask any Man, what
necessary Connection he sees between the Redness of a Blush and Shame? And yet
no sooner shall he behold that Color to arise in the Face of another, but it
brings into his Mind the Idea of that Passion which has been observed to
accompany it.

XXIV. What seems to have misled the Writers of Optics in this Matter is, that
they imagine Men judge of Distance, as they do of a Conclusion in Mathematics;
betwixt which and the Premises it is indeed absolutely requisite there be an
apparent, necessary Connection: But it is far otherwise, in the sudden Judgments
Men make of Distance. We are not to think, that Brutes and Children, or even
grown reasonable Men, whenever they perceive an Object to approach, or depart
from them, do it by virtue of Geometry and Demonstration.

XXV. That one Idea may suggest another to the Mind, it will suffice that they
have been observed to go together, without any Demonstration of the Necessity
of their Coexistence, or without so much as knowing what it is that makes them
so to coexist. Of this there are innumerable Instances, of which no one can be
ignorant.

XXVI. Thus, greater Confusion having been constantly attended with nearer
Distance, no sooner is the former Idea perceived, but it suggests the latter to
our Thoughts. And if it had been the ordinary Course of Nature, that the
farther off an Object were placed, the more confused it should appear, it is
certain, the very same Perception, that now makes us think an Object
approaches, would then have made us to imagine it went farther off. That
Perception, abstracting from Custom and Experience, being equally fitted to
produce the Idea of great Distance, or small Distance, or no Distance at all.

XXVII. Thirdly, An Object being placed at the Distance above specified, and
brought nearer to the Eye, we may nevertheless prevent, at least for some time,
the Appearance's growing more confused, by straining the Eye. In which Case,
that Sensation supplys the place of confused Vision, in aiding the Mind to
judge of the Distance of the Object; it being esteemed so much the nearer, by
how much the Effort or Straining of the Eye in order to distinct Vision is
greater.

XXVIII. I have here set down those Sensations or Ideas, that seem to be the
constant and general Occasions of introducing into the Mind the different Ideas
of near Distance. It is true in most Cases, that diverse other Circumstances
contribute to frame our Idea of Distance, to wit, the particular Number, Size,
Kind, etc. of the things seen. Concerning which, as well as all other the
forementioned Occasions which suggest Distance, I shall only observe, they have
none of them, in their own Nature, any Relation or Connection with it: Nor is it
possible, they should ever signify the various Degrees thereof, otherwise than
as by Experience they have been found to be connected with them.

XXIX. I shall proceed upon these Principles to account for a Phenomenon,
which has hitherto strangely puzzled the Writers of Optics, and is so far from
being accounted for by any of their Theories of Vision, that it is, by their
own Confession, plainly repugnant to them: And of Consequence, if nothing else
could be objected, were alone sufficient to bring their Credit in Question. The
whole Difficulty I shall lay before you in the Words of the Learned Dr. Barrow,
with which he concludes his Optic Lectures.

Haec sunt, quae circa pantem Opticae praecipue Mathematicam dicenda mihi
suggessit meditatio. Circa reliquas, (quae (...) sunt, adeoque saepiuscule pro
certis principiis plausibiles conjecturas venditare necessum habent) nihil fere
quicquam admodum verisimile succurrit, a pervulgatis (ab iis, inquam, quae
Keplerus, Scheinerus, Cartesius, and post illos alii tradiderunt) alienum aut
diversum. Atqui tacere malo, quam toties oblatam cramben reponere. Proinde
receptui cano; nec ita tamen ut prorsus discedam anteaquam improbam quandam
difficultatem (pro sinceritate quam and vobis and veritati debeo minime
dissimulandam) in medium protulero, quae doctrinae nostrae, hactenus
inculcatae, se objicit adversam, ab ea saltem nullam admittit solutionem. Illa,
breviter, talis est: Lenti vel Speculo cavo EBF exponatur punctum visibile A,
ita Distans ut Radii ex A manantes ex inflexione versus axem A B cogantur.
Sitque radiationis Limes (seu puncti A imago, qualem supra passim statuimus)
punctum Z. Inter hoc autem and inflectentis verticem B uspiam positus
concipiatur Oculus. Quaeri jam potest ubi loci debeat punctum A apparere?
Retrorsum ad punctum Z videri non sert Natura (cum omnis impressio sensum
afficiens proveniat a partibus A) ac experientia reclamat. Nostris autem e
placitis consequi videtur, ipsum ad parts anticas apparens ab intervallo
longissime dissito, (quod and maximum sensibile quodvis Intervallum quodammodo
exsuperet) apparere. Cum enim quo Radiis minus divergentibus attingitur
Objectum, eo (seclusis utique praenotionibus and praejudiciis) longius abesse
sentiatur; et quod Parallelos ad Oculum Radios projicit, remotissime positum
aestimetur. Exigere Ratio videtur ut quod convergentibus radiis apprehenditur,
adhuc magis, si fieri posset, quoad apparentiam elongetur. Quin and circa Casum
hunc generatim inquiri possit, quidnam omnino sit, quod apparentem puncti A
locum determinet, faciatque quod constanti ratione nunc propius, nunc remotius
appareat? Cui itidem dubio, nihil quicquam ex hactenus dictorum Analogia,
responderi posse videtur, nisi debere punctum A perpetuo longissime semotum
videri. Verum experientia secus attestatur, illud pro diversa Oculi inter
puncta B, Z, positione vary distans; nunquam fere (si unquam) longinquius ipso
A libere spectato, subinde vero multo propinquius adparere; quinimo, quo oculum
appellentes radii magis convergunt eo speciem Objecti propius accedere. Nempe,
si puncto B admoveatur Oculus, suo (ad lentem) fere nativo in loco conspicitur
punctum A (vel aeque distans, ad Speculum;) ad O reductus oculus ejusce speciem
appropinquantem cernit; ad P adhuc vicinius ipsum existimat; ac ita sensim,
donec alicubi tandem, velut ad Q, constituto oculo objectum sum proquinquum
apparens, in meram confusionem incipiat evanescere. Quae sane cuncta rationibus
atque decretis nostris repugnare videntur, aut cum iis saltem parum amice
conspirant. Neque nostram tantum sententiam pulsat hoc experimentum; at ex
aequo caeteras quas norim omnes, veterem imprimis ac vulgatam nostrae prae
reliquis affinem ita convellere videtur, ut ejus vi coactus doctissimus A.
Tacquetus isti principio (cui pene soli totam in aedificaverat Catoptricam
suam) ceu infido ac inconstanti renunciarit, adeoque suam ipse doctrinam
labefactarit; id tamen, opinor, minime facturus, si rem totam inspexisset
penitius, atque difficultatis fundum attigisset. Apud me vero non ita pollet
haec, nec eousque praepollebit ulla difficultas, ut ab iis, quae manifest
rationi consentanea video, discedam; praesertim quum ut hic accidit, ejusmodi
difficultas in singularis cuiuspiam casus disparitate fundetur. Nimirum in
praesente casu peculiare quiddam, naturae subtilitati involutum, delitescit,
aegre fortassis, nisi perfectius explorato videndi modo, detegendum. Circa quod
nil, fateor, hactenus excogitare potui, quod adblandiretur animo meo, nedum
plane satisfaceret. Vobis itaque nodum hunc, utinam feliciore conatu,
resolvendum committo.

In English as follows.

I have here delivered what my Thoughts have suggested to me, concerning that
part of Optics which is more properly Mathematical. As for the other Parts of
that Science (which being rather Physical, do consequently abound with
plausible Conjectures instead of certain Principles) there has in them scarce
any thing occurred to my Observation, different from what has been already said
by Kepler, Scheinerus, Descartes, and others. And methinks I had better say
nothing at all, than repeat that which has been so often said by others. I
Think it therefore high time to take my leave of this Subject: But before I
quit it for good and all, the fair and ingenuous Dealing that I owe both to You
and to Truth, obliges me to acquaint you with a certain untoward Difficulty,
which seems directly opposite to the Doctrine I have been hitherto inculcating,
at least, admits of no Solution from it. In short it is this. Before the double
Unequal Glass or Concave Speculum E B F, let the Point A be placed, at such a
Distance that the Rays proceeding from A, after Refraction or Reflection, be
brought to Unite somewhere in the Ax A B. And suppose the Point of Union (i. e.
the Image of the Point A, as has been already set forth) to be Z; between
which and B, the Vertex of the Glass or Speculum, conceive the Eye to be any
where placed. The Question now is, where the Point A ought to appear?
Experience shows that it does not appear behind at the Point Z, and it were
contrary to Nature that it should; since all the Impression which affects the
Sense comes from toward A. But from our Tenets it should seem to follow that
it would appear before the Eye at a vast Distance off, so great as should in
some Sort surpass all sensible Distance. For Since if we exclude all
Anticipations and Prejudices, every Object appears by so much the farther off,
by how much the Rays it sends to the Eye are less Diverging. And that Object is
thought to be most remote, from which Parallel Rays proceed unto the Eye.
Reason would make one think, that Object should appear, at yet a greater
Distance, which is seen by converging Rays. Moreover it may in general be asked
concerning this Case, what it is that determines the apparent Place of the
Point A, and makes it to appear after a constant manner, sometimes nearer, at
other times farther off? To which Doubt, I see nothing that can be answered
agreeable to the Principles we have laid down, except only that the Point A
ought always to appear extremely remote. But on the contrary, we are assured by
Experience that the Point A appears variously distant, according to the
different Situations of the Eye between the Points B and Z. And that it does
almost never (if at all) seem farther off, than it would if it were beheld by
the naked Eye, but on the contrary, it does sometimes appear much nearer. Nay,
it is even certain, that by how much the Rays falling on the Eye do more
converge, by so much the nearer does the Object seem to approach. For the Eye
being placed close to the Point B, the Object A appears nearly in its own
natural Place, if the Point B is taken in the Glass, or at the same Distance,
if in the Speculum. The Eye being brought back to O, the Object seems to draw
near: And being come to P it beholds it still nearer. And so on by little and
little, till at length the Eye being placed somewhere, suppose at Q, the Object
appearing extremely near, begins to vanish into mere Confusion. All which does
seem repugnant to our Principles, at least, not rightly to agree with them. Nor
is our Tenet alone struck at by this Experiment, but likewise all others that
ever came to my Knowledge are, every whit as much, endangered by it. The
ancient one especially (which is most commonly received, and comes nearest to
mine) seems to be so effectually overthrown thereby, that the most learned
Tacquet has been forced to reject that Principle, as false and uncertain, on
which alone he had built almost his whole Catoptrics, and consequently by
taking away the Foundation, has himself pulled down the Superstructure he had
raised on it. Which, nevertheless, I do not believe he would have done, had he
but considered the whole matter more thoroughly, and examined the Difficulty to
the bottom. But as for me, neither this, nor any other Difficulty shall have so
great an Influence on me, as to make me renounce that which I know to be
manifestly agreeable to Reason: Especially when, as it here falls out, the
Difficulty is founded in the peculiar Nature of a certain odd and particular
Case. For in the present Case something peculiar lies hid, which being involved
in the Subtilty of Nature will, perhaps, hardly be discovered till such Time,
as the manner of Vision is more perfectly made known. Concerning which, I must
own, I have hitherto been able to find out nothing that has the least show of
Probability, not to mention Certainty. I shall, therefore, leave this Knot to
be untied by you, wishing you may have better Success in it than I have had.

XXX. The ancient and received Principle, which Dr. Barrow here mentions as the
main Foundation of Tacquet's Catoptrics, is that every visible Point seen by
Reflection from a Speculum, shall appear placed at the Intersection of the
reflected Ray, and the Perpendicular of Incidence. Which Intersection in the
present Case, happening to be behind the Eye, it greatly shakes the Authority
of that Principle, where on the aforementioned Author proceeds throughout his
whole Catoptrics, in determining the apparent Place of Objects seen by
Reflection from any kind of Speculum.

XXXI. Let us now see how this Phenomenon agrees with our Tenets. The Eye the
nearer it is placed to the Point B in the foregoing Figures, the more distinct
is the Appearance of the Object; but as it recedes to O, the Appearance grows
more Confused; and at P it sees the Object yet more Confused; and so on till
the Eye being brought back to Z sees the Object in the greatest Confusion of
all. Wherefore by SECT. XXI. the Object should seem to approach the Eye
gradually, as it recedes from the Point B, that is at O it should (in
Consequence of the Principle I have laid down in the aforesaid Section) seem
nearer than it did at B, and at P nearer than at O, and at Q nearer than at P;
and so on, till it quite vanishes at Z. Which is the very matter of Fact, as
any one that pleases may easily satisfy himself by Experiment.

XXXII. This Case is much the same, as if we should suppose an Englishman to
meet a Foreigner, who used the same Words with the English, but in a direct
contrary Signification. The Englishman would not fail to make a wrong Judgment
of the Ideas annexed to those Sounds, in the Mind of him that used them. Just
so, in the present Case the Object speaks (if I may so say) with Words that the
Eye is well acquainted with, that is, Confusions of Appearance; but whereas
heretofore the greater Confusions were always wont to signify nearer Distances,
they have in this Case a direct, contrary Signification, being connected with
the greater Distances. Whence it follows, that the Eye must unavoidably be
mistaken, since it will take the Confusions in the Sense it has been used to,
which is directly opposed to the True.

XXXIII. This Phenomenon as it entirely subverts the Opinion of those, who
will have us judge of Distance by Lines and Angles, on which Supposition it is
altogether inexplicable, so it seems to me no small Confirmation of the Truth
of that Principle whereby it is explained. But in order to a more full
Explication of this Point, and to show how far the Hypothesis of the Mind's
judging by the various Divergency of Rays, may be of use in determining the
apparent Place of an Object, it will be necessary to premise some few Things,
which are already well known to those who have any Skill in Dioptrics.

XXXIV. First, Any radiating Point is then distinctly seen when the Rays
proceeding from it are, by the refractive Power of the Crystalline, accurately
reunited in the Retina or Fund of the Eye: But if they are reunited, either
before they arrive at the Retina, or after they have past it, then there is
confused Vision.

XXXV. Secondly, Suppose in the adjacent Figures NP represent an Eye duly
framed, and retaining Fig 1
Fig 2
Fig 3
its natural Figure. In Fig. 1. the Rays falling nearly Parallel on the Eye,
are by the Crystalline AB refracted, so as their Focus or Point of Union F
falls exactly on the Retina: But if the Rays fall sensibly diverging on the
Eye, as in Fig. 2. then their Focus falls beyond the Retina: Or if the Rays are
made to converge by the Lens QS, before they come at the Eye, as in Fig. 3.
their Focus F will fall before the Retina. In which two last Cases, it is
evident from the foregoing Section, that the Appearance of the Point Z is
confused. And by how much the greater is the Convergency, or Divergency of the
Rays falling on the Pupil, by so much the farther will the Point of their
Reunion be from the Retina, either before or behind it, and consequently the
Point Z will appear, by so much the more confused. And this by the bye, may
show us the Difference between confused, and faint Vision. Confused Vision is,
when the Rays proceeding from each distinct Point of the Object are not
accurately recollected in one corresponding Point on the Retina, but take up
some Space thereon: So that Rays from different Points become mixed, and
confused together. This is opposed to a distinct Vision, and attends near
Objects. Faint Vision is, when by reason of the Distance of the Object or
Grossness of the interjacent Medium few Rays arrive from the Object to the Eye.
This is opposed to vigorous or clear Vision, and attends remote Objects. But to
return.

XXXVI. The Eye, or (to speak truly) the Mind perceiving only the Confusion it
self, without ever considering the Cause from which it proceeds, does
constantly annex the same Degree of Distance to the same Degree of Confusion.
Whether that Confusion be occasioned by converging, or by diverging Rays, it
matters not. Whence it follows, that the Eye viewing the Object Z through the
Glass QS (which by Refraction causes the Rays ZQ, ZS, etc. to converge) should
judge it to be at such a Nearness, at which if it were placed, it would radiate
on the Eye with Rays diverging to that Degree, as would produce the same
Confusion, which is now produced by Converging Rays, i. e. would cover a
Portion of the Retina equal to DC. vid. Fig. 3. supra. But then this must be
understood (to use Dr. Barrow's Phrase) seclusis praenotionibus and
praejudiciis, in case we abstract from all other Circumstances of Vision, such
as the Figure, Size, Faintness, etc. of the visible Objects; all which do
ordinarily concur to form our Idea of Distance, the Mind having by frequent
Experience observed their several Sorts or Degrees, to be connected with
various Distances.

XXXVII. It plainly follows from what has been said, that a Person perfectly
Purblind (i. e. that could not see an Object distinctly, but when placed close
to his Eye) would not make the same wrong Judgment that others do, in the
forementioned Case. For, to him, greater Confusions constantly suggesting
greater Distances, he must, as he recedes from the Glass, and the Object grows
more Confused, judge it to be at a farther Distance contrary to what they do,
who have had the Perception of the Objects growing more confused, connected
with the Idea of Approach.

XXXVIII. Hence also it does appear, there may be good use of Computation by
Lines and Angles in Optics; not that the Mind judges of Distance immediately
by them, but because it judges by somewhat which is connected with them, and
to the Determination whereof they may be subservient. Thus the Mind judging of
the Distance of an Object, by the Confusedness of its Appearance, and this
Confusedness being greater or lesser to the naked Eye, according as the Object
is seen by Rays more or less diverging, it follows, that a Man may make use of
the Divergency of the Rays in computing the apparent Distance, though not for
its own sake, yet on account of the Confusion with which it is connected. But,
so it is, the Confusion it self is entirely neglected by Mathematicians, as
having no necessary Relation with Distance, such as the greater or lesser
Angles of Divergency are conceived to have. And these (especially for that they
fall under Mathematical Computation) are alone regarded, in determining the
apparent Places of Objects, as though they were the sole and immediate Cause of
the Judgments the Mind makes of Distance. Whereas, in Truth, they should not at
all be regarded in themselves, or any otherwise, than as they are supposed to
be the Cause of Confused Vision.

XXXIX. The not considering of this has been a fundamental and perplexing
Oversight. For Proof whereof, we need go no farther than the Case before us. It
having been observed, that the most diverging Rays brought into the Mind the
Idea of nearest Distance, and that still, as the Divergency decreased, the
Distance increased: and it being thought, the Connection between the various
Degrees of Divergency and Distance, was immediate, this naturally leads one to
conclude, from an ill grounded Analogy, that converging Rays shall make an
Object appear at an immense Distance: And that, as the Convergency increases,
the Distance (if it were possible) should do so likewise. That this was the
Cause of Dr. Barrow's Mistake, is evident from his own Words which we have
quoted. Whereas had the learned Doctor observed, that diverging and converging
Rays, how opposite soever they may seem, do nevertheless agree in producing the
same Effect, to wit, Confusedness of Vision, greater Degrees whereof are
produced indifferently, either as the Divergency or Convergency of the Rays
increases. And that it is by this Effect, which is the same in both, that
either the Divergency or Convergency is perceived by the Eye; I say had he but
considered this, it is certain he would have made a quite contrary Judgment,
and rightly concluded, that those Rays which fall on the Eye with greater
Degrees of Convergency should make the Object from whence they proceed, appear
by so much the nearer. But it is plain, it was impossible for any Man to attain
to a right Notion of this Matter, so long as he had regard only to Lines and
Angles, and did not apprehend the true Nature of Vision, and how far it was of
Mathematical Consideration.

XL. Before we dismiss this Subject, it is fit we take notice of a Query
relating thereto, proposed by the ingenious Mr. Molyneux, in his Treatise of
Dioptrics par. I. prop. 31. Sect. 9.
, where speaking of this Difficulty, he has these Words: And so he (i. e. Dr.
Barrow) leaves this Difficulty to the Solution of others, which I (after so
great an Example) shall do likewise; but with the Resolution of the same
admirable Author of not quitting the evident Doctrine which we have before laid
down, for determining the Locus Objecti, on account of being pressed by one
Difficulty, which seems inexplicable till a more intimate Knowledge of the
Visive Faculty be obtained by Mortals. In the mean time, I propose it to the
Consideration of the Ingenious, Whether the Locus Apparens of an Object placed
as in this 9th Section, be not as much before the Eye, as the distinct Base is
behind the Eye? To which Query we may venture to answer in the Negative. For in
the present Case, the Rule for determining the Distance of the distinct Base,
or respective Focus from the Glass is this: As the Difference between the
Distance of the Object and Focus is to the Focus or Focal Length, so the
Distance of the Object from the Glass is to the Distance of the respective
Focus or distinct Base from the Glass Molyneux Dioptr. par. I. prop. 5.
. Let us now suppose the Object to be placed at the Distance of the Focal
Length, and one half of the Focal Length from the Glass, and the Eye close to
the Glass, hence it will follow by the Rule, that the Distance of the distinct
Base behind the Eye is double the true Distance of the Object before the Eye.
If therefore Mr. Molyneux's Conjecture held good, it would follow that the Eye
should see the Object, twice as far off as it really is; and in other Cases at
three or four times its due Distance, or more. But this manifestly contradicts
Experience, the Object never appearing, at farthest, beyond its due Distance.
What ever therefore is built on this Supposition (vid. Corol. 1. Prop. 57.
ibid.) comes to the Ground along with it.

XLI. From what has been premised, it is a manifest Consequence, that a Man
born blind, being made to see, would, at first, have no Idea of Distance by
Sight; The Sun and Stars, the remotest Objects as well as the nearer would all
seem to be in his Eye, or rather in his Mind. The Objects intromitted by Sight,
would seem to him (as in truth they are) no other than a new Set of Thoughts or
Sensations, each whereof is as near to him, as the Perceptions of Pain or
Pleasure, or the most inward Passions of his Soul. For our judging Objects
perceived by Sight to be at any Distance, or without the Mind, is (vid. SECT.
XXVIII.) entirely the Effect of Experience, which one in those Circumstances
could not yet have attained to.

XLII. It is indeed otherwise upon the common Supposition, that Men judge of
Distance by the Angle of the Optic Axes, just as one in the Dark, or a
Blind-man by the Angle comprehended by two Sticks, one whereof he held in each
Hand. For if this were true, it would follow that one blind from his Birth
being made to see, should stand in need of no new Experience, in order to
perceive Distance by Sight. But that this is false, has, I think, been
sufficiently demonstrated.

XLIII. And perhaps upon a strict Inquiry, we shall not find that even those,
who from their Birth have grown up in a continued Habit of Seeing, are
irrecoverably prejudiced on the other side, to wit, in thinking what they see
to be at a Distance from them. For at this time it seems agreed on all hands,
by those who have had any Thoughts of that Matter, that Colors, which are the
proper and immediate Object of Sight, are not without the Mind. But then it
will be said, by Sight we have also the Ideas of Extension, and Figure, and
Motion; all which may well be thought without, and at some Distance from the
Mind, though Color should not. In answer to this, I appeal to any Man's
Experience, whether the visible Extension of any Object does not appear as near
to him, as the Color of that Object; Nay, whether they do not both seem to be
in the very same Place. Is not the Extension we see Colored, and is it
possible for us, so much as in Thought, to separate and abstract Color from
Extension? Now, where the Extension is, there surely is the Figure, and there
the Motion too. I speak of those which are perceived by Sight.

XLIV. But for a fuller Explication of this Point, and to show that the
immediate Objects of Sight are not so much as the Ideas or Resemblances of
things placed at a Distance, it is requisite that we look nearer into the
Matter, and carefully observe what is meant in common Discourse, when one says,
that which he sees is at a Distance from him. Suppose, for Example, that
looking at the Moon I should say it were fifty or sixty Semidiameters of the
Earth distant from me. Let us see what Moon this is spoken of: It is plain it
cannot be the visible Moon, or any thing like the visible Moon, or that which I
see, which is only a round, luminous Plain, of about thirty visible Points in
Diameter. For in case I am carried from the place where I stand directly
toward the Moon, it is manifest the Object varies, still as I go on; and by
the time that I am advanced fifty or sixty Semidiameters of the Earth, I shall
be so far from being near a small, round, luminous Flat, that I shall perceive
nothing like it; this Object having long since disappeared, and if I would
recover it, it must be by going back to the Earth from whence I set out. Again,
suppose I perceive by Sight the faint and obscure Idea of something, which I
doubt whether it be a Man, or a Tree, or a Tower, but judge it to be at the
Distance of about a Mile. It Is plain I cannot mean, that what I see is a Mile
off, or that it is the Image or Likeness of any thing which is a Mile off,
since that every Step I take toward it, the Appearance alters, and from being
obscure, small, and faint, grows clear, large and vigorous. And when I come to
the Mile's end, that which I saw first is quite lost, neither do I find any
thing in the likeness of it.

XLV. In these and the like Instances, the truth of the Matter stands thus:
Having of a long time experienced certain Ideas, perceivable by Touch, as
Distance, tangible Figure, and Solidity, to have been connected with certain
Ideas of Sight, I do upon perceiving these Ideas of Sight, forthwith conclude
what Tangible Ideas are, by the wonted ordinary course of Nature, like to
follow. Looking at an Object I perceive a certain visible Figure and Color,
with some degree of Faintness and other Circumstances, which from what I have
formerly observed, determine me to think, that if I advance forward so many
Paces or Miles, I shall be affected with such and such Ideas of Touch: So that
in truth and strictness of Speech, I neither see Distance it self, nor any
thing that I take to be at a Distance. I say, neither Distance, nor things
placed at a Distance are themselves, or their Ideas, truly perceived by Sight.
This I am persuaded of, as to what concerns my self; and I believe whoever will
look narrowly into his own Thoughts, and examine what he means by saying, he
sees this or that thing at a Distance, will agree with me, that what he sees
only suggests to his Understanding, that after having passed a certain
Distance, to be measured by the Motion of his Body, which is perceivable by
Touch, he shall come to perceive such and such tangible Ideas which have been
usually connected with such and such visible Ideas. But that one might be
deceived by these suggestions of Sense, and that there is no necessary
Connection between visible and tangible Ideas suggested by them, we need go no
farther than the next Looking-glass or Picture to be convinced. Note, that when
I speak of Tangible Ideas, I take the word Idea for any the immediate Object of
Sense, or Understanding, in which large Signification it is commonly used by
the Moderns.

XLVI. From what we have shown it is a manifest Consequence, that the Ideas of
Space, Outness, and Things placed at a Distance, are not, strictly speaking,
the Object of Sight; they are not otherwise perceived by the Eye than by the
Ear. Sitting in my Study I hear a Coach drive along the Street; I look through
the Casement and see it; I walk out and enter into it; thus, common Speech
would incline one to think, I heard, saw, and touched the same thing, to wit,
the Coach. It is nevertheless certain, the Ideas intromitted by each Sense are
widely different, and distinct from each other; but having been observed
constantly to go together, they are spoken of as one and the same thing. By the
variation of the Noise I perceive the different Distances of the Coach, and
know that it approaches before I look out. Thus by the Ear I perceive Distance,
just after the same manner as I do by the Eye.

XLVII. I do not nevertheless say, I hear Distance in like manner as I say that
I see it, the Ideas perceived by Hearing not being so apt to be confounded with
the Ideas of Touch, as those of Sight are; so likewise a Man is easily
convinced that Bodies and external Things are not properly the Object of
Hearing, but only Sounds, by the Mediation whereof the Idea of this or that
Body, or Distance is suggested to his Thoughts. But then one is with more
difficulty brought to discern the Difference there is betwixt the Ideas of
Sight and Touch: Though it be certain, a Man no more sees or feels the same
thing, than he hears and feels the same thing.

XLVIII. One Reason of which seems to be this. It is thought a great Absurdity
to imagine, that one and the same thing should have any more than one
Extension, and one Figure. But the Extension and Figure of a Body, being let
into the Mind two ways, and that indifferently, either by Sight or Touch, it
seems to follow that we see the same Extension, and the same Figure which we
feel.

XLIX. But if we take a close and accurate View of Things, it must be
acknowledged that we never see and feel one and the same Object. That which is
seen is one thing, and that which is felt is another; if the visible Figure and
Extension be not the same with the tangible Figure and Extension, we are not to
infer that one and the same thing has diverse Extensions. The true Consequence
is, that the Objects of Sight and Touch are two distinct things. It may perhaps
require some Thought rightly to conceive this Distinction. And the Difficulty
seems not a little increased, because the Combination of Visible Ideas has
constantly the same Name, as the Combination of Tangible Ideas wherewith it is
connected: Which does of necessity arise from the use and end of Language.

L. In order therefore to treat accurately and unconfusedly of Vision, we must
bear in mind that there are two sorts of Objects apprehended by the Eye, the
one primarily and immediately, the other secondarily and by Intervention of the
former. Those of the first sort neither are, nor appear to be without the Mind,
or at any Distance off; they may indeed grow greater, or smaller, more
confused, or more clear, or more faint, but they do not, cannot appraoch or
recede from us. Whenever we say an Object is at a Distance, whenever we say it
draws near, or goes farther off, we must always mean it of the latter sort,
which properly belong to the Touch, and are not so truly perceived, as
suggested by the Eye in like manner as Thoughts by the Ear.

LI. No sooner do we hear the Words of a familiar Language pronounced in our
Ears, but the Ideas corresponding thereto present themselves to our Minds; in
the very same instant the Sound and the Meaning enter the Understanding: So
closely are they united, that it is not in our Power to keep out the one,
except we exclude the other also. We even act in all respects as if we heard
the very Thoughts themselves. So likewise the secondary Objects, or those which
are only suggested by Sight, do often more strongly affect us, and are more
regarded than the proper Objects of that Sense; along with which they enter
into the Mind, and with which they have a far more strict Connection, than Ideas
have with Words. Hence it is, we find it so difficult to discriminate between
the immediate and mediate Objects of Sight, and are so prone to attribute to
the former, what belongs only to the latter. They are, as it were, most closely
twisted, blended, and incorporated together. And the Prejudice is confirmed and
riveted in our Thoughts by a long tract of Time, by the use of Language, and
want of Reflection. However, I believe any one that shall attentively consider
what we have already said, and shall say upon this Subject before we have done,
(especially if he pursue it in his own Thoughts) may be able to deliver himself
from that Prejudice. Sure I am it is worth some Attention, to whoever would
understand the true nature of Vision.

LII. I have now done with Distance, and proceed to show how it is, that we
perceive by Sight the Magnitude of Objects. It is the Opinion of some that we
do it by Angles, or by Angles in conjunction with Distance; but neither Angles,
nor Distance being perceivable by Sight, and the things we see being in truth
at no Distance from us, it follows, that as we have shown Lines and Angles not
to be the Medium, the Mind makes use of in apprehending the Apparent Place, so
neither are they the Medium whereby it apprehends the Apparent Magnitude of
Objects.

LIII. It is well known that the same Extension at a near Distance shall
subtend a greater Angle, and at a farther Distance, a lesser Angle. And by this
Principle (we are told) the Mind estimates the Magnitude of an Object comparing
the Angle under which it is seen with its Distance, and thence inferring the
Magnitude thereof. What inclines Men to this Mistake (beside the Humor of
making one see by Geometry is, that the same Perceptions or Ideas which suggest
Distance, do also suggest Magnitude. But if we examine it, we shall find they
suggest the latter, as immediately as the former. I say, they do not first
suggest Distance, and then leave it to the Judgment to use that as a Medium,
whereby to collect the Magnitude; but they have as close, and immediate a
Connection with the Magnitude, as with the Distance; and suggest Magnitude as
independently of Distance, as they do Distance independently of Magnitude. All
which will be evident to whoever considers what has been already said, and
what follows.

LIVE. It has been shown, there are two sorts of Objects apprehended by Sight;
each whereof has its distinct Magnitude, or Extension. The one, properly
Tangible, i. e. to be perceived and measured by Touch, and not immediately
falling under the Sense of seeing: The other, properly and immediately Visible,
by Mediation of which the former is brought in View. Each of these Magnitudes
are greater or lesser, according as they contain in them more or fewer Points,
they being made up of Points or Minimums. For, whatever may be said of
Extension in Abstract, it is certain sensible Extension is not infinitely
Divisible. There is a Minimum Tangibile, and a Minimum Visibile, beyond which
Sense cannot perceive. This every one's Experience will inform him.

LV. The Magnitude of the Object which exists without the Mind, and is at a
Distance, continues always invariably the same: But the Visible Object still
changing as you approach to, or recede from the Tangible Object, it has no
fixed and determinate Greatness. Whenever therefore, we speak of the Magnitude
of any thing, for Instance a Tree or a House, we must mean the Tangible
Magnitude, otherwise there can be nothing steady and free from Ambiguity spoken
of it. But though the Tangible and Visible Magnitude in truth belong to two
distinct Objects: I shall nevertheless (especially since those Objects are
called by the same Name, and are observed to coexist) to avoid tediousness and
singularity of Speech, sometimes speak of them, as belonging to one and the
same thing.

LVI. Now in order to discover by what means, the Magnitude of Tangible Objects
is perceived by Sight; I need only reflect on what passes in my own Mind, and
observe what those things be, which introduce the Ideas of greater or lesser
into my Thoughts, when I look on any Object. And these I find to be, First, the
Magnitude or Extension of the Visible Object, which being immediately perceived
by sight, is connected with that other which is Tangible, and placed at a
Distance. Secondly, The Confusion or Distinctness. And Thirdly, the
Vigorousness or Faintness of the aforesaid Visible Appearance. Caeteris
paribus, by how much the greater or lesser, the Visible Object is, by so much
the greater or lesser, do I conclude the Tangible Object to be. But, be the
Idea immediately perceived by Sight never so large, yet if it be withal
Confused, I judge the Magnitude of the thing to be but small. If it be Distinct
and Clear, I judge it greater. And if it be Faint, I apprehend it to be yet
greater. What is here meant, by Confusion and Faintness, has been explained in
SECT. XXXV.

LVII. Moreover the Judgments we make of Greatness do, in like manner as those
of Distance, depend on the Disposition of the Eye, also on the Figure, Number
and Situation of Objects and other Circumstances that have been observed to
attend great, or small Tangible Magnitudes. Thus, for Instance, the very same
Quantity of Visible Extension, which in the Figure of a Tower, does suggest the
Idea of great Magnitude, shall, in the Figure of a Man suggest the Idea of much
smaller Magnitude. That this is owing to the Experience we have had of the
usual Bigness of a Tower and a Man, no one, I suppose, need be told.

LVIII. It is also evident, that Confusion or Faintness, have no more a
necessary Connection with little or great Magnitude, than they have with little
or great Distance. As they suggest the latter, so they suggest the former to
our Minds. And by Consequence, if it were not for Experience, we should no more
judge a faint or confused Appearance to be connected with great or little
Magnitude, than we should that it was connected with great or little Distance.

LIX. Nor will it be found, that great or small Visible Magnitude has any
necessary Relation to great or small Tangible Magnitude: So that the one may
certainly be inferred from the other. But, before we come to the Proof of this,
it is fit we consider the Difference there is betwixt the Extension and Figure
which is the proper Object of Touch, and that other which is termed Visible;
and how the former is principally, though not immediately taken notice of, when
we look at any Object. This has been before mentioned, but we shall here
inquire into the Cause thereof. We regard the Objects that environ us, in
proportion as they are adapted to benefit or injure our own Bodies, and thereby
produce in our Minds the Sensations of Pleasure or Pain. Now Bodies operating
on our Organs, by an immediate Application, and the Hurt or Advantage arising
therefrom, depending altogether on the Tangible, and not at all on the Visible,
Qualities of any Object: This is a plain Reason, why those should be regarded
by us much more than these; and for this End, the Visive Sense seems to have
been bestowed on Animals, to wit, that by the Perception of Visible Ideas
(which in themselves are not capable of affecting, or any wise altering the
Frame of their Bodies) they may be able to foresee (from the Experience they
have had, what Tangible Ideas are connected with such, and such Visible Ideas)
the Damage or Benefit which is like to ensue, upon the Application of their own
Bodies to this or that Body which is at a Distance. Which Foresight, how
necessary it is to the preservation of an Animal, every one's Experience can
inform him. Hence it is, that when we look at an Object, the Tangible Figure
and Extension thereof are principally attended to; whilst there is small heed
taken of the Visible Figure and Magnitude, which, though more immediately
perceived, do less concern us, and are not fitted to pruduce any Alteration in
our Bodies.

LX. That the Matter of Fact is true, will be evident to any one, who considers
that a Man placed at Ten Foot Distance, is thought as great, as if he were
placed at the Distance only of Five Foot; which is true, not with Relation to
the Visible, but Tangible Greatness of the Object. The Visible Magnitude being
far greater, at one Station, than it is at the other.

LXI. Inches, Feet, etc. are settled, stated Lengths, whereby we measure
Objects, and estimate their Magnitude, we say, for Example, an Object appears
to be six Inches, or Six Foot long. Now, that this cannot be meant of Visible
Inches, etc. is evident, because a Visible Inch is it self no constant,
determinate Magnitude, and cannot therefore serve to mark out, and determine
the Magnitude of any other thing. Take an Inch marked upon a Ruler; view it,
successively, at the distance of half a Foot, a Foot, a Foot and a Half, etc.
from the Eye: At each of which, and at all the intermediate Distances, the Inch
shall have a different Visible Extension, i. e. there shall be more or fewer
Points discerned in it. Now I ask which of all these various Extensions, is
that stated, determinate one, that is agreed on, for a common Measure of other
Magnitudes? No Reason can be assigned, why we should pitch on one, more than
another: And except there be some invariable, determinate Extension fixed on to
be marked by the Word Inch, it is plain, it can be used to little Purpose; and
to say, a Thing contains this or that Number of Inches, shall imply no more
than that it is extended, without bringing any particular Idea of that
Extension into the Mind. Farther, an Inch and a Foot, from different Distances,
shall both exhibit the same Visible Magnitude, and yet at the same time, you
shall say, that one seems several times greater than the other. From all which
it is manifest, that the Judgments we make of the Magnitude of Objects by
Sight, are altogether in reference to their Tangible Extension. Whenever we say
an Object is Great, or Small, of this or that determinate Measure, I say, it
must be meant of the Tangible, and not the Visible Extension, which, though
immediately perceived, is nevertheless little taken notice of

LXII. Now, that there is no necessary Connection, between these two Distinct
Extensions is evident from hence: Because our Eyes might have been framed in
such a manner, as to be able to see nothing but what were less than the Minimum
Tangibile. In which Case, it is not impossible we might have perceived all the
immediate Objects of Sight, the very same that we do now: But unto those
Visible Appearances, there would not be connected those different Tangible
Magnitudes, that are now. Which shows, the Judgments we make of the Magnitude
of Things placed at a distance, from the various Greatness of the Immediate
Objects of Sight, do not arise from any Essential or Necessary, but only a
Customary Tie, which has been observed between them.

LXIII. Moreover, it is not only certain, that any Idea of Sight might not have
been connected with this or that Idea of Touch, which we now observe to
accompany it: But also, that the greater Visible Magnitudes might have been
connected with, and introduced into our Minds lesser Tangible Magnitudes, and
the lesser Visible Magnitudes greater Tangible Magnitudes. Nay, that it
actually is so, we have daily Experience; that Object which makes a strong and
large Appearance, not seeming near so great as another, the Visible Magnitude
whereof is much less, but more faint, and the Appearance upper, or which is the
same thing painted lower on the Retina, which Faintness and Situation suggest
both greater Magnitude and greater Distance.

LXIV. From which, and from SECT. LVII. and LVIII. it is manifest, that as we
do not perceive the Magnitudes of Objects immediately by Sight, so neither do
we perceive them, by the Mediation of any thing which has a necessary Connection
with them. Those Ideas that now suggest unto us the various Magnitudes of
External Objects, before we touch them, might possibly have suggested no such
thing: Or they might have signified them, in a direct contrary manner, so that
the very same Ideas, on the Perception whereof we judge an Object to be Small,
might as well have served to make us conclude it Great. Those Ideas being in
their own Nature equally fitted to bring into our Minds the Idea of Small or
Great, or no Size at all of outward Objects; just as the Words of any Language
are in their own Nature indifferent to signify this or that thing, or nothing
at all.

LXV. As we see Distance, so we see Magnitude. And we see both, in the same way
that we see Shame or Anger in Looks of a Man. Those Passions are themselves
Invisible, they are nevertheless let in by the Eye along with Colors and
Alterations of Countenance, which are the immediate Object of Vision: And which
signify them for no other Reason, than barely because they have been observed
to accompany them. Without which Experience, we should no more have taken
Blushing for a Sign of Shame, than of Gladness

LXVI. We are nevertheless exceeding prone to imagine those things, which are
perceived only by the Mediation of others, to be themselves the immediate
Objects of Sight; or, at least, to have in their own Nature a Fitness to be
suggested by them, before ever they had been experienced to coexist with them.
From which Prejudice every one, perhaps, will not find it easy to emancipate
himself, by any the clearest Convictions of Reason. And there are some Grounds
to think, that if there was one only invariable and universal Language in the
World, and that Men were born with the Faculty of speaking it, it would be the
Opinion of many, that the Ideas in other Men's Minds were properly perceived by
the Ear, or had at least a necessary and inseparable Tie with the Sounds that
were affixed to them. All which seems to arise from want of a due Application
of our discerning Faculty, thereby to discriminate between the Ideas that are
in our Understandings, and consider them apart from each other; which would
preserve us from confounding those that are different, and make us fee what
Ideas do, and what do not include or imply this or that other Idea.

LXVII. There is a Celebrated Phenomenon, the Solution whereof I shall attempt
to give, by the Principles that have been laid down, in reference to the manner
wherein we apprehend by Sight the Magnitude of Objects. The apparent Magnitude
of the Moon when placed in the Horizon, is much greater than when it is in the
Meridian. Though the Angle under which the Diameter of the Moon is seen, be not
observed greater in the former Case, than in the latter: And the Horizontal
Moon does not constantly appear of the same Bigness, but at some times seems
far greater than at others.

LXVIII. Now in order to explain the Reason of the Moon's appearing greater
than ordinary in the Horizon, it must be observed, that the Particles which
compose our Atmosphere intercept the Rays of Light proceeding from any Object
to the Eye; and by how much the greater is the Portion of Atmosphere,
interjacent between the Object and the Eye, by so much the more are the Rays
intercepted; and by consequence, the Appearance of the Object rendered more
Faint, every Object appearing more Vigorous or more Faint, in Proportion as it
sends more or fewer Rays, into the Eye Now, between the Eye and the Moon,
when situated in the Horizon, there lies a far greater Quantity of Atmosphere,
than there does when the Moon is in the Meridian. Whence it comes to pass, that
the Appearance of the Horizontal Moon is fainter, and therefore by SECT. LVI.
it should be thought bigger in that Situation, than in the Meridian, or in any
other Elevation above the Horizon.

LXIX. Farther, the Air being variously impregnated, sometimes more and
sometimes less with Vapors and Exhalations fitted to retund and intercept the
Rays of Light, it follows, that the Appearance of the Horizontal Moon has not
always an equal Faintness, and by Consequence, that Luminary, though in the very
same Situation, is at one time judged greater than at another.

LXX. That we have here given the true Account of the Phenomenon of the
Horizontal Moon, will, I suppose, be farther evident to any one from the
following Considerations. First, It is plain, that which in this Case suggests
the Idea of greater Magnitude, must be something which is it self perceived;
for, that which is unperceived cannot suggest to our Perception any other
thing. Secondly, It must be something that does not constantly remain the same,
but is subject to some Change or Variation, since the Appearance of the
Horizontal Moon varies, being at one time greater than at another. And yet,
Thirdly, It cannot be the visible Figure or Magnitude, since that remains the
same, or is rather lesser, by how much the Moon is nearer to the Horizon. It
remains therefore, that the true Cause is that Affection or Alteration of the
Visible Appearance, which proceeds from the greater Paucity of Rays arriving at
the Eye, and which I term Faintness: Since this answers all the forementioned
Conditions, and I am not conscious of any other Perception that does.

LXXI. Add to this, that in misty Weather it is a common Observation, that the
Appearance of the Horizontal Moon is far larger than usual, which greatly
conspires with, and strengthens our Opinion. Neither would it prove, in the
least, Irreconcilable with what we have said, if the Horizontal Moon should
chance sometimes to seem enlarged beyond its usual Extent, even in more Screne
Weather. For we must not only have regard to the Mist, which happens to be in
the place where we stand; we ought also to take into our Thoughts, the whole
Sum of Vapors and Exhalations, which lie betwixt the Eye and the Moon: All
which cooperating to render the Appearance of the Moon more Faint, and thereby
increase its Magnitude, it may chance to appear greater than it usually does,
even in the Horizontal Position, at a time when, though there be no
extraordinary Fog or Haziness, just in the place where we stand; yet, the Air
between the Eye and the Moon, taken altogether, may be loaded with a greater
quantity of interspersed Vapors and Exhalations, than at other times.

LXXII. It may be objected, that in Consequence of our Principles, the
Interposition of a Body in some degree Opaque, which may intercept a great Part
of the Rays of Light, should render the Appearance of the Moon in the Meridian
as large, as when it is viewed in the Horizon. To which I answer, it is not
Faintness any how applied, that suggests greater Magnitude, there being no
necessary, but only an experimental Connection between those two things: It
follows, that the Faintness, which enlarges the Appearance, must be applied in
such Sort, and with such Circumstances, as have been observed to attend the
Vision of great Magnitudes. When from a Distance we behold great Objects, the
Particles of the intermediate Air and Vapors, which are themselves
unperceivable, do interrupt the Rays of Light, and thereby render the
Appearance less strong and vivid; now, Faintness of Appearance caused in this
Sort, has been experienced to coexist with great Magnitude. But when it is
caused by the Interposition of an opaque sensible Body, this Circumstance
alters the Case, so that a faint Appearance this way caused, does not suggest
greater Magnitude, because it has not been experienced to coexist with it.

LXXIII. Faintness, as well as all other Ideas or Perceptions which suggest
Magnitude or Distance, does it in the same way that Words suggest the Notions
to which they are annexed. Now it is known, a Word pronounced with certain
Circumstances, or in a certain Context with other Words, has not always the
same Import and Signification that it has when pronounced in some other
Circumstances, or different Context of Words. The very same visible Appearance
as to Faintness and all other respects, if placed on high, shall not suggest
the same Magnitude that it would if it were seen at an equal Distance, on a
level with the Eye. The Reason whereof is, that we are rarely accustomed to
view Objects at a great Height; our Concerns lie among things situated rather
before than above us; and accordingly our Eyes are not placed on the top of our
Heads, but in such a Position, as is most convenient for us to see distant
Objects standing in our way, and this Situation of them being a Circumstance,
which usually attends the Vision of distant Objects, we may from hence account
for (what is commonly observed) an Object's appearing of different Magnitude,
even with respect to its Horizontal Extension, on the top of a Steeple, for
example, an hundred Feet high to one standing below, from what it would if
placed at an hundred Feet distance on a level with his Eye. For it has been
shown, that the Judgment we make on the Magnitude of a thing, depends not on
the visible Appearance alone, but also on diverse other Circumstances, any one
of which being omitted or varied may suffice to make some alteration in our
Judgment. Hence, the Circumstance of viewing a distant object in such a
Situation as is usual, and suits with the ordinary Posture of the Head and Eyes
being omitted, and instead thereof a different Situation of the Object, which
requires a different Posture of the Head taking place, it is not to be wondered
at, if the Magnitude be judged different; but it will be demanded, why an high
Object shoul'd constantly appear less than an equidistant low Object of the
same Dimensions, for so it is observed to be; it may indeed be granted that the
variation of some Circumstances may vary the Judgment, made on the Magnitude of
High Objects, which we are less used to look at: But it does not hence appear,
why they should be judged less rather than greater? I answer, that in case the
Magnitude of distant Objects was suggested by the Extent of their visible
Appearance alone, and thought Proportional thereto, it is certain they would
then be judged much less than now they seem to be, Vide SECT. LXXIX. But
several Circumstances concurring to form the Judgment we make on the Magnitude
of distant Objects, by means of which they appear far larger than others, whose
visible Appearance has an equal or even greater Extension; it follows, that
upon the Change or Omission of any of those Circumstances, which are wont to
attend the Vision of distant Objects, and so come to influence the Judgments
made on their Magnitude, they shall proportionably appear less than otherwise
they would. For any of those things that caused an Object to be thought
greater, than in proportion to its visible Extension, being either omitted or
applied without the usual Circumstances, the Judgment depends more entirely on
the visible Extension, and consequently the Object must be judged less. Thus in
the present Case, the Situation of the thing seen being different from what it
usually is in those Objects we have occasion to view, and whose Magnitude we
observe, it follows, that the very same Object, being an hundred Feet high,
should seem less than if it was an hundred Feet off on (or nearly on) a level
with the Eye. What has been here set forth, seems to me to have no small share
in contributing to magnify the Appearance of the horizontal Moon, and deserves
not to be passed over in the Explication of it.

LXXIV. If we attentively consider the Phenomenon before us, we shall find the
not discerning between the mediate and immediate Objects of Sight, to be the
chief Cause of the Difficulty that occurs in the Explication of it. The
Magnitude of the visible Moon, or that which is the proper and immediate Object
of Vision, is no greater when the Moon is in the Horizon, than when it is in
the Meridian. How comes it therefore, to seem greater in one Situation than the
other? What is it can put this Cheat on the Understanding? It has no other
Perception of the Moon, than what it gets by Sight: And that which is seen, is
of the same Extent, I say, the visible Appearance has the same, or rather a
less Magnitude when the Moon is viewed in the Horizontal, than when in the
Meridional Position: And yet it is esteemed greater in the former than in the
latter. Herein consists the difficulty, which does vanish and admit of a most
easy Solution, if we consider that as the visible Moon is not greater in the
Horizon than in the Meridian, so neither is it thought to be so. It has been
already shown, that in any act of Vision, the visible Object absolutely, or in
it self, is little taken notice of, the Mind still carrying its View from that
to some tangible Ideas, which have been observed to be connected with it, and
by that means come to be suggested by it. So that when a thing is said to
appear great or small, or whatever Estimate be made of the Magnitude of any
thing, this is meant not of the visible, but of the tangible Object. This duly
considered, it will be no hard matter to reconcile the seeming Contradiction
there is, that the Moon should appear of a different Bigness, the visible
Magnitude thereof remaining still the same. For by SECT. LVI. the very same
visible Extension, with a different Faintness, shall suggest a different
tangible Extension. When therefore the Horizontal Moon is said to appear
greater than the Meridional Moon, this must be understood not of a greater
visible Extension, but of a greater tangible or real Extension, which by reason
of the more than ordinary Faintness of the visible Appearance, is suggested to
the Mind along with it.

LXXV. Many Attempts have been made by Learned Men, to account for this
Appearance. Gassendus, Descartes, Hobbes, and several others, have emplowed
their Thoughts on that Subject; but how fruitless and unsatisfactory their
Endeavors have been, is sufficiently shown in The Philosophical Transactions
Phil. Trans. Number. 187. p. 314.
, where you may see their several Opinions at large set forth and confuted, not
without some Surprise at the gross Blunders that ingenious Men have been forced
into, by endeavoring to reconcile this Appearance with the ordinary Principles
of Optics. Since the Writing of which, there has been published in the
Transactions Number. 187. p. 323.
another Paper relating to the same Affair, by the celebrated Dr. Wallis,
wherein he attempts to account for that Phenomenon, which, though it seems not
to contain any thing new, or different from what had been said before by
others, I shall nevertheless consider in this place.

LXXVI. His Opinion, in short, is this; We judge not of the Magnitude of an
Object by the visual Angle alone, but by the visual Angle in conjunction with
the Distance. Hence, though the Angle remain the same, or even become less, yet
if withal the Distance seem to have been increased, the Object shall appear
greater. Now, one way whereby we estimate the Distance of any thing, is by the
Number and Extent of the intermediate Objects: When therefore the Moon is seen
in the Horizon, the Variety of Fields, Houses, etc. together with the large
Prospect of the wide extended Land or Sea, that lies between the Eye and the
utmost Limb of the Horizon, suggest unto the Mind the Idea of greater Distance,
and consequently magnify the Appearance. And this, according to Dr. Wallis, is
the true Account of the extraordinary Largeness attributed by the Mind to the
Horizontal Moon, at a time when the Angle subtended by its Diameter, is not one
jot greater than it used to be.

LXXVII. With reference to this Opinion, not to repeat what has been already
said concerning Distance, I shall only observe, First, That if the Prospect of
interjacent Objects be that which suggests the Idea of farther Distance, and
this Idea of farther Distance be the Cause that brings into the Mind the Idea
of greater Magnitude, it should hence follow, that if one looked at the
Horizontal Moon from behind a Wall, it would appear no bigger than ordinary.
For in that Case, the Wall interposing cuts off all that Prospect of Sea and
Land, etc. which might otherwise increase the apparent Distance, and thereby
the apparent Magnitude of the Moon. Nor will it suffice to say, the Memory does
even then suggest all that Extent of Land, etc. which lies within the Horizon;
which Suggestion occasions a sudden Judgment of Sense, that the Moon is farther
off and larger than usual. For ask any Man, who from such a Station beholding
the Horizontal Moon, shall think her greater than usual, whether he has at
that time in his Mind any Idea of the Intermediate Objects, or long Tract of
Land that lies between his Eye and the extreme Edge of the Horizon? And whether
it be that Idea which is the Cause of his making the aforementioned Judgment?
He will, I suppose, reply in the Negative, and declare the Horizontal Moon
shall appear greater than the Meridional, though he never thinks of all or any
of those things that lie between him and it. Secondly, It seems impossible by
this Hypothesis, to account for the Moon's appearing in the very same
Situation, at one time greater than at another; which nevertheless has been
shown to be very agreeable to the Principles we have laid down, and receives a
most easy and natural Explication from them. For the further clearing up of
this Point, it is to be observed that what we immediately and properly see are
only Lights and Colors in sundry Situations and Shades, and Degrees of
Faintness and Clearness, Confusion and Distinctness. All which visible Objects
are only in the Mind; nor do they suggest ought external, whether Distance or
Magnitude, otherwise than by habitual Connection as Words do Things. We are also
to remark, that, beside the Straining of the Eyes, and beside the vivid and
faint, the distinct and confused Appearances (which bearing some Proportion to
Lines and Angles, have been substituted instead of them, in the foregoing Part
of this Treatise) there are other means which suggest both Distance and
Magnitude; particularly, the Situation of visible Points, or Objects, as upper
or lower; the former suggesting a farther Distance and greater Magnitude, the
latter a nearer Distance and lesser Magnitude: All which is an Effect only of
Custom and Experience; there being really nothing intermediate in the Line of
Distance, between the Uppermost and Lowermost, which are both Aequidistant, or
rather at no Distance from the Eye, as there is also nothing in Upper or Lower,
which by necessary Connection should suggest greater or lesser Magnitude. Now,
as these customary, experimental means of suggesting Distance, do likewise
suggest Magnitude, so they suggest the one as immediately as the other. I say,
they do not (Vide SECT. LIII.) first suggest Distance, and then leave the Mind
from thence to infer or compute Magnitude, but suggest Magnitude as immediately
and directly as they suggest Distance.

LXXVIII. This Phenomenon of the Horizontal Moon is a clear Instance of the
insufficiency of Lines and Angles, for explaining the way wherein the Mind
perceives, and estimates the Magnitude of outward Objects. There is
nevertheless a use of Computation by them, in order to determine the apparent
Magnitude of things, so far as they have a Connection with, and are proportional
to those other Ideas, or Perceptions which are the true and immediate Occasions
that suggest to the Mind the apparent Magnitude of Things. But this in general
may, I think, be observed concerning Mathematical Computation in Optics: That
it can never be very precise and exact, since the Judgments we make of the
Magnitude of External Things do often depend on several Circumstances, which
are not proportionable to, or capable of being defined by Lines and Angles.

LXXIX. From what has been said, we may safely deduce this Consequence, to wit,
that a Man born blind, and made to see, would, at first opening of his Eyes
make a very different Judgment of the Magnitude of Objects intromitted by them,
from what others do. He would not consider the Ideas of Sight, with reference
to, or as having any Connection with the Ideas of Touch: His View of them being
entirely terminated within themselves, he can no otherwise judge them Great or
Small, than as they contain a greater or lesser Number of visible Points. Now,
it being certain that any visible Point can cover or exclude from View, only
one other visible Point, it follows, that whatever Object intercepts the View
of another, has an equal Number of visible Points with it; and consequently
they shall both be thought by him to have the same Magnitude. Hence it is
evident, one in those Circumstances would judge his Thumb, with which he might
hide a Tower, or hinder its being seen, equal to that Tower, or his Hand, the
Interposition whereof might conceal the Firmament from his View, equal to the
Firmament: How great an Inequality soever there may, in our Apprehensions, seem
to be betwixt those two things, because of the customary and close Connection
that has grown up in our Minds between the Objects of Sight and Touch, whereby
the very different and distinct Ideas of those two Senses, are so blended and
confounded together, as to be mistaken for one and the same thing; out of which
Prejudice we cannot easily extricate our selves.

LXXX. For the better explaining the Nature of Vision, and setting the manner
wherein we perceive Magnitudes in a due Light, I shall proceed to make some
Observations concerning Matters relating thereto, whereof the want of
Reflection, and duly separating between tangible and visible Ideas, is apt to
create in us mistaken and confused Notions. And First, I shall observe that the
Minimum Visibile is exactly equal in all Beings whatsoever, that are endowed
with the visive Faculty. No exquisite Formation of the Eye, no peculiar
Sharpness of Sight can make it less in one Creature than in another; for it not
being distinguishable into Parts, nor in any wise consisting of them, it must
necessarily be the same to all. For suppose it otherwise, and that the Minimum
Visibile of a Mite, for Instance, be less than the Minimum Visibile of a Man;
the latter therefore may by Detraction of some part be made equal to the
former: It does therefore consist of Parts, which is inconsistent with the
Notion of a Minimum Visibile, or Point.

LXXXI. It will perhaps be objected that the Minimum Visibile of a Man does
really, and in it self contain Parts whereby it surpasses that of a Mite,
though they are not perceivable by the Man. To which I answer, the Minimum
Visibile having (in like manner as all other the proper and immediate Objects
of Sight) been shown not to have any Existence without the Mind of him who sees
it, it follows there cannot be any part of it that is not actually perceived,
and therefore visible. Now for any Object to contain several distinct visible
Parts, and at the same time to be a Minimum Visibile, is a manifest
Contradiction.

LXXXII. Of these visible Points we see at all times an equal Number. It is
every whit as great when our View is contracted and bounded by near Objects, as
when it is extended to larger and remoter. For it being impossible that one
Minimum Visibile should obscure, or keep out of Sight more than one other, it
is a plain Consequence, that when my View is on all sides bounded by the Walls
of my Study, I see just as many visible points as I could, in case that by the
removal of the Study-walls, and all other Obstructions, I had a full Prospect
of the circumjacent Fields, Mountains, Sea, and open Firmament; for so long as
I am shut up within the Walls, by their Interposition, every Point of the
external Objects is covered from my View: But each Point that is seen being
able to cover or exclude from Sight, one only other corresponding Point, it
follows, that whilst my Sight is confined to those narrow Walls, I see as many
Points, or Minima Visibilia, as I should were those Walls away, by looking on
all the external Objects, whose Prospect is intercepted by them. Whenever
therefore we are said to have a greater Prospect at one time than another, this
must be understood with relation not to the proper and immediate, but the
secondary and mediate Objects of Vision, which, as has been shown, properly
belong to the Touch.

LXXXIII. The visive Faculty considered, with reference to its immediate
Objects, may be found to labor of two Defects, First, In respect of the Extent
or Number of visible Points that are at once perceivable by it, which is narrow
and limited to a certain Degree. It can take in at one View but a certain
determinate Number of Minima Visibilia, beyond which it cannot extend its
Prospect. Secondly, Our Sight is defective in that its View is not only narrow,
but also for the most part confused; of those things that we take in at one
Prospect, we can see but a few at once clearly and unconfusedly; and the more
we fix our Sight on any one Object, by so much the Darker and more Indistinct
shall the rest appear.

LXXXIV. Corresponding to these two Defects of Sight, we may imagine as many
Perfections, to wit, 1st. That of comprehending in one View a greater Number of
visible Points. 2dly. Of being able to view them all equally and at once, with
the utmost Clearness and Distinction. That those Perfections are not actually
in some Intelligences of a different Order and Capacity from ours, it is
impossible for us to know.

LXXXV. In neither of those two Ways do Microscopes contribute to the
improvement of Sight; for when we look through a Microscope, we neither see
more visible Points, nor are the collateral Points more distinct than when we
look with the naked Eye, at Objects placed in a due Distance. A Microscope
brings us as it were into a new World: It presents us with a new Scene of
visible Objects, quite different from what we behold with the naked Eye. But
herein consists the most remarkable Difference, to wit, that whereas the
Objects perceived by the Eye alone, have a certain Connection with tangible
Objects, whereby we are taught to foresee what will ensue upon the Approach or
Application of distant Objects to the Parts of our own Body, which much
conduces to its Preservation; there is not the like Connection between things
tangible and those visible Objects, that are perceived by help of a fine
Microscope.

LXXXVI. Hence it is evident, that were our Eyes turned into the Nature of
Microscopes, we should not be much benefited by the Change; we should be
deprived of the forementioned Advantage we at present receive by the visive
Faculty; and have left us only the empty Amusement of Seeing, without any other
benefit arising from it. But in that Case, it will perhaps be said, our Sight
would be endued with a far greater Sharpness and Penetration than it now has.
But I would fain know wherein consists that Sharpness, which is esteemed so
great an Excellency of Sight. It is certain from what we have already shown,
that the Minimum Visibile is never greater or lesser, but in all Cases
constantly the same: And in the Case of Microscopical Eyes, I see only this
Difference, to wit, that upon the ceasing of a certain observable Connection
betwixt the diverse Perceptions of Sight and Touch, which before enabled us to
regulate our Actions by the Eye, it would now be rendered utterly unserviceable
to that Purpose.

LXXXVII. Upon the whole, it seems that if we consider the Use and End of
Sight, together with the present State and Circumstances of our Being, we shall
not find any great Cause to complain of any Defect or Imperfection in it, or
easily conceive how it could be mended. With such admirable Wisdom is that
Faculty contrived, both for the Pleasure and Convenience of Life.

LXXXVIII. Having finished what I intended to say, concerning the Distance and
Magnitude of Objects, I come now to treat of the Manner, wherein the Mind
perceives by Sight their Situation. Among the Discoveries of the last Age, it
is reputed none of the least, that the Manner of Vision has been more clearly
explained, than ever it had been before. There is, at this Day, no one
Ignorant, that the Pictures of external Objects are painted on the Retina, or
Fund of the Eye. That we can see nothing which is not so painted: And that,
according as the Picture is more Distinct or Confused, so also is the
Perception we have of the Object: But then in this Explication of Vision, there
occurs one mighty Difficulty. The Objects are painted in an inverted Order on
the Bottom of the Eye: The upper part of any Object being painted on the lower
part of the Eye, and the lower part of the Object on the upper part of the Eye:
And so also as to Right and Left. Since therefore the Pictures are thus
inverted, it is demanded how it comes to pass, that we see the Objects erect
and in their natural Posture?

LXXXIX. In answer to this Difficulty, we are told, that the Mind perceiving an
Impulse of a Ray of Light, on the upper part of the Eye, considers this Ray as
coming in a direct Line, from the lower part of the Object; and in like manner
tracing the Ray that strikes on the lower part of the Eye, it is directed to
the upper part of the Object. Thus in the adjacent Figure C the lower Point of
the Object A B C is projected on c the upper part of the Eye. So likewise, the
highest Point A is projected on a the lowest part of the Eye, which makes the
Representation c b a inverted: But the Mind considering the Stroke that is made
on c as coming in the straight Line C c from the lower end of the Object; and
the Stroke or Impulse on a, as coming in the Line A a from the upper End of the
Object, is directed to make a right Judgment of the Situation of the Object A B
C, notwithstanding the Picture of it is inverted. This is illustrated by
conceiving a blind Man, who holding in his Hands two Sticks that cross each
other, does with them touch the extremities of an Object, placed in a
perpendicular Situation. It is certain, this Man will judge that to be the
upper part of the Object, which he touches with the Stick held in the undermost
Hand, and that to be the lower part of the Object, which he touches with the
Stick in his uppermost Hand. This is the common Explication of the erect
Appearance of Objects, which is generally received and acquiesced in, being (as
Mr. Molyneux tells us Diopt. par. 2. c. 7. p. 289.
) allowed by all Men as Satisfactory.

XC. But this account to me does not seem in any degree True. Did I perceive
those Impulses, Decussations, and Directions of the Rays of Light, in like
manner as has been set forth, then, indeed, it would not at first view be
altogether void of Probability. And there might be some Pretense for the
Comparison of the Blind-Man and his cross Sticks. But the Case is far
otherwise. I know very well that I perceive no such thing. And of Consequence,
I cannot thereby make an Estimate of the Situation of Objects. I appeal to any
one's Experience, whether he be conscious to himself, that he thinks on the
Intersection made by the Radious Pencils, or pursues the Impulses they give in
right Lines, whenever he perceives by Sight the Position of any Object? To me
it seems evident, that Crossing and Tracing of the Rays, is never thought on by
Children, Idiots, or in truth by any other, save only those who have applied
themselves to the Study of Optics. And for the Mind to judge of the Situation
of Objects by those things, without perceiving them, or to perceive them
without knowing it, is equally beyond my Comprehension. Add to this, that the
explaining the manner of Vision by the Example of cross Sticks, and hunting for
the Object along the Axes of the Radious Pencils, does suppose the proper
Objects of Sight to be perceived at a Distance from us, contrary to what has
been demonstrated.

XCI. It remains, therefore, that we look for some other Explication of this
Difficulty: And I believe it not impossible to find one, provided we examine it
to the Bottom, and carefully distinguish between the Ideas of Sight and Touch;
which cannot be too often inculcated in treating of Vision: But more especially
throughout the consideration of this Affair, we ought to carry that Distinction
in our Thoughts: For that from want of a right Understanding thereof, the
Difficulty of explaining Erect Vision seems chiefly to arise.

XCII. In order to disentangle our Minds, from whatever Prejudices we may
entertain with relation to the Subject in hand, nothing seems more apposite,
than the taking into our Thoughts the Case of one born Blind, and afterward,
when grown up, made to see. And though perhaps, it may not be an easy Task to
divest our selves entirely of the Experience received from Sight, so as to be
able to put our Thoughts exactly in the Posture of such a one's; we must,
nevertheless as far as possible, endeavor to frame true Conceptions, of what
might reasonably be supposed to pass in his Mind.

XCIII. It is certain, that a Man actually Blind, and who had continued so from
his Birth, would by the sense of Feeling attain to have Ideas of Upper and
Lower. By the Motion of his Hand he might discern the Situation of any Tangible
Object placed within his Reach. That part on which he felt himself supported,
or toward which he perceived his Body to gravitate, he would term Lower, and
the contrary to this Upper; and accordingly denominate whatsoever Objects he
touched.

XCIV. But then, whatever Judgments he makes concerning the Situation of
Objects, are confined to those only that are perceivable by Touch. All those
things that are Intangible, and of a spiritual Nature, his Thoughts and
Desires, his Passions, and in general all the Modifications of his Soul, to
these he would never apply the Terms Upper and Lower, except only in a
Metaphorical Sense. He may, perhaps, by way of Allusion, speak of high or low
Thoughts: But those Terms in their proper Signification, would never be applied
to any thing, that was not conceived to exist without the Mind. For a Man born
Blind, and remaining in the same State, could mean nothing else by the Words
Higher and Lower, than a greater or lesser Distance from the Earth: Which
Distance he would measure by the Motion or Application of his Hand, or some
other part of his Body. It is, therefore, evident, that all those things which,
in respect of each other, would by him be thought Higher or Lower, must be such
as were conceived to exist without his Mind, in the ambient Space.

XCV. Whence it plainly follows, that such a one, if we suppose him made to
see, would not at first Sight think, that any thing he saw was High or Low,
Erect or Inverted; for it has been already demonstrated in SECT. XLI. that he
would not think the Things he perceived by Sight to be at any Distance from
him, or without his Mind. The Objects to which he had hitherto been used to
apply the Terms Up and Down, High and Low, were such only as affected, or were
some way perceived by his Touch: But the proper Objects of Vision make a new
Set of Ideas, perfectly distinct and different from the former, and which can
in no sort make themselves perceived by Touch. There is, therefore, nothing at
all that could induce him to think those Terms applicable to them: Nor would he
ever think it, till such time as he had observed their Connection with Tangible
Objects, and the same Prejudices began to insinuate it self into his
Understanding, which from their Infancy had grown up in the Understandings of
other Men.

XCVI. To set this Matter in a clearer Light, I shall make use of an Example.
Suppose the abovementioned blind Person, by his Touch, perceives a Man to
stand Erect. Let us inquire into the manner of this. By the application of his
Hand to the several Parts of a Humane Body, he had perceived different Tangible
Ideas, which being collected into sundry complex ones have distinct Names
annexed to them. Thus one Combination of a certain Tangible Figure, Bulk, and
Consistency of Parts is called the Head, another the Hand, a Third the Foot,
and so of the rest: All which Complex Ideas could, in his Understanding, be
made up only of Ideas perceivable by Touch. He had also by his Touch obtained
an Idea of Earth or Ground, toward which he perceives the Parts of his Body to
have a natural Tendency. Now, by Erect nothing more being meant, than that
perpendicular Position of a Man, wherein his Feet are nearest to the Earth: If
the blind Person by moving his Hand, over the Parts of the Man who stands
before him, perceives the tangible Ideas that compose the Head, to be farthest
from, and those that compose the Feet to be nearest to, that other Combination
of Tangible Ideas which he calls Earth: He will denominate that Man Erect. But
if we suppose him on a sudden to receive his Sight, and that he behold a Man
standing before him, it is evident, in that Case, he would neither judge the
Man he sees to be Erect nor Inverted; for he never having known those Terms
applied to any other, save Tangible Things, or which existed in the Space
without him, and what he sees neither being Tangible, nor perceived as existing
without, he could not know that in propriety of Language they were applicable
to it.

XCVII. Afterward, when upon turning his Head or Eyes up and down to the right
and left, he shall observe the visible Objects to change, and shall also attain
to know, that they are called by the same Names, and connected with the Objects
perceived by Touch; then, indeed, he will come to speak of them and their
Situation, in the same Terms that he has been used to apply to Tangible Things:
And those that he perceives by turning up his Eyes, he will call Upper, and
those that by turning down his Eyes, he will call Lower.

XCVIII. And this seems to me the true Reason why he should think those Objects
uppermost that are painted on the Lower part of his Eye: For, by turning the
Eye up they shall be distinctly seen; as likewise those that are painted on the
highest part of the Eye shall be distinctly seen, by turning the Eye down, and
are for that Reason esteemed lowest: For we have shown that to the immediate
Objects of Sight, considered in themselves, he would not attribute the Terms
High and Low. It must therefore be on account of some Circumstances, which are
observed to attend them: And these, it is plain, are the Actions of turning the
Eye up and down, which suggest a very obvious Reason, why the Mind should
denominate the Objects of Sight accordingly High or Low. And without this
Motion of the Eye, this turning it up and down in order to discern different
Objects, doubtless Erect, Inverse, and other the like Terms relating to the
Position of Tangible Objects, would never have been transferred, or in any
degree apprehended to belong to the Ideas of Sight: The mere Act of Seeing
including nothing in it to that Purpose; whereas the different Situations of
the Eye naturally direct the Mind to make a suitable Judgment of the Situation
of Objects intromitted by it.

XCIX. Farther, when he has by Experience learned the Connection there is
between the several Ideas of Sight and Touch, he will be able, by the
Perception he has of the Situation of Visible Things in respect of one another,
to make a sudden and true Estimate of the Situation of Outward, Tangible Things
corresponding to them. And thus it is, he shall perceive by Sight the Situation
of External Objects, which do not properly fall under that Sense.

C. I know we are very prone to think, that if just made to see, we should
judge of the Situation of Visible Things as we do now: But, we are also as
prone to think, that at first Sight, we should in the same way apprehend the
Distance and Magnitude of Objects, as we do now: Which has been shown to be a
false and groundless Persuasion. And for the like Reasons, the same Censure may
be past on the positive Assurance, that most Men, before they have thought
sufficiently of the Matter, might have of their being able to determine by the
Eye at first view, whether Objects were Erect or Inverse.

CI. It will, perhaps be objected to our Opinion, that a Man, for Instance,
being thought Erect when his Feet are next the Earth, and Inverted when his
Head is next the Earth, it does hence follow, that by the mere act of Vision,
without any Experience or altering the Situation of the Eye, we should have
determined whether he were Erect or Inverted: For both the Earth it self, and
the Limbs of the Man who stands thereon, being equally perceived by Sight, one
cannot choose seeing, what part of the Man is nearest the Earth, and what part
farthest from it, i. e. whether he be Erect or Inverted.

CII. To which I answer, the Ideas which constitute the Tangible Earth and Man,
are entirely different from those which constitute the Visible Earth and Man.
Nor was it possible, by virtue of the Visive Faculty alone, without superadding
any Experience of Touch, or altering the Position of the Eye, ever to have
known, or so much as suspected, there had been any Relation or Connection
between them: Hence, a Man at first view would not denominate any thing he saw
Earth, or Head, or Foot; and consequently, he could not tell by the mere act of
Vision, whether the Head or Feet were nearest the Earth: Nor, indeed, would we
have thereby any thought of Earth or Man, Erect or Inverse, at all: Which will
be made yet more evident, if we nicely observe, and make a particular
Comparison between the Ideas of both Senses.

CIII. That which I see is only variety of Light and Colors. That which I feel
is Hard or Soft, Hot or Cold, Rough or Smooth. What Similitude, what Connection
have those Ideas with these? Or how is it possible, that any one should see
Reason, to give one and the same Name to Combinations of Ideas so very
different, before he had experienced their Coexistence? We do not find there is
any necessary Connection betwixt this or that Tangible Quality, and any Color
whatsoever. And we may sometimes perceive Colors, where there is nothing to be
felt. All which does make it manifest, that no Man at first receiving of his
Sight, would know there was any Agreement between this or that particular
Object of his Sight, and any Object of Touch he had been already acquainted
with: The Colors therefore of the Head, would to him no more suggest the Idea
of Head, than they would the Idea of Foot.

CIV. Farther, we have at large shown (vid. SECT. LXIII and LXIV.) there is no
dicoverable, necessary Connection, between any given Visible Magnitude, and any
one particular Tangible Magnitude; but that it is entirely the result of Custom
and Experience, and depends on foreign and accidental Circumstances, that we
can by the Perception of Visible Extension inform our selves, what may be the
Extension of any Tangible Object connected with it. Hence it is certain that
neither the Visible Magnitude of Head or Foot, would bring along with them into
the Mind, at first opening of the Eyes, the respective Tangible Magnitudes of
those Parts.

CV. By the foregoing Section, it is plain the Visible Figure of any Part of
the Body has no necessary Connection with the Tangible Figure thereof, so as at
First Sight to suggest it to the Mind: For Figure is the Termination of
Magnitude, whence it follows, that no Visible Magnitude, having in its own
Nature an aptness to suggest any one particular Tangible Magnitude, so neither
can any Visible Figure be inseparably connected with its corresponding Tangible
Figure: So as of it self and in a way prior to Experience, it might suggest it
to the Understanding. This will be farther evident, if we consider that what
seems smooth and round to the Touch, may to Sight, if viewed through a
Microscope, seem quite otherwise.

CVI. From all which laid together and duly considered, we may clearly deduce
this Inference. In the first act of Vision, no Idea entering by the Eye, would
have a perceivable Connection with the Ideas to which the Names Earth, Man,
Head, Foot, etc. were annexed in the Understanding of a Person Blind from his
Birth; so as in any sort to introduce them into his Mind, or make themselves be
called by the same Names, and reputed the same Things with them, as afterward
they come to be.

CVII. There does, nevertheless, remain one Difficulty, which perhaps may seem
to press hard on our Opinion, and deserve not to be passed over: For though it
be granted that neither the Color, Size, nor Figure of the visible Feet have
any necessary Connection with the Ideas that compose the Tangible Feet, so as to
bring them at first sight into my Mind, or make me in danger of confounding
them before I had been used to, and for some time experienced their Connection:
Yet thus much seems undeniable, namely, that the Number of the visible Feet,
being the same with that of the Tangible Feet, I may from hence without any
Experience of Sight, reasonably conclude, that they represent or are connected
with the Feet rather than the Head. I say, it seems the Idea of two visible
Feet will sooner suggest to the Mind, the Idea of two tangible Feet than of one
Head; so that the blind Man upon first Reception of the visive Faculty might
know, which were the Feet or Two, and which the Head or One.

CVIII. In order to get clear of this seeming Difficulty, we need only observe,
that Diversity of visible Objects does not necessarily infer diversity of
tangible Objects corresponding to them. A Picture painted with great variety of
Colors affects the Touch in one uniform manner; it is therefore evident, that
I do not by any necessary Consecution, independent of Experience, judge of the
number of things Tangible, from the Number of things Visible. I should not
therefore at first opening my Eyes conclude, that because I see two I shall
feel two. How, therefore can I, before Experience teaches me, know that the
visible Legs, because two, are connected with the tangible Legs, or the visible
Head, because one is connected with the tangible Head? The truth is, the things
I see are so very different and heterogeneous from the things I feel, that the
Perception of the one would never have suggested the other to my thoughts, or
enabled me to pass the least Judgment thereon, until I had experienced their
Connection.

CIX. But for a fuller Illustration of this Matter, it ought to be considered
that Number (however some may reckon it amongst the Primary Qualities) is
nothing fixed and settled, really existing in things themselves. It is entirely
the Creature of the Mind, considering, either an Idea by it self, or any
Combination of Ideas to which it gives one Name, and so makes it pass for an
Unite. According as the Mind variously combines its Ideas, the Unite varies;
and as the Unite, so the Number, which is only a Collection of Unites, does
also vary. We call a Window one, a Chimney one, and yet a House in which there
are many Windows, and many Chimneys, has an equal right to be called one, and
many Houses go to the making of one City. In these and the like Instances, it
is evident the Unite constantly relates to the particular Draughts the Mind
makes of its Ideas, to which it affixes Names, and wherein it includes more or
less, as best suits its own Ends and Purposes. Whatever therefore the Mind
considers as one, that is an Unite. Every Combination of Ideas is considered as
one thing by the Mind, and in token thereof is marked by one Name. Now, this
Naming and Combining together of Ideas is perfectly arbitrary, and done by the
Mind in such sort, as Experience shows it to be most convenient: Without which,
our Ideas had never been collected into such sundry distinct Combinations as
they now are.

CX. Hence it follows, that a Man born Blind, and afterward, when grown up,
made to see, would not in the first act of Vision, parcel out the Ideas of
Sight, into the same distinct Collections that others do, who have experienced
which do regularly coexist and are proper to be bundled up together under one
Name. He would not, for Example, make into one complex Idea, and thereby
esteem, and unite all those particular Ideas, which constitute the visible Head
or Foot. For there can be no Reason assigned why he should do so, barely upon
his seeing a Man stand upright before him: There crowd into his Mind the Ideas
which compose the visible Man, in company with all the other Ideas of Sight
perceived at the same time: But all these Ideas offered at once to his View, he
would not distribute into sundry distinct Combinations, till such as by
observing the Motion of the Parts of the Man and other Experiences, he comes to
know, which are to be separated, and which to be collected together.

CXI. From what has been premised, it is plain the Objects of Sight and Touch
make, if I may so say, two Sets of Ideas, which are widely different from each
other. To Objects of either kind, we indifferently attribute the Terms high and
low, right and left, and such like, denoting the Position or Situation of
things: But then we must well observe that the Position of any Object is
determined with respect only to Objects of the same Sense. We say any Object of
Touch is high or low; according as it is more or less distant from the tangible
Earth: And in like manner we denominate any Object of Sight high or low, in
Proportion as it is more or less distant from the visible Earth: But to define
the Situation of visible Things, with relation to the Distance they bear from
any tangible Thing, or vice versa, this were absurd and perfectly
untintelligible. For all visible things are equally in the Mind, and take up no
part of the external Space: And consequently are equidistant from any tangible
thing, which exists without the Mind.

CXII. Or rather to speak truly, the proper Objects of Sight are at no
Distance, neither near nor far from any tangible Thing. For if we inquire
narrowly into the Matter we shall find that those things only are compared
together in respect of Distance, which exist after the same manner, or
appertain unto the same Sense. For by the Distance between any two Points,
nothing more is meant than the Number of intermediate Points: If the given
Points are visible, the Distance between them is marked out by the Number of
the interjacent visible Points: If they are tangible, the Distance between them
is a Line consisting of tangible Points; but if they are one Tangible, and the
other Visible, the Distance between them does neither consist of Points
perceivable by Sight nor by Touch, i. e. it is utterly inconceivable. This,
perhaps, will not find an easy Admission into all Men's Understanding: However,
I should gladly be informed whether it be not true, by any one who will be at
the pains to reflect a little, and apply it home to his Thoughts.

CXIII. The not observing what has been delivered in the two last Sections,
seems to have occasioned no small part of the Difficulty that occurs in the
Business of Erect Appearances. The Head, which is painted nearest the Earth,
seems to be farthest from it; and on the other hand, the Feet, which are
painted farthest from the Earth, are thought nearest to it. Herein lies the
Difficulty, which vanishes if we express the thing more clearly and free from
Ambiguity, thus: How comes it that, to the Eye, the visible Head which is
nearest the tangible Earth, seems farthest from the Earth, and the visible
Feet, which are farthest from the tangible Earth, seem nearest the Earth? The
Question being thus proposed, who sees not the Difficulty is founded on a
Supposition, that the Eye, or visive Faculty, or rather the Soul by means
thereof, should judge of the Situation of visible Objects, with reference to
their Distance from the tangible Earth? Whereas it is evident the tangible
Earth is not perceived by Sight: And it has been shown in the two last
preceding Sections, that the Location of Visible Objects is determined only by
the Distance they bear from one another; and that it is Nonsense to talk of
Distance, far or near, between a visible and tangible Thing.

CXIV. If we confine our Thoughts to the proper Objects of Sight, the whole is
plain and easy. The Head is painted farthest from, and the Feet nearest to the
visible Earth; and so they appear to be. What is there strange or unaccountable
in this? Let us suppose the Pictures in the Fund of the Eye, to be the
immediate Objects of the Sight. The Consequence is, that things should appear
in the same Posture they are painted in; and is it not so? The Head which is
seen, seems farthest from the Earth which is seen; and the Feet, which are
seen, seem nearest to the Earth which is seen; and just so they are painted.

CXV. But, say you, the Picture of the Man is inverted, and yet the Appearance
is Erect: I ask, what mean you by the Picture of the Man, or, which is the same
thing, the visible Man's being inverted? You tell me it is inverted, because
the Heels are uppermost, and the Head undermost? Explain me this. You say, that
by the Head's being undermost, you mean that it is nearest to the Earth; and by
the Heels being uppermost, that they are farthest from the Earth. I ask again,
what Earth you mean? You cannot mean the Earth that is painted on the Eye, or
the visible Earth: For the Picture of the Head is farthest from the Picture of
the Earth, and the Picture of the Feet nearest to the Picture of the Earth; and
accordingly the visible Head is farthest from the visible Earth, and the
visible Feet nearest to it. It remains, therefore, that you mean the tangible
Earth, and so determine the Situation of visible things with respect to
tangible Things; contrary to what has been demonstrated in SECT. CXI. and
CXII. The two distinct Provinces of Sight and Touch should be considered apart,
and as if their Objects had no Intercourse, no manner of Relation to one
another, in point of Distance or Position.

CXVI. Farther, what greatly contributes to make us mistake in this Matter is,
that when we think of the Pictures in the Fund of the Eye, we imagine our
selves looking on the Fund of another's Eye, or another looking on the Fund of
our own Eye, and beholding the Pictures painted thereon. Suppose two Eyes A and
B: A from some distance looking on the Pictures in B sees them inverted, and
for that reason concludes they are inverted in B: But this is wrong. There are
projected in little on the Bottom of A, the Images of the Pictures of, suppose
Man, Earth, etc. which are painted on B. And besides these, the Eye B it self,
and the Objects which environ it, together with another Earth, are projected in
a larger Size on A. Now, by the Eye A, these larger Images are deemed the true
Objects, and the lesser only Pictures in miniature. And it is with respect to
those greater Images, that it determines the Situation of the smaller Images:
So that comparing the little Man with the great Earth, A judges him inverted,
or that the Feet are farthest from, and the Head nearest to the great Earth.
Whereas, if A compare the little Man with the little Earth, then he will appear
Erect, i. e. his Head shall seem farthest from, and his Feet nearest to the
little Earth. But we must consider that B does not see two Earths as A does: It
sees only what is represented by the little Pictures in A, and consequently
shall judge the Man Erect: For, in truth, the Man in B is not inverted, for
there the Feet are next the Earth; but it is the Representation of it in A
which is inverted, for there the Head of the Representation of the Picture of
the Man in B is next the Earth, and the Feet farthest from the Earth, meaning
the Earth which is without the Representation of the Pictures in B. For if you
take the little Images of the Pictures in B, and consider them by themselves,
and with respect only to one another, they are all Erect and in their natural
Posture.

CXVII. Farther, there lies a Mistake in our imagining that the Pictures of
external Objects are painted on the Bottom of the Eye. It has been shown,
there is no resemblance between the Ideas of Sight, and things Tangible. It
has likewise been demonstrated, that the proper Objects of Sight do not exist
without the Mind. Whence it clearly follows, that the Pictures painted on the
Bottom of the Eye, are not the Pictures of external Objects. Let any one
consult his own Thoughts, and then say what Affinity, what Likeness there is
between that certain Variety and Disposition of Colors, which constitute the
visible Man, or Picture of a Man, and that other Combination of far different
Ideas, sensible by Touch, which compose the tangible Man. But if this be the
Case, how come they to be accounted Pictures or Images, since that supposes
them to copy or represent some Originals or other?

CXVIII. To which I answer: In the forementioned Instance, the Eye A takes the
little Images, included within the Representation of the other Eye B, to be
Pictures or Copies, whereof the Archetypes are not things existing without, but
the larger Pictures projected on its own Fund: and which by A are not thought
Pictures, but the Originals, or true Things themselves. Though if we suppose a
third Eye C, from a due Distance to behold the Fund of A, then indeed the
Things projected thereon, shall, to C, seem Pictures or Images, in the same
Sense that those projected on B do to A.

CXIX. Rightly to conceive this Point, we must carefully distinguish between
the Ideas of Sight and Touch, between the visible and tangible Eye; for
certainly on the tangible Eye, nothing either is or seems to be painted. Again,
the visible Eye, as well as all other visible Objects, has been shown to exist
only in the Mind, which perceiving its own Ideas, and comparing them together,
calls some Pictures in respect of others. What has been said, being rightly
comprehended and laid together, does, I think, afford a full and genuine
Explication of the erect Appearance of Objects; which Phenomenon, I must
confess, I do not see how it can be explained by any Theories of Vision
hitherto made public.

CXX. In treating of these things, the use of Language is apt to occasion some
Obscurity and Confusion, and create in us wrong Ideas: For Language being
accommodated to the Common Notions and Prejudices of Men, it is scarce possible
to deliver the naked and precise Truth, without great Circumlocution,
Impropriety, and (to an unwary Reader) seeming Contradictions; I do, therefore,
once for all desire whoever shall think it worth his while to understand what I
have written concerning Vision, that he would not stick in this or that Phrase,
or manner of Expression, but heartily collect my Meaning from the whole Sum and
Tenor of my Discourse, and laying aside the Words as much as possible, consider
the bare Notions themselves, and then judge whether they are agreeable to Truth
and his own Experience, or no.

CXXI. We have shown the way wherein the Mind by mediation of visible Ideas
does perceive or apprehend the Distance, Magnitude, and Situation of tangible
Objects. I come now to inquire more particularly concerning the Difference
between the Ideas of Sight and Touch, which are called by the same Names, and
see whether there be any Idea common to both Senses. From what we have at large
set forth and demonstrated in the foregoing parts of this Treatise, it is plain
there is no one self same numerical Extension, perceived both by Sight and
Touch; but that the particular Figures and Extensions perceived by Sight,
however they may be called by the same Names, and reputed the same Things, with
those perceived by Touch, are nevertheless different, and have an Existence
distinct and separate from them: So that the Question is not now concerning the
same numerical Ideas, but whether there be any one and the same sort or Species
of Ideas equally perceiveable to both Senses? Or, in other Words, whether
Extension, Figure, and Motion perceived by Sight, are not specifically distinct
from Extension, Figure and Motion perceived by Touch?

CXXII. But before I come more particularly to discuss this Matter, I find it
proper to consider Extension in Abstract: For of this there is much talk, and I
apt to think, that when Men speak of Extension, as being an Idea common to Two
Senses, it is with a secret Supposition, that we can single out Extension from
all other tangible and visible Qualities, and form thereof an Abstract Idea,
which Idea they will have common both to Sight and Touch. We are therefore to
understand by Extension in Abstract, an Idea of Extension; for instance, a Line
or Surface, entirely stripped of all other sensible Qualities and Circumstances
that might determine it to any particular Existence; it is neither black nor
white, nor red, nor has it any Color at all, or any tangible Quality
whatsoever, and consequently it is of no finite determinate Magnitude: For that
which bounds or distinguishes one Extension from another, is some Quality or
Circumstance wherein they disagree.

CXXIII. Now I do not find that I can perceive, imagine, or any wise frame in
my Mind such an abstract Idea, as is here spoken of. A Line or Surface, which
is neither black, nor white, nor blue, nor yellow, etc. nor long, nor short,
nor rough, nor smooth, nor square, nor round, etc. is perfectly
incomprehensible. This I am sure of as to my self; how far the Faculties of
other Men may reach, they best can tell.

CXXIV. It is commonly said, that the Object of Geometry is abstract Extension;
but Geometry contemplates Figures: Now, Figure is the Termination of Magnitude,
but we have shown that Extension in Abstract has no finite determinate
Magnitude, whence it clearly follows that it can have no Figure, and
consequently is not the Object of Geometry. It is indeed a Tenet as well of the
modern as of the ancient Philosophers, that all general Truths are concerning
universal abstract Ideas; without which, we are told, there could be no
Science, no Demonstration of any general Proposition in Geometry. But it were
no hard matter, did I think it necessary to my present Purpose, to show that
Propositions and Demonstrations in Geometry might be Universal, though they who
make them, never think of abstract general Ideas of Triangles or Circles.

CXXV. After reiterated endeavors to apprehend the general Idea of a Triangle,
I have found it altogether incomprehensible. And surely if any one were able to
introduce that Idea into my Mind, it must be the Author of the Essay concerning
Humane Understanding; He, who has so far distinguished himself from the
generality of Writers, by the Clearness and Significancy of what he says. Let
us therefore see how this celebrated Author describes the general, or abstract
Idea of a Triangle. It must be (says he) neither Oblique, nor Rectangular,
neither Equilateral, Equicrural, nor Scalenum; but all and none of these at
once. In effect it is somewhat imperfect that cannot exist; an Idea, wherein
some Parts of several different and inconsistent Ideas are put together. Essay
on Hum. Understanding. B. iv. C. 7. S. 9. This is the Idea, which he thinks
needful, for the Enlargement of knowledge, which is the Subject of Mathematical
Demonstration, and without which we could never come to know any general
Proposition concerning Triangles. That Author acknowledges it does require some
Pains and Skill to form this general Idea of a Triangle. Ibid. But had he
called to mind what he says in another place, to wit, That Ideas of mixed Modes
wherein any inconsistent Ideas are put together, cannot so much as exist in the
Mind, i. e. be conceived. Vid. B. iii. C. 10. S. 33. Ibid. I say, had this
occurred to his Thoughts, it is not improbable he would have owed it above all
the Pains and Skill he was master of, to form the abovementioned Idea of a
Triangle, which is made up of manifest, staring Contradictions. That a Man who
thought so much, and laid so great a stress on clear and determinate Ideas,
should nevertheless talk at this rate, seems very surprising. But the wonder
will lessen if it be considered, that the Source whence this Opinion flows, is
the prolific Womb which has brought forth innumerable Errors and Difficulties,
in all parts of Philosophy, and in all the Sciences: But this Matter, taken in
its full Extent, were a Subject too vast and comprehensive to be insisted on in
this place. And so much for Extension in Abstract.

CXXVI. some, perhaps, may think pure Space, Vacuum, or Trine Dimension to be
equally the Object of Sight and Touch: But though we have a very great
Propension, to think the Ideas of Outness and Space to be the immediate Object
of Sight; yet if I mistake not, in the foregoing Parts of this Essay, That has
been clearly demonstrated to be a mere Delusion, arising from the quick and
sudden suggestion of Fancy, which so closely connects the Idea of Distance with
those of Sight, that we are apt to think it is it self a proper and immediate
Object of that Sense, till Reason corrects the Mistake.

CXXVII. It having been shown, that there are no Abstract Ideas of Figure, and
that it is impossible for us, by any Precision of Thought, to frame an Idea of
Extension separate from all other Visible and Tangible Qualities, which shall
be common both to Sight and Touch: The Question now remaining is, whether the
particular Extensions, Figures and Motions perceived by Sight be of the same
kind, with the particular Extensions, Figures, and Motions perceived by Touch?
In answer to which, I shall venture to lay down the following Proposition: The
Extension, Figures, and Motions, perceived by Sight are specifically distinct
from the Ideas of Touch, called by the same Names, nor is there any such thing
as one Idea, or kind of Idea common to both Senses. This Proposition may,
without much Difficulty, be collected from what has been said in several
Places of this Essay. But, because it seems so remote from, and contrary to,
the received Notions and settled Opinion of Mankind, I shall attempt to
demonstrate it more particularly, and at large, by the following Arguments.

CXXVIII. When upon Perception of an Idea, I range it under this or that sort;
it is because it is perceived after the same manner, or because it has a
Likeness or Conformity with, or affects me in the same way as the Ideas of the
sort I rank it under. In short, it must not be entirely new, but have something
in it Old, and already perceived by me: It must, I say, have so much, at least,
in common with the Ideas I have before known and named, as to make me give it
the same Name with them. But it has been, if I mistake not, clearly made out,
that a Man born Blind would not at first reception of his Sight, think the
Things he saw were of the same Nature with the Objects of Touch, or had any
thing in common with them; but that they were a new Set of Ideas, perceived in
a new manner, and entirely different from all he had ever perceived before: So
that he would not call them by the same Name, nor repute them to be of the same
Sort, with any thing he had hitherto known.

CXXIX. Secondly, Light and Colors are allowed by all to constitute a sort or
Species entirely different from the Ideas of Touch: Nor will any Man, I
presume, say they can make themselves perceived by that Sense: But there is no
other immediate Object of Sight, besides Light and Colors. It is therefore a
direct Consequence, that there is no Idea common to both Senses.

CXXX. It is a prevailing Opinion, even amongst those who have thought and writ
most accurately concerning our Ideas, and the Ways whereby they enter into the
Understanding, that something more is perceived by Sight, than barely Light and
Colors with their Variations. Mr. Lock terms Sight, The most Comprehensive
of all our Senses, conveying to our Minds the Ideas of Light and Colors, which
are peculiar only to that Sense; and also the far different Ideas of Space,
Figure and Motion. Essay on Human Understand. B. ii. C. 9. S. 9. Space or
Distance, we have shown is no otherwise the Object of Sight than of Hearing.
vid. SECT. XLVI. And as for Figure and Extension, I leave it to any one, that
shall calmly attend to his own clear and distinct Ideas, to decide whether he
has any Idea intromitted immediately and properly by Sight, save only Light and
Colors: Or whether it be possible for him, to frame in his Mind a distinct
Abstract Idea of Visible Extension, or Figure, exclusive of all Color; and on
the other hand, whether he can conceive Color without Visible Extension? For
my own part, I must confess, I am not able to attain so great a nicety of
Abstraction; in a strict Sense, I see nothing but Light and Colors, with their
several Shades and Variations. He who beside these does also perceive by Sight
Ideas far different and distinct from them, has that Faculty in a degree more
perfect and comprehensive than I can pretend to. It must be owned, that by the
mediation of Light and Colors, other far different Ideas are suggested to my
Mind: but so they are by Hearing, which beside Sounds which are peculiar to
that Sense, does by their mediation suggest not only Space, Figure and Motion,
but also all other Ideas whatsoever that can be signified by Words.

CXXXI. Thirdly, It is, I think, an Axiom universally received, that Quantities
of the same kind may be added together, and make one entire Sum. Mathematicians
add Lines together; but they do not add a Line to a Solid, or conceive it as
making one Sum with a Surface: These three kinds of Quantity being thought
incapable of any such mutual Addition, and consequently of being compared
together, in the several ways of Proportion, are by them esteemed entirely
Disparate and Heterogeneous. Now let any one try in his Thoughts to add a
Visible Line or Surface to a Tangible Line or Surface, so as to conceive them
making one continued Sum or Whole. He that can do this, may think them
Homogeneous; but he that cannot must, by the foregoing Axiom, think them
Heterogeneous: A Blue, and a Red Line I can conceive added together into one
Sum, and making one continued Line; but to make, in my Thoughts, one continued
Line of a Visible and Tangible Line added together is, I find, a Task far more
difficult, and even insurmountable; and I leave it to the Reflection and
Experience of every particular Person to determine for himself.

CXXXII. A farther Confirmation of our Tenet may be drawn from the Solution of
Mr. Molyneux's Problem, published by Mr. Lock in his Essay: Which I shall set
down as it there lies, together with Mr. Locke's Opinion of it, Suppose a Man
born Blind, and now Adult, and taught by his Touch to distinguish between a
Cube, and a Sphere of the same Metal, and nighly of the same Bigness, so as to
tell, when he felt one and the other, which is the Cube, and which the Sphere.
Suppose then the Cube and Sphere placed on a Table, and the blind Man to be
made to See: Quaere, Whether by his Sight, before he touched them, he could now
distinguish, and tell, which is the Globe, which the Cube. To which the acute
and judicious Proposer answers: Not. For though he has obtained the Experience
of, how a Globe, how a Cube affects his Touch; yet he has not yet attained the
Experience, that what affects his Touch so or so, must affect his Sight so or
so: Or that a protuberant Angle in the Cube, that pressed his Hand unequally,
shall appear to his Eye, as it does in the Cube. I agree with this thinking
Gentleman, whom I am proud to call my Friend, in his Answer to this his
Problem; and am of opinion, that the blind Man, at first Sight would not be
able with certainty to say, which was the Globe, which the Cube, whilst he only
saw them. Essay on Human Understanding. B. ii. C. 9. S. 8.

CXXXIII. Now, if a Square Surface perceived by Touch be of the same sort with
a Square Surface perceived by Sight; it is certain the blind Man here mentioned
might know a Square Surface, as soon as he saw it: It is no more but introduced
into his Mind, by a new Inlet, an Idea he has been already well acquainted
with. Since therefore he is supposed to have known by his Touch, that a Cube is
a Body terminated by Square Surfaces; and that a Sphere is not terminated by
Square Surfaces: upon the supposition that a Visible and Tangible Square differ
only in numero, it follows, that he might know, by the unerring mark of the
Square Surfaces, which was the Cube, and which not, while he only saw them. We
must therefore allow, either that Visible Extension and Figures are
specifically distinct from Tangible Extension and Figures, or else, that the
Solution of this Problem, given by those two thoughtful and ingenious Men, is
wrong.

CXXXIV. Much more might be laid together in Proof of the Proposition I have
advanced: But what has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to convince
any one that shall yield a reasonable Attention: And, as for those that will
not be at the pains of a little Thought, no Multiplication of Words will ever
suffice to make them understand the Truth, or rightly conceive my Meaning.

CXXXV. I cannot let go the abovementioned Problem without some Reflection on
it. It has been made evident, that a Man blind from his Birth would not, at
first Sight, denominate any thing he saw, by the Names he had been used to
appropriate to Ideas of Touch, vid. SECT. CVI. Cube, Sphere, Table, are Words
he has known applied to Things perceivable by Touch, but to Things perfectly
Intangible he never knew them applied. Those Words in their wonted application,
always marked out to his Mind Bodies, or solid Things which were perceived by
the Resistance they gave: But there is no Solidity, no Resistance or Protrusion
perceived by Sight. In short, the Ideas of Sight are all new Perceptions, to
which there be no Names annexed in his Mind; he cannot therefore understand
what is said to him concerning them: And to ask of the two Bodies he saw placed
on the Table, which was the Sphere, which the Cube, were, to him, a Question
downright bantering and unintelligible; nothing he sees being able to suggest
to his Thoughts, the Idea of Body, Distance, or in general, of any thing he had
already known.

CXXXVI. It is a mistake, to think the same thing affects both Sight and Touch.
If the same Angle or Square, which is the Object of Touch, be also the Object
of Vision, what should hinder the blind Man, at first Sight, from knowing it?
For though the Manner wherein it affects the Sight, be different from that
wherein it affected his Touch; yet, there being, beside this Manner or
Circumstance, which is new and unknown, the Angle or Figure, which is old and
known, he cannot choose but discern it.

CXXXVII. Visible Figure and Extension having been demonstrated to be of a
nature, entirely different and heterogeneous from tangible Figure and
Extension, it remains that we inquire concerning Motion. Now that visible
Motion is not of the same sort with tangible Motion, seems to need no farther
Proof, it being an evident Corollary from what we have shown concerning the
Difference there is between visible and tangible Extension: But for a more full
and express Proof hereof, we need only observe, that one who had not yet
experienced Vision, would not at first sight know Motion. Whence it clearly
follows, that Motion perceivable by Sight is of a sort distinct from Motion
perceivable by Touch. The Antecedent I prove thus: By Touch he could not
perceive any Motion, but what was up or down, to the right or left, nearer or
farther from him; besides these, and their several Varieties or Complications,
it is impossible he should have any Idea of Motion. He would not therefore
think any thing to be Motion, or give the name Motion to any Idea, which he
could not range under some or other of those particular kinds thereof. But from
SECT. XCV, it is plain that by the mere act of Vision, he could not know Motion
upwards or downwards, to the right or left, or in any other possible Direction.
From which I conclude, he would not know Motion at all at first sight. As for
the Idea of Motion in Abstract, I shall not waste Paper about it, but leave it
to my Reader, to make the best he can on it. To me it is perfectly
Unintelligible.

CXXXVIII. The Consideration of Motion may furnish a new Field for Inquiry: But
since the Manner wherein the Mind apprehends by Sight, the Motion of Tangible
Objects, with the various Degrees thereof, may be easily collected, from what
has been said concerning the Manner, wherein that Sense does suggest their
various Distances, Magnitudes and Situations, I shall not enlarge any farther
on this Subject, but proceed to inquire what may be alleged with greatest
appearance of Reason, against the Proposition we have shown to be true: For
where there is so much Prejudice to be encountered, a bare and naked
Demonstration of the Truth will scarce suffice. We must also satisfy the
Scruples that Men may raise in favor of their preconceived Notions, show
whence the mistake arises, how it came to spread, and carefully disclose and
root out those false Persuasions, that an early Prejudice might have implanted
in the Mind.

CXXXIX. First, Therefore, it will be demanded, how visible Extension and
Figures come to be called by the same Name, with tangible Extension and
Figures, if they are not of the same kind with them? It must be something more
than Humor or Accident, that could occasion a Custom so constant and universal
as this, which has obtained in all Ages and Nations of the World, and amongst
all Ranks of Men, the Learned as well as the Illiterate.

CXL. To which I answer, we can no more argue a visible and tangible Square to
be of the same Species, from their being called by the same Name, than we can,
that a tangible Square and the Monosyllable consisting of Six Letters, whereby
it is marked, are of the same Species because they are both called by the same
Name. It is customary to call written Words, and the Things they signify, by
the same Name: For Words not being regarded in their own Nature, or otherwise
than as they are Marks of Things, it had been superfluous, and beside the
design of Language, to have given them Names distinct from those of the Things
marked by them. The same Reason holds here also. Visible Figures are the Marks
of tangible Figures, and from SECT. LIX. it is plain, that in themselves they
are little regarded, or upon any other Score than for their Connection with
tangible Figures, which by Nature they are ordained to signify. And because
this Language of Nature does not vary in different Ages or Nations, hence it
is, that in all Times and Places, visible Figures are called by the same Names,
as the respective tangible Figures suggested by them, and not because they are
alike, or of the same sort with them.

CXLI. But, say you, surely a tangible Square is liker to a visible Square,
than to a visible Circle: It has four Angles, and as many Sides; so also has
the visible Square, but the visible Circle has no such thing, being bounded by
one uniform Curve, without right Lines or Angles, which makes it unfit to
represent the tangible Square, but very fit to represent the tangible Circle.
Whence it clearly follows, that visible Figures are Patrons of, or of the same
Species with the respective tangible Figures represented by them; that they are
like unto them, and of their own Nature fitted to represent them, as being of
the same sort; and that they are in no respect arbitrary Signs, as Words.

CXLII. I answer, it must be acknowledged, the visible Square is fitter than
the visible Circle, to represent the tangible Square, but then it is not
because it is liker, or more of a Species with it; but because the visible
Square contains in it several distinct Parts, whereby to mark the several
distinct, corresponding Parts of a tangible Square, whereas the visible Circle
does not. The Square perceived by Touch, has four distinct, equal Sides, so
also has it four distinct equal Angles. It is therefore necessary, that the
visible Figures which shall be most proper to mark it, contain four distinct
equal Parts corresponding to the four Sides of the tangible Square; as likewise
four other distinct and equal Parts, whereby to denote the four equal Angles of
the tangible Square. And accordingly we see the visible Figures contain in them
distinct visible Parts, answering to the distinct tangible Parts of the Figures
signified, or suggested by them.

CXLIII. But it will not hence follow, that any visible Figure is like unto, or
of the same Species with its corresponding tangible Figure, unless it be also
shown, that not only the Number, but also the Kind of the Parts be the same in
both. To illustrate this, I observe that visible Figures represent tangible
Figures, much after the same manner that written Words do Sounds. Now, in this
respect, Words are not arbitrary, it not being indifferent, what written Word
stands for any Sound: But it is requisite, that each Word contain in it so many
distinct Characters, as there are Variations in the Sound in stands for. Thus
the single Letter a is proper to mark one simple uniform Sound; and the word
Adultery is accommodated to represent the Sound annexed to it, in the Formation
whereof, there being eight different Collisions, or Modifications of the Air by
the Organs of Speech, each of which produces a difference of Sound, it was fit,
the Word representing it should consist of as many distinct Characters, thereby
to mark each particular Difference or Part of the whole Sound: And yet no Body,
I presume will say, the single Letter a, or the word Adultery are like unto, or
of the same Species with the respective Sounds by them represented. It is
indeed arbitrary that, in general, Letters of any Language represent Sounds at
all; but when that is once agreed, it is not arbitrary what Combination of
Letters shall represent this or that particular Sound. I leave this with the
Reader to pursue, and apply it in his own Thoughts.

CXLIV. It must be confessed that we are not so apt to confound other Signs with
the Things signified, or to think them of the same Species, as we are visible
and tangible Ideas. But a little Consideration will show us how this may be,
without our supposing them of a like Nature. These Signs are constant and
universal, their Connection with tangible Ideas has been learnt at our first
Entrance into the World; and ever since, almost every Moment of our Lives, it
has been occurring to our Thoughts, and fastening and striking deeper on our
Minds. When we observe that Signs are variable, and of Humane Institution; when
we remember, there was a time they were not connected in our Minds, with those
things they now so readily suggest; but that their Signification was learned by
the slow Steps of Experience: This preserves us from confounding them. But when
we find the same Signs suggest the same Things all over the World; when we know
they are not of Humane Institution, and cannot remember that we ever learned
their Signification, but think that at first Sight they would have suggested to
us the same Things they do now: All this persuades us they are of the same
Species as the Things respectively represented by them, and that it is by a
natural Resemblance they suggest them to our Minds.

CXLV. Add to this, that whenever we make a nice Survey of any Object,
successively directing the Optic Axis to each Point thereof; there are certain
Lines and Figures described by the Motion of the Head or Eye, which being in
truth perceived by Feeling, do nevertheless so mix themselves as it were, with
the Ideas of Sight, that we can scarce think but they appertain to that Sense.
Again, the Ideas of Sight enter into the Mind, several at once more distinct
and unmingled, than is usual in the other Senses beside the Touch. Sounds, for
example, perceived at the same Instant, are apt to coalesce, if I may so say,
into one Sound: But we can perceive at the same time great variety of visible
Objects, very separate and distinct from each other. Now tangible Extension
being made up of several Distinct coexistent parts, we may hence gather another
Reason, that may dispose us to imagine a Likeness or Analogy between the
immediate Objects of Sight and Touch. But nothing, certainly, does more
contribute to blend and confound them together, than the strict and close
Connection they have with each other. We cannot open our Eyes, but the Ideas of
Distance, Bodies, and tangible Figures are suggested by them. So swift and
sudden, and unperceived is the Transition from visible to tangible Ideas, that
we can scarce forbear thinking them equally the immediate Object of Vision.

CXLVI. The Prejudice, which is grounded on these, and whatever other Causes
may be assigned thereof, sticks so fast, that it is impossible without
obstinate Striving, and Labor of the Mind, to get entirely clear of it. But
then the Reluctance we find, in rejecting any Opinion, can be no Argument of
its Truth, to whoever considers what has been already shown, with regard to the
Prejudices we entertain concerning the Distance, Magnitude, and Situation of
Objects; Prejudices so familiar to our Minds, so confirmed and inveterate, as
they will hardly give way to the clearest Demonstration.

CXLVII. Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude, that the proper
Objects of Vision constitute an Universal Language of the Author of Nature,
whereby we are instructed how to regulate our Actions, in order to attain those
things, that are necessary to the Preservation and Well-being of our Bodies, as
also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. It is by their
Information that we are principally guided in all the Transactions and Concerns
of Life. And the manner wherein they signify, and mark unto us the Objects
which are at a Distance, is the same with that of Languages and Signs of Humane
Appointment, which do not suggest the things signified, by any likeness or
Indentity of Nature, but only by an habitual Connection, that Experience has
made us to observe between them.

CXLVIII. Suppose one who had always continued Blind, be told by his Guide,
that after he has advanced so many Steps, he shall come to the Brink of a
Precipice, or be stopped by a Wall; must not this to him seem very admirable and
surprising? He cannot conceive how it is possible for Mortals to frame such
Predictions as these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable, as
Prophesy does to others. Even they who are blessed with the visive Faculty, may
(though familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient Cause of
Admiration. The wonderful Art and Contrivance wherewith it is adjusted to those
Ends and Purposes for which it was apparently designed, the vast Extent,
Number, and Variety of Objects that are at once with so much ease, and
quickness, and pleasure suggested by it: All these afford Subject for much and
pleasing Speculation, and may, if any thing, give us some glimmering, analogous
Praenotion of Things, which are placed beyond the certain Discovery and
Comprehension of our present State.

CXLIX. I do not design to trouble my self with drawing Corollaries, from the
Doctrine I have hitherto laid down. If it bears the Test, others may, so far as
they shall think convenient, employ their Thoughts in extending it farther, and
applying it to whatever Purposes it may be subservient to: Only, I cannot
forbear making some Inquiry concerning the Object of Geometry, which the
Subject we have been upon does naturally lead one to. We have shown there is no
such Idea as that of Extension in Abstract, and that there are two kinds of
sensible Extension and Figures, which are entirely distinct and heterogeneous
from each other. Now, it is natural to inquire which of these is the Object of
Geometry.

CL. Some things there are, which at first sight incline one to think Geometry
conversant about Visible Extension. The constant use of the Eyes, both in the
practical and speculative Parts of that Science does very much induce us
thereto. It would, without doubt, seem odd to a Mathematician to go about to
convince him, the Diagrams he saw upon Paper were not the Figures, or even the
Likeness of the Figures, which make the Subject of the Demonstration. The
contrary being held an unquestionable Truth, not only by Mathematicians, but
also by those who apply themselves more particularly to the Study of Logic; I
mean, who consider the Nature of Science, Certainty and Demonstration: It being
by them assigned as one Reason, of the extraordinary Clearness and Evidence of
Geometry, that in this Science the Reasonings are free from those
Inconveniences, which attend the use of arbitrary Signs, the very Ideas
themselves being copied out, and exposed to view upon Paper. But, by the bye,
how well this agrees with what they likewise assert of abstract Ideas, being
the Object of Geometrical Demonstration, I leave to be considered.

CLI. To come to a Resolution in this Point, we need only observe what has
been said in SECT. LIX. LX. LXI. where it is shown that visible Extensions in
themselves are little regarded, and have no settled determinate Greatness, and
that Men measure altogether, by the Application of Tangible Extension to
Tangible Extension. All which makes it evident, that Visible Extension and
Figures are not the Object of Geometry.

CLII. It is therefore plain that Visible Figures are of the same Use in
Geometry, that Words are: And the one may as well be accounted the Object of
that Science, as the other; neither of them being any otherwise concerned
therein, than as they represent or suggest to the Mind the particular Tangible
Figures connected with them. There is indeed this Difference between the
Signification of Tangible Figures by Visible Figures, and of Ideas by Words:
That whereas the Latter is variable and uncertain, depending altogether on the
Arbitrary Appointment of Men, the former is fixed, and immutably the same in
all Times and Places. A Visible Square, for Instance, suggests to the Mind the
same Tangible Figure in Europe, that it does in America. Hence it is that the
Voice of the Author of Nature, which speaks to our Eyes, is not liable to that
Misinterpretation and Ambiguity, that Languages of Humane Contrivance are
unavoidably subject to.

CLIII. Though what has been said may suffice to show what ought to be
determined, with relalation to the Object of Geometry; I shall nevertheless,
for the fuller illustration thereof, consider the Case of an Intelligence, or
unbodied Spirit, which is supposed to see perfectly well, i. e. to have a clear
Perception of the proper and immediate Objects of Sight, but to have no Sense
of Touch. Whether there be any such Being in Nature or no, is beside my purpose
to inquire. It suffices, that the Supposition contains no Contradiction in it.
Let us now examine, what Proficiency such a one may be able to make in
Geometry. Which Speculation will lead us more clearly to see, whether the Ideas
of Sight can possibly be the Object of that Science.

CLIV. First, then it is certain, the aforesaid Intelligence could have no Idea
of a Solid, or Quantity of three Dimensions, which follows from its not
having any Idea of Distance. We indeed are prone to think, that we have by
Sight the Ideas of Space and Solids, which arises from our imagining that we
do, strictly speaking, see Distance, and some parts of an Object at a greater
distance than others, which has been demonstrated to be the Effect of the
Experience we have had, what Ideas of Touch are connected with such and such
Ideas attending Vision: But the Intelligence here spoken of is supposed to have
no Experience of Touch. He would not, therefore judge as we do, nor have any
Idea of Distance, Outness, or Profundity, nor consequently of Space or Body,
either immediately or by Suggestion. Whence it is plain, he can have no Notion
of those Parts of Geometry, which relate to the Mensuration of Solids, and
their Unequal or Concave Surfaces, and contemplate the Properties of Lines
generated by the Section of a Solid. The conceiving of any part whereof, is
beyond the reach of his Faculties.

CLV. Farther, he cannot comprehend the Manner wherein Geometers describe a
right Line or Circle; the Rule and Compass with their use, being things of
which it is impossible he should have any Notion: Nor is it an easier matter
for him to conceive the placing of one Plain or Angle on another, in order to
prove their Equality: Since that supposes some Idea of Distance, or External
Space. All which makes it evident, our pure Intelligence could never attain to
know so much as the first Elements of plain Geometry. And perhaps, upon a nice
Inquiry, it will be found, he cannot even have an Idea of plain Figures any
more than he can of Solids; since some Idea of Distance is necessary, to form
the Idea of a Geometrical Plain, as will appear to whoever shall reflect a
little on it.

CLVI. All that is properly perceived by the visive Faculty, amounts to no more
than Colors with their Variations, and different Proportions of Light and
Shade: But, the perpectual Mutability, and Fleetingness of those immediate
Objects of Sight, render them incapable of being managed after the manner of
Geometrical Figures; nor is it in any Degree useful that they should. It is
true, there are diverse of them perceived at once; and more of some, and less of
others: But accurately to compute their Magnitude, and assign precise
determinate Proportions, between Things so variable and inconstant, if we
suppose it possible to be done, must yet be a very trifling and insignificant
Labor.

CLVII. I must confess, it seems to be the Opinion of some ingenious Men, that
flat or plain Figures are immediate Objects of Sight, though they acknowledge
Solids are not. And this Opinion of theirs is grounded on what is observed in
Painting, wherein (say they) the Ideas immediately imprinted on the Mind, are
only of Plains variously colored, which by a sudden Act of the Judgment are
changed into Solids: But, with a little Attention we shall find the Plains here
mentioned, as the immediate Objects of Sight, are not Visible but Tangible
Plains. For when we say that Pictures are Plains: we mean thereby, that they
appear to the Touch smooth and uniform. But then this Smoothness and
Uniformity, or, in other Words, this Plainness of the Picture, is not perceived
immediately by Vision: For it appears to the Eye various and multiform.

CLVIII. From all which we may conclude, that Plains are no more the immediate
Object of Sight than Solids. What we strictly see are not Solids, nor yet
Plains variously colored; they are only diversity of Colors. And some of
these suggest to the Mind Solids, and others plain Figures; just as they have
been experienced to be connected with the one, or the other: So that we see
Plains, in the same way that we see Solids; both being equally suggested by the
immediate Objects of Sight, which accordingly are themselves denominated Plains
and Solids: But though they are called by the same Names, with the Things
marked by them, they are nevertheless of a Nature entirely different, as has
been demonstrated.

CLIX. What has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to decide the
Question we propose to examine, concerning the Ability of a pure Spirit, such
as we have described, to know Geometry: It is, indeed, no easy matter for us to
enter precisely into the Thoughts of such an Intelligence; because we cannot,
without great Pains, cleverly separate and disintangle in our Thoughts the
proper Objects of Sight from those of Touch which are connected with them.
This, indeed, in a complete Degree, seems scarce possible to be performed:
Which will not seem strange to us, if we consider how hard it is, for any one
to hear the Words of his Native Language pronounced in his Ears without
understanding them. Though he endeavor to disunite the meaning from the Sound,
it will nevertheless intrude into his Thoughts, and he shall find it extreme
difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly in the Posture of a
Foreigner, that never learned the Language, so as to be affected barely with
the Sounds themselves, and not perceive the Signification annexed to them By
this time, I suppose, it is clear that neither Abstract, not Visible Extension
makes the Object of Geometry; the not discerning of which may perhaps, have
created some Difficulty and useless Labor in Mathematics.

FINIS.

