LIBERTY CHASTISED: OR PATRIOTISM in CHAINS. A TRAGI, COMI, POLITICAL FARCE, As
it was performed by his M -- 's S -- ts, in the Year 1268; Which exhibits to
the PUBLIC, a View of the OPPRESSIONS under which LIBERTY groaned, during a
most flagitious A -- n in that weak R -- n; represented in the Characters of
BOTCH, GRAPNEL, MANSUPPLE, CHATWELL, and ALMAGNIA, etc.

SCENES near the P -- and in St. Gregoir's Fields.

MODERNISED By PAUL TELL-TRUTH, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by STAPLES STEARE, No. 93,
FLEET STREET, 1768.

Dramatis Personae.
Courtiers. GRAPNEL, BOTCH, MANSUPPLE, WIMPLE, SHELTER, BARNACLE,
Merchants. BLUNT, HONESTY,
Soldiers. MACMURTHER, MACSLAUGHTER,
DONALD, a North countryman, just arrived in a metropolis.
Justices, Officers, Constables, Guards, Mobs of Men, Women and Children.
WOMEN.
ALMAGNIA, -- ABIGAIL, A Waiting Woman. JENNY, A gay Lady.
LIBERTY CHASTISED: OR PATRIOTISM in CHAINS.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, a handsome house not far from St. J -- s. Enter Lord GRAPNEL in great
haste, and servants in waiting. GRAP. -- to DOMESTIC. PRAY Sir, show me to
Lord Botch, in a minute!


DOM. I really don't know, my Lord! whether his Lordship be here or no! (calls)
Abigail -- Is Lord Botch here?


ABIG. Stay I Will step and see -- (aside) "I know not if he has left Almagnia's
apartment." --

[Exit.
GRAP. 'Sblood! why all this ceremony? -- By heavens I shall be too late for
Newmarket! -- and my dearest creature Flavia will be out of all patience! --
ha! here she returns.


ABIG. Be pleased my Lord to follow me -- Lord Botch waits your G -- ce.


SCENE opens, discovers Lord BOTCH alone. BOTCH. What a wretched system of
government do we live under? -- That accursed LIBERTY! which ought to be
enjoyed only by the Great, has been, by the d -- d troublesome plebeian
scoundrels, who founded in freedom the basis of this hateful Constitution, so
clearly transmitted down to their posterity, that even with the most u -- and c
-- K -- that ever lived, and no want of M -- l tools ready enough to support
every step to despotism! -- Yet, one d -- obstinate fellow has had address
enough, in spite of persecution, to keep the peoples eyes open! and from my
very first appearance on the Theater of Politics to counteract every plot I can
form! -- Ha! but here comes Grapnel -- (enter Grap.) Your G -- s most obedient!
I rejoice to see you! --


GRAP. My Lord! -- I Am yours entirely! --


BOTCH. Well! Good Grapnel, -- how is it? does the madness of people begin to
abate? or do they continue as restless and desperate as ever? --


GRAP. Why, -- 'faith, my Lord, they go on to your wish; and their numbers
rather increase than diminish! --


BOTCH. So much the better! -- Military force! the very soul of Government! is
so fettered in this d -- d land of freedom, that there is no such thing as using
it, until the terror of every cowardly peace officer obliges them to cry for
it, and then we can employ it with some degree of plausibility! -- Grapnel, I
have contrived it so, that none but sneaking fools shall, on that occasion,
appear in opposition to the Watcherites! By which means the mobility may be
induced to proceed to such enormities, that the blockheads who are to deal with
them, will, to protect themselves, call loudly for military aid! and thereby
furnish us with an excellent pretext to govern by that Power! -- This, my Lord,
is a crisis which demands all our attention: -- your G -- e must be at hand to
support our schemes in C -- l! for you know there is some difficulty there! --


GRAP. Upon my honor, your Lordship must dispense with my attendance at this
so critical a juncture! -- My name and interest are always at your disposal: --
But -- my favorite pleasures! My Lord! I would not renounce -- to please the K
-- of heaven! far less any k -- on earth! --


BOTCH. Good God! how much does your G -- e surprise me? just at the most
important juncture of all our hopes and fears, to see a nobleman of your
abilities careless of so great concerns -- is, indeed, amazing!


GRAP. My Lord! it does not signify -- with me, business must yield to
pleasure! -- in this hour, I sacrifice more to your Lordship alone! -- than I
would -- to save a nation from perdition! -- Think only my darling Flavia is in
impatient waiting -- the post-chaise has been ready these two hours -- and --
let us drive as fast as we can -- we shall lose, at least, the first course of
sport! -- So -- My good Lord, excuse me -- I am yours -- (offering to go.)


BOTCH. But -- My Lord -- one moment! --


GRAP. Upon my honor, I cannot! -- a moment is an age -- you have nothing to
sear -- every thing is prepared -- Wimple is yours -- and the secretaries only
wait for orders! adieu! -- adieu! --

[Ex. hastily.
BOTCH solus. Never was there so unhappy a favorite as I am! with all that
well known influence I have gained over every thing stamped with R -- y, from
the indolence of an artless C -- n, down to the cunning of the more active
petticoat! -- yet those of the nobility, who have understanding to be of any
service in arbitrary projects, are either so timid and fearful of popular
clamor, or so prone to dissipation and pleasure -- that I am drove to the
disagreeable necessity of availing myself of others, who have too much to be
done by one man -- whose chief study is -- to make the world believe -- he does
nothing! -- Ha! some fresh reproach -- I hear Almagnia.


Enter ALMAGNIA. ALM. My Lord! it is past all bearing! -- was ever a person in
my exalted station, suffered to be so daringly and openly insulted, by a rabble
of -- rascally slaves!


BOTCH. Alas! Madam! they are not slaves! -- that is what I want to bring 'em
to! -- May I but accomplish that, -- your vengeance should be amply gratified.
-- But what is the matter -- tell me thou dear empress of my heart -- does any
thing new distress you?


ALM. See here! another vile scrawl, found pasted near the p -- e g -- e this
morning! -- What! are all the guards blind? where are their eyes? what have
they their arms and their pay for? I conjure you, my Lord, to enquire into this
matter; find out who were upon guard; -- I shall insist that they be punished
-- I never desire to see any but the -- d regiment mount upon the --


BOTCH. Madam -- that is what cannot be -- such distinctions would provoke our
best friends, the a -- y, to the same disaffection which governs the multitude
-- and then indeed, the event might be fatal to both you and me!


ALM. Well -- well, my Lord! -- if a -- must submit to such rudeness -- better
be the m -- of a shoe black -- than the m -- of a --! the one may sue for
redress -- I, it seems cannot! -- (she cries, and indignantly throws a paper to
him) -- he takes it up and reads: -- "The (...) is a fool! -- his (...) a
whore! -- Botch is a rogue! -- We need say no more!" --


BOTCH. Such insolence is indeed distracting! --


ALM. Yes, my Lord -- such insolence is distracting -- and to suffer it -- not
much to the honor of a man, for whom I have so dearly purchased so much power
-- By heavens, it is want of spirit! --


BOTCH. Madam! -- you wrong me. -- What man dare do -- I dare -- But the
constitution of this d -- d country, so little understood by either you or me,
is so pregnant with obstacles to arbitrary g -- t -- That while one Watcher
stands in our way, the difficulties are almost insuperable!


ALM. Very fine indeed! -- After having spent the very best of my youth to
aggrandize, and to make you happy -- I must at length be told, that the ac -- d
c -- n of this country condemns me to bear hourly insults unnoticed, and
confinement from every sort of pleasure; but -- those of my bed chamber! -- Of
what importance then, my Lord, has been the persecution and imprisonment of the
so much dreaded Watcher? -- Had it not been better to have purchased him also!
at any price?


BOTCH. Madam! you know as little of Watcher as you do of the E -- c -- n! --
he is incorruptible! -- For what good purpose, do you think it was that I
bestowed so much pains to soften and reclaim the most obdurate enemy we had! --
The so popular Chatwell! -- Why, madam! -- all that was with a view to trapan
Watcher! -- Chatwell had his price! -- I found it out -- I left him and his
contentious ally, Lord Taunter, to divide the nations spoils between 'em -- and
-- all to silence this d -- d Watcher! whom I thought was so inviolably
attached to their interests, that he would lead just as they pleased! -- but
he is an unfathomable fellow! -- The PEOPLE are his K --! -- and HE is THEIRS!
-- there is no separating their interests! -- Nor do I see a possibility of
purchasing Watcher's services. -- But at -- a price -- which no m -- r will
ever part with: -- that is -- to yield up all the power and wealth of c -- t
supporters and c -- t p -- rs, to be divided amongst the multitude, that they
forsooth may enjoy the conveniences of life, with no less satisfaction, than
the best of us! -- perdition seize such Liberty!


ALM. Then, my Lord! -- I find there is no hope left. -- I wish I was any where,
out of this vile country!


BOTCH. A moment's patience, madam! -- I have yet some cards to play: -- for
Chatwell and Taunter when they had, you know, the whole k -- m at their
disposal differed between themselves, as I rightly judged, about the dividing
of it. -- I threw them the bait on purpose; -- they tug'd, and tug'd at each
end of it; until Chatwell, finding, what every body had seen before, that the
avidity of Taunter was insatiable; then invited others, less gormandizers, to
partake of the feast! -- and by one clever jirk, he pulled the bait entirely
out of Taunter's maw! -- he next gilded a a pill for Prattle! -- Prattle
swallowed it! -- and the edge of his patriotic zeal was blunted! -- Watcher,
perceiving that the capital pillars of his grand structure were thus shaken,
and that Taunter only was left unsatisfied, bethought him next, to rear an
edifice on a broader bottom, to be founded in greater solidity, and to require
fewer ornaments. -- He applies himself to the public -- endeavors, as the most
interested, to open their eyes; and, to speak truth, he has labored so
successfully, that the Question now is -- Whether all must yield to WATCHER and
LIBERTY! -- or, by force and despotism, endeavor to chastise both!


ALM. And do you make a question of that? -- have you not Watcher already tied
up? Are not the j -- s of our side? and have you not all the m -- y force of
the n -- n at your command?


BOTCH. True, madam! Watcher is confined, but this confinement is rather form
than reality. -- And if he was of that seditious spirit that we attribute to
him, he has friends enough at his nod, to shake the pillars, not of his p -- n
only, but the p -- e too. -- And it is from some violent attempt of that sort,
that my best hopes are at present founded. -- But I fear he has too much
penetration for us all; -- for although he sustains the spirit of the multitude,
he artfully restrains their impetuosity. -- As for the j -- s -- I hope they
lean to our side, but the sagacity of Mansupple is so guarded, that he will do
nothing rashly -- the best services he will do for us, must have, at least, the
countenance of l --. -- The m -- y are no doubt at our devotion; but even with
respect to them, I am under some difficulties -- there is Lord Shelter rides
resty -- he is yet too young in m -- l practices -- nay, I Am afraid the
projects we must now carry through, are somewhat repugnant to his notions of
politics. -- I Am afraid he is either too honest, or too timorous -- he feels too
warmly for the people -- and although he never was in the cabal with Watcher, yet
he rather seems to disapprove of rigid measures -- in one word. I am deceived
in him -- I do not like him -- and yet when force is necessary, I would wish to
have his sanction. --


Enter a SERVANT. SERVE. My Lord -- an officer --.

[Ex. Almagnia.
Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. My Lord -- all is in an uproar -- nothing to be
heard from one end of the city to the other -- but -- WATCHER and LIBERTY -- no
liberty! no life! -- down with BOTCH and all Botchers -- The p -- n is
surrounded by thousands, and the fields are filled with millions! --


BOTCH. So much the better -- But pray how does Watcher behave?


OFFICER. Why, my Lord, he seldom appears; and when he does come to the window,
the acclamations are so loud, that he cannot be heard himself. -- One of his d
-- d adherents told me, that in the midst of their uproar, a servant of
Watcher's mingled with the mob; they bore the servant on their shoulders. --
Swore, that maugre all power on earth they would have him out. And that if he
would not come to the window to satisfy them that he was well, and well-used --
they would instantly knock down every thing before them, and make their way to
his apartment. -- The servant told them he would speak to them, and had twice
attempted it, but that their clamor was so noisy, he could not be heard. -- My
Lord, it will surprise you, but it is true, the word of command for silence was
given out, and in a trice all was as still as a bagnio at midday. -- The
servant returned. Watcher came to his window and harrangued the people, upon
the impropriety of their assembling in such numbers neglecting their business,
and their families, to do him more harm than good -- told them, his confinement
was by appointment of law, that the same law would soon relieve him; and that
he would not for a kingdom enjoy one hour of freedom that was contrary to law.
-- He prayed them to dismiss -- and promised that should any illegal steps be
pursued to punish him, or injure them, he would then be glad of and call for
their assistance, but at present he had no complaints. --


BOTCH. Curse his discretion!


OFFI. But all would not do, my Lord -- he had no sooner finished, and pulled
down his window, than the shouting grew louder -- his enemies were all d -- d
-- and swearing that there could be neither law nor reason to punish so great a
man; the outrage grew more violent -- they insulted the senturies -- and J --
requires more force, otherwise, he says, he will abandon his post. --


BOTCH. So far well -- fly instantly and find Lord Barnacle. --


OFFI. See, my Lord, he is here!


Enter Lord BARNACLE. BOTCH. My good Lord -- you're welcome --


BAR. My Lord -- the uproar increases -- Lord Wimple begs your lordship's
opinion -- Lord Shelter opposes sending any troops, or if any should be sent,
he is for marching all the three regiments, that the people seeing no chance of
opposition may disperse quietly. --


BOTCH. Why, my Lord -- that would be to represent g -- as too fearful, and the
mob as too important. -- My opinion is, that a small detachment should first be
sent; -- if they are resisted, let others be ready to reinforce them; and let
the t -- d r -- t be kept under arms as a reserve, that, when the fury of the
ruffians is thus gradually roused to a proper pitch, they may have a good
pretense to fall upon them, and heartily revenge their country's affronts. --


BAR. Yours, my Lord, is the judgment of a Soloman -- I go about it. --


BOTCH. Take care, my Lord, what ammunition may be served out -- none of your
harmless small shot. -- Ball -- ball!


BAR. Enough said -- my Lord. --

[Exeunt severally
ACT II.
SCENE, the Fields.
The curtain draws -- discovers a confused multitude of Men, Women, and
Children, as diverting themselves and laughing at some Soldiers --. 1st Woman.
HUzza! -- a -- a --! Watcher and Liberty! --


2d Wom. Liberty and Watcher for ever! huzza! -- a -- a --


Omnes. Watcher and Liberty! huzza -- a -- a --


Enter J -- E. J --. What! ho! sogers advance! have a care, you mad people!
what in the devil's name are ye all about. -- Let me hear who dare to cry for
Watcher! or for Liberty! -- I shall Liberty ye! -- Insolent wretches! be gone,
I say; nor dare to insult the guardians of our peace, the sogers! --


Wom. Ha! ha! ha! smoke him! smoke him! heydey master J -- E, does your worship
think to restrain our tongues, because you have got Mr. Watcher's body
confined? -- d -- me if ever a j -- e of ye all shall confine my tongue, nor my
t -- l either, when I have a mind to use them! huzza -- Watcher and Liberty,
huzza -- a -- a --

[Some dirt, clods, and horse dung, etc. thrown toward the J --, C --, etc.
J --. Mark -- mark -- master C --, mind these women, I shall know them again
-- there are some men and boys too who are roaring Watcher and Liberty! -- We
shall have more sogers by and bye -- I will read the act -- and then we shall
see who bawls for Watcher and Liberty -- some of ye shall sleep in your shoes
I Will warrant ye!


Wom. O! rare J --! -- Your worship will read the ack, will you? -- You Would
better wipe your a -- se with it! What -- in the devil's name read the ack --
against women and children! read the ack! I say read the ack too -- Y'ad better
read an ack against fornication and adultery, master J -- e -- Sleep in our
shoes too! O! brave general J -- e! go home, and sleep in your horns, master J
-- e -- You Will do more good, by minding your wife and your shop, than coming
here to read acks against Conscience, Watcher and Liberty! --


Omnes. Huzza -- a -- a -- Watcher and Liberty for ever!

[Drums are heard as advancing.
Justice reads -- while he is reading, several people out of derision and
indignation, throw some pieces of brick and clods -- and then leave the field
-- Guards advance in order of battle -- the J -- e finishes his reading -- and
immediately -- Omnes. Huzza -- a -- Watcher and Liberty! for ever, huzza -- a
--.


J --. Addressing himself to the sogers.] -- "Gentlemen -- I have done every
thing in the power of a civil magistrate clothed with all the authority of g
-- t! and as the representative of our august and venerable young --! to reform
and disperse this unlawful and dangerous mob! -- who threaten d -- n to all the
great m -- s of st -- who have scandalously slandered the wise name of the
noble Lord BOTCH! although to his lordship's wisdom this great n -- n is so much
indebted -- for purchasing to us and our posterity -- a glorious, lasting and
honorable peace! -- Who have dared to utter vile lying aspersions against the
greatest l -- y of this, or any other n -- n! -- And who, what is worst of all,
have had the impudence to laugh at the respectable authority of the quorum now
assembled in my person. -- For all which rebellious practices! Gentlemen, I
give you full authority to chastise that liberty, which these lawless people
contend for; and to secure their persons by death; or any other lawful methods,
which to your great wisdom and clemency shall be judged most expedient -- So
God save the k --, and grant you success!" --


MOB. Huzza -- a -- a -- Watcher and Liberty forever! huzza.


OFFI. To some sogers.] Macslaughter and Macmurder, do you mark that young
rascal yonderhow loud he roars?


SOG. Aye -- aye -- your honor -- We'll do for him presently?

[Several shots are heard, and two or three sogers run out of their ranks in
pursuit of a young man, who takes shelter in a stable-yard.
Enter C -- L. C --. Recover your arms! -- As you were! -- No more firing --
What in the name of God is all this for? I can see no riot, no, nor the least
resistance! -- And yet a great many unoffending people killed and wounded! --
Shame! -- shame! that British arms should be thus prostituted! --

[Exit another way.
Officer and sogers return. MACS. D -- me Donald! -- I have done for that young
rebel!


MACM. You! -- C -- e your blud! -- 'twas me that finished his E -- saul! --
Sin of a bitch! he bawled for leeberty too! he will bawl nae mair, Baldy! I'se
answer for that! --


MACS. So d -- me -- you would have a the oner o't! -- I Will be c --, but I fired
first. --


MACM. No matter for that -- it was my duble bullets that put an end to his
quaaking --


MACS. Na! God, Donald, if you come to that -- the coptain himsel ga' 'um the
last tutch. --


MACM. Deel make matter, man, how it was, its done, and gif we had but our awn
h -- d r -- s here -- before God -- we might send a' the E -- saul's of them to
follow his. --


MACS. Hadd your tung, mon, there is the Cornet, he is nae grit friend to Lord
BOTCH -- d -- m he lykes the E -- over weel. --

[Exeunt.
SCENE, a Garden.
Enter HONESTY and BLUNT. HON. Why, friend Blunt -- these are shameful and
terrible doings. -- See what all this patriotism of Watchers brings upon us?


BLUNT. Friend Honesty thou art certainly mad! -- All this patriotism of
Watchers! -- What in the name of justice! -- Do you blame Watcher?


HON. No, I do not blame Watcher as the actual transgressor, but as the
original cause; for had he kept himself quiet, and given no countenance to the
mob, perhaps his past offenses might have been forgotten; the g -- t might have
overlookt him; then there would have been no canvassing, no caballing, nor no
riots! --


BLUNT. Friend Honesty -- you are not yet well acquainted with the true spirit
and character of Jack Watcher. -- Some others of your more pusilanimous liberty
boasters, would, as you say, have kissed the rod long before now. -- But Jack
is not that man -- he has once fairly engaged to be liberty's and the people's
champion. -- And to expose to the just censure of the public, those m -- l s --
s, who would sacrifice both to the lust of their own temporary emolument -- he
has resolution, and he has honesty. -- And should arbitrary measures so far
prevail against him as to bring him even under sentence of death -- Whilst the
people will adhere to him, and until he obtains for them, the end of his noble
pursuit; he would go to that death sooner than owe his life to m -- l favor!


HON. Well! well! but to what end does he seduce the people to neglect their
business; and to make all this rout and noise, so much to the prejudice of
themselves and neglect of their families? I still say that he is indirectly the
cause of this day's slaughter!


BLUNT. Watcher does by no means either seduce or inflame them. -- They are
sensible that it is on account of his firm attachment to them, and to the just
influence he has got amongst them, that the resentment of a -- n so keenly
persecutes him; they justly think, if they were to leave him to lie neglected
in a prison, where he is confined for their sakes, it would be the height of
ingratitude. -- This leads numbers of them successively to show their personal
gratitude, by which they imagine they keep up his spirits -- This is poison to
his persecutors. -- They make a parade of g -- s, c -- s, etc. -- Such parades
always gather abundance of idlers; and the indifferent, and the interested
mingling together, look like a concourse of people, and are howsoever quiet,
branded with the name of mob! -- The scheme of g -- t is to deter every body
from so much as looking at him. -- In hopes, by procrastinating his trial as
they do, from day to day, that the people will at length be tired out, and so
desert him: -- But to blame him with any fatal consequences, is just as
reasonable as it would be to blame me. -- If I sent out a ship to purchase
wealth to the nation, and if by the mismanagement of the master or pilot, the
ship should be lost -- the loss of that ship's crew may, I say, be as justly
imputed to me, as the murders of this day can be imputed to honest Jack Watcher.


HON. Well, Blunt, but what security have the people, or you in your minds;
supposing that Watcher was to get the better of his enemies; what security have
you, I say, that he would more than others before him, exert unchangeably all
his masterly faculties for the public weal.


BLUNT. Every earthly security that can be promised upon incorruptibility! -- a
clear head! -- and an honest heart!


HON. Pray what mighty proofs has he given of being incorruptible?


BLUNT. Proofs, in such a case cannot be positive, because corruption seldom
admits of evidence. -- But never was any case supported by so strong
presumptive proof. -- During his service in p -- t, his vigilance and activity
could not escape the notice of the m -- s. -- We all know that many, with not
the half of his talents, were bought off at a very high price, and his
continuing so long unplaced, and unpensioned, is a convincing testimony to me,
that he was not to be purchased. -- In the next place, when through him, such a
wound was given to the native liberty of E --! can you suppose that any son of
corruption would have, in defense of it, undergone ignominious trials, and
suffered imprisonment, when doubtless he could have avoided both, by letting
the stab which liberty had sustained, pass unnoticed! Would not the m -- y,
think you, have paid him a very high price; rather than have submitted to the
disgrace he brought upon them, and their emissaries? and yet did he not, as
advocate for the public, peril his freedom and fortune, rather than yield one
inch of theirs?


HON. Why Blunt, these are strong presumptions, I confess; but how will you
justify that clearness of head, and goodness of heart, you ascribe to him, when
you consider the censure of p -- t! -- and the v -- s of a j --, standing
against him for sedition and impiety?


BLUNT. As for the seditious part of it, Honesty has too much good sense not to
grant me, that the speeches put into the mouths of the best of k -- s by wicked
m -- rs, have before Watcher's time been as freely handled, and not a word said
about it. -- As to the accusation of impiety -- I am sorry he is liable to the
imputation. -- But I will no more admit that he was guilty of a publication in
that case; than if you was to show me a witty poem; however wild it might be,
of which I should wish for a copy, and you should consent to let me take one,
on condition that I would furnish you with two or three. -- The perusal of free
thoughts on religious subjects, is only dangerous to the morals of mankind when
they fall into the hands of weak heads, incapable of distinguishing between
right and wrong. -- When they come into the hands of men of sense, they will be
able to discover and expose their errors, and thereby do rather service than
harm to the truth. -- And as it is impossible to conceive that ever the piece
in question was designed for the public eye, as I cannot help thinking that a
most absurd verdict which pronounced it to be a publication; and by that means
subjected the undesigning copier to the punishment due to a criminal publisher.


HON. Upon my word Blunt -- thou make no bad advocate for thy friend Jack
Watcher.


BLUNT. My friend! do you call him? -- 'Faith he is too keen a fellow to be a
friend to Blunt -- any farther, than as being the friend of the public, he is
every man's friend; and as such, he shall always have Blunt's best wishes. Nay,
neighbor! I Will fairly tell you, that I Am determined to stand by him at the
peril of all I Am worth.


HON. Give me thy fist, Blunt! -- for, by my soul, Honesty will go hand in hand
with thee. -- I Will tell thee Blunt -- It is now no trifling question -- I don't
at present look upon it as a simple contention between Watcher and the m -- y!
-- I consider it as war openly declared between Liberty and arbitrary Power! --
At no juncture, have the people so unanimously and avowedly distinguished
themselves in the cause of Freedom and Patriotism! -- And if it should be in
the power of prerogative and despotism to render their endeavors upon this
occasion, ineffectual, then may every one of us be next employed to rivet his
neighbor's chains! -- Along then, friend Blunt, let us go to the Duke's Head,
and quaff one sober bottle -- to Liberty -- to Watcher -- and to every true
friend of our good kind and free-constitution! --

[Exeunt.
SCENE, changes to Covent Garden.
Enter BLUNT, JENNY following. JEN. Hist! hist -- Mr. Blunt! one word.


BLUNT. What do you want, ye jade? get about your business -- I have no leisure
for you. --


JEN. Heyday! what the devil's the matter? get about my business! -- I have
been in quest of business all the evening, and can find none -- Times are very
hard! d -- d hard indeed, Mr. Blunt! -- Do! for charities sake, treat me with a
single pint -- and a little bit of -- any thing.


BLUNT. Why -- you hungry jade you, why don't you get to work? You could, if
you would, do well enough! -- But you prefer idleness, whoring, and starving,
to industry, decency, and a comfortable living?

'On my soul, now, that is merry enough -- What is Blunt turned reformer too? --
I shall lose all my friends bye and bye. -- There Is my good friend Jack Watcher
already cooped up for pretending to reform politics, and his acquaintance
Blunt, to follow his ambitious example, must next engage in a task, just as
arduous! -- a reformation of petticoats! -- But to be serious, Mr. Blunt. -- I
own I Am idle -- not because I love idleness; but, because I dare not think --
whoring I abhor -- though necessity obliges me sometimes to practice it -- and
when the few friends with whom I really can enjoy an hour, happen to be out
of the way; you would pity me, if you knew how distressed I am -- I have (hungry,
as I am) shunned half a dozen opportunities this same evening, of feasting and
carousing! -- but to go amidst such debauchery and rioting, as yet my stomach
rises against.


BLUNT. Well, JENNY -- I do pity thee -- I must give thee a bit of supper --
but tell me, how came you to fall out with Lord Scratch?


JEN. Why, Blunt, I Will be honest and tell you -- Although I was actually
faithful to Scratch while I lived at his expense, yet I never liked him --
Where one does not like -- they cannot give pleasure -- he conceited himself
the prettiest little fellow in the world -- and expected to be courted by a
thousand sort of amorous blandishments, that I could not force myself to divert
him with -- he grew also cool -- mutual indifference ensued! -- When my dear
undoer came to town -- I longed to repeat the act of my ruin! -- In fine,
without the least anger, we parted just as decently as we met.


BLUNT. Why in faith, JENNY! thou art as ill calculated for a wanton, as any of
thy profession I ever knew.


JEN. Dear Blunt! don't for love's sake, call it a profession; those who make a
profession of it -- have the power or art, which you will, to please every body
alike! -- That I cannot do -- I have too quick sensations, and too much honesty
to be a whore -- I should for all the world, make just such another whore, as
your friend Jack Watcher would make a courtier -- He would like very well to
enjoy all the pleasures, luxury and gaiety of a court; but he has too much
honesty to purchase them by flattery and dissimulation.


BLUNT. Well said, JENNY! -- Then you continue firm to Watcher, even in his
troubles -- that is another property seldom to be met with among the gay ladies!
they I Am told have all deserted him on account of the impious E -- on W --!


JEN. That Is an E --. Mr. Blunt, I never saw -- but if it contained any thing
to the prejudice of women, I Will be sworn it was none of Jack Watchers! and as
to its impiety -- if he had been tried by the judge, before whom the hypocrites
brought the woman that was caught in adultery -- he had escaped as unhurt as
she did! -- Is there a b -- p, p -- r, or c -- r among 'em all, think ye --
that dared in conscience to have thrown the first stone?


Both. Ha! he! he! --

[Exeunt.
SCENE, Lord Shelter's House.
Curtain draws and discovers Lord Wimple and Lord Shelter as very serious.
SHEL. My Lord -- these things will not do! -- I shall resign by heavens! --


WIM. But -- pray, my Lord --


SHEL. It is to no purpose to talk to me -- what! to have the name of power --
and of office; and by that means to pull down on my head the just resentment of
an abused people; for barbarities wantonly committed upon them, not only
without my consent, but contrary to my opinion -- it is too much -- I will not
suffer it.


WIM. Pray, my good Lord, be calm but for a moment -- did ever any government
bear patiently with such insult and lawless outrage as the present? -- Where
pray was it to end? -- No man -- not even the -- himself could promise to enjoy
one moment of peace, whilst those tumultuous harpies were permitted to assemble
and ravage with impunity in the manner they have done, ever since the c -- e --.


SHEL. My Lord! I must insist upon it, that there were a thousand less
desperate methods to be fallen upon, that would have pacified them much more
effectually than by becoming rioters ourselves, and putting into the hands of
irritated troops, the power of dealing death and destruction amongst an unarmed
multitude. -- Watcher, obstinate as he is, has better sense, than to have
encouraged his followers to proceed to the commission of any ravages, which
must rather have created him enemies than friends.


WIM. Well! my Lord -- but it is now over -- and cannot be helped -- don't let us
by differing among ourselves, give our enemies the advantage of laughing at us
-- We can set the pens of prostitution at work, to aggravate the madness of the
people into a semblance of rebellion! and by that means make the rest of the
nation imagine that a little military discipline was absolutely necessary.


SHEL. My Lord! you are in the scrape -- get yourselves out of it as well as
you can -- I Will keep my hands clean of it -- but I will meddle in none of your
affairs, until I can see that by some sensible means or other you have appeased
the wrath of an abused people -- In every other thing -- I am at his m -- s
service.


WIM. Well -- my Lord -- I hope we shall be able to cook it upto your
lordship's satisfaction -- Adieu!


End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
The Street -- diverse parties of people are seen discontentedly moving to and
fro. 1st Mob. COME on boys -- huzza, Watcher -- huzza Liberty -- d -- n Botch
-- d -- n m -- y -- down with them -- huzza! revenge! revenge!


2d Mob. Huzza boys -- let us from one end of the town to the other -- and if that
will not do from one end of the nation to the other -- huzza -- E -- blood cruelly
spilt by butchering S --! revenge -- revenge -- huzza! Watcher for ever! huzza
-- liberty for ever, huzza -- a -- a --


All. Revenge! -- revenge! -- huzza --


To them HONESTY and BLUNT. BLUNT. Huzza! liberty for ever! -- huzza -- But
hear me -- Brave neighbors and fellow citizens: -- let us think how we may
best obtain our revenge -- don't let us run our heads against a wall; and by
rashness here, give our enemies an advantage in other parts of the n -- n --
Let the whole n -- n be first convinced of the wrongs we suffer -- Let brave
Watcher patiently and with perseverance bear the course of law. -- Think, that
in the eyes of the rest of mankind, who know not all that we do, that you hurt
the cause of our champion; -- our enemies try to make the world believe -- that
we have no other views than to protect Watcher from the judgment of a l -- l c
-- t -- That we frighten the hand of justice by outrage and depredations --
These falsehoods, create enemies to him and to our glorious cause -- the cause
of liberty! -- Let us be more regular and peaceable -- and study to gain
friends in place of enemies -- The rigor of l -- may -- for a little time keep
patriotism in chains -- but it dare not destroy it -- The greatest l -- l
severity must in course come to an end -- then -- then -- Watcher will be free!
-- Then he will have in his power to put himself lawfully at our head -- and to
exert all the power of unfettered patriotism for the redemption of his groaning
country. -- Then -- then -- my friends -- will be the time to revenge her, and
your injuries -- Then huzza -- huzza -- for ever -- Watcher and liberty!


All. Huzza -- huzza -- huzza --


1st Mob. D -- n'd good sense -- Tom.


2d Mob. Ay -- that is the barber!


All. Ay -- ay -- d -- me, let us go home, mind our business, and get more
strength and more money to support Jack when he is free, bravely to fight our
cause for us! -- Watcher and Liberty for ever! -- huzza -- huzza -- huzza.

[The mob severally retire.
HON. In Faith, friend Blunt, that little harangue of yours has had a better
effect, and done more good in five minutes, than all the m -- l force of the
kingdom could have effected in a week.


BLUNT. Why, I Will tell thee Honesty. -- I say nothing but what are in reality
the sentiments of Watcher himself -- In the beginning of his endeavors here --
popular appearances were necessary for him, to supply the defections of those
affected patriots who had formerly flattered him with their eternal protection.
-- He found, after he had risked all, and spent all, in pursuit of the very
schemes they had concerted with him, that they had fallen off, and become so
lukewarm, that unless he should be able to inspirit the public with a just
sense of his and their own oppressions, he must fall a sacrifice to real merit
-- he therefore, did not at first discourage their cabals; but as no man is
more anxious than he, to preserve order and harmony in the community, and
knowing very well the dangerous effects of popular fury; he has labored with
as much zeal to moderate their resentments, as he nobly intends to employ for
the redress of their grievances!


HON. But pray tell me, Blunt! have his lately so great and powerful friends
actually abandoned him.


BLUNT. Not entirely abandoned him, -- that is what for their own sakes, at
least for the sake of that popularity on which they would still fain plume
themselves; they dare hardly do. -- They continue I believe to contribute
toward his expense -- but for his noble and spirited measures, they leave him
to struggle through them the best way he can. -- They will not consent, I
imagine, that he be too rigorously handled; but they will as little concur with
him in bringing to justice those tools of A -- n who have disgraced and
plundered the nation, to aggrandize themselves, and to crush the efforts of
true patriotism.


HON. By my soul -- Blunt! -- I always feared it would be so -- And yet, who
could have thought it? -- Who, for example to have heard the patriotic
declamations of an orator Chatwell, while a c -- r! -- could have believed, he
would ever submit to that degenerated inactivity, in which they now rock him to
sleep.


BLUNT. Chatwell's degeneracy does by no means surprise me, I have ever looked
upon him to be the vainest of all men! -- his best hopes were, from the
beginning, founded in the people's applause; that he courted; that he obtained;
and he has made a good account of it. -- The amazing success which crowned his
a -- n, made him the idol of the people, who would not see how greedily he
adorned himself with ornaments of which he often spoiled the real purchaser; no
man in these days dared to contradict him, and he therefore assumed every glory
to himself.


HON. Why Blunt -- all that is but too true -- nor did I begrudge him at that
time any honor ^he graspt at -- I regarded him as the savior of a sinking
state, and thought the more honor he acquired, the more he should have it in
his power to distribute justice. --


BLUNT. Yes, justice! -- what justice pray did he attain for the honest q -- I
forgot his name -- but who from pure public spiritedness -- threw himself out
of a thriving trading company -- Plan'd the attempt upon S -- l -- spent every
shilling he had industriously gained, that he might convince the M -- y of his
sincerity -- assisted or at least directed, in the operations which conquered
it, -- came home big with the hopes of grateful acknowledgments from so
patriotic an A -- n. -- These hopes, not founded on imagination only, but in
written holograph assurances under the hand of the great patriot himself -- and
did not Chatwell nevertheless, not only assume to himself the whole merit of
that scheme, but would fain have retracted his promises -- and because the
honest q --, unschool'd in the science of politics, would not belie himself,
and suffer the whole honor of the project to be ascribed solely to Chatwell,
-- did not Chatwell in place of rewarding, neglect, and insult him? -- And as
I Am well assured, had it not been for the generosity and truly patriotick
application of Lord Shelter, the S -- y, who solicited and obtained a pension
for the original contriver of that conquest, -- then in very deep distress --
the resentment of Chatwell would have left the cheated q --, to have lamented
in indigence the folly of a merchant, having forsook trade, to spend a fortune
in the public service!


HON. I have indeed heard as much -- and farther -- that although to
demonstration, there never was a better concerted plan -- yet -- that unless it
had been countenanced and enforced by Lord H --, all the q -- 's fervency never
could have moved the spirit of A -- n, to have carried it into execution. --


BL. I believe that is true -- for H -- was certainly the first who adopted it,
and as far as he had influence promoted it -- H -- is no bad man: -- and I wish
the execution of the d -- d g -- w -- had fallen to any other m -- r's share
than his.


HON. Well -- but pray, tell me, what did the q -- get by it at last?


BL. Why -- he got a pension -- I don't know how much -- but I'mtold -- little
more than sufficient to pay up the very debt he was obliged to contract, during
the time he was soliciting it.


HON. Well, Blunt -- and if Chatwell, now that he is again in A -- n does not
exert himself, to repair at least, a fortune, so sequestered to the public use
-- may --


BL. Ay! -- may the next fool, that spends a shilling in such a service, be
hanged -- as well as -- beggared.


HON. But tell me Blunt -- might not the fate of the q -- have served as a
beacon to your friend Jack Watcher?


BLUNT. Friend Honesty -- the case is extremely different -- The q -- for the
service of his country, had but one single object in view -- upon the fate of
that, he was willing to peril his life and all he was worth; -- but it was
still in the character of a merchant -- if his project failed he was undone --
if it succeeded, he hoped to avail himself, by some preference in the
commercial way. -- Watcher's enthusiasm is of quite another fort -- he
penetrates into the bowels of a -- n, he sees by what poison it has been
infected -- he is anxious to purge it -- and will rather die, than leave it
unrestored to its primitive constitution -- he has abilities and perseverance
-- And while he breathes, he will flatter himself with being upheld by honest
men. -- That, at length, if not in the c -- at least in the s --, he may be the
terror of evil doers -- Amen -- so be it

If patriots dauntless -- for their country bleed,
Reward, though late -- will certainly succeed.
[Exeunt.
SCENE changes and discovers Lord Botch and Lord Mansupple, extremely serious.
Botch. And what does your lordship think may be the consequence?


MAN'S. My lord! I Am sorry to tell it you, but it is truly my private opinion,
that the master j -- e, the o -- rs, who gave orders to fire, and the rascals
who left their stations, deserve all to be hanged! --


BOTCH. It must not be -- or by G -- d, I Am undone -- If these poor fellows,
who only acted under superior order, are given up -- The whole army will be as
much incensed, as the people are now! -- My dear Lord -- think how you may but
screen us for this once; and I Will promise you that there never shall be any
thing again countenanced on my part, without your lordship's advice.


MAN'S. Why, my Lord, you never put a more difficult task upon me; if we had
consented to take bail for Watcher -- we might with some color of justice have
bailed the s --, and then the worst would have been a forfeiture of the bail:
-- But how in equity can we accept the bail of wilful murderers! -- after
having rejected it, in the case of ludicrous publications, will be something so
repugnant to common sense, that every porter has judgment to reason upon the
impropriety. -- In a word, my Lord, they must be tried -- and if condemned --
you may obtain a pardon for them.


BOTCH. That will never do; -- We most not impose such a hardship upon the --,
he begins to think for himself -- and his humane soul, is so resolutely
inaccessible, to the most powerful intercessions in the case of murder, that
the greatest favorites at c -- t, would hazard their reputation, by the
application.


MAN'S. My Lord! I have every disposition in the world for your service; but you
know how much the eyes of mankind are upon me; and therefore I will by no means
condescend to take upon me the burden of an affair which would make my name
stink in their opinion. Pray have you talked to the a -- y g -- l upon this
subject?


BOTCH. My Lord, I have not -- but I Am certain he will not hesitate a moment,
to do any thing he may do, consistently with his office.


MAN'S. Then the greatest difficulty is over -- murder is one of the pl -- of
the c --. -- Let a well-timed petition be presented -- prepare the a -- g --
for it -- And, if no objection is made, the thing will go of course, as if the
j -- knew nothing at all of the matter.


BOTCH. My Lord, I go about it -- your most obedient!

[Exit.
MAN'S. That unhappy man! by warping himself into a power he never was equal to
-- has formed for himself a bed of thorns, whereon he will be restless all his
life! --


Enter Constable, four guards dragging in some common people, and amongst
others Jenny. CONSTABLE. My Lord -- may it please your lordship -- here are some
rioters, catched in the very fact! -- Will your lordship be so good as order
them to the B --, or to N --?


MAN'S. Not so fast friend! pray let me first know what fact they were caught in?


CONS. Why, my Lord! in no less, than the rebellious fact of roaring out
Watcher and Liberty! --


MAN'S. And pray, good master Constable, what bad consequence attended the
crying out Watcher and Liberty?


CONS. Bad consequence! -- is not Watcher and Liberty consequence sufficient?
is not Watcher and Liberty a heinous sin?


MAN'S. No master constable, there is no more sin in the words Watcher and
Liberty! than there is common sense in the word Constable -- It is according as
they are employed, that they are useful, or troublesome, to the community. --
And I am afraid that you are as much mistaken in having brought these people
before me; as they are mistaken in neglecting their business to cry out Watcher
and Liberty -- (to Jenny) and pray madam how comes a gentlewoman of your
appearance to be amongst the rest.


JENNY For saying, my Lord! what I imagine your Lordship thinks -- That this
wiseacre of a constable, was -- a fool! -- I was accidentally passing by, saw
these people, in no other act of rioting, than laughing and singing something
about Watcher and Liberty; and this sagacious gentleman having laid hold of
them -- I did tell him, that if he carried them before any judge, he would be
laughed at for a fool! -- So! madam, says the constable -- you are a Watcherite
too -- along, along! you shall go with the rest! -- Thus, my Lord, I have the
honor to be presented to your lordship.


MAN'S. Pray, Sir, why is this gentlewoman brought here?


CONS. Why? my Lord -- I think, she is hanged by her own confession! -- does she
not own that she called a civil magistrate a fool, in the due execution of his
office?


MAN'S. My good friend -- It is not possible, in every case to suppress the
truth -- I Am afraid -- when a constable acts foolishly -- one may call him a
fool -- without incurring the censure of the law -- let me advise you for your
own sake to carry for the future, such offenders before some of the acting j --
s -- don't trouble me with them. -- And in the mean time, you had best step in
some where with these honest people, and take a reconciling pot, lest it should
be put into their heads, to ask some questions about unlawful detention. -- So,
go about your business.

[The people go out hallowing -- huzza -- Watcher and Liberty for ever, huzza!
--
Mansupple and Jenny. Jenny courtesying, offers to go. MAN'S. You had best stop
a moment, my dear! -- let the crowd be gone before you expose yourself among
'em!


JEN. Your lordship's very obliging -- but I have nothing to fear, except from
such brutes as that there constable.


MAN'S. I imagine not, madam! -- men of larger abilities -- would hardly terrify
so pretty a creature as you (aside) "egad she is handsome."


JEN. My Lord!


MAN'S. I say my dear -- That men of the best understandings, are generally too
partial to the sex; not to desire, rather to please, than frighten those so
capable of charming! --


JEN. Your Lordship's very good -- And though your observation's rather
favorable -- It is not, I imagine, altogether unjust: for where will you find
a gentleman of livelier parts than my oppressed friend Jack Watcher! and surely
our sex never had reason to doubt of his benevolence for 'em!


MAN'S. So madam! -- I find at length, you are a well wisher to Mr. Watcher! --


JEN. Yes, my Lord -- I avow it -- and if your Lordship! -- I mean -- if every
body would speak their sentiments as honestly as I do mine; Watcher would have
avoided a great deal of distress, and your Lordship a great deal of trouble.


MAN'S. Come, come, madam! no politics! -- Politics methinks comes as awkwardly
from the lips of a fine woman as love would come from the lips of an old judge.


JEN. And so, my Lord! -- you would have me lay aside my awkwardness! -- that
your Lordship might put on yours! -- but as the one subject could not be more
disgustful to your lordship -- than the other would to me -- Your Lordship will
please to excuse me, -- my Lord I Am yours.

[Exit.
MAN'S. To that strange inconsistence can that same foolish passion lead a man?
When neither decency, situation, nor age, are able to withstand its
temptations! -- There Is that little sly minx, after assuming every inviting
leer of dissembled wantonness, has at last walked her ways unmoved, that she may
divert herself amongst her companions at the expense of my character -- so much
for the stupidity of a constable.

[Exit.
SCENE changes, discovers a crowd of men and women -- pulling and hawling a raw
S --.
1st. WOM. D -- n ye! who are you for then? speak!


DONALD. The deevel's i the weemen! wat would ye be at?


2d. WOM. Trounce the dog! trounce him! Moll!


1st. MAN. Speak ye fool! cannot ye say Watcher and Liberty, and then you may go
about your business. --


DON. I Will say leeberty! as fast and as lood: as any o'ye -- but I dinna like
Watcher -- he is d -- d a my coontry! if you are a for leeberty! why dinna ye gi
me my leeberty? --


WOMEN. Souse him! souse him! he is an obstinate dog!


2d Man. You blockead had not you better speak one word to get off, than to be
pulled and hawl'd about so?


WOM. Speak you cub you -- cry -- down with Botch -- up Watcher and Liberty!
huzza --


DON. Ay, ay, done wi Botch! -- Done wi Botch! I care nae mair for Botch than
any o'ye -- Done wi Botch! leeberty -- leeberty -- hurra.


1st Man. Come, come, let the fellow alone -- he is none of Botch's folks ye see.


DON. D -- Botch! what is Botch to me!


1st Man. What friend, is not Lord Botch your countryman? has he not made ye
all rich? and don't you love him for that?


DON. Made us a' rich! I say rich too! I Will tell ye neebers -- ye never was
mair mistaken in a your life -- My maister's master is a parliament mon, and I
hiv hard him say, that except it be for his awn saimely or near connecksion,
and for two or three graceless yung cheels like a H -- and a W -- that were
chaced oot of the country, and wha wanted to make him a G -- or a K -- at least
that he never did gued to any body -- Thae cheels, they say, gat in sae meickle
about him, that they wadna let any body come near him, but what they lykt. In
short lods! they say, that thae upstart cheels wanted as mutch to leed him by
the noase, as he led -- his master!


2d Man. Hear him! hear him! in faith Sawney's no senseless fellow! -- Speak on
Sawney! you're a good honest lad.


DON. They ca' me Donald, I'se tell ye, and yet deel a bane i Botches skin do I
like for a' hat, my master says, that a S -- might have been hard at the good
old D -- of N -- s ten times sooner, than coud sae muckle as see Lord Botch
once! for he was ay sae barracaded we thae idle flattering cheels, that nae
body that was better than themsels, wod get near him -- And it is them they
say, that is made a' the S -- sae ill spoken of in this muckle toon.


2d Man. Well said, Sawney! and I will tell you, Sawney! Donald I mean, that
that may be the reason why honest Watcher hates Lord Botch so much, for it is
only him, and such S -- as you speak of, that he dislikes.


DON. Is it sae? then i'se be for Watcher as weil as the best of ye! -- huzza
-- a -- a -- Watcher Leeberty for ever, huzza -- a -- a.


All. Watcher and Liberty for ever! huzza -- a -- a --.


Chorus of signing and dancing -- to the tune of Over the Hills and far away.
With Donald -- Jack shall quaff a pot
They Are fools! who all -- for one disdain,
Let neither Rose, nor Thistle rot,
We'll all untie the Patriots chain.
Then peace shall smile on H -- 's reign.
And discord shall be chased away,
The S -- shall with the E -- join,
To banish upstart rogues away.
Over the hills, and far away.

FINIS.
The SCENE at page 33, and the last Scene, rendered into intelligible English,
for the benefit of such readers who are unacquainted with the S --.
MAS. D -- n me, Donald -- I have done for that young rebel!


MACM. You! C -- your blood! -- it was me that finished his E -- soul! -- Son
of a bitch -- he bawled for liberty too! -- he will bawl no more Archibald! I
will answer for that! --


MACS. So d -- n me, you would have all the honor of it? I will be c -- but I
fired first!


MACM. No matter for that -- it was my double bullets that put an end to his
quaking!


MACS. No! -- Gad -- Donald, if you come that, the captain himself gave the
last touch!


MACM. What the d -- the matter, man, who it was, it is done -- and if we had
but our own h -- r -- ts here -- by G -- d we might send all the E -- souls of
them to follow his.


MACS. Hold your tongue -- man -- there comes the Colonel, he is no great
friend to Lord Botch -- d -- n him, he likes the E -- too well.


SCENE the last.
DON. The devil's in the women, what would you be at?


1st Wom. Trounce the dog! -- Trounce him, Moll --


1st Man. Speak you fool! cannot you say Watcher and Liberty, and then you may
go about your business.


DON. I will say Liberty! as fast and as loud as any of you, but I do not like
Watcher -- he has d -- d all my country! -- If you are for Liberty! why don't
you give me my liberty?


Wom. Souse him! souse him! -- he is an obstinate dog!


2d Man. You blockhead had not you better speak one word and get off, than to
be pulled and hauled about so.


Wom. Speak you cub you -- cry, down with Botch -- up Watcher and Liberty!
huzza -- a --


DON. Aye! aye! -- down with Botch! -- Down with Botch! I care no more for
Botch than any of ye? -- Down with Botch! Liberty! Liberty! -- huzza -- a --


2d Man. Come, come! let the fellow alone -- he is none of Botcher's folks ye
see.


DON. D -- n Botch! -- What is Botch to me?


1st Man. What friend, is not Lord Botch your countryman? has he not made ye
all rich? -- And don't you love him for that?


DON. Made us rich! -- I say rich too! -- I Will tell ye neighbors, ye never
were more mistaken in all your lives! my master's master is a member of
parliament, and I have heard him say, that except it has been for his own
family, or near connections, and two or three graceless young fellows, such as
a H --, and a W -- n, that were chased out of the country, and who wanted to
make him a G -- or at least a k -- g! that he never did good to any body! These
fellows, they say, gained so much upon him, that they would let no mortal get
access to him, but whom they thought fit! -- In short, my friends, it is said,
that these upstarts wanted as much to lead him by the nose, as 'twas said -- he
led -- his master! -- And let me tell ye, that the true blue (or honest whigs)
of my country, little as ye think of them, though they despise the upstarts, are
nevertheless thankful to God, that they had better luck than their patron; for
they got up themselves, whilst he tumbled down!


2d Man. Hear him! -- hear him! -- in faith Sawney's no senseless fellow --
speak on Sawney! your are a good honest lad.


DON. They call me Donald, I Will tell you, and yet the devil a bone in Botch's
body do I love for all that! my master says, that a S -- might have been heard
at the good old D -- of N -- s ten times sooner, than he could have once
admittance to Lord Botch! for he was always so strongly barricaded with these
idle flattering fellows, that no body that was better than themselves could get
near him! and it is them they say, that has made all the S -- be so ill spoken
of in this great city.


2d Man. Well said Sawney! and I will tell you Sawney! Donald I mean, that it
may be for the same reason, that honest Watcher so much hates Lord Botch! for
it is only him, and such S -- as you speak of that he dislikes. --


DON. Is it so? then I will be for Watcher as well as the best of ye! huzza --
a -- Watcher and Liberty for ever? huzza -- a -- a --


New Publications printed for STAPLES STEARE.
1 A Very Odd Thing, Price 1s. 2 A Short Examination into the Conduct of Lord M
-- F -- D. Price 6d. 3 The Court of Star Chamber, or Seat of Oppression, Price
6d. 4 An Essay on Patriotism, Price 1s. 6d. 5 The North Country Poll, Price 1s.
6 A Defense of the R -- t H -- the E -- l of R -- e, by Sir Archy Mac Sarcasm,
Price 6d. 7 Wilkes's celebrated Letter to the Electors of Aylesbury, Price 6d.
8 The Victim, a Poem, Price 1 s. 6d. 9 Sentiments on the Death of Sentimental
YORICK, Price 1s. 10 The Exile Triumphant, or Liberty appeased, Price 1s. 11
The RAPE, a Poem, Price 1s. 12 The Prophecy of Liberty, a Pastoral, Price 1s.
13 A Perspective View of the Complexion of some late Elections, Price ^s. 14
The Extraordinary North Briton, No. 1, 2, 3, Price 3d each. 15 The Englishman,
No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. Price 3d each.

