De^^^^aire (...)
1695.

From an original Painting in the possession of the Duke of W^r^^n^er.

(...) Pinx.
^lipar^ sculp ^ Paris


CHRONOLOGY: OR, A CONCISE VIEW OF THE Annals of England.

WHEREIN Every particular Occurrence, from the Descent of Julius Caesar, to the
present Time, met with in different Historians, is accurately and
alphabetically recorded, with the Date affixed:

Also, an exact Chronology of the Lives of the most eminent Men, in all Ages of
the World.

To which is added, A PLAN of the SAXON HEPTARCHY; By which means, the various
Successions of different Kings may be seen at one View, and the Time of each
particular Event immediately found, without the Trouble of recurring to the
voluminous Pages of History.

Useful to all who are desirous of being acquainted with their own Country.

BY JOHN TRUSLER, CLER.

LONDON: Sold by J. Almon, opposite Burlington-House, Piccadilly*

1769. [Pr. 1 s. 6 d.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS several Additions occurred to the Author, after the printing of the first
sheet, he has given them by way of ADDENDA.

The Events of different Reigns may be regularly seen, by turning to the
respective Kings, one after the other.

A CHRONOLOGICAL REMARK, Necessary to be observed by all Readers of HISTORY.
GREEK Authors always date from the Creation of the World. They reckon, to the
first Year of the Christian Era, 5503; so that, when we meet in them the Dates
of any Events since the Birth of our Savior, we need only subtract 5508, to
have, in the Remainder, the Year of the common Era. Thus, according to the
Greek Historians, the first Council of Nice was held in the Year 5833; subtract
5508, and there remains 325, the Year of Christ in which that Council was
assembled.

In like manner, when Events are dated by the Years of Rome, we need only
subtract 753, to have, in the Remainder, the common Years. For example,
Tiberius died in the Year of Rome 790; from 790, take 753, and the Remainder,
37, is the Year of Christ in which that Prince's Death happened.

A CONCISE VIEW OF THE Annals of England.
A.
ADRIAN, the Emperor, visited Britain, and built a strong rampart between Tyne
and the frith of Solway, about the year 78. Aella, came over from Germany, and
established the kingdom of South Saxony in 477, and was thus first king of
Sussex; died in 519. Alban's, St. the monastery built there, by Offa, King of
Mercia, who began his reign in 775. Alf helm murdered, by order of Edric, Duke
of Mercia, in 1009. Alfred IV. son of Ethelwolf, born in 849, at W^ntage, in
Berkshire; came to the crown of England at 22 years of age, in 871; took London
from the Danes, besieged Rochester, and drove them to their ships, in 882;
formed a body of laws, and died, in 900; and was succeeded by his second son,
Edward. Alfred, son of Ethelred II. his eyes were put out by Earl Godwin, and
600 of his train murdered at Guildford, in 1036; he died soon after, in the
monastery at Ely. Amboyna, the massacre of, 1623. Ambrosius Aurelius chosen
King of the Britons, in 465, and crowned at Stonehenge. America first
discovered, by John Cabot, a Venetian, 1498; settled in James I.'s reign. Anne,
Queen to Richard II. died, and was buried August 3, 1394, at Westminster. Anne
Bulleyn, Henry VIII.'s second wife, beheaded May 14, 1536, aged 29. Anne, James
I.'s Queen, died March 3, 1619, aged 44. Anne, Queen, born Feb. 6, 1665;
married to the Prince of Denmark, 1684; began to reign March 8, 1702; died
August 1, 1714, aged 49; and was succeeded by her cousin, George, Elector of
Hanover. Anselm made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1093, died in 1109. Apparitors
first instituted, about the year 1234. Argyl, Earl of, executed at Edinburgh,
1685. Armada, the Spanish, arrived in the channel, July 19, 1588, but broken by
a storm. Arthur, Henry VII.'s eldest son, died April 2, 1500, in the castle of
Ludlow, Shropshire. Arthur, King, first made his appearance, in 465. Ascue,
Ann, burnt for heresy, 1546. Ashdovn, battle at, between Canute and Edmund, in
1016; church built, in 1020. Athelstan made King of Kent, by Ethelwolf, in 848;
died about 853. Athelstan crowned King of England at Kingston, in 925; invaded
Scotland, and brought Constantine, its King, to subjection, in 936; reduced the
Welsh in 939; and Exeter and Scilly in 940; died at Gloucester, in 941; and was
succeeded by his brother, Edmund. Augustine, St. sent by Pope Gregory, to
convert the Britons, landed in the isle of Thanet, in 597; and was, soon after,
made the first Archbishop of Canterbury; died in 604.
B.
BACON, Sir Nicholas, made keeper of the great s^al, 1559. Bacon, Sir Frances,
made keeper of the great seal, March 7, 1617; died in 1626, aged 65. Bath
burnt, in 1117. Battle of Bovines, 1214. Battle of Jews, May 14, 1264. Battle
of Evesnam, Aug. 4, 1265. Battle of Bannockburn, June 25, 1314. Battle of
Hairdon-hill, near Berwic, where 30,000 of the Scotch were slain, and only 15
English, July 19, 1333. Battle of Crecy, Aug. 26, 1346. Battle of Durham, when
David, King of Scots, was taken prisoner, Oct. 17, 1346. Battle of Poictiers,
Sept. 19, 1356, when the King of France and his son were taken prisoners.
Battle of Shrewsbury, July 21, 1403. Battle of Azincour, Oct. 25, 1415. Battle
of Verneuil, Aug. 27, 1424. Battle of St. Alban's, May 22, 1455. Battle of
Bloreheath, Sept. 23, 1459. Battle of Northampton, July 10, 1460. Battle of
Wakefield, Dec. 24, 1460. Battle of Touton, March 29, 1461. Battle of Hexham,
May 15, 1464. Battle of Banbury, July 26, 1469. Battle of Barnet, April 14,
1471. Battle of Tewksbury, May 4, ditto. Battle of Bosworth, Aug. 22, 1485.
Battle of Stoke, June 6, 1487. Battle of Blackheath, June 22, 1497. Battle of
Floudon, Sept. 9, 1513, when James IV. King of Scots, was killed. Battle of
Solway, Nov. 24, 1542. Battle of Pinkey, Sept. 10, 1547. Battle of St. Quintin,
Aug. 10. 1557. Battle of Edgehill, Oct. 23, 1642. Battle of Shatten, May 16,
1643. Battle of Lansdown, July 5, ditto. Battle of Round-away-^^wn, July 13,
ditto. Battle of Newbury, Sept. 20, ditto. Battle of Marston-more, July 2,
1644. Battle of Newbury, Oct. 27, ditto. Battle of Nas^by, June 1645. Battle of
Dunbar, Sept. 3, 1650. Battle of Bothwell-bridge, June 22, 1679. Battle of the
Boyne, June. 1690. Battle of Aghrim, July 12, 1690. Battle of R^milies,
Whitsunday 1706. Battle of O^^enard, July, 1708. Battle of Dumblain, Nov. 12,
1715. Battle of Dettingen, June 26, 1743. Battle of Fontenoy, April 30, 1744.
Battle of Preston-pans, Sept. 21, 1745. Battle of Falkirk, Jan. 17, 1746.
Battle of Culloden, April 16, 1746. Battle of Minden, July, 1757. Battle of
Resbach, Nov. 5, 1757. Beaton, Cardinal, assassinated in Scotland, 1547.
Becket, Thomas, Archdeacon of Canterbury, made Chancellor to Henry II. in 1155;
made Archbishop of Canterbury, in 1163; four impeachments laid against him by
the parliament, at Northampton, in 1164; retired to France that year; agreed
with Henry. July 22, in 1170; murdered in the church of Canterbury, Dec. 29,
1171. (...) ^urnt, in 1173; again, by John, in 1216. Bible, tra^sl^^^on of it
first allowed, 1539. (...) of, first passed, in 1277. (...), 1555. (...) the
Duke of Ormond, with an intent (...) at Tyburn, but was prevented, 1671.
Boadicea burnt London, and massacred 70,000 inhabitants; soon after, being
defeated by Suetonius, poisoned herself, in 59. Braddock, Gen, killed at Du
Quesne, July 9, 1755. Bread, first assize made, in 1202. Britons applied to
Rome, for aid against the Scots, and were refused, in 446; by the advice of
Vortigen, they invited over the Saxons, in 448. Buckingham, Duke of, beheaded,
Nov. 2, 1483, at Salisbury. Buckingham, Duke of, beheaded, May 13, 1521.
Buckingham, Duke of, killed at Portsmouth, by Felton, Aug. 23, 1628. Burgundy,
Duke of, assassinated, by order of the Dauphin, 1419. Byng, Admiral, condemned,
and shot at Spithead, March 14, 1757.
C.
CADE, Jack, killed by Alexander Iden, sheriff of Kent, 1451. Calais, taken by
the English, Aug. 4, 1347; retaken by the French, in December, 1557. Cambridge
burnt to the ground by the Danes, in 1010; its university founded, in 915.
Cambden, the historian, died in 1623, aged 73. Cameron, Dr. Archibald, executed
at Tyburn, 1753. Canute, first Danish king of England, invaded this country, in
1015; was chosen King by the clergy, at Southampton 1016; fought a single
combat with Edmund Ironside, on an island in the river Severn, who divided the
kingdom with him; began to reign alone, in 1017; banished Edmund's sons, ditto;
made alliance with Normandy, and married Emma, Ethelred's widow, in 1018; in
1028, he made a voyage to Denmark, attacked Norway, and took possession of the
crown; died at Shastesbury, in 1036, was buried at Winchester, and was
succeeded by his second son, Harold. (...) defeated by Offorius Scapula, a
Roman ge^^^^^, in 50. C^^ew, Sir Alexander, beheaded on Tower Hill, Dec. 23,
1645. Carlisle fortified, in 1093. Caroline, Queen to George II. died of a
mortification in the bowels, Nov. 20, 1737; aged 54. Catherine, Queen of Henry
V. died the beginning of 1437. Catherine, Henry VIII.'s first wife, died at
Kimbolton, Jan. 6, 1536, aged 52. Catherine Howard, Henry VIII.'s fourth wife,
beheaded on Tower Hill, with Lady Rochfort, Feb. 12, 1542. Catherine Par, Henry
VIII.'s fifth wife, died the beginning of 1548. Ceodwalla, King of Wessex,
subdued the kingdom of Sussex, and annexed it to his dominions, in 686. Cerdic,
with his son Kenric, arrived in Britain in 495; defeated and killed Nazanleod,
a British Prince, in 508; befieged Bath, in 520; crowned King of Wessex, at
Winchester, where he resided, in 531; died in 534. Chamber, John a, the rebel,
executed, 1488. Charles I. born 1600; set out for Madrid, to fetch his wife,
March 7, 1623; began to reign, March 27, 1625; married Henrietta, daughter of
France, about the same time; crowned, Feb. 2, 1626; retired to York, 1642;
raised his standard first at Nottingham, Aug 22, following; traveled in
disguise of a servant, and put himself into the hands of the Scotch at Newark,
May 5, 1646; seized by one Joyce, at Holmby, June 3, 1647; escaped from
Hampton Court, and retreated to the isle of Wight, November, following; made
close prisoner at Carisbrook Castle, soon after set at liberty in the isle of
Wight, July 29, 1648; close confined in Hurst castle, Dec. 1, following;
removed to Windsor, Dec. 23; to St. James's house, Jan. 10, 1649; brought to
trial the next day; condemned the 27th; beheaded at Whitehall be 30th, aged 48;
and was buried in St. George's chapel, Windsor. Charles II. born May 29, 1630;
escaped from St. James's, April 23, 1648; landed in Scotland, 1650; crowned at
Scone, Jan. 1, 1651; defeated at the battle of Worcester, Sept 3, 1651, when he
made his escape, under the disguise of a wood-man, and secreted himself in an
oak; restored to his crown, May 29, 1660; crowned April 23, 1661; married
Catherine, the infanta of Portugal, May 21, 1662; died Feb. 6, 1685, aged 54,
of an apoplexy, and was succeeded by his brother James, Duke of York. Chaucer
died in the year 1400. Chichester built by Cissa, King of Sussex; Vide Cissa;
burnt, in 1113. Churches first begun to be built in 696. Cissa, King of Sussex,
in 519; died in 590. Clarence, Duke of, brother to Edward IV. murdered in the
Tower, 1478. Clarendon, Earl of, banished, Nov. 12, 1667. Claudius Caesar
landed in Britain, in August, 43. Cowley lived during the interregnum. Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, burnt, March 21, 1556. Cromwell, Oliver, born, about
1599, at Huntingdon; went over to Ireland with his army, May, 1649; returned,
1650; made Protector for life, Dec. 12, 1653; was near being killed, by falling
from a coach-box, October, 1654; elected king, but refused the title, March 25,
1657; died of the gout in his stomach, at Whitehall, Sept. 3, 1658, leavhis
son, Richard, his successor. Cromwell, Richard, proclaimed Protector, Sept. 3,
1658; deposed, April 22, 1659. Cruisad^ begun in 1096. Curfew bell established
by William the Conqueror, in 1088.
D.
DANEGELT, a land tax, first established by Fthelred II. in 1002; abolished by
Stephen, in 1136. Danes, their first descent upon England, landing at Portland,
in 787; their second, in Northumberland, in 794. when they were repelled, and
perished by shipwreck; they landed on Shepey island, in 832; again in Cornwall,
and defeated by Egbert, in 836; again at Charmouth, and defeated Ethelwol, in
840; landed at the mouth of the Thames, from 350 ships, and took Canterbury,
and London, in 851; subdued by Ethelwolf, at Okely in Surry, in 853; invaded
Northumberland, and seized York, in 867; defeated King Ethelred, and his
brether Alfred, at Basing and Merton, in 871; surprised Warham castle, and took
Exeter, in 876; took Chippenham, in 877; 1200 of them killed by O^un, Earl of
Devonshire, in 878; Alfred entered into treaty with them, in 879; their fleet
to^ally destroyed at Appledore, by King Alfred, in 894; invaded Anglesey, in
900; submitted to Edward the elder, in 921; invaded Dorsetshire, in 982; landed
again in Essex, in 991, and were bribed to de^art the kingdom; their ficet
defeated. in 992; fresh invasions by them, in 998; numbers of them massacred,
by order of Ethelred II. Nov. 13, 1^02; continued their ravages, and defeated
the English at Ipswich, in 1010; took Canterbury, and put nine out of ten of
the inhabitants to death, in 1011; settled in Scotland, in 1020; expelled
England, in 1041; landed again at Sandwich, in 1047, and carried off great
plunder to Flanders; joined the Northumbrians, burnt York, and slew 3000
Normans, in 1069; invaded England again, but brib^^ by William, to depart, in
1074. Darnley, Lord, husband to Mary. Queen of Scots, murdered, by being blown
up, Feb. 10, 1567. Dartmouth burnt by the French, 1377. David, Prince of Wales,
taken prisoner, condemned at Shrewsbury, and there drawn, hanged, and
quartered, 128^. Death, Capt. killed in a sea engagement, Dec. 23, 1757.
Denham, Sir John, lived during the interregnum. Denmark, Prince George of, died
of an asthma and dropsy, Oct, 28, 1708, Vide Queen Anne. Derwentwater, Earl of,
and Lord Kenmuir, beheaded on Tower Hill, Feb. 24, 1716. Devizes castle,
belonging to the Bishop of Salisbury, besieged in 1139, by Stephen.
Doomesday-book finished, after six years labor, in 1085. Drake, Sir Francis,
set sail for his voyage round the world, 1577; died of a bloody flux, Jan. 28,
1595. Dudley, Lord Guildford, beheaded on Tower Hill, Feb. 12, 1554. Duncan,
King of Scotland, murdered by Macbeth, in 1054. Dunkark taken by the English,
June 24, 1658; sold to the French, for 500,000l. Oct. 17, 1662. Dunstan, St.
made Archbishop of Canterbury, in 964; died in 988.
E.
EDGAR began his reign in 959, quite a youth; obliged eight of his tributary
princes to row him in a barge on the river Dee, in 961; destroyed the wolves,
with which the country was overrun, by demanding of the Welsh a yearly tribute
of wolves heads; betrayed by Ethelwold, who married Elfrida, in 971; laid waste
the isle of Thanet; was crowned at Axminster, in 973; died in 975, aged 33, and
was succeeded by his son, Edward. Edgar, King of Scotland, brother-in-law to
Henry I. died in 1107. Edinburgh burnt, 1544. Edmund began to reign, at
eighteen, in 941; was killed by a ruffian, in 946; and succeeded by his
brother, Edred. Edmund Ironside married the widow of Sigefert, a Danish
nobleman, who was put to death in 1015; began his reign in 1016, at
twenty-seven years of age, and was murdered at Oxford in 1017, and succeeded by
Canute. Edred began his reign in 946; died in 955, and was succeeded by his
nephew, Edwy, son to King Edmund. Edward the elder began his reign in 900; died
in 925; and was succeeded by his natural son Athelstan. Edward the martyr began
his reign in 975, at fifteen years of age; four years afterward was stabbed by
order of his stepmother, Elfrida, whom, as he was hunting, he called to see,
and was succeeded by his brother-in-law, Ethelred. Edward the Confessor began
his reign in 1041; was crowned in 1042; married Editha, daughter of Godwin,
1043; died Jan. 5, 1066, aged 65; was buried in Westminster abbey, and
succeeded by Harold II. the son of Godwin. Edward I. born June 16, 1239;
married Eleanor, Princess of Castile, in 1255; succeeded to the crown, Nov. 16,
1272; wounded in the holy land, with a poisonous dagger, but recovered, the
same year; landed in England, July 25, 1274; crowned at Westminster, 19th of
August following, with his queen; went to France, and did homage to the King of
France, 1279; went to France the summer 1286; returned August, 1289; married
Margaret, sister to the King of France, Sept. 12, 1299; died of a flux at Burgh
upon the sands, July 7, 1307, aged 69, was buried at Westminster, and succeeded
by his fourth son, Edward. Edward II. born at Carnarvon, in Wales, April 25,
1284; he was the first Prince of Wales; ascended the throne, July 7, 1307;
married Isabella, daughter of the King of France, in 1308; was obliged, by the
Barons, to sign a commission, by which he vested the government of the kingdom
in twelve persons, March 16, 1308; went to Bulloign on a pilgrimage, Dec. 13,
1213; dethroned, Jan. 13, 1327; and was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward. He
was murdered, in a most inhuman manner, at Berkeley castle, Sept. 21,
following, and buried in St. Peter's, in Gloucester. Edward III. born at
Windsor, Nov. 15. 1312; succeeded to the crown, Jan. 13, 1327; crowned at
Westminster, Feb. 1, the same year; married Philippa, daughter of the Earl of
Hainault, Jan. 24, 1328; was chosen Emperor of Germany, Aug. 1348; fought in
single combat with a Frenchman at Calais, and conquered, Jan. 1, 1349; died of
a cingle, at Richmond, June 21, 1377, aged 64, and was succeeded by his
grandson, Richard, son to Edward, the black prince. Edward, the black Prince,
born June 15, 1330; brought the King of France prisoner to England, from the
battle of Poictiers, May 24, 1357; made an expedition into Castile, 1367; died,
June 8, 1376. Edward IV. born, 1443; elected King, March 5, 1461; crowned, June
29, 1461; married Lady Elizabeth Gray, widow of Sir John Gray, at Grafton, in
Buckinghamshire, 1464; taken prisoner by the Earl of Warwick, March, 1470, but
escaped soon afterward; expelled the kingdom, 1470; returned, March 25, 1471,
and restored; died, April 9, 1482, at Westminster, aged 41, and was succeeded
by his son, Edward. Edward, Prince. son to Henry VI. murdered, May 21, 1471.
Edward V. born, 1470; succeeded to the crown, April 9, 1483; conveyed to the
Tower, May, 1483; deposed, June 20, following, and, with the Duke of York, his
brother, smothered in the Tower soon after, leaving his uncle, Richard,
successor to the throne. Edward VI. born, Oct. 12, 1537; succeeded to the
throne, Jan 28, 1547; crowned, Feb. 20, being Shrove Sunday following; died of
a consumption at Greenwich, July 6, 1553, and was succeeded by his sister,
Mary. Edwy began his reign, at seventeen years of age, in 955; died in 959, and
was succeeded by his brother, Edgar. Egbert, the father of the English
monarchy, began his reign, as King of Wessex, in 800; conquered Mercia, in 828;
became Sovereign of all England, south of the Humber, in 829; drove the Danes
out of Britain, 836; died, 838, and was succeeded by his son, Ethelwolf.
Eleanor, Queen of Henry II. died in 1204. Eleanor, Edward I.'s Queen, died of a
fever, on her journey to Scotland, at Herdby, in Lincolnshire, 1260; and was
buried at Westminster. Eleanor, Henry III.'s Queen, died in a monastery at
Ambresbury, where she had retired, about Midsummer, 1292. Elizabeth, Queen to
Henry VII. died in childbed, Feb. 11, 1503. Elizabeth, Queen, born, Sept. 7,
1533; sent prisoner to the Tower, 1554; began to reign, Nov. 17, 1558; crowned
at Westminster, Jan. 15, 1559; died at Richmond, March 24, 1603, aged 70, and
was succeeded by her third cousin, James V. of Scotland. Emma, Queen, died in
1052. Vide Ethelred, Canute. Empson beheaded on Tower Hill, October, 1509.
England ravaged by the Picts and Scots, in 448; divided into counties and
hundreds, in 886; invaded by the Scots, who were defeated by Athelstan, in 921;
invaded by the Welsh, in 984; invaded by Sweyn, King of Denmark, in 1003;
invaded again by Sweyn, in 1013, and was almost subdued by him; invaded by
Canute, in 1015; invaded by Godwin, in 1052; conquered by William of Normandy,
in 1066; invaded by the Irish, who defeated the English, 1069; Irish landed
again, and were defeated, in 1070; invaded by Malcolm of Scotland, who burnt
several churches, etc. in 1071; again, in 1091; again, in 1093, when Malcolm
and his son were killed at Alnwick; invaded by Robert Duke of Normandy, in
1101; invaded by David of Scotland, in 1136; again, by the Welsh, the same
year, with success; invaded by the Scots, in 1173; put under an interdict by
the Pope, in 1206; interdict taken off, 1214; all in arms, in 1215; underwent a
reform, in 1258; invaded by the French, in 1416: invaded by Henry Duke of
Richmond, Aug. 7, 1485; invaded by Lambert Simnel, from Ireland, 1487. Vide
Danes, War, Peace, Rebellion. Essex, Earl of, Cromwell, beheaded on Tower Hill,
July 28, 1540. Essex, Earl of, beheaded in the Tower, Feb. 25, 1601. Ethelred
succeeded his brothers Ethelbert and Ethelbald, and died of a wound received in
battle against the Danes, in 871; and was succeeded by his brother, Alfred.
Ethelred II. anointed King, by Dunstan, at Kingston upon Thames, at twelve
years of age, in 979; married Emma, sister to Richard II. Duke of Normandy, in
1001; fled from King Sweyn, into Normandy, in 1013; returned soon after, when
Sweyn was dead; died in 1016, on the feast of St. George; was buried in St.
Paul's, London, and succeeded by his son, Edmund Ironside. Ethelwolf began to
reign, in 838; died in 859; and left his kingdom to his two sons, Ethelbald and
Ethelbert. Evremond, St. died, Sept. 9, 1703, aged 90. Exchequer, court of,
instituted, in 1074. Exeter taken by Sweyn, King of Denmark, and destroyed, in
1003; rebelled in 1067; and was taken by William the Conqueror. Exeter, Marquis
of, Lord Montague, and Sir Nicholas Carew, beheaded, Dec. 31, 1538.
F.
FAIRFAX, the poet, lived in the reign of James I. Famine, in 976; another in
1005; another in 1087. Vide Remarkable Occurrences. Fenwick, Sir John, beheaded
on Tower Hill, early in 1697. Ferrars, Bp. of St. David's, burnt at Carmarthen,
March 30, 1555. Ferrers, Earl of, hanged at Tyburn, for murder, 1760. Feudal
law introduced, in 1070. Fielding, Henry, died, 1754, aged 47. Fisher, Bp. of
Rochester, beheaded, June 22, 1535. Fitzgerald, with five of his uncles, Irish
rebels, executed at Tyburn, Feb. 3, 1537. Forest, new, made, in 1081.
Frederick, Prince of Wales, arrived in England, Dec. 1729; died, March 30,
1751, aged 43.
G.
GALILEO died, 1642, aged 77. Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, died, Oct. 12,
1555. Garter, order of, instituted, in 1349; underwent some alteration, 1552.
Gaveston, favorite of Edward II. murdered July 1, 1312. Geofrey, Archdeacon of
Norwich, put to death, in 1210. George I. proclaimed, Aug. 1, 1714; landed at
Greenwich, Sept. 17; died in his journey, to Hanover, at Osnaburgh, Sunday,
June 11, 1727, of a paralytic disorder, aged 67, and was succeeded by his son,
George II. George II. ascended the throne, and was proclaimed, June 15, 1727;
died suddenly, Oct. 25, 1760; at Kensington, aged 77; buried, Nov. 10, at
Westminster. George III. born June 4, 1738; proclaimed, Oct. 26, 1760; married
Charlotte of Mecklenburgh, Sept. 7, 1761; crowned, Sept 22, 1761. Gibraltar
taken by Sir George Rooke, June 22, 1704. Gilpin, Bernard, died, March 4, 1583,
aged 65. Glassenbury, charter granted to the monks, exempting them from
episcopal jurisdiction, by Ina, King of Wessex, in 725. Glendower, Owen, died,
1409. Gloucester burnt, in 1102; again, in 1122. Gloucester, Duke of, uncle to
Richard II. smothered between two feather-beds, Feb. 28, 1397. Gloucester, Duke
of, Richard Plantagenet, brother to Edward IV. murdered Edward, Prince of
Wales, 1471; drowned the Duke of Clarence in a butt of malmsey, 1478; made
Protector of England, 1483; elected King, June 20, following. Vide Richard III.
Gloucester, Duke of, son to Queen Anne, died of a fever, July 29, 1700, aged
10. Godfrey, Sir Edmundbury, an active Justice of the peace against Papists,
murdered, Oct. 17, 1678. Godwin invaded England, in 1052; was tried for the
murder of Alfred, in ditto, and bought his pardon; was choked in protesting
his innocence at table with the King, in 1053. Greenland was discovered in the
reign of James I. Gregory, St. lived in the beginning of the third century.
Gray, Lady Jane, proclaimed Queen, July 9, 1553; beheaded in the Tower, Feb.
12, 1554, aged 17. Grotius, Hugo, died, 1645, aged 62. Guise, Duke of,
murdered, 1590. Gunpowder-plot, discovered, Nov. 5, 1605.
H.
HALE, Sir Matthew, died, Dec. 25, 1676, aged 66. Hales, Dr. Stephen, died, Jan
4, 1761. Hall, one of the murderers of the Duke of Gloucester, hanged at
Tyburn, in 1399. Hamilton, Duke of, and others, executed, 1649. Hamilton, Duke
of, and Lord Mohun, killed in a duel, in Hyde-park, 1712. Hampden killed at the
battle of Round-away, near Devizes, July 13, 1643. Handel died, April 14, 1759,
aged 75. Hardicanute, King of Denmark, began his reign in England, in 1039;
died at Lambeth, in 1041; was buried at New Winchester, and succeeded by
Edward, Ethelred's first son by Emma, Alfred's brother. Harfleur taken by the
English, Sept. 18, 1415. Harley, Mr. stabbed at the council board, by Guiscard,
early in 1711. Harold I. began his reign in 1036; died, April 14, 1039, and was
succeeded by his younger brother, Hardicanute, King of Denmark. Harold II.
began his reign, in 1066; defeated his brother Tosti, and the King of Norway,
who had invaded his dominions, at Standford, Sept. 25, in the same year; was
killed by the Normans at the battle of Hastings, Oct. 14, in the same year, and
was succeeded by William, Duke of Normandy, the Conqueror. Hastings burnt by
the French, 1377. Hastings, Lord, put to death in the Tower, June, 1483.
Havannah taken, Aug. 13, 1762. Hengist and Horsa, two Saxon brothers, landed in
the isle of Thanet, in 449. Henrietta, Charles I.'s Queen, died in France, Aug.
10, 1669. Henry I. crowned on Sunday, Aug. 5, 1100; made peace with his
brother, Robert, in 1101; invaded Normandy, in 1105; was attacked by Robert,
whom he defeated and took prisoner, in 1107, and sent to England; betrothed his
daughter Maude, to the Emperor of Germany, in 1109; challenged by Lewis of
France, in 1117; his son shipwrecked and lost, in 1120; in quiet possession of
Normandy, in 1129; surfeited himself eating lampreys, at Lions, near Roan, and,
six days after, died, Dec. 1, 1135, aged 68; his body was brought over to
England, and buried at Reading, in a monastery of his own founding; he was
succeeded by his nephew, Stephen, third son of his sister Adela, by the Earl of
Blois. Henry II. grandson of Henry I. succeeded to the throne, in 1154; arrived
in England, Dec. 8, and was, with his Queen, Eleanor, at London, crowned, the
19th; crowned again, at Lincoln, in 1158; again, at Worcester, in 1159; quelled
the rebellion at Maine, in 1166; had his son Henry crowned King of England, in
1170; invaded Ireland, and conquered it, in 1172; did penance at Becket's tomb,
July 8, 1174; took the King of Scotland prisoner, and obliged him to give him
up the independency of his crown, in 1175; named his son, John, King of
Ireland, in 1177; had, the same year, a criminal amor with Alice of France;
lost his son, Henry, in 1183, June 11; made a convention with Philip of France,
to go to the holy war, in 1188; died with grief at the altar, cursing his sons,
July 6, 1189, aged 57, and was succeeded by his third son, Richard. Henry III,
born, Oct. 1, 1207; crowned, at Gloucester, Oct. 28, 1216; was done homage to
by Alexander, King of Scotland, at Northampton, in 1218; crowned again, at
Westminster, after Christmas, 1219; married Eleanor, daughter of the Count of
Provence, Jan. 14, 1236; gave his daughter, Margaret, in marriage to the King
of Scots, in 1252; shut himself up in the Tower, for fear of his nobles, in
1261; taken prisoner, at Jews, May 14, 1264; wounded in the shoulder, at the
battle of Evesham, Aug 4, 1265; died with age, at St. Edmundsbury, Nov. 16,
1272, aged 64; and was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward. Henry IV. born in
1367; crowned, Oct. 13, 1399; was conspired against, Jan. 5, 1400; died in the
Jerusalem-chamber, Westminster, March 20, 1413, aged 45; was buried at
Canterbury, and succeeded by his son, Henry. Henry V. born in 1388; crowned,
April 9, 1413; married the Princess Catharine of France, May 30, 1420;
entrusted with the government of France, and declared heir to the crown, May
21, 1420; died of a fistula at Roan, Aug. 31, 1422, aged 33; was buried at
Westminster, and succeeded by his son, Henry. Henry VI. born at Windsor, 1422;
succeeded to the throne, Aug. 31, 1422; proclaimed King of France, the same
year; crowned at Westminster, Nov. 6, 1429; crowned at Paris, Dec. 17, 1430;
married to Margaret, daughter of France, April 22, 1445; taken prisoner at the
battle of St. Alban's, by the Duke of York, May 22, 1455; deposed by his fourth
cousin, Edward IV. March 5, 1461, and fled to Scotland; taken prisoner in
Lancashire, 1463; restored to his throne, 1470; taken prisoner again by Edward,
April 11, 1471; died in the Tower the May following, aged 49. Henry VII.
succeeded to the throne, Aug. 22, 1485; crowned, Oct. 30, following; married
Elizabeth, daughter of Edward IV. Jan. 18, 1486; crowned his Queen, Nov. 25,
1487; married his eldest daughter, Margaret, to James IV. of Scotland; died of
a consumption, at Richmond, April 22, 1509, aged 51, and was succeeded by his
second son, Henry. Henry VIII. born, June 28, 1491; began to reign, April 22,
1509; married his brother's wife, Catherine, infanta of Spain, June 3, 1509;
crowned June 24, following; received the title of Defender of the Faith, 1521;
styled, the Head of the Church, 1531; divorced Queen Catherine, and married
Anne Bulleyn, May 23, 1533; excommunicated by Pope Paul, Aug. 30, 1535; put
Anne to death, and married Jane Seymour, May 20, 1536; married Anne of Cleves,
Jan. 6, 1539; divorced her, July 10, 1540; married Catherine Howard, Aug. 8,
following; put her to death, Feb. 12, 1542; married Catherine Par, July 12,
1543; died, Jan. 18, 1547, aged 54; was buried at Windsor, and succeeded by his
son, Edward. Henry III. King of France, murdered by a monk, Aug. 1, 1589.
Henry, Prince of Wales, eldest son of James I. died of a looseness, Nov. 6,
1612, aged 18. Hertfort rebuilt, in 913. Hippocrates died, 361 before Christ,
aged 98. Hobbes, Thomas, died 1679, aged 90. Hogarth, William, died, 1764, aged
66. Homer lived about 915 before Christ. Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, burnt in
Smithfield, Feb. 4, 1555. Horace born at Venusium, Dec. 8, in 65 before Christ;
died in 8 before Christ. Horsa ( Vide Hengist) slain by Vortimer, in 455.
Howard, Sir Edward, attacked Prejeant, a French admiral, off Breast, and was
defeated, April 25, 1513. Hugh de Beauvois, with 40,000 foreigners, coming to
the assistance of John, perished in a storm, as he set out from Calais, in
1215. Huguenots, massacre of them at Paris, Aug. 24, 1572. Huss, John, the
martyr, burnt, 1415.
I.
IDOLATRY first abolished from Kent, by Ercombert, who began his reign in 640.
Ignatius made a bishop by St. Peter and Paul, died in 107. Invasion, Vide
England. Ireland conquered by Henry II. 1172. Irenaeus died in 202, aged 82.
Isaiah, the prophet, put to death, 696 before Christ.
J.
JAMAICA taken, 1655. James, St. died in 69. James I. King of Scotland,
murdered, the beginning of the year 1437. James III. of Scotland killed by his
nobility, 1487. James I. born at Edinburgh, June 19, 1566; crowned King of
Scotland, August, 1567; married the Princess of Denmark, 1589; succeeded to the
crown of England, March 24, 1603; lost his Queen, March 3, 1619; died of an
ague, March 27, 1625, aged 58, and was succeeded by his second son, Charles.
James II. born, Oct. 30, 1633; fled from his palace, Dec. 12, 1688; was seized
soon after at Feversham, and brought back to Whitehall; lest England, Dec. 23,
following; landed with an army at Kinsale, in Ireland, March 22, 1689; returned
to France, June, 1690; died at St. Germains, Sept. 16, 1701. Jane Seymour,
Henry VIII.'s wife, died in childbed, October, 1538. Jeremiah, the prophet,
died, about 577 before Christ. Jerome of Prague burnt, 1415. Jerusalem taken by
Robert, Duke of Normandy, who was there elected King of it, in 1100. Jesus
Christ was born, Monday, Dec. 25, in the year of Rome, 752, four years before
the common era. Jews massacred, in 1189; numbers executed for clipping, 1278;
totally expelled England, 1290. Joan de Arc, the maid of Orleans, burnt for a
witch, June 14, 1431. Joan of Navarre, Henry IV.'s widow, died, 1437. John, St.
died in 99, aged 91. John the Baptist died in 32. John, the youngest son of
Henry I. was born at Oxford, in 1166; crowned on Ascension-day, May 27, 1199;
divorced his wife Avisa, and married. Isabella, daughter of the Count of
Angoselme; went to Paris, in 1201; besieged the castle of Mirabel, and took his
nephew, Arthur, prisoner, in August, 1203, whom he murdered; the same year, he
was expelled the French provinces, and afterward recrowned in England;
imprisoned his Queen, in 1208; excommunicated, in 1209; landed in Ireland, June
8, 1210; surrendered his crown to Pandolf, the Pope's legate, May 25, 1213;
absolved, July 20, following; lost his treasure and baggage, as he passed
through the marshes at Lynn, in 1216; died of a fever, owing to drinking new
ale, and eating peaches, at Newark castle, Oct. 18, 1216, and was succeeded by
his son, Henry. Johnson, Ben, died in 1638, aged 63, possessed of a pension of
100 pounds. Jones, Inigo, died, 1647. Julius Caesar born, July 10, in 100
before Christ; invaded Britain, landing at Deal, Aug. 26, in 55 before Christ.
Julius Agricolo, totally subdued Britain, in 78. Justin, St. died in 163, aged
64. Juvenal born in 45; died, in 127.
K.
KENT, Earl of, brother to Edward II. beheaded, March 9, 1330. Kent, the maid
of, executed at Tyburn, 1534. Kilmarnock, Lord, and Lord Balmerino, beheaded on
Tower Hill, August, 1746. Kneller, Sir Godfrey, died, 1723, aged 76. Knolles,
Sir Robert, died, 1407.
L.
LAMBERT burnt in Smithfield, in 1538. Lambeth college and chapel founded by
Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 1196. Lancaster, Plantagenet,
Earl of, beheaded at Pomfret, March 23, 1322. Langton made Archbishop of
Canterbury, 1206. Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, burnt at Oxford, Oct. 16, 1555.
Laud made Archbishop of Canterbury, 1633; beheaded, Jan. 10, 1645, aged 71.
Leland, Dr. died, Jan. 16, 1766, aged 75. Lenox, Earl of, Regent of Scotland,
murdered, 1571. Lent, the fast of, first established in Kent, by Ercombert, who
began his reign in 640. Lewis, Philip of France's son, laid claim to the crown
of England, and landed with an army, in the isle of Thanet, May 23, 1216.
Lincoln burnt in 1123; its church thrown down by an earthquake, in 1185. Lock,
Mr. died, Oct. 28, 1704, aged 72. London repaired by Alfred, in 885; burnt to
the ground, about 982; nearly destroyed by fire, in 1077; again, in 1130.
London Bridge built, about 1098. Londonderry besieged, April 20, 1689.
Longbeard, William Fitz-Osbert, a lawyer, so called, a notorious ruffian,
hanged at Tyburn, in 1197. Louis XV. King of France, stabbed by Damien, but not
mortally, Jan. 5, 1757. Louisburgh taken, July 27, 1757. Lovat, Lord, beheaded
on Tower Hill, 1746. Lucan born at Corduba, in Spain, Nov. 11, 37; condemned
and bled to death in a hot bath, April 30, 64. Lucretius born at Rome in 95
before Christ; put an end to his life in a raging fit, in 52 before Christ.
Luke, St. died about the year 70, aged 80. Luther, Martin, appeared, 1518.
M.
MACHIAVEL died, 1529. Magna Charta granted by King John, June 19, 1215. Maldon
rebuilt in 919. Manilla taken, July 27, 1757. Manning, Cromwell's spy, put to
death abroad, by order of Charles II. 1655. Margaret, Queen to Henry VI. with
her son, taken prisoner at the battle of Tewkesbury, May 4, 1471. Mark, St.
died in 68. Marlborough, John Duke of, died 1722, aged 72. Martial born at
Bilboa, in 48; died in 109. Marvel, Andrew, lived in Charles II. and James I.'s
reign. Mary, Queen, born, 1516; proclaimed, July 19, 1553; crowned, Sept. 30,
following; married Philip, Prince of Spain, Jan. 19, 1554; died of a fever and
dropsy, Nov. 17, 1558, aged 41, and was succeeded by her sister, Elizabeth.
Mary, Queen of Scots, fled to England, May 16, 1568; imprisoned in Tutbury
castle, January, 1569; removed to Fotheringay, 1586; there beheaded, Feb. 8,
aged 44. Mary, William's Queen, born, April 30, 1662; proclaimed, with her
husband, Queen of England, Feb. 13, 1689, Vide William III.; died of the
smallpox, Dec. 28, 1694, aged 32, and was buried at Westminster. Massacre of
the Irish, 1641; of Glencoe, February, 1690. Matilda, Stephen's Queen, was
crowned on Easterday, March 22, 1136; died, May 3, 1151, at Henningham-castle,
in Essex, and was buried in a monastery, at Feversham, in Kent. Matthew, St.
died in 65. Maude, daughter of Henry I. married to Henry IV. Emperor of
Germany, in 1109; her right to succeed her father sworn to by the English,
1127; married to the Earl of Anjou, the same year; was set aside from the
succession, in 1136; landed in England, and claimed her right to the crown, in
September, 1139; was crowned, but, soon after, defeated at Winchester, in 1141;
escaped to Gloucester, in a bier; fled from a window of Oxford castle, by a
rope, in the winter, 1142; retired to France, in Lent, 1147; came to England,
and made a lasting peace with Stephen, in 1153; died abroad, Sept. 10, 1167.
Maximilian, the Emperor, enlisted as a subject and Captain, under Henry VIII.
when he invaded France in 1513. Merlin, the prophet, lived in 477. Milton died
of the gout, 1674, aged 68, and was buried at St. Giles, Cripplegate. Minorca
conquered by General Stanhope, August, 1708; surrendered to the French, June,
1756. Moliere died, 1672. Monk, General, arbiter of England's fate, 1659; made
Duke of Albemarle, July 12, 1660. Monmouth, Duke of, invaded England, June 11,
1685; defeated, near Bridgewater, July 5; beheaded, July 15, following, aged
35. Montaigne died, 1592, aged 58. Montrose, Marquis of, executed at Edinburgh,
May 21, 1650, aged 37. More, Sir Thomas, beheaded, July 6, 1535, aged 52.
Mortality, a great one, among men, cattle, and fowls, in 1111. Mortimer, Roger,
Earl of March, hanged at Tyburn, Nov. 29, 1330. Mortmain-act was passed,
November, 1279. Murray, Earl of, Regent of Scotland, assassinated, Jan. 23,
1570.
N.
NEWCASTLE on Tyne, founded by Robert, son to William the Conqueror, in 1081;
burnt to the ground, by accident, 1349. Newcastle, Duke of, chosen Chancellor
of the university of Cambridge, 1748. Newton, Sir Isaac, born, Dec. 25, 1642;
died, March 20, 1726. Norfolk, Duke of, beheaded, 1547. Norfolk, Duke of,
beheaded on Tower Hill, May 8, 1572. Normandy, Vide Rollo, invaded on all
hands, in 1117. Normans massacred at Durham, in 1069. Northumberland, Duke of,
beheaded on Tower Hill, Aug. 22, 1553. Northumberland, Earl of, beheaded at
York, 1572. Norwich burnt and destroyed, by Sweyn, King of Denmark, in 1004.
Nottingham burnt to ashes, in 1140.
O.
OLDCASTLE, Sir John, hanged and burnt in St. Giles's parish, without old
Temple Bar, 1418. Oldham, Mr. John, died, Dec. 9, 1683, aged 30. Orange, Prince
of, created Stadtholder, July 3, 1672; married the Princess Mary of England,
Nov. 4, 1677; landed at Torbay, in England, with an army, Nov. 5, 1688;
declared King of England, Feb. 13, 1689. Vide William III. Origin died in 253,
aged 69. Orleans, the siege of, May, 1428. Overbury, Sir Thomas, poisoned by an
envenomed glyster, in the Tower, Sept. 16, 1613. Ovid born at Sulmo, near Rome,
in 43 before Christ; died at Pontus, in banishment, in 15, aged 58. Oxford
university founded by Alfred, in 886.
P.
PARLIAMENT, the first, in King John's reign; the epoch of the house of
commons, Jan. 20, 1265; the first British one met, Oct. 23, 1707. Pascal Blaise
died, 1662, aged 38. Paul, St. died, in 67. Paul's, St. London, was built by
Ethelbert, King of Kent, on the foundation of an old temple of Diana, in 596;
burnt, in 964; rebuilt and consecrated, in 1240, having been 150 years
building; rebuilt, having been burnt down, 1631. Peace between England and
Scotland, in 1091; between England and France, in 1113; between England and
Scotland, in 1139; between England and France, in 1196, etc. Vide War.
Pembroke, Earl of, chosen Protector of England, Nov. 11, 1216; died in May
following, and was buried in the Temple church, London. Persius Flaccus born,
Dec. 4, 42; died, aged 29. Peter, St. died, in 67. Peterborough burnt, in 1117.
Phaedrus born in 47 before Christ; died in 31. Philip-Augustus, King of France,
died, in 1223. Philippa, Queen of England, died at Windsor, Aug. 15, 1369, and
was buried at Westminster. Philips, John, died of au asthma, Feb. 15, 1708,
aged 32, and was buried at Hereford. Physicians, college of, founded, 1518.
Pindar died, 435 before Christ, aged 85. Plantagenet, Geofrey, Earl of Anjou,
married the Empress, Maud, in 1127; invaded Normandy in 1137. Plato died, 348
before Christ, aged 80, Plutarch died in 119. Plymouth burnt by the French,
1377. Pole, Cardinal, died, Nov. 17, 1558. Pomfret, Rev. Mr. died young, in
1709. Pope, Alexander, died, 1744, aged 55. Porteous, Capt. put to death by the
mob, at Edinburgh, Sept. 7, 1736. Portobello taken by Admiral Vernon, 1740.
Portsmouth burnt, in 1265; again, by the French, 1377. Portugal, King of, shot
at, Sept. 3, 1758. Prior, Matthew, died, Sept. 18, 1721, aged 56. Prynne tried
by the court of Star Chamber, 1633. Puffendorf died, 1694, aged 62. Pulteney,
William, Esquire. struck out of the list of Privy Counselors, July 1, 1731.
Pythagoras died, 497 before Christ.
Q.
QUEBEC taken, 1759. Quintilian died, about 95.
R.
RACINE died, 1699, aged 59. Raleigh, Sir Walter, beheaded in Old Palaceyard,
Westminster, Oct. 29, 1617, aged 77. Rapin died, 1687, aged 63. Ratcliffe, Mr.
beheaded, Dec. 8, 1746. Ravaillac, the French King murdered by him, May 3,
1610. Rebellion of the English against William Rufus, in favor of his brother,
Robert, in 1088; extinguished in 1090. Rebellion of the Welsh, who defeated the
Normans and English, in 1095. Rebellion of the English, under Wat Tyler, June
12, 1381. Rebellion of the Barons, 1387. Rebellion of the English and Welsh,
1400. Rebellion of Jack Cade, in favor of the Duke of York, June 1, 1450.
Rebellion of the English, in 1469. Rebellion of ditto, 1536. Rebellion of
ditto, 1549. Rebellion Wiat's, 1554. Rebellion in the north, 1569. Rebellion of
the Irish, under Tyrone, 1599. Rebellion of the Scotch, 1639. Rebellion of the
Irish, 1641. Rebellion of the Scotch, 1666. Rebellion under Monmouth, June 11,
1685. Rebellion of the Scotch, under the Pretender, 1715. Rebellion ditto,
1745. Reformation begun, 1530; completed, 1547. Rhees, the last King of South
Wales, killed, in 1094. Richard I. was born at Oxford, in 1157; crowned at
London, Sept. 3, 1189; sat out on the cruisade, and joined Philip of France on
the plains of Vezelay, on June 29, 1190; took Messina, the latter end of the
year; married Berengaria, daughter of the King of Navarre, she being with him,
May 12, 1191; defeated the Cyprians, 1191; taken prisoner near Vienna, on his
return home, Dec. 20, 1192, by the Duke of Austria; ransomed, and set at
liberty, Feb. 4, 1194; returned to England, March 20, following; wounded in the
shoulder, abroad, with an arrow, at the eastle of Chaluz, near Limoges, which
mortifying, he died in eleven days after, April 6, 1199. and was succeeded by
his brother, John. Richard II. born at Bourdeaux, Jan. 6, 1367; made guardian
of the kingdom, Aug. 30, 1372; created Prince of Wales, 1376; succeeded his
grandfather, Edward III. June 21, 1377; crowned at Westminster, July 16,
following; married to Anne, sister to the Emperor of Germany, Jan. 14, 1382;
buried his Queen, Aug. 3, 1394; married Isabella, daughter of France, in
Autumn, 1396; taken prisoner by Henry, Duke of Lancaster, and sent to the
Tower, Sept. 1, 1339; resigned his crown, Sept. 28, following, and was
succeeded by his first cousin, Henry, Duke of Lancaster, grandson to Edward
III.; murdered, in January, 1400, at Pomfret castle; buried at Langley, but
afterward removed to Westminster. Richard III. elected King, June 20, 1483;
crowned, July 7, following; slain at the battle of Bosworth, Aug. 22, 1485, and
succeeded by his cousin, Henry; he was buried at Leicester. Richmond, Countess
of, Henry VIII.'s grandmother, died in the year 1509, soon after his marriage
with Ca^herine. Ridley, Bp. of London, burnt at Oxford, Oct. 16, 1555. Rivers,
Earl of, Anthony, beheaded at Pontefract, June 13, 1483. Rizio, the musician,
murdered, March 9, 1566. Robert Duke of Normandy died in prison, in 1134. Robin
Hood and Little John, great robbers, in 1189. Rochester, Earl of, died, July
22, 1680, aged 32. Rochester nearly destroyed by fire, in 1130; its castle
surrendered to John, Nov. 30. 1215. Rollo, first Duke of Normandy, conquered
that country from the crown of France, in 876. Rosamond, mistress to Henry II.
in 1172; shut up at Woodstock, in 1189. Row, Nicholas, died, Dec. 6, 1718,
aged 45. Row, Mrs. died, Feb. 20, 1737, aged 63. Rubens, Paul, died, 1640,
aged 62. Russel, Lord, beheaded, July 21, 1683, in Lincoln'sinn-fields. Rye
burnt by the French, 1377.
S.
SACHEVEREL, Rev. Dr. silenced for three years, March 23, 1710. Salisbury,
Countess of, the last of the Plantagenets, beheaded, May 27, 1540. Sandwich
burnt, 1217. Sanquir, Lord, hanged for killing his fencing master, 1612.
Scales, Lord, murdered by a ferryman, Aug. 19, 1460. Scarron, Paul, died, 1660.
Schomberg, Duke of, landed in Ireland, near Carrickfergus, with an army, Aug.
13, 1689; killed at the battle of the Boyne, June, 1690. Sea Fight with the
Dutch, June 3, 1664, when the English conquered. Sea Fight of four days, June
1, 1666. Sea Fight Victory of the English, July 25, following. Sea Fight at
Solebay, May 28, 1672. Sea Fight at the Texel, Aug. 11, 1673. Sea Fight English
and Dutch beat by the French, off Beachy head, June 30, 1690. Sea Fight French
beat, off La Hogue, May 19, 1692. Sea Fight French fleet destroyed by Sir
George Byng, Aug 11, 1718. Sea Fight Engagement off Toulon, Feb. 9, 1744.
Sea Fight of Admiral Hawke, 1759. Seneca born at Corduba, in Spain, in the year
1; died in 64. Seymour, Lord, beheaded on Tower Hill, March 20, 1549. Shadwell
died, Nov. 20, 1692, aged 54. Shaftesbury built by Alfred, in 879. Shakespeare
died in 1616, aged 52. Shepherd, James, executed, for plotting to take away the
life of King George, 1717. Shore, Jane, mistress of Edward IV. did penance,
1483. Shovel, Sir Cloudsly, lost on the rocks of Scilly, Oct. 22, 1707, aged
56. Sidney, Algernon, executed, Dec. 17, 1683, aged 66. Simnel, Lambert, the
impostor, crowned King in Ireland, 1487. Skinners company incorporated, 1327.
Slingsby, Sir Henry, governor of Hull, with D. Hewit, beheaded on Towerhill,
June 8, 1658. Somerset, Duke of, made Protector, 1547; deprived, 1549; beheaded
on Tower Hill, Jan. 22, 1552. Somerset, Duke of, Henry Beaufort, beheaded at
Heaham, May 15, 1464. Somerset House built by the Duke of Somerset, Protector,
1549. Sophocles died, 406 before Christ, aged 90. Southampton burnt by the
Danes in 1010. Spencer, the poet, born, 1510; died, 1596. Spencers, father,
son, and grandson. The father hanged at Bristol, aged 90, in October, 1326.

The son hanged at Hereford, Nov. 24, following.

The grandson beheaded at Bristol, 1400.

Stafford, Humphrey, for rebelling against Henry VII. beheaded at Tyburn, 1486.
Stafford, Lord, beheaded, through the perjury of false witnesses, Dec. 29,
1680. Stanley, Sir William, beheaded, Feb. 15, 1495. Star Chamber, court of,
instituted, 1487; abolished, 1641. Statius born about 41; died, about 102.
Steel, Sir Richard, died, 1729. Stephen, St. died, in 257. Stephen crowned,
Dec. 2, 1135; defeated and taken prisoner at Lincoln, by the Earl of
Gloucester, Maude's brother, in February, 1141, and put in irons at Bristol
prison, but released, on an exchange, for the Earl of Gloucester, who was taken
at Winchester; made peace with Henry, Maude's son, in 1153; died of the piles,
Oct. 25, 1154, aged 50; was buried at Feversham, and succeeded by his cousin,
Henry, Duke of Normandy, son of Maude, by the Earl of Anjou. Strafford, Earl
of, beheaded, on Tower Hill, May 12, 1641, aged 48. Style, old, ceased, Sept.
2, 1752, and the next day was accounted Sept. 14, N. S. Suetonius Paulinus, in
the reign of Nero, invaded the isle of Anglesey, and burnt the Druids, in 59;
defeated Boadicea at London, and show 80,000 of the Britons, the same year.
Suffolk, Duke of, murdered, 1450. Suffolk, Duke of, beheaded, February, 1554.
Suffolk, Edmond de la Pole, Earl of, beheaded on Tower Hill, in 1513. Surry,
Earl of, beheaded on Tower Hill, 1547. Sweyn, King of Denmark, drove Ethelred
II. from his kingdom, in 1013, but was killed, Feb. 2, 1013, at Gainsborough,
and was buried at York. Swift, Dean, died, 1745. Sydenham, Dr. died, 1689, aged
65.
T.
TEMPLE, Sir William, died, 1700, aged 71. Terence died, 159 before Christ,
aged 64. Tertullian died in 196, aged 85. Thetford burnt by the Danes, in 1010.
Thomson, James, died, Aug. 27, 1748, aged 47. Thorp, Speaker of the House of
Commons, murdered by the mob, 1460. Throgmorton, Francis, executed, 1583.
Thynne, Thomas, Esquire. shot in his coach, in PallMall, Feb. 12, 1682. Tibullus
born, in 43 before Christ; died, in 11 before Christ. Tillotson, Archbp. died
1694, aged 64. Tower of London built, in 1080. Tresilian, Sir Robert, and
others, hanged at Tyburn, 1388. Trump, Van, the Dutch Admiral, killed in an
engagement, July 29, 1653. Tyler, Wat, the rebel, killed by Walworth, Mayor of
London, 1381.
V.
VANDYCK died, 1641, aged 41. Vane, Sir Henry, beheaded, June 14, 1662.
Venables's expedition to America, Dec. 4, 1654. Vespasian conquered the isle of
Wight, in 43. Virgil born at Andes, near Mantua, in 69 before Christ; died at
Brundusium, in Italy, in 18 before Christ. Vortigern made King of Britain, in
447; deposed in 455; reassumed the crown in 457; deposed again, in 465.
Vortimer, son of Vortigern, succeeded to the government of Britain, in 455;
died, in 457, and was buried at Lincoln.
W.
WALES conquered, and divided by William among the conquerors, in 1091; again
completely, in 1283, and annexed to the crown of England. Wallace, Sir William,
taken prisoner, hanged, and quartered, 1305. Waller, Edmund, died, 1687, aged
81. War, among many others, with Scotland, in 1068. War, with France, in 1161.
War, again, with success, in 1194. War, with France, 1201. War, civil war
renewed, 1215. War, ended, 1216. War, civil, in 1262. War, ended in 1267. War,
with France, 1294. War, ended, 1299. War, with Scotland, 1312. War, ended,
March 30, 1323. War, again, with Scotland, 1327. War, ended, 1328. War, again,
with Scotland, 1333. War, with France, 1339. War, peace with France, May 8,
1360. War, war with France, 1368. War, civil war, 1400. War, war with Scotland,
1400. War, peace with France, May 21, 1420. War, war with France, 1412. War,
civil war between York and Lancaster, 1452. War, peace with France, October,
1471. War, civil war, 1486. War, war with France, Oct. 6, 1492. War, peace with
ditto, Nov. 3, following. War, peace with Scotland, 1502. War, with France,
Feb. 4, 1512. War, with Scotland, 1513. War, peace with France, Aug. 7, 1514.
War, war with ditto, 1522. War, with Scotland, 1522. War, peace with France,
1527. War, peace with Scotland, 1542. War, war with Scotland, directly after.
War, peace with France and Scotland, June 7, 1546. War, war with Scotland,
1547. War, with France, 1549. War, peace with both, March 6, 1550. War, civil
war, 1553. War, war with France, June 7, 1557. War, with Scotland, 1557. War,
peace with France, April 2, 1559. War, peace with Scotland, 1560. War, war with
France, 1562. War, peace with ditto, 1564. War, war with Scotland, 1570. War
with Spain, 1588. War, peace with Spain, Aug. 18, 1604. War, war with Spain,
1624. War, with France, 1627. War, peace with Spain and France, April 14, 1629.
War, civil war, 1642. War, war with the Dutch, 1651. War, peace with ditto,
March, 1654. War, war with Spain, 1655. War, with France, Jan. 26, 1666. War,
with Denmark, Oct. 1, following. War, peace with the French, Danes, and Dutch,
June 29, 1667. War, peace with Spain, Feb. 13, 1668. War, war with the
Algerines, Sept. 6, 1669. War, with the Dutch, March, 1672. War, peace with the
Dutch, Feb. 28, 1674. War, general peace, Sept. 20, 1697. War, war with France,
May 4, 1702. War, with Spain, December, 1718. War, peace with ditto, 1721. War,
peace with France, 1748. War, with France, 1756. War, with Spain, Jan. 4, 1762.
War, peace with France and Spain, Feb. 10, 1763. Warbeck, Perkin, the impostor,
executed at Tyburn, November, 1499. Warwick, Earl of, made sole governor of
King Henry VI. 1427; died, 1440. Warwick, Earl of, son to the Duke of Clarence,
beheaded on Tower Hill, Nov. 21, 1499. Warwick, Earl of, Richard Neville,
defeated at the battle of Barnet, April 14, 1471, and slain. West Indies
discovered by Columbus, 1493. Westminster-abbey built by Sebert, King of Essex,
on the spot where a temple of Apollo had once stood, about 600; its monastery
consecrated by Edward the Confessor, in 1065; rebuilt and consecrated, in 1269.
Westminster Hall built, about 1098. Whittington, Sir Richard, made Lord Mayor
of London, March 22, 1377. Wickliffe died in 1384. William I. Duke of Normandy,
paid a visit to Edward the Confessor in England, in 1051; betrothed his
daughter to Harold II. in 1058; made a claim of the crown of England, in 1066;
invaded England, landing at Pevensey, in Sussex, the latter end of the same
year; defeated the English at Hastings, Oct. 14, 1066, where King Harold was
slain; crowned at Westminster, Dec. 26; invaded Scotland, in 1072; subverted
the English constitution, in 1074; wounded by his rebel son, Robert, at
Gerberot, in Normandy, in 1079; invaded France, in 1088; soon after this, he
fell from his horse, and contracted a rupture, of which he died, at
Hermentrude, near Roan, aged 63, was buried at Caen, and succeeded in Normandy,
by his eldest son, Robert, and, in England, by his second son, William. William
II. crowned at Westminster, Sept. 27, 1088; invaded Normandy, in 1090, with
success; killed by accident, as he was hunting in the New Forest, by Sir Walter
Tyrrel, August, 1100, aged 40; was buried at Winchester, and succeeded by his
brother Henry. William III. landed at Carricksergus, June 14, 1690; crowned,
with his Queen, April 11, 1689; fell from his horse, and broke his collar-bone,
Feb. 21, 1702; died, March 8, aged 51; buried, April 12, following, and left
his sister-in-law, Anne, successor to the throne. Wills, privilege of making
them, granted by Henry I. in 1100. Winchester rebuilt by Alfred, in 893; burnt,
in 1102. Windsor-castle built by Edward III. Wolsey, Dean of Lincoln, formerly
Rector of Lymmington, Hants, appointed minister to Henry VIII. in 1513; made
Archbishop of York, 1514; made Cardinal, 1515; made Chancellor, Dec. 24,
following; appointed Legate, 1518; resigned the seals, Oct. 18, 1529; stripped
of all he possessed, November following; died, Nov. 28, 1530. Worcester burnt,
in 1113. Wren, Sir Christopher, died, 1723, aged 90.
X.
XENOPHON died, 359 before Christ, aged about 90.
Y.
YORK, Duke of, Richard Plantagenet, made Protector of the kingdom, March 27,
1454; declared right heir to the crown, 1460; slain at the battle of Wakefield,
Dec. 24, 1460. York city and cathedral burnt by the Danes, in 1069. Young, Dr.
Edward, died, 1765, aged 81.
ADDENDA.
AARON born, 1574 before Christ. Abraham died, 1823 before Christ, aged 175.
Adam and Eve created, Friday, Oct. 28, 4004 before Christ. Adam died, 3079
before Christ, aged 930. Addison died at Holland-house, Kensington, June 17,
1718, aged 47. Aeschylus, the poet, died in Sicily, 456 before Christ aged 69.
Aesop died 556 before Christ. Alban, St. the first English martyr, died in 287.
Alexander the Great born, 356 before Christ; began to reign, 336 before Christ;
died, 324 before Christ. Anacreon died, 532 before Christ, aged 85. Anaxagoras
died, 428 before Christ, aged 70. Andrew, St. martyred, Nov. 30, 69. Anthony,
St. died in a desert, Feb. 14, 358, aged 105. Arbuthnot, Dr. died, 1735.
Archimedes lived, 212 before Christ. Aristarchus flourished, 453 before Christ;
died, aged 100. Aristophanes lived, 397 before Christ. Aristotle died, 322
before Christ, aged 62. Athanasius, St. died in 373, aged 73. Atterbury, Bp.
banished, June 22, 1723; died, 1732, aged 69. Augustine, St. Father of the Latin
church, died, Aug. 28, 431, aged 78. Barclay, John, died, 1621, aged 37.
Barrow, Dr. Isaac, died, May 4, 1677, aged 47. Bartholomew, St. martyred, Aug.
24, 71. Bail, P. died, 1706, aged 58. Bid died, in 735, aged 65. Birch, Dr.
died, by a fall from his horse, 1768, aged 78. Blenheim, battle of, Aug. 2,
1704. Boerhaave, Dr. died, Sept. 23, 1738, aged 69. Boil, Robert, died, 1691,
aged 64. Bruyere died, 1696, aged 56. Burnet, Bp. died, 1715, aged 71. Butler
born, 1612; died, 1680. Calvin died at Geneva, May 27, 1554, aged 45. Cambray,
Fenelon, Archbp. of, died, 1715, aged 63. Cato killed himself, in 45 before
Christ. Catullus born at Sirmio, in 80 before Christ; died, in 11 before
Christ. Cicero born, in 107 before Christ. Circumcision established, 1897
before Christ. Clarke, Dr. Samuel, died, 1745, aged 53. Claudian born at
Alexandria, about 365. Cornelius Nepos died, before Christ, about 25. Cowley
died, Aug. 3, 1667, aged 48. Creech, Mr. Thomas, killed himself, in 1701.
Dacier, Madame, died, 1720, aged 68. David succeeded Saul on the throne of
Hebron, 1059 before Christ; died, in 1019 before Christ, aged 70. Deluge began,
2348 before Christ, Nov. 25. Deluge of Deucalion, 1529 before Christ.
Democritus died, about 403 before Christ, aged 109. Demosthenes killed himself,
313 before Christ, aged 62. Derham, Dr. William, died, April 5, 1735, aged 78.
Diogenes, born 520 before Christ. Doddridge, Dr. died, Oct. 26, 1751, aged 50.
Done, Dr. John, died, March 31, 1631, aged 58. Draiton, Michael, died, in
1613. Dryden born, 1632; died, May 1, 1700. Empedocles flourished, 445 before
Christ. Epictetus lived in 63. Euclid died, about 241 before Christ, aged 74.
Euripides died, 407 before Christ, aged 77. Foundling hospital, charter of,
passed, Oct. 17, 1739. Frost, hard, 1740. Hesiod lived 944 before Christ.
Herodotus lived, 469 before Christ; died, aged 42. Holofernes killed by Judith,
688 before Christ. Homer born, about 1041 before Christ. Isaac died, 1717
before Christ, aged 180. Isocrates, the Athenian orator, died, 338 before
Christ, aged 89. Jacob died, 1689 before Christ, aged 147. Jerome, St. died,
Sept. 30, 421, aged 91, and was buried at Bethlehem. Job died, 1533 before
Christ, aged 189. John, St. the Evangelist, died, Dec. 27, 100. Joseph tempted
by Potiphar's wife, 1788 before Christ; sold, 1728; made Governor of Egypt,
1715; died in Egypt, 1635 before Christ, aged 110. Josephus lived in 71. Justin
lived about 250. Kempis, Thomas a, died, 1471. Livius, Titus, born, 58 before
Christ; died, in 18. Luther died, Feb. 18, 1546. Mahomet began to teach his
errors, in 612. Malplaquet, battle of, in 1709. Mead, Dr Richard, died, 1754.
Moses born, 1571 before Christ. Noah died in 1998 before Christ, aged 950.
Patrick, St. first bishop in Ireland, died, in 491, aged 122. Plautus died in
184 before Christ. Pliny second, lived in 74; died, aged 56. Pliny the younger
lived in 99. Polybius born, 205 before Christ. Portobello taken by Admiral
Vernon, Nov. 22, 1739. Rome sounded, 753 before Christ. Romulus was the first
king. Sackville, Lord George, tried, Aug. 15, 1760. Sallustius died, in 34
before Christ. Samuel died, in 1061 before Christ. Sappho lived in 603 before
Christ. Socrates, the philosopher, died, in 400 before Christ, aged 70. Sodom
burnt, 1897 before Christ. Solomon born, 1043 before Christ; succeeded his
father, David, on the throne, 1019 before Christ; finished his temple, 1008
before Christ; died in 980 before Christ, aged 62. Solon was born, 640 before
Christ. He lived 80 years. Tacitus lived in 97. Thales, the philosopher, born,
640 before Christ; died, 572 before Christ. Thucydides born, 470 before Christ.
Westminster-bridge opened, Nov. 17, 1750. Zuinglius was killed in the Swiss
war, in 1531, aged 44.
ERRATA.
Battle of Oudenarde, for July, read June 30. Chaucer, etc. for 1400, read
1440. Rochester, Earl of, etc. for July 22, read July 26.
Remarkable Occurrences, Not inserted in the Body of this Work.
WILLIAM II.'s REIGN.
1090. A Dreadful earthquake throughout the whole kingdom, which was followed
by a great scarcity of fruit, and so late a harvest, that corn was not full
ripe at the end of November. Sir J. Haywood's History, Will. II. 1091. On the
5th of October, there fell a violent storm in several parts of England,
especially at Winchelscomb, in Glocestershire, where the steeple of the church
was thrown down by thunder and lightening, and the crucifix, with the image of
the Virgin, was broken to pieces. The hurricane was followed by a noisome
stink. Holingshed.

During the above, there was also a thick smoke which darkened the sky. Sir J.
Hayw.

On the 17th of the same month, there happened a storm of wind at S. W. the
same that blew in the late tempest, so dreadful to the whole nation. In London,
it threw down above 500 houses, and unroofed Bow-church. At Old Sarum, the
steeple and many houses were blown down. Holing.

1094, was remarkable for the number of gliding stars, that seemed to dash
together, in manner of a conflict. Sir J. Hayw.

Also for a great mortality of men and beasts, so that the ground lay untilled
in many places, which caused a severe dearth. Holing.


HENRY I.'s REIGN.
1104. A comet appeared, and four circles were seen about the sun. Sir J. Hayw.
Hist. Hen. I. 1107. Another comet was seen, and, on the Thursday night before,
two full moons appeared, one in the east, the other in the west. Ditto. 1110. A
third comet was seen, and an earthquake happened in Shropshire. 1111. The river
Trent, near Nottingham, ceased to run its course for twenty-four hours, so that
the channel was dried up. Holing.

There was, this year, a great mortality among men, cattle, and fowls. Sir J.
Hayw.

1113. The water of the river Medway failed so much, that the smallest boats
could not float in the channel; also, the Thames was so low between the Tower
and the bridge, that women and children waded it over; owing to so great an ebb
in the ocean, that laid the sands bare several miles from the shore, which
continued a whole day. Sir J. Hayw.

In December, the air appeared red, as though it burned, Holing.

1114. During this year, almost all the bridges in England, being then of
timber, were broken down by the ice when it thawed, after a severe frost.
Holing. 1116. In December a great earthquake happened, and the color of the
moon was that of blood. Ditto. 1120. In September, an earthquake. 1134. On the
2d of August, just as King Henry was about to take ship, and sail for Normandy,
an eclipse of the sun and moon appeared; at which time, William of Malmsbury,
who was then living, writes, he saw the stars plainly about the sun. This
eclipse was followed by a most terrible earthquake.

During the earthquake, flames of fire burst out of certain riffs of the earth
with great violence. Holing.


HENRY II.'s REIGN.
1160. Thirty German heretics came to England, to propagate their opinions.
They said they were Christians, but denied baptism, the Lord's supper, and
matrimony; for which they were condemned by a council of bishops at Oxford, and
delivered over to the secular arm. Accordingly, they were marked in the
forehead with a red hot iron, whipped, and thrust out of doors naked, in the
midst of winter^ where, none daring to relieve them, an order having been
published to the contrary, they died of hunger and cold. 1171. A great tempest
happened in Scotland, England, and Ireland. Holing.

As King Henry was about to take horse at Cardiff, in Glamorganshire, an
apparition appeared to him, and, having threatened him with some dreadful
plagues, if he did not amend his life, it vanished. Holing.

1172. The following infamous collect was ordered to be used in all churches in
the province of Canterbury, to expiate the guilt of Becket's murder: Be
favorable, good Lord, to our supplication and prayer, that we, which
acknowledge ourselves guilty of iniquity, may be delivered by the intercession
of Thomas, thy blessed martyr and bishop. Holing. 1179. On the 18th of June,
after sunset, the new moon then shining out fair, with her horns to the east,
on a sudden, seemed to be divided in two, out of which there appeared to rise a
burning brand, casting forth sparks and flames, as if it had been on fire. The
body of the moon seemed to wriggle like an adder that is beaten; it did so
above twelve times, and then turned black. Holing.

At Christmas, at a place called Oxen-hall, near Darlington, in the bishopric
of Durham, the earth raised itself up like a lofty tower, and remained several
hours in that posture; on a sudden, it funk down again, with a horrid noise,
and the earth so sucked it in, that it made there a deep pit, which continues
to this day. Mr. Camden supposes it to be the wells that are now called
Hell-kettles. Rog. Hov.

1185. There was so great an earthquake as to overthrow the church of Lincoln,
and others.
RICHARD I.'s REIGN.
1189. The fish leaped out of a pool in Normandy, and fought together on dry
land, with such noise, as drew the neighboring people to behold this wonder,
which was in the nighttime. 1190. On Midsummer-eve, the sun was eclipsed for
three hours, at ten in the morning, and the stars appeared. 1193. 1194. 1195.
There was so great a dearth in England and France, that a quarter of wheat was
sold for almost twenty shillings, as much as six pounds now, which was followed
by a pestilential fever, that carried off multitudes of people; during which
time, the dead were buried in a great many at once, people died so fast. About
Whitsunday, two suns appeared, so like each other, that they could not be
distinguished without instruments. Com. Hist. Eng. p. 156.
HENRY III.'s REIGN.
1221. Two impostors were crucified, for giving out, that they were both of
them the Messiah, or Christ; and two women were executed, the one for
pretending the Virgin Mary, and the other, Mary Magdalen. 1222. There was a
dreadful tempest of thunder, lightening, and rain, in February, which threw
down several churches. This was followed by extraordinary rains, and that by a
dearth, another violent tempest, an earthquake, a prodigious storm of wind,
inundations, and a comet. Holing. 1233. It thundered for fifteen days together.
The next year began with terrible tempests of thunder, rain, and floods, which
spoiled the fruits of the earth.

In April, at seven in the morning, there appeared four false suns, in
Worcestershire and Herefordshire. The true sun was of a red color, with a
great circle, of chrystaline color, whose circuit seemed as large as the
kingdom of England; from its sides went forth certain half circles, in whose
sections the four false suns appeared. Holing.

1239. On the 16th of June, Prince Edward, Henry III.'s eldest son was born.
Before his birth there appeared a new star in the heavens for several days
together; it was carried with a swift course through a long circuit of air; it
seemed sometimes to bear fire along with it, and sometimes to leave smoke
behind it. Holing. 1240. There was a great battle of fish at sea, so that
eleven whales were cast ashore, and appeared to be dead, from some wounds they
had received. Not long after, a great sound was heard at one time, in all parts
of England, as if it had been the noise of mountains falling into the sea. Mat.
Paris. 1242. The sun was eclipsed in a terrible manner, and, two years
afterward, so many stars seemed to fall from heaven, that, had they really
fallen, none would have been left. Holing. 1248. On the 14th of February, there
happened a dreadful earthquake, and the sea, for a long tract, near the coast
of England, ceased to ebb and flow for near three months together. Holing.
1249. Several steeples and houses were thrown down in Somersetshire by an
earthquake. Holing. 1250. On the 1st of October, the moon appeared red and
bloated, the presage of a storm of wind, so violent, that the sea flowed twice
without ebbing, and, in the night, seemed to burn. Soon after, an earthquake
was felt at St. Alban's. Holing. 1251. The chimney of the chamber where the
Queen and her children lay, was blown down by a terrible storm, and her whole
apartment at Windsor shaken and torn. Oaks in the park were rent asunder, and
turned up by the roots, and all was accompanied with such thunders and
lightnings as had not been known in the memory of man. Holing.

In May, the new moon appeared three days before her time, and the sun, moon,
and stars, for fifteen days successively, seemed of a red color. A dearth, and
a murrain among cattle followed this prodigy. Holing.

1254. In February, the new moon was seen four days before her time. Holing.
1256. A comet appeared, and the King and Queen of Scots visited England. 1262.
The two companies of goldsmiths and tailors of London fought, and several were
killed on both sides. The sheriffs appeased the tumult, and thirteen of the
most mutinous of them were hanged, as were thirty citizens of Norwich, for
quarrelling, and fighting with the monks of that city. Holing.
EDWARD I.'s REIGN.
1274. A general earthquake happened in England. It threw down St. Michael's
church on the hill, without Glastonbury. Mat. Westminster. 1278. Two hundred
and eighty Jews, besides many of their Christian accomplices, and those who
suffered in other parts of England, were executed in London, for clipping,
Guthrie. 1285. As the King and Queen were talking together, in their
bedchamber, a flash of lightning struck in at the window, passed by them,
killed two of their servants, who were waiting upon them, but did them no
prejudice. Ditto. 1286. Wheat sold in some places at twelve pence a quarter,
and not many years after, for twenty shillings a bushel, as much as four pounds
now. 1293. Fifteen days after Michaelmas, Baliol, King of Scotland, appeared in
Westminster Hall, in person, by summons, to answer a complaint against him, of
the Earl of Fife, where he pleaded his own cause. Guthrie.
EDWARD II.'s REIGN.
1315. Some time before Christmas, a blazing star, or comet, appeared in the
north, was seen for a month together, and was the forerunner of a famine or
mortality. Wheat was sold for forty shillings a quarter, as much as eight
pounds now; and a murrain destroyed the cattle. 1316. The famine continuing,
the poor were forced to eat horseflesh, dogs, and there was not sufficient
even of that vile food to keep them alive. Wheat was sold for near three pounds
a bushel, and the mortality raged as violently as in the preceding year.
Holing. 1318. Nov. 14, happened the greatest earthquake that had ever been seen
in England. 1326. The Bishop of Exeter, Walter de Stapleton, founder of Exeter
college, and Hart-hall, in Oxford, was murdered in an insurrection of the
people of London. He was a minister of state in Edward II.'s reign, and sided
with the court.
EDWARD III.'s REIGN.
1330. July 16, there happened a great eclipse of the sun, and the rains were
so violent this year, that the harvest did not begin till Michaelmas. At
Christmas, a mighty westerly wind overthrew several private houses and public
edifices, tore up trees by the root, and did a vast deal of mischief. 1335. The
rains were so fatal, that the corn was spoiled; a dearth ensued, wheat being
sold at forty shillings a quarter, as much as twenty shillings a bushel now;
and the cattle was destroyed by a murrain. 1338. It rained almost continually,
from the beginning of October, to the beginning of December, and then came a
frost upon it, which lasted twelve weeks; yet, though the corn was destroyed by
it in a great measure, the war with Scotland made money so scarce, that all
sorts of grain were sold at a reasonable rate. 1339. A hundred and twenty
laymen, and several priests, besides women, were drowned by an inundation, at
Newcastle upon Tyne. 1346. While the battle of Crecy was fighting, there fell a
violent storm of hail, accompanied with an eclipse, and terrible thunder; at
which time, prodigious flights of crows hovered over the English and French
armies.

This was also the time when Edward, the black Prince, first adopted, in
memorial of this victory, the Bohemian crest and motto, viz. three ostrich
feathers, and Ich dien (i. e.) I serve, the King of Bohemia being slain in the
action. Succeeding Princes of Wales have continued it ever since.

1348. It rained from Midsummer to Christmas, so that there was not one day or
night d^y together. This wet season caused great floods, and a pestilence,
which raged for a whole year. The earth was at the same time barren, and even
the sea did not produce such plenty of fish as formerly. The mortality was so
great, that, in the city of London, two hundred bodies were buried every day in
the Charter House yard, besides those interred in other common buryingplaces;
and this lasted from Candlemas to Easter. 1353, was remarkable for the scarcity
of corn and provisions in England and France, occasioned by a great drought. It
was called the dear summer. Rye was brought out of Zealand, to support the
poor, who otherwise must have perished for want of sustenance. 1359. When King
Edward was on his march, within two leagues of Chartres, there happened a most
dreadful hurricane of deadly piercing wind, that swelled a tempest of rain,
lightning, and hailstones, so prodigious, as to kill instantly six thousand of
his horses, and a thousand of his best troops. 1360. Men and beasts were
destroyed in several parts of England, by thunder and lightening; many houses
were burnt and ruined by it, and strange sights were also seen. 1362. A new
plague broke out in France, which cut off upwards of thirty thousand
inhabitants in Paris, and spreading into England, raged with equal violence in
London. 1364. On the 8th of April died, at the Savoy, in London, John, King of
France. 1365. The rains were again violent, and a great dearth and pestilence
followed. Flights of sparrows fought in the air, and many of them dropped dead
to the ground. 1371. On the 22d of February, died at London, David, King of
Scotland.

In March, a comet appeared between the north and west; the beams were darted
toward France, and were thought to presage new troubles to that kingdom the
year following.

The western parts of England, particularly Oxford, were greatly afflicted with
a pestilence.


RICHARD II.'s REIGN.
1379. This summer there was a pestilence, that laid waste a great part of the
north of England. 1381. When Richard II.'s first wife, Queen Anne, came from
Bohemia, she had no sooner set foot on shore, but such a tempest immediately
arose, as had not been seen in many years. Several ships were dashed in pieces
in the harbor, and the ship, in which the Queen came over, was shattered and
broken; which was the more observable, because his second wife brought a storm
with her to the English coasts, in which the King's baggage was lost, and many
ships of his fleet cast away. Sir J. Hayw. 1382. May 21, several churches were
thrown down by an earthquake. Holing.

This year the use of guns came in, and Sir Hugh Calverly, governor of Calais,
was the first that employed them in the English service.

1386. Wine was so cheap, that the best was sold at twenty shillings the ton,
and the second sort at thirteen and four pence.

Sir John Montacute, a follower of Wickliffe, ordered all the images to be
taken out of his church at Shenley, in Buckinghamshire. Holing.

1388. While the King was at Richmond, in the month of July, there appeared on
a sudden such innumerable swarms of gnats, that they darkened the air. They
skirmished and fought in parties. The slain fell to the ground by heaps at a
time, and, being swept together with brooms, were found to be many bushels
full. About a third part of the whole came off conquerors, and flew away. 1389.
A hurricane threw down many houses, destroyed cattle, and rooted up trees. This
preceded a great mortality, especially among youth, and that, a famine. Holing.
1391. July 9, the sun appeared to be obscured by certain thick and dreary
clouds between that and the earth; its beams seemed of the color of blood, and
gave little or no light from noon till it sat. These clouds rose daily for
almost six weeks together. The north and east parts of England were, at the
same time, sore afflicted with a pestilence. In a few weeks there died eleven
thousand persons in the city of York. Holing. 1392. A dolphin was taken near
London Bridge, ten feet long. 1394. An apparition of fire was seen in diverse
places in England, in several forms; sometimes like a turning wheel, burning;
sometimes like a barrel, with flames gushing out of the head; and sometimes
like a long burning lance. When it appeared to any persons, it would go as they
went, and stop as they stopped.

In April, a fiery dragon was seen in several counties, and, some time before
there happened a conjunction of the two greatest planets, Saturn and Jupiter.
Holing.


HENRY IV.'s REIGN.
1400. The conduit in Cornhill was built in a place where before stood a prison
for nightwalkers called the Tun, the materials of which served to raise the new
conduit. 1401. About the beginning of March appeared a very terrible blazing
star, sending forth its fiery streams at first toward the north-east, and at
length toward the north, where it seemed to fix, which after was thought to
portend the bloody wars between the Scots and English. 1402. The devil is said
to have appeared in the shape and habit of a gray friar, in Danbury church,
Essex, where he behaved himself so outrageously, that he much affrighted the
inhabitants. At the same time arose so great a tempest thereabout, that it blew
down the steeple, and carried away half the chancel. 1407. In October, a
violent plague broke out in England, which is said to have carried off 30,000
in London, and as many, in proportion, in the country.

A little before Christmas began a frost of that violence and long continuance,
that the like was scarce ever heard of in England. It lasted fifteen weeks,
and, being accompanied with abundance of snow, it was so destructive to the
birds especially, that almost all the smaller birds died with cold and hunger.

1408. There was a famous play acted at Skinnerswell, near Clerkenwell, London,
representing the chief matters of the world, from the creation; it lasted eight
days, and the chief of the nobility and gentry of England were at it. From
thence they went to royal justs in Smithfield, between the Earl of Hainault,
and certain Hanoverians, challengers, and the Earl of Somerset, and an equal
number of Englishmen, defendants. The victory was on the Englishmens side; for
the Earl overcame, and all the Englishmen but one. 1410. Guildhall, in the city
of London, which was but a mean cottage before, was, this year, made a stately
building, at the charge of the city; and the company of grocers laid the
foundation of their hall in Cunihope lane.
HENRY V.'s REIGN.
1413. April 9, the day of Henry's coronation, there happened a tempest of
rain, snow, and hail, on which there were various suggestions, as imagining it
foreboded extraordinary events. 1415. This year the church service was changed
throughout England, from the use of St. Paul, to the use of Sarum.

On Candlemas day, seven dolphins were discovered playing in the river Thames,
and four of them were taken.

1416. In Spring, the Emperor Sigismund came to England.
HENRY VI.'s REIGN.
1426. On Saturday, the eve of St. Michael, in the morning, began a very
dreadful earthquake, accompanied with thunder and lightning.

John Rainwell, fishmonger, was chosen Mayor of London, who was a great
benefactor to the city, and began building of the Tower at the drawbridge of
London.

1434. Nov. 24, a frost began, which lasted till Feb. 10. The Thames was frozen
over below bridge to Gravesend. 1437. The farthest gate of London Bridge, near
Southwark, with the tower on it, and the two arches that supported it, fell
down suddenly. About the same time, all the lions in the Tower died. 1438.
There was a great dearth, so that, in many places, they made bread of fern
roots and ivyberries.

Nov. 25, a gust of wind blew off the leads of the Gray Friars church, and
almost beat down the whole side of a street called the Old Exchange.

At Bedford, on the day of the assizes, eighteen persons were killed, and many
hurt, by the fall of a staircase.

1443. On Candlemas day, St. Paul's steeple was fired by lightning. At the same
time, the steeple of Waltham-cross was consumed, but the church was saved. 446.
Simon Air, Lord Mayor, began to build Leadenhall, as a storehouse for corn and
fuel for the poor of the city. This year also there were two unusual combats
within lists appointed. The first was by the prior of Kilmain in Ireland, who
impeached the Earl of Ormond of high treason, and the place of trial was in
Smithfield; but the quarrel was taken up by the King, and so decided without
combat. The second was by one John David, an armourer, who impeached his
master, William Catur, of treason; but the latter being with his neighbors,
intoxicated with wine, before he came to fight, he was unhappily slain, without
any just suspicion of guilt; but the servant lived not long after him; for, the
next assize, he was hanged for selony. 1453. John Norman, Lord Mayor of London,
was the first that went to be sworn in Westminsterhall, by water.

Constantinople was taken by the Turks.

1456. There was taken at Erith, within twelve miles of London, four wonderful
fishes, viz. two whales, one sword-fish, and a fish called Mors Morina. 1458.
The useful invention of printing was made public, by one John Faustus, a
goldsmith, and citizen of Mentz.
EDWARD IV.'s REIGN.
1467. The people had an extravagant way of adorning their feet. They wore the
beaks or pikes of their shoes so long, that they encumbered them in their
walking, and were forced to tie them up to their knees; the fine gentlemen did
theirs with chains of silver, or silver gilt, and others, with laces. This
ridiculous custom was in vogue ever since the year 1382, but now it was
prohibited, on the forfeiture of twenty shillings, and the pain of cursing by
the clergy.

This year the King concluded a league with the King of Castile and Arragon, by
which he allowed certain Cotswold sheep to be transported into Spain, where the
breed so increased, that their fine wool has since proved very detrimental to
England.

1471. William Caxton, a mercer of London, and a lover of letters, and author
of the chronicle called Fractus Temporum, brought the art of printing into
England, and practiced it first in Westminster-abbey. 1477. There was so
dreadful a plague, that historians relate more people were destroyed by it than
by fifteen years war before. 1479. Robert Byfield, one of the sheriffs of
London, was fined fifty pounds by the court of aldermen, for affronting the
Lord Mayor, which, it seems, was only by kneeling too near him at prayers, at
St. Paul's church. 1480. Two notorious thieves were pressed to death, for
robbing the church of St. Martin le Grand, London, and others of the gang
hanged and burnt.
RICHARD III.'s REIGN.
1483. There happened such a flood in Gloucestershire, that all the country was
overflowed by the Severn; several persons were drowned in their beds, children
in cradles swam about in the fields, and beasts were drowned even on the hills.
The waters did not abate in ten days, which hindered the Duke of Buckingham's
passing that river into Wales, to join the Welchmen, who were risen against the
King, and occasioned his misfortune and death. Holing.

Bannister, who betrayed the Duke of Buckingham, his master, was sorely
afflicted with God's judgments. His eldest son went mad, and died raving in a
hog-sty. His eldest daughter, a beauty, was suddenly stricken with a foul
leprosy. His second son taken lame in his limbs. His youngest son was
suffocated in a puddle of filthy water; and himself, in an extreme old age,
found guilty of murder, but saved by his clergy. Holing.


HENRY VII.'s REIGN.
1485. In September raged the sweating sickness, that carried off an infinite
number of people.

This year the yeomen of the guards were first instituted.

1486. John Percival, the King's carver, was drank to by the Lord Mayor, for
sheriff, the first time this method of election was used. 1491. Robert Fabian
was alderman and sheriff of London. He wrote a history of England and France,
from the creation of the world to the third year of the reign of Henry VIII.
1492. Aug. 2, Christopher Columbus set out from Cadiz, for the discovery of the
western world. 1493. April 28, Joan Boughton, a widow, was burnt in Smithfield
for heresy, and professing Wickliffe's opinion.

This year, wheat was sold in London for four shillings a quarter, and claret
for thirty shillings a hogshead.

1494. The body of one Alice Hackney, which had been buried one hundred and
seventy-five years, was accidentally dug up in the church of St. Mary-Hill,
London; the skin of the corpse was whole, and the joints of the arms pliable.
1499. A pestilence raged in England, which swept away no less than 30,000 in
the city of London. 1501. Sir John Shaw, this year, was the first Lord Mayor
that held his feast at Guildhall. It used to be held at Mercers or
Merchant-taylors hall. 1502. January 18, the first stone of Henry VII.'s chapel
was laid. 1505. Philip, King of Castile, in his voyage to Spain, was driven by
a storm on the coast of England, where he was detained till he had seen King
Henry, which he did at Windsor. 1507. The sweating sickness returned, but the
cure being known, it was not mortal.
HENRY VIII.'s REIGN.
1517. This year the sweating sickness raged in England, so great, that, in
some towns half the inhabitants died, in others one third. 1520. May 25,
Charles, Emperor of Germany, visited England. 1523. Christian, King of Denmark,
came over to England.
EDWARD VI.'s REIGN.
1548. The plague broke out in London. 1549. July 24, Lord Lieutenant of
counties first instituted. 1550. Horse-guards instituted. 1551. The sweating
sickness again visited England. 1552. Jan. 26, the Dowager Queen of Scotland
landed at Portsmouth. 1553. The book of common prayer first printed. 1567.
There were found, on enquiry, to be only fifty-eight Scotchmen in London.
ELIZABETH's REIGN.
1579. The Turkey company established in England. 1594. The plague broke out,
and was fatal in England. 1600. East India company established. Their stock
consisting of 72,000l. they fitted out four ships, and, meeting with success,
they have continued ever since.

About this time, London was almost entirely built of wood, and, in every
respect, a very ugly city. The Earl of Arundel first introduced the practice of
brick-buildings.


JAMES I.'s REIGN.
1604. The plague broke out in London, and carried off 30,000 people, near one
fourth of its inhabitants. 1606. This summer the King of Denmark visited
England. 1614. Baronets first created.

Lotteries were first established.

New River brought to London.

King of Denmark revisited England.

1617. Sports allowed on Sundays, after service. 1621. A parliament met, June
16, and was remarkable for being the epoch in which were first regularly formed
the parties of court and country.

The power of granting licenses to public houses was about this time first
vested in Sir Giles Mompesson and Sir Francis Michel, for their own emolument.


CHARLES I.'s REIGN.
1625. The plague broke out in London. 1631. The spring of this year was
distinguished by the trial of the Earl of Castlehaven, for inviting people to
commit rapes on his wife. He was condemned and executed. 1638. Queen Mother of
France arrived in England in October.

Episcopacy abolished in Scotland.


REPUBLIC.
1654. Don Pantaleon de Sa, brother to the Portuguese ambassador, executed, for
shooting Mr. Greenaway. 1658. Sept. 3, the day Oliver Cromwell died, there
arose a storm, so violent and dreadful, that it extended all over Europe, and
seemed to threaten a wreck of nature.
CHARLES II.'s REIGN.
1660. Oct. 10, ten of the regicides were tried, and executed soon after.

Dec. 30, The Royal Society instituted.

1663. June 1, a treasonable conspiracy in Ireland discovered. 1664. Jan. 5, a
plot of the fanatics in the north discovered, for which about twenty-one were
executed.

Dec. 4, 130 sail of Dutch merchantmen taken by the Duke of York.

1665. The plague broke out in London, which carried off 68,600 people. 1666.
Jan 6, the plague ceased.

Sept. 2, a great fire happened in London, that consumed 13,200 houses.

1667. June 11, the Dutch fleet sailed up as far as Chatham, and destroyed
great part of the English fleet. 1669. The Royal Exchange finished.

Coventry act passed.

1671. May 10, Sir Edward Spragg, an English admiral, destroyed twelve Algerine
pirates. 1673. March 29, the test-act passed against the papists, upon which
the Duke of York resigned his place of Admiral, which was conferred on Prince
Rupert. 1678. Sept. 6, Dr. Tongue and Titus Oats, an infamous clergyman, made
discovery of a pretended plot, said to have been entered into by the papists,
for destroying the King, and introducing popery. The Queen, and the Duke of
York, and almost all the Popish noblemen in England, were accused of being in
this plot, and the lives of many Roman Catholic clergymen, who were executed at
Tyburn, were most villainously sworn away by Oats, and other wretches, who
were too much encouraged by the Parliament, out of hatred to the Duke of York,
and the Papists.

Oct. 25, the Popish Lords were committed to the Tower, upon the oath of Oats.

1679. May 27, the Habeas Corpus act passed. 1680. In December, a remarkable
comet appeared. 1683. June 12, the charter of the city of London was declared,
by the court of King's Bench, to be forfeited to the crown.

June 28, the Earl of Essex and Lord Russel were committed to the Tower, where
the Earl of Essex cut his own throat.


JAMES II.'s REIGN.
1688. Seven bishops sent to the Tower.
WILLIAM AND MARY's REIGN.
1690. In April, great part of the palace of Whitehall was consumed by fire,
through the negligence of a female servant.

Nov. 7, 12,000 Irish Catholics transported themselves to France.

1693. The Bank of England established, and the act passed for licencing
hackney-coaches. 1694. In November, the bill for triennial parliaments received
the royal assent, 1695. The African company established. 1696. A plot was laid
in February, for assassinating King William. 1697. Peter, Czar of Muscovy,
visited England, in the disguise of a common man, working in a ship-yard. School.
A new East India company established.

Jan. 5, Whitehall palace was totally consumed, by the carelessness of a
laundress.

The Society for the reformation of manners was formed.

1700. The old East India company re-established.

June 12, the succession settled on the house of Hanover.


ANNE's REIGN.
1702. Feb. 22, the act passed, by which the quaker's affirmation is accepted
in the room of an oath. 1703. Nov. 26, 27, there happened such a dreadful
tempest as frightened the whole kingdom. The houses in London shook, and many
fell. The water rose to a great height in Westminster Hall, and London Bridge
was choked up with wrecks. Thirteen ships of war were lost, and 1500 seamen.
The damage at London was computed at a million sterling.

Charles, King of Spain, landed at Portsmouth, Sept. 26, 1703, on a visit.

1704. Feb. 7, the Queen granted the first fruits and tenths to the poor
clergy. 1707. May 1, the union took place between England and Scotland.
GEORGE I.'s REIGN.
1716. The act passed for septennial parliaments.

May 6, the South Sea act passed.

1717. This year was the last the houses of convocation sat to do business.

Charters granted to the Royal and London assurance-offices.


GEORGE II.'s REIGN.
1730. Seven Cherokee chiefs were brought into England, by Sir Alexander
Cummin. 1732. In April, Richard Smith, a bookbinder, prisoner in the
King's Bench, persuaded his wife to follow his example, and make away with
herself, after they had murdered their infant. They were found hanging in their
chamber, and their infant dead in the cradle. They left a paper, intimating,
they did it to avoid the distresses of life. 1740. A bard frost began at
Christmas, and continued till the latter end of February. 1750. Jan. 8, and
Feb. 8, were felt two shocks of an earthquake in London.

In the month of May, the Lord Mayor, one alderman, two judges, the greatest
part of the jury, and a number of spectators, caught the jail-distemper, at the
sessions house in the Old Bailey, of which they died.

1751. In December, his Majesty issued out a reward for apprehending the Hon.
Alexander Murray. 1753. The game-act passed, as did the naturalization-bill,
and the marriage-act.

The parliament purchased Sir Hans Sloane's museum.

The affair of Elisabeth Canning was on the carpet.

1755. July 15, account arrived of the French ships the Alcide and Lys being
taken by Admiral Boscawen.

Nov. 1, happened an earthquake that laid all Lisbon in ruins.

1756. The marine society established.

One hundred and twenty-three persons perished in the black hole at Calcutta.

1757. The militia-bill passed. 1758. Raine's charity, for portioning out two
maidens annually of his hospital, took place.

Magdalen charity and the asylum established.


GEORGE III.'s REIGN.
1762. London was, at this time, amused with the Cock-lane ghost.

In May, three Indian chiefs arrived in England.

1768. August, Christian VII. King of Denmark, visited England.
A GENERAL PLAN OF THE SAXON HEPTARCHY.
THE first was the kingdom of Kent, containing only that county, and had the
following Kings.

Reigned Years. Pagans. 1. Hengist -- 31 Pagans. 2. Esca -- 24 Pagans. 3. Otta,
or Octa -- 20 Pagans. 4. Immeric -- 29 Christians. 5. Ethelbert -- 56
Christians. 6. Eadbald -- 24 Christians. 7. Ercombert -- 24 Christians. 8.
Edgbert -- 9 Christians. 9. Lothair -- 12 Christians. 10. Edric -- 7
Christians. 11. Withred -- 33 Christians. 12. Edbert -- 23 Christians. 13.
Edilbert -- 11 Christians. 14. Alric -- 34 Christians. 15. Edilbert -- 3
Christians. 16. Cuthred -- 8 Christians. 17. Baldred -- 18

This kingdom began, A. D. 457, ended, A. D. 823.

This second was that of the South Saxons, containing Sussex and Surry.

Reigned Years. Pagans. 1. Ella -- 32 Pagans. 2. Cissa -- 75 Pagans. 3.
Ethelwolf -- 25 4. Berthune 5. Authune

It began in 491, and ended about 600.

The third was that of the West Saxons, containing Cornwall, Devonshire,
Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, and Berkshire.

Reigned Years. Pagans. 1. Cerdic -- 16 Pagans. 2. Cynric -- 26 Pagans. 3.
Ceaulin -- 31 Pagans. 4. Cebric -- 6 Pagans. 5. Ceolwulf -- 14 Christians. 6.
Cinegils and Rinchelm 31 Christians. 7. Kenewall and Sexburge 32 Christians. 8.
Esciwin -- 2 Christians. 9. Kentwin -- 9 Pagan. 10. Cedwalla -- 2 Christians.
11. Ina -- 38 Christians. 12. Ethelhard -- 14 Christians. 13. Cuthred -- 14
Christians. 14. Sigebert -- 1 Christians. 15. Kinewulf -- 29 Christians. 16.
Brithric -- 16 Christians. 17. Edgbert -- 37

It began, A. D. 519; ended, 1066.

The fourth was that of the East Saxons, containing Essex, Middlesex, and part
of Hertfordshire. The dates of the Kings reigns are not added, because there is
nothing certain of them.

Pagans. 1. Erkenwin. Pagans. 2. Sleda. Christians. 3. Sebert. Christians. 4.
Sexred, Seward, and Sigebert, brothers. Christians. 5. Sigebert, the Little.
Christians. 6. Sigebert, the Good. Christians. 7. Swithelm. Christians. 8.
Sigher and Seba. Christians. 9. Sigheard and Senfred. Christians. 10. Offa.
Christians. 11. Selred. Christians. 12. Swithred.

It began, 527, and ended, 747.

The fifth was that of Northumberland, containing Lancashire, Yorkshire, the
bishopric of Dresm, Cumberland, Northumberland, and part of Scotland, as far
as Edinburgh frith.

Reigned Years. Pagans. 1. Ida -- 12 Pagans. 2. Ella -- 30 Pagans. 3. Edelric
-- 4 Pagans. 4. Edelfrid -- 24 Christians. 5. Edwin -- 17 Christians. 6. Oswald
-- 9 Christians. 7. Oswy -- 28 Christians. 8. Egfrid -- 15 Christians. 9.
Alfrid -- 19 Christians. 10. Osred -- 11 Christians. 11. Kenred -- 2
Christians. 12. Osric -- 11 Christians. 13. Ceolwulf -- 8 Christians. 14.
Egbert, alias Eaadbert 20 Christians. 15. Osulf -- 1 Christians. 16. Ethelwald,
alias Mollo 6 Christians. 17. Alured -- 9 Christians. 18. Ethelred, alias
Ethelbert 4 Christians. 19. Alfwold -- 11 Christians. 20. Osred, then Ethelbert
again.

It began, 547; ended about 792. After Ethelred was slain, there was an
interregnum of 33 years, during which time, the kingdom was in the possession
of Edgbert, King of the West Saxons.

The sixth was that of the East Angles, containing Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Cambridgeshire.

Reigned Years. Pagans. 1. Uffa -- 7 Pagans. 2. Titist -- 10 Pagans. 3. Redwald
-- 44 Pagans. 4. Eorpwald -- 12 Christians. 5. Sigebert Christians. 6. Egric
Christians. 7. Anna -- 13 Christians. 8. Ethelbert Christians. 9. Ethelwald --
9 Christians. 10. Adulf -- 19 Christians. 11. Elswald -- 7 Christians. 12.
Beorna -- 24 Christians. 13. Ethelred -- 52 Christians. 14. Ethelbert -- 5

It began in 575; ended in 793. When Ethelbert was slain by Offa, it was united
to Mercia; yet St. Edmund reigned afterward, and was murdered by the Danes, in
870.

The seventh was that of Mercia, containing Gloucestershire, Herefordshire,
Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire,
Lincolnshire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire,
Staffordshire, Shropshire, Nottinghamshire, Cheshire, and part of Hertfordshire.

Reigned Years. Pagans. Cridda, Wibba, and Cheorl, Petty Kings. Pagans. 1.
Penda Christians. 2. Peada and Oswy, Dukes 3 Christians. 3. Wulser -- 16
Christians. 4. Ethelred, alias Aedired 30 Christians. 5. Kenred -- 4
Christians. 6. Ceolred -- 8 Christians. 7. Ethelbald -- 41 Christians. 8.
Beornred -- 1 Christians. 9. Offa -- 38 Christians. 10. Egfer -- 1 Christians.
11. Kenulf -- 2 Christians. 12. Kenelm and Ceolulf 1 Christians. 13. Beornulf
-- 3 Christians. 14. Ludecan -- 2 Christians. 15. Withlaf -- 13 Christians. 16.
Bertulf -- 13 Christians. 17. Burrhed -- 22 Christians. 18. Ceolwulf.

It began, under Cridda, A. D. 582, under Penda, 625; and ended, 874.

The particular Years in which each King reigned, since the Heptarchy.
Began to reign. Names. Reigned Y. M. 800, Egbert, of the West Saxons, 38 838,
Ethelwulf, 19 857, Ethelbald, 3 860, Ethelbert, 6 866, Ethelred, 6 872, Alfred,
29 900, Edward, the Elder, 25 925, Athelstan, 17 942, Edmund I. 4 946, Edred, 9
955, Edwy, 4 959, Edgar, 16 975, Edward, the Martyr, Simeon, Usurper, 4 1016,
Edmund II. 7 1017, Canute, King of Denmark, 22 Harold, Usurper, 5 1039,
Hardicanute, 2 1041, Edward III. 25 1065, Harold, Usurper, 1 1066, William, the
Conqueror, 21 1087, William II. 13 1100, Henry I. 35 1135, Stephen, 19 1154,
Henry II. 35 1189, Richard I. 10 1199, John, 17 1216, Henry III. 56 1272,
Edward I. 35 1307, Edward II. 20 1327, Edward III. 50 1377, Richard II. 23
1399, Henry IV. 13 1412, Henry V. 10 1423, Henry VI. 39 1461, Edward IV. 22
1483, Edward V. 5 1483, Richard III. 2 1485, Henry VII. 25 1508, Henry VIII. 38
1547, Edward VI. 6 1553, Mary, 5 1558, Elizabeth, 44 1602, James I. 25 1625,
Charles I. 24 Cromwell, Usurper, 1649, Charles II. 25 1684, James II. 4 1688,
William and Mary, 14 1702, Anne. 12 1714, George I. 12 1727, George II. 33 4
1760, George III.


